SCRINIA RESERATA: A MEMORIAL Offered to the Great Deservings OF John Williams,
D.D.

Who some time held the Places of Ld Keeper of the Great Seal of England, Ld
Bishop of Lincoln, and Ld Archbishop of York.

CONTAINING A SERIES OF THE Most Remarkable Occurrences and Transactions of his
LIFE, in Relation both to CHURCH and STATE.

Written by JOHN HACKET, Late Lord Bishop of LITCHFIELD and COVENTRY.

(...)

Nazianz. de laudibus Athanasii. Vita mortuorum in memoria vivorum est posita.

Cicero Philip. nona. IMPRIMATUR,

Nov. 27. 1692. JO. Cant.



In the SAVOY: Printed by Edw. Jones, for Samuel Lowndes, over against
Exeter-Exchange in the Strand. M. DC. XC. III.

THE PROEM.
READER,
Paragr. 1. BOOKS are sown so thick in all Countries of Europe,that a new one,
which one adds more to the former Gross, had need of an Apology. The easy
Dispatch of so many Sheets in a day, by the readiness of Printing, has found
the World a great deal more Work then needs. Many that love Knowledge, both
Industrious, and of sound Judgment, are not nice to say, that Repletion of
Authors has begat Loathing. Which is a Reason likewise, or a Pretense, that
diverse, who are Learned and full Men, contain their Liquor in their Vessels,
and never broach it in the Press to make it Public, because they think it is
Folly to contribute to Waste and Excess. I am one of those, I confess, that
wish it were possible, that a Moses could be raised up to restrain us, from
bringing more either of our Pamphlets, or Volumes, to the Work of the
Tabernacle; For the Stuff already is sufficient for all the Work to make it,
and too much, Exodus 36.7.

2. How shall I answer it therefore? Or, how shall I defend that I am constant
to mine own Judgment in this Design, that I thrust my Labors into the World?
What Warrant can I plead, that I build a new Cottage upon the Waste? I conceive
that it will stand for satisfaction, that I set forth an History of Things not
traversed before, but of memorable Passages running through the Channel of one
Man's Life in our present Age. It is a Debt owed to Posterity, to furnish them
with the true Knowledge of sore-gone Occurrences, worthy to be Registered; as, I
believe, these ensuing are. A Tradition must be kept of famous Exploits,
especially moving upon the Stage of turbulent Times. For when it is skilfully
drawn through the Acts of famous Men, it will rouse up our Children by
Emulation as much as by Precept, and give them double advantage to seek Virtue
and Glory. But better it will be to have it coarse spun, then quite omitted:
For such will serve for Cork, to keep a Net from sinking.

3. This Century of our Account from Christ's Birth wherein we live, now
wasting beyond the middle, has been happy in this, That it has brought forth
in our Kingdom of England many of great Renown, Wise and Eloquent, deep in
Learning, and sage in Counsels, in a word, to be praised as much as the best of
their Forefathers; yet granting to all, both former and latter, an Allowance
for some Grains of Frailties. It were pity their Memorial should perish with
them. Caesar was a large seeker of Glory; yet grudge no Man a share in Glory,
as testifies that little which remains of his Oration for the Bithynians,
saying, It is a Duty required from the surviving Generation, to keep them alive
in their good Name, who deserved it, and can endure the Censure of the World
for ever. I listen to his Encouragement; yet measuring my Strength by mine own
Meet-wand, I task my self to set up a Pillar but for one Man's Memory. The
Event will clear me, that I stint not my self to this one Theme to do but
little.

But, First, Because there is so much Kernel in one Shell; I must set forth a
great Bishop, a great Judge, a great Counselor, in all these Capacities most
active in most active Times. Such a Mill will not go with a little Water.
Beside the Turnings and Returnings of his Fortune, multiformous Changeableness,
rather Prodigious then Strange, by Honor and Dishonor, by Evil Report and
good Report, 2 Cor. 6.8. Which will draw considerate Thoughts for no little
time to this one Center. As Pliny writes of the Emperor Augustus his Life,
interwoven with much Glory, Lib. 7. Not. Hist. c. 45.
and much Misfortune, Si diligenter aestimentur sancta, magna sortis humanae
reperiantur volumina. So it is highly remarkable, that in this one Piece a
diligent Eye may discern all the Colors of human Inconstancy and Instability.

4. Secondly, I spend all my little Skill upon this Subject; for I can draw no
Picture so like, because I knew none so well. I noted his Ways and Worth in the
University, when I was but young. I observed him in his earliest Preferments,
when he came first sledge out of the Nest. I was taken into his Household
Service, as soon as he ascended to his highest Office. And commencing from that
time till thirty Years expired with his Life, I trespass not against Modesly if
I say, I knew his Courses as much, and saw them at as near a distance, as any
Man beside. I have as much Intelligence from an Eyewitness Information, and
from his familiar Conference with me, as can be expected from any Writer of the
Memorials of a great Statist: Qui audiunt audita dicunt, qui vident plane
sciunt, says Plautusvery well. He that reports but what he hears, must confess
he is at uncertainty; he that sees a Thing done, can relate it perfectly. Pliny
has cast down a great deal of that which he built up in the seventh Book of
his Natural History, with this Passage in his Proem, Nec in plerisque little
obstringam sidem meam, potiusque ad autores relegabo. He would make Faith for
little of that which he wrote; but turns his Reader over to such Authors, as
himself did not trust in. I am far from such Prevarication. I drew the
knowledge of those things of most moment which I shall deliver from the
Springhead. And I trust in God, that I have incorporated them into this Frame
with Integrity. This then is my confidence to make this Compilement, that my
Tools were whetted at home. I need not repair to the Allophyli, or Philistines,
to sharpen my Axe at their Grind-stone.

5. Thirdly, I am full of willingness to be the Father of this Child: And
nothing is apter for a Man to undergo, then that which is agreeable to his
Delight. I profess it is not the least of my drifts to sweeten my Master's
Memory with a strong composed Perfume; and to carve him out in a commendable,
but a true Figure. Suffer me to put one Day to his Life after his Decease. When
a worthy Man's Fame survives him, through their help, that light a Candle for
that use, that others in succession of Ages may perfectly behold him, it is a
grateful Service to put one Day more, as it were, to the Life of Nature, but a
Day that may be longer, perhaps, then the Mortal preceding Life thrice told
over. The Learned Grotius (Who can stop his Conjectures?) thinks it not
improbable, but that the Sun went down, Josh. 10.13. when Joshua pursued the
Kings of Canaan in the Valley of Ajalon: Sed post Solis occasum speciem ejus in
nube supra horizontem extanti per repercussum ostendere: That is, a kind of
Sun, that made a great Luster, shined sufficiently to make it Day, not in his
Presence, but in the repercussion of his Beams upon a Cloud. I cite it only for
Accommodation; that when a renowned Man is departed, his last Sun set, the
worthy Deeds of his Life may yet shine in our Horizon, as it were by
Repercussion in the memory of aftertimes; which causes a longer Day then any,
nay then all that went before.

6. Now I fear I am in danger of a stabbing Censure, through the Discovery of
some part of my Aim in this last Confession: For I have divulged, that I offer
up this Book as a Banner at the Shrine of this Renowned Prelate's Memory. Some
will say, What could be uttered more in way of Prejudice, to entangle the
Belief of the Reader with Knots of Jealousy? A Master in this Art, Dionysius
Halicarnassus gives this for one Rule, to examine prudentially the Truth of an
History, by considering, (...), the Affection of the Writer. For my part, I
desire to be tried by such a considerate Overseer. And let him judge uprightly,
that I could not but understand, it had been better for me to have smothered my
Purpose, which I hold out before the open Light, if I had meant corruptly, and
would stain my Paper, and my Conscience, with blots of Falsehood and Flattery. I
fear God. And he that feels that Motion within him, will not seek Honor to
himself, much less to cast it upon another, by Consenage and Fictions. Or if
Religion, carelessly present, did not bind so hard, I think Discretion and
Experience should advertise any Man, that he is a Fool that imagins he can
poison the whole World with a Lie. Polybius speaks soundly, that Truth will be
obscured by no History, by no Conspiracy. Yet although I should gild this
common Place with as much Oratory and Flourish as could be laid on, I know yet
there is no Historiographer, but must stand to the courtesy of his Judges to
think him honest. I am content to stoop to that Necessity. Not that I despair
to make it appear, that I play above Board so fairly, that he that is
true-hearted himself, Thomas Albius.
will suspect no Juggling. A late Writer, and one of our Countrymen, ^^^ds me
this Passage: That Historical Credit is of three degrees; First, When the Fact
was s^en of Thousands, as the Battle fought at Pharsalia. Secondly, When a
small Number can attest it, as Tully's Defense for Ligarius before Caesar.
Thirdly, When few were present to justify the thing, Sed a sido, occulato, and
aurito test posteris est consignata. Such are many Matters related by Comines
concerning his Master Lewisthe Eleventh. I am furnished in great part with
Materials of the first and second Faith; I will supply the rest from Evidences,
though of the third and lowest Credit, yet of the true Sterling value, being
the Hand-writings kept in custody, or the very Sayings kept in memory of the
chief Actors. The Result is, That I engage unto the World to carve my Mercury
out of sound Wood, and then to set it up. As the Roman Senate did the like for
the Glory of Cato Major, who s^t up his Statue in their Court, having been the
Honor of their Robe: To which Valerius very pertinently, Lib. 16. Com. 4.
Gratum ordinem, qui utilissimum Reipub. Senatorem tantum non semper secum
habere voluit. A thankful Bench of Judges, that would never suffer so
beneficial a Senator to be out of their sight.

7. In the end of this Preface I protest, that there is nothing troubles me
less, then that I expect this my Endeavor may displease some, that will either
cavil at my Pen, or at the Archbishop's Praise. I wish the Offense may rather
fall upon me: Lib. 1.(...)
For I am grown rather Impudent, then Bold, from that Defiance which Clem.
Alexandrinus gives; (...). Nothing was ever written so fortunately, that found
no Opponents: But that is considerately written, which no Man can considerately
oppose. But if any have their Teeth set on edge with a sour Humor, and gnash
at the honorable mention of the Dead, it is not to be wondered: For he lived
when there was little hope to please all; he died when there was less. I wish
well to his Memory. I profess it. And would have him live in Honor, though he
be dead, not with me, or a few more only, but with the Succession of Men.
Historia praestat, ut qui aevo priore vixerant, vivere adhuc nostra videantur
aetate, as a mighty Master of Learning says: Salmas. Praefat. in August. Histo.
Scriptores. And if this Monument covered no more then one dead Man, it ought to
be Intemerate; says as great a Scholar as the former: Grotius, Lib. 3. Cap. 12.
Com. 7. de ju. Bell. and pacis. Quae in honorem mortuorum structa sunt, violari
non possunt nisi contemta humanitate. But my Scope is, (and I am not understood
if I be taken otherwise) not to Consecrate this slight Piece to the Fame of
one, but to the Benefit of all, that will find leisure to peruse it: That is, I
intend in the Narration of one Life, to insert Rules for any. (...) (...):
Breathing Images of our Divine Conversation. Therefore I repeat it, that my
Labors may have a right Construction, that I cast out this Matter into the
Figure of a Moral Example; else I had been far more Compendious. Yet it is the
true Image of his Life, whom I describe, and not a Cyrus, or feigned Idea of
Wit. One of the greatest Knowledge of any in his Age said, Est Historia nihil
aliud, nisi Philosophia quaedam exemplis utens. Casaub. Proleg. in Aug. Hist.
Scriptores: A right History is a System of Exemplary, or Practick Philosophy.
Such I wish this were; though that way will not please all. Not. those who are
delighted with Romances, and like to have Shadows commended that were never
extant, rather then such as lived among us, did do us good, and deserved Glory;
who are no wiser then they, that had rather have Felicity in a Dream, then
Waking.

Lastly, That I may not Lavish in Proem, I crave my Due from my Readers and
Judges, their good Opinion that I extremely affect Candor; and let them try me
by this Mark, That I never (or with little Exception) blame any thing with my
Pen; but, First, I consider how much I may Excuse it: Or, Secondly, How I may
Recompense it with some other Praise.

A MEMORIAL Offered to the Great Deservings OF JOHN WILLIAMS, D.D. Who
sometimes Held the Places of the LORD KEEPER of the GREAT-SEAL of England, etc.
PART I.
Paragraph 1. EDMOND WILLIAMS Esquire of Aber. Conway in the County of Carnarvan,
was the Son of William Williams Esquire of Coghwillanne near adjoining, and of
Dorothy Daughter to Sir William Griffith Knight, of Penrhyn. This Edmond took
to Wife Mary Daughter to Owen Wyn Esquire and by her had five Sons and two
Daughters. Of the Male Children, John was the youngest; the Womb of his Mother
ceasing to bear, when it had done its best. This John, whose Memory deserves to
be Dignified in a lasting Story, was born at Aber-Conway, a Sea-Town in
Carnarvanshire, about, or upon the Feast Day of our Lady the Blessed Virgin,
March 25. 1582. The Shire wherein he drew his first Breath, is notorious for
the highest Hills of this Island, Snoden, Penmanmaur, Creig-Eriri, and others.
It is not unlikely that it has much Riches under the Earth, but it is Barren
above Ground. As Pliny speaks of the Orobii, certain Mountainers in Italy, Lib.
3. c. 17. Etiam nomine prodentes se al. tius quam fortunatius sitos: Their
Situation was rather high than prosperous. But what the Region wants in Fatness
of Soil, is requited by the Generous Spirits of the Inhabitants, a far greater
Honor than much Clay and Dirt. I light upon it in the Invention of a Masque,
Presented before King James at Whitehall, An. 1619. that our Laureat-Poet Ben.
Johnson has let some weighty Words drop from him, to the Honor of that
Nation, and I take them as a serious Passage, and will own them, That the
Country is a Seed-Plot of honest Minds and Men. What Lights of Learning has
Wales sent forth for our Schools? What Industrious Students of our Laws? What
Able Ministers of Justice? Whence has the Crown in all times better Servitors,
more Liberal of their Lives and Fortunes? And I know I have their good Leave to
say, That the Honor of Wales shined forth abroad in the Luster of such a
Native as this; and I add what Pliny writes to Sabinus of the Firmians, among
whom he was born, Credibile est optimos esse inter quos tu talis extiteris,
Lib. 6. Epist.

2. For Carnarvanshire in particular, says Reverend Mr. Cambden, the Ordovices
lived there of old, who held the Romans Play to preserve their Liberties the
longest of all our Britains: and forced the Roman General Suetonius Paulinus to
fix his Head-Quarter there, desiring to keep them his first and surest Friends,
who were his last subdued Enemies. Afterward the Saxons had the longest and
stoutest Repulses in North Wales, that they felt in all their Battles; which
made them bloody their Swords most barbarously in the Bodies of those resolute
Defendants.

3. Among the Champions of greatest Note and Valor, that did the best Feats of
Chivalry against the Saxons, was a gallant Commander, the Top of the House of
Williams, which is preserved in Memory to this day, because the Family of that
Name does until this time bear in their Coat three Saxons Heads, ( De tree pen
Saix, they call it in Welsh, I think) a noble Testimony of the Valor of the
Chief of that Stock, that sought manfully for his Country, and preserved it
from the Invasion of the Saxons, when their Armies had marched over the Ground
of England (now so called) with Slaughter and Conquests. And since the best Men
of the ancient Houses in Wales did manage War so valiantly in maintenance of
Glory and Liberty, it is no marvel if the Inhabitants are noted in the current
Ages ever since, to have almost a Religious Care in preserving the Pedigrees of
their Gentry. Who could excuse them from Ingratitude, if they should not
garnish Heraldry with the Genealogies of such Worthies?

4. Among their copious Stems, and far-fetched Descents, the Pedigree of the
House of Williams of Coghwillanne has as many brave Strings in the Root, and
spreads as wide in the Branches, as I have seen produced from the Storehouse
of their Cambrian Antiquities. It grows up in the top Boughs to the Princes of
North Wales in King Stephen's days, as it is deducted by Authentic Records
which I have seen, and are formalized into a comely shape by Evan Lloyd of
Egloyvach in the County of Denbigh, and Jacob Chaloner of London, Gent. Men
faithful and expert in such Monuments of elder Years. The same Authors
demonstrate, that Williams of Coghwillanne has continued his Coat of three
Saxons Heads constantly, and without any the least alteration, from Edneuet
Vychan Lord-Steward of Wales, an. 1240. and of Hen. 3. his Reign, an. 25. to
this day. It hit right indeed for a Coat of Arms, says the neat Wit of Mr. Hugh
Hotland, when one of that Lineage was advanced to be Lord Keeper of the
Great-Seal, as he couched it in an elegant Distic, engraven on his Lordship's
Silver Standish, as I found it there: Qui sublime fori potuit cons^^ndere
tignum,
Par suit hunc capitum robur habere trium.
Meaning, it was a sign he had the Abilities and Brains of three Heads, whose
good Parts lifted him up to that Honor, to set Chief Judge in the highest
Court of the Kingdom. But I need neither the light Air of Poetry, much less the
empty Wind of Vain-boasting, to blow it about the World, that he was Anciently
and Nobly descended, there are so many Proofs for it, as there are Offsprings
of Gentry in North Wales, being all of his Blood and Alliance, to whom a
Catalogue might be added of Great and Honorable Persons in England. Which King
James was aware of, when he was sworn his Counselor; for He told him
pleasantly, that He thought not the worse of him, nor suspected his Fidelity,
though He knew well enough, that Sir William Stanley, (then living) a great
Traitor to his Prince and Country, was his near Kinsman. I could insist more
upon this; but it is the Rule of a wise Author, that whosoever will search into
a Man prudently and Philosophically, -- Nunquam cunabula quaerit: -- Et qualis,
non unde satus.

I close it up therefore, that his Pedigree of Ancestors gave a good Luster to
his Birth, but he gave a greater to them. Howsoever I receive it for a Moral
Truth, as well as a Mathematical, that the longest Line is the least of all
quantitive Dimensions.

5. Now to begin with my Subject, from the first time that he was able to go
without the hand. His Education was like to be Prosperous, for not only his
Parents, but his Grandmother the Lady Griffith; his Grandmother Lois, as well
as his Mother Eunice, contributed her Care to give him Godly and Learned
Breeding. It fell out well for their purpose, that their Pious Countryman
Gabriel Goodman, Dean of Westminster, had about that time founded a Public
School at Reuthen, and had placed a good Grammarian in it, under whom he was
taught his first Rudiments of the Latin and Greek Tongues. I have heard some of
his Contemporaries say, that his Master knew not for a while how to manage him,
he was of so strange a mixture; for at sometimes he was addicted to loiter and
play, and to much exercise of Body: Again, by fits he would ply his Book so
industriously, that his Praeceptor thought it a great deal too much for a Child
to undergo it. But, like a prudent Man, he quickly consented to leave his
Scholar to his own pace; wherein he got ground so fast of all his Fellows. He
that raised himself up to that height of Knowledge in his adult Age, had need
to lay some part of the Foundation so early: For as Comines observes it, Lib.
1. Hist. Indubitatum est ees qui in ulla re unquam excelluerunt, maturi
puerilibus annis ad came accessisse.

6. All things fell out happily by Divine Disposition, to bring him up from a
towardly Youth, to a worthy Man. For by that time this Bud began to blow, it
fortuned that Dr. Vaughan, afterward the Reverend Lord Bishop of London, came
into Wales, and took the School of Reuthen in his way, where he found his young
Kinsman John Williams to be the Bell-weather of the little Flock. Dr. Vaughan
was exceeding glad to find him in that forwardness, and being not only as
Learned as most Men to try a Scholar, but Judicious above most Men to
conjecture at a rich Harvest by the green Blade in the Spring, took speedy care
to remove his Kinsman to Cambridge, and commended him to the Tuition of Mr.
Owen Gum of St. John's College, well qualified by his Country and Alliance for
a Friend, and no indiligent Tutor. The young Youth was now entering into the
16th Year of his Age, an. 1598. much welcomed to Cambridge by the Old Britains
of North Wales, who praised him mightily in all places of the University, ^for
they are good at that, to them of their own Lineage,) and made more Eyes be
cast upon him, than are usual upon such a Punie. Which took the rather, because
of his great Comeliness, I might say Beauty: And it is a great Attractive of
common Favor, when virtue takes up a fair Lodging. One thing put him to the
blush, and a little Shame, that such as had gigling Spleens would laugh at him
for his Welsh Tone. For those who knew him at his Admission into St. John's
Society, would often say, that he brought more Latin and Greek, than good
English with him. This also plucked Advantage after it; for it made him a very
retired Student, by shunning Company and Conference, as far as he could, till
he had lost the Rudeness of his Native Dialect. Which he labored and affected,
because he gave his Mind to be an Orator; which requires, Decus linguae,
regnumque loquendi, as Manlius lays it out, Lib. 4. And all that heard him will
subscribe, that when he was put to it to speak publicly, his Gesture and
Pronunciation did add much Grace to his Matter, and Invention.

7. He was the Pattern of a most diligent Student to all that did emulate him
then, or would imitate him hereafter. He had read over so many Authors in
several Sciences, so many Volumes, so many Historians and Poets, Greek and
Latin, in four Years, (the Evidence of it was in his Note-Books) that I may
say, Aetatem ultra putes; who would have thought it had been the dispatch of an
Under-Graduate? He had ransacked not only the bare Courts, and spacious
Lodgings, but the very Closets and Corners of the best Arts and Authors.
Nothing so great that exceeded him; nothing so little that escaped him. I will
make this Credible to all that are not utter Drones. He plied his Book, (...);
As much in the Night, as in the Day. Nature contributed to this a strange
Assistance, that from his Youth to his old Age he asked but 3 hours Sleep in
24, to keep him in good plight of Health. This we all knew, who lived in his
Family. It would not quickly be believed, but that a cloud of Witnesses will
avouch it, that it was ordinary with him to begin his Studies at six of the
clock, and continue them till three in the morning, and be ready again by seven
to walk in the Circle of his indefatigable Labors. Aristo complains thus in
Pliny, l. 7. c. 50. Vivendi breve tempus homini datum, quoniam somnus veluti
publicanus dimidium aufert. That which makes the Life of Man short is, That
Sleep, like an exacting Publican, takes half of it away for Toll and Tribute.
But here was one that paid very little Custom to that common Publican of
Nature, and kept so much Time continually going in his Stock, that he lived
almost twice as much as any Man, that lived no longer. Who will not say now,
but so much Toil was plain Drudgery? And I marvel it the more, that so great a
Wit could endure to task him to such constant and vexatious Pains. No doubt he
looked far before him, upon the hope of a great Recompense in Church or
Commonwealth: that contented him, and confirmed him. Marius speaks gailantly in
Salust, Nae illi falsi sunt qui res diversissimas pariter expectant, ignaviae
voluptatem, and praemia virtutis. They are much mistaken, that think to piece
together two Things so different, the Pleasure of Ease, and the Guerdon of
Virtue. Therefore all these concurred together in him to make up the
Masterpiece of a Scholar, a rare Wit, a most tenacious and even stupendous
Memory, a clear Judgment, a most distinguishing common Sense, called Natural
Logic, which is the best, and most vital part of Judgment, and that which
hatched all these, that they might not addle, uncessant Industry. Truly he that
will build many Stories high, had need of all these Materials. And let those
that are happy in great Natural Endowments take Example by him, to join the
Felicity of Nature, with such a Mate as Diligence. Gardners give the most
attendance to the best Stocks in their Nursery, and the Fruit will quit the
Cost, after due time has matur'd it. It was God above therefore that gave his
young Servant so wise a Mind, to fill up the choice Vessels of Nature with
Liquors distilled from his own Studies. And herein I may compare him to Messala
Corvinus in Tully, as he writes of him to Brutus, Ep. 15. Tanta industria est,
tantumque evigilat in studio, ut non maximo ingenio (quod in e^ summum est)
gratia habenda videatur. He was so laborious and vigilant about his Studies,
that though his Wit were of the best kind, yet he was not most beholding to it.

8. I have not added a Grain to the just weight of Truth, that his Sails were
filled with prosperous Winds, which blew from the Cape of Nature, yet that he
plied the Oar with main might to make a gaining Voyage. Especially the good God
was pleased to give a good Rudder to the Vessel to stear it right, both in the
Channel of true Religion, and virtuous Practice. For in those Lubric and often
failing years, he neither fell upon the Rocks of dangerous Errors in Opinion,
nor stuck in the quick Sands of Vice. He was duly present at the Service of
Common Prayer in the College-Chappel: And in his private Prayers, as he began,
so he did ever continue to commend himself to God's Mercy and Protection
morning and evening, rather with a due Constancy, and, as it were, Canonical,
never to be dispensed with, then a long winded Prolixity; it grew up with him
by a Catechetical Principle, rather to be, then after a contrivance and
fashion, to profess to be a good Christian. I expound him thus: A Face set
smooth by the Glass of Hypocrisy, an affected show of holy Simplicity, a
dreaming simpering of Words to shuffle into the good Opinion of the World by
mere Histrionical Devices, he declined in himself, and disliked in others.
Though he did not strive to cry up himself for a great-gifted Saint, yet no
wholesome Morals, which are commendable in such green and sappy Years, were
wanting in him. He was obedient to Superiors, strictly just in his Word, and in
all Commerce and Dealing a Faithful Friend, and, as will appear more in the
Sequel, no Vindicative Enemy. He was no Loiterer, no Companion for Ruffians and
loose Persons, no Tippler, no Wine-bibber. And though the University Discipline
began to be more remiss in those days, then in bygone Ages, yet he consigned
himself most inculpably to Modesty and Sobriety, not so much as leaning toward
Youthful Exorbitancies. So far he was a Stranger to wanton Lusts, that his
Acquaintance marvelled, that the more the Sin came near to him, so comely a
Feature wanting not Enticement, the further he ran from it. Arthur Wilson, in
his History of King James, by some secret Whisper came nigh to the Discovery of
the Reason. Not that he was an Eunuch ab utero, as he bluntly delivers it; but
he had suffered an adventitious Mischance, being about 7 Years old, which
compelled him to actual Chastity. He took a leap, being then in long Coats,
from the Walls of Conway Town to the Seashore, looking that the Wind, which
was then very strong, would fill his Coats like a Sail, and bear him up, as it
did with his Play-fellows: But he found it otherwise, for he did light with his
Belly upon a big ragged Stone, which caused a secret Infirmity, fitter to be
understood, then further described; and want of timely Remedy, the Skill of
good Surgery being little known in that Climate, continued it to his dying
day. They that traduced him when he came to be Lord Keeper, not only to be
Amorous, but to be Incontinent with a great Lady, and taught common Fiddlers to
sing it, may blush at this Discovery, if they be alive; but if they died
without Repentance, it may be they want the tip of his Finger dipped in Water
to cool their Tongues.

9. Though I have not concealed that he was Chaste perforce, yet I must witness
for him, that in the use of Meats and Drinks he was one of the most temperate
Men in the Kingdom of free Election. I think he sucked it in with his Milk, it
was so fixed in him. To let pass how well he was satisfied with his short
Academical Fare, I will go further, and come to him, when he came to be a great
Housekeeper. He kept a full Table, elegantly set forth, none of his Rank
beyond him. Yet I scarce ever saw him eat a plentiful Meal. He supplied the
convival time at his Board with Carving and Discourse, which made his
Abstinence less observed by his Guests; but it was most beneficial to him. He
that eats sparingly, sacrifices to Health, and is fit for Labor, and
Watchfulness upon all Occasions. What Repugnancy there was in his Concoction to
Flesh, I know not; but he fed the least upon it that ever I saw: His Diet upon
his own Trencher consisting chiefly out of a Dairy, a Garden, and an Orchard.
No Capuchin kept Lent, and Fish-days, as we term them, more strictly. As his
Appetite was easily under his Will, so his Will was as much under the Laws of
the Realm. It were a rash Censure to count him Superstitious in this
Observation of Abstinence, because he would not be a Libertine. Obedience is
accountable to the smallest Commandments, and which are customarily broken. I
cannot but call to mind upon what is rehearsed before, that what Pythagoras
asked of his Disciple, was comprised in this Verse, (...); to be unaddicted to
Belly-pampering, Sleep, and Carnal Wantonness. Which threefold Rule, this might
Moral Man made up into one Practice.

10. Many are happy that they have not Means to be Riotous, though they would;
but he was happy that he had Means of large Supply for his Breeding, and would
not. His Father was a Gentleman of a bountiful and kind Heart, and spent more
upon himself, and upon his Neighbors, then upon his Children. But the numerous
Stock of rich Gentry, to which he was Allied, his dear Grandmother especially,
made him a great Allowance. But to say the truth, all of them could never fill
his Purse. From a Youth, and so upward, he had not a Fist to hold Money, for he
did not only lay out, but scatter, spending all that he had, and somewhat for
which he could be trusted. By one Instance, which I have heard much quoted in
Cambridge, he did discover a most charitable and franc Affection. That
unparalleled worthy Man Mr. Edward Liveley, Publick-Professor of the Hebrew
Tongue, was so unprovided to sustain himself and his Family, that he was put to
a sad shift, to sell a part of his Library, which being made known to some by
pitiful Rumor, and to young Williams, among others in Cambridge, he got the
Sum of three Pounds together, and carried it home to Mr. Liveley, which the
Learned Man's Necessity made him accept, and his Thankfulness told it abroad,
to bring his pretty benefactor into Estimation, which was much noised, that so
little a Hand did open it self, when large ones were shut. Many things concurred
to make him talked of, and to be noted out for future Eminency; yet Envy, that
loves to crop the Bud of Virtue, had two Things to object against him. First,
That he gave Distaste to some by his Vehemence of Anger, not seldom flying out.
It Is true, he was obnoxious to Arles (...), a sudden eruption of Choler
sometimes upon a little stirring; an Infirmity which only bred him Enemies, for
his fair Candor could give no other Offense. But as Hippocrates, the chiefest
of the Aesculapians, writes, Where Fire abounds in the Mixture, and exceeds the
Moisture, such Flashes cannot always be suppressed. And sublime Wits are seldom
without the Frailty to bring them to Humility. So Pliny said of them in the
Character of Julius Caesar; Acutissimi evadunt, and ignea celeritate volucres.
The second thing called Culpable in him, but was not, was picked at by the
cross Humors of some in the end of Q. Elizabeth's Reign. They were of the old
Stock of Non-conformitants, and among the Seniors of his College, who looked
four upon him, because he was an Adherent to, and a Stickler for the Discipline
and Ceremonies of the Church of England; these laid their Heads together to
exclude him from Preferment, but their Plot would not hit. Others that were the
most orderly Sons of the Church, were not pleased with him, because he
frequented Reverend Mr. Perkins his Congregation. It is true, he was his
constant Auditor, while Mr. Perkins lived, so early his well-kneaded Judgment
took delight in clear and solid Divinity. And he that is discreet, will make
his Profit out of every side, or every Faction, if you like to call it so.

11. At the close of the most happy Reign of Q: Elizabeth, he Commenced
Bachelor of Arts. And to make that Degree sit upon him with the better Credit,
within a Month he was made Fellow of his College, with the advantage of that
Seniority which promised him the Proctorship of the University, if he lived to
it, according to the constant Order of that Society. Filii prunae exultant
volare, Job 5.7. He was full of warmth, and tended upward. I find in a Letter,
which he wrote to King James 22 years after, wherein he remembers the King,
That His Majesty's Gracious Letters conferred that Blossom of the first
Preferment upon him. He was no heavy Log to be lifted up to a Fellowship with a
Court-Leaver. But the Place being extraordinary, (for it was pregnant with the
Pretorship) there needed some Engine from above to settle him. Without
disparagement to his Merit, it shall not be concealed, that some of the Seniors
did make resistance against him, whose Suffrages are requisite by Statute for
the Election of Fellows. One or two of them were observed to stop the
Advancement of all the most sharp Wits, as far as they could, Men not to be
compared with the sweet Philosopher Plato, but like him in this, That Plato
would not admit Homer into his Commonwealth, for he was too great a Citizen for
his City. This was a Grief apparent, that Mr. Aluy, though himself departed
into Ireland, had left of his Spirit among them, a Spirit devious from the
Quiet and Happy Way of obeying our Church Discipline. And this did season a few
with a wrong Zeal to depress such whose Learning and prudent Behavior did
promise, that they would be Champions for Conformity. But he that was then the
Pinnacle of the Codege, far higher then the low-roost Building of the rest, was
Dr. Playsere, one of the Public Professors of Divinity, and of most celebrated
Eloquence, (let me carve a good Figure for his Memory in this Structure,) it
was he that opened the stiff Soil, and planted this young Sprig in his
Fellowship, and led him in his hand out of the Throng of Contradiction. You may
guess, that the young Bachelor did Glory in it, and had the sense of Juily in
his mind, when he said, He had rather be Praised by Cato, then have a Triumph
voted to him by the Senate.

12. Now our young Graduate began to run the Race of three years Course to the
Degree of Master; a time of loitering with too many, but not with him. It was
his common Theme, even when he was a Bishop, if young Students were at his
Table, to inveigh gravely against Batchelors of Arts, because commonly they
misspent that Triennial Probation, and left upon that place a Vacuum of doing
little or nothing. He that least of all committed that Crime, might best set
Judge upon the Guilty. For his own part, now his Clay was upon that Wheel, it
turn d about, as Peripateties say of the highest Sphere, with a most rapid
Motion. He surrendered up his whole Time to dive into the Immense Well of
Knowledge, that has no bottom. He Read the Best, he Heard the Best, he
Conferred with the Best, Excrib'd, committed to Memory; Disputed, he had some
Work continually upon the Loom. And though he never did so much in this
unwearied Industry, as himself desired, he did far more then all that did
highly value him could expect. Ingenium caeleste suis v^lecius amns surgit.
Ovid. His Equals of the same time began to find his Discourse far above their
pitch in weighty Judgment; and what was looked for from him in his Public
Exercises, might be perceived by the Throng that come to Hear him, and that
none at the parting but Admired him. All perceived that a Fellowship was a
Garland too little for his Head, and that he that went his pace, would quickly
go further then St. John's Walks.

13. He that will dig diligently for Wisdom, God will provide a Mine for him to
Recompense his Labor; my Proof lies thus: Here was a Student that would take
any pains to know much; and God supplied him with as good Men in that Age, as
ever Cambridge afforded before or since, that were able to teach him. A Scholar
can have no taste of Natural Philosophy, without some conditement of the
Mathematics. See the good luck of it, that he had Mr. Edward Briggs within the
Walls of the same College for his Master; by whom he was initiated into the
Principles of Geometry, which never departed out of his tenacious Memory. Yet
he did but kiss the Cup of those Sciences, and drank not deep: Fruit that is
next the Sun, may change the color; but unless it hang long on the Tree, it
comes not to maturity. He frequented Mr. Lively and Mr. Downs, ( Duo
Scipiadae) the Professors of the Hebrew and Greek Tongues in the Public
Schools, from whose full Breasts he sucked most excellent Skill in those
Learned Languages. He had also other choice Praeceptors to perfect him in the
Sacred Tongue, Mr. Robert Spalden, a modest and no less Learned Divine, Fellow
of St. John's, and Rabbi Jacob a Jew born, whom I remember for a long time a
Commorant in the University; with the Instruction of these two, he dived far
into the Mystery of that Holy Language. But chiefly he did heartily
acknowledge, that the Hand of God did go with him, that Dr. Overal was the
King's Professor in the Chair of Divinity in his Years of soft Wax, from whom
he took such a right Orthodox Impression of stating Theological Controversies.
I asked him on a time, what it was that pleased him in Dr. Overal above all
others whom he heard to handle Determinations of Divine Points in a
Scholastical Form? He gave me this Answer; because, First, Dr. Overal was used
to prove his Conclusion out of two or three Texts of Scripture at the most, and
no more, being such Places upon whose right Interpretation the judgment of the
Cause did chiefly depend. Secondly, That above all Men that ever he heard, he
did most pertinently quote the Fathers, both to the right sense of their
Phrase, which few did understand, and out of those their Treatises, wherein
especially they handled the Cause, for which he Appealed unto them. And,
Thirdly, When he had fixed what was prime and principal Truth in any Debate,
with great Meekness and Sweetness he gave copious Latitude to his Auditors, how
far they might dissent, keeping the Foundation sure, without breach of Charity.
These were the Constellations, whose fortunate Aspect did shine upon this
Neophytus in the Orb of Cambridge, and being under the Influence of such
Luminaries, a judicious Academian might Prognostic, how much he would prosper
without a judicious Astrologer. But for all that he posted so speedily through
the broad Way of the best Tracts of Knowledge, yet he found a little leisure to
call in as he went, at the attaining of some Skill in Music, Instrumental and
Vocal, not as a Siren to catch him, but as a Delight to solace him. Nay, though
he set his Face to the end of a great Journey, yet in transi^^ he took
Acquaintance of the French Tongue, to make himself able to read the choice
Pieces of that acute Nation, which flowed in easily and apace into him, having
the Pipes of the Latin Tongue ready cast to convey it. What shall we say to him
that took in hand such a long Sorites of Sciences and Tongues together? But
that such Blood and Spirits did boil in his Veins as Tully felt, when he spoke
so high; Mihi satis est si omnia consequi possim: Nothing was enough, till he
got all.

14. The Gamester was the freer to throw at all, because he was like to draw a
good Stake, Preferment already holding its Hand half open. For ^f^c^bi 2o his
Patron, and tenderly-loving Kinsman, Dr. Vaughan was Removed from the
Bishopric of Chester to the Sea of London. The young Eaglets are quickly taken
up upon the Wings of the old one. But the good Bishop, within three Years after
he had ascended to that Dignity, ended his days, greatly lamented of all, and
lived not till his young Cousin was adult for Promotion. This only was much to
his Benefit, that every Year the Bishop sent for him to spend a few Weeks in
his Palace of London, a great help to his Breeding, to let him see the course
of Church Government managed by the Piety and Wisdom of so grave a Prelate, who
had much of a Gentleman, much of a Scholar, and most of a Christian. During his
abode in the Reverend Bishop's Palace, he had the opportunity to tender his
Duty to that noble-minded and ancient Baron John Lord Lumley, who received him
with equal Courtesy and Bounty as his Kinsman. That Lord having given his
Sister in Marriage to Mr. Humfry Llyd of Nor. h. Wales, a most industrious
Antiquary, as appears in Ortelius, and Adjutant to Mr. Cambden in his great
Work. This Lord Lumley did pursue Recondite Learning, as much as any of his
Honorable Rank in those Times and was owner of a most precious Library, the
Search and Collection of Mr. Humsry Llyd. Out of this Magazine, that great Peer
bestowed many excellent Pieces printed, and Manuscript, upon Mr. Williams for
Alliance sake, a Treasure above all Presents most welcome to him. Yet the
noble-hearted Lord, a free Mccaenas, gave with both hands, and never sent his
young Kinsman away from him without a Donative of ten Pieces. The first Gift of
Books he kept better then Gold; for the Gold went from him again as
magnificently, as if he had been no less then the Lord Lumley himself But that
he had received those noble Favors, I heard him remember with great and
grateful Expressions in the Chancel of the Parish Church of Cheam near to
N^n^^c^ in Surrey, (whereof my self have been Rector now above 30 Years) coming
on a day to view the Burial-place of the Lord Lumley, where his Body lies under
a comely Monument.

15. It fell out luckily to Mr. Williams, to keep him from incurring great
Debts, that he had such an Ophir or Golden Trade to drive with the Lord
Lumley's Pu^se, who supplied him with a Bounty that grudged him nothing, till
the Year 1^^9. (for then that aged Baron died.) Four Years before the loss of
that dear Friend, An. 1605, he took his Degree of Master of Arts, and he
Feasted his Friends at the Commencement as if it had been his Wedding, having
more in Cash at command by the full Presents of many Benefactors, then is usual
with such young Graduates. His Merits being known, brought him in a great
Revenue, long before he had a certain Livelihood. A Master of Arts, is a Title
of honest Provocation rightly considered: Nomina insignia onerosa sunt, says
the Emperor Alexander Mammaens. But they are scarce so many as a few, that are
warmed with the remembrance of that Honor, which the Regent-House conferred
upon them, worthy to be taxed, in parodie, with that Increpation, Heb. 5.12.
Cum deberetis Magistri esse propter tempus, rursum indigetis ut vos doceamini.
When for the time ye eught to be Masters, you have need one teach you again.
Whose Reproach has this, and no other use, that they are a pitiful Foil to
their Betters. I am sure I explain a Man, who added as much Grace to the Name,
as any his Ancestors; of those that came after, he that was the best, was but
second in the Order. Every day (borrowing much of the Night) advanced his
Knowledge. He hired himself to labor under all Arts, and sorts of Learning.
The more he toiled, the more he perceived, that nothing in this Earth had such
Amplitude, as the extent of Sciences: He saw it was a Prospect which had no
Horizon, a Man can never say, he sees the utmost Bound of the Coast. Therefore
he was continually drawing his Bow, because he was sure he could never shoot
home. No Man fishes to get all the Fish in the Sea; yet since the Sea contains
so much, he is slothful that labors but for a little. Our Student began now to
fall close to the deep, and spacious Studies of Divinity. I deliver from his
own mouth what he would relate sometimes in his riper Years; That he began to
read all the Scriptures with the choicest and most literal, and, as he found it
fit, with the briefest Commentators, so that all his Superstructure might knit
close to that Foundation. He compared the common places of P. Martyr,
Chemnitius and Musculus, Calvin and Zanchie, being in at all, with the Sacred
Text, and found that Harmony in them all with the Oracles of God's Word, that
he perceived he might with a good Conscience, as he would answer it to Christ
Jesus, defend the Integrity of the Reformed Religion, taking it not upon Trust,
but upon Judgment and Examination. But an Artist knows not what he has got
by all his Diligence till he uses it; neither can a Scholar understand what
Taste is in the Waters of his own (...), till he draws some quantity out.
Therefore he disclosed himself both in his own Terms, and for his Friends, in
common Places and in Problems, sweet as Sampson's Honey in the one, strong as
his Lion in the other. By both he received mighty Praise from his Elders, and
great Thanks from the younger Fry, whose Benefit is to be intended in such
Exercises. For it is a Duty that sits as close to them, as an Oath can fasten
it, who live in such a social Life, to make ready, not wild Gourds, but of
their best Preparation, to set before the Sons of the Prophets, that they may
eat.

16. Having fetched such a great compass about Theology in less then two years,
he began to climb up higher upon the Mountain of God. His Project was to take
so much Work in hand, that no Temptation should make him idle. And that he
might be to seek in nothing, which might exactly furnish him in the Ministry of
Christ, he adventured to read the Schoolmen, Histories Ecclesiastical, and the
Fathers all together. Conceive me that this course of Study begun so early,
co-extended with all the space of his Life. But was it possible for one Hand,
and yet but a tender one, to grasp all this together? Himself knew best how he
could weave so many Webs at once. My manner was, says he, to allot one Month to
each of these Employments. And Variety was almost as much Refreshing, as
Cessation from Labor. Then I was sure to return to none of those courses of
Learning as a Stranger, making my spaces of Absence from none any longer then
those Monthly Revolutions. Manilius.
Howsoever, Viam sibi repperit usus, and I like my own method so well, that I
was constant to it for 13 Years, until I was called off by my Secular
Employments, and when I was discharged of them, I fell again to run round with
my former Circle. He was an exact Philosopher, but chiefly in the Metaphysics,
whose Utility and Necessity he defended in the Schools, Pro more Academico,
when he was Proctor of the University. Having taken such a Preparative of
Metaphysical Quidities, the Potions of School Divinity wrought easily with him,
so that he was not lost a whit in their Intricoes, any further then they lose
themselves, which is not seldom in more Subtilty then Solidity, being like
those Artichokes that have much Core, and little Bottom. He was the first that
made me look into them better when I was a Novice, then all the Conference I
had had with the greatest Doctors did Premonish me before. He said, The best
Thing was, that those Disputative Men crossed and opposed one another eagerly,
which was the way to strike out Sparks of Truth between the Flint and the
Steel. But the worst was, that such Maxims as passed for common Principles
unquestionable on all sides among themselves, were hollow and unsatisfactory.
Chiefly herein they do but beat the Air, they never scann the Interpretations
of any Scriptures, but take them upon Traditional Trust, which are easily wrung
from them by more curious Expositors: So that an hundred Quodlibets all of one
Blood, I may say, being not maintainable, but from such sense of Scripture as
they offered to derive them, are but so many Bastard-Slips begotten upon vulgar
Errors. A young Clerk that reads them, and trusts them, may think they are good
Men, and have paid him the whole Sum of Divinity; but let him weigh their Coin,
and I am confident he will perceive, that they will owe him above half the
Debt. This was a sound Caution from him, to take heed how we Trust: Yet he was
not so easily provoked against those Scholastical Plodders as some are, who
fault them above all, because they have mixed the Learning of Arle, the Topics
of Boethius, and the like, with Conclusions laid down out of the Word of God;
for Prophets and Apostles themselves are not without Embellishments of Humane
Sciences, as well in Argument, as for Ornament: For why may not Sheaves of
Wheat be bound about with Wisps of Straw, that they may not shatter? This
Brable is put into a true Sea^e by a late Author, and is thus poized; Accedens
Philosophia ad Th^ol^gi^^n (...), facit eam (...), s^d facit Sophisticam
adversus eam debilior^m. Divinity borrows no Recruit from Philosophy to make it
self stronger, but to make Sophistry, or Heresy, which impugns it, weaker.

17. Let it be no marvel if I stay long to take a right prospect of his
Studies: To proceed then, you shall find him, as it follows, it the next
Partition. The Jews divide the Months of the Year after their Calculation in
plenos and cavos, some filled, of 30 Days, some unfill'd, of 29 Surely they
were Menses pleni, solid Months of the longest Measure, wherein this Man p^ied
Ecclesiastical History. This one eminent Merit alone, his diligence in reading
History is worthy of an History: For I will deliver it confidently, that I took
him to be the best Proficient in that spacious Knowledge, that this Age brought
forth wherein he lived. His Memory was so trusty, that it made him presume to
be very fleet in Reading. Therefore I know nothing which he had not Read, and I
could observe nothing he had not remembered. (...), as the Greeks boast; Let no
Man compare with Simonides for a Memory. So without boasting I may say, Who
would compare with Mr. Williams but Simonides? He that would try his Cunning in
History when he was old, might wager an Oath upon it, that he fell to it very
young. He moiled a while in Chronology, especially after the Epoch of Times
was meetly well set from the Olympiad of Greece, and Consulships of Rome, yet
he stuck not long in the Briars of Chronologers, from which a Man can never
pluck out his Feet, but referred his own Collections to such Computations of
Years as himself liked best, by which he knew well enough in what Rank to find
his own Notions. And because Cosmography is like Eyes unto the Blind, to lead a
diligent Man in all the Journeys of the Earth, through which diverse Authors
carry him, he took such Light to walk by as Ortelius held before him; yet he
would confess, that oft-times he was like an Errant-Knight, and knew not in
what Desert he was, till he came to live in York-house a Chaplain to the
Lord-Chancellor Egerton, and then became a Scholar to Mr. Richard Hacklun, a
Prebendary of Westminster, and so his near Neighbor, indeed the most versed
Man in that Skill that England bred, and from him his Preceptor, whom he forgot
not to mention with much Praise, he got as much Thread from Ariadne's Quill, as
served him never to lose himself in any Region or Sea, whether near or remote.

18. Chronology and Chorography were his Bladders to swim with. Now suppose him
lanch'd into the Main Ocean for Historical Traffic. The Writers are but few
that afford any thing to illustrate the Contents of the Old Testament, till the
Jews came back to their own Country again from the Babylonish Captivity. From
that time whatsoever concerned the Records of the Church under the Persian and
Macedonjan Monarchies, together with the Seleuctan and Ptolemae^n Princes, he
had it at his Fingers ends. But after that the Barren brought forth more
Children then the Fruitful, since the propagation of the Christian Faith among
the Nations, the Books are infinite which have compiled Occurrences of
Evangelical Memorials; yet our indefatigable Undertaker was not disheartened to
read over all that was preserved, but ransacked Rolls and Libraries for all
that was hid or lost. Of such as faithful Custody had brought to light, none
escaped him. They are not the Divines of Magdepurg, nor Baronius Annals,
(though twice read over by him) which furnished him with the Title of his
Skill. He knew more then they had observed, from the Originals out of which
they had dug their Ore. Especially he was cunning in all Transactions done
in the old Asian Churches, and no less in the Greek, even to the time of their
Decay, or Ruin rather under the Turkish Tyranny. And because General and
Provincial Councils, the most Pure of them having been Celebrated in the East,
were the brightest Lanthorns of this kind of History, he had observed in them
as much as his Wit could penetrate into. I say as much as he could; for none
was more ingenuous then he to confess his Defects And he did deplore, when
discourse of that Learning was on foot, that the meaning of the Greek Canons
(nay, nor of the Latin likewise) was not opened to the World by an Artifice
that was able to try their Metal. That all Glossators hitherto had mistaken the
Phraseologies, and Terms of Imperial Laws, and quaint Words, having allusion to
popular Speech in those days, which are couched in them. And since he minded me
of such abstruseness in the Contexture of those Canons, I have accused mine own
oversight to my self, that I thought I had known more of the true sense of
those Canons, then now I perceive I do. There wants a Scholar like an Hound of
a sure Nose, that would not miss a true Scent, nor run upon a false one, to
trace those old Bishops in their fuse. A Divine, he ought to be of the first
Magnitude; a Critic, that should be an Hercules in the Greek Tongue; a rare
Canonist, a most Learned Civilian, mightily acquainted with all Pristine
Ceremonies, of a strong and inquisitive Judgment. And since the matchless
Salmasius is lately dead, the Man whom I would have trusted with such a Work
before all others, who is sufficient for such a Task?

19. The Histories of the Occidental Churches of great Bulk, but little Credit,
he knew were both Partial and Adulterated, many of them no better Authors then
Luit prandus, though it was his ill hap more then his Fellows to confess his
Knavery; for he says in his third Book, that he set himself to write. Ut de
inimicis sumat vindictam, and landibus extollat eos, qui se multis (...)
aff^erant. Such as this plain-dealing Fellow, and all after him, that struggled
to raise up the Grandeur of the Rom^n Court, Mr. Williams had read them and had
hanged them all upon the File of his Memory; and could vouch each or them to
King James, when a Question was asked about any of their Contents, as if it had
been the freshest thing in his Mind, which he had perused but an hour before. I
think bona side, there was no Man born more like to Eum^es in our Divine Poet
Mr. Spencer's Description, Recording all Things which this World does weld,
laying them up in his Immortal Scrine, where they for ever Incorrupted dwelt.
Let the Reader, if he be not struck enough into Wonder already, be advertized
further, that he could as readily and as dexterously recite Things which had
been done in our British and English Churches, from the first Infancy of them
to his own days, as if it had been written in the Palm of his Hand. He carried
in his Mind an Universal Idea of all Synods and Convocations that were ever
held in our Land, of all our Cathedrals, their Foundations, Conditions of
Alteration, Statutes, Revenues, etc. As he had spared for no Travel to purchase
this Skill; so, to fill his Vessel brim full, he received all that Sir Harry
Spelman, Sir Robert Cotton, and Mr. Seldom, his dear Friends could pour into
him. Some will say, his Mind was set upon this Church, and every particular of
it might in some occasion concern him. I will satisfy him that so proposes it,
that there was not a corner of an History, Sacred or Secular, in any Kingdom or
State in Europe which he had not pried into, and wherein he could not suddenly
enlarge himself, whether they were their Wars, or Leagues of Amity; whether
their Laws, Inheritances of their Crowns and Dignities, their Lineages,
Marriages, or what not? The Chronicles of the Empire and German Princes, the
great Partidas of Spain, all the Pieces of Antiquity he could rake out of
French Abbeys, he was expert in them all, as if he had got them by heart. The
issue of his Life bewrayed his End therein; for he made this Study pay him
Wages for all his Labor: For he discerned his own Abuities to be fit for
Public Employment; therefore he searched into the notable Particularities of
all Kingdoms, Republics, and their Churches, with all the Importances that
hung upon them. And he guessed right, that King James would give all he could
ask for such a Minister.

20. The Tertia of his Industry and happy Studies, and the Top-sail of them,
was the reading of the Fathers Greek and Latin. Great was his Diligence in
them; mavelous was his Devotion to their Volumes. These were the casting
Counters, with whom he reckoned all the Items of Christian Truth. The least
stood for a Pound, the best for an hundred. These were the Champions, that
first took the Field to fight the Lord's Battle, all of them the Worthies of
David, whereof the stoutest had lifted up his Spear against 800, 2 Samuel ^. 23.
and chased them. These were after the Apostles the firstborn Sons of the
New-Jerusalem, to whom, by the Blessing of Primogeniture, God had given the
double Portion of Wisdom, and his Spirit. Mr. Williams remembered, and would
remember others of it, when they needed such Advice, that a Disciple of the
Church of England must be their Disciple, and would often cite out of the
Canons concluded in Convocation, an. 1571. That Preachers should teach nothing
in their Preaching, which they would have the People Religiously to observe,
but that which is agreeable to the Doctrine of the Old Testament and the New,
and that which the Catholic Fathers and ancient Bishops have gathered out of
that Doctrine. This is our Directory. Let our Adversaries make the best of it
to their advantage, as the Funambulatory Jesuit C^mpian presumes, Ad patres si
(...)ctum est praeliuns. Let him crow over Capons; we have long laughed at his
Arrogance.

21. I have here a Passage to insert, as well for the Good of others, as for
the Praise of this Man of God. He was as free as Water that runs from a public
Conduit, to lay open his Knowledge to all that would listen to his Discourse.
If I must give Precedence to this Charity to any before him, it shall be only
to that Glorious Servant of God, the Marrow of Learned Communication, the Lord
Primate of Armach. But to our present Matter, thus he would say, as my self and
many others have heard it come often from him. That his Contemporaries in
Cambridge delivered to him by Tradition, which was given to them in the name of
Dr. Whitaker's Resolved Rule. By Proviso, first of all, sift the Chaff from the
Wheat; mark whom Valla, Erasmus, and others, have bored in the Ear for
Counterfeit Pieces; and for the rest, acquaint your selves with the choicest
and least corrupted Editions. The Protestants, to their great Commendation, had
given no cause to suspect them in either kind. They that had notoriously, more
than all others, vented false Wares, were Italian Huckiters; for be^de those
good Authors, Coins, Medals, Monumental Inseriptions in Stone and Brass, nay
nothing of Archaique Value, had escaped their false Fingers. Having separated
the Vi^e from the Precious. expect that all the Leaven of the Fathers is hid,
as the Gospel speaks, in three Measures of Meal. They are very witty and
exuberant in Allegories, which are the Windows of the House; they serve well
for Light, but not a jot for Strength. Another share of their Works is taken up
in maintaining Ecclesiastical Decrees grounded upon Canons and prudent Orders
for Decency and Discipline. And a good Moiety of their Writings presses only
such Matters, as are settled by no more then Canonical, or Humane Authority. No
wonder if now adays we hold such Obligations but in a slip Knot. Variableness
of Customs, alternation of Manners, sundry new Products in new Ages gives power
to dispense, so we abuse not our Liberty to a scornful License. But it is
approveable in Music, to set new Tunes, if we keep the old Gammut. The 34th
Article of the Church of England decides it gravely, That every particular or
National Church has Authority to Ordain, Change and Abolish Ceremonies and
Rites of the Church, Ordained only by Man's Authority, so that all Things be
done to Edifying. Now these Canonical and Human Decretals are Butteresses to
the House of God, they are raised up without the Walls, but all that is within
is the stronger for their Supportance. The third Part of the Heavenly
Extraction of the Fathers, the Pearl growing between the two Shells premised,
is Dogmatical, their Doctrine of Faith, and Works necessary to Selvation In any
of which, when many of them consent we may well presume, that the Spirit of
Christ breathed in them. For the Martyrdom of soms, the Humility, Self-denial,
and Sanctity of them all will attest, that they intended the Truth; and one
Point of Success, that those who gainsaid them, never took Root, or prosper'd,
will persuade you that they found the Truth. Neither is there any Reverence
toward them diminished by this distinction, that what they sowed in the Field
of God, saving here a little, and there a little, was sound Wheat; but all that
they mowed down were Weeds, or Heresies without exception. Thus far He, or
rather Dr. Whitaker; whose Antagonist Duraeus would seem to ascribe more to the
Fathers; indeed it is but a seeming. Says he, We assent to all the Doctrine of
the Holy Fathers, to all of it without exception. A mighty Concession, but his
Hand slacks immediately; N^que patres censentur, cum suum aliquid, quod ab
Ecclesia non accep^^^, vel seribunt, vel docent: For if they write or teach any
thing, which they have not received of the Church, they are not to be esteemed
Fathers. As like to Plato's Sophister, as one drop of Water to another, who
would prove that no Shoemaker did ever make a bad Shoe; for he that made a bad
Shoe, was not Master of his Crast, he was not a Shoemaker.

22. I will invite the Reader but to the notice of one Thing more upon this
Title. This Man was the least Distasted, so far as I have known Men, among all
of his Profession, with a Scholar that was diverse from him in a Theological
Debate. And this, he said, he learned from the moderation of the Fathers, who
were zealous Upholders of the Glory of the Blessed Trinity, of Christ, and of
his M^diatorship, and of the Covenant of Grace for the Redemption of Penitent
^ners; but for differences of Questions which were not so prime and
substantial, they caused no angry Contract about them, much less a Separation
of Churches. St. Cyprian is praised for this Candor by St. Austin, De Bap. con.
Donat. lib. 3. c. 3. in this wise: Cyprian was not to be removed from a darling
Opinion of his own, too much his own, about Re-baptizing of those that had been
Baptized by Heretics, yet so as, Nominem judicantes, nee a jure communio^s
aliquem, si diversum senser^, amov^ntes. I like this Concordance, says Austin,
with two Explanations: 1. In iis quaestionibus quae nondum eliquatissima
perspectione discussae sunt. 2. Exceptis iis quae jam sunt d^sinita in tota
Ecclesia. First, Not to think the worse of any, much less to make a Rupture for
maintaining Opinions, which were not discussed so far to be convincing and
conspicuous. Secondly, To be the bolder with them, if they were the Tenets of
some Men only, and not the Definitions of the Church Univeral. O that many
living Stones, now scattered from one another, were cemented together with this
Mortar! O that such as are rigidly addicted to their own Fancies, would desine
less, and leave more charitable Allowance to their weak, or at least dissenting
Brethren! O that there were less Enclosure, and more common Pasturage in the
Church for poor Cottagers! And I wish again, that it were wisely considered,
that a good Conscience may continue in our Brother, though he be not so found
in some lesser Truths. Then you would not deny him your Love, because he
submits not his Wit and Reason to all your Persuasions. Many hot Opiniators of
our Age are little better then the S^maritans, as described by Epiphanius,
Haeres. 61. (...): They thought it piaculous to touch a Man, that did not
Dogmatize as they did. Therefore how many Slanders must they put up quietly,
who were of Mr. Williams his Equanimity, sociable with them that are at point
blank contradiction in some Quarrels of Polemical Divinity, n^y as ready to
prefer the one side as the other, how sure is this to be called by our
F^ri^s^'s lukewarm and undigested Christianity? I have seen the Life (...)
Renowned Friar Padre P^^lo of Venice, written in Italian by his (...) and (...)
tersely and faithfully into English by that Gentleman (...) great and elegant
Parts Mr. (...) Secretary to this He^oical Prelate, of whom I write, when he
was Lord-keepe^: Out of that Piece I shall observe many Things as I can
overtake them in fitness of Time; this comes to me now under (...), that
Fulg^^io cannot deny, that Father Paul was Libel'd for a stupid (...) Man,
(...) careless of Religion, because when two perhaps were divided which was the
Truth, he made a good Construction of them both. To put this into the Trial of
an Instance; it is as recent to me, as if it had been (...) done, what befell
this prudent Man I write of, for looking upon (...) of two vehement Factions,
and yet laying a Bet on neither (...). He had a mighty Insight into the seventh
Volume of St. Austin's Works, wherein that holy Bishop has so divinely
contended for the Efficacy of Grace against (...), and Semipclagians. For his
own part, St. Austin had possessed him, and he was over entirely his Adherent
in those Controversies. Many others of exquisite Learning were not convinced
with St. Austin's Judgment. The Schools had many that ventilated those
impenetrable Conceptions, pro and con; at first, with sharpness of Learning; at
last, with more sharpness of Enmity. The Netherlanders unluckily invented
several Names for these Scholastical Skirmishes, Remonstrants, and
Contra-Remonstrants. Ate, and the Furies of Contention, came among us out of
Belgia with these Names. Reproaches, and all sorts of unkind Discriminations,
succeeded. But he, whose Praise is under my Pen, held his Augustinian
Conclusions, but never disparaged, (...), never condemned the Judgment of them
that opponed, but commended both Tribes with this P^acidness, that himself, and
those of his Mind went upon this Ground, to be circumspect to ascribe all Good
unto God; and that the adverse part were very cautious to state their Cause so,
as to ascribe no Evil to God. If the most Learned in the World could not decide
how to join both these together, without some jarring Consequences, let us meet
together in Peace, till God had decided it. Was not this sweet and candid? Yet
it was called in him, and in others of that Moderation, Sluggishness,
Craftiness, Neutrality and the like; as if in points unfundamental and
unresolved, every man must be a Guelph or a Gibelline. Whereas by deep
inspection it will appear, that many such Opinions are of as even choice as two
Shillings, though not of the same Stamp, yet of the same weight; it is all one
which you Receive in Pay.

23. Such a Scheme, as I have drawn forth at large of his profounder Studies,
was expedient to be put whole together, to avoid the trouble of broken
Interruptions. With the weight of those Plummets, his Wheels began to turn
about at the 25 year of his Age: And with the same Plummets the Clock went even
Hour from Hour, from Month to Month, to the expiration of his Life. He never
changed his fashion. Now let me invite such as may peruse these Papers to go
back with me, and to look upon him again in the Spring of his Mastership of
Arts. For who has despised the day of small things? as the Prophet says,
Zachar. 4.10. And because he made his first, and most advantageous Sallies into
the World about this time, being employed for his College in Civil or Litigious
Causes, call them as you will, I will bring him upon that Stage before I go
further. Dr. Clayton, the Head of St. John's College at that time, was a careful
and prudent Governor at home, Thrifty for the public Stock, Meek and quiet as
any of that Dignity. Yet it is not possible that so numerous a Society should
be so fortunate, to dispatch all their business among themselves, what by Suits
of Law, which burst in upon them by bad Tenants; what by frivolous complaints
often Raised by their own Members, but by these and other sudden Claps, against
which there is no prevention, the Governor being very Aged, and wisely
contented to dispatch others to struggle in such contestations, he sent forth
diverse that were Trusty and Judicious to be employed in such designs. But if it
were a knot to be cleaved by a strong Wedg, he did always entreat Mr. Williams,
either alone, or with colleagues, to manage such an Enterprise. As the Greeks
Adagy goes, Nil sine Theseo, Theseus made one in every Masterpiece of
Chivalry: Such was our Theseus to the Athens where he lived. And he was
considerately looked upon for such service, for he well understood any thing he
went about, he had a fineness to be Gracious with them to whom he was sent, and
no man could deliver a Tale more smoothly, or wrinkle it less with digressions,
or Parentheses. To say much in brief, he had the Policy and Gravity of a
Statesman, before he had a Hair upon his Chin. The Messages of greatest Trust
committed to him from the College were to these Eminent persons that follow; To
the Earl of Salisbury Chancellor of the University. By the way I can Witness
that he much lamented, that he knew that most Wise Lord Cecil no longer, or
upon no greater occasions; whom he extolled above all Wits, spying him through
the Trial of such petty matters as were brought before his Lordship in his
Presence: For, as if the Chancellor had a Spirit of Divination, he would
instantly discover, whether the Suit made to him were fit for his serious care,
or whether it were but Faction and Envy, the Diseases of Scholars within their
own Walls, that made a Clamor for Justice. Upon such like Errands for his
Society, he was admitted sometimes to Speak and Argue before the true Pillar of
the Church, Archbishop Bancroft. And upon this Reverend Father he gained so
far, by his neat Wit and decent behavior, that the Archbishop sent for him
two years before he was Batchelour of Divinity, and ex mero motu gave him the
Advouzon of an Arch-Deaconry in Wales (Cordigan, if I forget not) which came to
the Metropolitan by his customary Prerogative. I am not certain when it fell
void, and came to Mr. Williams's possession. This I am sure of, that he sat in
Convocation in the Title of this Arch-Deaconry the year 1613. expiring, when
Dr. Lake, Holy and Learned Dr. Lake was Prolocutor. Sometimes also he
Petitioned Lord Chancellor Egerton for the same Foundation. And in a Lucky
hour. For the Lord Chancellor in those Addresses quickly found him out, that
he was a Jewel fit for his own wearing; which broke forth in due time, as shall
be comprised in the sequel. And to rise up one step more upon the degrees of
God's Providence, the Master and Fellows aforesaid deputed him for their Agent
to the Court to Petition the King for a Mort-main, thereby to bring some
increment to their maintenance. It is no New thing to say he sped in the Suit^
for when did he miscarry? You have him right in that Elogy, which Aurelius
gives to Septimius Severus, acer erat ingenio, and ad omnia quae intenderat in
finem perseverans: His Wit was sharp, and drew success after it, as the Needle
does the Thread, and his Industry was restless, till he had his End for which he
Labored. The marvel is that his Worth and Activity should make such impression
in the King, that his Majesty upon some occasion told him of it long after,
when he was then become His Highness's principal Officer.

24. These were the noted Adventures which our young Academian, by deputation
from his College, did make abroad; but his Staple was at his Study at home,
where his Light did break out openly in great splendour upon this occasion. On
Candlemass-Day Anno 1608. his Reverend Friend Dr. Playfere departed out of this
World, in the 46 year of his Life, in his Flower and Prime; whose greatest
well-wishers did not wish him alive again, because his rarely beautified Wits,
with which he had even enchanted his hearers in so many estivat commencements,
were now more and more distempered. Yet Mr. Williams wept over him, and
exceeded in Grief, as if a Child had lost his Father. The University making
preparation for the Solemn Funeral of so great an Ornament to it, the
Vice Chancellor that then was Dr. Jeggon possessed the Pulpit to Preach, and Mr
Williams was required to be the Orator, to give him a farewell of due praise in
the Chapel of St. John's College. He pleaded the Truth, that his sorrow would
not grant him such a dispassionate mind, as was fit to compose a Panegyric and
that in the space of three days, and for such a man as Dr. Playfere. And with
this Excuse he held off, till Dr. Clayton, set upon it to enforce the Tasque on
him that could best discharge it, Threatened him with expulsion, if he refused
that Service to which his Superiors had allotted him. An hard condition, and
such as might have been disputed, as long after I heard him Argue upon it. But
then he yielded, whether fair means or foul means overcame him I know not: But
I think rather Love than Fear got the upper hand of Grief. And when ^his Turn
came to speak upon the day of the Obsequies, O what a tunable Music he made
between his Rhetorique and his Tears! for both flowed together. How curious
were his Apostrophes! How moving were his Passions? How winning his
pronunciation? Many pauses he was compelled to make by the Applause and humming
of the Swarms about him in the close of his Periods. When he had done, and the
Assembly brake up, it was in every Mouth, that Playferes Eloquence was not dead
with him, while this Orator was alive. Let me trouble this Narration with a
small interjection. I was my self in the throng among those that heard this
Oration, newly admitted into Trinity-College, that being the second day wherein
I wore my Purple Gown. This being the First Exercise that I heard in Cambrige
in the Latin Tongue, I thought it was a City paved all with Emeraldes, and that
such Learning and such Silver Elocution was common to them all. But there is a
saying in Macrobius, a great Orator being the Subject, which might have made me
Wiser; it is thus, ad notam seculi sui non sufficit Hortensius. All men that
lived in that Age were not like Hortensius; and among a bundle of Gods, the
Poets have feigned but one Mercury; and although the success of this Funeral
Encomium was much to the Authors praise, yet I have it from his own Testimony,
that he never suspected himself so much as then in all his Life, least he
should have shamed his own parts, and Trespast against the Honorable Memory of
the Dead, because his Wits were bedarkened with a Cloud of Sadness. But I see
that falls out otherwise, with many more than he imagined. The Noble Author of
the History of the Council of Trent has remembered, that the Letters of the
Cardinal of Lorain, ween he was struck with horror of Grief for the untimely
Loss of his Brother the Duke of Guise; I say, his Letters consolatory written
in that plunge and amazement of Sorrow to his Sister the Duchess, were the
most full, the most sententious, the most flourishing in Phrases that ever he
wrote. No instance can go higher that that of the Prophet Jeremy, whose
Eloquence and curious Figures in his Lamentations were never matched: The
mourning of that Dove is sweeter than the warbling of any Nightingale.

25. Having bought this Credit so dear, with the loss of his dearest Friend, he
grew more considerative to look above him, not about him, to the praise of God,
and not of Men. He had labored four years strenuously in Theological Studies,
and found himself in some Ripeness to do God Service in the Ministry. So
surrendering himself in Prayer to him, that alone gives sufficiency, he received
the Orders first of Deaconry, then of Priesthood in the 27 year of his Life.
And being recommended to the Grace of God by imposition of hands, presently he
began to labor in his Masters Harvest, and became a Preacher of more frequency
and diligence, than it uses to be with Fellows of houses for the greater part.
Who stay too much upon their preparation before they buckle to the work of
their calling, like Mowers that are longer in whetting their Sith, then in
cutting down the Grass. And that the Lord when he came might find him careful
in tending like a good Steward over the Household, immediately with the Office
of his Ministry he took the charge of a Living, the scantling of it very mean,
and it could be no better after the Letter of the Local Statutes where he
Lived, that he might keep his Fellowship with it. It lay beyond St. Edmunds
Bury in the confines of Norfolk, (perhaps Fakenham, or very near to it) it was
the flitting Milk of a poor Vicarage, the Parsonage Tithes being scumm'd from
it. I know not who presented him to it, but questionless the Benefice sought
him, and not he the Benefice. He had a fair Champion Country to Ride over to it
from Cambridg, which was Exercise with breathing in sweet Air: But the profits
of the living would hardly defray the Costs of his Journeys. The exility of the
small Revenue took not off his Edge: For it yielded all out as much as he did
drive at, to teach the simple, to attain to a readiness in Preaching, by early
and often practice; and to be acquainted with compassion (I use his own words)
toward the hard condition, which his poor Brethren did undergo, that had
scarce enough to feed them, and keep them Warm for all their Labor. It seems
the people of the Parish were good people, or he thought them such; for in his
highest Honor I heard him Treating with Sir Lionel Talomach of Fakenham, that
Sir Lionel would employ from him an 100 l. to buy Land of five or six pounds
per annum Value, for the Relief of the Poor of that Village to the worlds End.
I hearkened no more after it: For I reckoned it was done: Because every place
wherein he had a Title was the better for his Charity. If further for a deeper
Gage to sound his Learning, some expect to know what he performed in St. Mary's
in Cambridg, rather than in a sorry Vicarage, I can tell them among others that
were present, that he published himself a most rare Preacher in a Sermon made
before the University anno 1610. upon this Text, Luc. 16.22. It came to pass,
That the Beggar died, and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's Bosom. He
handled the points of the Souls Immortality, of the present Blessed ^ss of them
that dye in Gods Mercy, of their Reception into Heaven, of the Ministry of
Angels, whether particularly Guardian, or rather in general to all Christians,
there he discoursed with that depth of Learning, yet liquidating that depth
with such facility of opening it, beside with that Energy and Vigor of Voice
and Sides, that his Auditory granted him to be a loud Cymbal, and a well-Tuned
Cymbal. About Eight Mouths after, being Listed into the Combination of the
choicest Preachers: He was called to do that Duty before K. James and Prince
Henry at Royston, whereupon the King spoke much good of him, but the Prince
taking great notice of him as an Honor to Wales, was not satisfied to give him
encouragement of praise, but gave him his Princely Word, that He would Reward
him after the weight of his Worth. But the Father bestowed that preferment on
him, which the Prince, taken away by early Death for our Sins, intended. I
heard of this Sermon Six Weeks after, and by a merry Token; for having occasion
to come to that hunting Court at Royston, I received Hospitality at a Table
full of good Company, where I was asked over and over, especially by the old
Britains, what Place and Dignity Mr. Williams had in Cambridge; every one of
them could tell me he made a most Excellent Sermon before the King, but for
their parts they had been such attentive Hearers, that among them all I could
not Learn the Text.

The Fame of our accomplished Preacher, who had taken the University and the
Court so far with his Merits, as none more, spread far: And he wanted not
Friends in the Lord Chancellor Egertons Family to acquaint his Lordship with
it, who instantly preferred him before all Competitors, and said no more, but,
Send for him, and let me have him. This was at Midsummer anno 16^1. That Lord
Chancellor was a great Patron to Divines, but then they must be of many
degrees above Mediocrity; and those whom he picked out for the Service of his
House, were of the first, and as it were, Seraphical Order. And such indeed
were Dr. Richard Field, Dr. King Bishop of London, Dr. Carew Bp. of Exon; and
as one of that stamp, he was pleased to entertain Mr. Williams. But when he
came to London to be Approved for that Service, after great and humble
acknowledgment of his Thankfulness, he prayed the Lord Chancellor he might
continue a year, or the greatest part of it at Cambridg, before he came to wait
constantly in his Lordships Honorable Family, because at Michaelmass following
he was to enter upon the Proctor-ship of his University, a place of Credit and
some Emolument. And may you not fulfill that place by a Deputy? says the
Chancellor, My Lord, says the Chaplain, I must take an Oath upon my admission
into that Office, to oversee the Government entrusted to me, not in general
Terms only of Faith and Diligence, but for the due Provision of many particular
Branches of the Statutes; and I dare not trust my Oath with another man's
Conscience. To so fair a Plea, he got a gentle concession, where I must show
him in his Honor of Proctorship, before he return again to my Lord Egerton.

I have more to say, than to tell the World he was Junior Proctor of Cambridge:
So have many been, who did nothing, but that which deserves to be forgotten;
like Consuls that acted nothing, and were useful for nothing but to have the
Fasti known by their Names. His was (...), or a a procuration indeed (so it is
Translated out of Xenophon) which he filled up with as much real Worth and
Value, with as much Profit and Dignity to the University as could be dispatched
in the Orb of that Government. The first place wherein Epaminondas appeared
publicly among the Citizens of Thebes, was the Surveyorship of the Highways
and no better, Et muneri Dignitatem addidit, says Valerius lib. 3. c. 4. He
gave Luster by his management to that petty Function. It holds as right, as
possibly an Example can match a thing, in this instance. It is well known our
Proctor came into this Magistracy burdened with great expectation, which
measure he filled up, and exceeded it. He rose with great Light, and set with
more Brightness than he rose. Happy were those times that heard his Plinian
Orations (for his Style had that Savor) that heard his Aristotelian
disputations, that enjoyed the Fruit to hear him moderate at the Morning
Exercises between a Master and a Bachelor. Methinks yet I do hear him
inveighing, as I did once, against the Sloth of the Batchelors, for
degenerating from themselves and the Ancient Customs of the Schools, as of a
fearful Metamorph^is with those Words, Nam vos mutastis and illas. He was an
assiduous Overseer and Interlocutor at the Afternoon Disputations of the Under
Graduates. Some of the most hopeful he enflamed with his Praise: Not a few
Tasted of his Bounty, and in no meaner Mettle than Gold. I know a man whom he
took Notice of at those Acts, who is the better for his good liking to this
day. It was greatly commendable in him that he disdained not to be President
himself at these (...), but attended at them, and acted in them viva voce, and
did not put off the Work to Journey-men. The Night-watches indeed, he committed
sometimes to Deputies, as the manner is, to compel the Looser sort from their
Haunts of Inns and Taverns, and Houses of ill Fame. But when he held the Staff
in his own hand, he perceived he prevailed most. And it was sensible to the
Eye, That he reclaimed many from disorder; not that in all the year he
damnified any one by censure, that I could hear of: Neither did he use to make
a crackling Noise with contumelies and Threatenings. But won Regard to his Place
by Sweetness, by Affableness, by Persuasions, as dealing with Scholars, not
with Peasants; with Freemen, and not with Servants. This I am sure of, by his
Prudence and Vigilance Scandals of corrupted behavior abated, but increased
not. And what any of his Successors of the sowrest Rigor could do more, I know
not.

27. In this Procuratorian year, it is as due as any thing to be Remembered, how
he behaved himself in three weighty occurrencies. Soon after Christmas, the
Kings Majesty Commanded the Heads of the University, to give entertainment,
such as might be prepared of a sudden, to a German Prince, and his Train. It
was the Duke of Wittenberg. I cannot err in that I suppose; for we of the
younger fort were taught to know him by that Name; and his Style at every Word
was his Excellency. The Duke was singularly Learned for one of that Eminency
and Illustrious Blood. Therefore it was thought meet to receive him in the
Public Schools with a disputation in Philosophy, performed by the most expert
Professors of it, who were ready, we were sure, at the shortest warning. I must
do him Right to him that was the first Opponent, that he charged the Repondent
bravely with Arguments of the best Artillery. It was Mr. Wr^n of
Pembrooke-Hall, now the Reverend and Afflicted Bishop of Ely whose Enemies God
has punished with such hardness of Heart, that he being never yet brought to
Answer to the Objections of his Persecutors after Ejection out of all his
Estate, and after Twelve years of Imprisonment in the Tower, he continues still
in that cruel Durance. But I look back to my own Matter. Mr. Prectour Williams
was the President or Moderator at this Learned Act; who by discretion, as well
as other sufficiency, outstript them all. For, as the Apostle of the Gentiles
says, He was made all things to all Men, so the Proctor managed his part before
this Prince alla Tudesea, to Dutchmen he became a Dutch Philospher, for all
his Conceptions he confirmed by Quotations out of Julius Pacius. G^^l^^ius,
Keckerman, and others, that had been Professors within the Districts of the
Gorman Principalities, which was so unexpressibly acceptable to the Duke of
Wittenberg and his Retinue, that they kept him in their Company so long as they
stayed in Cambridge, and would never part with him; and in fine, carried him in
their Caroaches to Nowmarket, and acquainted the King what Credit he had done
to their Country Philosophers.

28. The next Passage is of another frame; and tried his Judgment, not his
Learning. The Earl of Salisbury, that famous Lord-Treasurer, had Governed our
University as Chancellor from the Year 1600, with good liking to all. Uxit dum
vixit been. He lest this World May 24. 1612. In the Election of a Successor,
the Regent-House, in whom the Choice was, were improvidently divided. The
greater Number gave their Voices for Henry Earl of Northampton, Lord
Privy Seal, sometimes a Gremial of our Body, superlatively Learned, a Writer of
Books in Queen Elizabeth's days, that especially against Judicial Astrology is
of as elegant Contexture, as any that are written in more Sunny Climates:
Beside, he was very Rich, and a Bachelor; a Founder already of a charitable
and handsome Pile of Building at Greenwich. Therefore such as devised all good
ways to attract the Benevolence of Liberal and Wealthy Men unto us, hoped he
would be very beneficial to Cambridge his Mother, which now cast her self into
the Arms of his Governance and Patronage. So far the adverse Part could not
dislike him. One and the only thing to them of ill digestion was, that Vox
populi, not the Jealousy, but the Clamor of Court and Country was, that he
was no better then a Church-Papist: That certainly his Heart was more with the
Consistory of Rome, then of Cambridge. These, with whom this Objection stuck,
were close Students, plain and honest Men, the least of all others acquainted
with the World abroad. Therefore they run blindfold upon a desperate way; and
to discountenance or discourage the Lord Privy Seal, they put one, far better
then himself, in balance against him, the King's second Son, Charles Duke of
York his Highness, though then but in the 12th Year of his Age. The Lord
Privy Seal had far more Votes in the Scrutiny for his Election, and so it was
in all Post-haste signified unto him. But he took on with all Impatience to be
so Abused, to be made Competitor with the King's Son, and to prevail in the
Election. And the King was more Wroth with the Simplicity, or rather
Presumption of those silly Clerks, that durst Nominate his Dear and Tender Son
the Duke to any Place or Office, before they had begged Leave in all Humility
for the Royal Assent. A few of these received a great Check for it at the
Council Table, and were a while under the Custody of Pursuivants. For their
Error, the whole University was under as black a Cloud of Displeasure, as ever
I knew it in all my time, and floated like a Ship in a great Storm, that knew
not where to Anchor. The King exclaimed at them for Heady, Inconsiderate,
swayed by Puritanical Factions. The Lord Privy Seal, the Elect Chancellor,
shrunk up his Shoulders, and made an Answer of fine Words, and well set
together, 'That he was not worthy to have the Primacy or Pilotship 'over the
Argonauts of such an Argosie: But in Rude English it was no better, then that
He scorned their Proffer. The Lords of the Council told them plainly, They
deserved no Chancellor among the Peerage, who had so spitefully confronted an
Earl of that Eminency. The Vice Chancellor Dr. Gouch, with the Sophies of the
Consistory, Resolved, That this was not a Sore that would heal with delay,
therefore they dispatch Proctor Williams with their Letters, to offer himself
before the King, though the Storm blew stiff against him. So he came to the
Court at Greenwich, and casting himself upon his Knees before the King with his
Letters in his hand, the King, with no pleased Countenance, asked him what he
would have. Sir, says he, my self, and they who sent me, crave Justice of Your
Majesty in the behalf of Your University of Cambridge, which suffers under Your
Displeasure in that sort, as I believe never any of Your Subjects did before,
that nineteen Parts of a great Incorporation should be Condomn'd, for the
Frowardness, and that unpreventable by all the Power we had of the twentieth
Part, and they the meanest of us all. We beseech You, Grati^us Sovereign, to
Name a Chancellor to preside over us, or suffer us to come to Your Majesty upon
all Occasions as unto our Chancellor, not made so by the suffrage of poor
Scholars, You are far above that, but in the sublime Title of Your Kingly
Office, by which You are obliged to Protect all Your People, that are
Unprotected. This confident Speech was enough to hint to so wise a King, that
this was not the Style of Guiltiness; so Justice being even the Girdle of his
Loins, and Mercy dropping easily from his Lips, like an Honeycomb, without
streining, he gave the Petitioner his Hand to kiss, and bad him bid those that
sent him, to take Courage in looking well to their Charge in the University.
All Errors lately committed were struck off. They should have Power to choose
their Chancellor; for he would not take their Right of Free Election from them.
His further Pleasure should be declared in his Letters, which would be at
Cambridge before him, if he made not haste home. And indeed the Proctor and the
Letters came thither both in a day, which being opened, signified to the
Vice Chancellor, and the Heads assisting, That they should forthwith call a
Congregation, and resume an Election for a new Chancellor, and that His Majesty
would constrain him to hold it, whosoever it were that the Congregation agreed
upon. The Heads were yet in a Quandary, and knew not well what to do, because
the King was not more Particular, and seemed to be ill pleased with the
Proctor, that he had dived no further into His Majesty's Meaning: For they
feared to fall upon a new Rock, because His Majesty had pointed at no Person,
nor disclosed His Meaning by any Decipher or Intimation. Nay, says the Proctor,
I shall help this Mistake before you stir from hence. Certainly there is one
Clause in the Royal Letters, which sets up the White at which all our Votes
should aim: For none has declared a flat Refusal of this vacant Place but the
Earl of Northampton, therefore none else can be meant in this Passage, "That
whomsoever we Choose, the King will constrain him to hold. It were not proper
to think, that any Grandee in the Realm, beside that Lord, should need to be
constrained by the High Power and Prerogative of our Sovereign to be our
Patron. The Riddle being so luckily Unfolded by this Oedipus, the Business was
concordiously dispatched; and then the King confessed, that they had hit upon
the Interpretation of his secret Meaning. Which abounded to the Praise of Mr.
Williams's Solertiousness; and indeed in an hundred Instances more, he was as
dextrous as in this, to hunt upon a Fault, and to recover upon a Loss: But as
Cicero says, Orat. pro Cecinna, cujus prudentiam pop. Romanus in cavendo,
nunquam in decipiendo perspexit. The Lord Privy Seal soon after took his Oath
with due Solemnity to be our Chancellor, and gave civil Entreaty when the
Esquire-Beadles, or other Ministers of our Body came to him. And we can boast
of no more that came from him; who went out of the World before his Sickness
was suspected, Jun. 15.16 14. The Golden Mountains we hoped for, and promised
to our selves from his Liberality came to nothing; and the University was not
the better for him by the worth of a Barly-Corn.

29. There remains one Passage more justly devolved to be last and lowest; for
it had more of Success, then of good Success in it in my judgment. Dr. Clayton
the Master of St. John's College died, a good old Man, about the beginning of
June. His Breath no sooner expired, but the Fellows, who have all Right of
Election, first began to Confer, and then to Canvas for a Successor. It was
soon discovered that the swaying Men, and that were fit for the bandy of such a
Business, meant to set up Mr. Owen Gwin one of the Senior Fellows. Others
looked out for one that was Simplicitor optimus, and they hit him. It was the
Darling of Divines, Dr. Morton, then Dean of Winton, now Lord Bishop of Durham,
the Polycarpus of our Smyrna the Church of England, whose Piety and Humility
are Incomparable, his Learning most Admirable, and his long Age most Venerable.
Almost all the true Children of the Muses blessed their Endeavors that acted
for such a Man, saying with the Psalmist, We wish you good luck in the name of
the Lord. But this Patriarch, as I may call him, was not like to carry the day
by the Consent of the most. Too few stood up for him, too few by one
especially, and that one was Proctor Williams. O how could one of his deep
Reach, and passing great Love to his Society prefer an obscure one, scarce to
be named before the Man that had all good Men's Applause, Dr. Morton? If there
be any thing to be said to make it look fair on his part on one side, it is
this, Mr. Gwin had been his Tutor. A high Spirit, of which he was guilty, will
rather Trespass, then not repay the least Benefit it had received. Nay, a wise
Man dare not incur such a Folly as to be Ungrateful. Says Comines, lib. 2. Mihi
absurdum quiddam esse videtur hominem prudent em ingratum esse posse. For great
Ones, before they will collate a Favor to make a Man, and raise him up, will
desire to be satisfied, how he has carried himself to other Obligations? What
Fidelity has he shown to former Benefactors? Ecclus. 3.34. He that requiteth
good turns, is mindful of that which may come hereafter. The relation of
Pupilship pricked on Mr. Williams to do any thing that was in his power for
him, that had so much Interest in his Breeding. But while he was struggling and
wooing his Friends to advance that Choice, he solicited Mr. Sen. house, a very
rare Preacher, as Floury as the Spring-Garden, afterward Bishop of Carlisle, who
bespake him fairly again. Sir, if you desire my Voice to confer the M^stership
upon your self, I will not deny you. I know you, though a young Man, right
worthy of it; but your Tutor shall never have my Suffrage, while I can say No.
After he had prevailed to set Mr. Gwin over that great Society, his Fortunes
carried him away, but he heard so much, that he quickly disliked his own Work.
For there was another in that College, whose Name is best concealed, that was a
robustious driver of Canvasses, who took the whole Rule from Mr. Gwin, (a soft
Man, and given altogether to Ease,) into his own hand, and was like the Major
Domo, by whom all Suits passed, and every Student stooped to him for his
Preferment: To compare great Things with smaller, such another as Victor says
Mutianus proved, after he had advanced Vespasian to the Empire by his Cohorts,
Fiducia meruorum factus insolens, saucy to meddle with all, because he had
deserved so much, and nothing would content him, unless nothing were denied
him. Mr. Williams heard of these Passages too late, when he could not help the
harm he had done. But because he endured much compunction of Mind for it, I
will only commit him for this Fault to the castigation of the wise Poet Horace;
Qualem commendas etiam atque etiam aspice, ne mox
Incutiant aliena tibi peccata pudorem.
Horat. Lib. 1. Ep. 12.

30. It was time for him, after the Settlement of these great Places upon
others, to look to his own Place in the ensuing Commencement, which was even
approaching. The Inceptor-Masters by Prescription have the Right to choose out
of the two Proctors whom they please, to be the Father of the Act, as we
Cantabrigians call it. It is a strange Aenigma, that the Sons should beget
their Father. It lights commonly, as if it were Postulatum Mathematicum, upon
the Senior. But because he that now was the Elder, if ever he had Polite
Learning fit for such a Performance, had out-grown it, therefore because he was
no Elder that could Rule well, the Inceptors gave the Younger the double
Honor. This Commencement was as Gay and full of Pomp, by the great Concourse
of Nobles and Gentlemen, as ever I saw. The Acquaintance and Fame of the
Proctor drew the most. The Welsh Gentry were enough to fill the Scaffolds.
Beside such as repaired thither at that Season from Lord Chancellor Elsmore's
House, and the very brave Attendance of the Lord Privy Seal, the lately
confirmed Chancellor of the University, diverse others attended the Elder
Brother of the Act. Sir Charles Stanhop Knight of the Bath, only Son and Heir
to John Lord Stanhop of Harington, a comely Gentleman, that took his Degree of
Master, and well deserved it, as much by the Proficiency of his Learning, as by
the Title of his Blood. These Gallants must be Feasted by the Proctor, and
there was no Want, I would there had been no Superfluity. These Costly and
Luxurious Meals are the Lard of our Commencements, thrust in among the better
Banquets of Scholastical Exercises. The Proctors Table was more Sumptuous (I
understand my Comparison) for the time, then uses to be at a Mayoralty in
London. I do not reckon it among his clean and unblemished Praises. But if I
may presume to sit Judge over his Thoughts, I believe He took Parsimony to be
most uncivil Behavior. The Prevaricator made me smile, when he gave him this
Character to his Face, Titus Largius primus Dictator Romanorum. To express my
self a little further: These Messes of good Cheer ought to be frankly set out
at the times of such Genial and Gaudy Days. It were a wise World, if they could
be kept within Moderation. The wise and well-governing Heathen Romans had Leges
Cibarias, as old thrifty Cato termed them: Leges sumptum comprimentes, in the
Style of Tertullian in his Apology. I take it from A. Gellius, lib. 2. c. 24.
that the Sum of 300 Sestertii, and no more were permitted to be spent in feriis
Solennibus, which comes to about 40 Shillings, or a little under, as I cast it
up with my Counters. Yet Liberal Julius Caesar indulged on such Occasions the
Expense of 1000; his Nephew Augustus bounded it up to 2000; which comes not
altogether to 15 Pounds of our Money, Ut his saltem finibus Luxuriae
effervescentis aestus coercerctur. And this was granted only to Senators, the
Princes of the World, and not to Scholars, and that neither but, in Nuptiis and
Repotiis, at the Feast of the Bride, and the Repotations of the Bridegroom. I
want not Commission to spend this little Ink, and it is but very little, upon
this Subject. For the Holy Scriptures speak of Salomon's Feasts, as well as of
Salomon's Wisdom: Howsoever these Junquets, and the mention, are quickly taken
away with a Voider. The Feasts of his Learning and Eloquence, demonstrated in
the Theater of the Commencement, (that was the open Housekeeping) were far
more delicious and sweet to the Ear, then Meats could be to the Belly. All his
Speeches were damask'd quite over with most pleasant Allusions out of Greek and
Latin Authors. This was the last Scene acted on the Stage of that one Year's
Office, and it had the loudest Plaudite. Indeed this was the Vintage, when more
then ever before he pressed out the ripe Grapes of his Elegancies: Virgil.
Georg.
Tumidisbumasta racemis. These were his Olympic Wrestlings, wherein he got the
Mastery in all sorts of Exercises. As Laertius says of Democritus, lib. 9.
(...); So this Champion got the best at all the Weapons of Philosophy. Selected
Questions were disputed, and fit for the greatest Celebrity of the Year,
extracted out of the Politics, Natural Theorems, and the Metaphysics, he became
Victor in every Duel. And so he shut up his Proctorship (as to the Learned
Trial of it, here it ended) with that General Testimony of his Praise, Ut
puderet virum altius extollere, as Pollio says of Valerianus, that neither we
could give, nor he with modesty receive a greater Commendation.

31. These Performances being so well over, he left Cambridge, and made a happy
Remove, as a Consul, well approved in the Year of his Magistracy, was
transposed into a Proconsulat, or Charge of a Province, to testify the good
liking of the People to his precedent Office. By this Province, I mean his
Chaplain-Attendance in the House of Lord Chancellor Egerton; a Nest for an
Eagle. From that Step in the House of Lord Chancellor Hatton, Dr. Bancroft
began to rise higher, till he came to be Metropolitan of all England. By the
like Service in the House of Lord Keeper Puckering, Dr. Vaughan first made his
Abilities known, and afterward got his Prince's Favor to sit in the Sea of
London. Now, the Disciple whom these two great Prelates loved so well,
performing that Trust with Lord Egerton, which they had done with his
Lordship's Predecessors, was their Match at least in Dispatch and Judgment;
and, by God's Providence, their Equal in Prosperity. Yet before I settle him
for good and all in this Honorable Family, which will best be done in an whole
Piece without disjoyning it, I must bring him to Cambridge again by an Act of
Revocation. A fond Mother that dotes upon her dear Son, whom she has sent
abroad to be Manner'd and Disciplined, will pick many Occasions, after a little
absence, to recall him. But the Expedient, and not the Fondness, which made the
University borrow him of the Lord Chancellor his Master, after he had been 7
months away, was this: The King's only Daughter, the Glorious Princess
Elizabeth, was married at Whitehall to Frederick Prince Palatine, and Chief
Elector of the Empire at Shrovetide. Nothing could be devised to Honor a Royal
Solemnity with Bravery, Tiltings, Barriers, Masks, and all sorts of Triumphs,
which was not used and presented. The Gallantry of the Court having had
deservedly the first Place in Celebrating these Nuptials, it was Resolved by
the King's Majesty, That His Son-in-Law the Elector, with the Strangers of the
Platz, should be received for a Conclusion with an Academical Entertainment at
Cambridge. The Warning coming to Dr. Carew the Vice Chancellor, a Prudent
Courtly Man, and very fit for the Service, Matters were put in a short time
into Order and Readiness. The Earl of Northampton, our Chancellor, was
expected, for Tradition Immemorial required him at such a season; but the
frugal old Man appeared not. The Charge of great Fare and Feasting was not more
Costly then Welcome to the brave Mind of Dr. Nevile Master of Trinity College;
who never had his like in that Orb, I believe, for a splendid, courteous, and
bountiful Gentleman. His Table was Graced with the Company of Prince Charles,
Prince Elector Frederick the Bridegroom, Count Henry of Nassaw, Lodwick Duke of
Lenox, with a most comely Concourse of Nobles and Gentlemen, both of the German
and English Nations. In two distinct Nights a Comic and a Pastoral Fable, both
in Latin, were Acted before their Highnesses, and other Spectators, by the
Students of the same College. This was Play, the rest was Work. The
Scholastical Dissertations were the Work of the Day, the Church of St. Mary
being Scaffolded for that use.

32. The Vice Chancellor, with the Sages of the Consistory, concluded there
should be a kind of Commencement extraordinary to Congratulate these Potentates
and their Followers. Dr. Richardson, the King's Professor in Divinity, to
manage the chief Place in the Chair; Dr. Davenant to moderate in the
Theological Disputation; and Mr. Collins to answer upon three Questions. The
next Care was for Opponents. And Mr. Williams was so high in the Opinion of all
the Learned Doctors, that he was thought upon in his absence as a most Select
Antagonist for this Conflict, and Letters of Entreaty were directed to him, to
come and fulfill that part, which, upon Assurance of his Sufficiency, was
imposed on him. There was no leisure for a Demur; the straitness of Time said,
either do it, or deny it. But he submitted; yet humbly protesting against
himself from one point of Incapacity, that though he had complete time from the
Midsummer elapsed for the Degree of Bachelor of Divinity, yet he had not taken
it. And without that Title, it was not usual or decent to show himself in the
luster of such an Auditory. Well, (says Dr. Richardson) you speak Reason, yet
we will not want you at this needful time; for I will teach you how to fill up
that empty Circumstance It will be a fortnight yet before our Royal Guests the
Princes will come to us: Prefer your two Questions Pro Gradu this night or to
morrow to me. I know your readiness, that you need take no more time. In five
days after I will meet you in the Schools. Incontinently your Degree shall be
conferred upon you Pro More, or by special Grace. He obeyed. And the Theses,
which upon allowance of such short time he maintained, were these: 1. Peccata
semel remissa (...) redeunt. 2. Qui sacres ordines susecperunt samulari possunt
magnatious ut fructus Ecclestasticos percipiant. Dr. Richardion, who received
from him these T^^ses, as it were the Chartel of Challenge, met him in the
Schools. He was a profound Divine, as famous in the Pulpit as in the Chair,
(which is not usual) a great Linguist, noted for a kind of Omnisciency in
Church Antiquities, of pure Language, yet used not his Pen to Compose his
Lectures but brought his Memory with him, and dictated his Mind with great
Authority. We that frequented at his Polemical Exercises observed, That if the
Respondent that stood before him were not a lusty Game-Cock, but of a Craven
kind, he would shake him a little, but never cast him on his back: But if he
were one of the right Brood, that would strike Spur for Spur, he would be sure
to make him feel the weight of a Professor's Learning before they parted.
Therefore he did not dally with Mr. Williams at this time, but laid at him with
all his Puissance. Nothing could be more delightful for two long hours and
better to us that were the Lookers on. In ventilating the first Question, we
judged that the Doctor of the Chair had twice duck'd the Respondent under
Water, but he quickly appeared again at the top. Once was upon the Objection,
That Original Sin is remuted in Baptism, and yet some Baptized become
Reprobates, and are for ever Tormented. Even so (says the Answerer) for their
Actual Rebellions, but not upon the score of Original, which was wiped out. The
second Shock was upon that Scripture, Matthew. 18.32. where the Lord tells the
Unmerciful Servant, that He had forgiven to him the Debt which he desired, but
since he had no compassion of his Fellow, he should be kept in Prison, till he
had paid all which was due. Though I might decline the Instance (says the
Respondent) because it is Parabolical, yet to encounter the Text more directly,
I say, that the Debt was not cancelled to that rigid and hard Servant, for if
he had his Ap^cha or Quietance, to speak after the manner of Men, he were free
from all insequent Demands. But, I forgave thee, in that Verse, is as much as,
I forbear thee, I did not pross thee, or exact upon thee. Though the Tally was
not struck, yet no Suit was commenced, and a Temporary Forbearance is a kind of
Forgiveness. The Professor was satisfied, and drove his Wedge no further into
that Knot. Upon the second Question, I remember the grave Doctor gave the Onset
somewhat frowningly. But the Pith of his Obligation was, That the Vocation to
Sacred Orders, Ministerium est, non mercatura: Piscatores sumus hominum, non
venatores munerum; that is, Our holy Profession is a Ministry, not a
Merchandise; that we are made Fishers of Men, and not of Livings. The Retorsion
to this had Strength and Sweetness, like Iron that is gilded; Alius est finis
artis, alius artificis: The end of Theology is to gain Souls; the end of the
Theologue, subordinate to the first and Architectonical end, is for an honest
Maintenance and Sustentation. As the end of Art Medicinal is to cure a Sick
Man; but the end of the Physician is to live well upon his Profession. This
agrees with the mind of Seneca, lib. 3. De Benef. That the end of Phidias his
Art was to carve a Statue with likeness, concinnity, and due proportion: Finis
artificis fecisse cum sructu; The Artificer's end was to take Money for his
Work. A Distinction that cuts by an even Thread; which, with all that was
delivered beside, received great Congratulation from the Professor and Auditors.

33. From henceforth he was a Licemiate, as the Transmarines call it, as we a
Bachelor in Divinity: A Relation to beautify his Profession, or rather a mere
Scabbard to put in the sharp-edg'd Weapon of his Learning, out of which he drew
it forth upon a fair Quarrel, which was decided before a glorious Auditory,
Mar. 3. 1612. That was the day wherein the Princes, with the Attendance of
mighty Peers, and one Bishop Dr. James Montagu Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells,
vouchsafed to give a most Gracious Hearing to a public Disputation held between
some of our chief Divines. The Place was filled with the most Judicious of this
whole Island; and some of the Attendants of the Palsgrave so Learned, that One
might stand for many, Plato alone for Ten Thousand: One Abraham Scultetus, a
Worthy greatly looked upon, was able to awake the Diligence of them that had
been Drowsy. But they that were set forth for this Encounter had Metal enough,
and needed no Provocation, but their own Virtue. Dr. Richardson ( Agmen agens
Lausus, magnique ipse agminis instar,) began first with his grave Nestorean
Eloquence, and having saluted Prince Charles, the great expectation of our
future Happiness, (...), as G. Nyssen calls Isaac, the Branch of Succession;
and having blessed his Serenity the Prince Elector the Bridegroom with Solemn
Votes and Wishes to be added to his Hymeneal Joys, then he called forth the Son
of his right hand, Mr. Samuel Collins, (created Doctor at this Commencement) to
stand in the gap, and to maintain the Truth in three Theses against all
Assailants. He was a firm Bank of Earth, able to receive the Shot of the
greatest Artillery. His Works in print against Eudaemon and Fitz-Herbert, Sons
of Anak among the Jesuits, do noise him far and wide. But they that heard him
speak, would most admire him. No Flood can be compared to the Springtide of
his Language and Eloquence, but the milky River of Nilus, with his seven Mouths
all at one disemboguing into the Sea. O how voluble! how quick! how facetious
he was! What a Vertumnus, when he pleased to Argue, on the right side, and on
the contrary! These Things will be living in the memory of the longest Survivor
that ever heard him. In this Trial, wherein he stood now to be judged by so
many Attic and Exquisite Wits, he strived to exceed himself, and showed his
Cunning marvelously, that he could invalidate every Argument brought against
him with variety of Answers. It was well for all sides, that the best Divine in
my Judgment, that ever was in that place, Dr. Davenant held the Rains of the
Disputation; he kept him within the even Boundals of the Cause; he charmed him
with the Caducaean Wand of Dialectical Prudence; he ordered him to give just
Weight and no more. Horat. l. 1. Od. 3. Quo non Arbiter Adriae major tollere,
seu ponere vult freta. Such an Arbiter as he was now, such he was, and no less,
year by year, in all Comitial Disputations; wherein whosoever did well, yet
conslantly he had the greatest Acclamation. To the close of all this Exercise I
come. The grave elder Opponents having had their courses, Mr. Williams, a new
admitted Bachelor of Divinity, came to his Turn last of all. Presently there
was a Smile in the Face of every one that knew them both, and a prejudging that
between these two there would be a Fray indeed. Both jealous of their Credit,
both great Masters of Wit, and as much was expected from the one, as from the
other. So they fell to it with all quickness and pertinency, yet (thank the
Moderator) with all candor; like Fabius and Marcellus, the one was the Buckler,
the other the Sword of that Learned Exercise. No Greyhound did ever give a Hare
more Turns upon Newmarket Heath, then the Replier with his Subtleties gave to
the Respondent. A Subject fit for the Verse of Mr. Abraham Hartwel in his
Regina Literata, as he extols Dr. Pern's Arguments made before Queen Elizabeth:
Quis sulmine tanto tela jacet? tanto fulmine nemo jacet. But when they had both
done their best with equal Prowess, the Marshal of the Field, Dr. Davenant,
cast down his Warder between them, and parted them. A Fable comes into my
Memory, That Vulcan, to despite Diana, made a Dog which should catch every
thing he hunted, called (...), and Diana, to despite Vulcan, made a Fox which
could never be caught in Hunting, called (...): And all the Gods and Goddesses
could never reconcile the Contradiction, till upon one Chase both the Dog and
the Fox ran themselves to death; which Ovid compriseth in a little, Lib. 3.
Metamor. Scilicet invictos ambo certamine cursus
Esse Deus Voluit.


The Moral in a great part may suit well with these two unvanquish'd
Disputants. The Bishop of Bath and Wells, Dr. Montagu, gave great demonstration
of Affection to Mr. Williams ever after his Negotiation in this Act. As
Velleius says, Nulla festinatio hujus viri mentionem debet transgredi: That
Bishop was a Reverend and Learned Father in the Church, a most loving Son to
his Mother the University; he was full of good Works, as Bath and Farnham, and
Winchester-house in Southwark, could testify, if these impious and
overthrowing Times had let them stand, and many more recited by Bishop Godwin
in his Catalogue of Bishops. This was the good Man, who from henceforth was the
truest Friend to Mr. Williams of all that did wear a Rochet to his Last Day;
who, after these two sublime Performances of the Responsion for Batchelorship
of Divinity, and Opponent's Place in the Great-Day before the most Illustrious
Princes, retired to his Home, for so I must now call the Lord Chancellor's
Family.

34. He was now in the House of Obed-Edom, where every thing prosper'd, and all
that pertain'd to him. The Chaplain understood the Soil on which he had set his
Foot, that it was rich and fertile, able with good Tendance to yield a Crop
after the largest Dimensions of his Desires. To be well then, was but to be
well now. His fore-casting Mind thought of the future, how to stock himself
with Experience, with Wisdom, with Friends in greatest Grace, with other
Viaticum for the longest Journey of his ensuing Life. Let me use the Phrase
correctedly, He lived not for half a Time, but for a Time and Times. He never
lived Ex tempore, but upon premeditation to day what to do long after. As a
wise Man says, Non disponet singula, nisi cui jam vitae summa propesita est;
Sen. Ep. 71. Particular Actions will be kept in method, when Providence has
affected the Sum and End of them. As at Chess, the Idea of the Game must be in
the Head of the Gamester, then the Remove of every Chess-man promotes it. The
Chaplain began his part, as any wise Man would, to demerit his Lord with all
due Offices, and prudent bearing, and he got it faster then he fought it. He
pleased him with his Sermons: He took him mainly with his sharp and solid
Answers, to such Questions as were cast forth at Table to prove his Learning:
His Fashion and Garb to the Ladies of the Family, who were of great Blood and
many, was more Courtly a great deal then was expected from a Scholar: He
received Strangers with courtesy, and labored for their satisfaction: He
Interposed gravely, as became a Divine, against the Disorders of the lowest
Servants: And unto all these plausible Practices, the Backbone was continual
diligence. Other Things that commended him no less, or perhaps more, were
these: My Lord Elsmore was at that time Chancellor of the University of Oxford;
whose References and Petitions, when they were brought before that great Judge,
the Chaplain, newly come from the Sister-Corporation, understood them more
suddenly then all that were about his Master; and was cunning at the first
Opening to propound, how to bring them into the just Academical way to be
determined. And the Opinion which he gave did so constantly Arbitrate all those
Complaints, that the truly admired Bishop of London, Dr. King, would sometimes
call him pleasantly, The Chancellor of Oxford. The second Part of his Industry,
to make his Acceptance so gracious, was, That he was stored with Friends in the
Courts of the King and Prince, from whence he gathered Intelligence fit for the
Hearing of his Master: Not blind Rumors, or the frothy Talk of the Lobbies;
but weighty Passages carried in a Mist before they came to Light: Clouds that
at the first rising were scarce so big as an hand, yet portending mighty
Tempests when they fell. For he had a Palate to taste their Court-Wine, when it
was working in the Must. Every day this Sufficiency grew with him more and
more, till he became the only Jewel, which the Lord Chancellor hung in his Ear.
Yet in four months after he fell to this Trade, his best Customer failed him;
the Court of the Prince being Dissolved by the Death of Prince Henry, Nov. 6.
1612. with whom so much Light was extinguished, that a thick Darkness, next to
that of Hell, is upon our Land at this day. O matchless Worthy! live in
everlasting Fame with the Elogy given by that quaint Historian Velleius to
Pub.Rutilius; Non seculi sui, sed omnis aevi optimus. The third Step of
Felicity upon which he clim'd, Eis (...), as it is Athanasius his Metaphor,
into the Bosom of his Master's Soul, was, That he had picked up in a short
space some Gleanings, in his own modest words in the knowledge of the Common
Laws of the Realm, but indeed full Sheaves, if his Acquaintance may be
believed. He remitted not the Studies of his own Science and Profession; but
having read the Tenures, the Doctor and Student, and somewhat else like unto
them, at hours of Relaxation, he furnished himself with no little quantity of
that Learning, by Discourse and Conference, and enquiring after some cases how
they sped in the Courts of Justice. When he was at a nonplus, he respited that
Difficulty till he met with Sir John Walker, (afterward Lord Chief Baron) whose
Judgment was most agreeable to his Genius. This was his Practice, not now, but
all along, to gather up more at the Interspaces of Leisure, then others do at
their Study. Which was the Contrivance of Scipio Aemilianus, the Sir Philip
Sidney of the Old Romans, Neque quisquam Scipione elegantius intervalla
negotiorum otio dispunxit, says the Character of the Author lately cited.

35. Here I will provide a little to set my Shoulder against the Justle of an
Objection. Perhaps some will say, What did the Study of our Laws belong to him?
The Dainties of the Scriptures were his daily Diet prescribed him by his
Calling. Why did he seed upon those coarse Coleworts? And who could spare any
of the Time of this short Life, when the Work of a Divine is more then this
Life can dispatch, so that the Remainder must be learnt in Life Eternal?
Somewhat to that purpose is pithily expressed by Seneca; Quae dementia est in
tanta temporis egestate supervacua discere? Ep. 48. And what say you to the
Judgment of Pope Honorius the Third, who sat, an. 1216. who forbad all Clerks
to study Physic, or the Pandects of the Laws? Or to the Emperor Justin the
elder, who lived 600 years before Honorius, c. leg. 41. Opprobrium est si
Ecclesiastici peritos se velint ostendere legum forensium? I say, those Laws
must be weighed with Grains of Temper and Charity. Whom Nature has made
docile, it is injurious to prohibit him from learning any thing that is
docible. Marie he that forsakes his holy Calling, and lists himself in another
Warfare, that gives himself up wholly to scrape a Livelihood from curing
Diseases, or fogging in Secular Causes, is a Renegado, and must be brought back
again to his Colors with the Infamy of a Fugitive. But far is he from being
guilty of this Fault, who serves Christ Jesus faithfully in the Labor of the
Gospel, and can do it the better by poizing Humane Laws, and trying how
consonant they are to God's Justice; and by searching the Virtue of Plants and
other Creatures, can find out how wonderful the Almighty is in all his Works.
The Collation between Moses and the Imperial Laws, which Paulus Modestinus, and
others of his Robe have made, why may not a Minister peruse it with as much
profit as an Advocate? It were a Tyranny, more then barbarous, to confine a
Wit, that has a Plummet to found the depth of every Well that the Arts have
dug; or to clip his Wings, that he may not fly into every Bush as freely as
the Fowls of the Air. Padre Paulo the Friar, the brightest Star in the
Hemisphere of Italy, was second to none in Divinity while he lived; equal with
the best Doctors in Rome or Siena in explicating Canon or Civil Laws; and above
all the Practisers of Padua, or in the World, in understanding the Aesculapian
Art, says Fulgentius. Albericus Gentilis spoke it, to do Honor to the Industry
of Dr. Reynolds of Corpus-Christi College, that he thought that great (...) had
read as much in the Civil Law as himself. Wherein then consists the difference?
Why might not Mr. Williams examine the Cases, Reports, and Maxims, of our
Municipal Laws to be expert in them? Both being egged on into it by the
Happiness of his Attendance in the Pretorian Court, where he might learn much,
and labor little for it; and making it the Recreation, not the Intermission of
his proper Studies. Therefore out of Charity give him leave to gather Stubble
where he would, since he fulfilled his Task of Brick, Exodus 5.18. The Lord
Chancellor did highly countenance him in it, and was so taken with his
Pregnancy, that at his leisure-times, both for his own solace, and his
Chaplain's furtherance, he would impart to him the Narration of some famous
Causes, that had been debated in Chancery, or Star Chamber. What could not such
a Master teach? What could not such a Scholar learn? Socrates says in Plato of
Alcibiades, that he Gloried in nothing so much, as that he was Ward to
Pericles, and brought up under him. Neither had this Chaplain a more graceful
Ornament to show in the Eyes of the World, then that he was Disciple to the
Lord Egerton. That great Senator, the most judicious Judge and Counselor of
his Age, would not have disparaged himself to give a young Divine so great a
Place in his Affections, but that he had founded him, and discovered him to be
a person of rare Abilities. By this favor to which he had attained, though he
was not in the place of one of the Secretaries, yet he became to be like a
Master of Requests; especially in weightier Petitions he could prevail more
then any other Minister, which was not to be presisted by the other Officers.
He had a Mind full of worth, and full of warmth, and no place became him so
well as the foremost; as Pliny says of Cocks, lib. 10. c. 21. Imperitant suo
generi, and regnum in quacunque sunt domo exercent. None of his Fellows had
cause to repent, that he rode upon the Fore-Horse. For he was courteous, and
ready to mediate in any Cause, and as bountiful as might be wished; for he left
all Fees and Veils of Profit to those to whom they did belong. By this, in a
little while, they that would have kept him back at first, did their utmost to
put him forward; which did not need. For the Lookers on did mark, that his Lord
did not only use him in his most principal Employments, but delighted to confer
with him; for it is a State-Rule: Raro eminentes viri non magnis adjutoribus ad
gubernandam fortunam suam usi sunt. Yet this latter Favor, the Nature of the
Lord Chancellor considered, was greater then the former. For though he was as
good a Master to his Followers as ever was served, yet he was of an austere
Gravity, and rather Bountiful then Affable. Now though it be as clear as any
Ocular Demonstration, that the Chaplains full and absolute Parts did introduct
him to this Love and Likeing; yet I will not say, but that which brought it to
this Growth and Excess was a sympathy of Souls, which is a knitting of Souls by
secret Ligaments that transcend Reason. Our Genetl^iacal Writers, perhaps,
would call it Synastrta, which is a wrong Word for a right Meaning.

36. By this opportunity he interceded, that diverse Benefices, which fell to
the Lord Chancellor's Presentation, should be devolved upon deserving Scholars,
and quickly became a great Patron before he was a Bishop. They were Godly Men
whom he obliged, and such as had waited long in the Universities, and fit to be
called forth to use their Talents. If he displeased any in the use of this
Power, they wey were such as presumed upon ancient Acquaintance, more then upon
their Merit. Pity and Power meeting equally in him, swarms of Scholars flocked
about him. Those whose Backs were bowed down with tedious and chargeable Suits,
he was the Sanctuary to which they sled; and he refused none. This diffused
Humanity to so many that stood in need of help, is that which Marc. Antonius
the Emperor calls Natural Duty: (...). It suits with the Nature of a Man to
take all Men into their Compassion and Care. I have heard some of those
distressed ones, that were Strangers to him before, with whom he had never
changed a word, when they returned back to Cambridge with Peace and quiet
Possession of their own, speak of his Goodness to Admiration, that he would
teach them either the validity or weakness of their Cause, commend them to
faithful Attorneys and able Counsel, work the Officers and Clerks of the Courts
to abatement of Fees, thrust Money into their hands that wanted it, the Nerves
of Law as well as of War. Especially if the Cause concerned the Title of their
Living, or the Right of their Tithes, he would sweat and bestir him for his
poor Brethren, and never forsake them, till Sacrilege and Oppression were
charmed with the golden Meet wand of Justice. The way that some use in the
manner of their doing a thing, makes them to be rumored for their Courtesy
above many others, though they do not affect it. So the Chaplain's readiness
and Felicity in assisting the Clergy, was in a little while ^lked among
Churchmen in all places; so that not a few of the Bishops, and Chapters of
Cathedral Churches, who were encumbred about their Leases and Privileges, In
foro Litigioso, thought it their best way to send their Messengers, and to show
their Condition to him, who was easily entreated to be their Servant and
Solicitor; and he was like one that lay Lieger at London for their Dispatches.
But being of a most tender and dutiful Regard to such Reverend Persons, he did
always acquaint his Lord and Master with a Breviate of their Grievances, and
humbly besought his Judgment for Support and Remedy; and steering by that
Oraculous Wisdom, he never put forth into the troubled Waters for those
Dignities and Foundations, but they came merrily to the Haven with
Bon-adventure.

37. His own Share follows: For by coming to that pitch of Interest with so
great and good a Lord, as he befriended many, so in the space of about 5 years
that he lived with him, he compassed a plentiful Fortune to himself, from that
Bounty which denied him nothing, and commonly prevented him before he asked.
Methinks it was that sweet Patron's Speech, which Pliny makes the fruitful
Earth to speak to us all, Lib. 23. in Prooem. Ex me parata omnia, sese
porrigentia ultro, and si pigeat attingere, etiam cadentia. I have provided all
things for us, I offer them to you voluntarily, if you will not gather them,
they shall fall down at your Feet of their own accord. To be particular, he
conferred the Parsonage of Walgrave in Northamptonshire upon him, and no other
Cure of Souls by direct Presentation. For the Lord Chancellor had declared in
the Conference at Hampton Court before King James, page 58. That he did not
dislike the Liberty of our Church, in granting two Benefices to one Man; But
out of his own private Purpose and Practice, he disposed such Livings as he
gave, that some might have single Coats that wanted them, before others had
Doublets. But by his furtherance, the Chaplain had likewise the Rectory of
Grafton-Underwood, in the same County, lying in a very small distance from
Walgrave, gratifying the Patron with as good or better in some other Shire.
Diverse Cathedral Churches offered their Preferments to him, because they needed
such a Colleague, and some to make amends for his former Civilities. In the
Church of Lincoln he was a Prebendary and Resident, with the Chantorship of the
same. He had a Choral Place in the Minster of Peterborough, and in the Churches
of Hereford and St. David's. Neither the Canons of our Church, nor the Statutes
of our Realm, have provided an Incapacity for holding Plurality of Prebends. I
find indeed among the Decretals of the Popes, a Constitution of Urban the
Second, an. 1087. running thus: Licet Episcopi dispositione unus diversis
praeesse possit Ecclesiis, Canonicus tamen Praebendarius nisi unius Ecclesiae
in qua conscriptus est, esse non debet. An Order which they keep, till any Man,
that has occasion to transgress it, brings enough in his hand to pay for a
Dispensation. These Stalls therefore he possessed in Cathedral Foundations, for
which the Lord Chancellor was well pleased by exchange of some of his own
Preferments, to make amends to those who had conferred their Kindness upon his
faithful Servant. Nay yet further, Mantissae loco, he gave him a Donative
(called Sine cura) in Wales, which was equal in Profit to any Endowment that he
held. Here was a glut of Preferment indeed, will some say: Be it so; it was the
Liberality of a large and a loving-hearted Master, that would let him do no
less; and it is as true, that the Chaplain desired no less. Aristotle lived in
the most flourishing times of Greece, and perceiving that the valiantest Heroes
that attended Alexander grew very rich, he framed this Axiom, Lib. 3. ad Nicom.
That great Spirits are willing to be wealthy, to reward and gratify others.
Doubtless such as are of an high-flown Animosity, affect Fortunas Laciniosas,
as one calls it; a Fortune that sits not strait and close to the Body, but like
a loose and a flowing Garment. They would spend to be beloved, and to oblige as
far as they can; and that cannot be done out of a narrow Revenue. Salmasius (O
what a Miracle of Judgment and Learning!) wrote bountifully, and lived
bountifully, as I have heard: These are his words, Lib. de Usur. p. 392.
Quomodo liberalis esse potest, qui nihil plus acquireret, quam quod sibi ad
victum necessarium sufficere queat? They that talk of possessing no more then
to content Nature, must live with such as know no other People but themselves,
else it is impossible but they will depart from that Primitive Simplicity. And
truly I have known but few, perhaps none, that would not be content to have had
all the Chaplain's Portion, or more, if they had lived in as good a way of
getting. I do not excuse him therefore, it need not, that he got sufficient
Wealth, and bestowed it Charitably, and Honorably, as will be manifested.
Whither it be Tully or Panaetius that says it, or both, it is well said, as I
learnt it in my Lessons of Puerility, Lib. 1. de Off. Neque rei familiaris
amplificatio vituperanda est, nemine nocens; sed fugienda semper injuria.
Riches that are augmented out of Niggardice, or by Cheating, Extortion, or
doing unworthy Offices, carry their Curse along with them; those that are well
gotten, are the Blessing of God. The Adjection of Wealth then was not to be
refused, by one that served not such an Idol, but made it serve him for worthy
Purposes. Neither did his franc and generous Nature esteem such Things to be
the Recompense of five years Service, but this rather, to be brought up at the
Feet of the most prudent Counselor that lived in the King's Service, and that
he got his Favor so early, and held it so strongly till Death, which came on
apace. An. 1616. in October, this aged Patriarch began to languish and droop.
Therefore to recreate him, and to put an after-spring into his decaying
Spirits, the Prince with due Solemnity being created Prince of Wales, Nov 4.
the Lord Chancellor was created Viscount Brackley on the 7th of the same. This
Honor was a Token that the King held him Precious, yet it worked not inward.
Who did ever see, that the Sand in an Hourglass did run the flower, because
the Case in which it was put was gilded? For all this Viscountship his
Feebleness was more and more sensible, the Eyes that looked out of the Windows
were darkened, and he grew thick of Hearing. From thence, that is about January,
he delighted not in any Talk, unless his Chaplain spoke to him. All his
Business with his Great and Royal Master the King, he sent by him to be
delivered with Trust and Prudence. Upon which Messages the King took great
notice, that the Chaplain was Principled by his Master to be a Statesman, and a
Pillar of the Kingdom. And even hard upon the day of his Death, which was Mart.
15. the Chancellor called him to him, and told him, If he wanted Money, he
would leave him such a Legacy in his Will, as should furnish him to begin the
World like a Gentleman. Sir, (says the Chaplain) I kiss your hands, you have
filled my Cup full, I am far from Want, unless it be of your Lordships
Directions how to live in the World, if I survive you. Well, (says the
Chancellor) I know you are an expert Workman, take these Tools to work with,
they are the best I have. And he gave him some Books and Papers written all
with his own hand. These were as Valuable as the Sibylline Prophesies. They
were that old Sage's Collections for the well ordering the High Court of
Parliament, the Court of Chancery, the Star Chamber, and the Council Board. An
inestimable Gift, being made over to the true Heir Apparent of his Wisdom. Let
every one wear the Garland he deserves. For my part, I attribute so much to the
Lord Egerton, that I believe the Master's Papers were the Marrow of Mr.
Williams his Prudence, and subtle Judgment in all his Negotiations. These Notes
I have seen, but are lost, as it is to be feared, in unlucky and devouring
Times. So died that Peerless Senator, the Mirror of a Lord Chancellor, having
left that Blessing to his Chaplain and dear Servant, that bewailed him long
after with the mourning of a Dove, and attended his Body to Cheshire, and said
the Office of Burial over him in a Chapel, where he was entombed with his
Ancestors: Whose surviving Name a Grave cannot cover, and a Tomb is too little
to preserve it. You may measure him in much by these two Spans: Queen Elizabeth
(says Mr. Cambden) was a Lady that never Chose amiss in the Preferment of an
Officer, when she was left to her own Judgment. She made him her Solicitor,
Attorney General, Master of the Rolls, and Lord Keeper. She tried him in every
Place of Trust, the former meriting the latter, till he possessed the highest.
King James did more, not because he gave him the splendid Name of
Lord-Chancellor, or enobled him with the Titles of a Baron and a Viscount, but
because in the open Court of Star Chamber he blessed him with his Prayers, (and
the Speech wherein he made the Prayer is Printed with his Works) That as he had
long held that Place, so God would continue him longer in it. To know him
altogether, I will borrow the Character of Aemilianus, and engrave it into the
green Saphir of his Memory, which will ever keep green: Qui nihil in vita nisi
laudandum aut fecit, aut dixit, aut sensit.

38. While the Obsequies for the Entertainment of this deceased Lord were
preparing at London, the Successor unto the Office of the great Seal was Sir
Francis Bacon, very Learned in the judgment of all European Scholars,
especially best known at home, that his Soul was a Cabinet replenished with the
greatest Jewels of Wit, and in all our Kingdom none did ever set them forth
with purer Language. He hearing that Mr. Williams had chested up his Books, and
had furnished himself every way for an Housekeeper to remove to his Cure of
Walgrave, he made him an offer of great Civility, to continue with him in that
place, wherein he had served the Lord Egerton, which he declined; but with so
graceful a compliment, that they parted great Friends; and Sir Francis, willing
to mark him with some cognizance of his Love, of his own accord made him
Justice of Peace, and of the Quorum in the County of Northampton, an Office
fitter for none than a Scholar and a Gentleman. Yet he could hot leave London,
so God had provided, without a calling into a new Service, but it was in
Caesar's household. His faithful and fast Friend Dr. James Montagu, now Bishop of
Winton, sent for him, and brought him to the King, who received him with
consolatory Words, and extraordinary Grace, and commanded he should be Sworn
his Chaplain forthwith, (whereupon he Attended at the Court yearly in the Month
of February) appointed him also to wait on him in his great Northern progress
into Scotland, now hard at hand to begin in April ensuing; and pleasantly bad
him expect the Laborers penny as soon as they that had served him longer. But
the Bishop of Winchester made a proposition before his Majesty for another
employment, and both could not consist together; that whereas the Archbishop
of Spalato, a Proselyte much welcomed at that time, was designed to be present
at Cambridge commencement in the next July, that he might behold the University
in the fairest Trim, and hear the disputation, the best being ever provided for
that appearance, that Mr. Williams might be reserved unto that time for a
double Service, to answer publicly in Divinity for the Degree of Doctor, the
fittest to be the Days-man before that Learned Prelate, and likewise give him
Hospitality, such as a great Guest deserved; so it was ordered, and so it was
performed. Some men are right Learned, yet with all that worth steal out of the
World unknown, because it was their ill hap never to be brought upon a Theater
of manifestation. And some are as Valiant as the best, and yet are never
praised for it, because they were never invited into the Field to show it. So
Velleius speaks for Seianus, that he never Triumphed, nou merito, sed materia
adipiscendi triumphalia defectus est, he deserved it, but the matter of a
Triumph never fell in his way. There are others, whom not only deliberate
Advice, but every casualty and contingence puts forward to be Aspectabiles, it
conducts them likely where they may best be viewed, and their full Stature seen
upon the advantage of a Rising. I fall into this contemplation, because an
Object is before me, wherein I may aptly Exemplify. Dr. Williams (his Title for
which he stood in the Act, an. 1617.) culled not out gaudy Seasons for vain
Glory; that cannot be suspected, because he took all his Academical degrees in
their just year: But he above, that disposes all things, provided those
Co-incidencies of great Resort and Celebrity, such as Archbishop Spalato's
Presence at this Commencement, to make his Worthiness be known the further. The
Theses which he defended in the Vespers, and were imposed upon him by the
overruling Power of the Vice Chancellor and Heads of the Consistory, (it is
their Right and Custom) were these: 1. Supremus Magistratus nou est
Excommunicabilis. 2. Subductio calicis est mutilatio Sacramenti and Sacerdotii.
It was well for the Doctor that he was a right Stag, well breathed, and had a
fair Head with all his Rights; for I never heard a Respondent better hunted in
all my time that I was a Commorant in Cambridge. The Opponents were the Princes
of their Tribes, Men of Renown in their Generation; Dr. Richardson the first,
Dr. Branthwait, Dr. Ward, Dr. Collins, Dr. Alabaster, Dr. Goad, (...), who did
Honor the University that day, to the admiration of Mr. Antonie de Dominis,
with the utmost of their Learning. Every Argument they pressed, was a Ramm to
throw down the Bulwarks of the Cause, and yet it tottered not, neither did the
Answerer give ground. Such a Disputation was worthy to be heard, which was
carried with equal Praise of the Assailants, and Defendants. As Plutarch, lib.
(...), says of Moral Precepts, that they require a good Speaker and a good
Hearer with mutual Diligence, as a Game at Tennis is well played, (...); When
the Stroke is served well, and the Service taken well.

39. That I may mix some Profit to the Reader in this Relation, I will let him
know upon what Rules and Reasons the Respondent proceeded in the first Cause
for the Conviction of all Gainsayers, both of the Pontifician part, and of the
heady Consistories of some Reformed Churches. The Pontifician Rubbish he
removed away, as a Dunghill of unsavory Filth fit to be cast out of the Lord's
Vineyard either because the Popes meddled so far beyond their own Bounds,
attempting to send out Effulminations against Christian Kings in all Countries,
upon Arrogation of an Universal bishopric, which has the Plenitude of all
Jurisdiction in it self alone, to which they have exalted themselves without
Christ's Warrant and Seal; or, because by the Declaratory Sentence of their
Excommunications, they inflict the highest Temporal Indignities upon Kings that
can be imagined: As inhibiting their Courts of Justice to proceed any further,
till he that sits in the Throne shall receive Absolution from their Grace:
Absolving their Subjects from obligation of all Service and Fidelity: Deposing
them from their Government, and exposing their Lives to Assassinate. For though
they do not say, that such Effects should necessarily go along with
Excommunication, yet they maintain, That if the Pope see cause, such Tragical
Punishments may be annexed unto it. Far wide from the Truth. For it is evident,
that an Excommunicated Person can be deprived of nothing by the Church, but
that which is enjoyed through the Ministry of the Church, and its Privileges;
but how can he be dispossessed of that which he holds by Civil and Natural
Right, which are not dependant upon Spiritual Relations? And as it is expedient
to chip away these hard Crusts of Error, so neither is the Crum to be digested,
which likes the Palates of some who are devoted to the Presbyterian Discipline.
A King is not obnoxious to be interdicted, or deprived of the Sacraments by
their Aldermen, who can show no more for the Proof of such Officers, with whom
they Organize a Church, then the Pope can for his unlimited Jurisdiction. Nor
is it to be suffered, that they should deny a Christian King to be a
Church Officer properly, and by right of his Crown over Christian Subjects as
Christians; whose Causes can never be separated by their Metaphysical
Abstractions before distinct supreme Rulers that are coordinate; but that
there will be endless Jarrs in their several Entrenchments, and God is not the
God of Confusion. Should he that is next under God in all Causes be subject to
the Courts of his Liege-People and Homagers? He is their common Parent; and the
only Mandat how to bear our selves to our Father, is to Honor him: But what
can make him more vile before the People, then to thrust him out of the
Communion of Saints? Moreover the greater Excommunication includes in it the
Horror of Anathematizing, or a Curse; but, Curse not the King, no not in thy
thought, Eccles. 10.20. Neither would God give a constant Power to any which
were in vain, and could not sting. Vanum est quod fine suo destuuitur. But it
is vain to interdict a King, over whom there is no external Power appointed to
bring him into order by Violence and Coercion, if he will not be Interdicted.
In every Policy there must be a Supreme, that can be Judged of none, for else
the Process between Party and Party would be Circular, or rather Infinite.
These Aphorisms, and abundance more, flowed from the Doctor Respondent in the
warmth of Disputation. Above all, his Answer was highly applauded, which he
gave to Dr. Richardson's Argument, taken from the Excommunication or
Abstension, which St. Ambrose exercised by his Episcopal Power over the Emperor
Theodosius, for commanding a great Slaughter to be made upon the People of
Thessalonica in an hasty distemper of Anger, before their Cause was heard. To
which Dr. Williams said, That what St. Ambrose said, was neither Juridical
Abstension, nor Excommunication: It was a private Act of St. Ambrose's,
directed by the motion of his proper Piety, and not a Censure issuing from a
Court or Authority Ecclesiastical. And if at the same time another bishop, is
of Rome, Aquileia, or Ravenna, had communicated with the Emperor, and received
him to Prayers, and the Holy Sacrament, he might have done it, without the
violation of any Canon. A particular Presbyter may do the like at this day, and
with a good Conscience, withdraw himself from doing Sacred Offices, if a King,
after often and humble Admonition continue Impenitent in great Sins, which the
Day light has detected. Therefore this was no Precedent for the
Excommunication of the Supreme Magistrate, which was but a particular
forbearance of St. Ambrose's in Sacred Duties, not to impact them for his share
to so great an Offender, whom he left at liberty to all the World beside to
partake with him. But he that is justly Excommunicated from one Congregation in
^rict Discipline, is excluded from all. This Answer was it which afforded most
Matter of Discourse, and spread far, even to King James's Ear, who heard of it,
and approved it. Much was not said to the Second Question, a Bush that had been
often beaten. Yet there was some grappling about the new Clause, That the
Subduction or Denial of the Cup to the People, maimed the very Priesthood. But
the Doctor maintained it thus: That the Order of Priesthood is a Sacrament in
the Roman Church; the Matter of which Sacrament, by a wretched shift, some of
their Controversial Writers say, is the Bible laid upon the Neck of the
Ordained, to furnish him to teach Christ's Mystical Body, together with the
Paten and the Chalice put into his hand to authorize him to make Christ's
Natural Body. If a Priest so Ordained were consigned to Pray, and not to Preach
to the People, it were a Mutilation of his Office. So if he be stinted to
distribute the Consecrated Bread, and not the Cup, it is a cutting of one half
of his Priesthood. This was the God-speed and the Good-speed of his
Disputation. It were no Sin to forget the Feasts he made at this Solemnity.
They were bounteous, nay excessive, after the usual Trespass of the superfluity
of our Nation: Such as Plutarch says Lucullus made in his Dining Room, which he
calls Apollo. One thing deserves a Smile, That the Doctor was at no little Cost
to send to the Italian Ordinaries at London, and to ransack the Merchants
Stores for such Viands as might please Archbishop Spalato out of his own
Country. To which accates he was observed, that he never put his Hand toward
them, but liked our Venison and English Dishes a great deal better, he Thanked
him. But enough of this; for many do not love the smell of a Kitchen.

40. Presently after he had shown himself such a Man in this Field of Honor,
Veianius armis Herculis ad postem fixis latet abditus agro: Horat. Ep. 1. He
never went more cheerful to any place then to his private Home, the Rectory of
Walgrave, as if then he had been called from the Custom-house of the World to
follow Christ; or as if he had been one of David's Mariners landed at a quiet
Shore: Psalm. 107.30. Then they are glad because they be at rest, so he brings
to the Haven of their desire. His Cost was over before he came thither; For
there he had built, and garden'd, and planted, and made it a Dwelling sit for
all the changeable Seasons of the Year, as much when Warmth, as when Pleasure
was intended. Here he became his own Master for a while; here he could solace
himself in private Retirements; here he was attended by Mutes like the Monarchs
of the East, by so many Volumes of a well replenished Library. As Vatia said in
Seneca, when he went out of Rome to live in his little Villa three Year before
he died, Fuit Vatia multos annos, vixit tantura tres; So this Doctor might have
written, that in three Years, or not fully four, that he kept for the most part
in this Bower of Tranquillity, he lived the Comforts of twenty. The harmless
Country Cottages bred more Saints, who are only seen unto the Eyes of God, then
would fill a thousand Calenders. Why may not the Speech of Christ to his Church
look this way, Cant. 7.11. Come my Beloved, let us go forth into the Field, let
us lodge in the Village^ To track him a little in this shady Life; He hazarded
to lose his Health by excessive Study at all the Hours of the Clock, but
preserved it by Temperance. For though he were greatly Hospital, the Cloth that
covered his Table being always covered with Dishes, yet with Carving and
Discoursing he gave his own Appetite but a short Bait. Velleius says, that
great Caesar discerned, that none but a temperate Man could do mighty things,
Qui somno and cibo in vitam, non in voluptatem uteretur: Through Temperance he
had strength to be Industrious, and gave a good Example to the Divines his
Neighbors, who had need to have such pricked in here and there among them. For
a Country Minister has mastered a great Tentation, that has overcome Sloth, a
Mischief that will fear upon the Soul with too much craft and sweetness.
Idleness is commonly the English Gentleman's Disease, and the Rural Curate's
Scandal. Let the first learn from as good a Gentleman, as the best of them,
Marc. Antoninus the Emperor, lib. 9. who writes thus: Rise early; leave the Bed
of Sluggishness to them that are sick in Body or Mind. And being up, it were as
good you were laid down again, as not to be guilty of so much Reason to know,
you rose to do the Work of a Man, (which is, not to waste all the day in
sporting with Beasts:) (...): That is, Why should I be loath to be put to the
Employment of some Work, for I was made for that use; and I came for that end
into the World. Let others learn from a greater then Antoninus, that Labor and
Watching, Pureness and Knowledge, are the Gifts that commend them to be the
Ministers of God, 2 Cor. 6.4. They are Master Builders, and must not loiter,
who should set all to work. Or, to pass a sharper Sentence, It is certain, that
the worst of Superstition is an Idol, and the worst of Idols is an Idle
Shepherd, (that is, Who has a Mouth, and speaks not?) Zech. 11.17. This
Doctor, that walked as a burning Light before his Brethren, did the whole
Office that belonged unto him, as Reading the Liturgy of Divine Service
Wednnesdays and Fridays before such as would attend Prayer, Expounding the
Catechism to the simple Ones in Lent, and upon all Holy Days, Preaching
constantly twice every Lord's Day at Walgrave, or at Grafton, and performing his
Turn at Kettering, a Market Town not much remote, in a Lecture supplied by a
Combination of the Learned Divines of the Vicinage. Who has not heard him
say that knew him, it was so often in his mouth, that the way to get the Credit
from the Non-Conformitants was to out-preach them? Who in great part were
Covetous, Cross-grained, Half-witted, and Distractious, and had nothing but
much Preaching to make them plausible and popular. No marvel if such had crept
into the good Opinion of weak Judges, who resided much, and taught their Charge
themselves; and that others suffered hard Construction, who seldom spoke to
their Congregation, but through the hollow Trunk of their Curates and
Hirelings. It was a witty Scorn which Dicaerchus put upon the Husbandmen of
Tanagra, a Town in Baeotia, (...); That they all lived upon Farms, yet they
Plowed not themselves, but their Drudges for them. If this were unthriftily
done in Humane Tillage, how much worse is it in God's Husbandry, which is a
Culture of Souls? No Man will be so gross to endite himself, that he loves to
hide his Talent in a Napkin, and to do nothing. I will prae-occupate what he
will rather say, That other Affairs of Weight do take him up. But Conscientious
Gerson will not allow him that Excuse, as I find it in him, Lib. de Vit.
Spirit. Sanctius est Ecclesiasticum per sese Deo servire, ac mundo per
Vicarium, quam ordine inverso, imo perverso. If an Ecclesiastic have other
Irons in the Fire, beside his Pastoral Charge, let him serve the World by his
Deputy, and God in his own Person.

41. But this Diligence of often Preaching were but sorrily commended in the
Doctor, unless the Weight go along with the Measure. If any man speak, let him
speak as the Oracles of God, says St. Peter, ^ Ep. c. 4. v. 11. This was the
Canon by which he did adorn his Pulpit, he delivered that which was Oraculous,
wel^ Studied, premeditated with Care, able to draw the Consciences of his
Hearers into his Drag-Net, yet not with the enticing words of Man's Wisdom, but
in the demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power, 1 Cor. 2.4. ^ mean, that
always he laid his Principles out of the Doctrine of Christ, yet he burnished
them brighter with all sort of comely Literature, as well what the Doctors of
the Church afforded, as those that are without. For Human Literature is made
Sacred, when it is well inoculated into Divinity; which is willing to entertain
the Assistance of every Art, not as a Corrival, but as an Handmaid. It was his
Judgment, That rude unordain'd Dunces would in the Licentiousness of some
Tumults thrust into our Pulpits, (and is it not come to pass to the very
pricking of our Hearts?) if the true Possessors did teach them by their
Negligence, to fill up the Time with Babbling and vacuity of Matter, like them
that jangle the Bells to no Tune, and are never out, because they were never
in. Therefore for his part he never set Husks or Orts, but his Dainties before
the People. Which Expectation likewise did promote, for his Church was thronged
every Sunday, with the Gentry especially, of all the Neighboring Parishes. We
have extant but one touch and no more of his Skill, according to the elevation
of his Learning in those days, a Sermon preached before K. James at Theobalds,
Febr. 22. 1619. upon this Text, Matthew. 11.8. What went you out for to see? A
man clothed in soft Raiment? Behold they that wear soft Clothing are in Kings
houses. A Sermon like one of Ph^cion's Orations, which Plut^rch compares to the
Cretick Wine, which was, (...), an Aromatic Liquor, which was sweet, and yet
had a quick austerity upon the Palate. So this Piece of his is very sweet in
the Composure, and yet very tart against the sinfulness of vain Attire; wherein
wanton Quaedams in those days came to that excess, that they delighted
altogether in the Garb, and Habit, and roisterly Fashions of Men: This Sermon
the King did greatly approve, as a fit Antidote against such corrupt Manners,
and commanded it to be Printed. For the Doctor himself never wrote any thing,
with intention to let the World see it in the Press, unless necessity
constrained him.

42. The next thing of Laudable Account in his Deportment at Walgrave, but in a
long Interval after the former, was his liberal Housekeeping: For he lived
like a Magnifico at home. His Brethren the Clergy, both of the better and of
the lower Fortune, visited him much; whose Love he repaid with Courtesy,
Conference, and Hospitality. He had mightily won the Friendship of all the
Gentry in the whole District about him, and had such favor and countenance
from the Nobility likewise, that they vouchsafed their Presence at his Feasts,
but chiefly for his Musick-sake, which was the Banquet they came for; and he
was furnished very well both for Voices and Instruments in his own Family. It
was Sumptuous, I confess, for one of his Level in those days. But allow him
this for the Recreation of his Spirit, the rather because I never knew him so
much as dip his Senses in any other Pleasure. I pass by these Grandees, the
Flower of the County, whose Hearts he stole with these Obligements. But they
were the Poor and Needy, for whom he brake his Bread especially, and
replenished their hungry Souls with Goodness. Give a Portion to seven, and also
to eight, says Solomon, Eccles. 11.2. So he never murmured that their Number
was too great that came to his Door for Charity. It follows in the same
Scripture, If the Clouds be full of Rain, they empty themselves upon the Earth:
So out of his fullness he dropped fatness upon the Indigent without making
distinction, because the same Earth is the Parent unto all. The Town of
Walgrave indeed, where he abode, had some right to share in his Beneficence
above others: And so it did. The Labourer, that was so near a Neighbor, knew
often where to fill his empty Stomach, and the Thirsty where to drink that
which would cherish him. The Decrepit, the Widow, and the Fatherless, resorted
when they pleased to the common Refectory of them all. The Sick, who of the
Comfortless are most to be compassionated, he came to them to their (...) Bed
to pray for them, and to bless them, gave them largely from his Purse to
succor them, not seldom paid the Fees of their Physicians, and always
cherished them from his own Kitchen with Broths and Cordial Decoctions. These
were the Issues of a plentiful Estate, a single Life, and a merciful Heart.
This was the Oil of a wise Virgin's Lamp. I follow St. Chrysostom, who was my
Leader in that Exposition of our Savior's Parable, Mat. 25. on this wise: You
that are unmarried, and live chastely, you have conquered the Love of the Flesh;
but if you will be wise Virgins, you must conquer Covetousness, and the Love of
the World. Will you know the way to it? Fill your Vessels with Oil: That Is your
Wisdom. (...). And what Vessels are so fit to receive your Oil, as the Bellies
of the Poor? Many of these dry Lamps he succored; and the Lord anointed him
again with fresh Oil, and made his Olive-yard increase. He that has pity on
the Poor lends unto God, and what he has given he will pay him again, Prove.
19.17. For at this time one rich Sheaf was added to his Store by a valuable
Legacy bequeathed to him, a great Wind-fall (as we commonly say) from his
Kinsman Mr. John Panton, Servant with him to the Lord Chancellor Egerton, who
by his Last Will appointed him to be Guardian to his Children, and with due
discharge of that great Trust he bred them virtuously, and bestowed them
happily. No sooner had he gathered up this Income, but another Dole of Fortune
fell into his Lap, and much more unlooked for then the other. While the King
was in his Summer-Progress in the West, the Deanery of Salisbury became void by
the Death of Dr. Gordon; straightway many Eagles were about that Carcass, and
the Marquess of Buckingham struck in for one of the Competitors, a deserving
Scholar: But the King gave him a Denial, and sent for Dr. Williams, a Man that
could not be heard of in a fortnight, as it fell out, till he was found at
Lincoln, most remote from the Court, upon the Duty of his Residency. This was
the first Step of his Dignity, to which no Hand helped to raise him but the
King's. He was bereft of his dear Friend Dr. James Moutagu Bishop of Winton,
who died on the 19th of July in the same Summer, if my Notes do not err. Beside
him, he had dependence on none about His Majesty. Yet God moved the King's
Heart to confer this Favor upon him, when he did not so much as stand in His
Gracious Sight: But it was better that he was in His Heart. The old Romans were
churlish, or rather unjust, in bestowing their Honors, because none in their
Republic might be advanced to an Office, but such as courted the People, and
fauned on them for their Suffrages. Their Decree runs thus: In honoribus
conferendis nullius absentis habeatur ratio. Alex. ab Alexandro, lib. 8. c. 3.
Whereas Baseness and Ambition are better prevented, when Places of Pre-eminence
are cast upon them, that stir not in the Suit, neither aspire to Promotion.
Being so suddenly admitted into this Deanery, which is as rich as any in the
Land, except four, yet he lived not much in that Place. His Predecessor Dr.
Gordon, a Stranger, and unacquainted with our Customs, remitted the Care of the
Church wholly to the management of the Residentiaries, grave Men, but subtle
and attentive to their own Emolument, who contended to keep up the Power they
had long enjoyed, when one more knowing and active came into Dr. Gordon's room.
Though their Claim were wrong, yet the new Dean, to step out of the way of
Contention, appeared but seldom in their Chapter, but reposed himself in the
Tranquillity of Northamptonshire, till a better Advancement within the space of
two Years released him from those Wranglers.

43. As yet then he made his Abode most commonly at Walgrave: The place was
healthful; for no Air is so wholesome to a Man, as where he is generally beloved.
Of which Love, his share was the greater, by his Place which he held among them
of a Justice of the Peace. He was as expert in weilding that Office as any that
sat upon the Bench, not excepting those that wore the Coif. For vouching of
Statutes, he needed no Man to prompt him, or to compare Old and New, or to
interpret them to their fair meaning. He loved his Country, and was the
forwardest of any Patriot to defend the public against private Engrosments. He
was stout, and never turned his back to opposition, chiefly when the
Oppressions of the poor Clergy did modestly call upon him to maintain them in
their just Rights. It is their hard hap in every place to be trampled upon, not
only by such as Gallio, that care not for the Things of Christ, but by such
whose Zeal is compounded of contrary Elements, they love the Harvest of the
Gospel, if you will believe them, and hate the Laborers. But in that County,
while Dean Williams was present, they did eluctate out of their Injuries with
credit to themselves, and damage to their Adversaries: So much did his
Countenance conduce to their Profit, and their Peace. If private Wranglings
were brought before him, he seldom granted to those Parties his Warrant to
proceed, but counseled them, and preached them out of their Litigious Humors,
saying, That it was for Christ's Servant to Suffer twice, before he Complained
once; that Religion was unspirited without Love; and that Love was a blank
without Forgiveness; that Variances, when all Charges are cast up, make the
Purse light, and the Soul heavy. With these, and such words, some did melt into
meekness, and shook hands, the rather being Reconciled in his Buttry, or his
Cellar. But if they did not Edify with such Homilies, many times he took
another, and a surer course, to pay the Damages all, or in part, which one
Neighbor alleged for the matter of his Quarrel against the other; till after
Experience dear bought, he perceived he was cheated, and that some would seem
to be Foes, because he used to be at cost to make them friends.

44. I would he had done himself no greater wrong as a Justiciary: But there
was a Miscarriage, which I cannot pass over; a great deal of it was Error, but
somewhat in it has the wilfulness of a Fault. I am not wanton, like the Ladies
that lodge about the Piazza in Covent Garden, to lay a black Patch upon a fair
Cheek, where it need not. No; my scope is to make his Oversight a caution to
others. For I intend in all that I write, (I appeal to God; who knows it)
rather to Profit many, then to Praise him. Plainly thus it was: Mr. Lamb, whom
succeeding times knew to be Dean of the Arches, came, by holding fast to
Fortune's middle Finger, from a Schoolmaster that taught Petties, to a Proctor
in Christian Courts, and so to an Official. An Official, as Petrus Blasensis
says of such another, not from the Noun Ossicium, but from Officio the Verb.
The Dean of Salisbury had occasion to employ him thrice, or oftener, in those
Spiritual Courts, to untangle some distressed Ministers that sought unto him,
who were caught by the Horns in those Thickets. The Official did his work
trustily, and pleased the Dean with as great obsequiousness as could be
expressed, knowing that he had many long Feathers in his Wing, and was like to
fly high. I do not accuse the Dean, that this Instrument was not yet detected
to him. For read him what he was indeed out of the Description, which Tacitus
gives, lib. 16. Annal. circa finem, to P. Egnatius, Client to Soranus the
famous Senator; Cliens hic Sorani autoritatem Stoicae sectae praeferebat,
habitu and ore ad exprimendam imaginem honesti exercitus, caeterum animo
perfidiosus, and subdolus. Yet this Stoical Gravity did not long conceal him,
but that his needless Vexations of harmless People, his cutting Fees, his
Briberies, and other Muck of the same Dunghill made an outcry, and put the
King's good People to seek a Remedy, by preferring Articles against him at the
Assizes, where he was charged home with an Alphabet of Misdemeanors. He pleaded
to the general, that he was so much despited, because he had looked more
narrowly into the Disobedience of the Paritans, then formerly had been used. My
Opinion is, that such Physicians of no value, Job 13.4. may cast the Water of
such sick Distempers, but will never heal them: Infamous Judges may correct
them, they will never rectify them. For he that is fallen into a Moral
Turpitude, is soon convinced in his own Mind; but he that is misguided by
darkness of Understanding, thinks that he does right to his own Conscience by
going wrong, and is never so well reclaimed, as when he is mildly rebuked by
them, whose open Integrity and Pity justify them, that they walk as Children
of the Light. But for the Particulars, which laid down so many Oppressions at
the Official's door, they were not Dust which would be brushed away with the
Fox Tail, but Dirt that stuck to him, till the Dean, his Mediator, obtained
from the Judges a Reference to himself, and some others, for further
Examination. By which sly Diversion, some of his Charges were laid aside by
Composition, all of them by delay, and delusion. After this, (what should be
the End of it I know not, without it were to make him look big, and
superciliously, upon his Prosecutors) the Dean engaged his Friends at
Cambridge, my self was one that was solicited from him, to sublimate the
Official with the Degree of a Doctor, wherein he had one Repulse in the
Regent-House, such an ill relish his Name had; but he was carried out in a
second day's Scrutiny. But for all his Doctorship he was not out of the Brakes,
he was but Tapisht, as Hunters call it. The stirring Spirits of the the subtle
Air of Northamptonshire preferred their Articles afresh against him to the House
of Commons assembled in Parliament, an. 1620. Wedges enough to cleave a bigger
Log then Dr. Lamb, and yet he was no little one, but Saginati corporis bellua,
as Curtius says of Dioxippus the Pugil. Well, (nay indeed ill) his Friend that
was too sure to such a branded Man, now become the Dean of a College near to
the Parliament, finds the Articles in the hand of the Chairman of the
Committee, appointed to sift the Complaints, (it was Sir Edward Sackvil,
afterward the brave-spoken Earl of Dorset) with whom he wrought to abortive the
Bill before it came to the Birth, and so he set Dagon upon his Feet again, who
was fallen with his face upon the ground, 1 Samuel 5.4. but the palms of his
Hands were never cut off, for so long as he lived he could take a Bribe. I
blush to remember, that the Dean did not only set him up again as well as ever
he stood before, but raised him higher: For he wrote to a great Lord in Court
(the Letter is among my Papers) to procure him the Honor of Knighthood, which
was obtained: And when his Enemies labored to cut his Comb, he got the Spurs.
'Twas pleasantly spoken by Sir Ed. Montagu, (since that Pious and Loyal Lord
Montagu of Boughton) when a cluster came about him to ask Counsel and
Assistance for a third Petition against Sir John Lamb, says Sir Edward, If we
tamper the third time, his great Friend that has already made him a Doctor and
a Knight, I fear will make him a Baron. I have thus much to say for the Dean
his friend, whose very Entrails I knew, that he was strongly espoused to love
where he had loved, and 'twas hard to remove his Affections when good Pretenses
had gained them. Chiefly he was of a most compassionate Tenderness, and could
not endure to see any Man's Ruin, if he could help it. And though Offenses
were as legible as a Dominical Letter, he would excuse any thing that was
capable of an Excuse, as far as Wit and Mercy could contrive it. But if a
little Confession were wrung out, it cut down many Faults to make him see as it
were a Glade of Repentance in a Grove of Sins; and did ever hope for better
Fruits upon easy and formal Promises. Let Quintilian help me out a little more
in his sixth Declam. Si angustus saltem detur accessus, per quem intrare
humanit as possit, vera clementia occasion contenta est. Yet David's Rule is
better then all this, Be not merciful to them that offend of malicious
wickedness, Psalm. 59.5. And our God is so merciful, that whosoever adds a dram
beyond his Pattern, it must be reckoned for foolish and hurtful Lenity.
Certainly God was not pleased, that the Dean would save a Man whom He meant to
destroy, 1 King, 20.42. And though it slept Unpunished about 12 Years, yet in
the end the Lord awakened it with a Mischief, through the treachery of that
Man, whom himself had protected.

45. That which I have hitherto passed over, was but his low and shrubbish
Fortune, compared with that Access, which the Providence of God in short time
after did cast upon him. Which Providence is Religiously appealed to in all
things; yet without any check to Reason and Experience, to trace it in its
Manifestations. The Omni-regency of Divine Providence is the Tree of Life in
the midst of the Garden of the World; the Strings of whose Root are secretly
interwoven with all Works and Motions. But the Sons of Adam are not content,
unless they taste of the Tree of Knowledge, and have a Lust, as far as
Curiosity can pry, to learn how God does put the Issue of his Wisdom into
outward, and Instrumental Causes. I am ready therefore to show what Men will
seek, the Occasions which were in the way, and who was Lord of the Ascendant,
when God did raise up this his Servant, that he might set him with Princes,
even with the Princes of his People, Psalm. 113.8. His Abilities were worthy of
a great Place; none so Emulous, or so Envious that denied it. Neither was there
any Churchman in his time so likely to purchase a great Place with those
Abilities. He that will will read Budaeus his Epistle to his Notations upon the
Pandects, shall find this Character of Mons. Peganay Chancellor of France,
Cujus ea vis fuisse ingenii at que animi cernitur, ut quocunque loco natus
esset, in quodcunque tempus incidisset, fortunam ipse sibi facturus videretur.
A Word as fit for him that kept the Seal of England, as for him that kept the
Seal of France: In what Kingdom soever he had been born, in what Age soever he
had lived, he would have shared with them, that had a considerable part of
Honor and Dignity. Certainly he was embued with that Wit, and Spirit, that he
need not lag after the Train of Preferment, unless he would. And I dare not
say, he would. For they that are sanguine, and of a stirring temper, which was
his Complexion, love to take the right hand. I must be thus far bold, because I
write not of an Angel, or a Soul among the Beati, but of a Man, consisting of
Humane Desires and Passions. And he that describes an ingenious active Man,
without some addition to Honor and Greatness, makes him not Laudable, but
Prodigious. And I will as soon believe it, as I will the Alcoran, that the
Angel Gabriel took out all the black Core of Original Frailty from the Heart of
Mahomet. Experience teaches us more then strict Rules, that Virtue, which is
forward to thrust it self into practice, nay into danger, for the public Good,
will never discharge it cheerfully without a Ticket from hope of some
Amplification. Salust, in the Oration De republica ordinanda, spoke pleasingly
and truly to Caesar; Ubi gloriam dempseris, ipsa per se virtus amara atque
aspera est.

46. Now he, whom I insist upon, being a Subject thus fit for Impression, his
good Master King James was as ready to put the Stamp upon him. He never met
with any before, no not the Lord Egerton, much less with any after, that loved
him like King James at the full rate of his worth. That King's Table was a
trial of Wits. The reading of some Books before him was very frequent, while he
was at his Repast. Otherwise he collected Knowledge by variety of Questions,
which he carved out to the capacity of his understanding Writers. Methought his
hunting Humor was not off so long as his Courtiers, I mean the Learned, stood
about him at his Board. He was ever in chase after some disputable Doubts;
which he would wind and turn about with the most stabbing Objections that ever
I heard. And was as pleasant, and fellow-like in all those Discourses, as with
his Huntsmen in the Field. They that in many such genial and convival
Conferences were ripe and weighty in their Answers, were indubiously designed
to some Place of Credit and Profit. Wherein he followed the Emperor Adrian, as
Spartianus remembers it; Omnes professores and honoravit, and divites fecit,
licet eos quaestionibus semper agitaverit. But among them all, with whom King
James communed, was found none like Daniel, c. 1. v. 19. His Majesty gave his
Ear more Graciously to this Chaplain, and directed his Speech to him, when he
was at hand, oftener then to any, that crowded near to harken to the Wisdom of
that Solomon. He had all those Endowments mightily at command, which are
behoved in a Scholar, (...), as Aristotle, 3o Top. terms them, unto Extemporary
Colloquies. Ingenium in numerato habuit, as Quintil. l. 6. said of a ready Man,
he had all his Learning in ready Money, and could spend it at an hour, as well
as at a day's warning. There was not a greater Master of Perspicuity, and
elucidate Distinctions; which looked the better in his English, that ran sweet
upon his Tongue, especially being set out with a graceful Facetiousness, that
hit the joint of the Matter: For his Wit, and his Judgment, never parted. If
the King lead him quite out of the rode of Verbal Learning, and talked to him
of real and gobernative Wisdom, he pleased his Majesty most of all, because his
Answers discovered, that he loved to see through the present to the future.
Chiefly since he would be bold, not only to argue, but to quarrel against
Innovations. For though he was never addicted to his own Opinions, no not among
his Inferiors, with that pertinacious Obligation, for better for worse; yet
neither his best Friends, nor the higher Powers, could ever get him pleased
with new Crotchets, either in Church or State. His constant Rule was, That old
Imperfections were safer then new Experiments. To which purpose, a Saying of
his was famous in Court. The manner how it came in, was thus: A great Servant
to the King pressed for a change of that, which was well enough already, and
commended his Design by this Note, That it would be an easier way for the
People. Sir, (says Dr. Williams) a Bed is an easy Repose, but it is not
wholesome to lie upon a new Tick, and new-driven Feathers. All these Passages the
King considered from time to time; Multa viri virtus animo, etc. And was glad
he had a Servant to be raised up, of whom He thought as Cicero did of Demetrius
Valerius, lib. 3. de Leg. Et doctrinae studus and regenda civitate Princeps;
That he was a full Scholar fit for the Sacred, and for the Civil Gown: In a
word, one of the stronger Cattle, Genesis 30.41. and designed for a Bell-weather
in Jacob's Flock.

47. The King was the Fountain of Honor indeed, but there was a pre-eminent
Pipe, through which all Graces flowing from him were derived. I pray the Reader
to consider the sweetness of this King's Nature, (for I ascribe it to that
cause) that from the time he was 14 Years old and no more, that is, when the
Lord Aubigny came into Scotland out of France to visit him, even then he began,
and with that Noble Personage, to clasp some one Gratioso in the Embraces of
his great Love, above all others, who was unto him as a Parelius; that is, when
the Sun finds a Cloud so fit to be illustrated by his Beams, that it looks
almost like another Sun. At this time, upon which my Pen drops, the Marquess of
Buckingham was the Parelius. He could open the Sluice of Honor to whom, and
shut it against whom he pleased. This Lord was our English Alcibtades for
Beauty, Civility, Bounty, and for Fortitude wanted nothing of Man enough, says
Art. Wills. p. 223. who favors all Republicans, and never speaks well of
Regians, (it is his own distinctions) if he can possibly avoid it. The Marquess
by Sweetness as much as by Greatness, by Courtesy as well as by Power, plucked
a world of Suitors to him, especially by his generous and franc Usage: For he
did as many Favors to the King's Servants and Subjects freely and nobly, that
is, without the sordid Fee of Gifts and Presents, as ever any did that ruled
the King's Affections. Some of the most honored Ladies of his Blood have told
me, That there was a Chopping-taker in his Family, that was least suspected;
but his Lordship's Hands were clean, and his Eyes could not look into every
dark corner. Dr. William, was aware, that this was the Man, by whom the King
delighted to impart his Bounties. Aemilio dabitur quicquid petit: Juv. Sat. 7.
The Doctor had crept far, as I may say, for Ground Ivy, he had a plentiful
Fortune. But he must clasp upon this Tree, or none, to trail and climb: Yet
hitherto he had not come forward one step to gain him. One time he made a
Repetition of his former Life unto me, being under a great Sickness at Buckden,
when he taught me two Reasons, why he moved so slowly to the Protection of that
great Lord, with this solid and ingenious Confession. First, To whom a Man is
obliged for his Raising, it is expected he should run the same hazard with him:
Which is so far from Slavery or Weakness, that it may well be called, The
height of Magnanimity; no Virtue being more truly Heroical then Thankfulness,
by which the Spirit of a Man advances it self with confidence of Acceptance to
the Love of God and Man. This Consideration seriously taken, he was afraid of
that Lord's continuance, the Title of a Favorite being so Inauspicious in
almost all Examples. For what is more likely, but that a Sail will break, when
it is too much stretched with the sore Wind? And whosoever builds unto a lofty
height upon a new Foundation, Envy will pull him down by insensible
Demolishments. For new Men, when they become Plenipotentiaries, all Suits at
Court passing by their Assistance, they please few, (who are the Gratified) in
comparison of the Swarms that must be repulsed; so that if an Eddie and
Mutation fall heavy, they are lost without much Pity; not because they were
bad, but because they were great. And take all others into this Moral Compass,
who were unconcerned; who is so upright in his Candor, that gapes not for the
removal of the greatest Actors in Promotion, upon a Dream of better days to
follow the Alteration? And commonly they that are born to waft over the Sea of
this Life in a Cock-boat, are glad to see their Shipwreck that sail in the
Argosie.

48. Though he that did run this Descant was sick, as I said, when he uttered
it; yet certainly there was no Sickness in his judgment when he first conceived
it. I will produce a pair of the best Scholars that revived Learning in our
Grandfather's days, who foretell, that Court-Minions are like to have no Favor,
but the King's. Thus Erasmus in his Epistle, Ante scriptores Angustae
historiae, published by him. An parum est suam quamque regionem habere Dominum,
nisi singulae rursus alium haberent Dominum conduplicata servitute? As if he
thought it no better then a doubling of Servitude, to have a Privado, like a
Lord Lieutenant, under the sepreme Lord, to ride upon the Backs of the People.
Budaeus is more churlish upon the Pandects, p. 61. Howsoever (says he) the King
gives Honors, patient Spirits will accept it; but when they are conferred by
one, Qui majoribus fatis sub-princeps est, they will be ill looked upon. And
all, whom he prefers, are esteemed no better then Janissaries, to be his Guard
to protect him in violent Courses, or rather suspected to debase Virtue under
the power of Fortune. He proceeds further, That whosoever oversways in Favor
with his Sovereign, in effect does all, and yet is like to give no account of
his Actions, which is the worst mortifying of Justice. (...), says Plato: Let
no Man be a Judge, unless he may be judged for his Judicature. Let no Man bear
an Office, that grows too formidable to them that call his Behavior to a
Trial. These Fleeces plucked from the Judgments of such great Clerks assure us,
that not only Ahasuerus his Haman, Tiberius his Seianus, Edward the Second his
Gaveston, and such corrupt ones, must needs decline faster then they got up,
but the most circumspect that possess such a Room, as they did, will prove to
be May-Lords in Fortune's Interlude: For though their Honor be not swelled
with Pride, yet their Balast will certainly be Envy. It would be a wonder
therefore, if a great Favorite could act his part to come off the Stage with
Applause, in whom this double Misery concurs, the Favor that he takes from his
Chief is odious, the Favor that he gives to his Confidents is dangerous.
Hereupon some that had the estimation of discreet Men, conceived of the Crimes
and Clamours objected to the Lord of Buckingham, that his Place was more guilty
of them, then his Person.

49. Now the second Reason said this wise Man, which kept him suspensive,
whether he should seek a Lift higher in the World by the courtesy of that
Lord's Power, was, That he saw his Lordship was bred in a great Error, he was
so ready to cast a Cloud suddenly upon his Creatures, and with much inconstancy
to root up that which he had planted. A fault too patent against all Apology.
He had changed the White Staves of the King's Household, the Secretaries, the
Masters of the Court of Wards, the Chancellors of the Exchequer, and many
others. Partly it happened, because fresh Undertakers came with Proffers and
Forecasts, which had not been made before. Presently some must be discarded, to
make room for those, who albeit in their Discharge they did less then their
Predecessors, yet they outbid them in Promises. And partly, which goes
together, his Lordship was of very desultorious Affections, quickly weary of
those whom he had gratified, and apt to resume his Favors to make Trial upon
others, if they would obey his Commands upon undiscoursed Obedience. A
Prognosticator might have guessed upon every Day of the Year, while he was
glorified in his Greatness, somewhat variable Weather. From whence it came to
pass, that his Lordship was often served by bad Instruments; for they made too
much haste to Rich, because they knew their Turn was quickly coming to be
shifted. And it is a weak part to blast the good Turns which a Man has done,
to lose his Thanks, and the Fidelity of his Clients. Mark what Sylla said to
Bacchus, In Salust, amicorum ne^ue nobis, neque cuiquam hominum satis fuit.
Bell. Jugur. No Man can have too many Friends; but he that loses his Friends,
will have too many Enemies. Such inconstant Revocations are prettily called,
Praefloratae Liberalitates, Mildew'd Liberalities: Or like a Tree that has a
cankerous Malignity, to dry up, and cast its own Blossoms. And it is a weak
part to think it a gaudy thing, to be cringed unto with new Acquaintance. Green
Heads know not the Utility of old Friendships. But none are so unestimable, be
they never so Potent, as those sickle-fancy'd Men, whose Friendships will hold
no longer then Pliny's Peaches, after they are gathered, Longissima decerpto
bidui mora est; After they have been plucked, and laid by two days, they are
rotten.

50. These two, so related to me, were his intimate Consultations with himself;
A great Fruit of Philosophy, says Antisthenes in Laertius, (...), to confer
much with a Man's own Mind. From both those Reasons he concluded, to give way
to others to seek the Lord Marquess, who were bolder then himself. For why
should he render himself as an Hostage to Fortune, when he needed not? Or what
could mend his present Condition but a contented Mind? Pol si est animus aequus
tibi, satis habes qui vitam colas. Plaut. Aul. He that has much, and wants
nothing, has yet as little as comes to nothing, if he wants Equanimity. It was
generously spoken of Esau, Genesis 33.9. I have enough my Brother. And they that
lose a good Portion which they had before, because their Appetite did
over-drive them, let them look upon Children playing at a petty Game, they will
not stand, but ask for another Card, which puts them out. Though these things
were so maturely considered, an Occasion came about, which did lead him quite
aside; yet it was in the King's Highway. He was at Royston in Attendance on
the King, and in the Marquess his Absence. The King abruptly, without
dependence upon the Discourse on foot, asked him, When he was with Buckingham?
Sir, (says the Doctor) I have had no business to resort to his Lordship. But
wheresoe'er he is, you must presently go to him upon my Message, says the King.
So he did that Errand, and was welcomed with the Countenance and Compliments of
the Marquess, and invited with all sweetness to come freely to him upon his own
Addresses. Who marked rather from whom he came, then to whom he was sent: And
gathered from the King's Dispatch, That His Majesty intended that he should
seek the Marquess, and deserve him with Observance. From henceforth he resolved
it; yet not to contaminate his Lordship with Bribery, or base Obsequiousness,
but to show himself in some Act of Trust and Moment, that he was as sufficient
to bring his Lordship's good Ends to pass, as any whom he employed, both with
readiness to do, and with judgment to do well. Which thus succeeded to his
great Commendation. My Lord Marquess was a Bachelor, and ripe for a gallant
Wedlock His Youth, his comely Person, his Fortunes plentiful and increasing,
his Favor he held with the King, being as much, or more, then the
Cardinal-Nephews in the Pope's Conclave: What Graces could be sweeter in the
Girdle of Venus that the Poets speak of, Cestum de Veneris sinu calentem?
Martial. He could not seek long to be entertained, who was so furnished for a
Suitor. The Lady with whom he desired to match, was Lady Katherine Manners,
Daughter, and only Child surviving, to Francis Earl of Rutland. Hereby he
should marry with a Person of Honor, her Family being very anciently Noble,
and draw to his Line an access of Wealth and Revenue, as the like not to be
expected from the Daughter of any Subject in this Realm. The Motion was set on
foot in the beginning of the Year 1520, which stuck at two Objections. The Earl
of Rutland was slow, or rather fullen, in giving way to this lusty Woer; who
came on the faster, directed it seems by Proverbial Wisdom, That faint Heart
never won fair Lady. Certain it is, that he kept not such distance in his
Visits, as was required. Which put the Earl into so strong a Passion, that he
could not be mitigated, though great Ones had attempted the Pacification. In
this distraction Dr. Williams took the opportunity to go between the great Men,
and to Umpire the Controversy. He had often in former times made Journeys from
Lincoln to visit the Earl at his Castle of Belvoir, who was Lord Lieutenant of
the County of Lincoln, and held some Leases of that Church, whereof the Doctor
was a Residentiary, and Precentor. The Earl had found him so true and fortunate
in many Offices of Service, which he had managed for his Lordship's sake, that
he preferred him before all his Neighbors for Wisdom and Fidelity. Therefore he
gave him very patient Hearing to his Propositions about the Lord Marquess his
Amors, and took down the heat of Inflammation with cool Advice. All youthful
Dalliances were cleared from sinister Jealousy, and had Allowance to be
inoffensively continued. To speak all together: The Doctor brought the Earl
about so dexterously with his Art and pleasant Wit, that his Lordship put it
into his hands to draw up all Contracts and Conditions for Portion and
Jointure; which he did to the fair satisfaction of both sides, the noble Earl
being so glad of a good Understanding between him and the Lord Marquess, that
the Counselor at his Elbow induced him to settle more upon the Marriage, then
the Marquess and his Mother had demanded. The first Door that was shut against
the young Lord in Cupid's Court was thus opened to him. Nothing is so good to
soften that which is hard, as the Language of a discreet Man. Therefore the old
Gauls did carve the God of Eloquence, not after the shape of Mercury, but of
Hercules, says Lucian, carrying his Club in one hand, his Bow and Shafts in the
other: But innumerous small Rings were drawn through his Tongue, to which a
multitude of Chains were fastened, that reached to the Ears of Men and Women,
to which they were tied; meaning by this Picture, that he performed all his
hard Labors by his Tongue, and not by his Club: (...). And that which the
Doctor brought to pass in the preceding Matter, is fit for the Application of
the Apologue. Of whose Performance, the Mother-Countess, her Noble Son, with
the Ladies of the Kindred, gave the best Account to the King that Thankfulness
could make.

51. The King commended it; and was right glad that they were well out of the
Mire, where they all stuck before. And now the Progress of the Suit seemed so
easy, as if a pair of Doves might draw the Chariot of Love; when His Majesty
put a strong Spoke into the Wheel, which I may call The Second Obstruction. For
the Lady Katherine, though she and her Family were not rigid forbearers of our
Church, yet she was bred a Papist. This was no Straw at which the King
stumbled: For he knew it would sad the Spirit of some good People, most tender
of the Religion established, when they should hear, that the Nobleman in whom
His Majesty did most delight, was wedded to a Lady of that disaffected
Superstition. Therefore he liked not that the Marquess should proceed in that
Marriage, till the Lady were tried with sweet Persuasions to serve God,
together with her Husband, constantly, and without Hypocrisy, after the
Confession of the Reformed Church of England. So His Majesty called for Dr.
Williams, and laid his strict and highest Commands upon him, to use his best
Skill upon the Conscience of that tender Lady, misled by Education, to make her
a true Proselyte: Before that was done, He would be loath to give his Blessing
to the Nuptials. This He required of him, before all his other Chaplains, as
well because he had the Ear of the Family more then any Man of his Coat,
whereof Proof was made in his late Actions; as because he knew he had the Gift
of Wisdom, mixed with Learning, to cure a Corruption in Opinion. Sir, (says the
Doctor) I obey Your Commands with all my heart, and with belief of some
Success. But in case upon the first or second Conference I bring the young
Madam to some Access toward the Church of England, without a total Recess from
the Church of Rome, will Your Majeshy discomsit a good Beginning, and stay the
Marriage, whose Consummation is every day desired, because the Party is not
brought to the perfection of an absolute Convert? To which the King answered, I
know that commonly Grace proceeds by degrees in conception, and building up its
Features, as well as Nature; but though you walk slow, walk sure. I cannot
abide to be cozened with a Church-Papist. So the Doctor received his Commission
cheerfully from His Majesty; the rather, because though he cunningly concealed
how far he had entered, yet he had assayed before, to bring the Lady Katherine
into a good liking of our Church with many strong and plausible Arguments, and
found her Tractable and Attentive. She easily perceived, that Conjugal Love
would be firmest and sweetest, when Man and Wife served God with one Heart, and
in one way, and were like the two Trumpets of Silver made of an whole Piece,
Number. 10.12. And quickly she was confirmed by diverse and solid Representations,
to confess that our Cathechism was a plain Model of Saving Truth; and the Form
of Matrimony in our Liturgy pleased her abundantly, being as pious and forcible
as any Church could make, to bind up a sanctified and indissoluble Union. And
after some Prayers made to God for his secret Breathings into her, such easy
Demonstrations were spread before her, that she confessed our Ministers were
fit Dispensers of the Ordinances of God, and all Gospel-Blessings from Christ
Jesus. So the second Obstruction was mastered by the good Spirit of God, and
this Doctor's Industry. The Remotion of two such Impediments is not commonly
accompass'd by one Headpiece. Sometimes it is seen, as Macrobius says, yet
very seldom, Ut idem pectus and agendi, and disputandi facultate sublime sit.
Lib. 2. de Som-Scrip. c. 17. Now all things being made smooth for Love and
Concord, on the 16th day of May, 1620. the Nuptials were celebrated between the
Lord Marquess and his Bride, the Lady Katherine Manners, at Lumly-House on
Tower Hill, where the Earl of Rutland lay, Dr. Williams joined them together
with the Office of our Liturgy; all Things being transacted more like to
Privacy, then Solemnity, to avoid the Envy of Pomp and Magnificence. I have
been no larger then there was cause in this Report; for the Negotiation in this
Marriage, said the Negotiator often unto me, was the last Key-Stone that made
the Arch in his Preferment.

52. It behoved him therefore to spare no Pains, nor Study, to season the new
Marchioness with such a measure of Knowledge, as might keep her found in the
Integrity of Truth. He needed not a Remembrancer to keep his Diligence waking.
Yet the King was so intent, that the Lady should become an upright and sincere
Protestant, that he proposed to his Chaplain, now her Ghostly Father, to draw
up a pretty Manual of the Elements of the Orthodox Religion, with which she
might every day consult in her Closet-Retirements, for her better confirmation.
A Book was Compiled accordingly, but (...), put forth, and not put forth.
Twenty Copies were printed and no more, and without the Author's Name, (in a
Notion common to many) By an old Prebendary of the Church of Lincoln. The
Copies were sent to the Lord Marquess, and being no more, are no more to be
found; for I have searched for one, but with lost Labor. I can truly say I
have seen one, and read it about 30 Years since, which being in a negligent
Custody, is miscarried. It contents me better, that I have a written Copy, out
of which it was printed; by which the Author could set it in order for the
Press, surer then I can now. If I should miss to digest the Expunctions,
Interlinings, and Marginal References, as they were intended, I should make the
Work differ from it self, though quite against my will. But because it is a
Golden Medal, and sit to be worn like an Amulet against Seducers, when this Web
is spun and woven, which I have in hand, I will try my best Skill, though a
weak Aristarchus, to fashion it into Native Contexture. And if I can truly
affirm it to be the very Mantle which fell from Elijah, it shall be
forthcoming in a Wardrode in the end of the Book. If I fail in that, (I do not
despair) let this Letter, sent with the 20 Copies to the Lord Marquess,
discover what sappy Kernels were in that Pomegranate.

My most Noble Lord,
MY most humble Duty, and all due Respects, remembered. I have at the last
according to His Majesty's Intimation, and your Lordship's, made up for my
Ladies private Use a little Stock, as it were, in Divinity, and divided the
same into three small Treatises. The first, to furnish her how to speak unto
God by Invocation. The second, how to speak unto her self by Meditation. And
the third, how to speak unto those Romanists, that shall oppose her, by way of
Answer and Satisfaction. Prayers are the most necessary for the obtaining,
Principles for the augmenting, and Resolutions (in these days) for the
defending of her Faith and Profession. I held these three, (in some sort) and
more I held not, to have been necessary. The Prayers I have Translated from
ancient Writers, that her Ladyship may see, we have not coined a new Worship,
or Service of God. Of the rest, I received my best Grounds from His Majesty,
and such as, I protest faithfully I never could read the like in any Author for
mine own satisfaction. If I be out in my Descant upon them, I hope your
Lordship will the rather pardon it, because the Book is but private, whereof 20
Copies only are imprinted, and as many of them to be suppressed, as your Honor
shall not command and use. I make bold to send these Books to your Lordship,
because I hope they will be more welcome and acceptable to both the great
Ladies, coming immediately from your Honor. I humbly thank your Honor for
affording me this occasion, to do your Lordship any little Service, who am in
all affectionate Prayers, and best Devotion,

Your Honor's true Creature and Beadsman, JOHN WILLIAMS.
From Your College at Westminster this 28th of November, 1620.

53. I perceive by the Date of this Letter, that the Book was printed six
months after it was bespoken, which could not be helped, because the Author was
taken up almost all that Summer in making a progress to survey the Lands of the
College of Westminster, whereof he was become Dean by the Lord Marquess's
Favor, and Installed July 12. 1620. Dr. Tolson, who preceded, a man of
singular Piety, Eloquence, and Humility, in the March before had the
Approbation of the King, and the Congratulation of good Men for the Bishopric
of Salisbury. The Deanery to be vacated, had many that longed for it; a
fortunate Seat, and near the Court: Like the Office over the King of Persia's
Garden at Babylon, which was stored with his most delicious Fruits; Hortus ille
nunquam nisi dominantis in Aula fuit, says Pliny, lib. 1^. c. 4. He that was
trusted with that Garden, was the Lord of the Palace. This Preferment had ever
been conferred by the nomination of him that was Steward of the College and City
of Westminster. The Lord Treasurer Burleigh, the Earl of Salisbury his Son, the
Earl of Somerset, and the Lord Marquess, bearing the Office at the present, had
been the constant Patrons of it. Therefore it was requisite, it being now to be
conferred, to take it from his Lordship's hand. Whom the Doctor solicited with
no more then this short Letter, Dated March 12. 1619.

My most Noble Lord,
I Am an humble Suitor, first, to be acknowledged your Servant; and then that I
may be nearer and better able to perform my Desires, to be by your happy Hand
transplanted from Salisbury to Westminster, if that Deanery shall prove vacant.
I trouble not your Honor for Profit, but only for Convenience; for being
Unmarried, and inclining so to continue, I do find that Westminster is fitter
by much for that disposition. And mine own, nothing inferior in value, will be
at His Majesty's Collation. If your Honor be not bent upon an ancienter
Servant, I beseech you think upon me. I am true, and so reputed by my former,
and by the grace of God will prove no otherwise to my second Master. God in
Heaven bless you, as he has began. He prays it, who is,

Your Honor's poor Beadsman already ever bound, J. W.


I observe, out of these Lines, a Precedent for Suitors and Candidates of
Ecclesiastical Promotions, that he neither extorted his Place by Importunity,
nor invaded it by Impudency, nor licked it out of the Dust by Flattery, nor
bargained for it by Simony, or the mollifying Term of Gratuity; in a word, he
did not dishonest himself for it with any Indignity. He carried it as he
wished, not being griple of Profit, as he confessed, but fond of Convenience.
He was Vir palmavius: And Pliny says of the Palm Trees, Gaudent mutatione
sedis, they take Liking to be removed from Soil to Soil. The Righteous carry
branches of Palm before the Lamb, Rev. 7.9. And their good Works do follow
them, Rev. 14.13. I trust, and do verily believe, that he is among those
Palmers now in the Church Triumphant, who did so many worthy Things for that
Religious Foundation precious in the Eyes of the Lord. For my own part, I take
no little Joy to recount, that this College was so happy in such a Man, and the
Liberty of that City in such a Governor. It was the Soil of my Birth, and my
Breeding. There I served this good Master, when I came out of the University
first into the World, there he paid me my Wages, my Livelihood, which, with
God's Blessing, I owe to him alone. A lucky spot of Ground to me. I crave leave
to set up this little Pillar in the place, where God appeared so Gracious to
me, and to pour Oil of Benediction on the top of it, as Jacob did at Rethel,
Genesis 28.18. I do not aim at all to crowd in a Legend of my self, as Phidias did
insert his own Picture in the Shield which he made for the Statue of Minerva.
But I will speak of him, whose Memory deserves to be refreshed, for the
imprints of his Goodness in all sorts, and for the Braveries of his Mind, which
he left behind him in that Orb.

54. His Predecessors (whose Names and Actions are not forgotten) were Men of
good Report. Two above all, because none were comparable to them, he cast in
his Head to imitate, Abbat Islip, and Dr. Andrews Dr. Andrews for advancing
Learning in the School, Abbat Islip for his Cost expended upon the Fabric of
the Minster, and the Dean's place. I dispose it so, to mention first what a
Foster-Father he was to the Scholars, because himself proceeded to greater
Designments by that Order. He had heard much what Pains Dr. Andrews did take
both day and night to train up the Youth bred in the public School, chiefly the
Alumni of the College so called. For more certain Information, he called me
from Cambridge in the May before he was Installed, to the House of his dear
Cousin Mr. Elwis Winn in Chancery Lane, a Clerk of the Petty-Bag, a Man of the
most general and gracious Acquaintance with all the great Ones of the Land that
ever I knew. There he moved his Questions to me about the Discipline of Dr.
Andrews. I told him how strict that excellent Man was, to charge our Masters,
that they should give us Lessons out of none but the most Classical Authors;
that he did often supply the Place both of Head Schoolmaster and Usher for the
space of an whole week together, and gave us not an hour of Loitering time from
morning to night. How he caused our Exercises in Prose and Verse to be brought
to him, to examine our Style and Proficiency. That he never walked to Cheswick
for his Recreation, without a brace of this young Fry; and in that wayfaring
Leisure, had a singular dexterity to fill those narrow Vessels with a Funnel.
And, which was the greatest burden of his Toil, sometimes thrice in a week,
sometimes oftener, he sent for the uppermost Scholars to his Lodgings at night,
and kept them with him from eight till eleven, unfolding to them the best
Rudiments of the Greek Tongue, and the Elements of the Hebrew Grammar, and all
this he did to Boys without any compulsion of Correction; nay, I never heard
him utter so much as a word of Austerity among us. Alas! this is but an
Ivy-Leaf crept into the Laurel of his Immortal Garland. This is that Andrews,
the Ointment of whose Name is sweeter then all Spices, Came. 4.10. This is that
celebrated Bishop of Winton, whose Learning King James admired above all his
Chaplains; and that King, being of most excellent Parts himself, could the
better discover what was Eminent in another. Indeed he was the most Apostolical
and Primitive-like Divine, in my Opinion, that wore a Rochet in his Age; of a
most venerable Gravity, and yet most sweet in all Commerce; the most Devout
that ever I saw, when he appeared before God; of such a Growth in all kind of
Learning, that very able Clerks were of a low Stature to him: Colossus inter
icunculas; full of Alms and Charity; of which none knew but his Father in
secret: A certain Patron to Scholars of Fame and Ability, and chiefly to those
that never expected it. In the Pulpit an Homer among Preachers, and may fitly
be set forth in Quintilian's Judgment of Homer; Nonne humani ingenii modum
excessit? Ut magni sit viri virtutes ejus non aemulaticne (quod fieri non
potest) sed intellectu sequi. I am transported even as in a Rapture to make
this Digression: For who could come near the Shrine of such a Saint, and not
offer up a few Grains of Glory upon it? Or how durst I omit it? For he was the
first that planted me in my tender Studies, and watered them continually with
his Bounty. The Occasion that brings in this, was the new Dean's addition to
his Pattern, that looking into such a Mirror, he might keep up the Learning of
that happy Plantation, that it might never hear worse, then as Mr. Camden
testifies for it, Felix eruditorum in Ecclesiam and Rempublicam proventus.
Eliz. p. 61. Fol. In his Zeal to this Work, as soon as he was possessed of the
Deanery, he was assiduous in the School, and missed not sometimes every week,
if he were resident in the College, both to dictate Lectures to the several
Classes, and to take account of them. The choicest Wits had never such
Encouragement for Praise, and Reward. He was very Bountiful in both, and they
went always together, scattering Money, as if it had been but Dung to manure
their Industry. And seldom he did fail, no not when he kept the Great-Seal, to
call forth some of them to stand before him at his Table, that in those
intervals of best Opportunity he might have account of their Towardliness;
which ripened them so fast, made them so Prompt and Ingenuous, that the number
of the Promoted to the Universities, which swarmed out of that Stock, was
double for the most part to those that were Transplanted in the foregoing
Elections.

55. These were the first Fruits of his Care. In tenut labor, at tenuts non
glovia: Virg. Georg. 4. The Buildings of Abbat Islip, Monuments of a great
worth, were the next Object of his Emulation. That wife and holy Man was the
Lord Abbat over the Benedictine Monks, who professed their Vows within those
Cloysfers in the Glorious Reign of King Henry the Seventh. The Abbat was a
Privy-Counsellor, and, for his Fidelity and Prudence, was one of the Executors
to the King his Master by his Last Will and Testament. The Structure of the
Abbey was left imperfect from the Reign of King Henry the Third, who had been
very Sumptuous in advancing the Workmanship from the Altar to the lower-end of
the Quire: From his Death, that stately Pile of Building had looked for some to
help, and there was none that pitied it. This Abbat, a devout Servant of
Christ, and of a wakeful Conscience, considered the Office he bore, how he was
the Chief who had that House of God in possession. Therefore he enlarged the
length of the Church at his own Cost, from the entering in of the Quire, or
thereabout, to the West-Gate that looks toward Tuttle-street; and contrived
the Lodgings with strength and handsomness at the South-end, which, after the
Change made in King Henry the Eighth's Reign, received the Dean and his
Retinue. But Eternal Fame does best shine upon his Memory in the Rising-Sun, or
upon the Eastern part. There this Abbat, and John Fisher Bishop of Rochester,
(the Executor to King Henry the Seventh joined with him) laid out such Sums of
Money, as that King had appointed for the Noble Enterring of his own Body and
his Queens, with the Stems of their Royal Line, and none other. These two, like
men of faithful and large Minds, built the Chapel, next behind the Chapel of
Edward the Confessor, called by King Henry the Seventh's Name, which nothing
can surmount for Cost and Curiosity. There they set up his Monument in a Brazen
Impalement, which looks like the Work, not of our Moderns, but of Bezaleel.
Now, though not the Soul, yet the Piety and Liberality of the Abbat to this
Domo, came into Dr. Williams by Transmigration; who, in his entrance to that
place, found the Church in such decay, that all that passed by, and loved the
Honor of God's House, shook their Heads at the Stones that dropped down from
the Pinacles. Therefore that the Ruins of it might be no more a Reproach, this
Godly Jehoiada took care for the Temple of the Lord to repair it, to set it in
his state, and to strengthen it, a Chren. 4.3. He began at the South-east part,
which looked the more deformed with decay, because it coupled with a latter
Building. I mean the Chapel of King Henry the Seventh, which was tight and
fresh. The North-west part also, which looks to the great Sanctuary, was far
gone in Dilapidations: The great Buttresses were almost crumbled to Dust with
the Injuries of the Weather; which he re-edified with durable Materials, and
beautified with elegant Statues, (among whom Abbat Islip had a place) so that
4500 Pounds were spent in a trice upon the Workmanship. All this was his own
Cost. Neither would he Impatronize his Name to the Credit of that Work, which
should be raised up by other men's collatitious Liberality, like Laonicus in
Castilio his Courier, Lib. 4. Vide quam liberalis sit, qui non sua solum sed
etiam aliena largiatur. I do not expect that the Sacrilegious of our Times
should commend him for disbursing so much upon a Building of Sacred Use; who
either make no difference between Holy and Profane, or Tender Profane, and
Common Things before the Holy. Never in the days of old was so much spent in
private Buildings: Enough is Erected upon new Foundations in the Skirts of
London, to make two large and beautiful Cities: Yet we suffer all our
Cathedrals of egregious Piety, and stupendous Bravery, to run to a general
Decay, which is all one as to put hands to their Demolishment. What Christians
would not tremble to see their Rubbish rise up in Judgment against them? I
appeal to found Judgment, whether in an Heathenish, but a Civil Republic, the
Aedils of Rome would not have saved such Structures from Ruin at the public
Charge? But I am indifferent to appeal to any man, sound or corrupt against
Art. Will. in his History, p. 191. who nibbles at the good Name of the
magnificent Dean upon his magnificent Church-works, because he could not bite
it. For this is his Censure: These Works were Arguments of a great Mind, but
how far from Ostentation in this frail body of Flesh, cannot be determined.
Such suspicious and ungrounded Glances discover more Rancor then direct
Contumelies; for which, Macrobius has a pretty Simile, Lib. 7. c. 3. Hami
angulosi, quam directi mucrones tenacius infiguntur. Ill-favored Suspicion is
like a crooked Hook, where it enters it will stick in the Flesh, though it make
but a little wound. But thus he serves King James and all his Courtiers, of
both Sexes, of all Professions, pelts them all along with rotten Surmises, or
palpable Untruths. I will fit him with Spalatensis his Judgment upon Baronius
the great Annalist, who was Squint-eyed, Omnia regum facta non rectis sed
contortis oculis intuetur, Lib. 7. c. 9. In all his Volumes he squinted at the
famous Actions of Kings and Princes.

56. For their further satisfaction, who will judge of good Works by Visions,
and not by Dreams, I will cast up in a true Audite other Deeds of no small
reckoning, conducing greatly to the Welfare of that College, Church, and
Liberty, wherein Piety and Beneficence were Relucent in despite of Jealousies.
First, that God might be praised with a cheerful Noise in his Sanctuary, he
procured the sweetest Music, both for the Organ, and for the Voices of all
Parts, (...) was heard in an English Quire. In those days that Abbey, and
Jerusalem-Chamber where he gave Entertainment to his Friends, were the Volaries
of the choicest Singers that the Land had bred. The greatest Masters of that
delightful Faculty frequented him above all others, and were never nice to
serve him: And some of the most Famous yet living will confess, he was never
nice to reward them; a Lover could not court his Mistress with more prodigal
effusion of Gifts. With the same Generosity and strong propension of mind to
enlarge the Boundaries of Learning, he converted a wast Room, situate in the
East side of the Cloisters into Plato's Portico, into a goodly Librarary,
modeled it into decent Shape, furnished it with Desks and Chains, accoutred it
with all Utensils, and slored it with a vast Number of Learned Volumes: For
which use he lighted most fortunately upon the Study of that Learned Gentleman
Mr. Baker of Highgate, who in a long and industrious Life had Collected into
his own possession the best Authors in all Sciences, in their best Editions,
which being bought at 500 l. (a cheap Penny worth for such precious War) were
removed into this Storehouse. When he received Thanks from all the professors
of Learning in and about London far beyond his expectation, because they had
free admirtance to such Honey from the Flowers of such a Garden, as they wanted
before, it compelled him to unlock his Cabinet of Jewels, and bring forth his
choicest Manuscripts. A Right Noble Gift in all the Books he gave to this
Serapaeum, but especially the Parchments. Some good Authors were conferred by
other Benefactors, but the richest Fruit was shaken from the Boughs of this one
Tree, which will keep Green in an unfading Memory in despite of the Tempest of
Iniquity. As Pliny the younger wrote in an Epistle upon the Death of his Son,
quatenus nobis denegatur diu vivere, relinquamus aliquid quo nos vixisse
testemur; so this Work will bear Witness to Posterity, that he lived, and that
he lived beneficently. I borrow that assurance from honored Mr. Seldom in his
Epistle before the History of Eadmerus Dedicated to the Founder of this
Library, to whom he writes in these Words; Egregius peritissimusque literarum
censor, and fautor indulgentissimus and audis, and vere es. Quippe qui
Doctrinam suo merito indies cupientissimus honestas: Et sumptuosam in struendis
publico usui Bibliothecis operam impendis. Praemium ita studiosis and armarium
etiam sine exemplo solicitus parandi. Yet what an ill requital did these
unthankful times make him, when they removed that worthy Scholar, the
Bibliothecary whom he had placed, Mr. Richard Gouland? whom he picked out above
all men for that Office, being inferior to none in the knowledge of good
Authors, Superior to any for Fidelity and Diligence of so mortified a Life,
that he could scandalize none but with Innocence and Piety; nor offend any but
by Meekness, and Inoffensiveness. Such times, such Fruits; for as Antoninus the
Emperor says, lib. 12. (...), He is mad that looks for Figgs upon the Tree in
Winter. I cannot end with the Erection of this Library. I have but almost done.
For this Dean gratified the College with many other Benefits. When he came to
look into the State of the House, he found it in a Debt of 300 l. by the
Hospitality of the Table. It had then a Brotherhood of most worthy
Prebendaries, Moumford, Sutton, Laud, Caesar, Robinson, Dorrel, Fox, King,
Newel and the rest; but ancient frugal Diet was laid aside in all places; and
the prizes of Provisions in less than fifteen years were doubled in all
Markets: By which enhancements the Debt was contracted, and by him discharged.
Not long after, to the Number of the forty Scholars, the Alumni of Queen
Elizabeth's Foundation anno 1560. he added four more, distinguished from the
rest in their Habit of Violet Colored Gowns, for whose maintenance he
purchased Lands. These were Adopted Children, and in this diverse from the
Natural Children, that the place to which they are removed, when they deserve
it by their Learning, is St. John's College in Cambridge, of whom more
hereafter. And in those days, when good Turns were received with the Right
Hand, Cabal. page 69.
it was Esteemed among the praises of a Stout and Vigilant Dean, that whereas a
great Limb of the Liberties of the City was threatened to be cut off by the
Encroachments of the higher Power of the Lord Steward of the Kings Household,
and the Knight Marshal with his Tip-Staves, he stood up against them with a
wife and a confident Spirit, and would take no composition to let them share in
those Privileges, which by right they never had, but preserved the Charter of
his place in its entire Jurisdiction, and laudable Immunities.

57 As the place was most Fortunate in him, so it come now to be shown that he
was most Fortunate in that place. That which was the Lodging of a Dean, became
in the current of one year, the House of the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and
the (...)lace of the Bishop of Lincoln. Ab eo Magistratu alium post alium sibi
peperit; semperque in potestatibus eo modo agitabat, ut amplioris quam gerebat
dignns haberetur; Words as fit for this Man, as Salust made them for C. Marius.
The Occasion of his sudden Rising was wondered at, because known to few. And
they that were busy in the search did not find it; albeit it had done him
Credit, that received the Honor. Works that deserve well, deserve the better,
when they are wrapped up in Silence, till Prudence chooses the best time to
disclose them. When the Apostles had seen the Glory of our Lord Transfigur'd in
the Mount. they were commanded Secrecy to Tell the Vision to no Man, till the
Son of Man was Risen from the Dead, Math. 17.9. Let discretion then be my
Warrant to give some State-Occurrencies liberty to go abroad, which were
confined upon good Reason to the Kings Cabinet in their Minority; Nam (...)
ille tempus est ipsum temporis. Jul. Seal. On Jan. 30. 1620. the King met with
the Lords and Commons in the High Court of Parliament: The like Assembly
convened anno 1613. had given unkindness to the King, so that Parliaments had
been disused for seven years. The unkindness so deeply taken was chiefly from
hence, that the greatest part of the House of Commons gave willing Audience to
those Zealots, who would admit no business into Treaty, till they had made
their passionate Complaints, That Popery was suffered to increase without Care
and Controlement, His Majesty knowing it to be a scandalous Untruth, which
blemished him in the good Opinion of his People, and the contrary so well known
at home and abroad, that himself with his own Pen had cut the Head of that
Superstition, to the admiration of all the World. Yet the Clamor being more
stoutly than wisely maintained by the Undertakers, it reached to this
prejudice, or rather mischief, that the King bethought him that all their
Grievances (and they were many) were as groundless as this, and that the
Proponents were not to be consulted with for the Public Weal, and so Dissolved
them. Generally the Grave and Moderate Gentry throughout the Realm dislike
those hot Distempers, which wrought so high in the House of Commons: Yet were
not satisfied with their abrupt Recess. Such Physic is too Violent for the
Body, and naught for the Head. For the Unruly shall less offend in their House,
than when they go home, and exaggerate Reports of Misgovernment among their
Neighbors. And that Monarch sooths himself in Error, that thinks he will close
up the Wound of such a Breach with a Lip-Salve of a Protestation; or by some
Declaration that he will Redress Grievances by himself and by his Judges,
without troubling his Lord and Commons. For it is ingrafted into the people,
not to account any thing for Reformation, unless the Workmen, whom themselves
have chosen, do mend the decays of the great Building.

58 It is much that a King of great Experience, and so full a Soul did discern
this no sooner; at last he came to it: And after seven years Pause, he was
desirous to try the good Temper of another Parliament. It was high time for
many Respects. Let not two among many be forgotten. First he lacked Money, and
being so profuse in Gifts, he had lacked sooner, it the Custom-House had not
supported the Exchequer. In ten years he had not he Received one Subsidy, a
very long time to live like a Shellfish upon his own Moisture, without any
public Supply; which truly he deserved as much, or above his Predecessors. For
the Kingdom, since his Reign began, was Luxuriant in Gold and Silver far above
the scant of our Fathers that lived before us. Only the King wanted, who bred
all the Plenty: It was dry upon the Fleece only, and there was Dew on all the
ground; Jud. 6.40. Besides, those Princes should be cheerfully supplied, whose
Wisdom procures us safety and quiet by Treaties, rather than by Effusion of
Blood. For as Or sins says well lib. 5. Hist. Tributum pretium pacis est, What
is Tribute? but a Debt duly paid to Princes for enjoyment of Peace. Secondly,
and far above Money, the King desired to close with his people in such a strein
of mutual good liking, as might give him high Reputation in all Countries,
wherein he did negotiate by his Ministers. A course that has a long Span of
forecast in it. For a good Correspondence with all the Heads of the people, is
a Sign of the general Love of the Realm. And a King that is beloved at home,
will be dreaded abroad. The House of Austria, to whom he had sent often for the
Restitution of the Palatinat, which they had invaded, was so great in its own
Opinion, that where they Treated, nothing came from them, but that which was
fastidious and insolent. As at this time the King of Spain would deign to grant
Peace to the States of the United Provinces, not unless upon conditions
unsupportable; which were these four. First to acknowledge him for their Patron
and Protector. Secondly, To recall their Fleets and Merchants out of the East
and West Indies, surrendering what they had in either unto him, and to Trade in
those Parts no more. Thirdly, To permit the Roman Catholics free use of
Religion in all their Provinces, with Churches and maintenance. Fourthly, To
open the Channel of free Navigation between Zealand and Antworp. They that
would demand no less for their Friendship, where they had not one Foot of
possession, were like to vex them with more lofty Bravadoes and Grandiloquence,
in whose Territories their Armies had been most prosperous, through breach of
Promises. Therefore our King was provident to fill himself with his just
dimensions, like the Praepotent Monarch of Great Britain, fortified with the
Concord and Affections of his Parliament, that by his Ambassadors employed to
prevent the Fears, the Miseries and Oppressions of War, he might not beg but
demand: He might not crave but postulate his Childrens Inheritance.

59. I could not spare these Premises for the Illustration of the sequel. The
Parliament began to sit, whose bearing was dutiful to the King, but quick and
minatory against some vile persons, who had spoiled the people by illegal
oppressions. These were Canker-worms, Harpies, Projectors, who between the
easiness of the Lord Marquess to procure, and the readiness of the Lord
Chancellor Bacon to comply, had obtained Patent Commissions for latent
Knaveries; which Exorbitancies, being countenanced in the Court, were grown too
strong for any Justice but the Parliaments to root them up. There the Appeals
of the vexed Subject were heard, more like to Outcries than Complaints; which
fell thick upon Sir Gyles Mompesson, and Sir Francis Michel, for Fines and
Levies raised upon Inns and Alehouses, Arbitrary impositions, and a President
dangerous to spread even to Shops and Warehouses. Others remonstrated against
a pack of Cheaters, who procured the Monopoly of Gold-thread, which with their
spinning was palpably corrupted and embased. These Gilt Flies were the bolder,
because Sir Edward Villers, half Brother to the Lord Marquess, was in their
Indenture of Association, though not Named in their Patent. A Gentleman both
Religious and true hearted to good ways, who was ensnared by crafty Merchants;
and so far excused, that after strict enquiry, when this Adulterate Ware came
to the Test, it appeared that he knew not of the Juggling of the Patentees, who
drew on grievances with Threads of Vanity, and Scandal upon the Chief
Government with Cords of Iniquity. Together with these Vermin (and much more
than these) the Lord Chancellor was questioned, and without pity to his
Excellent Parts) the Castle of Munera (as I borrow it from Mr. Spenser's Divine
Wit) must be quite defaced. Monopolies and Briberies were beaten upon the
Anvile every Day, almost every Hour. The obnoxious that were brought to the Bar
of Justice, with a multitude that feared to be in as ill condition, saw no way
for safety, but to Poison the King with an ill Opinion of the Parliament, that
it might evaporate into a Nullity. They terrify the Lord Marquess, that the
Grants of these things, which are now Bastardized by the Knights and Burgesses;
nay, by the Lords that envy him, were begotten by his Favor and Credit. That
the Arrow of Vengeance is grazed near to himself, which is shot at his Brother.
That it was time to look about him; for at the opening of that Session it was
much Noted, that the King had said before all the Members, Spare none where you
find just Cause to punish. And if the two Houses should sit a year, what good
could be expected from them, but two or three Subsidies? That it were less
danger for the King to gather such a Sum, or greater, by his Prerogative,
though it be out of the way; than to wait for the exhibition of a little Money,
which will cost Dishonor, and the Ruin of his most Loyal and Faithful Servants.

60. O what a Tempting Fiend is self-preservation? These Mormo's, and ill
shaped Jealousies hatched in Hell, and prompted by the Father of mischief,
disquieted the King, but Robbed my Lord of Buckingham of all peace of Mind; till
the Dean of Westminster his good Genius, conjured them down; whose Wisdom
luckily consulted gave him this Advice, as I find it in a Breviate of his own
hand Writing. That the Parliament in all that it had hitherto undertaken, had
deserved praise, as well for their dutiful demeanor to the King, as for their
Justice to his people. His Majesty's just and gracious Prerogative was
untouched: The Grievances of all that were Wronged with indifferency were
Received, which they must sift, or betray the Trust of their Country which sent
them. The former Parliament was very Tart, if not undutiful; what then? Shall
we be fearful to put our hands into cold Water, because we have been Scalded
with hot? There Is no Color to quarrel at this general Assembly of the Kingdom
for Tracing delinquents to their Form: For it is their proper Work. And the
King has very Nobly encouraged them to it in his Speech that in the first day
he made before them, nay even proffering to have the blemishes of his
Government Reformed by them; for his own Words must literally bear that
meaning, as you well remember them; if I may know my Errors I will Reform them.
But your Lordship is Jealous, if the Parliament continue Embodied in this
Vigor of your own safety, or at least of your Reputation, least your Name
should be used, and he brought to the Bandy, Follow this Parliament in their
undertakings, and you may prevent it; Swim with the Tide, and you cannot be
Drowned. They will seek your favor, (if you do not start from them) to help
them to settle the public Frame, as they are contriving it. Trust me and your
other Servants, that have some Credit with the most Active Members, to keep you
clear from the strife of Tongues. But if you assist to break up this
Parliament, being now in pursuit of Justice, only to save some Cormorants, who
have devoured that, which must be regorged, you will pluck up a Sluice which
will over-whelm your self. The King will find it a great disservice before one
year expire. The Storm will gather, and burst out into a greater Tempest, in
all insequent Meetings. For succeeding Parliaments will never be Friends with
those, with whom the former fell out. This is Negative Counsel. I will now
spread Affirmative Proposals before your Honor, which I have studied and
considered. Delay not one day, before you give your Brother Sir Edward a
Commission for an Embassage to some of the Princes of Germany, or the
North-Lands, and dispatch him over the Seas before he be mist. Those empty
Fellows, Sir G. Mompesson and Sir Fr. Michel, let them be made Victims to the
public Wrath. It strikes even with that Advice, which was given to Caesar in
Salust, when the people expected that some should be Examples of impartial
Justice, Lucius Posthumins, Marcus Fauonius mihi videntur qu^si magnae navis
supervacua onera esse; Si quid adversi coort^m est, de illis pstissumon sactura
sit, quia pretii minimi sunt. Let Lord Posthumous and M. Fauonius be thrown
over board in the Storm; for there are no Wares in the Ship that may better be
spared. Nay, my Sentence is, cast all Monopolies and Patents of griping
projections into the Dead Sea after them. I have searched the Signet Office,
and have Collected almost forty, which I have hung in one Bracelet, and are fit
for Revocation; Damn all these by one Proclamation, that the World may see,
that the King, who is the Pilot that sits at the Helm, is ready to play the
pump, to eject such Filth as grew Noysom in the Nostrils of his people. And
your Lordship must needs partake in the Applause; for though it is known that
these Vermin haunted your Chamber, and is much Whispered, that they set up
Trade with some little License from your Honor, yet when none shall appear
more forward than your self to crush them, the Discourse will come about, that
these Devices, which take ill, were stolen from you by Mis-representation, when
you were but New blossomed in Court, whose Deformities being Discovered, you
love not your own Mistakings, but are the most forward to re-call them.

61. Before I proceed, though Anger be an Enemy to Counsel, I confess I cannot
refrain to be angry; O hearken not to Rhehoboams Ear-Wigs, drive them away to
the Gibbet, which they deserve, that would incite the King to Collections of
Aid, without concurrence of his Parliament. God bless us from those Scorpions,
which certainly would beget a popular Rage. An English man's Tribute comes not
from the King's Exaction, but by the peoples free Oblation, out of the Mouth of
their Representatives. Indeed our Ancient Kings from the beginning did not
receive, but impose Subsidies. When the Saxon Monarchs wanted Relief for
repairing Castles, Bridges, or Military Expeditions, they Levied it at their
will upon the Shires, as we may learn by some Names, the only Remainder of
those Old times, Burg-boot, Brig-boot, Hen-fan, Here-geld, Horn-geld, Danegeld,
Terms that meet us every where in our Ancient Chronicles. The Normans, you may
Swear, lost nothing that came in by wonted Signory, but exacted as they saw
Cause, as William the Conqueror, de Unaquaque hida sex solidos cepit, imposed
Six Shillings on every plowed Land, says Matthew Paris. And William Rusus had
his Auxilium non lege statutum, an Aid without an Act of Parliament, as Hoveden
in the Life of Henry the Second. And in this manner the Norman Race supplied
themselves, as they needed until King John's Reign; who in his great Charter
bound himself, and his Successors to Collect no Aid, nisi per commune concilium
regni, as it is in Matthew Paris. With this agrees the Old Statute of 51 Henry
the Third, de tallagio non concedendo, that Subsidies should not be Levied
without the consent of Parliament. Which being confirmed also in the 25 of
Edward the First, has been inviolably observed by all the good and peaceable
Kings of England to this very day. And God forbid that any other Course should
be Attempted. For this Liberty was settled on the Subject, with such
Imprecations upon the Infringers, that if they should remove these great
Landmarks, they must look for Vengeance, as if Entailed by public Vows on
them and their Posterity. These were the Deans Instructions, which the Lord
Marquess received with as much Thankfulness as he could express, and requited
his Adviser with this Complement, that he would use no other Counselor
hereafter to pluck him out of his plunges, for he had delivered him from Fear
and Folly; and had Restored him both to a light Heart, and a safe Conscience.
To the King they go together forthwith with these Notes of honest Settlement,
whom they found accompanied in his Chamber with the Prince, and in serious
Discourse together upon the same perplexities. Buckingham craves leave, That
the Dean might be heard upon those particulars, which he had brought in
Writing; which the King Marked with Patience and Pleasure. And whatsoever
seemed contentious or doubtful to the King's piercing Wit, the Dean improved it
to the greater liking by the Solidity of his Answers. Whereupon the King
resolved to keep close to every Syllable of those Directions. Sir Edward
Villiars was sent abroad, and returned not till September following. Michel and
Mompesson received their censure, with a Salvo, that Mompesson's Lady, not
guilty of his Crimes, should be preserved in her Honor. And, before the Month
of March expired, Thirty seven Monopolies, with other sharking Prouleries, were
decry'd in one Proclamation, which returned a Thousand praises, and Ten
Thousand good prayers upon the Sovereign. Out of this Bud the Deans Advancement
very shortly spread out into a blown Flower. For the King, upon this Trial of
his Wisdom, either called him to him, or called for his Judgment in Writing, in
all that he deliberated to Act, or permit, in this Session of Parliament in his
most private and closest consultations. The more he founded his Judgment, the
deeper it appeared; so that his Worth was Valued at no less, than to be taken
nearer to be a Counselor upon all Occasions. The Parliament wearied with long
sittings, and great pains, was content against the Feast of Easter to take
Relaxation, and was Prorogued from the 27 of March, to the 18 of April. The
Marquess had an Eye in it upon the Lord Chancellor, to try if time would
mitigate the displeasure, which in both Houses was strong against him. But the
leisure of three Weeks multiplied a pile of New Suggestions against him, and
nothing was presaged more certain than his downfall; which came to Ripeness on
the third of May. On that day the Patent of his Office, with the Great Seal,
was taken from him; which Seal was delivered to Four Commissioners, the Lord
Treasurer Mountagu, Duke of Lenox Lord Steward of the King's Household, William
Earl of Pembroke Lord Chamberlain to the King, and Thomas Earl of Arundel and
Surry; with whom it rested till the 10th of July following. In the mean time
Sir James Leigh, Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench was Commissioned to be
Speaker in the Upper House; and Sir Julius Caesar, Master of the Rolls, was
Authorized, with certain Judges in equal power with him, to hear, dispatch, and
decree all Causes in the Court of Chancery.

62 The Competitors for the Office of the Great Seal were many; Sir James Leigh
before mentioned, a Widower, and upon Marriage with a Lady of the Buckingham
Family; Sir Henry Hobart Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Chancellor to
the Prince, a Step to the Higher Chancellorship, and as fit as any man for his
Learning and Integrity; which of these it was uncertain, but one of these was
expected. And verily a fitter Choice could not be made, than out of the
pre-eminent Professors of the Common Laws, but that all Kings affect to do
somewhat which is extraordinary, to show the liberty of their power. The Earl
of Arundel was thought upon, a Master of Reason, and of a great Fortune. For it
was remembered upon the Death of Lord Chancellor Bromly anno 1587, That Queen
Elizabeth designed a Peer of the Realm for his Successor; Edward Earl of
Rutland, whose Merit for such a place is favored by Mr. Cambden, because he
was Juris scientia, and omni politiori literatura ornatissimus; and if his
Death much bewailed, had not prevented, the Great Seal had been born before
him. But the likeliest to get up (and I may say he had his Foot in the Stirrup)
was Sir Lionel Cranfield, Married in the kindred that brought Dignity to their
Husbands; a man of no vulgar headpiece, yet scarce sprinkled with the Latin
Tongue. He was then Master of the Court of Wards, and did speak to the Causes
that were brought before him quaintly and evenly. There seemed to be no Let to
put him in Possession of the great vacant Office, but that the Lord Marquess,
set on by the King, was upon enquiry, how profitable in a just way it might be
to the Dignitary, and whether certain Branches of Emolument were natural to it,
which by the endeavor of no small ones were near to Lopping: Sir Lionel
besought the Marquess to be sudden, and to Advise upon those things with the
Dean of Westminster, a found man and a ready, who did not wont to clap the
Shackles of delay upon a business. He being spoken to, to draw up in Writing
what he thought of those Cases, returned an Answer speedily on the Tenth of
May, with the best advantage he could foresee to the promotion of the Master of
the Wards: Yet it fell out cross unto him, that the Dean woing for another,
utterly beyond expectation sped for himself. The Paper which he sent to the
Marquess has his own Words, as they follow.

My most Noble Lord,
Although the more I Examine my self, the more unable I am made to my own
Judgment, to wade through any part of that great Employment, which your Honor
vouchsafed to confer with me about, yet because I was bred under the place, and
that I am credibly informed my True and Noble Friend the Master of the Wards is
willing to accept it (and if it be so, I hope your Lordship will incline that
way) I do crave leave to acquaint your Honor, by way of prevention, with
secret underminings, which will utterly overthrow all that Office, and make it
beggarly and contemptible. The lawful Revenue of that Office stands thus or not
much above at any time. In Fines certain 1300 l. per annum, or thereabout. In
Fines Casual 1250 l. or thereabout. In greater Writs 140 l. for impost of Wine
100 l. in all 2790. and these are all the true means of that great Office.


Now I am credibly informed, that the Lord Treasurer begins to Entitle the King
to to the casual Fines, and the greater Writs; which is a full Moiety of the
profits of the place; not so much to Enrich the King, as to draw Grist to his
own Mill; and to wind from the Chancellor the donation of the Cursitors places.
The preventing the Lord Treasurers in these Cases, made Queen Elizabeth ever
Resolve suddenly upon the disposing of the Great Seal. Likewise they are very
busy in the House of Commons (and I saw a Bill which is put up to that Effect)
to settle the Custodes Rotulorum, and the Clerks of the Peace for Term of Life
upon the Persons, who now possess them; which as it is inconvenient, so it is
very prejudicial, and derogating from the next Lord Chancellor. Finally the
Underofficers do also Petition unto the Lords, not without Encouragement, to
have some Collops out of the Lord Chancellors Fees; and New Devices will daily
spring up, if the disposing be delayed any longer. Now I hope when your
Lordship shall use this Information, to let the King see it, that you will
excuse me for the boldness that I am put upon by your great Commands. The Lord
Marquess being not a little Ambitious to present the King with Works of the
Brain strongly wrought, and well carded, offered this Paper to his Majesty from
the Dean of Westminster, when the Ink was scarce dry, which caused this
unlooked for saying from the King, You Name diverse to me to be my Chancellor.
Queen Elizabeth after the Death of Sir Christopher Hatton was inclined in her
own Judgment, that the good man Archbishop Whitgift should take the place, who
modestly refused it, because of his great Age, and the whole multitude of
Ecclesiastical Affairs lying upon his Shoulders. Yet Whitgift knew not the half
that this Man does in Reference to this Office. The Lord Marquess the less he
looked for those Words, the more he liked them, and Replied extempore; Sir I am
a Suitor for none, but for him that is so capable of the Place in your great
judgment. Be you satisfied then, says the King, I think I shall seek no
further. The Lord Marquess, impotent to contain his Gladness, sent a blind
Message to the Dean immediately, That the King had a Preferment in the Deck for
him. He nothing aware of what the King had spoken in design to the Dignity of
keeping the Great-Seal, mistook the Message to be meant of the Bishopric of
London, now wanting a sit Prelate, by the Death of him that was most fit while
he lived, Dr. King, whose Soul Heaven received Mar. 30. In prospect whereof,
the Dean was a Suitor before. But it happened to him as Velleius said of Scipio
AEmilianus, AEdilitatem petens, Consul creatus est; He sued for the Edileship,
and because that was too little, he was made a Consul. This is the very manner,
as faithfully digested as any History can be contexed, how this Preeminency
dropped upon him, that never dreamt of it. It is not like to some mistaken Report
that then went about, and may yet be believed by some. But thus much is
copiously disclosed for their sakes, that had rather be Disciples of Truth,
then Masters of Error.

63. Such a Reader is invited to a further Collation; engaging upon peril of
offending God, not to clam his Taste with the smallest Collection of Flattery.
The Chancellorship, or a Title equivalent to that Office, is a Supreme Dignity
in the Empire of Germany, and in all Christian Kingdoms and States, and further
then Christendom, executed by the Grand Vizier of the Port at Constantinople.
Only the Chief Pontiff of the Sea of Rome styles the Prelate of his Palace, who
presides in that Employment, his Vice Chancellor, and no more. And why?
Because, says Gomesius in his Proem to the Rules of that Court, Vices agit
Cancellarii Dei, quia Papa est Dei Cancellarius: He can be but a Vice, for the
Pope himself is God's Chancellor. Let him be as Liberal as he will to himself
by his own Assumption, I am certain he is not such by God's Nomination. Leaving
the Pontifical Court to its own Platform, elsewhere the Chancellor is the Chief
Magistrate, under the Supreme Power of the King that sets him up. To which
purpose, Budaeus in his Notes upon the Pandects, p. 325. Cancellariatus summum
est hodie honorum fastigium, and quasi quoddam summa quaeque ambientis animi
solstitium. This was it then which was marvel'd, and looked upon as a Rarity,
that the King should prefer the Dean of Westminster, though very richly
qualified in a Churchman's condition, to the Estival Solstice of Honor, as
Budaeus calls it, at one step, who had never passed through the lower Ascendant
Signs of the Zodiac of the Law. But that great Master of Wisdom did never
repent him, that He had trusted such a Servant so far; never gave the least
sign of Displeasure to the day of his Death, that He would Remove him; never
taxed him, that he had gone awry in any thing either as a public or private
Person. Which good Opinion he kept so constantly, that after two years
Probation in his Office, I find these Lines in a Letter which he send to the
Lord of Buckingham to Madrid, May 11. 1623. The King's Grace to me is such,
that I profess before God I never received ill Word, or clouded Aspect from
him, since the first day I served him in this great Place. His Majesty would
many times speak of him, that He never met with a better Statesman for a
clear, and far-reaching Judgment. His Knowledge was a Political Circle, that
comprehended all things in it. Bring any Matter unto him, his Reason was never
shallow, nor at Low Water. He studied Foreign Courts, as much as this at home;
and cared not what he paid to expert Ministers, Strangers or Native, to be
acquainted with the Secrets of their Masters. The best, to whom he may be
similized herein, is Friar Paul the Servite, of whom it is written, When any
News were bruited, he seldom was mistaken in his Opinion, whether they were
true or false; and nothing could be propounded to him, to which he did not
suddenly give an Answer, and with that Solidity, as if he had meditated much
upon those Answers, which were conceived presently under the Question. Such an
Eminency of Intellectual Parts opened the broad Gate for this Dean to enter
into the Royal Favor. As among Plants, it is the property of the Palm Tree,
says Philo, lib. 1. de Vit. Mos. that the Vital Virtue thereof is not in the
Root, which is under the Earth, but in the top of the Trunk, as in the Head
which is next to Heaven: And Pliny, lib. 13. c. 4. accords well unto it, Dulci;
medulla earum in cacumine, quod cerebrum vocant: The sweet and succulent Marrow
in the top, is the Brain and Life of the Palm. So to them that enquire how Dean
Williams shot up so soon to this Palm of Honor, I will point to the top of the
Tree, even to the Marrow of his Brain; Dulcis medulla in cacumine, quod
cerebrum vocant.

64. Withal he was most Industrious; and that not by fits, but every day did
conclude its Work, as if he were not to live till to morrow. No Cammel did bear
more burden then he did, when he first entered to sit in the Seat of
Lord Keeper, or traveled further with so little Food, and less rest; which he
suffered the better, because he was weary of Ease, and loved Labor. For
confirmation of it I will anticipate, how he was breathed (till he was almost
out of breath with a violent, but short Sickness) upon the end of the first
Term that he appeared in Chancery. It was the Term of Michaelmas, and in the
November of it the Parliament sat again, in which he attended in the Office of
Speaker in the Lords House. With these, concurred a spiny and difficult Treaty
between our Merchants, and the Agents of the United-Provinces, for the most
savage Insolences committed at Amboyna, a Treaty wherein he was the Chief
Commissioner, and the sharpest against those Thieves and Murderers: Which
Treaty took up three Afternoons constantly in every week, while it continued to
hear that Cause. In the Court of Chancery, beside the ordinary Work, several
Causes, and of a reaching number, were referred in the preceding Session of
Parliament to the succeeding Lord Keeper, to review the Orders of the
Predecessor displaced. Into this vast Sea of Business he launched forth all at
once. Hereupon my self, and half an hundred more, have seen his Industry, that
he was compelled to sit by Candlelight in the Court two hours before day, and
there to remain till between eight and nine, that the Prince being come to the
Lords House, sent for him to take his Place, there to Propound and Report the
Questions of that Honorable House, till past twelve every day, not seldom till
past one. After a short Repast at home, he returned to hear the Causes in
Chancery, which he could not dispatch in the morning. Or if he did attend at
Council in Whitehall, he came back toward evening, and followed his Employment
in Chancery till eight at night, and later. Then, on the neck of this, when he
came home, he perused such Papers as were brought to him by his Secretaries And
after that, though far in the night, prepared himself for so much as concerned
him to have in readiness for the Lords House in the morning. In this
overwhelming hurry of Troubles, of such diverse sorts and compositions, what
time come could he borrow for necessary Refreshment, or the Repose of his
wearied Body night or day? And as the good King picked him out for this Task,
because He foresaw that none would outdo him in Diligence, so He preferred him
to be Great in Place, because He knew he was great in Courage. The Supporters
on the Steps of Salomon's Throne were not Sheep, but Lions. The way to be Just,
is to be Inflexible; the way to be Inflexible, is to be Stout; casting all
thoughts of Fears and Favors under feet. No man by natural complexion could be
better engrained for it. I will take it up from one that had no mind to say the
best of him; Mr. Art. Will. p. 196. He was of a comely and stately Presence, and
that, animated with a great Mind, made him appear very proud to the vulgar Eye.
Quaedam videntur, and non sunt: So far was his Heart from Pride, that he never
thought himself the finer for the Trappings of Fortune. Yet so far from
baseness, that he knew the Bench he sat upon, and would not be made despicable
in the Eyes of the World, much less be brought about to serve great Men's
turns, and stretch the Causes of the Court, according to the Contents of their
Letters and Messages; which were no better, in a rude Phrase, then to be a
Pandar to their Lust, to let them deflower Justice. Therefore in the same Leaf,
says Ar. Will. again, The height of his Spirit made him odious to them that
raised him, happily because they could not attain to those Ends by him, which
they required of him. The height of his Spirit made him speak freely, and
counsel faithfully, and decree justly, though that Lord, to whom he had
espoused his greatest Devotion, were concerned in the Opposition. Which was
rectitude and magnitude of Mind, as Tully in his Brutus makes Atticus decipher
Caesar, Splendidam minimeque veteratoriam dicendi rationem tenet; voce, motu
forma etiam magnifiea and generosa quodammodo. His Person, his Gesture, his
Eloquence, were magnificent and generous; whose wont it was to reduce his chief
Friends to Reason, not craftily and timidly, but with a noble and sublime
Sincerity.

65. Among the Qualities of a good Judge, there is one remaining, and fit to
bring up the Rear, which the King looked upon as verily to be presaged in his
new Officer, an Hand clean from corruption and taking Gifts, which blind the
Eyes of the Wise, and pervert the Words of the Righteous, Deuteronomy. 16.19. 'Twas
loudly exclaimed, (and the King was ashamed to have so far mistaken the
Persons) that there were sucking Horse-Leeches in great places. Things not to
be valued at Money were saleable; and what could not Gold procure? As Meander
writes, (...): That is, Friends, and Judges, and Witnesses, you may have them
for a Price; nay, such as sit in the place of God, will serve you for such
Wages. The wise King having little prevailed by Monitions and Menaces against
this fordid Filthiness, cast his Liking upon a Man whom He might least suspect
for Gripleness and Bribery. The likeliest indeed of all others to shake this
Viper from his hand, and to be armed with a Breast Plate of Integrity against
the Mammon of Iniquity; for he was far more ready to give, then to take; to
oblige, then to be beholding: Magis illud laborare ut illi quamplurimi debeant,
as Salust of Jugurtha. He was well descended, of a fortunate and ancient
Lineage, and had made his progress to Advancements by Steps of Credit; a good
Bridle against base Deviations. What then made an an unsavory Historian call
him Country Pedant? A Reproach with which H. L. does flirt at him in his
History of King Charles; a scornful Untruth. So I shake off this Bar, and
return to the Reverend Dean, who was in a Function of Holy Calling next to God.
Among them I know all have not been incorrupt; the Sons of Samuel turned aside
after Lucre, and took Bribes, and perverted Judgment, 1 Samuel 8.3. But commonly
I trust they do not forget what a Scandal it is, if God's Stewards turn the
Devils Rent-Gatherers. He was also unmarried, and so unconcerned in the natural
Impulsion of Avarice to provide for Wife and Children. Our old moral Men
touched often upon this String, that Justice is a Virgin, (...), says Hesiod;
and therefore fit to be committed to the trust of a Virgin Magistrate. He was
never fullied with Suspicion that he loved Presents, no not so much as
Gratuidad di Guantes, as the Spaniards Phrase is; but to go higher, they are
living that know, what Sums of Value have been brought to his Secretaries, such
as might have swayed a man that was not Impregnable; and with how much
Solicitousness they have been requested to throw them at his Feet for Favors
already received; which no man durst undertake, as knowing assuredly it would
displace the Broker, and be his Ruin. And it was happy for him, when, five
years after, Lime-Hounds were laid close to his footsteps to hunt him, and
every corner searched to find a little of that Dust behind his door: Eut it
proved a dry scent to the Inquisitors; for, to his Glory and the Shame of his
Enemies, it could never appear that the least Bird-lime of Corruption did stick
to his Fingers. And now I have shown what was the rich Portion, which he
brought when he was wedded to the Office of the Great-Seal, these are
convictive, and daylight Evidences. To one or two Writers of late, that have
gone another way, I have nothing to answer, because in those things wherein
they calumniate, they address not themselves to prove any thing Enough to give
them up to the censure of that Infamy which they merit, Qui notitiam viri non
ex bonis gestis, dictisque, sed ex minus probabilibus fieri volunt; quo quid
nequius? says the Author called Zeno of Verona. When such candid Authors, as
Sir T. Moore, Sir J. Hayward, S. Daniel, and Renowned Camden, wrote the Lives
of Princes, they drew the Characters of Men by their Actions, and Speeches; not
out of Obloquies and Suspicions, the Brats of rotten Fame, that have no Father.
But in Sick, or rather Pestilentious Times, when no Wares are set forth so much
as Untruths and Malice, too many are not more bold to Lie, then confident to be
Believed. Never, with no People under the Sun, did Veracity suffer so much as
by the Pen of Sir A. Well. whose Pamphlet is Perpetuus Rhotacismus, one snarling
Dogs-Letter all over; which I condemn therefore, as Philoxenus the Poet
censured Dionysius the Syracusan's Tragedy, A front ad calcem una litura
circumduxit, Correct it with one Scratch or Score from the beginning to the end.

66. Such as he are not in my way; why then should I loiter one Line to jostle
them out? Yet since discreet Persons, and they that extolled the Dean, and
confessed that his Soul carried a great freight of Worth, did think their
Exceptions weighty against his undergoing that great Office, I will not
dissemble as if I were a Stranger to them. The Words of the Wise are as Nails,
fastened by the Masters of Assemblies, Eccles. 12.11. Yet some Nails are not so
fast in, but they may be wrench'd out. Many alleged, that he had Dedicated
himself to the Church in an holy Calling: Why should he take his hand from his
own Plow, to preside in Secular Affairs? Indeed when the Harvest was great, and
the Laborers few, it was the Summum bonum of a Labourer to ply that Harvest;
for nothing could be better, then to Plant the Gospel among those that had not
believed. But where an whole Nation is gained so far as to believe in Christ,
and the Message of Salvation known to all; that Church is preserved unto Christ
by other means beside Preaching. They that attend their Charge in Prayer,
Exhortation, and dispensing the Sacraments in all Quarters of the Land, had
need to have some of their own Coat in Places of Power and Dignity, to preserve
their Maintenance from Sacrilege, and their Persons from being trodden down
with dirty Feet. Such as God has blessed to go in Rank with the Chiefest to
help their Brethren, whether in public Office, or in Attendance on their
Sovereign, in his Chapel, Closet, Eleemosynary Trust, or the like, they are as
much in the Harvest, as they that labor in the Pulpit. St. Ambrose in his
sundry Embassages for his Lord the Emperor; the Father of Gr. Nazianzen a
Bishop, of whom his Son says in his Epitaph, that he was (...), employed in
Pre-eminency, and Honor, and Government. Eusebius. de vit. Constanti. l. 4. c.
27. Sozom. l. 1. c. 9. mention the Rescript of Constantine to Ablavius the
Praetorian Prefect, Ut pro Sanctis semper and venerabilibus habeatur, quicquid
Episcoporum fuerit sententia terminatum: idque in cansis omnibus, quae vel
Praetorio, vel civili jure tractantur. Which large Concession of Constanstine
was restrained indeed by Gratian and Valentiman, an. 376, Ad causas quae ad
Religionis observantiam pertinebant. All the Prelates to whom the Emp.
Constantine the Great referred the Hearing of Causes by Appeals, which they
discharged to the gaining of great Love and Praise; these were not out of their
Sphere, but served the Church, when they did that which ingratiated the Church,
and made the Christian Name to be venerable. Some never speak of Secular
Policy, but as of a Profane thing; whereas a worthy Man may manage a Civil
Tribunal with that maintenance of Virtue, with that galling of Vice and evil
Manners, so as many good Pulpit-Orators put together might give God thanks, if
their Success were equal. Councils, it is true, may be produced, as, to be
brief, the Quin-Sext in Trullo, can. 11, which forbids Priests and Deacons, (it
names not Bishops) (...), to handle worldly Principalities. I am struck with
Reverence to the Council, but not Convicted by its Reason, which is fetched out
of one Scripture, that no Man can serve two Masters. Tell this to the
Ecclesiastics of Rome, who are wholly buried in Things, not only different, but
contrary to the Ministry Instituted by Christ. Opposite Masters cannot be
served by one faithful Servant, subordinate may; for we may love both, and hate
neither. The King's Service in a Righteous way is not opposite to Christ's
Evangelical Administrations, but co-incident. And a Supreme Governor does not
lose his Right in a Subject, that is made a Priest or Bishop; but may employ
him under him as he pleases, since the compacture of the whole Commonwealth
together is but one Christian Economy. ABP. Spotswood, p. 299.
In the Articles proponed to the Parliament at Sterling by Mr. Andrew Melvin,
an. 1578. this is the 17th of the 11th Cap. We deny not that Ministers may, and
should assist their Princes, when they are required, in all things agreeable to
the Word of God, whether it be in Council, or Parliament, or out of Council;
providing always that they neither neglect their own Charges, nor through
flattery of Princes hurt the public State of the Church. A Caution that their
own Charges be not neglected, is most Pious; otherwise the Indulgence is very
indefinite. Many Zealots are as kind to themselves in England to serve their
own turn. I never saw any of our Ministry more abstracted from their Studies,
continually progging at the Parliament-Door, and in Westminster Hall for many
years together, having no Calling, but that of an Evil Spirit to raise
Sedition, then those that were most offended at a Bishop, for bestowing some
part of his Time in a Secular Place: And yet a considerate Judge will not say,
that the Lord-Keepership is an Employment merely Secular. To mitigate the
strict Cases of the Law with the Conscience of the King, in whose Place he
sits, is it not as fully Ecclesiastical, as a Consistory of teaching and ruling
Elders? Ulpian did not stick to say of all the grave Senators, that sat upon
the Bench to decide Right from Wrong, Nos merito juris sacerdotes a quodam
dicti sumus, siquidem sanctissima res est civilis sapientia. This Heathen was
pleased to have them styled, Priests of the Law, because the Wisdom of Civil
Judicature was an holy Thing. Much more it agrees in a Chancellor, who directs
that part which is (...), as Aristotle says, Eth. 5. the mitigating of public
Justice, when it breaths Intemperate Rigor. Happy are the People who are
governed by full and exact Laws, which make them liable, as little as may be,
to the Errors and Passions of Arbitrary Moderation: Yet because a Law is a
General Rule, and that it is not possible that a General Rule should provide
sufficiently to satisfy all particular Cases, therefore as the same
Philosopher said again, Polit. 3. Let the Laws have the chief Power, yet
sometimes let one or more Judges have the Power of the Laws; which in effect is
the merciful Voice of God, to mollify the Strictness and Inconveniences of
the Voice of Man. And we living in a Christian State, how can that be
incongruous, nay any way unseemly in his Person, that is an Ambassador of
Christ?

67. It was said also, that he was illiterate in the knowledge of the Laws,
being bred up in other Studies, and very unprepared to discharge this Function.
But it was quickly unsaid as soon as the Court had trial of his Abilities.
There have been others besides Peter Gallaudes, that have been capacious of all
Sciences and Learning, of whom Turnebus Advers. l. 2. c. 1. Omnium rerum capax
natura, quam it a facile regebat, and versabat, ut quicquid ageret, unum illud
curae habere, tractareque putaretur. So this man had a mind of such a Glebe by
the felicity of Nature, and so manured, that it could bring forth a plentiful
Crop, whatsoever Seed or Grain was cast into it; and whatsoever he addicted
himself to convey into the Storehouse of his Brain, he was never long at suck,
but had it with much more speed then other men. Though he was never a
Practitioner in the course of the Law, yet he had been an hard Student in the
Tenures, Reports, and other Compilements of that Profession. But no marvel if
others were diffident of him, for he was very diffident of himself. Therefore
he humbly besought the King, he might be a Temporary Lord Keeper, nay a
Probationer and no more, as it is divulged in the Cabal, p. 56. and of the rest
of that in a sitter place. Nay, he besought that His Majesty's free and
unlook'd-for Election might bear the blame of his Infirmities; as Gregory the
Great wrote to Mauritius the Emperor, when he did in a manner enforce Gregory
to be Bishop of Rome, Lib. 1. Ep. 5. Necesse est ut omnes culpas meas and
negligentias non mihi, sed tuae pietati populus deputet, qui virtutis
Ministerium infirmo commisit. The Chancellorship of England is not a Chariot
for every Scholar to get up and ride in it. Saving this one, perhaps it would
take a long day to find another. Our Laws are the Wisdom of many Ages,
consisting of a world of Customs, Maxims, intricate Decisions, which are
Responsa prudentum. Tully could never have boasted, if he had lived among us;
Si mihi vehementer occupato stomachum moverint, triduo me jurisconsultum
profitebor. Orat. pro Mar. If the Advocates of Rome angered him, though he were
full of business, he would pass for a Lawyer in 3 days. He is altogether
deceived, that thinks he is fit for the Exercise of our Judicature, because he
is a great Rabbi in some Academical Authors; for this has little or no
Copulation with our Encyclopaidy of Arts and Sciences. Quintilian might judge
right upon the Branches of Oratory and Philosophy, Omnes Disciplinas inter se
conjunctionem rerum, and communionem habere. But our Law is a Plant that grows
alone, and is not entwined into the Hedge of other Professions; yet the small
insight that some have into deep Matters, cause them to think, that it is no
insuperable Task for an unexpert man, to be the chief Arbiter in a Court of
Equity: Bring Reason and Conscience with you, the good stock of Nature, and the
thing is done. Aequitas optimo cuique notissima est, is a trivial Saying, A
very good man cannot be ignorant of Equity: And who knows not that extreme
Right is extreme Injury? But they that look no further then so, are
short-sighted: For there is no strein of Wisdom more sublime, then upon all
Complaints to measure the just distance between Law and Equity; because in this
high Place, it is not Equity at Lust and Pleasure that is moved for, but Equity
according to Decrees and Precedents foregoing, as the Dew-beaters have trod the
way for those that come after them. What was more Absolute then the Power of
the Pretorian Courts in Rome? Yet they were confined by the Cornelian Law to
give Sentence Ex edictis perpetuis; to come as near as might be to the
Perpetual Edicts of former Pretors: And wherefore? Of that Budaeus informs us:
Ne juris dicendi ratio arburaria praetoribus esset, and pro eorum libidine
subinde mutabilis. In Pandec. p. 205. To keep Justice to cert^in and stable
Rules; for every man will more readily know how to find his own, when he trusts
to that Light, which burns constantly in one Socket. This is to keep the Keeper
from Extravagancies of his own Fancies and Affections, and to hold him really
to Conscience; and Conscience, as it is in Queen Elizabeth's Motto, is Semper
ead^m, It is ever the same. No all this does adorn and amplisie the great
Wisdom of the Dean, that being made the Pilot in the chief Ship of the
Political Navy, a Pilot that had never been a Mariner in any Service of that
Vessel before; yet in all Causes that ever he heard, he never made an
improsperous Voyage. For from his first setting forth to his last Expedition,
the most Envious did never upbraid him with Weakness, or scantiness of
Knowledge. Neither King James, King Charles, nor any Parliament, which gave due
Hearing to the frowardness of some Complaints, did ever appoint that any of his
Orders should be retexed: Which is not a Pillar of Honor, but a Pyramid.
Fulgentius has Recorded the like upon the Wonder of his Age, Father Paul of
Venice, that being Provincial of his Order, and hearing many Causes, none of
the Judgments that he gave (which were innumerable) were ever Repealed upon
Instance made to higher Judgment. Neither do I find that any of his Fraternity
did maunder, that the Friar was a Strippling but 28 years old, and therefore
but a Novice to make a Provincial, who is a Judge and a Ruler over his Fellows.
He had better Luck in that then our Dean, who was 39 years old when he
achieved this great Honor, yet some (it is presumed they were nettled with
Emulation) utterly disliked his Age, that it was not wrinkled with Gravity.
They were but Yonkers themselves that made such Cavils; For he that is stepping
into the Fortieth Year of his Life, if he have spent his Time as he ought, is
come to adult maturity. Many, as soon as their Spring is over, are in their
Autumn. So Nazianzen calls Basil, then but a young man, (...); One whose Mind
was gray with Senility, before his Head was enriched with Silver Hairs. And how
prevailing was Cato in the Senate at the time of the Catilinarian Conspiracy?
And yet, in my Collection, at that time he had scarce seen 30 years in the
World. I will cite out of many Examples but one more, and that is Lasthenes in
Aeschylus his Tragedy, (...); He carried an aged Soul in a youthful Body. We
learn out of the Typical Lessons of the Old Law, Levit. 2.14. That green Ears
of Corn were accepted for an holy Oblation, if Oil and Frankincense were put
upon them. Which will bear this Note: That the Gifts of our young and
flourishing Age are very sweet, when they are Balsam'd with Discretion.

68. At last I come slowly to a Stone of Offense, that cannot quite be removed;
yet I come to it. It were not Ingenuous to deal like Fl. Josephus, that in all
his History never mentioned the Trespass of his Forefathers in Worshipping the
Golden Calf at Horeb. But why should that be covered which the Penitent himself
did not conceal? That Eruptions of Anger flashed from him too often, which he
confessed in his Letter to the Lord of Buckingham, printed in the Cabal, p. 78.
Heat and Earnestness, I know by looking into my self, are Symptoms of good
Nature. It is in a manner a National Cognizance among his Countrymen the
Welsh, to be quickly stirred, and of an hot Blood; and when they have been very
loud in Choler for a trice, after a short fray to be as good Friends as ever. I
confess this was a Bird of that Feather. He that will trouble himself with me,
to look upon the Disease, and the Sympton's in a moral Landchape, shall not
altogether be weary of it. The composition of Fire is great in some men; there
is some of it in all men. So says he that wrote the Book of Wisdom, c. 2. v. 2.
(...); There is a little Spark in the m^ving of our Heart. Some are so still,
so happy in Tranquillity, that they are little provoked to Hastiness and Heat:
The Spark glows not, but lies as if it were covered under the Ashes. Some have
more Brimstone in their Complexion, and if they take disrelish, their Spirits
are hurried to their Heart swifter then Lightning, which blow the Spark, and
the Spark kindling in the Blood makes it boil over, before Reason can be
consulted how to cool it. Now as there is no Good in us, but has much
Infirmity; so there is no Infirmity in us out of which God cannot bring much
Good: For, in the memory of all Times, those that were of Cholerical
Complexions have been the most active, and the most fortunate in bringing great
Exploits about. No better Witness can be quoted, then the meekest Writer that
the Greek Church enjoyed: Nazian. Orat. 26. (...). (He writes it for the
Defense of St. Peter, of an hasty Nature, and a prompt Speaker.) Do not utterly
condemn all angry Heat, without which nothing that is Brave can be brought to
pass toward Piety and Virtue. Again, though it be an unruly Passion, it wants
not this Apology, That it chafes away Malice, as it were, by imperceptible
Perspiration. Usually such as are quickly instigated to Displeasure, and seem
to be Foes, of all that we converse with, soonest become Friends. When I
instance in Theodosius the Elder, it is to let him stand for the Figure of Ten
thousand; of whom says Aurelius Victor, Irasci rebus indignis, sed flecli cito,
unde modica dilatione emolliebatur: He was quickly angry, and quickly
entreated, mollified after his Fit in the turning of an hand. A Weakness that
deserves much Indulgence, when it draws such a Virtue after it: Which in the
knowledge of all men, that were willing to see the Truth, was the Dispraise and
the Praise of our Prelate, who came to such sudden Greatness. He was quickly
stirred and provoked, but the Sun never went down upon his Wrath. There did not
live that Christian that would put up greater Wrongs, or pass them over with a
more slight Contempt. He forgot Injuries as if they had been Dreams; neither
could be endure to be told that he had been injured, when fawning Sycophants
came to whisper such things in secret. He liked the Informer far worse then the
Offender: The first was sure to have no Reward; the other was certain to have
no more then a mild Rebuke for his Punishment. Revenge is a kind of Savage
Justice, though Wolvish Natures affect it, which he abhorred, first out of
Evangelical Charity, next out of the greatness of his Spirit: Wherein, if he
had his match, I think upon Earth he had not his Superior, being most exorable
to Offenders, facile in taking Satisfaction, faithful after Reconciliation;
using his Power too much to Protect some, but never to Ruin any; toward
Malcontents that sometimes forgot good Manners, his Heat was so far abated,
that he was too cord in Repressing them: As Theophylact said of Joseph his
Pacificatory Thoughts toward the Blessed Virgin, That he was willing, (...), so
he was ever inclined to overshadow a Fault with a gentle Interpretation. Take
his Picture in his own words, as he wrote them to the L. Buckingham in behalf
of the wise and valiant Earl of Southampton, Cabal, p. 59.
Of all Actions, forget not those of Mercy and Goodness, wherein Men draw
nighest to God himself; Nor of all Persons, Prisoners, and afflicted Joseph's.
Celerity does redouble an Act of Mercy; therefore it is no Flattery to contest,
that such a proneness to Ebullition of Anger, is much better then a sullen
Saturnine Temper, which betrays not it self outwardly in flame, but burns
inwardly with implacable Rancour; which Cato of Veica had learnt out of the
School of the Stoics: He was not easily incensed, but if he were, (...), says
Plutarch, being once warmed, he was never cool again. To whom this man was so
contrary, that if he had been Transported to Transgress against Civility
toward any Man, who in the distraction of much business had rushed upon him
unseasonably, and followed him with Insolency, able to discompose a most
Resolved Patience, I would have undertaken, in less than two hours, to present
that man's business to him with hope of good success, if the Justice of his
Cause would bear it, when I durst not have moved him for another Man.

69. To stoop this Vinacre to the very Lees; some will say, that Eruptions of
Anger in a Person of Honor, chiesly if they be fierce, will seem to be
compounded with Pride and Haughtiness; the Answer without struggling shall be
with yielding, and distinguishing. It is granted that Anger and Pride are
seldom parted; Eccles. 7.10. The patient in Spirit, is better than the Proud in
Spirit; which infers, that there is some Pride, where there is not patience,
there is a Connection between Evil Works; every Offense against God is a Lump of
Spawn; a Row that will yield a Fry of Sins; especially by the incubation of
Custom and Impenitency. In this knot and coherence of Sins a severe Casuist
will tell you, that there is no Sin committed without Pride in the Stomach of
the Disobedient. Questionless it putrifies somewhat in every Man's Heart by
Original fomentation. But there are Mountains of Pride, and there are Hillocks;
no Fragment of so great a Sin is so little as a Mole Hill. There is a proud Man
who is a great Oppressor, who would cast down all that are in his way, and
Trample upon them to ascend higher and higher upon their Subjection. Pacatus
says neatly in his Panegyric to Theod sius, that the people could find no worse
Name for Tarquinius the Tyrant, than Tarquinius the Proud. And upon David's
prayer to God to deliver him from the Horns of the Unicorn, it is St. Austin's
Note, In Unicornibus superbi intelliguntur, qui soli cupiunt eminere. He is the
single Horn of the Unicorn, that in singularity of Pride would excel in Power,
and push all others down; from whom, let us all say with David, Good Lord
deliver us. Herein he that I write of, is nothing concerned; that Crime has no
similitude with his Mercy and Modesty. There is a proud Man that Values his own
Worth, or rather no Worth, in an high Estimation, and above the common Level of
Men like Julian, the Renouncer of Christ, that put scorn upon all Worthies,
Heathenish as well as Christian, and this Great Idolater Worshipped nothing but
himself. This Arrow shoots wide from our present Mark, Gods Grace be Thanked;
this Pride, which has the true Taste of Lucifer, is rather begotten by
Melancholy, than by Anger. It was not possible that one should be more liberal
than Dean Williams was, in Attributing due and down-Weight to every Man's
Gifts, his Candor made him praise every one promiscuously, perhaps beside his
Judgment; and I have heard him prefer diverse, and very seriously, before
himself, who came short a Mile and a way-bit. This, as it ought, let it stand
for a Flower of Humility; for his erected Spirit, so free from baseness, would
never stoop to Hypocrisy. In fine, there is a Pride, when we Love our own
Desires, our own Delight and Satisfaction; not only our Will, but our Starts
and Fancies so much in every thing, that without open Offense taken we will be
crossed in nothing. It spurns at every Rub in the way; it frets against Beasts,
nay against things insensible: Now he that is disturbed, if he be not humor'd
at every Turn, must take this Rebuke with Patience, that he is a proud Man.
This frailty was his blemish: This last kind of Pride and Anger compounded
together: Yet I believe he might have been Tempted to be prouder in another
kind, if he had not been familiar with this infirmity. But his insight into
this defect, begat in him a loathing of himself, and a lowly mind. Neither was
he ignorant that some went beyond him in the cunning of getting Affections with
a formal patience, who were not his Paragons in Innocence and Cordial Humility.
Now let an Upright Moralist be the Judge of this Great Judge; it is not for the
satisfaction of a wrangling Mome; for what can be expected from Crabs but
Verjuice?

70. The Abilities of the designed Lord Keeper were such, and (be it delivered
impartially) greater than are set forth, as in time he made it good. But when
it came to be divulged, that this preferment hovered over him, it was much, and
dividedly spoken of as a Paradox of Honor. Some could not believe it; some
said it was no New way, but an Old one Renewed, and God give him Joy of it.
Some did stomach it, I must not say Envy it; for Envy is so low and base a Sin,
that every Man, though the most guilty of it, will scorn to confess it. The
best Professors of our Laws took it sadly without doubt, that one who did never
Run in their Race, had got their Garland. Many others there were, and ever will
be, that, like Joseph's Brethren, hate the very Dream of a Sheaf, to which they
must do Obeisance. Therefore it required the Art of a Wise Man to set up the
Frame with that skill, that it might be no Eyesore to the Judicious beholder;
which was thus Effected. Though the Grant of the Place was fixed upon this Man,
without any likelihood of Revocation; yet he besought the King and obtained,
that Ten Weeks should run out before the Seal should be remanded from the
Commissioners, and put into his Custody. A Benefit of sundry Advantages. The
least was, that popular Discourse, inclining much to descant upon this matter,
would spend it self away in two or three Months, and as it were boil from a
Pint to a Spoonful. It was further looked into, that he might have respite to
study the Weight and Trust of the Office, whereby to supply it with that skill,
as might in Candor be expected from a Beginner; which he improved as far as
could be done in so short a time; having the assistance of Sir Harry Finch, a
most profound Lawyer, whom he kept in his Lodgings from May to October
following, for all sorts of Advice, The best Heifer he could have Plowed with,
to find out Riddles, Jud. 14.18. What could not his quick capacity draw from
such a Master? Or what could not Industry reach to with that Capacity? being of
all Men, perhaps above all men, most Laborious; and far from the sheepishness
of Sloth, the greatest blemish in our English Nation. He had day enough also to
look about him, to enquire for able and honest Servants, to be preferred into
the Chief places of Fidelity under him, which succeeded with that praise of
Judgment, and Blessing of Success, that certainly God was at his Right hand in
it; some of his Followers were as Learned Gentlemen as our Kingdom had. No man
that knew them will deny that to be due to Sir William Boswel, and Mr. Edward
Palmer. All of them were of Virtuous Conversation, Grave Deportment, greatly
experienced in the World, Sober, Civil, Incorrupt; in a Word it was a Ship of
Argonautes; so that I have heard of our Honorable Peerage, and of the worthy
Judges then Living not a sew affirm, that an Household so Excellently modeled,
was one of the most evident things that discovered the great Wisdom of the
Master. Other things likewise in the Interlunium, as I may call it, of that
Great Office were spread abroad by Fame, and very justly, which served
exceedingly to sweeten the general Opinion. They that could dive furthest into
Court secrets had found, that it was a preferment that came to hand of it self,
neither lured to, nor whistled to; never sued for, never sought for; but as
Mamertinus said of the Consulship which Julian bestowed upon him of his own
Grace, and proper Motion, non modo nullum popularium deprecatus sum, sed ne te
quidem Imperator, quem orare praeclarum, cui preces adbibere plenissimum
dignitatis est. It Is humane to wonder at such a Fortune, 'twere divellish to
Envy it. It qualified also, that no detection could be made then, or
thereafter, that he bought this Greatness, unless in Claudian's sense, Emitur
sola virtute potestas. But this Place was pointed out by the King, not for him
that would give, but to him that would not take; to one that pretended to make
no more requital, than to serve God in his Calling, to be True to the King, and
no Exactor upon his people. If a Jearer shall cast in, that no marvel if he
paid nothing down to his up-lifter, for he was low in Coffers and Credit, and
not worth a Bribe; such a one says the same Truth that I do to the main, but he
Collects it falsely. For the Dean was never Richer in present Coin in his Life,
than he was at that time, which came to appear upon this Account, that as soon
as he was warm in this New Honor, even within two Months after, William Earl
of Pembroke his Noble Friend, made the Bargain with him to purchase his
Grandfathers Lands in Wales, which were slipped aside by ill Husbandry, for
which he disbursedten Thousand pounds, not much more being to be added to the
Seller, which he borrowed; wherein he Explained two things to the World by this
one Act, that such Moneys as lay by him he gave not for his Office; and those
that he laid out, he got not by his Office. This was not his Forecast, but the
Lords above; who takes care for every Sparrow. He little thought to live upon
that pittance in his Old Age. But God provided it, that when the wide Throat of
Sacrilege had swallowed down more than ever was devoured at one Gulp, when the
pleasant Vine of the Church of England, with all the Fruitful Branches were cut
down with the Pruning Hook of an Ordinance, than this little Gourd in Wales
should shadow over the head of our Jonah. It was well said of Plato, That a
Prudent Man would lay by somewhat in Store to supply him; neither was it
superfluous though it did survive him; for, says he, I had rather leave
somewhat, though to mine Enemy, when I Die; than stand in need of my Friends,
who may prove no Friends, while I live.

71. I am yet in the lingering Season of the Parasceve, or induction
preparative, before the Candidate carried the Palm in his hand, wherein he
proceeded, as far as the Line of a good Wit would let him run, to gain public
Equanimity to the Kings intentions. For he besought His Majesty to clog the
Grandeur of that place with such Terms and Conditions in his person, as might
comprize it in a less Size, than it was ever before Received by any. All which
were his own Invention, and his own seeking, as it is somewhat detected in the
Cabal. page 56. but more largely drawn out in his own Papers, and offered only
to be Engrossed in an Act of Council. First, That the King would continue no
Chancellor in that place above three years thenceforth; which should first be
put in practice in this Man's person. Secondly, That he should be admitted in
the Nature of a Probationer for one year and half; and if it appeared the
Charge of the Office to be above his Abilities, yet doing Justice equally to
his best power, he should be Rewarded with an Arch-Bishopric, or one of the
best Bishoprics at the End of that Term. Thirdly, If upon the expiring of one
year and half, it were found that he discharged the Trust to His Majesty's
contentment, the Royal Pleasure should be signified to continue him to the
Triennial Period. Fourthly, When three years were finished, to have no further
expectance to hold that Office, but to give it over with a peremptory
Resignation; so I may say, like Saladine the Great, He carried the Winding
Sheet of his Honor before him as a Banner. Fifthly, He moved earnestly that
the Court of Chancery might have a Master of the Rolls of exact knowledge and
judgment to sit with him, Naming Sir Robert Heath the King's Solicitor; but it
was hindered by some, that would try how he could Walk on such slippery Ground,
without a Staff to lean upon. Sixthly, He Petitioned for some of the principal
Judges of the several Benches, whom he Named, that two at least should always
assist him, submitting himself humbly as a young Tree to be kept steady with
such supporters A Prudent way, to have many Sage Heads concur to produce one
Act of Wisdom. To say in the contrary, it is best to leave the entire matter to
one, if he be of sound Intelligence, is as gross a Flattery as that of the
Orator in the Panegyric to Maximianus, quid opus erat multitudine, cum ipse
pugnares? What needed an Army in the Field, when Maximian himself did Fight?
Now so many of the Orders forecited as concerned the Mortality of that Office,
and set the period of his duration in it, were Mortal Laws, and utterly
forgotten; for he continued as he began without interpellation above four
years, till he was annihilated by his frown, whose favor had Created him. The
Complication of those Restrictions served only for a Method of discretion in a
due Season, to keep that Dignity low shorn in appearance, that it might not be
blasted with the Lightnings of Envy. Yet these things so dispread were more
confirmed in Vogue and Opinion, by a Speech which he made to the King in the
Audience of all the Lords of the Council, when the Great Seal was actual
delivered to him at Whitehall, July 10. which follows Verbatim.

72. Most Dread and Mighty Sovereign, if I should think my self any way worthy
or sufficient for this Great Place, wherein Your Majesty is pleased to make
Probation of me, I were the most unworthy and insufficient Wretch in all the
World. But in good Faith I do not: But as Conscious of mine own Weakness, as I
am quite astonished at Your Favor and Goodness. I do not therefore trouble my
Head to find out the Reasons of this Advancement, because I take it for no
Ordinary Effect, but an extraordinary Miracle. Deus, and qui Deo proximus,
tacito munera dispertit aribtrario, and beneficiorum suorum indignatus per
homines stare judicium, mavult de subditis dedisse Miraculum. I must only lift
up mine Eyes unto Heaven, and beseech that God, who some Ten Years since
brought me like Elisha to be Servant only unto that Elias, who under God and
Your Majesty was the Chariot and Horsemen of our Israel, that now he would be
pleased to double the Spirit of Elias upon his Servant Elisha, whom Your
Majesty has thus invested with his Robe and Mantle. And for my especial
direction, I will take up that Counsel which Pliny gave his Friend Maximus,
Newly Elected Praetor for Achaia, Meminisse oportet Officii Titulum; I will
never forget my Office and Title, I am designed to be a Probationer in this
Place, and as a Probationer by God's Grace I will demean my self; I will take
up together with this Seal that Industry, Integrity and Modesty, Non ut me
Consulem, sed ut consulatus candidatum putem. That is, I will not Esteem my
self a Keeper, but a Suitor only for the Great Seal. And if I feel the burden
too heavy (which I mightily fear and suspect) I will choose rather desinere
quam deficere, to slip it off willingly to some stronger Shoulder, than to be
crushed in pieces with the poise of the same. And I humbly beseech your Majesty
also to Remember, I am no more than a mere Probationer. If I prove Raw at the
first, I must have my time to Learn. The best of them all have craved no less,
and I will desire no more. For if after the full weighing of my Strength I
shall still find my self unable for this Service, I will say unto Your Majesty,
as Jacob said unto Pharaoh, Pastor ovium est servus tuus; whatsoever You are
pleased Sir to make me, I am but a Keeper of Sheep; in that Calling Your
Majesty found me, and to that Calling I shall ever be ready to appropriate my
self again. In the mean time I beseech Your Majesty to protect this Court of
Justice wherein You have placed me, that the Strength and Power of that body be
nothing impaired through the weakness of the Head. Nemo Adolescentiam meam
contemnat. Let not my Fellows of an other Profession cry out with him in the
Psalm. There, there, so would we have it, neither let them say, We have
Devoured him. And so I end with my Prayer unto God, That Your Majesty may Live
long, and my self no longer, than I may be serviceable to Your Majesty.

73. The King heard him very Graciously to the end, and used no more then these
few Words in Answer, That he was pleased in his Settlement, as in any whom he
had preferred, and was persuaded he would not deceive his Judgment. Neither did
the good liking of the most stick at any thing, but that the Worthies of the
Lay, and chiefly of the Law were pretermitted. But his Majesty rather regarded
the fitness of a Man, then the Custom of a Tribe: As he that takes a Lodging in
the City, never Examines which are the best Rooms by Squares of Architecture,
but likes that for the best Chamber, which has ^the best Furniture. At the
same time the Lord Keeper, by super-impregnation of favor, was made a Bishop,
and Reaped no less than two Harvests in one Month. It was K. James his wont to
give like a King; for the most part to keep one Act of Liberality warm with the
covering of another. A meaner Man then a King could say (it is Pliny lib. 2.
Epist.) beneficia mea tueri nullo modo melius possum, quam ut augeam. He that
has placed a benefit well, let him imitate himself, and do another; that is the
sure way of obliging. The Bishopric of Lincoln was bestowed on him by the Royal
Conge d'Elire, the Largest Diocese in the Land, because this New Elect had the
Largest Wisdom to super-intend so great a Circuit. Yet in as much as the
Revenue of it was not great, it was well piec'd out with a Grant to hold the
Deanery of Westminster, into which he shut himself fast, with as strong Bars
and Bolts, as the Law could make: Else when the Changes began to Ring in the
Fifth year after, he had been sure to be thrust out of Doors in a storm, when
he had most need of a Covering. Yet some Suitors were so importunate to compass
this Deanery, upon his expected leaving, that he was put to it to plead hard
for that Commenda, before he carried it. The King was in his Progress, and the
Lord Marquess with him, to whom he writes to present his Reasons to the King,
which were, that the Port of the Lord Keeper's Place, though he would strike
Sail more than any that preceded him, must be maintained in some convenient
manner. Here he was handsomely housed, which if he quitted, he must trust to the
King to provide one for him, as His Majesty, and his Predecessors have ever
done to their Chancellors. Here he had some Supplies to his Housekeeping from
the College in Bread and Beer, Corn and Fuel; of which if he should be
deprived, he must be forced to call for a Diet, which would cost the King 1600
l. per annum, or crave for some addition in lieu thereof, out of the King's own
means, as all his Foregoers in that Office had done. In that College he needed
to entertain no Under-Servants, or Petty-Officers, who were already provided to
his Hand. Beside the Very Name and Countenance thereof would take away all
expectation of extraordinary Entertainments. And it was but a step from thence
into Westminsterhall, where his business lay; and 'twas a Lodging which
afforded him marvelous quietness to turn over his Papers, and to serve the
King. He might have added (for it was in the bottom of his Breast) he was loath
to stir from that Seat, where he had the Command of such exquisite Music. A
Request laid out in such Remonstrance was not, nay could not be refused by so
Gracious a Prince; who granted twenty Suits to one that he denied, Magnarum
largitor opum, largitor honorum pronus, which singularly fits King James,
though Claudian made it for Honorius. Likewise by the Indulgence of his
Commenda he reserved the Rectory of Walgrave to himself, a Trifle not worthy to
be Remembered, but his Reason is not unworthy to be detected. Take it as he Read
this Lecture to me upon it. That in the instability of humane things, every man
must look for a Dissolution of his Fortunes, as well as for the Dissolution of
his Body; the latter, of sure Things is most sure; the former, of usual Things
is most usual. Common Men are in doubtful Places; great Men in slippery Places;
but Sacrilege, being a Raven that continually croaks over the Church-Patrimony,
Clergymen were in most obnoxious Places. Many have paid dear for this
Experience, That Fortune will fly quite away, when she is well fledge. Then let
such as are upon the highest Stairs of those Preferments, have this Forecast,
To keep a little Room behind their Backdoor, to which they may retreat. When
there was no place for Elijah in Jezreel, he took his Commons in an obscure
Village, to which God sent him, with the Widow of Zarephath. Anselm Archbishop
of Canterbury kept his Right to a poor Cell which he had in a Monastery called
Becc in Normandy, and that Hospitality kept him, when he fled out of England,
and all the Revenues of his Mitre failed him. Stephen Gardner Bishop of Winton,
and Lord-Chancellor, held the Mastership of Trinity-hall to his Dying-day; and
though he gave forty better Preferments to others, he would never leave his
Interest in it; and did not conceal the Cause, but said often, If all his
Palaces were blown down by Iniquity, he would creep honestly into that Shell.
They that will not be wise by these Examples, Ia Te^
I will send them to School to a Fable in Plautus, Cogitato mus pusillus quam
sit sapiens bestia, AEtatem qui uni cubili nunquam committit suam, Qui si unum
ostium obsideatur aliud perfagium quaerit: So in the upshot he said, Walgrave
was but a Mouse-hole, yet it would be a pretty Fortification to Entertain him,
if he had no other Home to resort to. He was not the only Prophet of that which
is fallen out in these dismal Days; many such Divinations flashed from others,
who saw the Hills of the Robbers afar off, who have now devoured the Heritage
of Jacob, and say, they are not Guilty; and they that have sold us, and bought
us, say, Blessed be the Lord, for we are rich, Zech. 11.5.

74. Whom I leave to a Day of Account, having an Account to give my self, how
Prosperous the Lord Keeper was in the King's Affections at this time, to whom
His Majesty measured out his accumulated Gifts, not by the Bushel, or by the
Coome, but by the Barn-full. It was much he had compacted his own Portion to
such advantage, but it was not all, for, being warm in Favor, he got the Royal
Grant for the Advancement of four more, who are worthy to be named. He spoke
and sped for Dr. Davenant to be made Bishop of Salisbury, who had plowed (that
I may allude to Elisha, 1 King. 19.19.) with twelve yoke of Oxen, and was now
with the twelfth, when this Mantle was cast upon him. Twelve years he had been
Public Reader in Divinity in Cambridge, and had adorned the Place with much
Learning, as no Professor in Europe did better deserve to receive the
Labourer's Penny at the twelfth Hour of the Day. Beside, what a Pillar he was in
the Synod of Dort, is to be read in the Judgment of the Britain Divines,
inserted among the public Acts, his Part being the best in that Work, and that
Work being far the best in the Compilements of that Synod. The Bishopric of
Exon being also then void, it came into the Lord-Keeper's head to gratify a
brace of worthy Divines, if he could attain it, his old Friends, who had been
both bred in the House of Wisdom, with the Lord-Chancellor Egerton, Dr. Carew
who had been his Chaplain, a man of great Reason and polished Eloquence, and
Dr. Dunn who had been his Secretary, a Laureat Wit; neither was it possible
that a vulgar Soul should dwell in such promising Features. The Success was
quickly decided, for these two prevailed by the Lord-Keeper's Commendation
against all Pretenders; the Bishopric of Exeter was conferred upon Dr. Carew,
and Dr. Dunn succeeded him in his Deanery of St. Paul's. The Sea of St. David's
did then want a Bishop, but not Competitors: The Principal was Dr. Laud, a
Learned Man, and a Lover of Learning. He had fastened on the Lord Marquess to
be his Mediator, whom he had made sure by great Observances. But the
Archbishop of Canterbury had so opposed him, and represented him with
suspicion (in my judgment improbably grounded) of Unsoundness in Religion, that
the Lord Marquess was at a stand, and could not get the Royal Assent to that
Promotion. His Lordship, as his Intimates know, was not wont to let a Suit
fall, which he had undertaken; in this he was the stiffer, because the
Archbishop's Contest in the King's Presence was sour and supercilious.
Therefore he resolved to play his Game in another hand; and conjures the
Lord Keeper to commend Dr. Laud strenuously and importunately to the King's
good Opinion, to fear no Offense, neither to desist for a little Storm.
Accordingly he watched when the King's Assections were most still and
pacisicous; and besought His Majesty to think considerately of his Chaplain the
Doctor, who had deserved well when he was a young Man in his Zeal against the
Millenary Petition: And for his incorruption in Religion, let his Sermons plead
for him in the Royal Hearing, of which no Man could judge better then so great
a Scholar as His Majesty.

75. Well, (says the King) I perceive whose Attorney you are, Stenny has set
you on. You have pleaded the Man a good Protestant, and I believe it: Neither
did that stick in my Breast, when I stopped his Promotion. But was there not a
certain Lady, that forsook her Husband and married a Lord, that was her
Paramour? Who knit that Knot? Shall I make a man a Prelate, one of the Angels
of my Church, who has a flagrant Crime upon him. Sir, ( says the Lord Keeper
very boldly) you are a good Master, but who dare serve you, if you will not
pardon one Fault, though of a scandalous Size, to him that is heartily Penitent
for it? I pawn my Faith to you, that he is heartily Penitent; and there is no
other Blot that has fullied his good Name. Vellcius said enough to justify
Murena that had committed but one Fault, Sine hoc facinore potuit videri
probus. You press well, (says the King) and I hear you with patience; neither
will I revive a Trespass any more, which Repentance has mortified and buried.
And because I see I shall not be rid of you, unless I tell you my unpublish'd
Cogitations; the plain Truth is, that I keep Laud back from all Place of Rule
and Authority, because I find he has a restless Spirit, and cannot see when
Matters are well, but loves to toss and change, and to bring Things to a pitch
of Reformation stoating in his own Brain, which may endanger the steadfastness
of that which is in a good pass, God be praised. I speak not at random; he has
made himself known to me to be such a one: For when three years since I had
obtained of the Assembly of Perth to consent to Five Articles of Order and
Decency in correspondence with this Church of England, I gave them Promise by
Attestation of Faith made, that I would try their Obedience no further anent
Ecclesiastic Affairs, nor put them cut of their own way, which Custom had made
pleasing unto them, with any new Encroachments. Spotswood, p. 543. Marquess
Hamilton the King's Commissioner, in the last Parliament that ever he kept in
Scotland, having Ratified the Five Articles of Perth by A^^ of Parliament,
assured the People, that His Majesty in his days should not press any more
Change on Alterations in matters of that kind without their Consent.] Yet this
man h^th pressed me to invite them to a nearer conjunction with the Liturgy and
Canons of this ^^tion; but I sent him back again with the friv^lous Draught he
had drawn. It seems I remembered St. Austin' s Rule better then he, Ipsa mutatio
consuetudinis, ctiam quae adjuvat utilitate, novitate perturbat: Ep. 118. For
all this he feared not mine Anger, but assaulted me again with another
illfangled Platform, to make that slubborn Kirk stoop more to the English
Pattern: But I durst not play fast and loose with my Word. He knows not the
Stomach of that People, but I ken the Story of my Grandmother the Queen Regent,
That after she was inveigled to break her Promise made to some Mutineers at a
Perth Meeting, she never saw good day, but (...) thence, being much beloved
before, was despised of all the People. And now your (...) has compelled me to
shrive my self thus unto you, I think you are at your furthest, and have no
more to say for your Client. May it please you Sir, (says the LordKeeper) I
will speak but this once: You have indeed convicted your Chaplain of an Attempt
very Audacious, and very Unbeseeming; my Judgment goes quite against his. C.
Grac^^hus mended nothing, but lost himself in his Tribuneship, Qui nihil (...),
nihil tranquillum, nihil quietum, nihil denique in codom staturelinquebat. I am
assured, he that makes new work in a Church, begets new Quarrels for Scriblers,
and new Jealousies in tender Consciences. Yet I submit this to Your Sacred
Judgment, That Dr Laud is of a great and a tractable Wit. He did not well see
how he came into this Error; but he will presently see the way how to come out
of it. Some Diseases, which are very acute, are quickly cured. And is there no
whee, but you musl carry it (says the King)? Then take him to you, but on my
Soul you will repent it: And so went away in Anger, using other fierce and
ominous Words, which were divulged in the Court, and are too tart to be
repeated. So the Lord Keeper procured to Dr. Laud his first Rochet, and
retained him in his Prebend of (...). a Kindness which then he mightily valued;
and gave him about a year after a Living of about 120 l. per annum in the
Diocese of St. David's, to help his Revenue: Which being unsought, and brought
to him at Durham-House by Mr. William Winn, his Expression was, Mr. Winn, my
Life will be too short to require your Lord's Goodness. But how those Scores
were paid, is known at home and abroad: Which he that will excuse, has no way
but to shift it upon an Adagie, Unum arbustum nen capit erithecos duos: He that
would be Great alone, cares not whom he depresseth, that would be as Great as
himself.

76. More cannot be required, to show how great the Lord-Keeper's Credit was
with the King, then that four Bishoprics were bestowed at once to three others
with himself, for which he interposed. All three did then observe him with
Congratulation as their Raiser. Salisbury and Exeter were Men of faithful
Acknowledgment in all their Life. Est tanti ut gratum invenias experiri vel
ingratos, says Seneca: He that finds two faithful Men among three, is well
requited. Our Savior found but one among Ten, Luke 17.15. This Quaternion
making ready for their Consecration, a Calamity fell out, which put them all to
their Studies, that they knew not which way to turn. The Archbishop of
Canterbury, making a Summer Journey into Hampshire, was welcomed by the Lord
Ze^nch, and invited to some Hunting-Sports in Bramshill-Park about St.
James-tide. The Archbishop, pretending to be a Wood-man, took a Cross-bow to
make a shot at a Buck. One of the Keepers did his Office to wind-less up the
Deer to his stand, who too suddenly shot at a fair-headed Buck in the Herd. But
his Arrow meeting with a small Bought in the way, was cast a little from the
mark, and by an unhappy Glance, wounded the Keeper in the Arm. It was but a
Flesh-wound, and a slight one; yet being under the Cure of an heedless Surgeon,
the Fellow died of it the next day. The like had never happened in our Church,
nor in any other in the Person of a Bishop and a Metropolitan, which made work
for Learned Men to turn over their Books. Councils, and Canon-Laws, and
Proviso's of Casuists, were ransacked, whose Resolutions were unfavourable, and
greatly to the prejudice of the Fact. It was clear in our Common Law, that his
Personal Estate was forfeited to the King, though it were Homicidium
involuntarium. But he was quickly comforted, that he should not Suffer in that:
For, upon the first Tidings, His Majesty, who had the Bowels of a Lamb,
censured the Mischance with these words of melting Clemency, That an Angel
might have miscarried in that sort. The Archbishop was an happy man in this
Unhappiness, that many Hearts condoled with him; and many precious Stones were
in the Breast Plate which he wore, that Pleaded for him. He was Painful, Stout,
Severe against bad Manners, of a Grave and a Voluble Eloquence, very Hospital,
Fervent against the Roman Church, and no less against the Arminians, (which in
those days was very Popular) he had built and endowed a beautiful Eleemosynary
Mansion at Guilford, where he was born; he sent all the Succors he could spare
to the Queen of Bohemia the King's only Daughter; was a most stirring
Counselor for the Defense of the Palatinate; was very acceptable to the
Nobility, and to the People both of this Realm, and of Scotland, where he had
preached often 14 years before, when he was in the Train of the Earl of Dunbar.
All those Flowers in his Garland were considered severally and mixtly, when
this gloomy day of Misfortune bedarken'd him. And you may be sure our Sovereign
Lord thought it the more Pardonable, because it was an Hunting Casualty, and
was very Humane to those Harms beyond prevention, which fell out in that Sport
wherein he greatly delighted. Therefore His Majesty Resolved, and gave it him
in a Consolatory Letter under his Hand, That He would not add Affliction to his
Sorrow, nor take one Farthing from his Chattels and Movables, which were
Confiscated by our Civil Penalties.

77. But it cost more Labor to get out of the Ecclesiastical Brias; for many
of our best advised Churchmen took it sore to heart, and lamented for it, not
without bitter Tears, for the Scandal which was fallen upon our Church in his
Person, who in the Eye of General Councils and Canon-Laws was wonderfully
Tainted, and made Incapable to all Sacred Functions performing. Therefore, to
come home to the case, they said, God forbid those Hands should Consecrate
Biships, and Ordain Priests, or Administer the Sacraments of Christ, which God,
out of his secret Judgments, had thus permitted to be embrued in Human Blood.
And some of the Prelacy professed, If they had fallen into the like mischance,
they would never have despaired of God's Mercy for the other Life, but from
this World they would have retired, and besoughts His Majesty for a Pension to
support them in their sequestered Sadness, where they might spend their Days in
Fasting and Prayer. It was vehemently considered, that our Hierarchy was much
quarreled with and opposed by our own Fugitives to the Church of Rome, who
would fasten upon this Scandal, and upon it pretend, against our constant
Succession, (hitherto undemolish'd) with all the Malice that Wit could
excogitate. And indeed they began already: For the Fact was much discoursed of
in Foreign Universities, who were nothing concerned; especially our Neighbors
the Sorbonists at Paris, '(...), 1 Pet. 4.15. over-busie to have an Oar in our
Boat, Disputing it three several times in their Schools, and concluded the
Accident to amount to a full Irregularity, which is an Incapacity to exercise
any Ecclesiastical Act of Order, or Jurisdiction. His Majesty, upon the
eruption of these Scruples, was called up to think seriously, that his
Sweetness and Compassion did not leave a Slur upon this Church, which himself,
under Christ, had made so Glorious. It belonged to the four Bishops Elect to be
most Circumspect in this matter, expecting their Consecration shortly, and to
be informed, whether they should acknowledge that the Power of an Archbishop
was Integral and Unblemished in a casual Homicide, and submit to have his Hands
laid upon their Heads. Dr. Davenant showed Reason, That it behoved him not to
be seen in the Opposition, because the Archbishop had Presented him to the
rich Parsonage of Cotnam, not far from Cambridge. It was well taken, for among
honest Pagans a Benesiciary would not contend against his Patron. Howsoever
such as knew not the wherefore, were the more benevolous to the Archbishop's
misfortune, because so great a Clerk stood off, and meddled not. The Rhodian's
Answer in Plutarch was not forgotten, who was baited by his Accusers all the
while that the Judge said nothing: I am not the worse for their Clamours, (says
the Defendant) but my Cause is the better that the Judge holds his peace; Non
refert quid illi loquantur, sed quid ille taceat. The other three, without
Davenant, stirred in it the most they could, to decline this Metropolitan's
Consecreation; not out of Enmity, or Superstition, but to be wary, that they
might not be attainted with the Contagion of his Scandal, and Uncanonical
Condition. The Lord Keeper appearing for the rest, writes thus to the Lord
Marquess, as it is extant, Cabal, p. 55.

MY Lord's Grace, upon this Accident, is by the Common Law of England to
forfeit all his Estate to His Majesty, and by the Canon Law, which is in force
with us, irregular Ipso facto, and so suspended from all Ecclesiastical
Function, until he be again restored by his Superior, which, I take it, is the
King's Majesty in this Rank, and Order of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. I wish
with all my heart His Majesty would be as Merciful as ever He was in all his
Life. But yet I hold it my Duty to let His Majesty know by your Lordship, that
His Majesty is fallen upon a Matter of great Advice and Deliberation. To add
Affliction to the Afflicted, as no doubt he is in Mind, is against the King's
Nature. To leave a Man of Blood Primate and Patriarch of all his Churches, is a
thing that sounds very harsh in the old Councils, and Canons of the Church. The
Papists will not spare to descent upon the one and the other. Heave the Knot to
His Majesty's deep Wisdom to Advise and Resolve upon.


A gentler Hand could not touch a Sore; yet I think of his Judgment in this
Point, as Sealiger did of the sine Poet Fracostorius, Ab sua ipse magnitudine
descendisse credi potest aliquando; He flew lower at this Game, then the pitch
of his wonted Wisdom. For the Question did hang yet upon this Pin, Whether
there were a Sore to be cured? His Lordship had looked attentively into the
Canonists, whom he could cite by rote with his happy Memory. Their Decretals
and Extravagants Un-bishop a Man that killed a Man, and meant a Beast; nay
further, if the Bishop's Horse did cast the Groom that watered him into a Pond,
and drowned him. But if we Appeal from them to higher and better Learning,
their Rigor will prove Ridiculous. The Fact is here confessed: But is Sin in
the Fact, or in the Mind of the Facient? Omne peccatum in tantum est peccatum,
in quantum est voluntarium. This is the Maxim of the Schools upon actual Sins,
and a true one; A guilty Mind makes a guilty Action: An unfortunate Hand
concurs often with an innocent Heart. Quis nomen unquam sccleris errori
indidit? Put the Case that these Writers are very inclinable to have Absolution
granted incontinently to such Contingencies; but to keep a bustle, whether
Absolution is to be given or not, when there is no fault, is to abuse the Power
of the Keys. Irregularities in that Superstitious Latin Church are above
Number; what have we to do with them? That we did cut them off, we did not name
it indeed in our Reformation under Edward the Sixth, etc. for they were thrown
out with Scorn, as not to be mentioned, among ejected Rubbish. For we perceived
they were never meant to bind, but to open, I mean the Purse. He that is
Suspended, may entangle himself from the Censure with a Bribe. The Canonists
are good Bone-letters for a Bone that was never broken; their Rubrics are
filled with Punctilio's, not for Consciences, but for Consciuncles;
Haberdashers of small Faults, and palpable Brokers for Fees and Mercinary
Dispensations. Therefore those plain-dealing, and blunt People among the
Helvetians, otherwise Clients of the Roman Party, served them very well, as
Simler has Page 64. of his History, Cum Papa Rom, accepta pecunia Matrimonium
contra canones concesserat, populus recognita statuit, Si divitious pecunia
numerata hoc licitum sit, etiam pauperibus absque pecunid fas essc. And a
little before, Page 135.
when those poor Cantoners could not enjoy their own in quiet, for the
Rent-gatherers of the Court of Rome, they bid them keep off at their own peril,
with this popular Edict; Si pergant nundinatores bullarum jus urgere, in
vincula conjiciontur; and ni huic renuntient aquis submorgantur, scilicet ut
ita bullae bullis eluantur. Such resolute Men as these were too rude to be
cozened. So Irregularities should be used, which are invented for the Prosit of
Dispensative Graces; having nothing in them to Unsanctisie the Order of a
Bishop by Divine Law, or the Law of Nature, because they can be wiped away with
a Feather, if it be a Silver Wing, and the Feathers of Gold. But because these
double Doctors of Canon and Civil Laws, will pretend to some Reason in their
greatest Folly, it is not amiss to repeat the best Objection, with which they
stiffen their Opinion. Thus they divide the Hoof: That if one by chance-medly
kills a Man, being then employed in nothing that is evil, or improper to him
and his Calling, he is to be Acquitted by a formal Pardan as an Innocent; but
if he were acting in Indebita materia, when he did it, then it is to be
gathered, that God did give him up to that mischance, that he might be
disciplined for his Extravagancy by the Censure of the Church. Now take the
Illation, That the Archbishop fell into this Misfortune being unduly employed,
many Synods having prohobited Hunting to all Species of the Ministry.
Maldonatus, lib. 2. de Sacr. p. 254. Quod nonnulli dicum irregularom esse
Saccrdotom, qui d^ns operam ^nationi, juod illi non licebat, homimm intersecit,
putans se feram intersicere, falsum esi. Sir H. Martin answered, That
Employment in undue matter is to be understood of Evil simply in it self, Non
de malo quia prohibitum; not in a thing clearly lawful, if it were not
prohibited. Are Clerks restrained from Hunting? No wonder. So they are by some
Synodical Rules from playing at Tennis. What mean such austere Coercions?
Nothing but to keep them from excess of Pleasure and Idieness, which turn to be
Avocations of their Studies, and Attendance on the Church of Christ. That in
particular Hunting is no Unpriestly Sport by the Laws of England, may thus be
proved: For every Peer in the higher House of Parliament, as well Lords
Spiritual as Temporal, has Permission by the Charta de Forcsta, when after
Sunmons he is in his Journey to the Parliament, and not else, to cause an Horn
to be sounded, when he travels through any of the King's Forests, and to kill a
brace of Bucks, signification being given of his Intent to the Verdurers.

78. The King had persect knowledge how these Things were discussed. He saw
that whether the Person of the Archbishop were tainted by this Fact or not,
yet his Metropolitical Function was unsettled in many men's Opinions; he heard,
that the Acts of Spiritual Courts were unsped, and came to no end, till
Sentence were pronounced one way or other by the Supreme Authority. Therefore a
Commission was directed from His Majesty to ten Persons, to meet together for
this purpose about the beginning of October. These were the Lord Keeper; the
Bishops of London, Winton, and Rochester; the Elects of Exeter, and St. David's;
Sir Harry H^bart, Lord-Chief-Justice of the Common Pleas; Sir John Dodderidge,
one of the Justices of the King's Bench; Sir H. Martin, Dean of the Arches; and
Dr. Steward, esteemed the Papinian of Doctors-Commons. These began to lay their
Heads together upon the Third of October, and then Conser'd upon the manner of
their Proceeding: The Lord Hobart, and Sir H. Martin affecting, that his Grace
should send Counsel to Plead before them; from which, the rest dissented:
First, Because no such Privilege was allowed him in the King's Letters directed
to the Commissioners. Secondly, Because the Honor of the King, and the Seandal
of the Church, which as yet made the adverse Party have no Counsel on their
side. Thirdly, Because His Majesty required Information from those ten upon the
nature of this Fact, relying upon their Knowledge, Learning, and Judgments, but
not referring the Matter to their final Decision and Determination. Indeed
their Work, to prevent Excursions, was laid out in three Questions, which they
were commanded to Resolve, and to Act no further. And those were Debated till
the 27th of that Month, and in the end Decided with great Disagreement of
Opinions. The first Question, Whether the Archbishop were Irregular by the
Fact of Involuntary Homicide? The two Judges, and the two Civilians did agree,
That he was not Irregular; and the Bishop of Winton, who was a strong Upholder
of Incontaminate Antiquity, coming to the same sense, said, He could not
conclude him so: The other five held, He was Irregular. The second Question,
Whether that Act might tend to a Scandal in a Churchman? The Bishop of Winton,
the Lord Hobart, and Dr. Steward, doubted: All the rest Subscribed, That there
might arise from such an Accident, Scandalum acceptum, non datum; a Scandal
taken, but not given. The third Question, How my Lord's Grace should be
restored, in case the King should follow the Decision of those Commissioners,
who had found him Irregular? All agreed it could no otherwise be done, then by
a Restitution from the King: In the manner they varied. The Bishop of
Wi^ch^s^er, Lord Hobart, Dr. Steward, were of one mind to have it done
immediately from the King, and from him alone in the same Patent with the
Pardon. The Lord Keeper, Bishops of London, Rochester, Exon, and St. David's, to
be directed to some Bishops by a Commission from the King, to be transacted in
a fo^mal Absolution Church-wise, Manu Clericali. Judge Dodderidge, and Sir
Harry Ma^^in, were willing to have it done both ways for abundant Caution. The
whole Business was submitted to His Majesty to determine it, who took the
shortest course to show Mercy: Sprevit caelestis animus humana consilia, as
Velleius said of C. Cae^ar. So by his Broad-Seal He assoiled the Archbishop
from all Irregularity, Scandal, or Infamation, pronouncing him to be capable to
use all Metropolitical Authority, as if that sinistrous Contigency in spilling
Blood had never been done. A Princely Clemency, and the more to be Extolled,
because that Archbishop was wont to dissent from the King as often as any man
at the Council Board. It seems he loved him the better for his Courage and
Sincerity: For it was he that said to Jo. Spotswood Archbishop of St. Andrews,
telling His Majesty, That if he wrote an History of the Church of Scotland, to
which Labor he was appointed, he could not approve of his Mother in all things
that she did. Well, (says the King) speak the Truth, and spare not Words, after
Salomon's Praise, which are Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver.

79. But because when our Archbishop's Unfortunateness was recent, it appeared
far worse to some scrupulous Ecclesiastics, then it did in process of time;
therefore the Lord Keeper, with the two other Elects, cast themselves at His
Majesty's Feet, and besought Him, That since they had declared before God, and
the World, what they thought in that dubious Case, they might not be compelled,
by wounding their Consciences, to be Consecrated by him, but be permitted to
receive that Solemnity from some other Bishops, which was warrantable by His
Majesty's Laws. This was easily granted, and the Lord Keeper was Consecrated in
the Chapel of King Henry the Seventh at Westminster on the 11th day of
November following, by the Bishops of London, Worcester, Ely, Oxford, Landaff:
And the Elects of Sarum, Exeter, St. David's, in the Chapel of the Bishop of
London's Palace Nov. 18. by the same Reverend Fathers. From hencesorth the
suspicion of the Irregularity was brought asleep, and never wakened more. Mr.
H. L. is quite mistaken, page 71. of his History: 'It is true, the Archbishop,
an. 1627. was Commanded from his Palaces of Lambeth and Croydon, and sent to a
Moorish House in Kent called Foord, but not, as he conceives it, that the
Impulsive of it was the supposed Irregularity, which was then revived, but
because he would not License a Sermon of Dr. Sibthorp's, which the King sent to
him by Mr. W. Murry of the Bedchamber, for his Hand to the Printing, which he
denied, saying, There was some Doctrine in the Sermon which was contrary to his
Judgment. I write (I confess) by hearsay; but I heard it from his own mouth,
and have it in a Manuscript under his own Hand. It had been a wild thing to
rake up the Irregularity again out of the Embers, since in the interim he had
Consecrated many Prelates; nay since he had Consecrated the Elements of
Christ's Supper at the King's Coronation, and set the Crown upon His Majesty's
Head. And not long after he returned from Foord to a Parliament Summoned to
begin March 17. 1627. he Consecrated that Learned Divine Mr. Richard Montagu,
Promoted to the Sea of Chichester, at Croydon, Aug. 24. 1628. Yet that great
Scholar had Presented his studied Papers for the Irregularity to the
Lord Keeper more then any man. But now he was satisfied to be Consecrated by
the whilom Irregular supposed. And at the same time Dr. Laud, then Bishop of
London, was Assistant with the Archbishop to impose Hands. Such Changes there
are in Human Judgments.

80. Perhaps I may be thought Irregular my self, that I have knit the Election
and Consecration of the Bishop of Lincoln to the long Series, and Discussion of
this famous Case I crave Pardon, if I want one. Now I step back to the
Lord Keeper, who before the end of June was a Keeper of more then he desired,
the Earl of Southampton, one of his dearest Friends on Earth, being committed a
Prisoner to his Custody. A worthy Lord, and of a gallant Freedom, yet such as
less then Kings do not like. In the Session of Parliament, which was then newly
ended, he was interpreted to exceed in some words against the Royal
Prerogative, a Stone of Offense that lay in many men's ways. Beside he had
Rebuked the Lord Marquess of Buckingham with some Passion and Acrimony for
speaking often to the same thing in the House, and out of Order. Therefore he
was Confined; but with as much Gentleness as could be devised, rather to a
Nurse, then a Jailer. But the Lord Keeper, though he liked his Guest, yet he
preferred his Liberty before that Liking, and never gave over till he had got
his Enlargement, discharged him from the Attendance of Sir William Parkhust,
(who, as a Spy, was sent to wait upon him at Tichfield) that he might be lest
only to the Custody of his own good Angel, as he writes, Cabal, p. 59.
Likewise, in Tenderness to the Earl's Wealth and Honor, he kept him from an
Information in Star Chamber, which was threatened; and buoyed him up at last to
the King's Favor, so as he might rather expect new Additions, then suspect the
least Diminution from his Gracious Majesty. Though all this came purely from
his Love and Industry; yet of all that was obtained, he would take nothing to
himself, but directed the Earl to cast his Eye upon my Lord of Buckingham, Of
whose extraordinary Goodness, (says he) your Lordship and my self are remarkabe
Reflections, the one of his Sweetness in forgetting Wrongs, the other of his
Forwardness in conserring Court sies. These Passages occur in the Printed
Bundle. But there is a Letter, the Publisher of the former did not meet with
it, dated two days before, Jul. 19. written to the Lord Marquess, in behalf of
that Honorable Earl, and likewise of Mr. J. Seldom, (my great Friend while he
lived) who was clapped up at the same time, because being a Member of the House
of Commons in that Parliament, he had preferred the danger of telling Truth,
before the safety of Silence. Thus for them both together he Solicites.

My most Noble Lord,
WHat true Applause and Admiration the King and your Honor have gained for
that gracious, and most Christian-like Remorse showed the E. of Southampton, a
Delinquent by his own Confession, I refer to the Relation of others, lest I
might be suspected to amplify any thing, which my self had propounded. The
Earl, if he be a Christian, or a moral honest Man, will endeavor to regain His
Majesty's further Favor by more observance, and to requite your unexpressible
Goodness toward him by all true and hearty Friendship, both which he deeply
Vows and Protests. Now poor Mr. Seldom flies to the same Altar of Mercy, and
humbly Petitioneth your Lordship's Mediation and Furtherance. He, and the
World, take knowledge of that Favor your Lordship has ever offorded my
motions, and my self without the motion of any, and so draws me along to
Entreat for him. The which I do the more boldly, because by his Letter enclosed
he has utterly denied, that ever he gave the least Approbation of that Power
of Judicature lately usurped by the House of Commons. My Lord, The man has
excellent Parts, which may be diverted from an Affectation of Applause of idle
People to do some good and useful Service to His Majesty. He is but young, and
this is the first Offense that ever he committed against the King. I presume
therefore to leave him to your Lordship's Mercy and Charity.


These soft words mollified Anger, and Mr. Seldom was Released by the next
Packet that came from the Court in progress. If the Stoics had been wise men,
truly the Lord Keeper had been none, for they pronounced with their Master Zeno
in Laertius, (...), That wise Men are not Pitiful. But insooth there was never
a greater Stickler then he to bring Afflicted Ones out of Durance and Misery,
when he could effect it by Power and Favor; none that lent their hand more
readily to raise up those that were cast down. But if a Gentleman of Mr.
Selden's merit were under the peril of Vindicative Justice, he would stretch
his whole Interest, and cast his own Robe, as it were, to save him. When he had
brought him to Liberty, he stayed not there. He perceived his Fortune in those
days was not equal to his Learning; therefore he conferred the Registership of
the College of Westminster upon him, not meaning to hinder his Growth with a
Garment that was too little for him; but he procured a Chapman that gave him
400 l. for his Right in the Place: A Courtesy which Mr. Seldom did never
expect from the Giver, and was repaid with more Duty and Love, then the Giver
could ever have expected from Mr. Seldom. And although that singular good
Scholar Mr. Montagu did never agree with Mr. Seldom, as their Adverse and
Polemical Writings about the Right of Tithes do evidence; yet the Lord Keeper
made them both agree in his Favor and Patronage: Which Mr. Montagu has
proclaimed abroad in his Treatise of Invocation of Saints, Licensed for the
Press with his Lordship's own Hand, in Right as he was his Visitor in the
Colleges of Windsor and Eaton. His Words may be found in the Epistle Dedicatory
to that Treatise, as follow: Let the World take notice, if it may concern any,
your Honor is be, unto whom, next unto His most Sacred Majesty, my most
Gracious Sovereign and Master, I owe more then to all the World beside:
Professing unseignedly in the word of a Priest, F^cisti ut vivam and moriar
ingratus.

81. The Lord Keeper being so great a Dealer in the Golden Trade of Mercy, and
so successful, he followed his Fortune, and tried the King and the Lord
Marquess further in the behalf of some, whom their dear Friends had given over
in Despair to the Destiny of Restraint. And those were of the Nobles: For he
carried a great regard to their Birth and Honor; and knew it was good for his
own safety to deserve well of those highborn Families. The East of
Nerthumberland had been a Prisoner in the Tewer above 15 years. His Confidents
had not Considence and a good Heart, I say not to Petition, but to dispute with
the King, how ripe the Earl was for Clemency and Liberty. (...) Majesty was
very merciful, but must be rubbed with a Fomentation of hi^ (...) Oil, to make
him more supple. This dextrous Statesman infuseth into (...) how to compass the
Design, with what Insinuations and Argum^ (...) were improved with the Earl's
demulcing, and well-languag'd Phrases. And when it came to strong Debate, the
Lord Keeper got the better of the King in Reason. So the Physic wrought as well
as could be wished, and on the 18th of July the Earl of Northumberland came out
of the Tower, the Great Ordnance going off to give him a joyful Valediction:
Who turned his Thoughts to consider the Work of God, that a Stranger had
wrought (...), Comfort for him in his old Age, whose Face he had ne(...) never
purchased by any Benefit, nor courted so much as by the me^age of a Salutation:
Which his Lordship compared to St. Peter's Deliverance by the Angel of God,
Acts 12. when Peter knew not who it was that came to help him. Though not in
order of Time, yet in likeness of Condition the Earl of Oxford's Case is to be
ranked in the same File. It was in April in the year following that he was sent
to the Tower, betrayed by a false Brother for rash Words, which heat of Wine
cast up at a merry meeting. His Lordship's Enemies were great and many, whom he
had provoked; yet after he had acquainted the Lord Keeper with the long Sadness
of his Restraint in a large Letter, (which is preserved) he wrought the Earl's
Peace and Releasment, conducted him to the King's Chamber to spend an hour in
Conference with His Majesty, from whence a good Liking was begot on both sides.
Whom thereupon that Earl took for his trusty, and wisest Friend, using his
Counsel principally how to Husband his Estate, and how to employ his Person in
some Honorable Service at Sea, that the Dissoluteness of his Hangers-on in the
City might not sink him at Land. The Lord Keeper did as much for the Earl of
Somerset in Christmas-time before, bringing him by his mediation out of the
House of Sorrow, wherein he had continued above five years, that he might take
fresh Air, and enjoy the comfort of a free Life; which was affected by him to
gratisie the splendid and spreading Family of the Howards. And they were all
well pleased with him, as were the greatest part of the Grandees, except the
Earl of Arundel, for a Distaste taken, of which the Lord Keeper need not be
ashamed.

82. Within Six Weeks after he was settled in that Office, the Earls Secretary
brought two Patents to be Sealed, the one to bestow a Pension of 2000 l. per
annum upon his Lord out of the Exchequer, which was low mow'n, and not sit to
bear such a Crop; beside the Parliament, which was to meet again in the Winter,
could not choose but take Notice, what over-bountiful Issues were made out of
the Royal Revenue to a Lord, that was the best Landed of all his Peers. Yet the
Seal was put to, with a dry assent, because there was no stopping of a Free
River. With this Patent came another, to confer the Honor of the Great Marshal
of England upon the same Noble Personage. The Contents of it had scarce any
Limits of Power, much exceeding the streit Boundaries of Law and Custom. The
Lord Keeper searching into the Precedents of former Patents, when the same
Honor was conser'd, found a great inequality, and doubted for good Cause, that
this was a device to lay his unfitness for his great place Naked to the World,
if he swallowed this Pill. But nothing tended more to the praise of his great
Judgment with His Majesty. He writes to my Lord of Buckingham to acquaint the
King, that he thought His Majesty intended to give to greater Power, than the
Lords Commissioners had, who dispatched Affairs belonging to that Office
jointly before him; and that all Patents refer to the Copy of the immediate
Predecessors, who were the Earls of Essex, Shrewsbury, and Duke of Somerset;
but my Lord leaped them over, and claimed as much as the Howards and Mowbries,
Dukes of Norfolk, did hold, which will enlarge his Authority beyond the former
by many Dimensions. There is much more than this in the Cabal of Letters p. 63.
And much more than I meet there in his own private Papers. The King was much
satisfied with the Prudence and Courage of the Man, that he had rather display
these Errors, than commit them for fear of a mighty Frown; so the Earls Counsel
were appointed to attend the Lord Keeper, who joining their hands together
examined the Obliquities of the Patent, and altered them. What would have
followed if it had passed entire in the first Draught? For being so much
corrected and Castrated, yet the proceedings of the Court of Honor were a
Grievance to the People not to be supported: The Decrees of it were most
uncertain, most Arbitrary, most Imperious: Nor was there any Seat of Judgment
in the Land wherein Justice was brought a bed with such hard Labor: Now I
invite the Reader, if he please to turn to the 139 page of Sir An. Well.
Pamphlet, and let him score a Mark for his Remembrance at these Lines, That
Williams was brought in for this Design to clap the Great Seal, through his
Ignorance in the Laws, to such things, that none that understood the danger, by
knowing the Laws, would venture upon. This Knight when he is in a Course of
Malice is never out of his Way; but like an egregious Bugiard here he is quite
out of the Truth. For the New Lord Keeper walked so Circumspectly, that he
seemed to fear an Ambush from every Grant that was to pass for the use of
encroaching Courtiers; if any thing were Ambiguous or Dangerous he was not
ashamed to call for Counsel: If any thing were pressed against Rule he was
inexorable. (...). Eth. He kept constant to Justice in its Flat Square. I could
be Luxuriant in instances; nothing is easier then to observe two which are in
Print already. But Twelve days after he was sworn Lord Keeper Mr. Secretary
Calvert wrote to him, and used the King's Name, and to make all the stronger,
the Spanish Ambassadors Mediation was not wanting, to deliver one Rockweed a
Papist out of the Fleet. Not a jot the sooner for all this; but he excuses his
Rigor to the Lord Marquess Cabal. p. 62. That he would not insame himself in
the beginning to break his Rules so foully; which he was Resolved to keep
straight against ah Men whatsoever. Another of the same Stamp, page 65. One
Beeston had been committed from the Power of the High Court of Chancery,
loathing this Captivity he besought this New Officer to be Released, and was
denied; he Cries out for Mercy to the King, Roars out that the Parliament might
hear him, follows the Lord Bucking. with his Clamors, who advised the Keeper to
consider upon it. It is a Maxim indeed in Old Colwnella, lib. 6. c. 2. pervicax
contumacia plerumque saevientem fatigat, etc. Boisterous Importunity thinks to
fare better then modest Innocence; but he gave the Lord Marquess this Answer.
My Noble Lord. Decrees once made must be put in Execution; Else I will confess
this Court to be the greatest Imposture and Grievance in the Kingdom. The
Damned in Hell do never cease repining at the Justice of God; Nor the Prisoners
in the Fleet at the Decrees in Chancery. In the which Hell of Prisoners this
one for Amiquity and Obstinacy may pass for a Lucifer. I neither know him, nor
his Cause, but as long as he stands in Contempt, he is not like to have any
more Liberty. A Lion may be judged by these two Claws of his Pounce.

83. And now I have past over these exordial Marks of his Demeanor and
sufficiency before the Term began. Upon the first day of it, when he was to
take his Place in Court, he declined the Attendance of his great Friends, who
offered, as the manner was, to bring him to his first settling with the Pomp of
an nauguration. But he set out Early in the Morning with the Company of the
Judges, and some few more, and passing through the Cloisters into the Abbey, he
carried them with him into the Chapel of Henry the Seventh, where he Prayed on
his Knees (silently, but very Devoutly, as might be seen by his Gesture) almost
a quarter of an hour, then Rising up cheerfully, he was Conducted with no other
Train, to a Mighty Confluence that expected him in the Hall, whom from the
Bench of the Court of Chancery, he Greeted with this Speech.

MY Lords and Gentlemen all. I would to God my former Course of life, had so
qualified me for this Great Place (wherein by the Will of God, and the special
Favor of the King I am for a time to bestow my self) that I might have fallen
to my Business, without any farther Preface or Salutation. Especially
considering, that, as the Orator observes, Id ipsum dicere nunquam sit non
ineptum, nisi cum est necessarium. This kind of Orationing has ever a Tincture
of levity, if it be not occasioned by some urgent Necessity. For my own part, I
am as far from Affecting this Speech, as I was from the Ambition of this Place.
But having found by private Experience, that sudden and unexpected Eruptions
put all the World into a Gaze and Wonderment, I thought it most convenient to
break the Ice with this short Deliberation, which I will limit to these two
Heads, my Calling, and my Carriage in this Place of Judicature.


84. For my Calling unto this Office, it was (as most here present cannot but
know) not the Cause, but the Effect of a Resolution in the State, to Change or
Reduce the Governor of this Court from a Professor of our municipal Laws to
some one of the Nobility, Gentry, or Clergy of this Kingdom. Of such a
Conclusion of State (quae aliquando incognita, semper justa) as I dare not take
upon me to discover the Cause, so I hope I shall not endure the Envy.
Peradventure the managing of this Court of Equity does Recipere magis, and
minus, and is as soon diverted with too much, as too little Law. Surely those
Worthy Lords, which to their Eternal Fame, for the most part of an hundred
years Governed and Honored this Noble Court, as they Equaled many of their
own Profession in the knowledge of the Laws; so did they excel the most of all
other Professions in Learning, Wisdom, Gravity, and mature Experience. In such
a Case, it were but Poor Philosophy to restrain those Effects to the former,
which were produced and brought forth by those latter Endowments. Examine them
all, and you shall find them in their several Ages to have the Commendation of
the Compleatest Men, but not of the deepest Lawyers. I except only that mirror
of our Age and Glory of his Profession my Reverend Master, who was as Eminent
in the Universal, as any other one of them all in his choicest particular.
Sparguntur in omnes, Uno hoc mista fluunt, and quae divisa beatos efficient,
conjuncta tenet. Again, it may be the continual Practice of the strict Law,
without a special mixture of other knowledge, makes a Man unapt, and undisposed
for a Court of Equity. Juris Consultus ipse per se nihil nisi leguleius quidam
cautus and acutus, as M. Crassus was wont to define him. They are (and that
cannot be otherwise) of the same Profession with the Rhetories at Rome, as much
used to defend the Wrong, as to Protect and Maintain the most upright Cause.
And if any of them should prove corrupt he carries about him, armatam
nequitiam, that skill and Cunning to palliate the same, that that mis-sentence,
which pronounced by a plain and understanding Man, would appear most Gross and
Palpable; by their Colors, Quotations and Wrenches of the Law, would be made
to pass for Current and Specious. Some will add hereunto the Boldness and
Confidence, which their former Clients will take upon them, when, as St. Austin
speaks in another Case, They find, That Man to be their Judge, who but the other
day was their hired Advocate. Marie that depraedandi Memoria, as St. Jerome
calls it, That promness to take Money, as accustomed to Fees, is but a Base and
Scandalous Aspersion, and as incident to the Divine, if he want the Fear of
God, as to the common Lawyer, or most Sordid Artizan. But that that former
Breeding and Education in the strictness of Law, might (without good Care and
Integrity) somewhat indispose a Practiser thereof, for the Rule and Government
of a Court of Equity; I Learned long ago from Plinius Secundus, a most
Excellent Lawyer in his time, and a Man of singular Rank in the Roman Estate;
for in his 2, 3, and 6 Epist. Making Comparison between the Scholastici, as he
calls them, which were Gentlemen of the better sort, bred up privately in
feigned pleadings, and Schools of Eloquence, for the qualifying of themselves
for Civil Employments; And another sort of Gentlemen termed Forenses, who were
Pleaders at the Bar, and Trained up in real Causes, he makes the former more
Innocent and Harmless a great deal then the latter, and yields hereof the
principal Reason. Nos enim qui in foro verisque litibus terimur, multum
malitiae, quamvis nolimus, addiscimus. For we, says he, That are bred in Real
Quirkes, and personal Contentions, cannot but Reserve some Tang thereof,
whether we will, or no. These Reasons, though they please some Men, yet, God be
Praised, if we do but Right to this Noble Profession, they are in our
Commonwealth no way concluding or Demonstrative. For I make no question, but
there are many Scores, which profess our Laws, who, beside their Skill and
Practice in this kind, are so Richly enabled in all Moral and Intellectual
Endowments, Ut omnia tanquam singula persiciant, that there is no Court of
Equity in the World, but might be most safely committed unto them: I leave
therefore the Reason of this Alteration as a Reason of State not to be Fathomed
by any Reason of mine, and will say no more of my Calling in the General.

85. Now when I reflect upon myself in particular, Quis sum ego? aut quis
Filius Ishai? What am I, or what can there be in me in Regard of Knowledge,
Gravity, or Experience, that should afford me the least Qualification in the
world, for so weighty a Place? Surely if a Sincere, Upright, and well-meaning
Heart does not cover Thousands of other Imperfections, I am the unfittest Man
in the Kingdom to supply the Place. And therefore must say of my Creation, as
the Poet said of the Creation of the World, Materiam noli quaerere, nulla fuit.
Trouble not your Heads to find out the Cause, I confess there was none at all.
It was (without the least Inclination or thought of mine own) the immediate
work of God and the King: And their A^ions are no ordinary Effects, but
extraordinary Miracles. What then? Should I beyond the Limits and Duty of
Obedience despond, and refuse to make some few years Trial in this place? Nor,
- Tu^s, O Jacobe, quod optas Explorare labor, mihi jussa capessere fas est. I
will therefore conclude this Point with the Excuse of that Poet, whom the
Emperor Gratian would needs enforce to set out his Poem, whether he would or
no. Non habeo ingenium, Caefar sed jussit, habebo. Cur me posse negem, posse
quod ille putet? I am no way fit for this great Place, but because God and the
King will have it so, I will endeavor, as much as I can, to make my self fit,
and put my whole confidence in his Grace and Mercy, Qui neminem dignum Eligit,
sed eligendo dignum facit, as St. Austin speaks. And so much of my Calling, now
I come unto my Carriage in this Place.

86 It is an Observation which Tully makes, In causis dicendis effugere solebat
Antonius, ne succederet Crasso, Antonius was ever afraid to come after Crassus,
a most Eloquent and Powerful Orator. And the greatest discouragement I find in
this Place is, that I am to come after (after indeed, nec passibus aequis) my
two immediate Predecessors, the one of (...) Excellent in most things, the
other in all things. But both of them so bred in this Course of Life, Ut illis
plurimarum reruni agitatio frequens, nihil esse ignotum patiobatur; as Pliny
speaks of the Pleaders of his time. It were too much to expect at my bands, a
Man bred in other Studies, that readiness or quickness of dispatch, which was
effected by them Lords, both of them brought up in the King's Courts, and not
in the King's Chapel. My Comfort is this, That Arriving here as a Stranger, I
may say as Archimedes did, when he found these Geometrical Lines and Angles,
drawn every where in the Sands of Egypt, Video vestigia humana, I see in this
Court the Footsteps of Wise Men, many Excellent Rules and Orders for the
managing the same, the which, though I might want Learning and Knowledge to
invent, (if they were not thus offered to my hands) yet I hope I shall not want
the Honesty to Act and put in Execution. These Rules I will precisely follow,
without the least deslexion at all, until Experience shall Teach me better.
Every thing by the Course of Nature has a certain and regular motion. The Air
and Fire move still upward, the Earth and Water fall downward: The Celestial
Bodies whirl about in one and the self same Course and Circularity, and so
should every Court of Justice. Otherwise it grows presently to be had in
Jealousy and Suspicion. For as Vel. Paterculus Observes very well, In iis
homines extraordinaria reformidant, qui modum in voluntate habent. Men ever
suspect the worst of those Rules, which vary; with the Judges Will and
Pleasure. I will descend to some few particulars.

87. First, I will never make any Decree, That shall Cross the Grounds of the
Common or Statute Laws, for I hold by my Place the Custody not of mine own, but
of the King's Conscience; and it were most absurd to let the King's Conscience
be at Enmity and Opposition with his Laws and Statutes. This Court (as I
conceive it) may be often occasioned to open and confirm, but never to thwart,
and oppose the Grounds of the Laws. I will therefore omit no Pains of mine own,
nor Conference with the Learned Judges, to furnish my self with competency of
Knowledge, to keep my Resolution in this Point Firm and Inviolable. Secondly, I
shall never give a willing Ear to any Motion made at this Bar, which shall not
apparently tend to further and hasten the bearing of the Cause. The very word
Motion, derived a movendo to move, does teach us that the hearing is, Finis
perfectio, and terminus ad quem, the End, Perfection, and proper Home as it
were of the matter propounded. If a Counselor therefore will needs endeavor,
as Velleius Writes of the Gracchi, Optimo ingenio pessime uti, to make that bad
Use of a good Wit, as to justle a Cause out of the King's Highway, which I
hold in this Court to be Bill, Answer, Replication, Rejoinder, Examination and
Hearing, I will ever Regard it as a Wild Goose Chase, and not a Learned Motion.
The further a Man Runs out of his Way, the further he is from home, the End of
his Journey, as Seneca speaks; so the more a Man Tattles beside these Points,
the further it is from the Nature of a Motion: Such a Motion is a Motion Per
Antiphrasin, ut mons a non movendo. It tends to nothing but certamen ingenii, a
Combat of Wit, which is Infinite and Endless. For when it once comes to that
pass, some will sooner a great deal, loose the Cause then the last Word.
Thirdly, I would have no Man to conceive that I come to this Place to
overthrow, without special Motives, the Orders and Decrees of my Predecessors.
I would be loath to succeed any man, as Metellus did Caius Verres, Cuius omnia
erant ejusmodi ut totam Verris Praeturam retexere videretur. Whose Carriage,
says Tully, was a mere Penclopes Web, and untwisting of all the Acts of
Verres' s Pretorship. Upon New matter, I cannot avoid the re-viewing of a
Cause, but I will ever expect the forbearing of Persons, so as the Ashes of the
Dead may be hereafter spared, and the Dust of the Living no further Raked.
Fourthly, I will be as cautelous as I can, in referring of Causes, which I hold
of the same Nature of a Byway Motion. For one Reference that Spurs on a Cause,
there are ten that bridle it in, and hold it from hearing. This is that which
Bias calls the backward forwarding of a Cause; for as the Historian speaks,
Quod procedere non potest recedit. Fifthly, I profess before hand, this Court
shall be no Sanctuary for Undiscreet and Desperate Sureties. It is a Ground of
the Common Law, That a man shall make no Advantage of his own Follies and
Laches. When the Money is to be borrowed, the Surety is the first in the
Intention, and therefore, if it be not paid, let him a God's Name be the first
in Execution. Lastly, I will follow the Rules of this Court in all
Circumstances, as near as I can. And considering that, as Pliny speaks,
Stultissimum est adimitandum non optima quaeque proponere, It were a great
Folly to make Choice of any other then the very best for Imitation, I will
propound my Old Master for my Pattern, and Precedent in all things. Beseeching
Almighty God so to direct me, That while I hold this place I may follow him by
a True, and Constant imitation. And if I prove Unfit and Unable for the same,
That I may not play the Mountebank so in this Place, as to Abuse the King and
the State, but follow the same most Worthy Lord in his Cheerful and Voluntary
Resignation: Sic mihi contingat vivere, sicque mori.

88. This he delivered, thus much; and I took Council with my self not to
Abbreviate it. For it is so Compact and Pithy, That he that likes a little must
like it all. Plutarch gives a Rule for Sanity to him that Eats a Tortoise,
(...), Eat it up all, or not a whit, for a Modicum will Gripe the Belly: He
that fills himself with a great deal shall procure a Cleansing Evacuation. So
the Speech of a Great Orator is Instructive, when it is entire: Pinch it in
with an Epitome, you mangle the meaning, and avile the Eloquence. From Words he
fell to Practice; Industry, I think was his Recreation; for certain he had not
a drop of Lazy Blood in his Veins. He filled up every hour of the Day and a
good part of the Night, with the dispatch of some public and necessary
business. And though as a Counselor of State, and both as a Peer and Speaker
in Parliament he had many diversions, yet none of the work in Chancery was
diminished; which Attendance grew so light and familiar to him, that in a
little while it seemed to be no more a burden to him, then the Water is to the
Fishes, under which they Swim. He would not excuse himself a day, for any the
most lawful pretense; he would not impart himself to the Star Chamber or
Parliament, when it sat, before he had spent two hours, or more, among the
Pleaders. Two or three Afternoons he Allotted every Week to hear Peremptories.
By which unequalled diligence, commonly he dispatched five or six Causes in a
morning, according to the quality, or measure of the Points that came to be
debated. He did not only labor Six Days, but as it follows in the Commandment,
He did all that he had to do. For of all the Causes that were usually set down
for hearing, he never left any of them unheard at the End of the Term; which
was both an especial Ease and Comfort to the Subject; and a full Testimony of
his labor and ability, to expedite so many Knotty and Spacious Causes, that
came before him, in as little time as the Clients could expect. The Survey of
an whole year will give better satisfaction, then every Term a part by it self.
Whereupon he Writes thus to the Lord Marquess July 10. 1622. In this Place I
have now served His Majesty one whole Year diligently and honestly: But to my
Hearts Grief, by Reason of my Rawness and Inexperience very unprofitably. Yet
if his Majesty will Examine the Reg^ers, there will be found more Causes
finally Ended this one Year, then in all the Seven Years preceding. How well
ended I confess ingeniously I know not. His Majesty and your Lordship (who no
doubt have Received some Complaints, though in your Love (...) from me) are in
that the most competent Judges. A Testimony of Great Labor; and not more
Copious then Clear: For the Registry could not I ye. Thus Joseph in his
faithful Service under King Pharaoh, gathered in as much in one Year, as was
wont to be Reaped in Seven. And truly it becomes him that he was not confident,
but mistrustful of himself, least some Waspish and Vexatious men had attempted
to lay open some Errors to his Superiors, which should escape him in fixing so
many Planetary Causes. But there was I had almost said none. Yet then I had
forgotten Sir John Bourcher, who complained to both Houses of Parliament; that
his matters in debate were for ever shut up in a Decree, before his Counsel was
ready, having some Allegations which expected more time to be Ripened; still
more time? The business of this Knight was Arbitrated with consent by the Chief
Baron Jac. 7. That Arbitration he would not stand to. It was Decreed in full
hearing by the Lord Elsmore, Jac. 10. This did not please him. Yet it was
Ordered to the same Effect by the Lord Bacon, Jac. 17. And after this the same
Decree was confirmed by the Lord William's, Jac. 19. Having the consent of
Justice Hutton, Justice Chamberlain, and the Master of the Rolls, with an
hundred Pounds advantage more, then was given him before. And was not this Suit
come to Adultage for Trial after Seventeen Years Vexation in it first and last?
If a Suitor shall have Power to define when his Cause is sufficiently heard, a
Fiddler would not undertake the Office of a Judge; Sir John durst not have
presumed to this Boldness, but that he was encouraged by his Father-in-Law the
Lord Sheffeild, who was a Scholar, a Judicious Lord, and of great Experience,
that knew well enough the Futility of this Appeal (for it was discharged with a
general Rebuke.) But the Spirits usually beat with an un even Pulse, when they
stir too much in pity to our own Relations.

89. Some others there were; I yet remember it, of the coarsest Retainers to
Court, who lived by picking up Crumbs that fell from Stale Bread, these
Whispered their Discontents, that Causes were cut off too soon, that delay
would bring them to a more considerate Ripeness. Sic vero dificiente crimine
laidem ipsam in vituperium vertit invidia, says Tully; but he is sufficiently
praised, who is disprais'd for nothing but his Virtues. Dispatch was a Virtue
in him. And all his Sails were filled with a good Wind, to make riddance in his
Voyage. He was no Lingerer by Nature; and kindly warmth is quick in digestion:
Our time is but a Span long, but he that does much in a short Life products his
Mortality. To this he had such a Velocity of mind, that out of a few Words
discreetly spoken, he could apprehend the Strength and Sirrup of that which
would follow. This is that Ingeny which is so much commended 4. Tuseul.
Multarum rerum brevi tempore percussio; such a Wit is ever upon an Hill, and
fees the Champain round about him. And it was most contrary to his
incorruptness to prolong an hearing as Felix did, Act. 24.26. Till Money
purchased a convenient Season. He never was Accused of it. Quod nemo novit,
poene non fit, as Apuleius says 10. Metam. 'Twas never known, therefore 'twas
never done, is a Moral and a Charitable inference. Guess his great Spirit from
this Essay, and how he Coveted no Man's Silver or Gold, that when he was in his
lowest Want and Misery in the Tower, Sequestered of all he had, yet he Refused
the offers of his Friends with this Reason, that he knew not how to take from
any but a King. There is another Rub in the way sometimes, Court Messages, and
Potentates Letters; for, alas, in many Causes there are great Betters that are
no Gamesters. But he had a Spell against that Enchantment; an invincible
Courage against Enmity and Envy. I will truly Translate Mamertinus his
Qualities upon him, of which he boasted in the Panegyric for his Consulship,
Animi magm adversus pecuniam, liberi adversus offensas, constantis adversus
invidiam. Those Magnificoes, that were Undertakers for perdue Causes, gave him
over quickly for a stubborn Man, that would go his own Pace, and make no Halt
for their sakes, that sat in the Gallery of great ones above him. As Cicarella
says of Sixtus Quintus, in his Addition to Platina, In ore omnium erat, nunc
tempus Sixti est, it is not as it was, these are Pope Sixtus's days: No Man now
can work a Reprieve for a Malefactor. So this Magistrate was passive to many
Solicitations, but strenuously Resolved to be Active for none; for whatsoever
Cause was brought before him, he could instantly discern the true Face from the
Vizard, and whether the Counsel did not endeavor rather to shut it up, then to
open it. It asked him a little time to Learn, as it were, the use of the
Compass, how to Sail into the Vast Ocean of Pleadings, and not to creep always
by the Shore: To follow the Pleaders in their own method, and to speak to them
in their own Dialect, nay to reduce them from starting out, and to Rectify
every Sprain and Dislocation. See what a Globe of Light there is in natural
Reason, which is the same in every Man; but when it takes well, and rises to
perfection, it is called Wisdom in a few.

90. The Terms of the Common Law, as in all other Professions and Sciences,
seem Barbarous to the Vulgar Ear, and had need to be familiariz'd with
pre-acquaintance; which, being the Primar of that Rational Learning, he had
inured himself to it long before, and was nothing to seek in it. Yet one of the
Bar thought to put a Trick upon his Fresh-man-ship, and trouled out a Motion
crammed like a Granada with obsolete Words, Coins of far fetched Antiquity;
which had been long disused, worse then Sir Thomas Mores Averia de Wethernham
among the Masters of Paris. In these misty and recondit Phrases, he thought to
leave the New Judge feeling after him in the Dark, and to make him blush, that
he could not Answer to such mystical Terms, as he had Conjured up. But he dealt
with a Wit that was never entangl'd in a Bramble Bush; for with a serious Face
he Answered him in a cluster of most crabbed Notions, picked up out of
Metaphysics and Logic, as Categorematical, and Syncategorematical, and a deal
of such drumming stuff, that the Motioner being Foiled at his own Weapon, and
well Laughed at in the Court, went home with this New Lesson, That he that
Tempts a Wise man in Jest, shall make himself a Fool in Earnest. Among many
Gown-men at the Bar this was but one, and that one proved a solid Pleader; and
sound at the hands of a more reconcilable man, more than common Favor, who
procured him Knighthood, and did send him his help in another Capacity Ten
Years after, to advance his Fortunes. To proceed; his Judgment could not be
dazzled with Dark and Exotic Words; they were proper to the matters in Hand.
The difficulty that he did most contend with, was against Intrigues, and
immethodical Pleadings; so that he had much to do to force the Council to
gather up their Discourses more closely, and to hold them to the Point in Hand,
checking Excursions and impertinent Ramblings with the Rebuke of Authority,
though it seemed a little Brackish to some Palates. With a little Experience he
gathered up such Ripeness of Judgment, and so sharp-sighted a knowledge, that
upon the opening of a Bill, he could readily direct the Pleaders, to that which
was the Issue between the Plaintiff, and Defendant, and constrein them to speak
to nothing, but the very Weight of the Cause, from the Resolution whereof the
whole business did attend it is dispatch: So true it is which Nepos delivers in
the Life of Atticus, Facile existimari potest Prudentiam esse quandam Divinati
nem. Prudence is a kind of Divination; let it Taste a little, and it can guess
at all. It needs not to have all the Windows opened, when it can see Light
enough through a Chink. On the Judges part it is not Patience but Weakness, not
to abridge Prolixity of Words, that he may come the sooner to the Truth. And on
the Advocates part it is Affectation, to seem more careful of his cause then he
is, when he speaks more then he needs. Thus the Lord Keeper behaved himself
constantly and indifferently toward every Bill and Answer, using the same
method, the same diligence, the same Application of his great Gifts to all
Causes, following the Council which Q. Cicero gave to his Brother, de Petiti.
Consul. It a paratus ad dicendum venito, quasi in singulis caulis Judicium de
omni ingenio futurum sit; so he carried himself, as if he his whole sufficiency
were to be Tried, upon every Decree he made. I shall say much, I think enough,
to his Approbation, that in the Trial of two Terms, the Councei at the Bar were
greatly contented with him. The Primipili or Vantguard of them, were such as
filled up their place with great Glory in their Generation. Sir J. Davies. Sir
Ron. Cr^w. Sir T. Coventry. Sir R. H^ath. Sir J. Walter. Sergeant F^nch.
Sergeant Richardson. Sergeant Astly. Sir H^n. Finch. Mr. T. Crew. Mr. W. N^^.
Mr. A. P^n^. Mr. J. Glanvil. Mr. J. Finch. Mr. E. Littleton. Mr. D. Jenkyn. Mr.
J. Ba^kes. Mr. E. H^rb^rt. Mr. T. Gardner. Mr. T. H^dly. Mr. Egr. Thin. Mr. R.
Mason.

The Chief among them, that did deserve to Fight next the Standard my Memory
perhaps is not Trusty enough after the space of 30 years to remember all those
Worthies) are filled in the Margent, like a Row of Cedars, and are set down in
those Titles which they carried then, which most of them by their Deserts did
far out-grow. But these contributed all they could to his Credit, with as much
Observance, with as great Reverence, with as full Applause and Praise, as could
be required from ingenious Gentlemen, toward one that was a Stranger to their
Studies; whose acceptance, no doubt, was a Whetstone to his Industry.

In the first Term that he came abroad into Westminster Hall, a Parliament sat
in it is second Session; wherein by Command from the King, he spoke to both
Houses. Of which Speech thus my Lord of Buckingham in a Letter to him dated
November. 24. I know not how the Upper House of Parliament approve your Lordships
Speech. But I am sure he that call d them together, and, as I think, can best
judge of it, is so taken with it, that he says it is the best that ever he
heard in Parliament and the nearest to his Majesty's meaning; which beside the
contentment it has given to his Majesty, has much comforted me in his choice
of your Lordship; who in all things does so well Answer his expectation. This
is laid aside by some negligence, the more is the pity, that it cannot he
found. But here are two credible Witnesses, how well he could open the great
Affairs of the Kingdom; for the best of Orators gave this Rule to Brutus, N^m
disertus esse potest in eo quod nesciat, no man can speak well to that, which
he does not understand. At this time I find in safe Records, how advisedly he
carried himself in the House of Peers, upon the starting of two particulars.
The Privilege of the Nobility was discussed, and ready to be determined finally
by the more Active part, that they should take no Oath, save only by their
Honor; which through his Intercession was laid aside for these Reasons. That
the Word of God allows of no Swearing for the finding out of Truths and
deciding of Controversies, but by an Invocation of the Name of God: Quod
confirmatur, per cortius confirmatur; and it is God's Glory that his Name, and
no other, should be accounted more certain then any thing in the World. In all
Controversies, the last Appeal is to him, and to none beside, because there is
none above him. The last Appeal is ever to the highest; therefore we make no
further Inquisition for Truth; after our furthest provocation to the Lord in
Heaven. In Assertory Oaths we Swear, That thereby we may put an End to
contentious Causes: And it is not Man's, but God's Honor to end them, who is
the God of Peace, and that makes men to be of one mind. Moreover our best
consulting Divines collect, that the Ground of an Oath builds upon his holy
Name, because He is most True, and cannot Deceive; likewise because he is
Omniscient, and cannot be ignorant; and therefore to be the only due Witness
for all contentious matters, where there is no other Witness. The Honor of the
Peerage is a very Estimable Prerogative; but a Creature to Swear, is to put our
Soul upon a Religious Action: And shall a Creature be the Object of Religious
Worship? God forbid: shall a Creature be brought in as the Witness of all
Truth? Or shall it be Raised up as the Judge which avengeth all falsehood?
There is none but God that is privy to all Truth: And Vengeance belongs to none
but him, that can cast both Body and Soul into Everlasting Fire. He added, that
singularities are ever to be suspected; and challenged any man to show the
contrary, that no other Oath, but In the Name of God was used in Solemn Trials,
at that day, in any part of Christendom. And he bad them look to themselves at
home, how prejudicial it would prove to all Courts of Justice; and how
unwillingly the Gentry and lower conditioned people of the Land would be
brought unto it: How loath they would be to refer their Freehold, their Meum
and Tuum to the protestation of Honor; (...). If it be stood upon, that in the
highest Criminal Causes of Life and Death, their Lordships vouched their Honor
only to Guilty or not Guilty, it might receive this Satisfaction. If a Peer be
produced as a Witness against another Peer before the Lord High Steward, he
lays his hand upon the Book, and takes his Oath. No man can be cast by the
deposition of a Witness that is not Sworn. But when the Peers bring their
Verdict into the same Court against a Peer, they lay not their Hand upon the
Book, but upon their Breast; which is a Sign that their vouchment by their
Honor in that Trial is not an Oath. Indeed it is not. For their Lordships
utter it not Via juramenti, but Via Comparationis That is, they do not Swear by
their Honor, but pronounce comparatively that as sure as they are Honorable,
they find the Prisoner Guilty or not Guilty. Like to that frequent expression
in Scripture, As thy Soul Lives, it is thus and thus. The living Soul comes
not in as an Oath, but as a Comparison. As who should say, As sure as your Soul
lives, or as sure as Pharaoh lives, I affirm the Truth. Thus far he contended,
and to general Satisfaction. It was much that in his Novitiatship in that
house, he durst contradict such mighty ones in so tender a Cause. But a Wise
man commends the Wisest of Heathen men, Socrates for that Gallant Freedom; 1
Tus^ul, adhibuit liberam contumaciam a magnitudine animi inductam, non a
Superbia It Is Pride that makes men obstinate in their Errors: But magnanimity
makes them confident in the Truth.

91. In the same morning while this Debate continued very long, he had another
Pass with a Master-Fencer. For the question being canvas'd thoroughly concerning
Oaths, an Aged Bishop, very infirm in health excused himself, if he could not
stay so long; whereupon some Lords, who bore a grudge to that Apostolical
Order, cried out, they might all go home if they would; and not contented with
that Vilipendency, grew higher in their demand, and would have this contempt
against the Prelates inserted in their Journal Book. The Earl of Essex pressed
it more passionately then the rest; who wanted Theological Advice about the
strict Obligation of Oaths, as much as any Christian, which appeared by his
Attempts and Practice about twenty years after. But nothing would now quiet his
eager Spirit, but to put it to the question, whether the Lordships were not
content to open their Doors wide, and to let all the Bishops out, if they
would. The Lord Keeper Replied with a prudent Animosity, That, if he were
Commanded, he would put it to the Question, but to the King, and not to the
House of Peers. For their Lordships, as well Spiritual as Temporal, were called
by the King's Writ to sit and abide there, till the same Power dissolved them,
And for my Lords Temporal, they had no Power to License themselves, much less
to Authorize others to depart from the Parliament. With which Words of
irrefragable Wisdom, that Spirit was conjured down, as soon as it was raised.
But when the House was swept, and made clean, it returned again in our dismal
Days, with seven other Spirits worse than it self. The Motion was then in the
Infancy, and we heard no more of it, till it was grown to be a Giant, and
dispossessed our Reverend Fathers of their ancient Possession, and Primigenious
Right by Club-Law. Let my Apostrophe plead with our Nobles in no Man's Words
but Cicero's to Cataline, In vastitate omnium, tuas possessiones sacrosanctas
futuras putas? Could your Lordships imagine to limit Gunpowder and Wildfire
to blow up one half of the Foundation, and to spair the other half? When the
Pillars of the Church were plucked down, could the Pillars of the State be
strong enough to support the Roof of their own Dignity? They should have
thought upon it, when they pill'd the Bark off the Tree, that the Tree would
flourish no more; but quickly come to that Sentence, Cut it down: Why cumbereth
it the Ground?

92. Our Forefathers, when they met in Parliament, were wont to auspicate their
great Counsels with some remarkable Favor of Privilege or Liberality
conferred upon the Church. And because the Prelates and their Clergy were more
concerned than any in the Benefit of the Statutes made; before the Art of
Printing was found out, they were committed to the Custody of their Religious
Mansions. The Reward of those Patriots was like their Work; and God did show he
was in the midst of them: They began in Piety, they proceeded in Prudence, they
acted marvelously to the Maintenance of the Public Weal; and they Concluded
in Joy and Concord. But since Parliaments, of latter Editions, have gone quite
another way, to hearken to Tribunitial Orators that defamed the Ministry, to
encourage Projectors, that would disseize them of their Patrimony, when the
Nobles (from whom better was expected) waxed weary of them, who were Twins born
in the same Political Administration: Samnium in Samnio: We may look for
England in England, and find nothing but New England. How are we fallen from
our ancient Happiness? How Diseased are we grown with the Running Gout of
Factions? How often have those great Assemblies been cut off (unkindly on both
sides) before their Consultations were mellow, and fit for Digestion? We look
for much, and it came to little: Was it not because the Lord did blow it away?
Hag. 1.9. It is not good to be busy in the Search of Uncertainties that are
not pleasing; yet they that will not trouble themselves to consider this
Reason, may find diverse Irritations to Jars in the Causes below; but I believe
they will not reduce them better to the Cause of Causes from above. From hence
came Fierceness and Trouble upon this Session, and God sent evil Angels among
them, Psalm. 78.49. For the House of Commons seemed to the King to step out of
their Way, from the Bills they were preparing, into the Closet of his Majesty's
Counsels: which put him to make Answer to them in a Style that became his
Sovereignty. The King's Son-in-Law taking upon him the Title of King of
Bohemia, sore against the Father-in Law's Mind, the Emperor being in lawful
Possession of that Kingdom, overrun the greatest part of the Palatinate with
some Regiments of Old Soldiers, whereof the most were Spanish, under the
Conduct of Marquess Spinola. Our King received the Injury no less than as a
deep Wound gash'd into his own Body: And all true English Hearts, which did not
smell of the Roman Wash, were greatly provoked with the Indignity. Prince and
People were alike affected to maintain the Palsgrave in his Inheritance, but
several Ways. They that are of one Mind, are not always of one Passion. The
King assayed to stop the Fury of the Imperialists by Treaty. The Votes of the
bigger Number of the House of Commons propounds nothing but War with Spain; and
this they could not do, but in Civility they must first break off the Treaty of
Marriage, then in Proposition between the King's dearest Son, and the Infanta
Maria. Neither of which pleased his Majesty in the Matter, and but little in
the Form, that his Subjects should meddle in those high Points, which he
esteemed no less than the Jewels of his Crown, before he had commended them to
be malleated upon their Anvil. The Matter, that the Match with the Spanish
Princess should be intended no more, was dis-relishable, because he esteemed
her Nation, above any other, to be full of Honor in their Friendship, and
their Friendship very profitable for the enriching of Trade. The Lady her self
was highly famed for Virtue, Wisdom, and Beauty. The Noble House, of which she
came, had ever afforded fortunate Wives to the Kings of this Land, and gracious
with the People. Her Retinue of her own Natives should be small, and her
Portion greater than ever was given with a Daughter of Spain. And in the
League, that should run along with it, the Redintegration of the Prince Elector
in the Emperors Favor, whom he had offended, should be included. Therefore his
Majesty wrote thus to the Parliament: We are so far engaged in the Match, that
we cannot, in Honor, go back, except the King of Spain perform not such things
as we expect at his Hands. Some were not satisfied (of which more in a larger
Process) that our Prince should marry a Wise of the Pontifician Religion. For
as Man's Soul contracts Sin, as soon as it touches the Body, so their severe
and suspicious Thoughts were as consident, as if they had been the Luster of
Prophetic Light, that a Protestant could not but be corrupted with a Popish
Wedlock. Therefore the King took in hand to cure that Melancholy Fit of
Superstitious Fear, with this Passage that he sent in his Message at the same
time: If the Match shall not prove a Furtherance to Religion, I am not worthy
to be your King. A well-spirited Clause, and agreeable to Holy Assurance, that
Truth is more like to win, than lose. Could the Light of such a Gospel as we
profess, be eclipsed with the Interposition of a single Marriage? A faint
hearted Soldier coming near in his March, to an Ambush unawares, Plut vit.
Pelop.
Cried out to his Leader Pelopidas, Incidimus in hosts, We are fallen among
the Enemy. No, Man, (says his Captain) Hosts inciderunt in n^, the Enemy is
fallen among us, and into our Power. So to such as talk timorously, We shall
fall into the Mis-perswasions of a Catholic Lady, and her Household; It may
well be answered, Be not distrustful of a good Cause, they are fallen among us,
and, if God love them, they will join with us.

93. The other thing in debate seemed very harsh and boisterous to his Majesty,
that sundry Leaders in the House of Commons would provoke him to proclaim open
War with Spain. To which he replied, in a long Letter to the Speaker, That he
had sent some Forces to keep the strong Towns of his Son-in-Law from the
Imperialists. That he had sent 30000 l. to those Princes of Germany that
promised to assist him, in Jealousy of their own Territories; and had they
done their Part, that handful of Men which he sent, had sufficiently done
theirs. He told them, that he treated sedulously, at that time, for Peace; but
it would be a very Contradiction, at the same Instant, to be a Party in an open
War. And he gravely minded them, that he rather expected Thanks for a long
Peace, the great Blessing of God, than to stir him up to one of the greatest
Plagues, which the Lord threatens to a sinful Kingdom. That many of his
Subjects, wanton with Ease and Plenty, and pampered with Rest, desired a
Change, though they knew not what they would have. But did these Words, so wise
and melting, compose the Humors of the Passionate? No, The Stoics said well,
that from all Words and Actions, there were two Handles to be caught hold of,
a Good and a Bad. The Virtuous interpret all to the best, and lay hold on the
Good: The Quarrelsome apply all to the worst, and lay hold of the Bad. Some
that were Christianly Principled, and were desirous to contrive every way how
to spare the Effusion of so much Humane Blood, admired the Lenity and
Moderation of the King, and looked up to God, that he would bring this Work to
pass by other Means, than unruly and unsatiate Armies. But some cried out in
Ar. W. Language, That the King's Heart was not advanced to glorious
Achievements, P. 172. Or as another of the same Tribe, That howsoever the
World did believe, that he was unwilling to fight it out, from a Religious
Ground, yet it was no other but a cowardly Disposition, that durst not
adventure. Others would find a Knot in a Rush, and laid the Blame upon his
Learning, that did intenerate his Heart too much, and make him a Dastard.
These, belike, were not acquainted with the Exploits of the Grecian Xenophon,
the Roman Caesar, the English Sidney, Montjoy and Raleigh, Gentlemen that were
renowned both in Arms and Letters. Yet such as were transported with Warmth to
be a sighting, prevailed in Number, before the Pacificous. Well has Pliny
noted, Epist. Lib. 2. In publico concilio nihil est tam inaequale quam aequali
as ipsa: nam cum sit impar prudentia, par omnium jus est. It Is the Inequality
of that equal Right which all have in public Councils, that every Puny has a
decisive Voice as much as Nestor. But for all the Swordmen were so forward,
the King's Head was in Travel with Hopes of Peace. He considered that even just
Wars could not be prosperous, unless they were begun with Unwillingness; for
they are the first Felicity of bad Men, and the last Necessity of good Men.
Macrobius observes in Bacchus, the great Invader of India, That he carried his
Spear with a Trail of Ivy twined about it, Lib. 1 ^. 17
Quod vinculo patientiae obligandi sunt impetui Belle: Because the Fierceness
of Fighting should be rained in with the Bridle of Patience. Lofty Spirits,
more Heathenish than Evangelical, account one Victory worth ten thousand Lives.
But he that looks for the true Life above, is sure, that Mercy and Tenderness
of Heart are better than a thousand Victories. E^saws indeed was not the
Soldiers Friend; but thus far he may be heard in this Cause, Epist. Aute.
August. Hist. Idem omnes pariter adnitantur ne Bellum sit, po^ius quam ut bello
vincant: It Is glorious before Men to fight well: it is blessed before God not to
sight at all. Warlike Motions are a Trial of Gallantry for a time; but all the
Pages of Horror, Calamity, and Desolation attend them upon the Place, where the
Camp continues. And why may not that continue till an Infant come to gray
Hairs? It Is easy to set the Day when Wars shall begin, but none can tell the
Year, nor the Age when they will end. Metellus had been brought up in such
Service, none could tell Bacchus better than himself, Salush. Jug.
Bellum sumi facile, ceterum aegerime dirimi, non in ejusdem potestate initium
ejus and sinem esse. And if War last long, Who can feed that Cormorant with so
much as it will devour? What Millions and Millions of Coin have been exhausted
to maintain this great Curse of God in our Land? it is thrice as chargeable to
transport an Army. If great Contributions be exacted Year by Year, What
Outcries will the People make? And if we be not shorn to the Quick, nay, if we
be not flayed to advance Payments, What Outcries will the Soldiers make? It Is
remarkable, that the Commons in this Parliament voted to give one entire
Subsidy to the King, to begin the War. They were not ignorant that five times
that Money was not enough to Rig a Navy, and to receive a good Army in it at
the Seaside. What a poor Stock was this to set up such a Trade? a Sign they
were neither able nor willing to maintain a War, but at the Tongues end.
Finally, The King having deliberated upon this Hurry to Battle, opened the very
Oracle of his Heart in this manner to some that were near him: That a King of
England had no reason, but to seek always to decline a War, though he carried
his Forces abroad; for the Array, or Sword was in his Hand, and the Purse in
the Peoples. His Sword could not fight without their Purse to maintain it.
Suppose a Supply were levied to begin the Fray; What Certainty could He have,
that He should not want enough to make an honorable End? If he called for
Subsidies, and did not obtain, he must retreat ingloriously, to the Wounding of
his own Honor, and the Nations. If he were instant to have Succor, and were
resolved never to give over till he had it, after he had craved it, as if he
had begged an Alms, he must take it with such Conditions, as would break the
Heart of Majesty, through Capitulations that some Members would make, who
desire to improve the Reputation of their Wisdom, by retrenching the Dignity of
the Crown in Popular Declamations. For 'twas likely they would ask the Change
of the Church, of the Laws, of the Court Royal, the Displacing of his Officers,
the Casheiring of his Servants. Either at this Rate he must buy the Soldiers
Pay, or be Scandalized in the Army, to the endangering of a Mutiny, that he
would yield nothing to save them from Starving, who had jeoparded their Lives
for him and his Children. All this praemised, I cannot dive into his Nature as
some do, that knew no more than I, to say he was no Man of Courage; but out of
the Pith of his Arguments, I can collect, he was a Commander of Reason. Happy
those that lived under his Scepter, who could say, Claudian. land. Still.
Hujus pacificis debemus moribus omnes -- Quod cuncti gens una sumus. Plutarch
compares Romulus and Numa, that the former did all he could to train the People
to Fight, Numa did his best to suppress Wars: Non ob ignavia sed innocentiae
causa: not out of Timorousness, but of Harmlesness. (This is he that they say
had the Goddess Aegeria to his Dry-Nurse, whereas Romulus had a Wolf to his
Wet-Nurse.) So I will define it in the Peroration, that it was Harmlesness and
Innocence that taught King James not to leave his Kingdom naked to the Storms
of War, and disrobed of the Mantle of Peace.

94. Now to go on. If the Matter debated about breaking of the Match, and
Proclaiming War with Spain had not disgusted, the Modus Procedendi, or Form how
the Commons took in hand, would have given less Displeasure. But to keep them
from hunting after such Royal Game, his Majesty confines them into their own
Purlues: Not to meddle (says he) with any thing concerning our Government, or
deep Matters of State; and namely, not to deal with our dearest Son's Match
with the Daughter of Spain; nor to touch the Honor of that King, or any other
our Friends and Confederates. And also not to meddle with any man's
Particulars, which have their due Motion in any Our Courts of Justice. To which
they Answer, That they acknowledge it belonged to his Majesty alone to resolve
of Peace and War, and of the Marriage of the most Noble Prince, his Son. Nor
did they assume to themselves any Power to determine of any Part thereof, but
to demonstrate those things to his Majesty, which they were not assured could
otherwise come so fully and clearly to his Knowledge (which are mannerly, but
plain Shifts.) In the L'enocoy they rise higher, That his Majesty did seem to
abridge them of the ancient Liberty of Parliament, for Freedom of Speech, an
Inheritance received from their Ancestors. The Apple of Contention at last grew
only upon the Stalk of those Words. The King rejoyns unto it thus: Although We
cannot allow of the Style, calling it your ancient and undoubted Inheritance;
but could rather have wished that ye had said, that your Privileges were
derived from the Grace and Permission of our Ancestors and Us (for most of them
grew from Precedents, which shows rather a Toleration than inheritance:) Yet We
are pleased to give you Our Royal Assurance, that as long as you shall continue
your selves within the Limits of your Duty, We shall be as careful to maintain
and preserve your Lawful Liberties and Privileges, as ever any of Our
Predecessors were; nay, as to preserve Our own Royal Prerogative. Had Queen
Elizabeth sent such Lines to any of the Parliaments called in her Blessed
Reign, her Name had been advanced for a gracious and a renowned Lady. It was
this, if not alone, yet chiefly, that made her Government more Popular at Home,
and Glorious Abroad, than the Kings her Successors (for they wanted nothing of
Piety, Wisdom and Justice;) that she never encountered with Harsh, Gainsaying,
Tumultuous Parliaments. But what Requital had King James sot his gentle Words,
perfumed with sweet Gums? Why, they begat another Remonstrance, full of strong
Contestation, That the Liberties, Franchizes, Privileges and Jurisdictions of
Parliament are the ancient and undoubted Birthright and Inheritance of the
Subjects of England, and so forth along with every Note above Ela. Yet that no
Diversion might be made, nor Cessation of weightier Business for this, the Lord
Keeper writes to the Lord Marquess, December. Cabal. p. 65.
16. in these Words. His Majesty infers, that the Privileges of Parliament are
but Graces and Favors of former Kings. Most true, for where were the Commons
before Harry the First gave them Authority to meet in Parliament? They claim
those things to be their Inheritance and natural Birthright. Both these
Assertions, if men were peaceably disposed and affected, the Dispatch of the
common Business might easily be reconciled. Those Privileges were originally
the Favors of Princes, and are now inherent in their Persons, in their Politic
Body. His Majesty may be pleased to qualify that Passage with some mild and
noble Exposition. This wise Letter cuts the Controversy by a Thread. And this
Office, to mitigate that Passage, Sir Humphry May performed singularly to his
Praise, yet nothing to Success. Hereupon, on the 21st of December, this Session
was Prorogued till February the 8th, but utterly Dissolved by Proclamation Jan.
7. Surely every good man wished that the King and they had embraced at Parting.
Plutarch, in the Life of Dion, tells of a small Error in Nature, which happened
in Syracusa, That a Sow Farrow'd, and her Pigs had no Ears. That the
Soothsayers portended to Dionysius the Governor, a great Mischief upon it,
that the People would be Disobedient, and hear nothing that was Commanded.
There cannot be a more ominous Presage of Evil to come, than when the
Magistrate has lost the Happiness of a persuasive Tongue, and the People of a
listening and obedient Ear.

95. An Evil befall that Archimago, that Fiend of Mischief, that set Variance
between the Head and the Body: The Lord Keeper, who saw about him, and before
him, understood who would have the worst of it in the End. For the next
Parliament is not weakened in its Power or Privileges by the Dissolution of the
Former; but a King grows-less than himself, if he depart asunder, from that
public Assembly in a Paroxism, or sharp Fit, as Paul and Barnabas went one
from another, Acts 15.39. Therefore he read nothing so much to his Majesty, as
to study it, next to his Faith in Christ, how to close with the Desires of that
High Court, when it assembled again, that it might be like a Mixture of Roses
and Wood-binds in a sweet Entwinement. And for his Part, he was willing to
serve him in it, rather than in any thing, to be unto him as the Black Palmer
was to the Fairy Knight in Mr. Spencer's Moral Poem, to guide his Adventure
from all distemperate Eruptions: Which was put home: And let it rest a while,
till time brought it on, that he was the Days-man of Success. For now I remove
him into his Place in Star Chamber; a Court, though buried now, yet not to be
forgotten. Cambden, who kept the Nobleness of his Country from Oblivion, says
of it, Curia cam^rae s^llatae, si vetustatem spectemus, est antiquiss^ma: Si
dignitatem, honoratissima. For the Antiquity, the Lord Cook, in his
Jurisdiction of Courts, looks no higher than 28. of Edw. 3. This Lord Keeper
cites a Precedent out of his own Search of Records, of a Baron Fined and
Imprisoned by it, in the 16th of Edw. 2. as it is quoted, Cabal. P. 58. Of what
standing it was before (for the Evidence does not run as if then it were newly
born) to me is uncertain. For the Dignity, that famous Judge I mentioned, lifts
up his Style, that it is the most honorable Court (our Parliament excepted)
that is in the Christian World. Jurisdic. P. 65. The Citations of it are to
cause to appear Coram Rege and Concilio; for the King, in Judgment of Law, is
always in the Court when it fits, and King James did twice in Person give
Sentence in it. The Lords, and others of the Privy Council, with the two Chief
Justices, or two other Justices, or Barons of the Exchequer in their Absence,
are standing Judges of that Court. For in Matters of Right and Law, some of the
Judges are always presumed to be of the King's Counsel. The other Lords of
Parliament, who are properly De magno Concilio Regis, are only in Proxima
poteentia, of this Council, and are actually Assessors, when they are specially
called. These Grandees of the Realm (who cannot fit to hear a Cause under the
Number of Eight at the least) ennoble this Court with their Presence and
Wisdom, to the Admiration of Foreign Nations, and to the great Satisfaction of
our selves; for none can think himself too great to be Tried for his
Misdemeanors, before a Convention of such Illustrious Senators. And, as Livy
says, Nihil tam aequandae libertati prodest, quam potentissimum quemque posse
causam dicere. As touching the Benefit that the Star Chamber did bring, thus
that Atlas of the Law, the Lord Cook (Et cujus pars magna fuit) says in the
same Place, That the right Institution, and ancient Orders thereof being
observed, it keeps all England in Quiet. Which he maintains by two Reasons.
First, Seeing the Proceeding according to the Laws and Customs of this Realm,
cannot, by one Rule of Law, suffice to punish, in every Case, the Enormity of
some great and horrible Crimes; this Court deals with them, to the end the
Medicine may be according to the Disease, and the Punishment according to the
Offense. Secondly, To curb Oppression and Exorbitancies of great Men; whom
inferior Judges and Jurors (though they should not) would, in respect of their
Greatness, be afraid to offend. Indeed in every Society of Men, there will be
some Bashawes, who presume that there are many Rules of Law, from which they
should be exempted. Aristotle writes it as it were by Feeling, not by Guess;
Polit. 4. c. 11. (...). They that were at the Top among the Greeks, nor would
be ruled, nor would be taught to be ruled. Therefore this Court professed the
right Art of Justice, to teach the Greatest, as well as the Meanest, the due
Construction of Good Behavior. I may justly say, that it was a Sea most proper
for Whale-Fishing; little Busses might cast out Nets for Smelts and Herring. So
says the great Lawyer, Ordinary Offenses, which may sufficiently be punished by
the Proceeding of the Common Laws, this Court leaves to the ordinary Courts of
Justice; Ne dignitas hujus Curiae vilesceret.

96. Accordingly the Lord Keeper Williams having Ascended by his Office to be
the first Star in the Constellation, to illuminate that Court, he was very
Nice, I might say prudent, to measure the Size of Complaints that were
preferred to it, whether they were knots, fit for such Axes. A number of
contentious Squabbles he made the Attorney's Pocket up again, which might
better be compounded at home by Country Justices. It was not meet that the
Flower of the Nobility should be called together to determine upon Trifles.
Such long Winged Hawks were not to be cast off, to fly after Field-Fares. The
Causes which he designed to hear, were Grave and Weighty, wherein it concerned
some to be made Examples for Grievous Defamations, Perjuries, Riots,
Extortions, and the like. Upon which Occasions his Speeches were much heeded,
and taken by diverse in Ciphers, which are extent to this day in their Paper
Cabinets. To which I Appeal, that they were neither long nor Virulent. For
though he had Scope on those Ocasions to give his Auditors more then a Taste of
his Eloquence, which was clear, sententious, fraught with Sacred and Moral
Allusions, yet he detested nothing more, then to insult upon the Offender with
girds of Wit. He foresaw that Insolences and Oppressions are public
provocations to bury a Court in it is own Shame. And what could exasperate more,
then when an unfortunate man has run into a Fault, to show him no humane
Respect? Nay, to make him pass through the two malignant Signs of the Zodiaque,
Sagitary and Scorpio? That is, to wound him first with Arrows of sharp-pointed
Words, and then to Sting him with a Scorpiack censure. Indeed, if there be an
extreme in showing too much mercy, I cannot Absolve the Lord Keeper. For many,
I confess, censured him for want of deeper censures; said he was a Friend to
Publicans and Sinners, to all delinquents, and rather their Patron then their
Judge. (...) was so oftentimes, when he scented Malice in the Prosecution. It
was so sometimes, when he laid his Finger upon the Pulse of humane Frailty.
Brethren, if a Man be overtaken in a Fault, we which are Spiritual Restore such
a one in the Spirit of meekness, considering thy self, least thou also be
Tempted, Galat. 6.1. Pliny the younger had been faulted, that he had excused
some, more then they deserved: Whereupon he Writes to Septitius lib. 7. Ep.
Quid mihi invident felicissimum Errorem? Ut enim non sint tales quales a me
praedicantur, ego tamen Beatus, quod mihi videntur; Which is to this meaning;
Why do you grudg me this Error? they are not so good as I accounted them; but I
am happy in my Candor, that I account them better then they are. But first he
never condemned an Offender to be Branded, to be Scourged, to have his Ears
cut. Though that Court has proceeded to such censure, in time old enough to
make Prescription, yet my Lord Cook advises it should be done sparingly upon
this Reason, Quod Arbitrio judicis relinquitur, non facile trahit ad effusionem
Sanguinis. They that judge by the light of Arbitrary Wisdom should seldom give
their sentence to spill Blood. He would never do it; and declined it with this
plausible avoidance, as the Archbishop Whitgift and Bancroft, and the Bishop
of Winton, the Learned Andrews, had done before him, that the Canons of
Councils had forbidden Bishops to Act any thing, to the drawing of blood in a
judicial Form. Once, I call to mind, he dispensed with himself; and the manner
was pretty. One Flood a Railing Libelling Varlet, bred in the Seminaries beyond
Seas, had vented Contumelies bitterer then Gall against many Excellent persons.
Among other passages of his Reviling Throat, it was proved against him, that he
had said, that our Bishops were no Bishops, but were Laymen, and Usurpers of
that Title. Flood, says the Lord Keeper, Since I am no Bishop in your Opinion,
I will be no Bishop to you. I concur with my Lords (the like I never did
before) in your Corporal punishment. Secondly in inflicting pecuniary Mulcts
upon him that was found Guilty, he was almost never heard but to concur with
the smallest Sum. I would this had been imitated, chiefly by them of the
Hierarchy, who managed the judgments of that Court after he retired, I would
that favor, which was wont never to be denied to any, had not been forgotten,
to take away such a part of an Offenders Estate by Fine, that still he might
have Honestum Continementum, an Honest Provision to live upon according to his
Place and Dignity. It was never intended to prune away the Loppings, and to cut
down the Trunk too. Nothing could be more harsh to tender Ears and Hearts, then
such a Torrent of censure as came from Q. Furius against Dolabella 11. Philip.
of Tully, he had loaded him with all the severity he could think of, Dixit
tamen, si quis eorum qui post se rogati essent graviorem sententiam dixisset,
in eam se iturum. But he may get a fall himself, that in the undoing of a Man
Gallops to Ride as fast as the Fore-Horse. Thirdly the Lord Keeper's Indulgence
was not satisfied to set the lowest Fine, but labored for as much mitigation,
as could be granted, at the end of the Term. The Officers that are yet alive
will say as much, and make me a true Man, that the Fines of the Court were
never shorn down so near before: And after the Period of his Presidency, it is
too well known how far the Enhancements were stretched. But the wringing of the
Nose hringeth forth Blood, Prove. 30.33. The Lord Treasurer Cranfeild, a good
Husband for the Entrates of the Exchequer, complained against him to the King,
how Delinquents by his Abatements were so slightly punished in their Purse,
that the Fees, that came to His Majesty's Enrichment, would not give the Lords
a Dinner once a Week, as the Custom had been, nay, hardly once a Term. Behold
now a Man that was Lenissimus sine dispendio Disciplinae, as Ausonius says of
Gratian, as full of Lenity as could be, saving the Correction of evil Manners.
But it will be said, he was liberal to spare men out of the King's Stock. And
no whit less, as I will show it, out of his own. Sir Francis Inglefeild, a
prisoner in the Fleet, upon a contempt of a Decree in Chancery, was much
overseen, not once nor twice, in bitter Words against the Lord Keeper, which he
vented so rashly, that they were certified home. Well says the Lord Keeper, Let
him Bark on, but he shall never bite his Chain asunder, till he submit to mine
Order. But there came a Complaint, by the Information of Sir J. Bennet, that
Sir Francis had not spared to say, before sufficient Witness That he could
prove this Holy Bishop Judge had been Bribed by some that fared well in their
Causes. As the Old Adagy goes, he might as easily have proved that Hercules was
a Coward. But this contumely could not be passed over: There was a necessity to
purge it, or to fall under it in a public hearing. After time given to Sir
Francis to make good his Words in Star Chamber (the Lord Keeper withdrawing
himself for that day) he could prove nothing of Corruption against him, no not
to the Value of a Doit. So a Large Fine of many thousand pounds was inflicted
on Sir Francis to be paid to the King, and to his Minister, whom he had
Slandered. The Lord Keeper in a few days following, sent for the woeful
Gentleman, and told him, he would refute his soul Aspersions, and prove upon
him, that he scorned the Pelf of the World, or to exact, or make lucre of any
man. For, for his own part he forgave him every penny of his Fine, and would
crave the same Mercy toward him from the King. Sir Francis blessed himself, to
find such Mercy from one, whom he had so grievously provoked, acknowledged the
Crime of his Defamation; and was received afterward into some Degree of
Acquaintance and Friendship. Many have been undone by those, whom they took to
be their Friends: But it is a rare chance to be seen, as in this instance, for
a man to be preserved by him, whom he had made his Enemy: Let this suffice to
declare, that the Star Chamber by this Lord's Prudence was the Court of Astraea.

97. Being to take his Picture from Head to Foot, it is pertinent to consider
him in the Office of a Privy-Councellor. It was his first Honor, wherein the
King called him to serve the Crown, being Sworn to sit at that Board, Three
Weeks before he was entrusted with the Great Seal. Many things, and the best of
his Abilities in that place, I believe, are un-publishable; for the most of
that Work is secret, and done behind the Curtain. He that sits in that
Employment, had need to have the whole Commonwealth in his Head. So says an
exact Senator, 2 De Orato: Ad Consilum de Repub. dandum caput est nosse
Rempublicam. Many may spit Sentences upon such great matters, and speak little,
as worthy Doctor Gauden says, like sealed Pigeons, The less they see, the
higher they Fly. But blessed be his Name that gives all good Gifts, he was
furnished with strong intellectuals to discern into the means, that concern the
Honor, Safety, Defense and Profit of the Realm. Yet it is not enough to have a
piercing Eye, unless there be an Heart to affect the public good. Tully began
well, but Pontanus makes up the rest in Extolling the Venetian Government.
Senatoribus mira in consentiendo integritas, atque erga patriam amor
incredibilis. And his Lordship was as true an Englishman, as ever gave Counsel
in the Royal Palace. Therefore he was more employed by his Majesty then all the
rest, to negotiate with Ambassadors; being most Circumspect and tender to yield
to nothing, that was not advantageous to our own common Welfare. Neither did
the Courts of France and Spain, and the States of Holland, with whom we Acted
most, upon Trial how he sisted their Leagues, expect any other from him, He had
the most sudden Representation of Reason, to confirm that which he defended of
any Man alive. None could abound above him in that Faculty, which made his
great Master value him at that weight, that the thrice Noble Lodwick, Duke of
Richmond, told him in my hearing, That the King listened to his Judgment, rather
than to any Minister of State. Which took the oftener, because if his Majesty
were moody, and not inclined to his Propositions, he would fetch him out of
that Sullen with a pleasant Je^t, and turn him about with a Trick of
Facetiousness.

I find by his own Confession remaining in some Schedules, that he was
beholding to Lord Egerton's Directions, to fill up the Worth of that Place;
which were these. First, To open his sincere and intimate Mind in all Advice;
which is indeed to give Counsel, and not Words. For he that speaks against his
Conscience, to please the King, gives him a dry Flower to smell to. Secondly,
Whatsoever was proposed, to examine primarily, if it were just: For he that
dare make bold with God for Reasons of State, is not to be trusted by Man.
There can be no Reason against Right: Velleius says, that Cato the Heathen was
of that Opinion; Cui id solum visum est rationem habere, quod haberet
justitiam. 2. If it were for the Honor of the King, for Crown-wisdom must not
be soiled with the Dust of Baseness, but aim at Glory. 3. If it were
profitable, as well for the Ages to come, as for the present Use; for present
Occasions are mortal, but a Kingdom is immortal. If it hit not every Joint of
Just, Honorable, and Profitable, he voted to lay it aside. He kept other Rules
at the Table, but more dispensable. As to mature great Matters, with slow
Deliberation, at least to give them a second Hearing, after himself and his
Colleagues had laid their Heads upon their Pillows. Next he called upon the
King, to follow the beaten Tract of former Precedents: For new ways are visibly
the Reproach of ancient Wisdom, and run the Hazard of Repentance. New Stars
have appeard and vanished; the ancient Asterisms remain, there is not an old
Star missing. Likewise it was his modest, but frequent Motion, that Counsels
should not be whispered by one or two in a Corner but delivered openly at the
Board by the sworn Ministers. For what avails it, when a Globe of Senators have
pressed sound Judgment, if some, for their own Ends, shall overthrow it, who
have made Blastus their Friend in Agrippa's Chamber? Act. 12. The Lord Cooke's
Jurisdiction of Courts, Page 57. gives it for a special Note of his own
Observation, when he was a Privy Counselsellor, that when a thing upon Debate
and Deliberation is well resolved at the Council Table, the Change thereof,
upon some private Information, is neither safe nor honorable. As Seneca says,
Lib. 2. de Benif. Vota homines parcius faccrent, si palam facienda essint. If
all Prayers were made in the Hearing of a public Assembly, many that are
mumbled in Private, would be omitted for Shame. So if all Counsels, offered to
Princes, were spread out before many Witnesses. Ear-Wiggs that buzz what they
think fit in the retired Closet, durst not infect the Royal Audience with
pernicious Glozing, for fear of Scandal or Punishment. Well did the Best of our
Poets, of this Century, decipher a Corrupt Court, in his Under-woods, Page 227,
When scarce we hear a public Voice alive;
But whispered Counsels, and these only thrive.
Lastly, He deprecated continually, and obtained that private Causes should be
distinguished from Public; that Actions of Meum and Tuum should be repulsed
from the Council Board, and kept within the Channel of the Common Law. But to
run along with the Complacemia of the Multitude, with that which was most cried
up in the Town by our Gallants at Taverns and Ordinaries, he defied it utterly.
Populo super ^canea est calliditas, says Salust. The Peoples Heads are not
lined with the Knowledge of the Kingdoms Government, it is above their
Perimeter. When they obey, they are in their Wits; when they prescribe, they
are mad. Excellently, King James, in one of his Speeches, Who can have Wisdom
to judge of things of that Nature (arcana imperii) but such as are daily
acquainted with the Particulars of Treaties, and the variable and fixed
Connection of Affairs of State; together with the Knowledge of the secret Ways,
Ends, and Intention of Princes in their several Negotiations? Otherwise small
Mistakings, in Matters of this Nature, may produce worse Effects than can be
imagined. He gave this Warning very sagely to his People: what Warning he
received from his faithful Servant, the Lord Keeper, shall be the Close of this
Subject. His Majesty being careful to set his House within himself in good
Order, against he came to the Holy Communion, on the Eve before, he sent for
this Bishop as his Chaplain, to confer with him about Sacred Preparation for
that Heavenly Feast; who took Opportunity, when the King's Conscience was most
tender and humble, to show him the way of a good King, as well as of a good
Christian, in these Points. First, To call Parliaments often, to affect them,
to accord with them. To which Proposal he fully won his Majesty's Heart.
Secondly, To allow his Subjects the Liberty and Right of the Laws, without
entrenching by his Prerogative; which he attended to with much Patience, and
repented he had not looked into that Counsel sooner. Thirdly, To contract his
great Expenses,, and to give with that Moderation, that the Prince his Son, and
his succeeding Posterity, might give as well as He. In short, to contrive how
to live upon his own Revenue, or very near it, that he might ask but little by
way of Subsidy, and he should be sure to have the more given him. But of all
the three Motions, there was the least Hope to make him hear of that Ear. For
though he would talk of Parsimony as much as any, yet he was lavish, and could
keep no Bounds in Spending. As Paterculus observes of an Emperor that wrote to
the Senate, Triumphum appararent quam minimo sumtu, sed quantus alias nunquam
fuisset. To be a great Saver, and a great Spender, is hard to be reconciled,
for it touches the Hem of a Contradiction. But since the Benefit of that
Counsel would not rest upon the Head of the King, the Honesty of it returned
again to him that gave it,

98. Who had the Abilities of two Men in one Breast, and filled up the Industry
of two Persons in one Body. He satisfied the King's Affairs in the Civil
Theater, and performed the Bishops Part in the Church of Christ: As (...) and
Jehojada were great Judges in the Land, and ministered before the Lord to their
Linen Ephods. The Custody of the Great Seal would not admit him, so long as he
kept it, to visit his Diocese himself; but though he was not upon the Soil of
the Vineyard, he was in the Tower of it, to overlook the Vine-Dressors. Though
he was absent in his Body, he was present in the Care and Watchfulness of his
Spirit, and as our Savior said of the Woman that poured her precious Spikenard
upon him, Quod potuit, fecit, Marc. 14.8. So I doubt not but God did accept it
from him, that he did what he could. He heard often from those whom he had
surrogated, and appointed in Office to give him Information; and was so
assiduous to enquire after all Occurrences in those many Parochial Towns, that
were under his Pastoral Power, that he would be very angry at the least
Slackness of his Ministers, and was used to say, They might provoke him with
Negligence, but never molest him with double Diligence; for he could read as
much in an Hour, as they would write to him in a Week. Mr. W. Boswel his
Secretary, and Custos of his Spirituality, and chief Servant under him in this
Work, was all in all sufficient for it, eximious in Religion, Wisdom,
Integrity, Learning, (as the Netherlands know, where he was long time Agent and
Ambassador for King Charles.) Through Mr. Boswell's Collection, and narrow
Search, the Diocesan of so large a Precinct, together with the Names of every
Parson and Vicar, was able to speak of their Abilities, and manner of Life,
which I think no Memory could carry away; but that it is credible he had some
Notes affixed to every one of their Persons. For he could decipher the Learning
of each Incumbent, his Attendance on his Cure, his Conformity, his Behavior,
as well as most men knew them in their respective Proximities. I do not say he
had a passive Infallibility, but that he might be abused with untrue Relations.
But for the most part a good Headpiece will discover a counterfeit Suggestion,
and crush the Truth out of Circumstances. The Sum is, He did as much as a
Bishop could do, while, for the space of four Years and a half, Necessity would
not suffer him to reside with his Clergy: whom they knew not that they mist
him, till he removed from London to live among them, and made a large Amends
for his Absence, when he settled at Bugden. In the mean time his Apocrisarii,
they, to whom he had committed his Trust and Authority, were among them, to
hear their Complaints, and to Judge Right. Now it is a good Rule in St.
Cyprian, to a laudable Purpose, though the Father applies it for once to a Bad,
Epist. 61. Non potest videri certasse qui vicarios substituit; and qui pro se
uno plures succidaneos suggerit. He that fills his Office with a good
Co-adjutor, his Absence may be dispensed with for a time upon reasonable Cause:
For a good Substitute is not a Shadow, but a Substance. Howsoever, whether his
Abode were within his Diocese, or without it, he knew that the Calling of a
Bishop went along with him in every Place. And whatsoever the standing Weight
of his Business was that lay upon him, he remembered to stir up the Gift of God
that was in him, by the Putting on of Hands. He Preached constantly in the Abbey
of Westminster, at the great Festivals of our Savior's Nativity, Resurrection,
and Whit-Sunday: On which high Days, he sung the Common Prayers, Consecrated
and Administered the Sacrament, the Great Seal of the Righteousness of Faith;
besides the Sermon which he Preached every Lent in the King's Royal Chapel:
Which was Work indeed, being so learnedly performed. For when he put his Hand
to that Plough, no man cut up a deeper Furrow, that came into the Pulpit.

99. Such Examples of Preaching were necessary for this time; but very ill
followed. For there were Divines more Satirical than Gospel-spirited, chiefly
some among the Lecturers in populous Auditories, that were much overseen.
Banding their Discourses either under the Line, or above the Line, against the
quiet Settlement of present Government. Some carried their Fire in
Dark-Lanthorns, and deplored the Dangers that hung over us. Some railed
outright, and carried the Brands end openly in their Mouth to kindle
Combustion. Both did marvellously precipitate slippery Dispositions into
Discontents and Murmurings. The Treatise about the Spanish Match was the Breize
that bit them, and made them wild. That was such a Bugbear, that at the Motion
of it, some that were conscientious, and some that seemed so, thought that the
true Worship of God was a Shipboard, and Sailing out of the Realm. True
Religion is the Soul of our Soul, and ought to be more tender to us than the
Apple of our Eye. But we all know what will grow out of that Religion, when it
is marked with Charity. It is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, bears
all things, believes all things, hops all things, 1 Cor. 13. It is not
distrustful of it own fastness, as if so good a Fortress could be pushed down
with a bruised Reed. It will not raise Tumults and Tragedies from
Misapprehensions, that float upon the idle Lake of Suspicion. That the Orthodox
Church of England should totter upon this Occasion, God be thanked it was not
in proof, nor could be made evident. Sometimes Jealousy is too watchful;
sometimes it is fast asleep. When the French Marriage was in Treaty, when it
was concluded, when the Navy was under Sail to Land the Royal Bride, the
Preachers were modest, and made no stir, not one Zealot complained of for
jerking at it with unadvised passion. And yet the Daughter of France was a
Daughter of the Roman Chair, no less then Donna Maria. She never had Commerce,
nor ever like to have, with the Hugonots. The Swarms of her own Train, all
Papists by Profession, were ready to abound in our Land far more than from the
Spanish Coast. Because of the short and easy passage from Calis to Dover,
their Shavelings would fly over as thick as Wasps about a Honey-Pot. This was
mightily dreaded, when the Marriage was in some forwardness between Queen
Elizabeth, and the Duke of Anjoy, and opposed strongly by some that were hot in
the Mouth to their cost. But now no Leprosy was suspected, but from Spanish
Popery. Which was aggravated with such Insolences by some Ecclesiastical
Fencers against the King's Honor; and the Sincerity of his Oath which he had
taken, to maintain true Religion, that they were at the height of Rage to
profess, Come, and let us smite him with the Tongue, Jerem. 18. Verse. 18. So
that his Majesty rouzed up like a Lion silenced some of the Offenders,
imprisoned some, threatened to arraign some for their Lives. Yet after he was
come to more Serenity of Passion, the Lord Keeper, who thought as hardly of
their Indiscretion as the King himself did, was Advocate for them all,
undertook to settle their Brains, and procured them their Liberty and their
Livings. Among the rest, he invented a merry Contrivance in the behalf of a
very learned and misguided Scholar, a Prisoner upon that score. He told the
King that he had heard, that some idle Gossips complained of him grievously,
and did not stick to curse him. Why? What Evil have I done to them? says the
King. Sir, says the Lord Keeper, Such a Man's Wife, upon Tidings of her
Husband's Imprisonment, fell presently in Labor, and the Midwifes can do her
no good to deliver her, but say it will not be effected till she be comforted
to see her Husband again: For which the Women that assist her revile you, that
her Pains should stick at such a Difficulty. Now Weal away, says the King, send
a Warrant presently to release him, lest the Woman perish. There was none that
was worse to be tamed than the Lecturer of St. Martins in the Fields, a great
Opiniator, who was committed to the Gate House; and having scarce kissed the
Jayl, was restored to go abroad, and to Preach again at the Lord Keeper's
humble Suit. Who gave him grave Advice, to take some other Theme to treat of
before his Auditors, than the King's Counsels and Intentions. And what does
your Lordship prescribe me to Preach upon? says this Frampul Man. What else?
(and that you know your self, says he,) But Jesus Christ, and him Crucified.
The next Sunday the Lecturer restored to his Place, takes for his Text 1 Cor.
2. V. 2. I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and
him Crucified. And withal told the People, That a Bishop and a great Statesman,
had restrained him to Preach of that only, and no other Scripture. Of which
Indignity when Sir George Calvert, the Principal Secretary, had brought him
News, he laughed heartily, and said no more, But let him alone, Sir George, he
has vented his Crotchet: His Notes will not let him continue long on that
Subject. He delights in Quarrels, but he shall never be questioned for my sake,
if he will not trouble the King. So he dealt with him as Leo says he used
Anatasius, Ep. 57. Benigniores circa ipsum, quam justiores esse volumus. A
Magistrate is in a great strait, that deals with such a Headstrong Piece.
Whether he be summoned to answer before Authority, or passed over in
Connivence, his Heart is as fat as Brawn, and has no feeling of the Public
Peace: Dicere si tents aliquid, tacitus ve recedas, Tantundem est, feriunt
pariter, Juven. Sat. 3. Yet perhaps when they are left to themselves, they will
be soonest weary of themselves. And every Dunghill smells ill, but worst when it
is stirred.

100. A few things more, subjunctive to the former, were thought meet to be
Castigated in Preachers at that time. It jarr'd in the Ears of the Discreet to
hear some, that exercised in the Church, battle out they knew not what about
Regal Authority, and limit which were the Enclosures of Subjection, and which
were not. To Be subject to the Higher Powers, is a constant and a general Rule;
and Reason can discern, that the Supreme Majesty, which unquestionably is in
our King, is inviolable. For omnis motus est super quietem. That all Penalties
against them that offend may move orderly, there must be a Power Quiescent, and
exempted from that Motion, not subject to Penalty by Man. He that maintains not
this Principle, leaps wilfully into Confusion, and will never get out of it.
But for Active Obedience to Laws and Edicts, it is local, and therefore various.
Every Nation know their own way best, to what they are tied, as we know ours.
He is a Busie-body that trasheth this in a Pulpit. A Minister is pur-blind of
that side; and cannot tell how far the Eagle may fly: For it comes not under
the Divine's Cap, but under the Judges Coif. A Scholar of Broad-Gates in
Oxford, Mr. Knight, that had newly taken Orders, broke a Sermon against this
Rock, in April 1022. out of Paraeus his Aphorisms on the 13th Chap. ad Romans
(how far forth he understood him I contend not,) he delivered that which
derogated much from the safety of Regal Majesty. Dr. Pierce the Vicechancellor,
a Learned Governor, found the Crime too great for the Cognizance of his
Consistory: But informed Bishop Laud of all Passages, and the Bishop the King.
Presently the Floods lift up their Voice: Ruin is thundered against Knight, who
had set such a Beacon on Fire in the Face of the University. To the Gate House
he was committed a close Prisoner, till a Charge were drawn up against him, to
Impeach him of Treasonable Doctrine. All other Passages I pretermit: And how
the Charge came not in, shall be told by and by. But this weak Predicant, that
run blindfold into Error and Destruction, lay in Limbo a great while macerated
with fear, and want, and hard Lodging. Dr. White, he who purchased Sion-College
for the Clergy of London, and conferred other Beneficence on the place, had
like to have kept Knight Company. He Preached a Sermon at St. Paul's Church
London, in his Residentiaries Course, though very Aged, and was better able to
discharge it Forty Years before. There were among those that heard him some
that wrested his Words to a bad meaning, as if he had pricked the Court in the
Basilick, or Liver-Vein. Though his Doctrine was harmless in good Construction,
yet a Tale was told to the King to the contrary, for he was very Rich. That was
the Carrion after which the Crows cawed. Though he was Orthodox, his Money was
Heterodox; and the Informers looked to part it among them. To avoid this Peril,
Dr. White fled to the Lord Keeper's Sweetness and Civility, who assured him he
would do him the best Office he could. He thought upon the Doctor, and forgot
not Mr. Knight, but rubbed his Forehead to find a Stratagem how to hunt two
Hares at one Course. The next time he came into the King's Presence he fell
upon it, how to amaze his Majesty with a Paradox. Some Instructions were
appointed to be drawn up by his Discretion and Style for the Performance of
useful and Orderly Preaching. Which being under his Hand to dispatch, he
besought his Majesty that one Proviso might pass among the rest, that none of
Holy Calling might Preach before the Age of thirty years complete, nor after
threescore. On my Soul, says the King, the Devil, or some Fit of Madness is in
the Motion; For I have many great Wits, and of clear Distillation, that have
Preached before me at Royston and New Market to my great Liking, that are under
Thirty. And my Prelates and Chaplains, that are far stricken in Age, are the
best Masters, in that Faculty that Europe affords. I agree to all this, says
the Lord Keeper, and since Your Majesty will allow both Young and Old to go up
into the Pulpit, it is but Justice that you show Indulgence to the Young Ones,
if they run into Errors before their Wits be settled (for every Apprentice is
allowed to mar some Work, before he be cunning in the Mystery of his Trade);
and Pity to the Old Ones, if some of them fall into Dotage, when their Brains
grow dry. Will Your Majesty conceive Displeasure, and not lay it down; if the
former set your Teeth on edge sometimes, before they are mellow-wise; and if
the Doctrine of the latter be touched with a Blemish, when they begin to be
rotten, and to drop from the Tree? This is not unfit for Consideration, says
the King, But what do you drive at? Sir, says he, First, to beg your Pardon for
mine own Boldness: Then to remember you that Knight is a Beardless Boy, from
whom Exactness of Judgment could not be expected. And that White is a decrepit
spent Man, who had not a Fee-Simple, but a Lease of Reason, and it is expired.
Both these, that have been foolish in their several Extremes of Years, I
prostrate at the Feet of your Princely Clemency. Which was granted, as soon as
the Paradox was unridled to pitch upon them. Another Gust, that blew from the
same Cape, I mean from the Pulpit, began to be so boisterous, that it came very
cross to his Majesty's Content. Our Unity among our selves was troubled in
Point of Doctrine; which was not wont. The Synod of Dort in the Netherlands
having lately determined some great Controversies, awakned the Opposition of
diverse Scholars in our Kingdom, who lay still before. Learned and Unlearned did
begin to conflict every Sunday about God's Eternal Election, Efficacy of Grace
in our Conversion, and Perseverance in it, with much Noise, and little Profit
to the People. The King, who loved not to have these Dogmatizers at Variance,
used all speed to take up the Quarrel early, that our Variances might not
reproach us to them that were without. For there was that in him, which Pope
Leo applauded in Marcian the Emperor, Ep. 70. In Christianissimo Principe
sacerdotalis affectus. He was a mixed Person indeed, a King in Civil Power, a
Bishop in Ecclesiastical Affections. After he had struggled with the
Contentious Parties a while, and interposed like Moses, Sirs, ye are Brethren,
Acts 7.26. and that this rebated not the keen Edge of Discord, he commanded
Silence to both Sides, or such a Moderation as was next to Silence. First,
Because of the Sublimity of the Points. The most of Men and Women are but
Children in Knowledge; and strong Meat belongs to them only that are of full
Age, Hebr. 5.14. St. Austin subscribed to that Prudence, Lib. 2. de porsev. c.
16. Unile est ut taceatur aliquod verum propter incapaces. Secondly, Because
the ticklish Doctrine of Predestination is frequently marred in the handling;
either by such as press the naked Decree of Election standing alone by it self,
and do not couple the Means unto it, without which, Salvation can never be
attained; or by those that hold out God's peremptory Decrees concerning those,
whom especially he has given to Christ, and do not as much, or more, enforce
the Truth of Evangelical Promises made to all, and to every Man, that whosoever
believes in the Son of God, shall not be confounded. Now let the Reader
consider all the Premises, and he shall find how the Instructions that follow,
depend upon them: Which in Form and Style were the Lord Keepers, in the Matter
his Majesty's Command, and were called Directions concerning Preachers

101. Forasmuch as the Abuses and Extravagancies of Preachers in the Pulpit
have been in all Ages repressed in this Realm by some Act of Council or State,
with the Advice and Resolution of Grave and Learned Prelates; insomuch as the
very Licencing of Preachers had his Beginning by an Order of the Star Chamber,
(...) July (...) Hen. 8. And that at this present. young Students, by Reading
of late Writers, and ungrounded Divines, do broach Doctrines many times
unprofitable, unfound, Seditious and Dangerous, to the Scandal of this Church,
and Disquieting of the State and present Government. His Majesty has been
humbly entreated to settle for the present, either by Proclamation. Act of
Council, or Command, the several Diocesans of the Kingdom, these Limitations,
and Cautions following, until by a general Convocation, or otherwise, some
more mature Injunctions might be prepared and enacted in that behalf. First,
That no Preacher (under the Degree and Calling of a Bishop, or Dean of a
Cathedral or Collegiate Church) do take occasion, by the Expounding of any Text
of Scripture whatsoever, to fall into any Discourse or common Place (otherwise
than by opening the Coherence and Division of his Text) which shall not be
comprehended and warranted in Essence, Substance, Effect, or natural Inference,
within some one of the Articles of Religion set forth 1562; or in some one of
the Homilies set forth by Authority in the Church of England, not only for a
Help to the Non-preaching, but withal, for a Pattern, and a Boundary (as it
were) for the Preaching Ministers. And for their further Instruction for the
Performance hereof, that they forthwith read over and peruse diligently the
said Book of Articles, and the two Books of Homilies. Secondly, That no Parson,
Vicar, Curate or Lecturer, shall Preach any Sermon or Collation upon Sundays
and Holy Days hereafter in the Afternoon, in any Cathedral or Parish Church
throughout the Kingdom, but upon some Part of the Catechism, or some Text taken
out of the Ten Commandments, or the Lords Prayer (Funeral Sermons only
excepted.) And that those Preachers be most encouraged and approved of, who
spend this Afternoon's Exercise in the Examining of the Children in their
Catechisms, and in the Expounding the several Heads and Substance of the same,
which is the most ancient, and laudable Custom of Teaching in the Church of
England. Thirdly, That no Preacher, of what Title soever, under the Degree of a
Bachelor of Divinity, at the least, do henceforth presume to Preach in any
Popular Auditory, the deep Points of Predestination, Election, Reprobation, or
of the Universality, Efficacy, Resistibility, or Irresistibility of Gods Grace,
but leave those Themes to be handled by Learned Men, and that moderately and
modestly, by way of Use and Application, rather than by way of positive
Docttine, as being Points fitter for the Schools and Universitles, than for
simple Auditories. Fourthly, That no Preacher, of what Title or Denomination
soever, under the Degree and Calling of a Bishop, shall presume from
henceforth, in any Auditory within this Kingdom, to Declare, Limit, or bound
out, by way of positive Doctrine, in any Sermon or Lecture, the Power,
Prerogative, Jurisdiction, Authority, or Duty of Sovereign Princes, or to
meddle with Matters of State, and the References between Princes and the
People, otherwise than as they are Instructed and Precedented in the Homily of
Obedience, and in the rest of the Homilies and Articles of Religion, set forth
(as before is mentioned) by Public Authority; but rather confine themselves
wholly to those two Heads of Faith and good Life, which are all the Subject of
the ancient Sermons and Homilies. Fifthly, That no Preacher, of what Title or
Denomination soever, shall causelessly, and without any Invitation from the
Text, fall into any bitter Invectives, and undecent raising Speeches or
Scoslings against the Persons of either Papists or Puritans; but modestly, and
gravely, when they are occasioned thereunto by the Texts of Scripture, free
both the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England from the Aspersions
of either Adversary; especially where the Auditory is suspected to be tainted
with the one or the other Infection. Lastly, That the Archbishops, and Bishops
of the Kingdom (whom his Majesty has just Cause to blame for former Remisness)
be more wary and choice in Licensing of Preachers, and revoke all Grants made
to any Chancellor, Official, or Commissary to pass Licenses in this kind. And
that all the Lecturers throughout the Kingdom (a new Body severed from the
ancient Clergy of England, as being neither Parsons, Vicars, nor Curates) be
Licenced henceforward in the Court of Faculties only, with a Fiat from the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, and a Confirmation under the Great Seal of England.
And that such as transgress any one of these Directions, be suspended by the
Lord Bishop of the Diocese (or in his Default, by the Lord Archbishop of the
Province:) Ab officio, and beneficio; for a Year and a Day, until his Majesty,
by the Advice of the next Convocation, shall prescribe some further Punishment.

102. These Orders were well brought fourth, but Success was the Stepmother.
Destinata salubriter omni ratione potentior fortuna discussit. Curtius lib. 5o.
Crossness and Sturdiness took best with the Vulgar, and he was counted but a
Cockney that stood in awe of his Rulers. No marvel if some were brought to no
State of Health, or toward any Temper of Convalesence with these Mandates.
Nothing is so hardly bridled as the Tongue, says St. James, especially of a
mis-guided Conscience; when their Bladder if full of Wind, the least Prick of a
Thorn will give it eruption. A Fool traveleth with a Word, as a Woman in Labor
of a Child. Ecclus. 19.11. Restraint is not a Medicine to cure epidemical
Diseases; for Sin becomes more sinful by the Occasion of the Law. Diliguntur
immodice sola quae non licent, says one of the Exteriors, Quintil. decl. 1a.
The less we should, the more we would. Curb Cholerical Humors, and you press
out Bitterness; as it is incident to those that are strait-lac'd, to have sower
Breaths. The Scottish Brethren were acquainted by common Intercourse with these
Directions, that had netled the aggrieved Pulpitarians: And they, says Reverend
Spotswood, P. 543. accuse them to be a Discharge of Preaching, at least a
Confining of Preachers to certain Points of Doctrine, which they call Limiting
of the Spirit of God. But the Wiser Sort judged them both necessary and
profitable, considering the Indiscretion of diverse of that sort, who to make
Ostentation of their Learning, or to gain the Applause of the Popular, would be
meddling with Controversies they scarce understood, and with Matters exceeding
the Capacity of the People. But what a Pudder does some make for not stinting
the Spirit, or Liberty of Prophesying, as others call it? They know not what
they ask. Such an indefinite License is like the Philosopher's Materia Prima, a
monstrous Passive Subject without Form: A Quid libet, which is next to nothing.
Indeed it is a large Charter to pluck down, and never to build up. Every Man
may sling a Stone where he will, and let it light as Luck carries it. But how
can the House of God be built, unless the Builders be appointed to set up the
Frame with Order and Agreement among themselves, according to the Pattern which
was shown in the Mount? Try it first in Humane Affairs, and see how it will
sadge with them, before we proceed to Heavenly. Dissolve the public Mint, let
every Man Coin what Money he will, and observe if ever we can make a
Marchandable Payment. Their Confusion is as like to this, as a Cherry to a
Cherry. Give their Spirit as much Scope as they ask: Let them Coin what
Doctrine they will with the Minting-Irons of their own Brain. They may pay
themselves with their own Money; but will it pass with others for Starling?
Will it go for current Divinity? To meet them home. Suppose this Privilege
were allowed; yet every good Spirit will limit it self to lawful Subjection.
Yet these would not: Then what Remedy? in earnest none was tried. It is the
height of Infelicity to be incurable. As Pliny in his Natural History, said of
Laws made against Luxury in Rome, which would not be kept down, therefore the
Senators left to make Laws against it. Frustra interdicta quae vetucrant
cernentes, nullas potius quam irritas esse Leges maluerunt.

103. Neither were uncharitable Suspicions like to mend. For the Unsatisfied,
that sung so far out of Tune, had another Ditty for their Prick-Song. The
King's Letters were directed to the Lord Keeper to be Copied out, and sent
forth to the Judges and Justices to afford some Relaxation of our Penal Laws to
some, but not all Popish Recusants. Which made sundry Ministers interpose very
harshly, and in the Prophet Malachy's Style, Chap. 2. Ver. 13. To cover the
Altar of God with Tears, and Weeping, and Crying; but the Lord regarded not the
Offering, neither received it with Good Will at their Hands. What could this
mean, as they conjectured, but the highest Umbrage to the Reformed Religion,
and ^at Toer^ion of Popery? Leave it at that cross way, that they knew not
whither this Project will turn. Nay, Should they not hope for the best Event of
the Meaning? A King is like to have an ill Audit, when every one that walks in
the Streets will reckon upon his Councels with their own casting Counters. It
is fit in sundry Occurrences, for a Prince to disguise his Actions, and not to
discover the way in which he treads. But many times the Wisdom of our Rulers
betrays them to more Hatred than their Follies, because Idiots presume that
their own Follies are Wisdom. Plaurus displays these impertinent Inquisitors
very well in Trinummo. Quod quisque habet in animo, aut habiturus est, sciunt.
Quod in aurem Rex Reginae dixerit, sciunt. Quae neque futura neque facta sunt,
illi sciunt. Yet these Fault-sinders were not jear'd out of their Melancholy,
though they deserved no better, but were gravely admonished by his Majesty Viva
voce, in these Words. I understand that I am blamed for not executing the Laws
made against the Papists: But ye should know, that a King and his Laws are not
unfuly compared to a Rider and his Horse: The Spur is sometime to be used, but
not always. The Bridle is sometime to be held in, at other times to be let
loose, as the Rider finds Cause. Just so a King is not at all times to put in
Execution the Rigor of his Laws; but he must for a time, and upon just Grounds,
dispense with the same: As I protest to have done in the present Case, and to
have connived only for a time, upon just Cause, howbeit not known to (...). If
a Man, for the Favor showed to a Priest or Papist, will judge me to be
inclining that way, he wrongs me exceedingly. My Words, and Writings, and
Actions have sufficiently (...) what my Resolution is in all Matters of
Religion. That Cause not known to (...) in part unfolded by that grave Father,
Spotswood, where I quoted him (...). Says he, The Better and Wiser Sort (of his
Countrymen) who considered (...) Estate of things, gave a far other Judgment
thereof (than the Discontented:) (...) then our King was treating with the
French King for Peace to the Protestants of France; and with the King of Spain,
for withdrawing his Forces from the Palatinate. At which time it was no way
fitting that he should be Executing the Riger of his Laws against Papists at
Home, while he did labor for Peace to them of the Religion Abroad. The most
likely way to obtain what he did seek of those Princes, being a Moderation of
the Severity of Laws against Priests and Papists, at least for a time. Thus far
that wise man; but the Reason was stronger than he enforced it. For in sundry
Places beyond our Seas, the Churches of the most disconsolate Reformed were
never so near, if not to an Extirpation, yet to an utter Dispersion. Those in
Bohemia and Moravia were hunted from Hole to Hole by the Emperor's Men of War.
The King of Spain was Victorious over the persecuted Servants of Christ in the
Val-Teline. The King of France prepared to lay Siege to Rochel, and to all his
fenced Cities that were in the Hands of the Protestants. The Duke of Savoy was
suspected that he would watch this time to surround Geneva with an Army, while
Cuspis Martis shined so sinistrously upon their Brethren every where. Now what
Remedy was more ready to pacify these destroying Angels, for their Sakes, with
whom we walked in the House of God as Friends, then to begin in Clemency, to
those among us, that carry their Mark? Can a Kingdom be governed without such
Correspondencies? Salmasius in his Notes upon Simplicius, introduces
Aristides, Surnamed the Just, that he was compelled to unpeg his Rigor, and to
make it go to a softer Tune in rugged Times, (...), as he translates it, Quod
rationibus patrae se accommodaret, quae multa injustitia opus habert. Necessity
is so great a Part of Reason, that that is Justice, which looks like Injustice,
because of Necessity. Our good People, forsooth, would have the Protestants
suffer no Ill Abroad, under the Dominions of the Pontificians, and yet mitigate
no Severity to Pontisicians under the Dominion of Protestants. Hand stulte
sapis, siquidem id est sapere, velle id quod non potest contingore, says the
Comaedian. This is wisely laid, if a thing may be wisely laid, which can never
be effected. I am not able to express this so well as the Lord Keeper has done
in his Sermon preached at King James's Funeral, P. 49. This Blessed King, in
all the time I served him, did never, out of deep and just reason of State, and
the bitter Necessity of Christendom, in these latter Times, give way to any the
least Connivance in the World toward the Person of a Papist (for to his
Doctrine he never did, he never would do, nor was there any Consideration under
Heaven would have forced him thereunto;) but he strictly guided himself in the
same by some notable Precedent of Queen Elizabeth (the Load-Star of all his
greatest Actions) and that in the very Point; and bathed his Favors in Showers
of Tears (I speak it in the Presence of Almighty God) least those Intendments
of his for the apparent Good of the State, might scandalize, for all that, in
an oblique Line his weak, but well-meaning Subjects in their Religion and
Doctrine. This was a Testimony of the Integrity of these Proceedings almost
three years after: But for present, and full Satisfaction, here follows a
long Letter, anticipated in the Cabal, but here inserted in its proper Place,
which was written to the Lord Viscount Anan by the same Hand, Sept. 17. 1622;
declaring the Nature and Reason of the Clemency, at that time, extended to the
Lay-Recusants of England.

Right Honorable,
104. I Owe more Service to that true Love and former Acquaintance, which your
Lordship has been pleased to afford me, now these full ten years, then to be
sparing or reserved in satisfying your Lordship about any doubt whatsoever: The
Resolution whereof shall lie in my Power. Concerning that Offense, taken by
many people, both this side the Borders, and in Scotland, from that Clemency,
which his Majesty was pleased to extend to the Imprisoned Lay-Recusants of this
Kingdom. And my Letter Written to the Justices for the Reigling of the same
(which your Lordship did intimate unto me yesterday, at Mr. Henry Gibb his
House, out of some News received from a Peer of Scotland) This is the plainest
return I can make unto your Lordship. In the general, as the Sun in the
Firmament appears unto us no bigger then a Platter, and the Stars but as so
many Nails in the Pomel of a Saddle, because of that Esloinment and
Disproportion between our Eyes and the Object: So there is such an
un-measurable distance betwixt the deep Resolution of a Prince, and the shallow
Apprehension of Common and Ordinary people; that as they will be ever Judging
and Censuring, so they must be Obnoxious to Error and Mistaking. Particularly,
for as much as concerns my self, I must leave my former Life, my Profession, my
continual Preaching, my Writing (which is extant in the Hands of many) my
private Endeavors about some great Persons, and the whole bent of my Actions
(which in the place I live in cannot be concealed) to Testify unto the World,
what favor I am like to importune for the Papists in point of Religion. For
the King my Master, I will tell you a Story out of Velleius Paterculus. A
Surveyor bragging to M. Livius Drusus, that he would so contrive his House, Ut
libera a conspectu, immunis ab omnibus Arbitris esset; That it should stand
Removed out of sight, and be past all danger of Peeping, or Eaves-dropping, was
answered again by Drusus, Tu vero, si quid in te artis est, ita compone domum
meam, ut quicquid agam ab omnibus conspici possit. Nay my good Friend, if you
have any devices in your head, contrive my House after such a manner, that all
the World may see what I do therein. So if I should endeavor to flourish up
some Artificial Vault to hide, and conceal the intentions of his Majesty, I
know I should receive the same Thanks that the Surveyor did from M. Drusus. I
was not called to Counsel by his Royal Majesty, when the Resolution of this
Clemency to the Lay-Recusants was first concluded: But if I had been asked my
Opinion, I should have advised it without the least Hesitation. His Majesty was
so Popishly addicted at this time, that (to the incredible exhaustments of his
Treasury) he was a most Zealous Interceder for some Ease and Refreshment to all
the Protestants in Europe (his own Dominions, and Denmark only excepted) Those
of Swethland, having lately provoked the Pole, had no other hope of Peace:
Those of France of the Exercise of their Religion: Those of the Palatinate and
adjoining Countries of the least connivency to say their Prayers, then by the
earnest Mediation of our Gracious Master. And advised by the late Assembly of
Parliament to insist a while longer in this milky way of Intercession and
Treaty, what a preposterous Argument would this have been to desire these
mighty Princes (Armed and Victorious) to grant some Liberty and Clemency to the
Protestants, because himself did now Imprison, and Execute the Rigor of his
Laws against the Roman Catholics. I must deal plainly with your Lordship, our
Viperious Countrymen the English Jesuits in France, to frustrate those pious
endeavors of his Majesty, had many Months before this Favor granted, retorted
that Argument upon us, by Writing a most malicious Book (which I have seen, and
read over) to the French King: Inciting him, and the three Estates, to put all
those Statutes in Execution against the Protestants in those parts, which are
here Enacted, and (as they falsely informed) severely Executed upon the Papists.
I would therefore see the most subtle State-monger in the World, chalk out away
for (...) Majesty, to mediate for Grace and Favor for the Protestants, by
Executing (at this (...)) the Severity of his Laws upon the Papists. And that
this Favor should (...) Toleration is a most dull, and yet a most devilish,
misconstruction. A Toleration looks forward to the time to come: This favor
backward to the Offenses past. If any Papist now set at Liberty shall offend
the Laws again, the Justices may, Nay, must recomm^ him, and leave Favor and
Mercy to the King, to whom they properly belong. Nay, let those two Writs
directed to the Judges, be as diligently perused by these rash Censurers, as
they were by those Grave and Learned Men, to whom his Majesty referred the
Penning of the same; and they shall find that these Papists are not otherwise
out of Prison, then with their Shackles about their Heels, sufficient sureties,
and good recognizances to present themselves again at the next Assizes. As
therefore that Lacedaemonian opposed the Oracle of Apollo, by asking his
Opinion of the Bird which he grasped in his hand, whether it were alive or
dead: So it is a matter yet controverted and undecided, whether these Papists
(closed up and grasped in the Bands of the Law) be still in Prison, or at
Liberty. Their own demeanor, and the success of his Majesty's Negotiations are
the Oracles that must decide the same. If the Lay-Papists do wax insolent with
this Mercy, insulting upon the Protestants, and Translating this favor from
the Person to the cause, I am verily of Opinion, that his Majesty will remand
them to their former State and Condition, and renew his Writ no more. But if
they shall use these Graces modestly, by admitting conference with Learned
Preachers, demeaning of themselves Neighbourly and Peaceably, praying for his
Majesty, and the prosperous success of his Pious Endeavors, and Relieving him
bountifully (which they are as well able to do as any other of his Subjects) if
he shall be forced and constrained to take his Sword in Hand: Then it cannot be
denied, but our Master is a Prince, that has, as one said, plus humanitatis
poene quam hominis: And will at that time leave to be merciful, when he leaves
to be himself. In the the mean while this Argument fetched from the Devils
Topics, which concludes a concreto ad abstractum, from a favor done to the
English Papists, that the King favors the Popish Religion, is such a
Composition of Folly and Malice, as is little deserved by that Gracious Prince,
who by Word, Writing, Exercise of Religion, Acts of Parliament, late Directions
for Catechizing and Preaching, and all Professions and Endeavors in the World
has demonstrated himself so Resolved a Protestant. God by his Holy Spirit open
the Eyes of the People, that these Airy Representations of ungrounded Fancies
set aside, they may clearly discern and see, how by the Goodness of God, and
the Wisdom of their King, this Island, of all the Countries in Europe, is the
sole Nest of Peace and True Religion. And the Inhabitants thereof, unhappy only
in this one thing, that they never look up up to Heaven to give God Thanks for
so great an Happiness. Lastly for mine own Letter to the Judges (which did only
declare, not operate the Favor) it was either mispenned, or much
mis-construed. It recited four kinds of Recusants only capable of his Majesty's
Clemency: Not so much to include these, as to exclude many other Crimes,
bearing among the Papists the Name of Recusanties, as using the Function of a
Romish Priest, seducing the King's Liege people from the Religion established,
Scandalizing and Aspersing our King, Church, State, or present Government. All
which Offenses (being outward practices, and no secret Motions of the
Conscience) are adjudged by the Laws of England to be merely Civil and
Political, and excluded by my Letter from the benefit of those Writs, which the
bearer was employed to deliver unto my Lords the Judges. And thus I have given
your Lordship a plain Account of the Carriage of this business; and that the
more suddenly, that your Lordship might perceive it is no Aurea Fabula, or
prepared Fable, but a bare Narration, which I have sent unto your Lordship: I
beseech your Lordship to let his Majesty know that the Letters to the Justices
of the Peace, concerning those four Heads, recommended by his Majesty, shall be
sent away as fast as they can be exscribed. I will not trouble your Lordship
more at this time, etc.

Your Lordships I. L. C. S.


105. The Letter as it exceeds in length, so it excells in Judgment. Yet
thrusting into the midst of the Throng to part the Fray, he got a knock
himself. For because he was principally employed by his Office to distribute
the King's Favors to some of the adverse Sect, he was Traduced for a
Well-willer to the Church of Rome, nay so far by a ranting fellow about the
Town, that he was near to receive a chief promotion from that Court, no less
than a Cardinals Hat. At the first Bruit of this Rumor the Scandal was told
him, and one Sadler the Author discovered, which he despised to prosecute, and
passed it by with this moderation, 'That the Reporters saw the Oar under Water,
and thought it was 'Crooked; but he that had it in his hand knew that it was
whole and straight. An admirable Similitude to reconcile contraries to a good
meaning; for the Eye were not right if the Oar under Water did not seem broken
to it: And the Judgment were not right, if it had not a contrary Opinion. So
the people that are upon the Shore judge one way; for they look upon things
beneath the Water: But Statesmen judge another, who work at the Oar, or guide
the Bark. The Error of the former is tolerable; the Sense of the other is
Magisterial, and unquestionable. So great were this Lord's disaffections to
that corrupt and unfound Church, that he watched their Ministers more narrowly
then any Counselor, when they shot beyond the Mark of his Majesty's late
indulgences. It was ever the unlucky diligence of those, that were Proctors to
agitate the Recusants Cause, to importune his Majesty for those things, which
they did not hope to obtain, but the very offer of them with their Arts and
Graceless Carriage, would make the Council Table odious, contribute much to
embitter the Subjects, and to raise divisions. So they dealt now. For they put
a Paper into my Lord of Buckingham's hands to assist them for the Erection of
Titulary Popish Praelates in this Kingdom. A most Natural superfaetation; with
the motion whereof the Lord Marquess being amuzed, he sent to the Lord Keeper
for advice, who damned the Project with these Reasons ensuing, First it will
set all the Kingdom on Fire, and make his Majesty unable to continue those
Favors and Connivencies to peaceable Recusants, which he now most Graciously
affords them. Secondly, It takes away from his Majesty an Hereditary Branch of
the Crown, which the Kings of this Land have ever enjoyed, even before the
Conquest, and has never, since the days of King John, been so much as
Challenged by any Pope, to Wit, the Investitures of Bishops. Thirdly, It is a
far greater mischief in a State (I mean in regard of the Temporal, but not of
the Spiritual good thereof) then an absolute Toleration. For a Toleration, as
we see in France, does so divide and distinguish Towns and Parishes, that no
place makes above one payment to their Churchmen. But this invisible
Consistory shall be confusedly diffused over all the Kingdom, that many of the
Subjects shall to the intolerable exhausting of the Wealth of the Realm, pay
double Tithes, double, Offerings, and double Fees, in regard of their double
Consistory. And if Ireland be so poor, as it is suggested, I hold, under
Correction, that this invisible Consistory is the principal cause of the
exhausting thereof. Fourthly, If the Princes Match should go on, this New
Erected Consistory will put the the ensuing Parliament into such a Jealousy
and Suspicion, that it is to be feared that they will show themselves very
untractable upon all propositions. Fifthly, For the Pope to place a Bishop in
this Kingdom is against the Fundamental Law of the Land, and the King will be
held unjust and injurious to his Successors, if to his utmost power he should
not resist and punish. This Draught was brought to the King, who was glad such
Pills were prepared to purge away the redundancy of the Catholic Encroachments.
And his Majesty gave Order to him, who had confected them so well, to
Administer them with his best skill to the Spanish Ambassador. That they might
work gently with him, the Lord Keeper at his Visit made show, that he was
startled at a heady motion that came from Savoy, as he thought, taking no
notice of any Spanish Agent that had his Finger in it: And besought his
Excellency to send for the Savoyan, and to wish him to throw aside his Advice
for Titulary Bishops, least it should hinder the King of Spain's desire, in
accomodating the Catholics with those Courtesies, which had been granted; which
took so well with the Spanish Ambassador, his own indiscretion being not Taxt,
but the Folly laid at another Door, that the motion sunk in the Mud, and was
seen no more. I will add but one thing, how distastful it was to him, that the
Papists should have so much as the shadow of a governing Church in this Realm
taken out of a Letter ( Cabal. page 81.) Written to my Lord of Buckingham,
being then at Madrid, dated Aug. 30. 1623. Doctor Bishop, the New Bishop of
Chalcedon, is come to London privately, and I am much troubled at it, not
knowing what to Advise his Majesty, as things stand at this present. If you
were Shipped with the Infanta, the only Counsel were to let the Judges proceed
with him presently; Hang him out of the way, and the King to blame my Lord of
Caterbury, or my self for it. Surely this does not favor of addiction to the
Purple-Hat, or the Purple-Harlot. Ovid. Nunquid ei hoe fallax Creta negare
potes? Nay, it was a Pang, rather then a Passion, to the welfare of this
Church, which forced sentence of Blood out of his sweet and mi'ky Nature.

106. Yet well fare those good Fellows that did not defame him for a Papist:
Much otherwise they charged him with a loud Slander, and a long Breach for it
continued in his days of Sorrow) that he was a Puritan; of what Color Si^s?
Blew, or Black; Both these might he false (so they were) both could not be
True. David says of God's Servants, whom he Tried as Silver is Tried in the
Fire, that they went through Fire, and through Water, Mise^ies of Repugnant
Natures. So Sometimes they pass through Defamations inconsistent, and as
contrary one to another as Fire and Water. The Old Non conformists were called
by the Nick Name of Puritans in Queen Elizabeth's days. I know not who imposed
it first, whether Parsons the Jesuit, or some such Franion: I know it grew not
up like Wild Oats without Sowing. But some Supercilious Divines, a few years
before the End of K. James his Reign, began to Survey the Narrow way of the
Church of England with no Eyes but their own, and measuring a Right Protestant
with their straight line, discriminated, as they thought fit, sound from
unsound, so that scarce ten among a Thousand, but were Noted to carry some
Disguise of a Puritan. The very Prelates were not free from it, but, Tantum non
ni ^piscopatu Puritani became an Obloquy. At the Session which these
Arislarchusses held near to the Court in the Strand, the Lord Keeper, the most
Circumspect of any Man alive to provide for Uniformity, and to countenance it,
was scratched with their Obeliske, that he favored Puritans, and that sund^y
of them had Protection through his Connivency or Clemency. All the Quarrel in
good Sooth was that their Eye was Evil, because his was Good. Such whom the
Aemulous repined at, as he cast it out himself, were of two Ranks. Some were of
a very strict Life, and a great deal more laborious in their Cure, then their
Obtrectators. Far be it from him to love these the worse, because they were
Stigmatized, to the Offense of Religious and Just-men, with a by word of
Contumely. Pacatus the Orator inveighed against it for a Rank impiety in his
Pan^g. Quod Clarevati Matrorae objicicbatur, atque (...) exprobrabatur mulieri
vi luae nimia Religio, and diligentius culta Divinitas. I will lay it open in
one particular. The Lord Bishop of Norwich Dr. Harsnet, a learned Prelate, and
a Wise Governor (bate him perhaps a little roughness) began to proceed in his
Consistory, against Mr. Samuel Ward a Famous Preacher in Ipswich; who Appealed
from the Bishop to the King. And the King committed the Articles exhibited
against him to be Examined by the Lord Keeper, and by him to be Reported to his
Majesty. The Lord Keeper found Mr. Ward to be not altogether blameless, but a
Man to be won easily with fair dealing. So he persuaded Bishop Harsnet to take
his Submission, and to continue him in his Lecture at Ipswich. The Truth is, he
found so much Candor in Mr. Ward, so much readiness to serve the Church of
England in its present Establishment, and made it so clearly appear that he had
gained diverse Beneficed Men to conform (who had stumbled at that Straw) that
the Lord Keeper could do no less then compound the Troubles of so Learned and
Industrious a Divine. And I aver it upon the Faith of a good Witness, that
after this, Bishop Harsnet acknowledged, that he was as useful a man to assist
him in his Government, as was in all his Diocese. Another Rank for whose sake
the Lord Keeper suffered, were scarce an handful, not above three or four in
all the wide Bishopric of Lincoln, who did not oppose, but by ill Education
seldom used the appointed Ceremonies. Of whom when he was certified by his
Commissaries and Officials, he sent for them, and conferred with them with much
Meekness; sometime remitted them to argue with his Chaplain. If all this
stirred them not, he commended them to his Old Collegiate Dr. Sibbs, or Dr.
Gouch: Who knew the scruples of these men's Hearts, and how to bring them about,
the best of any about the City of London. If all these labored in vain, he
protracted the hearing of their Causes de die in diem, that time might mollisie
their refractory Apprehensions But had it not been better said some (...); to
stop the mouth of the unruly, Tit. 1.11. I Answer, Their mouth was slept in St.
Paul's meaning. Estius has begun the distinction, and it is easily made up,
Alind est silontium indicere, quod est imperamis: Alind ad metas saciturnitatis
reduccre, quod est docte redarguentis. They were not imperiously commanded to
be silent, but enough was spoken wifely to their Face, to put their Folly to
silence. Men that are found in their Morals, and in Minutes imperfect in their
Intellectuals, are best reclaimed when they are mignarized, and strok'd gently.
Seldom any thing but severity will make them Anti-practise: For then they grow
desperate Facundus Dominus quosdam a^fugam cogit, quosdam ad mortem, says
Seneca. And they are like to convert more with their sufferings, then with
their Doctrine. He that is openly punished, whatsoever he has done, he shall
find Condolement. But I will spend no more Words to wipe away this stur of
Puritanism, it needs not a laborious Apology; (...), as the Proverb is in
Athenaeus; Let Lubbars Talk of it over a Winter Fire, when they Droll out Tales.

107. Yet I want not matter how to wash out this spot of Jealousy by great
Actions: In this year 1622, he began to expend a great Sum upon St. John's
College, the Nurse of his hopeful breeding. A right stamped Puritan is not a
Founder, but a Demolisher of good Works. He laid the platform of his
Beneficence on this Wife. Four Scholars he Added to the 40 Alumni in the
College of Westminster. For their Advancement he provided and endowed four
Scholarships in St. John's College, upon their Maturity and Vacancy of those
places to be Translated to them. Two Fellowships he Newly Erected in that
House, into which only out of those four the best were to be chosen. Withal he
purchased the Patronage of four Rich Benefices to receive those Scholars and
Fellows of his Foundation upon the Death, or other Cessation of the Incumbents.
But the Chief Minerval which he bestowed upon that Society was the Structure of
a most goodly Library, the best in that kind in all Cambridge. And as he had
picked up the best Authors in all Learning, and in all plenty, for his own use,
so he bequeathed them all to this fair Repository. This was Episcopal indeed,
to issue out his Wealth, as the Lord brought it in, in such ways. This is the
Purse that Mr. H. L. says he Ran away withal, after he had departed with the
Great Seal; wherein we see how far the Portion of overflowing wast, which
(...) from Great Ones, and is spilt, if it were saved, and well bestowed, would
(...) the Land with all sort of Monumental Bravery. What a good Steward he was
for his Master Christ Jesus's Household and how provident to put none into part
of the Care, but such as were Obedient to Civil and Sacred Rulers, appears most
in his happy choice of those, upon whom he conferred the livings that fell into
his Patronage. They were ever picked out of the best Learned, the best
Qualified, the most Cordially affected to our most Godly Liturgy, and to the
Government of the Prelates. Within these Apostatizing times, wherein so many
have departed from them without Cause, I cannot remember any of his preferring,
but kept their Traces, and to their best Power, never run out of the Ring. I
have a short Story to tell, and then I leave this Subject. Among the poor
distressed Protestants in Bohemia, many of them were Braziers by their
Occupation These sent sent some messengers from them with a Petition to his
Majesty, that they might Transplant a Colony into England, ( London especially)
Men, Wives, Children, and their full Families. Signifying that they would bring
with them to the Value of two hundred Thousand Pounds in Coin, and Materials of
their Trade. That their Substance and Labor should be subject to all Customs
and Taxes for the King's profit. They desired to live in a Body of their own
Nation, and to serve Christ Jesus in that Church Discipline which they brought
with them from Bohemia. Though they had inclined his Majesty to admit them,
being a great Swarm of People, and bringing Wax and Honey along; yet the Lord
Keeper diverted it, from the Example of the Dutch and French that were settled
among us. These brought commodious Manufacture into the Realm; but they brought
a Discipline with it, according to the Allowance of their Patent, which was a
Suffocation to the Temperate Crisis of our own Church Government. Which Peril
of Distemper would be increased by the Access of the Bohemick Congregation. A
great Forecast to keep our Hierarchy found from the Contagion of Foreigners;
and he was more Religious to keep the Church of England in its Sabbath, and
Holy Rest, than to help out the Neighbors Ox, that was fallen into the Pit.
Yet I have somewhat to allege in the Behalf of the Bohemians. I have in my
little Library, a Book printed 1633 (eleven years after the Lord Keeper
appeared against their Petition) called Ratio Disciplinae, ordinisque
Ecclesiastici in unitate sratrum Bohemorum. Their Platform in that Piece comes
so near to the old Protestant Church of England, above all the Reformed, that
for my part, I wish we had had their Company. This is sufficient, I am sure,
against those Opposite, and Self-overthrowing Aspersions. Let them do their
worst, there is one Metal that will never be the worse for them, of whose
Property, this Lord partak'd. It is Gold, of which Pliny writes, Lib. 33. N. H.
c. 3. that nothing makes it more precious, Quam contra salis and aceti, succos
domitores rerum, constantia. The Spirits of Salt and Vinegar (the most biting
and sowrest Reproaches) cannot hurt it with their Tartness. That which corrodes
all other Bodies, cannot dissolve the Constancy of Gold.

108. How faithfully, and with what Courage, like himself, he adventured to
maintain Orthodox Religion against old Corruptions, and new Fanglements, will
be a Labor to unfold hereafter. One thing remains that is purely of Episcopal
Discharge, which I will salute, and so go by it, before I look again upon his
Forensive, or Political Transactions. When he was Dean of Westminster he had a
Voice in the High Commission Court, and so forth when he was in higher Degrees.
For as Nazianzen commends Athanasius, page 24. Encom. he was (...), skiiful in
all the various Arts of Government. He appeared but once at Lambeth, when that
Court sat, while he was Dean. A sign that he had no Maw to it. For he would
say, that the Institution of the Court was good without all Exception; That is,
to Empower the Kings of England and their Successors by Statute to issue out
that Authority under the Great Seal, which was annexed to the Imperial Crown of
this Realm, to assign some, as often, and to so long time as the King should
think fit, to be Judges for the Reformation of great Abuses and Enormities. But
that this Power should be committed from the Kings and Queens of this Realm to
any Person or Persons, being Natural born Subjects to their Majesty's, to
overlook all Ecclesiastical Causes, correct, punish, deprive, whether one or
more, whether Lay or Clergy, whether of the vilest as well as the noblest, nay
whether Papist as well as Protestant, as no harm was to be feared from good
Princes, albeit they have this Liberty by the Tenure of the Act 1 Eliz. Cap. 1.
So if God should give us a King in his Anger, who would oppress us, till our
cry went up like the Smoke out of a Furnace, this Statute would enable them to
enact Wickedness by a Law. This was a Flaw (to his seeming) in the Corpse of the
Statute, which gave Vigor to the High Commission. But in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, and her two blessed Successors, God be praised, we were never the
worse for it. Better Commissioners than were appointed in their Days, need not
be wished. What ailed this wise Churchman then to be so reserved, and to give
so little Attendance in that Court? He was not satisfied in two things: Neither
in the Multiplicity of Causes, that were plucked into it, nor in the Severity
of Censures. It is incident to Supreme Courts, chiefly when Appeals fly unto
them; to be sick of this Timpany, to swell with Causes. They defraud the lower
Audiences of their Work and Profit, which comes home to them with Hatred. What
a Clamor does Spalat. make, Lib. 5. Eccl. Reip. c. 2. ar. 28. That the
Judicatories at Rome lurch'd all the Bishops under that Supremacy, of all
Complaints that were promoted to their Consistories. Eo lites omnes, co
dispensationes trahuntur. Fluviorum omnium tractus ad suam derivat molam, nobis
quod sugamus, nihil relinquitur. The Affairs of all Ecclesiastical Tribunes
were little enough to drive that Mill: So the Consistories of all the
Suffragans in the Province of Canterbury became in a manner Despicable, because
the Matters belonging to every Diocese were followed before the High
Commission. That it might be said to the neglected Praelates at Home, Are ye
unworthy to Judge the smallest Matters, 1 Cor. c. 2. It seems ill Manners
increased apace: For I heard it from one that lived by the Practice of that
High Court, An. 1635: That whereas in the last Year of Archbishop Whitgift,
eight Causes were left to be discussed in Easter-Term, there were no less than
a Thousand depending at that time. This was one of his Exceptions, That the
High Court drew too much into its Cognizance. The other Reason, which made him
stand a loof from it, was, That it punished too much. Archbishop Abbot was
rigorously Just, which made him show less Pity to Delinquents. Sentences of
great Correction, or rather of Destruction, have their Epoch from his
Predominancy in that Court. (And after him it mended like sour Ale in Summer.)
It was not so in his Predecessor Bancroft's Days, who would Chide stoutly, but
Censure mildly. He considered that he sat there rather as a Father, than a
Judge. Et pro peccato magno paululum supplicii satis est patris. He knew that a
Pastoral Staff was made to reduce a wandering Sheep, not to knock it down. He
looked upon St. Peter, in whom the Power of the Keys was given to the Unity of
all the Officers of the Church, who incurred a great Offense in the Hall of the
High Priest (let the Place be somewhat considered, but his Action most.) Ut
mitior esset delinquentibus grandis delinquens, Says St. Austin. It being the
most indubitate Course of that Commission, to deprive a Minister of his
Spiritual Endowments; that is, of all he had, if Drunkenness, or Incontinency
were proved against him. I have heard the Lord Keeper (who was no Advocate for
Sin, but for Grace and Compassion to Offenders) dis-relish that way, for this
Reason. That a Rector, or Vicar, had not only an Office in the Church, but a
Freehold for Life by the Common Law, in his Benefice. If a Gentleman, or
Citizen had been Convicted upon an Article of Scandal in his Life, was it ever
heard that he did Confiscate a Manor, or a Tenement? Nay, What Officer in the
Rolls, in the Pipe, in the Custom-house, was ever displaced for the like? Under
St Cyprian's Discipline, and the Rigor of the Eliberitan Canons, the Lay were
obnoxious to Censures as much as the Clergy. But above all (said he) there is
nothing of Brotherhood, nor of Humanity in this, when we have cast a Presbyter
cut of Doors, and left him no Shelter to cover his Head; that we make no
Provision for him out of his own for Term of Life, to keep him from the
Extremities of Starving or Begging, those Deformed Miseries.

109. These Reasons prevailing with him, to be no ordinary Frequenter of that
Court; yet an Occasion was offered, which required his Presence, Mart. 30.
1622, which will draw on a Story large and memorable. M. Amonius de Deminis,
Arch Bishop of Spalato, made an Escape out of Dalmatia, an English Gentleman
being his Conductor, he posted through Germany, and came safe into England in
the end of the Year 1616. The King gave him Princely Welcome: Many of the
Religious Peers, and Chief Bishops, furnished him with Gold, that he lacked for
nothing. He seemed then, for all this Plenty brought in, to be covetous of none
of these things; but was heard to say, That the Provision of an ordinary
Minister of our Church would suffice him. For in the end of June, as he was
brought on his Way to the Commencement at Cambridge, a Worthy and a Bountiful
Divine, Dr. John Mountfort received him for a Night in his Parsonage-House of
Ansty. Where Spalat. noting that Dr. Mountfort had all things about him orderly
and handsome, like a genteel Scholar; he protested to all that were in
presence, that if he could obtain such a House to dwell in, and no more than
the Profits of such a Parish to maintain him, he would go no further in the
Desire of the Things of this Life. But King James, no Niggard in Liberality,
persuaded him to take more than he asked; as Naaman urged Gehazi, who was as
willing to receive, as Naaman to give, 2 King. 5.23. He was installed Dean of
Windsor, and admitted Master of the Savoy-Hospital in the Strand. These
together were worth to him 800 l. per Annum. They brought in no less, and he
would not loose a Penny of his Due; but studied to exact more, than ever by
Custom had been received by any of those Dignitaries. Of which Sharking, his
Majesty once admonished him: Yet his Veins were not full, but he got himself
presented by the Church of Windsor, to a good Benefice, says Mr. Ri. Montagu,
West Ilsly in Barkshire, where he made a shift to read the Articles of 1562 in
English, pro more Clericali, and subscribed to them. But Jesurum waxed fat, and
kicked, Deuteronomy. 28.15. For toward the end of January 1621, he came to Theobalds
to be brought to the King, and with as bold a Forehead, as ever any Face was
dressed in, he became an humble Suppliant to his Majesty, that he might have his
Leave to return for Italy. The Courtiers that stood by looked up to Heaven in
wonder: For no Man dreamt of this Inconstancy, and certainly no Man less than
the King. He that is not ready to do Evil, is ever flow to suspect Evil of
others. But his Majesty carried it with high Wisdom: For, as if this Recoiler
had told him no News, he spoke but this little, and dismissed him. If you have a
mind to be gone, I will not stay you; and at my first Leisure, I will appoint
those that shall confer with you about your Dismission. A brave Contempt, and
well bestowed upon a Proud Man, that did not expect to be valued at a Trisle,
which was not worth the keeping. Many have written before me the reason of this
Archbishop's retrograde Motion, and likewise what it was that bore him up so
stiffly, to be very confident, or to seem to be, to present himself before the
Roman Conclave. I shall not lose my Thanks, I hope, If I add my Observations,
with a little more than has already been discovered. First, About the middle
of Autumn, Ann. 1621, Ant. de Dominis besought the King to confer the
Archbishopric of York upon him. A hasty Suitor, for the Place was not void.
The Error came about thus: The Archbishop then in being (called familiarly
Toby Matthew) was ever pleasant, and full of becoming Merriment; and knowing
that his Death had been long expected, was wont every year, once, or oftener, to
cause Rumors to be raised that he was deceased. And when he had put this
Dodgery strongly upon those at London, that gaped for the Vacancy to succeed
him, it was a Feast of Laughter to him, to hear what Running and Riding there
was to fill up his Room, who jear'd them behind the Lattuce. No wonder if
Spalat. a Stranger, were caught in this Trap; but he had worse Luck than to be
derided for his Forwardness, for the King bade him sit quiet, and seek no
further. It was not now as in Lanfranke and Anselm's Days, to make a Stranger a
Metropolitan of England. The Man, impatient that his Request had so large a
Denial, offers his Departure, as it is said before, not distrusting, but that
the King would bid for such Ware, as much as the Man thought himself to be
worth. But being over-shot, and laid aside with Scorn, he would have eat his
Words, and east out Speeches in oblique before some of the Council, that
whatsoever he had uttered, he was disposed more to please the King, than to
please himself. But he found no Place for Repentance. And of all this the Lord
Keeper is my Author.

110. But what can be so quick sighted as the Devil? that spies the first Spark
of attentation, and blows it into a Flame. The vigilant Men at Rome knew better
than we in England, that the Jade had a mind to slip his Halter, and to run
away, because we did not fill his Rack, and plump him up with Provender.
Therefore in the beginning of January, (Hui! tam cito?) a Packet came to his
Hands from Cardinal Mellino, whose Contents were, That Paul the Fifth was dead,
from whose Anger he had made haste to be gone, because he had provoked him in
defending the Venetian Quarrel against him; but Gregory the Fifteenth, of the
Ludovisian Family, was then in the Papal Throne, as propense unto him of old as
any Friend, and as true to him as his own Brother. That he had sent him an
Apostolical Brief to Brussels ( for such Missives were not welcomed in England)
to give him Assurance of good Speed at Rome, with a plenary Indulgence for all
the Provocations of his Writings. And Mellino added (for that must not be left
out) That a great Dignity lay in Lavender for him, Eaque valde opima. So Dr.
Crakanthorp cites it from Spalato 's own Mouth, Pretium octuplicis stipendii,
eight times more in value than his english Preferments, Defen. Eccl. Angl. c.
8. art. 5. But a Man not half so wise as Spalat. might discern, that if he did
conside in this Ludovisian Pope alone, the Security was very rotten. Every
Child presaged his Life was not long. Death was ready to arrest him every day
upon two Suits, great Age, and great Infirmity. This Renego sailed from our
Ports in the end of April, arrived at Rome in June, and this Pope, the Hope of
his Life and Fortunes, expired July 8, Stilo Novo, 1623. Neither was he
ignorant of this Gregory's approaching Mortality, his own Physicians confessed he
was of short Continuunce. Be that very probable, said they that undermined him,
and plied him with Packets from beyond Seas, all the better. For who is the
Rising-Sun? Who is the Prelate upon whom all Eyes are cast for the certain
Successor, but Cardinal Mellino, his other Self, the Undertaker for his
Indemnity, and Advancement? Certainly he was bewitched with that Imposture, yet
an Imposture that had Truth in it, as well as Cunning. The Conclave how Urban
the Eighth was chosen Pope, Aug. 6. 1623, was Printed at London by License, An.
1642. Therein is discoursed, how Cardinal Burgesi, the leading Prelate of the
Conclave, labored so stiffly for Mellino, that July 22, he had fifteen Voices
in the Scrutiny, and eleven in the Access, Which filled his Friends with Hopes
to get ten Voices more to consummate the Election. Again, July 27, he had most
Voices both in the Scrutiny and Access: Whereupon Cardinal Sforza was so
transported in his own Imagination to advance him, that if Mellino might have
been created Pope by Adoration (as formerly the Custom would have done it, but
was crossed by a new Bull) it had been effected. Mellino had a good Course for
it, though Cardinal Barberino caught the Hare, and was as near to the Papacy,
and as publicly cried up, as Cardinal Sachetti in the late Contestation of the
tedious Conclave, wherein the now inthroned Alexander the VII. had much ado to
step before him. But Mellino lost the Day and thereupon Am. de Dominis his Cake
was Dough; who set his Rest upon a Card before it was drawn. Yet that was the
least part of his Folly; he remains for an Example of the most besotted
Castaway that ever I read. Ita se res habet, ut plerumque cui fortunam
mutaturus est Deus, consilia corrumpat, says Paterculus. The Judgment of
Blindness fell upon Sodom, before the Vengeance of Fire. How durst this bold
Bayard look the Court of Rome in the Face upon any Terms, whose Writings were
more copious against the Amplitude of the Papacy, than ever came out of the
Press? An Italian never forgives an Injury. But Indignities written, and with
the Pen of a Diamond, against the Sublimity Pontifical, are more unpardonable
with them, than Blasphemies against Christ. Had Cardinal Mellino, his
Confident, been elected Pope, the Pope would have forgotten all that the
Cardinal had promised him. What had Fulgentio the Servite done, to be compared
with his Scopuli, and such jerking Books? He had maintained the Venetian just
Laws against Paul the Fifth's Abrogations; yet ever abode in the Bosom of the
Roman Church. He had wrote the Life of Friar Paul, whom they hated, to the full
pitch of his Praise. But what were these Toys to the Ecclesiastical Republic
of Antonius de Dominis? Yet after twelve years that Fulgentio had provoked
them, he having obtained safe Conduct to go to Rome, under the Fisher's Ring,
and Berlingerius Gessius, the Apostolical Nuntio at Venice, pawned his Faith to
the poor Man for his Incolumity; yet he was cited before the Inquisition,
Condemned, and Burnt in Campo di Flora: And his Ashes were scarce cold, when
this daring Wretch came wittingly into the Den of the Lion.

111. I forbear a while to tell his Disaster, for a third Reason remains of the
retrocession of this Crab, whose Brains were fallen into his Belly. He
protested he came hither, and returned to the Place from whence he came for the
same end, to finish the Work which G. Cassander began, to compose a Method of
Concord for the Eastern and Western Churches, Greeks and Latins; for the
Uniting of the Northern and Southern Distractions of the Reformed Evangelical
Divines, and the Papalins. That this had been his Design within his own Breast
for twenty years; and that his Studies were now come to that Maturity, that he
saw no Unlikelihood to prevail. But what if the Arch-Bishopric of York had
fallen into his Mouth, which he gaped for? Certainly he would have forgot his
Trade of Composing Churches, and cast Anchor upon this Shore for ever; for his
Religion was a Coat that had all Colors, but wanted Argent and Ore. Yet if a
Mountain of some such Promotion had stopped his way, I do not dis-believe him,
but that he was traversing in and out to atone the Differences of the most
principal Christian Sects. So Mr. Camden understood him, under whose Hand I
find this Note among his Diary Records. Accingit se aditer Romam Versus, nescio
qua spe convocandi generalis concilii, and rem religionis componendi. He was
packing for Rome, in hopes to see a General Council called to cure the
Distractions of Religion. I appeal also to the Writer of the best Appeal,
Bishop Morton, our Holy Polycarpus, who told me that he dehorted Spulat. from
his Vagary into Italy, to accommodate Truth and Peace, for the Italians would
never be persuaded to retract an Error. Spalat. takes him up for it churlishly,
An putas Papam and Cardinales diabolos esse, quod non possunt converti? Says
our Bishop again, Neque puto Spalatensem Deum esse, ut possit eos convertere.
Further, When he was convented before the High Commissioners, Mart. 30, he
requested their Lordships to think charitably of him, that his Departure hence
was not that he took any Dislike at the Church of England, which he held to be
sound and Orthodox, and that he would avouch before the Pope, Grackan. c. 85.
to whom he was going: Etiamsi hoc fiat cum discrimine vitae meae, though it
cost him his Life. And it will not cost you less, says the Lord Keeper, for you
may propound to the Pope the Conciliation you drive at; but you will never be
suffered to live to prosecute it. God's Will be done, says the other, I do not
fear it; yet I suspect it the more, that so wise a Man presageth it. The same
had dropped from his Pen, Lib. 7. Eccl. Reip. c. 7. ar. 133. Conciliation and
Union to reduce Christ's Flock to feed together without Schism, is so brave a
Work: Ut pro hoc negotio si contingeret nobis vitam cum sanguine fundere,
praeclari martyrii laudem apud Deum and Ecclesiam mereremur. For all this, sew
believed him that he was in earnest. He that is untrue in many things, is
justly presumed to be bad in all. But I am brought over, by palpable Evidences,
to suspect him of so much Honesty, that he followed that good Work, with all
the Might of Wit and Labor, to bring the Churches of Christ together, which
were withdrawn from one another in Hatred and Hostility. And it was an easy
thing to him to surmise it feasible, because he was of so loose a Religion.
Nay, He thought it was so near to be effected, that it was already as good as
done, if both sides would take prudent notice that it was done. For he builds
upon this Bottom, 7 de Rep. Eccl. c. 12. a. 13. Nihil sive in dogmatibus, sive
in ritibus in alterutrd part adeo intolerabile esse invenw, ut propterea
separatio facienda sit, aut schisma fovendum. On all sides, all Opinions were
so tolerable in his Presumption, that the White and the Black Church were both
of a Color. For Example, these Instances which follow, and many others, may be
found in that 12 Chap. rashly slubber'd over. We may communicate with them that
hold Transubstantiation, for it destroys Nature rather than Grace: it is an
Error of a good Mind, not out of Dishonor to Christ, but out of Devotion. For
Image Worship, it is the least thing of an hundred to be past over; for as when
the Bible lies before us, and we Pray out of the Psalms, we do not adore the
Bible, no more do they the Crucifix that is placed before them. The Supremacy
of the Pope is no necessary Cause of Divorcement; for John and Cyriacus of
Constantinople took to themselves the Title of Universal Bishop; yet Gregory
the Great, who highly inveighed against their Error, kept Unity with that
Church: And so should we do upon like Provocation, Art. 117. Thus he patcheth
up the Rents, but it was beyond his Skill to draw up the Pieces. Another of his
Reconciliatory Devices, is in Art. 119. That the most of Reformation consists
in the right Direction of our mental Intention, which God only sees: Et
Ecclesia non judicat de occultis. As a Protestant may be present at Mass, and
do his Duty at it; kneel down with the rest, and pray to God, but not adore the
visible Host. Chiefly, as Lib. 12. c. 6. He relies much upon this Distinction,
Alia est ecclesia manca, alia monstrosa. That the Church of Rome is not
mutilated for want of any integral Part of Faith, but monstrous and luxuriant
in too much which is superadded. Which Deformity, they that are strong may bear
with, since they are enlivened with all the saving Faith that we profess, and
we need not partake with their Redundancies. Therefore he persuades, Art. 21,
that without any Offense to Conscience, you may abide in either Church, keeping
a good Purpose of Mind and Heart. But he speaks with the wide Mouth of a
complete Libertine, Lib. 7. c. 17. Art. 120. Rideo illos ego, qui ingenti
incommodo and periculo, ab una ad aliam partem, solus conscientiae causa
trasfugiunt What then? Make it his own Case. Was it not Conscience that removed
him hither? Not a jot, for it follows in the same Sentence, Illi soli prudenter
id faciunt, qui de abusibus alterutrius partis liberi disserere, and scribere
ibi volunt, ubi nullum impedimentum inveniant. We thank him for his Company. It
seems he took Refuge in England, not out of Conscience to leave the Roman
Church, but out of Prudence to write safely against their Errors, and to draw
up the great Schism to an Overture of Concord among merciful Men, that would
not persecute him for his Good Will. I will represent him in a Line or two,
that he was as indifferent, or rather dissolute in Practice, as in Opinion. For
in the same Cap. Ar. 35. this is his Nicolaitan Doctrine, A pluralitate uxorum
natura humana non abhorret; imo fortasse neque ab earum communitate. Thus
leaving all Differences of Religion indeterminat, and in vago, he thought it
would be his great Honor to be the Conciliator of Christendom. All Is made
ready to shake Hands: For you need not lick any Point into the Shape of a
distinct Conclusion, but involve all in the Lump of an indigested Concord.
Therefore, though he was posted up for a Shittle-cock in all Universities, and
even Balladed by Boys for his Inconstancy, they were mistaken: For both
Churches to him were one, and when he was in one, he was in both. In his
Passage hither and thither, he made no Salt from one Religion to another, but
he was still walking in his long Gallery, sometimes with his Face to the East,
sometimes to the West.

112. There is such a fag end, which remains to piece this out, after I have
brought the unhappy Man to his Friends at Rome, that sent for him, that the
Judicious will find upon it, that he juggled with himself, rather than with us.
He would have blessed God if he had been used with that Lenity there, which he
found in England. For our High Commissioners made this end with him, Mart. 30.
1622. That since he had ungratefully reproached his Majesty's Liberality,
prosessing that he was hired to depart for a better Stipend: Since he held
Correspondence with some of the Popes great Council, by Name with Cardinal
Mellino, who are presumed Illwillers, if not Enemies to the King, and this
State: Since he professed open Adherence to the Romish Church, and did not
renounce the Missatical Corruption of their Priesthood, against whom our Laws
have Decreed the utmost Punishment, therefore Sentence was given to Deprive him
of all the Spiritual Preferments which he held in this Realm, with a strict
Command to depart out of the said Realm within Twenty Days, and never to return
again into any his Majesty's Dominions, upon pain of undergoing the Penalty of
the Statute against Priests and Jesuits. 'Twas too late for him to Reply. So
on the 18th Day of April, Count Suartzenburg, Ambassador Extraordinary from the
Emperor Ferdinand, after he had been very splendidly entertained for the space
of 16 Days, returned homewards, and took Shipping at Gravesend, in whose
Company, but in another Vessel, Spalat. crossed the Seas, and coming to
Brussels, after a little stay, the Eagle flew away with the Buzzard, and dropped
him at Rome. After he was settled there, the first News we heard from him was
his Book called Consilium reditus. How wonderfully does he appear in that Book
to be a changed Man? He defies the Church of England, backbites, picks new
Quarrels; nothing in it that favored of Cassander, the Moderator of
Contentious Disputes, but of Eudaemon, or some such Jesuit. His other Works
being prohibited so strictly and minatorily, that Bishops might not read them;
this last abortive piece, born out of due time, was thought to be his Doctrine
by the Ultra-montans, and nothing else. I do not say it was not his Pen: to my
Sense the Style bewrays him; but to be his Mind and Judgment, I oppose it to
this hour. He wrote it in a noisome Prison, despairing of Liberty for ever,
unless he could release himself by impudent Forgeries, and Contradictions.
Ultimum malorum est ex vivorum numero antequam morier^s, exire, says Senec. de
Tran. c. 3. It Is an unexpressible torment to be shut up close in a stinking
Hole, and to be buried quick. He was kept in continual fear to be burnt, as if
he were torn with an Harrow of Iron, and made to pass through the Brick-kiln, 2 Samuel 12.31. What would he not do to escape that Death, who was better prepared
to spend an Ounce of Ink in the Devils Cause, than a Spoonful of Blood for
Christ? Therefore I reckon that Book to be the Issue not of this Man, but of
his carnal fear. A Subscription to Articles in time of Duress, and strict
Custody, what is it worth in Law? I am sure one of the best Sconces in Europe,
Sir Nic. Throgmorton, ascertein'd Mary Queen of Scotland, Cessionem in carcere
extortam, qui justus est metus, plane irritam esse, Camd. Elizab. An. 1567.
Take it likewise from the Judgment of the great Athanasius, Ep. ad solit. vit.
again. p. 839. The Pope Liberius stood to Athanasius, (...), when he was free to
do what he would. But being thrown out into Banishment, and hunted to be
destroyed as a Partridge in the Mountain, he subscribed against his own Hand,
which yet did not prejudice Athanasius his Innocence. (...). Those things which
Liberius acted against his first Judgment, were not his doing, that was awed
with fear; but the results of those that compelled them with Tyranny. And that
our M. Antony was cudgel'd into a Recantation with the impendent fear of an
horrid Death, will be made clear, because after he had dazzled the World with
that false Light, he never pleased his Judges, that had secretly tried the
Constitution of his Conscience. Sir Edward Sackvile, (who shortly succeeded his
Brother Richard in the Earldom of Dorset) was at Rome Ann. 1624. and had Welcome
given him with much Civility in the English College, so far that he presumed to
ask, rather out of Curiosity than Love, to see this Prisoner de Dominis. Mr. T.
Fitz-herbert the Rector did him the Observance to go with him to the Jayl. He
found him shut up in a Ground-Chamber, narrow and dark; for it looked upon a
great Wall, which was as near unto it as the breadth of three spaces. Some
slight forms being passed over, which use to be in all Visits, says Sir Edward,
My Lord of Spalato, you have a dark Lodging: It was not so with you in England.
There you had at Windsor as good a Prospect by Land, as was in all the Country:
And at the Savoy you had the best Prospect upon the Water, that was in all the
City. I have forgot those things, says the Bishop; here I can best Contemplate
the Kingdom of Heaven. Sir Edward taking Mr. Fitz-Herbert aside into the next
Room; Sir, says he, tell me honestly, Do you think this Man is employed in the
Contemplation of Heaven? Says the Father Rector, I think nothing less; for he
was a Malcontent Knave when he fled from us, a Railing Knave while he lived
with you, and a Motley parti-colour'd Knave now he is come again. This is the
Relation which that Honorable Person made Ann. 1625. which I heard him utter
in the hearing of no mean Ones.

113. But by this time Spalat. was dead, either by his fair Death, or by
private strangling. Gallo-Belgicus, that first sent the News abroad, knew not
whither. But he knew what became of his Body, that it was burnt at the same
place in Rome, where Heretics do end their Pain. It is a Process of Justice
which is usual with their Inquisition, to show such abhorrence to Heretics,
(that were so in their sense) to call them to account, though they be dead and
rotten. First, They are so Histrionical in their Ceremonies, as if they made a
Sport of Barbarousness, that they cite the dead Men three several Days to
appear, or any that will answer for them, (but happy they if they do not
appear) then their Carcasses, or Bones, are brought forth, and burnt in the
common Market with a Ban of Execration. The latest that were used so among us
were Reverend Bucer and Fagius at Cambridge, Anno 1556. And Dr. Scot, Bishop of
Chester, one of Cardinal Pole's Visitors, defended it before the University,
Haud mirum videri debeat, si in mortem quoque ista inquisitis extendatur,
Bucer, Scrip. Angl. p. 925. Sic postulare sacros Canones, p. 923. This is their
Soverity, from which the Dead are not free. Now by the Blaze of that Bonfire in
which De Dominis his Trunk was consumed, we may read an Heretic in Fiery
Characters: I mean, as he was entered into the black Book of the Roman
Slaughterhouse. He lived and died with General Councils in his Pate, with
Wind-Mills of Union to concord Rome and England, England and Rome, Germany with
them both, and all other Sister-Churches with the rest, without asking leave of
the Tridentine Council. This was his Piaculary Heresy. For as A^orius writes
Tom. 1. Moral. Lib. 8. Cap. 9. Not only he that denies an Article of the Roman
Creed, but he that doubts of any such Article is an Heretic, and so to be
presented to Criminal Judgment. Si quem in foro exteriori l gitime allegata and
pro^ata probaverint in rebus Fidci scienter and voluntary dubitasse, arbitrer
cum ut v re and proprie haereti^um puniendum. Therefore if Spalat. had returned
a Penitent in their Construction, and imbodied himself into that Church as only
true and Apostolical, he could not have suffered in his Offals and Carcass as
an Heretic. So the same Azorius confesses, Lib. 8. Cap. 14. And Alphonsus a
Castro is angry with Bernard of Lutzenburg for holding the contrary, Lib. 1.
Cap. 9. Quis unquam docuit eum esse dicendum haereticum, qui errorem sic
tenuit, ut monitus and conviclus non crubuerit palinodiam cantare? This was the
success of the variable Behavior of M. Antonius de Dominis. De Domims in the
plural, says Dr. Crakanthorp, for he could serve two Masters or twenty, if they
would all pay him Wages. He had an Hearing, as it is mentioned before, in our
High Commission: To countenance the Audience of so great a Cause, the Lord
Keeper gave attendance at it. I began at that end of his Troubles, and, having
footed all the Maze, am come out at the other.

114. Johosaphat distinguishes between the Lord's Matters, and the King's
Affairs, 2 Chronicles. 19.12. So do I in the Subject before me. I have given some
Says of his Church-Wisdom in the former Paragraph: I go on to set the Sublimity
of his State-Wisdom in the latter. I must look back to a small Service which he
did perform in Michaelmas-Term 1621. for as much as the Conjunction of some
things, which raised a Dust in the Year following, are sit to go together. Upon
the solemn Day, when the Lord Cranfield (then Master of the Wards, and
immediately created Earl of Middlesex) took his Place as Lord Treasurer in the
Exchequer-Chamber, the Lord Keeper gave him his Oath, and saluted his Admission
with a short Speech following: My Lord, You are called to serve his Majesty in
the Place of a Lord Treasurer, by the most Honorable and most Ancient Call in
this Realm, the delivery of a Staff, to let you know, that you are now become
one of the surest Staffs or Stays that our great Master relies upon in all this
Kingdom. And these Staffs Princes must lean upon, being such Gods as die like
Mon; and such Masters as are neither omni-sufficient, nor independent. For St.
Austin writing upon that place of the Psalm, I have said unto the Lord, Thou
art my God, my Go^ds are nothing unto thee; observes that God only is the
Master that needs no reference to his Servant. All other Masters and Servants
are proper Relatives, and have a mutual Reciprocation and Dependence. Eges tu
Domino tuo, ut det panem: Eget te Dominus tuus ut adjuves labor. As the
Servant wants a Master to maintain him, so the Master wants a Servant to assist
him. For the present supplying of this want in his Majesty, I will say as the
Historian did of the Election of Tiberius, Non quaerendus quem eligeret, sed
eligendus qui emineret: The King was not now to think of one whom he should
choose, but to choose one who was most eminent. For as Claudian said of
Ruffinus, -- Taciti suffragia vulgi,
Vel jam contulerant, quicquid mox addidit Aula.
You were stated in this Place by the Votes of the People, before you
understood the Pleasure of the King. Now for your own private, I make no
question but I may say of you, my Lord, as one said of Coccius Nerva, Foelicior
long quam cum foelicissimus; That you were greater a great deal in your own
Contentment, than now that you have worthily attained to all this Greatness.
But as in this World of Things every Element forsakes his Natural Disposition;
so as we many times see the Earth and Water evaporating upward, and the Fire
and Air darting downward, ad conservationem universi, as Philosophy speaks, to
preserve and maintain the common course: So in this World of Men, private Must
give way to public Respects. Now if it be expected that I should say any thing
for your Lordships Direction in this Great Office, your Lordships Wisdom, and
my Ignorance will plead pardon, though I omit it. I will only say one word, and
that shall be the same which Pliny said to one Maximus appointed Questor, that
is, Treasurer for Achaia, Memenisse oportet Ossicii titulum; Remember but your
Name, and you shall do well enough. Your Lordship is appointed Lord Treasurer:
Take such Order in his Majesty's Exchequer, that your Lordship do not bear this
Denomination and Title in vain; and your Lordship shall be worthily honored
for the happiest Subject in this Kingdom. And surely as your Lordship has the
Prayers, so you have the Hopes of all good Men, that Si Pergama dextra defendi
poterant: If any Man living can improve the Kings Revenue with Skill and
Diligence, you are that good Husband. And so I wish your Lordship as much Joy
of your Place, as the King and the State do conceive of your Lordship. This was
the Perfume which was cast upon the new Treasurer in his Robes of Instalment.
The King was pleased much in his Advancement: For his Majesty had proved him
with Questions, and found that he was well studied in his Lands, Customs, in
all the Profits of the Crown, in Stating of Accounts And in the general Opinion
the White-Staff was as fit for his Hand, as if it been made for it. The most
that could be objected was, that he was true to the King, but gripple for
himself: A good Steward for the Exchequer, but sower and unrelishing in
Dispatch: A better Treasurer than a Courtier. There was nothing in appearance
but Sunshine and warm Affections between him and the Lord Keeper. The Lord
Treasurer, I know well, had crossed the other in one or two Suits which had
been beneficial to him, and not drawn a Denier out of the Kings Purse. He dealt
so with every Man; therefore the Sufferer gave little sign of Grievance: It was
not his Case alone. Another Pick in which they agreed not, (I cannot say
disagreed) was about a Brood of Pullein, which were never hatched. The last
Parliament being dissolved, it was well thought of by some of the Lords of the
Council Board, to sweeten the ill relish, which it had in some Palats, with a
Pardon of Grace, that might extend to a fair Latitude, for the ease of those
that were questioned for old Debts and Duties to the Crown, for concealed
Wardships and not suing out Liveries, and such charges of the like kind, which
put those that were secure in their Improvidence to a great deal of trouble,
and disanimated their best Friends, for fear of such blind Claps, to be their
Executors. When the Lord Keeper had brought this Pardon so near to his Birth,
that the Atturney-General was sent for to draw it up, the Lord Treasurer moved,
That such as took out this Pardon should pay their Fees, which are accustomed
in that kind, to such Officers as he should appoint, that the Advantage might
enrich the King, and that himself might have that share, which the Lord
Chancellor used to have, who put the Seal to those Pardons This was heard with
a dry laughter, and denied him. But from thenceforth he struggled to correct
the lusty Wine of the Pardon with so much Water, that there was no comfort in
it; and falling short of that Grace which was expected, was debated no more.
The Lord Keeper having obtein'd a good Report for the Conception of the Pardon,
and the Lord Treasurer a great deal of Envy for the Abortion, it curdled in his
Stomach into Choler and Mischief. And wherefore was he angry with his Brother
Abel? Look what St. John answers, 1 Epist. Chap. 3. Verse. 12. He endeavored
first to make a Faction in Court against the Lord Keeper, and it would not hit,
because he had no Credit with the Great Ones. Then he falls to Pen and Paper,
and spatters a little Foam, draws up Ten What-do-you-call-Um's, (some of them
are neither Charges of Misdemeanour nor Objections) which were meant for
Accusations, but are most pitiful failings, entramell'd with Fictions and
Ignorance. They are extant in the Cabal, Page 72. which the Lord Keeper puts
away as quietly, as the Wind blows off the Thistle-Down: Pusheth his Adversary
down with his little Finger, yet insults not upon his Weakness. As Pliny writes
to Sabin, Lib. 9. Ep. Tunc praecipua mansuetudinis laus, cum irae causa
justissima est. It was very laudable to be so mild, when there was just cause
given to be more angry. Yet he complained by Letters to the Lord Marquess, as
if he were sensible of the despite, and unto him was very loud in his own
Justification. From whom he got no more remedy, but that his Adversary was not
believed: And was willed to consider that he dealt with one, whose ill Manners
would not pay him Satisfaction for an Injury. Unto which the Lord Keeper
rejoined to the Lord Marquess, His Majesty's Justice and your Lordships Love
are Anchors strong enough for a Mind more tossed than mine is, to ride at. Yet
pardon me, my Noble Lord, upon this Consideration, if I exceed a little in
Passion, the Natural Effect of Honesty and Innocence. A Churchman and a Woman
have no greater Idol under Heaven than their Good Name: And they cannot Fight,
nor with Credit Scold, and least of all Recriminate to Protect and Defend the
same: The only Revenge left them is to grieve and complain. Then he concludes,
Whom I will either Challenge before his Majesty to make good his Suggestions,
or else (which I hold the greater Valor, and which I wanted I confess before
this Check of your Lordships) go on in my course, and scorn all these base and
unworthy Scandals, as your Lordship shall direct me. What need more be said? In
the space of a Month they wrangled themselves into very good Friends, and the
Lord Keeper was Gossip to the next Child that was born to the Treasurer. As
Nazianzen says of Athanasius, Encom. p. 21. (...), There was the Condition of
two kinds of Stones in his Nature, that are much commended: He was an Adamant
to them that smote him, found and firm, and would never break: But a Loadstone
to draw them to him that discorded with him, though they were as hard as Iron.

115. Among the Exceptions with which the Lord Cranfeild did exagitate him, one
may require a larger Answer, than he thought him worthy of in that Humor. He
replies to him very briefly in the Laconcick Form, because such brittle Ware
would break with a Touch. The Treasurer was misinformed, or coined it out of
his own Head, That the Keeper dispatched great Numbers of Causes by hearing
Petitions in his Chamber, and that he did usually reverse Decrees upon
Petitions That Forty Thousand Pounds had been taken in one Year among his
Servants by such spurious and illegitimate Justice. Yet Sir An. IV. all whose
Ink makes blots, could not imagine how such a Man should be raised out of that
Practice, but that it was Calculated to be worth to him and his Servants Three
Thousand Pounds per Annum. A great fall, and the less charge. I do not say that
either of them did learn to suspect by their own practice: Let God judge it.
But I knew this Man so well, that he would as soon have taken a share out of
Courtesans Sins, as the Pope does, as out of his Servants Purses. But state the
Case thus, That he did much Work by Petitions, and trebble as much in the first
Year, as in those that succeeded, it is confessed. First, The Hindrances had been
so great which the Court sustein'd, before he began to rectify them, that
unless he had allowed poor Men some Furtherance by Motions in Petitions, they
had been undone for want of timely Favor. Even Absalom won the Hearts of
those, whom he seemed to pity, that were in that condition, 2 Samuel 13.3. A
Plaintiff makes great moan for redress of Wrongs; but a delaying Judge is his
greatest Oppressor. Secondly, All high Potentates, and Magistrates under them,
have ever employed some at their Hand to give Answers to Supplicants, that made
Requests unto them. Papinian served in that Office under Severus Pertinax: So
did Ulpian under Alexander Mammaeus. Many more may be produced, who were
greatly honored for that Employment. All the Praefecti Libellorum, and
Magistri Scriniorum, who are mentioned of old, were of this Constitution. Every
Proconful ca^ried such a Scribe with him into his Province, and heard the
Oppressions of the People by Petition, and redressed them. Not that main Causes
were not pleaded in the open Face of the Praetorian Court, as it is in the
Pandects, Ubi decretum necessarium est per Libellum, id expedire Proconsul non
potest. But an Exception strengthens a Rule, as Cicero says pro Corn. Balbo.
Quod si exceptio facit, ne liceat: Ibi necesse est licere ubi non est exceptum.
And where Decrees were not necessary, a Subscription to a Supplication was a
common way, to relieve those, who needed not the Ceremony to be undone with
longer Obstruction. Thirdly, What if I should grant, without Derogation to the
Lord Keeper's admired Sufficiency, that when he took that litigious Work of
Chancery first in hand, if some crabbed Difficulties were mine'd small into a
Petition, he could the better swallow them. Every man may judge better of that
which he reads, than that which he hears; chiefly, he that is initiated into a
Profession. Allow him Cork that learns to Swim, to keep him from Sinking, he
saves himself, and hurts no man. Therefore it was a most certain way to
overcome some part of the Tediousness of Business by Petitions; and it was no
less incorrupt, innocent, legal, expedite to do good to the People. Some that
practiced at the Bar, repined that they might not have a Glut of Motions: Of
whose covetous Discontents, this Lord was aware; as Pliny says of Apelles, Lib.
31. Post tabulam latens vitia quae notarentur auscultabat. He was at the back
of the Frame which he set forth, and heard what Errors the Passengers noted in
his Picture. So this Man's Ears were open, and his Eyes waking, groundless
Repining never took him winking. Therefore to straiten his Course against all
Presumption of Errors, he directed two Remonstrances, the first to the Lord
Marquess, September the 8th; the other to his Majesty, October the 5th, 1622,
which follow as he penned them.

My most noble Lord,
116. I Am half ashamed of my self, that any Man durst be so shameless, as to
lay upon me the least Suspicion of Corruption, in that Frugality of Life,
Poverty of Estate, and Retiredness from all Acquaintance, or Dependencies
wherein I live. But I have learnt one Rule in the Law, that Knaves ever
complain of Generalities. And I long to be Charged with any Particular.
Petitions are things that never brought to any Man, in my Place, either Profit
or Honor, but infinite Trouble and Molestation. Three Parts of four of them
are poor Men's, and bring not a Penny to my Secretaries. The last part are so
slighted and dis-respected by my Orders, that they cannot be to my Secretaries
(whom I take to be honest men, and well provided for) worth their Trouble, or
Attendance. All Petitions that I answer, are of these Kinds. 1. For ordinary
Writs to be signed with my Hand. 2. For Motions to be made in Court. 3. For to
be placed in the Paper of Peremptories. 4. For License to beg. 5. For referring
of insufficient Answers. 6. For a day to dispatch References recommended from
the King. 7. For Reigling Commissions to be dispatched in the Country. 8. For
my Letter to the next Justices to compound Brables. 9. For Commissions of
Bankrupts, Certiorari especial. Stay off an Extent till Counsel be heard,
etc.Let any Man, that understands himself, be questioned by your Lordship,
whether any of these poor things can raise a Bribe, or a Fee, worth the
speaking of. I protest I am fain to allow twenty Pounds a year to a Youth in my
Chamber, to take care of the poor Men's Petitions, the Secretaries do so neglect
them.


In a while after, Thus to the King.

May it please Your most Excellent Majesty,
TO pardon the first Boldness of this kind of interrupting Your Majesty.
Although I do find by search those particular Charges of Chamber-Orders showed
unto me by my most Noble Lord, the Lord Admiral, to be falsely laid, and
wilfully mistaken, as being either binding Decrees, or solemn Orders pronounced
in open Court, and pursued only to Processes of Execution by these private
Directions. Yet do I find withal, that I have advisedly, and with mature
Deliberation, upon my entering into this Office, made many Dispatches upon the
Petitions of the Subjects, to mine own exceeding great Trouble, and to the Ease
of their Purses many thousand Pounds in the Compass of this Year. For that
Motion, which upon a Petition will cost the Party nothing, if it be denied, nor
above Five Shillings to the Secretaries (unless the Party play the Fool, and
wilfully exceed that expected Fee) when it is granted, being put into the Mouth
of a Lawyer, will cost the Client, whether granted or denied, one Piece at the
least, and for the most part, Five, Ten or Twenty Pieces, as is notoriously
known to all the World. Yet have I most willingly observed in all Orders upon
Petitions, these Cautions following, which I received from Your Majesty. First,
To order nothing in this kind, without Notice given to the adverse Part, and
Oath made thereof. Secondly, To reverse, correct, or alter no one Syllable of
any Decree or Order pronounced in Court, upon Counsel heard on both Sides.
Thirdly, To alter no Possession, unless it be in pursuance to a former Decree,
or Order pronunced in open Court; or to save (by a Sequestration to indifferent
Hands) some Bona peritura, which commonly be a Tithe, or a Crop of Hay or Corn,
which are ready to be carried away by force, by unresponsal Men, and will not
stay for a Decree in Court. Now I humbly crave Your Majesty's Opinion, whither
I may go on this way, as ancient as the Court, for easing Your Majesty's
Subjects with these Cautions and Limitations, the Clamor of the Lawyers, and
Ignorance of some Men, Qui me per ornamenta feriunt, notwithstanding. For
although no Party grieved does, or indeed can complain against these
Dispatches, and that in the corruptest Times it was never heard, that any
Bribes have been taken for Answers upon Petitions: Yet what Reason have I to
over-toil my self in easing the Purse of the Subjects, if it be objected as a
Crime against me, and be not a Service acceptable to Your Majesty and the
Realms? I have eased my self there three days in this kind, but am so oppressed
with the Clamor of poor People, who come for ordinary Dispatches, that I am
enforced to prevent their Complaint by this humble Repraesentation unto Your
Majesty. I most humbly therefore crave Your Majesty's Directions, denied to
none of Your Servants that desire them, to be signified unto me by the Lord
Admiral, at his Lordship's best Convenience.


117. Thus much perhaps is too much, but that as Alexander said in Curtius,
Satius est purgatos esse quam suspectos. It Is better to clear an Error imputed,
than to be suspected. The King stood to him, as he did always, and sent him a
gracious Message. It was his Conscience he dispensed in that Court, and he had
his Approbation in all he had heard of. Truly, I believe his Majesty's Love
wrought that Ableness in him, to make him more than else he would have been.
Neither did the Lord Marquess see any Reason, but to justify his Integrity and
Diligence, Yet before Michaelmas Term was spent, An. 1622, that great Lord
dropped some Words, that he was not altogether pleased with the Lord Keeper's
Observance, and looked upon him with a stranger Countenance than before; so as
from that time the Lord Keeper failed but with an half Wind in that mighty
Lord's Favor; which he hid most prudently, and showed not the least appearance
that he was fallen into that dislike. As Macrobius commends Pisistratus, Lib. 7.
c. 1. whose Children secretly made Head against him. Yet Pisistratus dissembled
strangely that all was well between them, that the City of Athens might not
practice upon their Enmity. So it was covered as artificially from Court and
City, that these two Luminaries were near to Opposition. The first Man that was
like to know it from the Lord Marquess, was the Bishop of St. David's; for about
this time he styles himself Confessor to his Lordship, in Mr. Prinn's
Publications. And within the compass of this Time, he says, he dreamt that the
Lord Keeper was dead, that he went by, and saw his Grave a making. And how does
he expound this Vision, which he saw in his Sleep, but that he was dead in my
Lord of Buckingham's Affections? Some are like to ask, what it was that did the
ill Office to shake the Stedfastness of their Friendship? That will break out
hereafter. But the Quarrel began, that some Decrees had been made in Chancery,
for whose better Speed, my Lord Marquess had undertaken. An Undertaker he was,
without Confinement of Importunity, There was not a Cause of moment, but as
soon as it came to Publication, one of the Parties brought Letters from this
mighty Peer, and the Lord Keeper's Patron. For the Lord Marquess was of a kind
Mature, in Courtesy more luxuriant, than was fit in his Place; not willing to
deny a Suit, but prone to gratify all Strangers, chiefly if any of his Kindred
brought them in their Hand; and was far more apt to believe them that asked him
a Favor, than those that would persuade him it was not to be granted. These
that haunted him without shame, to have their Suits recommended to great
Officers, made him quickly weary of his faithful Ministers, that could not
justly satisfy him. I had mentioned none, but that I am beholding to the Cabal
to fall upon one, the worst of twenty, Sir John Michel, P. 84. of whose
Unreasonableness the Lord Keeper writes thus, God is my Wuness, I have never
denied cither Justice or Favor (which was to be justified) to this man, or any
other, that had the least Relation to your good, and most Noble Mother. And I
hope your Lordship is persuaded thereof. Budaeus, P. 67. Upon the Pandects,
writes offensively upon the meddling of such Lady Advocates, Why may not Women
be our Magistrates, and govern us, if they think to govern them, that are our
Magistrates? But he complains with more Impatience against the Courtiers of
Paris, P. 188. Quotusquisque est qui modo in aula interiore sit alicujus
nominis, qui non se dignum censeat, propter quem leges and constitutiones,
quamvis gravi sanctione munitae, violari debeant? which makes the Place of a
Judge a Burden that cannot be supported. For as no Artist can make the Year
run even by the Course of Sun and Moon, so no Justice can run even between the
imperious Directions of a Favorite, and the Conscience of a just Man. The Lord
Marquess had used his Power to assist the Lord Keeper in his Lifting up; but
good Turns are not to be counted a Servile Bond, to impose as much as shall be
obtruded to be done, with a Blindfold Readiness: For no man in Earth is all in
all a Servant, but to God. Gratitude may exact much, but Innocence is free from
paying a Tribute. And it is pity they should ever have the Ability to do
Benefits, who over-lay their good Turns, and would not have those, to whom they
have been gracious, persevere in Integrity. Yet many do so far value their own
Kindness, that they think, for their good Works Sake, they have bought God's
Part in us; which, if it be subtracted, none are so ready to dismount a Man,
as they that did promote him. It is observed before me, by Aurelius Victor, in
the Lite of Nerva, Qui cum se merreri omnia praesumant, si quicquam non
extorserint atrociores sunt ipsis hostibus. Therefore let a private Man be
content, and take sweet Sleeps. He holds his Conscience in no Tenure but of
God. He that is out of great Place, is out of great Tentation. Tuta me media
vehat vita decurrens via, Sense. in Ad.

118. I have touched upon the very Thread, where the Lord Marques^s Friendship
began to unravel. I have shown how blameless the Lord Keeper was, and that the
Offense on his Part was undeclinable. Yet I will not smother with partiality,
what I have heard the Countess Mother say upon it: That the Lord Keeper had
great Cause sometimes to recede from those Courses which her Son propounded;
that she never heard him different but that his Counsels were wise and
well-grounded, ever tending to the Marquess's Honor, Safety and Prosperity;
but that he stirred her Son to Offense with Reprehensions that were too bold
and vehement. I heed this the more, because it was usual with the Lord Keeper
to be very angry with his best Friends, when they would not hearken to their
own Good. Pardon him that Fault, and it will be hard to find another in him; as
Onuphrius says of P. Pius the Fifth, for his Choleric Moods, Hoc uno excepto
vitio, non erat in illo quod quisquam possit reprehendere. And if the Testimony
of that Lady be true, (it is but one, and a most domestic Witness) I do not
shuffle it over as if his Meanor to the Lord Marquess were not a little
culpable. It was not enough to have Justice of his Side, without Discretion.
Good Counsel is Friendly, but it must be mannerly. St. Ch^ysostom though a
Free, and a very hot man himself, preached thus at Antioch, Hom. 27. That some
Inflammation will not be touched, no, not with a soft Finger: (...). Words as
soft as Lint must be used to some Ears, who disdain to be dealt withal as
Equals. Let me join Ric. Victor to him, enforcing the like from David's Playing
on the Harp when Saul was moved: When stubborn Opposition will vex some great
Men into Fury, Dignum est ut elocutionis nostrae tranquilitate, quasi citharae
dulcedine, ad salutem revocentur. Use them tenderly, and play, as it were, a
Lesson upon the Harp, to flatter them into Attention and Tranquillity. This is
enough to reprehend a few stout Words; but the Lord Keeper, for all the Frown
of the Lord Marquess staid upon him, carried as true a Heart toward him, and
all his Allies, as exuberant in Gratitude, as ever lived in F^esh. He never
wrote to him, no not when he was quite forsaken; but he refreshed the Benefits
he had received from him in his Memory. He never commanded him, but he obeyed
in all, which was to be justified. No Danger impending over his Lordship, but
he was ready to run an honest Hazard with him, even to the laying down of his
Life. In his Absence, when a Friend is best tried, when his Lordship was in
Spain, far from the King, and giving no little Distaste there by his Bearing,
then he smoothed his Errors to his Majesty, and kept him from Precipitation,
knowing that he had threatened to bring about his own Ruin. Yet in strict
Justice, a Founder loses his Right of Interest, that would destroy, or debauch
his Foundation As Amber and Pearl are turned to mean Druggs and Dust, when the
Chemists has drawn their Elixir out of them. At this stop I can resolve one
Question, which many have asked me, whence the Occasion sprung, which
transformed Bishop Laud from a Person so much obliged Eighteen Months before to
the Lord Keeper, to the sharpest Enemy. As soon as ever the Bishop saw his
Advancer was under the Anger of the Lord Marquess, he would never acknowledge
him more, but shunned him, as the old Romans in their Superstition walked a
loof from that Soil, which was blasted with Thunder. It was an Opportunity
snatched to pluck him back, that was got so far before him. Hold him down, that
he might not rise, and then he promised himself the best Preeminence in the
Church; for he saw no other Rival. As Velleius says of Pompey, That he was very
quiet, till he suspected some Senator that thrust up to be his Equal. Civis in
taga, nisi ubi 'vereretur ne quem haberet parem modestissimus. But, will a good
Christian say, did so much Hatred grow up from no other Seed? From no other
that ever appeared; and look upon the World, and marvel not at it, for it is
frequently seen, that those Enemies which are most causless, are most
implacable; which our Divines draw out of this, that no Reason is expressed by
Moses, why the Devil tempted our first Parents, and sought their Fall. The like
was noted by the gravest Counselor of our Kingdom, the Lord Burleigh, who
condoled when he heard the Condemnation of Sir John Perrot, with these Words,
Odium quo injustius, eo acrius. Ill Will is most vehement, when it is most
unjust, Cambden, Eliz. An. 1592. But when himself was not harmed a jot, would
he be so unkind to his Benefactor? Phoed. Act. 1. Se. 3.
What says a long Tongued Fellow? In Plautus mortuus est qui suit, qui vivus,
est. He that was, was lost. He dreamt his Benefactor was defunct, there was
Life in my Lord of Buckingham; and it was good Cunning to jog along with his
Motions. I am confident to give this Satisfaction to the Question above. For
the Lord Keeper did often protest upon his Hope in Christ, that he knew no
other Reason of their Parting. Reader, say nothing to it, but hear what Solomon
says, Proverbs 18. ver. ^. according to the Septuagint, and the Vulgar Latin.
(...) (...). Occasiones querit, qui vult recedere ab amico; omni tempore erit
exprobrabilis.

119. These Enmies were blowing at the Forge three years well nigh, before the
Ingeneers could frame a Bar to lift him off the Hinges of his Dignity; for he
was fast locked and bolted into the Royal Favor. He bore up with that
Authority, that he could not be checked with Violence; and Occasions grew fast
upon his Majesty to use his Sufficiency and Fidelity. For though he was a King
of profound Art, yet he was not so fortunate in that Advice which he took, to
send his dear Son the Prince with the Lord Marquess into Spain Feb. 17, 1022.
So soon as those Travelers had left the King with his little Court at
New Market, the King found himself at more Leisure and Freedom, in the Absence
of the Lord Marquess, to study the Calling of a Comfortable and Concordious
Parliament, wherein the Subject might reap Justice, and the Crown Honor. And
Occasion concluded for it, that since the Prince like a Resolute and Noble
Wooer, had trusted himself to the King of Spain's Faith in the Court of Madrid,
whether his Adventure sped or not sped, he must be welcomed Home with a
Parliament. The King prepared for the Conception of that Public Meeting, that
it might fall to its proper Work without Diversions. He conceived there was no
Error more fatal to good Dispatch, than that some Members took up the greatest
part of the Time, in speaking to the Redress of petty Grievances, like Spaniels
that rett after Larks and Sparrows in the Field, and pass over the best Game.
Therefore his Majesty, to loose no time, drew up a Proclamation with his own
Pen, Feb. 20, to this end, that certain of the Lords of the Privy Council,
should have Power and special Commission to receive the Complaints of all the
good People of this Land, which should be brought before them concerning any
Exorbitances, Vexations, Oppressions, and Illegalities, and either by their own
Authority, if it would reach to it, to see them corrected, or to give Orders to
cut them off by the keenest Edge of the Laws. That Complainants should be
encouraged to present their Grievances, as well by the Invitement of the
Proclamation, as by the Signification of the Judges to the Country and Grand
Juries, in their respective Circuits. The Draught of this, the Features of his
Majesty's own Brain, came by Post to pass the Great Seal. Yet for all that
Have, the Lord Keeper took time to scan it, and sent it back with Advice, that
the Project would be sweeter, if it were double refined; presuming therefore,
that his Majesty would not be unwilling to stop a little at the Bar of good
Counsel, he wrote this ensuing Letter to the Court, Feb. 22.

May it please Your most Excellent Majesty,
120. I Do humbly crave Your Majesty's Pardon, that I forbear for two or three
days to seal Your Proclamation for Grievances, until I have presented to Your
Majesty this little Remonstrance, which would come too late after the Sealing,
and Divulging the Proclamation. First, As it is now coming forth, it is
generally misconstrued, and a little sadly looked upon by all men, as somewhat
restreining, rather than enlarging Your Majesty's former Care and Providence
over Your Subjects. For whereas before they had a standing Committee of all the
Council Table to repair unto, they are now streitned to four or five only: Most
of which number are not likely to have any leisure to attend the Service.
Secondly, I did conceive Your Majesty, upon Your first Royal Expression of Your
Grace in this kind, in a Resolution to have mingled with some few Lords of Your
Privy Council, some other Barons of Your Kingdom, Homines (as Pliny said of
Virginius Rufus) innoxie Populares. Whose Ears had been so opened to the like
Grievances in the time of Parliament, as their Tongues notwithstanding kept
themselves within the compass of Duty, and due Respect to Your Majesty, as the
Earls of Dorset, and Warwick; the Lord Houghton, Dr. Morton.
the Lord Dennie, the Lord Russel, the Lord North. And among the Lords
Spiritual, the Bishops of Lichfield, Rochester, and Ely; and especially, unless
Tour Majesty in Your deep Wisdom have some Reasons of the Omission, Dr.
Buckeridge.
the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. This mixture would produce the these
Effects ensuing. First, An Intimation of Your Majesty's Sincerity and Reality
in this Proclamation. Dr. Felton.
Secondly, A more free and general Intimation to Parties Aggrieved, who will
repair soonear to these private Peers, then to the great Lords of Your
Majesty's Council. Thirdly, The making of these Lords, and the like, Witnesses
of Your Majesty's Justice, and good Government against the next ensuing
Parliament, and the stopping of their Ears against such supposed Grievances at
that time, as shall never be heard of in their Sitting upon this Commission.
Fourthly, and Lastly, The gaining of these Temporal Lords to side with the
State, being formerly much wrought upon by the Factious, and Discontented. If
Your Majesty shall approve of these Reasons, it is but to Command Your
Secretary to interline these, or some of these Names in the Commission, which
in all other respects is already wisely and exceeding well penned, with two
short Clauses only: First, That these Lords shall attend very carefully and
constantly in Term-time, when they are occasioned to be at London. Secondly,
That they be instructed to receive all Complaints with much Civility and
Encouragement, giving them full Content and Redress according to the merit of
their Grievances: For nothing will sooner break the Heart of a People, or make
them lose their Patience, than when hopes of Justice are frustrated, after the
Royal Word is engaged. But if Your Majesty in Your high Wisdom will overpass
these Particulars, which I have dutifully presented, upon the return of the
Proclamation as it is, it shall be sealed, and divulged with all expedition.


But these Reasons were not overpass'd: Both the Proclamation, and private
Orders to the Lords Commissioners were reformed by the Contents of that weighty
Letter; His Majesty greatly inclining to the Lord-Keeper's Readiness and
espying Judgment in all Consultations. For as Laertius in Zeno's Life said of a
famous Musician, (...): That Ismenias could play well upon all Instruments. So
this was another Ismenias, who had the Felicity to make all Deliberations
pleasing and tuneable; especially he had that way, above all that I knew, to
make sweet Descant upon any plain Song that was pricked before him. It will be
to the Profit of the Reader, if I rub his memory with one Passage of the Letter
(for it is but one, though it come in twice,) which presses the King to
Sincerity and Reality; to fix his Word like the Center of Justice, that cannot
be moved. Righteous Lips are the delight of Kings, Prove. 16.23. And a King of
Righteous Lips is most delightful. Since the coercitive part of the Law does
not reach him, upon what Nail shall those Millions that stand before his Throne
hang their Hopes, if his Word do not bind him? A People that cannot give Faith
to their Sovereign, will never pay him Love. It seems that the ancient Latin
Kings did profess to use Crookedness, and Windings of Dissimulation in their
Polity; therefore their Scepter was called Lituus, because it bent in toward
the upper end. But the Scepter of thy Kingdom (says David of GOD) is a right
Scepter. A right one indeed: For Contracts and Promises bind God to Man, much
more must they oblige the King to his People. An Author of our own, Dr. Duck,
in his very Learned Treatise, De usu Juris Civilis, p. 44. has well delivered
this Morality; Princeps ad contractum tenetur uti privatus; nec potest
contractum suum rescindere ex plenitudine potestatis cum maxim in eo
requiratur bena sides: Falsehood is Shopkeepers Language, or worse; but it is
beneath Majesty.

121. A Parliament being not far of, either in the King's Purpose, or in
Prospect of Likelihood, Serj Crook. Cvew. Finch. Damport. Bramston. Bridgman.
Crawly. Headly. Thin. (...). Authurst. Blng. D^y.
the Lord Keeper was provident, that the Worthies of the Law should be well
entreated. Their Learning being most comprehensive of Civil Causes and Affairs,
they had ever a great Stroke in that Honorable Council. Therefore he wrought
with his Majesty, to sign a Writ for the Advancement of some of the Gravest and
Greatest Pleaders, who were ripe for Dignity. And a Call of Sergeants was
splendidly solemnized, for Number Thirteen, for Quality of the best Reputation,
May 6, 1623: Who on that Day made their Appearance before Lord Keeper, sitting
in the High Court of Chancery, who congratulated their Adoption unto that Title
of Serjeancy with this Oration.

AS upon many other Occasions, so likewise upon this present in hand, I could
wish there sat in this Place, a man of more Gravity and Experience, than can
be expected from me, to deliver unto you those Counsels and Directions, which
all your Predecessors have successively received at this Bar. Yet among many
Wants, I find one singular Comfort, that as I am of the least Ability to give,
so you are of the least Need to receive Instructions, of all the Calls of
Sergeants, that any Man now alive can bring to his Remembrance. You are either
all, or the far greater Number of you, most Learned, most Honest, and well
accomplished Gentlemen. Lest therefore my Modesty, or your Integrity might
suffer therein, I will not be tedious in this kind of Exhortation; but like
those Mercuries, or High-way-Statues in Greece, I will only point out those
fair Ways, which my self, I confess, have never trodden. In the beginning, for
my Preface, be assured, that your Thankfulness shall be recommended to his
Majesty, who has honored you with this high Degree, making your Learning
only, and your Integrity, His Praevenient, and all other Respects whatsoever;
but subsequent and following Causes of his Gracious Pleasure toward you.
Turning my Speech next to your selves, I will observe mine own common Exordium,
which hitherto I have used to all those, whom I have saluted with a few words,
when they were Installed in their Dignities; and I have it from the manner of
the old Romans, Meminisse oportet Ossicii T^lum, Remember the Title of your
Degree, and it will afford you sufficient Matter of Admonition. You are called
Servientes ad Legem, Sergeants at the Law; Verba bractrata, Words very
malleable and extensive, and such as contein more Lessons than they do
Syllables.

122. The word Sergeant, no doubt, is Originally a Stranger born, though now
for many Years denizon'd among us. It came over at the first from France, and
is handled as a French word by Stephen Pasquier, in his Eighth Book of
Recherches, and the Nineteenth Chapter. They that are too luxuriant in
Etymologies, are sometimes barren in Judgment, as I will show upon the
Conjectures of this Name. For they are not called Sergeants, quasi Caesariens,
some of Caesar's Officers, as the great Guiacius thinks. Nor Sergents, qu isi
Serregens, because they laid hold on Men, as inferior Ministers. But Sergiens
in the old French is as much as Serviens, says Pasquier, a Servant, or an
Attendant: As Sergens de Dicu, the Servants of God, in the old History of St.
Dennis: Sergens and Disciples de la Sanchite, Servants or Disciples of his
Holiness the Pope, in the Life of St. Begue: And Sergens d'Amour, Servants of
Love in the Romance of the Rose, a Book well known in our Country, because of
the Translator thereof Geoffry Chaucer. And therefore as Pasquier thinks, that
those inferior Officers are called Sergeans, that is Servants, because at the
first Bailiffs or Stewards employed their own Servants in such Summons: So this
more honorable Appellation of Sergeant at Law, has received it; Denomination,
because at the first, when the Laws were no more than a few plain Customs; When
as the Year-Books had not yet swelled; When the Cases were not so diversified;
When so many Distinctions were not Coined and Minted; When the Volumes of the
Laws through our Misdeeds and Wiliness were not so multiplied, Men employed
their own Servants to tender their Complaints unto the Judges, and to bring
them home again a plain and present Remedy. But afterward Multitude of Shifts
begetting Multitudes of Laws, and Multitudes of Laws Difficulties of
Interpretations, especially where the Sword had engraven them in strange
Languages, as those induced by the Saxons, Danes and Normans into this Island,
the State was enforced to design and select some learned Men to prepare the
Causes of the Client for the Sentence of the Judge, and the Sentence of the
Judge for the Causes of the Client; who though never so Enobled by their Birth
and Education, yet because they succeeded in those places of Servants, were
also called Servientes, Sergeants, or Servants. Great Titles have grown up from
small Originals, as Dux, Comes, Baro, and others, and so has this, which is
Enobled by the affix unto it, a Sergeant at Law.

123. Though you are not the Rulers of Causes, and Masters upon the Bench, yet
it is your Pre-eminence that you are the chief Servants at the Bar: In the
Household of our Dread Sovereign, the Chief in every Office, who Commands the
lower Ministers, is advanced to be called the Sergeant of his Place, as
Sergeants of the Counting House, Carriages, Wine-Cellar, Larder, with many
others. In like manner your Name is a Name of Reverence, though you are styled
Servants: For you are the Principal of all that practice in the Courts of Law;
Servants, that is, Officers preferred above all Ranks of Pleaders. For every
thing must be Ruled by a Gradual Subordination. You are next in the Train to my
Lords the Judges: And some of your File not seldom employed to be Judges
Itinerant. But you are all constantly promoted to be Contubernales and
Commensales: You have your Lodgings in the same Houses, and keep your Table and
Diet with those Pillars of the Law, who therefore call you, and love you as
their Brethren. Fortescue in his sixth Book De laudibus Legum Angliae, Cap. 50.
compares your Dignities with the chief Degrees of the Academies: And there is
no Argument that proves the Nobleness of the one, but it is as strong and
militant for the other. I will touch upon the Reasons, as they are set down in
Junius his Book De Academia, and apply them in order to this purpose. First,
This Degree is as a Caveat to the whole State and Commonwealth, that by it they
may know whom to employ, and whom not to employ in their weighty Causes and
Consultations. And so does Fortescue appropriate Omnia Realia Placiata, all the
Real Actions and Pleadings of his time to the Sergeants only. Secondly, As St.
Paul says to the Corinthians, Epistola nostra vos estis; You are our Letter,
or Epistle; So may we the Judges in our several Places say unto the Sergeants,
Epistela nostra vos estis; You are, by reason of your Degrees, our Letters of
Recommendation unto the Kings Majesty, for his Choice and Election for the
Judges of the Kingdom. Because, as Fortescue also truly observes, no Man,
though never so Learned, can be chosen into that eminent Place, Nisi statu and
gradu Servientis ad Legem fuerit insignitus. Thirdly and lastly, This Degree of
Honor is (...), a kind of Spur and Incentive to all the Students of the Law,
that they might more easily concoct those otherwise insupportable Difficulties,
and Harshness of their Studies, in hope one Day to attein unto those Honors,
wherewith all of you by his Majesty's Favor, and your own Merits, are now to
be Invested. Those outward Decorums of Magnificence which set forth your
Exaltation this Day, are very specious, and sparkle so much in the Eyes of the
young Fry, that swim up after you, that they cannot but make very sensible
Impression in their Minds, to follow your Industry, that they may attein to
your Dignity. That Gold which you give away, secundum Consuetudinem regni in
hoc casu, implies that by your faithful Labor and Gods Providence, you have
attein'd to the Wealth of a fair Estate. And Wisdom is good with an
Inheritance, Eccles. 7.11. Nay, I wish heartily that all wise Men had plentiful
Inheritances; and that the Silly and Sottish were not so fortunate in gathering
Treasure: For a Rich ignorant Man is but a Sheep with a Golden Fleece. Then
your great and sumptuous Feast is like that at a Kings Coronation. At which you
entertain the Ambassadors of Foreign Kings now Resident about the City, and the
prime Officers and Nobility of this Realm. But to ascend higher, King Henry the
Seventh in his own Person did Grace the Sergeants Feast held then at Ely-Palace
in Holborn: So estimable was your Order in those Days to that Mighty Monarch. I
should be too long if I should speak of the Ornament of your Head, your pure
Linen Coif, which evidences that you are Candidates of higher Honor. So
likewise your Librata Magna, your abundance of Cloth and Liveries, your Purple
Habits, belonging anciently to great Senators, yea to Emperors; all these, and
more, are but as so many Flags, and Ensigns to call up those young Students,
that fight in the Valleys, to those Hills and Mountains of Honor, which you by
your Merits have now achieved.

-- Neque enim virtutem amplectimur ipsam
Praemia si tollas.
124. Gentlemen, I have told you from the Explanation of your Title, what you
are by Denomination. You must be dutiful, and respect my Lords the Judges,
because you are but Servientes, Servants. And you must be Reverenced by all of
your Robe, but the Judges, because you are Servientes ad Legem, Journey-Men of
the Law; whereas the rest, though called to the Bar, are no more than Discipuli
in Justinian's Phrase; or, as your own Books term, Apprenticii, mere
Apprentices. You serve in that Law which is of excellent Composure for the
Relief of them that seek Redress in this Nation through all Cases: And of rare
Privilege it is, above the Trials of all other Kingdoms and States, for the
Trial of those that are under Criminal Attainder, by a Jury of their own Peers.
Which I find as one to have used in ancient Polities, but Cato major in his own
Family. Supplicium de Servo non sumsit, nisi postquam damnatus est conservorum
judicio. He punished none of his Bondmen, unless they were cast by the Verdict
of their fellow Bondmen. To be elected the prime Servants of our most wise, and
most equal Laws, supposes in you great Reading, great Reason, great
Experience; which deservedly casts Honor upon your Persons. Emulous, I may say
Envious Censurers, speak scornfully of your Learning and Knowledge, that it is
gainful to your at Home in your own Country; but of no use or value abroad. For
what is a Sergeant or Counselor of these Laws, if he get Dover Cliffs at his
back? So I remember Tully in his Oration pro Murena, being more angry than he
had cause with S^lpitius, who was Vir juris consultissimus, disdains his Skill
with this Taunt, Sapiens existimari nemo potest in ea prudentia, quae extra
Romam nequicquam valet: That was a wise Art indeed, which was wise no further
than the Praetors Courts in R^e. Let Sulpitius answer for himself. But in your
behalf I have this to answer, That beside your Judicious Insight into the
Responsa Prudintum, and the laudable Customs of this Kingdom, which are proper,
with our Statute-Laws, to our own People; I say, beside these, the Marrow of
the whole Wisdom of the Caesarcan Transmarine Law, is digested into our Common
and Statute-Laws, as wi^ easily appear to him that examines the Book of
Entries, or Original Writs: Which makes you sufficient to know the Substance
and Pith of the Civil Law in all Courts through Europe: So that you would be to
seek in their Text, not in their Reason; and in their Traverses and Formalities
of Pleadings, which are no prejudice to the Worthiness of your Function. Now I
have told you as a judge, that you are Servants, but Honorable Servants of the
Law; before I con^, let me admonish you as a Bishop, that you are in your
highest Title the Servants of God. Therefore keep a good Conscience in all
things. Serve that holy Law, which bids you Not to pervert the Right and Cause
of the Innoc^. I know it is very hard to discern the Right from the Wrong in
many Suits, till they come to be thoroughly sisted and examined. So truly did
Quimilian say, Lib. 2. Cap. 8. Potest accidere ut ex utraque part vir bonus
dicat. An honest Man in many Plea^ may be entertained on either side. Therefore
it is no discredit to your Profession, that as the Aetolians in Greece of old,
and the Suitzers in the Cant^ns at this Day are often Auxiliaries of both sides
in a pitched Battle; so you should be Feed to try your Skill either for
Plaintiff or Defendant. But when you discern a Clients Cause is rotten, then to
employ your Cunning to give it Victory against Justice, is intolerable. The
more vulgar that Iniquity is, the more it is odious. As Pliny said, Lib. 8.
Episto. ad Russiuum, Decipere pro meribus temporum prudentia est; It was the
great Blindness and Corruption of the Times, when Cheating past for Wisdom. He
that labors by Witty Distortions to overthrow the Truth, he serves Lucre, and
not God; he serves Mammon, and not the Law. You know you cannot serve those two
Masters; for they are utterly opposite But, to conclude, three Masters you may,
nay, you ought to serve, which are subordinate; Serve God; Serve the King;
Serve the Law. Ite alacres, tantaeque precor confidite Causae. I have ended.
The Fear of God go with you; and his Blessing be upon you.

125. All things upon this Festival Day of the new Sergeants were answerable to
this Eloquent Speech. Yet every Day looked clowdy; and the People were
generally indisposed to Gaudy Solemnities, because the Prince was in a far
Country. Others may undertake to write a just History of that Journey into
Spain, (and a just History gives Eternity to Knowledge) I fall upon no more,
than came under the dispatch of one Person, upon whom I insist. Yet some
Passages upon the whole Matter will require their mention; the parts of the
Narration needing as it were Sinews and Tendons, without which they cannot grow
together. Two Years and little more were run out after the Death of Prince
H^nry, so much missed, so much bewailed, when the principal Statesman then in
Spain under King Philip the Third, the Duke of Lerma, opened the Motion first
to Sir J. Digby, our King's Ambassador Resiant in the Court of Madrid, for a
Match between our Prince, (who was by this time every where renowned for the
Diligence he showed to that brave Education which was given him) and the
Infanta Maria, the much praised Daughter of his Master, the Mightiest Christian
Potentate in Europe. Our King was passing well pleased, when his Servant Digby
sent him word of it, and encouraged him to bring it to as much ripeness as he
could. The Treatise went on very cheerfully with the great Ones on both sides,
who were only, or chiefly concerned in it. But no People meddle more, or more
impertinently, with the discourse of great things which are above them, than
the paultriest of the English, I mean Shopkeepers, and Handycrafts-men. These
had some vain Fears which made them deaf to Reason, and swift to murmur. But
the King was too wise to put his Honor, and his greatest Actions under the
Hazard of their Interpretation. That some of our Nobles sided with the common
Man's Opinion, it weighed as little. For they were such as loved it like their
Life to be commended by open Fame, and could not dissemble, that their coldness
to the Match was not without a Fever of Popularity. No discreet Person thought
that the Success would be the worse, because a few gay Coats forbid the Bands,
with the Tryes and Dewces of Sedentary and Loitering Men. Pliny says of
Miscellen Pulses, sowed together in Italy in his time, Nihil ocymo faecundius,
quod maledictis and probris serendum praecipiunt, ut laetius proveniat, Lib.
19. N.H. C. 7. The Husbandmen had a Superstition to curse it, or to give it all
ill words, when it was sown, and thought it would grow the better. With more
Reason I may affirm it were Superstition to imagine, that a good Design would
the sooner go back, because it was rashly malign'd by them that walked in
Paul's, or thronged together in the Markets. There was nothing like a halt in
the Treaty of this Marriage between the two Kings, till the Prince Elector, our
Kings Son-in-Law, made his Excursion into Bohemia, and left his own Country
naked and undefensible behind him, and lost it. Though in fair dealing now the
Nuptials should have hastened faster to a Conclusion, than before, because the
young Parties were grown up to a mature Age for Marriage: Yet the Spaniard
could be brought on to no dispatch, but took respite of time about three Years,
to resolve how the Bridal-Joy should be doubled with the Settlement of the
Palsgrave in his own Principality. For till that was done, Peace between the
two Kingdoms was but in a doubtful, and a catching Condition.

126. The Castilian Court is ever slow; but, to make it worse, it was
suspected, as I incline to think, uncharitably, that in this great Business it
would not be sure. It is incident when one State offends another, to impute the
fault not to that one Error, but to a general and National Vice. So the
Spaniards were set out to the Prince in some busy Pamphlets, and other
Draughts put into his Hand, for such as the Parthians are described in Justin.
Lib. 41. Parthi Natura taciti, ad faciendum quam ad dicendum promptiores, sides
diclis promissisque nuila, nisi quatenus expedit. Such as were given to
suppress and conceal their Counsels: Such as would sooner bite, than bark: Such
as would keep no Faith, but when it served their turn. The Prince both
discountenanced and discarded those, that, in Zeal to his Affairs, presumed to
write contumeliously of that Prepotent, Wise and Grave Nation He had cast the
Anchor of great Hopes and Joys upon that Shore. Every Tongue gave loud
Commendation to the Infanta his Mistress. He loved the report of her Virtues
and Beauty; and he that is sick of Love, will be more sick of Procrastination.
Thereupon, as he did publicly before the ensuing Parliament take it upon
himself, (...) Heroic Thought started out of his own Brain, to visit the Court
of (...), as well to show what Confidence he had in the Justice and Honor of
that King, committing the safety of his Person to him in a strange Land, as to
bring his Comforts to a sudden Consummation, if his Catholic Majesty meant
seriously (...) bellow his Sister upon him. But if he had played an ignoble part
by count ^ing Pro^tions, then resolutely to give King Philip no leisure to
abuse him any longer. And set the Discredi^e at his Door, that had done the
wrong; for it is more honorable to suffer an injury, than to do it. The Lord
Marquess of Buckingham, then a great Gra^o, was put on by the Prince to ask the
Kings liking to this Amour^ (...) ^enure: Of whom he obtein'd both his Consent,
and his Secrecy, (...) ^ere over the Seas. For this was the Pirithous, that
went with (...) his Love. They left New Market on the 17th of (...) on the
18th; from thence posted to Dover, and were in France before they were missed.
But then upon the Bruit of the Prince's sudden departure, so thinly Guarded for
so long a Journey, even the Wisest were troubled. The Courtiers, chiefly those
that wanted their Master, talked out their Discontents boldly. The Lords of the
Counsel looked dejectedly, that they were pretermitted in a Consultation of so
great Importance; but prayed heartily, That since his Majesty was pleased to
walk softly that he might not be heard, his chance were not to tread away.
Among them all, the Lord Keeper was the only Counselor suspected to be of the
Plot. Yet he knew as little as the rest; and satisfied their Lordships, that
Ignorance was often a happy thing; as in this instance. For if the Prince had
gone out of the Kingdom privily with their Lordships Knowledge and Counsel, and
some misfortune (which God avert) should prevent his safe return, their Heads
would be forfeited to Justice, and their Names exposed to perpetual Infamy.
Indeed this was but the second time that King James had balked his whose
Counsel upon a like Occasion: Not out of Confidence that he knew enough without
them; but out of tenderness to their safety, that they might not undergo the
Anger exacted upon ill Events, if God should cause them. In the Year 1589. he
caused some Ships to be Rigged, that the Admiral of Scotland might fetch Queen
Ann out of Denmark: But when the Fleet was ready, he went Aboard himself,
hoisted Sails, and took his leave of no Man. For which sudden Voyage, not
imparted to the Lords that fate close at Edinburgh, he gives this Satisfaction
to them in a Letter, (see it in worthy Spotswood, page 377.) I took this
Resolution, none of (...) unsel being present, keeping my Intention from my
Chancellor himself, from whom I never kept any of my weightiest Business:
Because if I had made him of my Counsel in that purpose, he had been blamed for
putting the same into my Head; which had not been his Duty. For it becomes no
Subject to give his Prince Advice in such Matters. In this Story it appears,
that the Father-King trod the way to his Son to undergo such an Audacious
Journey in the pursuance of his Love. Quid non effraeno captus amore Audeat.
Ovid. Then that he Persisted in his Principles of Secrecy for a generous End,
that he might not draw his Chief and Best Servants, whom he loved most, into a
Snare of Guiltiness.

127. Let Provision be made to the most that could be for the safety of all
others, yet Sir Ant. W. in his Court and Character of K. James, has one
Exception. That the King set this Wheel on Running to destroy Buckingham, for
the hatred which he had long bore him, and would not think it ill to loose his
Son, so Buckingham might be lost also, Page 149. O Horrid! But the best is the
Foundation is Rotten: For Buckingham as all Men about the King would Testify,
was in as high Favor at that time, as any Subject was ever with his Sovereign.
But when Sir A. to make out the Proof, he lays it upon Sir H. Yelverton,
displaced from the Office of Attorney General to the King, and committed to the
Tower; 'twas he that assured the Marquess that the King hated him more than any
man Living, page 159. Sir Harry was Unfortunate, but too honest a Man to sow
Discord between the King, and his principal Peer and Attendant. Now mark upon
what Bottom the Contriver of this Tale does wind his Forgery. Sir W. Balfore,
at the time of his Lieutenancy of the Tower, brought the Marquess at Midnight
to Sir H. Yelverton's Chamber, being then his close Prisoner: Where Sir William
heard those Passages, and a great deal more between them. And by one or other,
who came to the knowledge of it, but this Sir Anthony? O Wicked Servant to thy
good Master! O fowl Bird that defilest the Nest, wherein thou were hatched, and
well fledged! Thou art caught in thine own Lime; for thou never could have
Conserence with Sir W. Balfore, or Sir H. Yelverton about such a matter. For
Learned Yelverton was never Prisoner to Valiant Balfore, Sir Allen Apsley was
Lieutenant all the time of that worthy man's restraint. And Sir W. Balfore was
not preferred to that Office of great Trust, in more than four years after Sir
Harry had obtained his Liberty; when Knaves will turn Fools, it is not amiss to
be merry with them. And I will fit Sir Anthony with a Jest out of Illustrius
the Pythagorean, p. 23. One Daphidas came to the Pythian Deity, to beseech his
Oracleship to tell him when he should find a Gelding of his that was gone
astray. You shall find him very shortly, says Apollo's Minister. I thank you
for your good News, says Daphidas, but I have neither lost a Horse, nor have a
Horse to loose. So I turn Sir Anthony over to the Committee of Oracles and
proceed. After the Princes Out Leap, the King lingered at New Market, till the
time was nigh, that every day Tidings were expected of his safe Arrival in
Spain, that he might show himself to the Lords at White Hall with better
Confidence, which he did March 30. being the first day that the Lord Keeper
spoke with the King about his dear Sons Planetary Absence. No sooner had he
made most humble sign of his Majesty's Welcome by Kissing his Hand, but the
King Laughed out this Question to him; Whether he thought this Knight Errant
Pilgrimage would be lucky to win the Spanish Lady, and to convey her shortly
into England. Sir says the Lord Keeper, If my Lord Marquess will give Honor to
Conde Duke Olivares, and Remember he is the Favorite of Spain: Or if Olivares
will show Honorable Civility to my Lord Marquess, Remembering he is a Favorite
of England, the Woing may be Prosperous. But if my Lord Marquess should forget
where he is, and not stoop to Olivares, or if Olivares, forgetting what Guest
he has Received with the Prince, bear himself haughtily, and like a Castilian
Grandee to my Lord Marquess, the Provocation may be Dangerous to Cross your
Majesty's good Intentions. And I pray God that either one or both of them do
not run into that Error. The King drew a Smile at the Answer, but bit his Lip
at the presage Discourse, being Enlarged between them, the King perceived that
his Counselor had other Fears, and that his Brain teemed with Jealousies of
very hard Encounters, which he knocked upon softly, that his Majesty might
discern them, and not seem to apprehend them. Only thus far the King proceeded,
to ask him, If he had wrote to his Son and to the Lord Marquess clearly, and
upon what Guard they should stand. Yes Sir, says he for that purpose I have
dispatched some Packets. Then continue, says the King, to help me and themin
those difficulties with your best Powers and Abilities, and serve me faithfully
in this motion, which, like the highest Orb, carries all my Raccolta's, my
Counsels at the present, and my prospects upon the Future, with it, and I will
never part with you. The Cause which made His Majesty so solicitous, made the
Lord Keeper need no Provocation to diligence. He was before hand. And upon the
25 of February, by a Currier that was at Madrid almost as soon as the Prince,
he wrote two Letters following to his Highness and to the Lord Marquess

A Letter to the Prince.
May it please your Highness,
128 ALthough Prayer is all the Service, That at this time either I the most
obliged, or any other, the wisest of your Servants, can perform unto you, yet I
Humbly beseech your Higness to pardon true Affections, that cannot stay there,
but will be expressing of it self, though peradventure neither wisely nor
discreetly. The Comic Writer held these two scarce competent, Amare and
sapere. And to exclude all show of discretion, I presume to write this First
Letter of mine to your Highness, without so much as excribing, or taking a Copy
of the same, this opportunity admitting no leisure at all to do the one or the
other. Your Journey is generally reputed the depth of your danger, which in my
Fears and Representations your Arrival should be. You are in a strange State,
for ought we know uninvited, business being scarce prepared, subject to be
staid upon many and contrary pretenses, made a Plot for all the Wisdom of Spain
and Rome, for all the contemplations of that State, and that Religion to work
upon. And peradventure the detaining of Your Highness his Person may serve
their turn, as amply as their Marriage; at least wise for this time, and the
Exploits of the ensuing Summer: I write not this to fright you, who have
Testified to all the World your incapability of that Passion. But to give Your
Highness to understand, that I hope, if you discover any ^ndment to detein your
Princely Person under any fair Color, or Pretense whatsoever, You will
endeavor by all means possible to make your departure as secret as your
Arrival was. I pray God this may prove but my Folly and Jealousy. And I thank
God heartily that you have in Your Company the Earl of Bristow, who for Advice
and Counsel upon the Place, is, in my poor Opinion, inferior to none in His
Majesty's Dominions. Here is no Course omitted to still the Noise, and to take
away the Affrightments, caused by your sudden departure. I am a little afraid,
that the person of the Earl of Car^, whom His Majesty has posted after you,
will not prove so acceptable in the Spanish Court, which I wish might have no
Provocation at all, while your person is there. If it prove so, he is a most
willing Lord to please Your Highness, and you may (...) so of ^im the sooner
back again. I have endeavored to smooth, and sweeten all things at home, in
the best accommodation that lay in me. I have stayed a Collection which went on
for the Grisons, though I bear them good will, least the King of Spain might
take Offense thereat. I have restored the Priests and Jesuits, that were
restrained in the New Prison, to their former Liberty. I have given special
Order to the Judges for Sweetness, and Doulcure to the English Catholics. I
have twice Visited the the Spanish Ambassador, and do now deny him no Suit he
makes. And all this with a Reflection upon that inestimable Pearl of curs,
which God has now put into their Hands. On the other side, if things prosper
according to your Highness's desire, you will not fail to write to some person,
that will Publish it, that nothing has been represented to you there, adverse
or contrary to your Profession, and Religion. And that you were much Offended,
when you heard of those Surmises of this people, that you took this Journey out
of an Yielding and Recklesness in the Constancy and Sincerity of the same. This
Course will quiet the sond Jealousies at home. Your Highness will now give me
leave to Remember mine own Calling, and to call upon you to do that, which you
have never failed to do, to call upon God Morning and Evening for his Gracious
Assistance and continual Protection, to whose preventing, accompanying, and
pursuing Grace, I do most humbly and Devoutly now upon my bended Knees
recommend your Highness. Dominus Custodiat introitum tuum, and exitum tuum, ex
Loc nunc and usque in seculum. Ps. 121.8.


A Letter to the L. Buckingham.
My most Noble Lord,
129 ALthough the Service I can now only perform to your Lordship, is praying
and not writing, yet my Affection will not suffer me to conceal my Folly in
this kind. I have no time to recollect my Thoughts, this Gentleman, who steals
away after you, is in such haste. I have uttered most of my Dreams unto his
Highness, who, I know, will impart them to your Lordship, unless they shall
prove so wide, as, out of respect to my Credit, he shall be pleased to burn
them. If things prove so ill (which God forbid) as that his Princely Person
should under Color of Friendship, larger Treaty, or any Device, be then
detained, longer then his liking, be you, my sweet Lord drawn by no Means,
Counsel, or Importunity, to leave his Person, and to return without him. If you
should do so (as I know you will not) beside the disgrace thereof, it would
prove your certain Ruin. If things prove well, you need no Counsel, your
Adventure will be Applauded, and great Note cast upon your Wisdom and
Resolution. But if the Health, Entertainment, and the principal business of His
Highness, nay if any one of the Three should miscarry, You cannot in your
Wisdom and great Experience in this Court, but certainly knew, that the blame
will be laid upon you. And therefore for Gods sake prepare your self
accordingly by Mature Deliberation to Encounter it. My Lord; for fear others
will not, I will tell you the Truth. If I Offend you with my Trusty Care; I am
sure your good Nature will blow it over before we meet again. But in sooth all
the Court, and the Rabble of people lay this Voyage upon your Lordship. The
King would seem sometimes, as I hear, to take it to himself (and we have
Advised him so to do by Proclamation) yet he sticks at it, and many times casts
it upon you both. Thus Sir J. Epsley told me within this hour, whom I sent to
the Court of purpose to learn it. Nay Faces are more sowred, and Rumors of
Dangers more Increased, because you have defeated some great Lords, who
expected to be employed, for the Conduct of the Infant a hither. And though
things speed never so well, this Quarrel will remain. But I would that might
prove the greatest Danger. If Your Lordship will Command me what to do in Your
Absence, I hope you believe you have a faithful Servant, and wise enough to
follow Directions. I will be as Vigilant in your Affairs, as my distance from
the Court will give me Leave, Your Lady is well, but unapproachable and
invisible. Your little Daughter is very Pleasant, and as it seems, bids us hope
the best in her Infantile Presagements. My Lady Your Mother is well, and chides
me that I could not Divine, and Prophecy of your Journey. I will make bold to
remember me to your Host, as we conceive it, the Earl of Bristow, and his good
Lady, my loving Country-woman. My Noble Lord, my Humble Suit unto you, and my
best Advice is, that as all the Lords in England sought your Lordship with all
Observance in this Court, so you will seek and gain the great Lords of Spain,
with as much Observance in the Court of Spain. I ended His Highness Letter with
a Text of Scripture, and I have another for your Lordship, Genes. 24. ver. 48,
49. And I bowed my Head, and Worshipped the Lord, and Blessed the Lord God of
my Master Abraham, who has led me in the Right-way to take my Masters Brothers
Daughter to his Son. And now if you will deal kindly and truly with my Master,
tell me, that I may turn to the Right Hand, or to the Left. I Leave your
Lordship in this Meditation, and in Gods Gracious Protection for ever.


130. These, in the Levitical Phrase, were but the Green Ears of the First
Fruits. The Sheaves of his Wisdom will follow after. For more is to be looked
for how he proceeded, then how he began. All things went well, and unanimously
on the part of our English Counselors in those Foreign Juntoes, from hence,
and so forth at least to the beginning of May. Thus far 'twas easy to please
them all. But there is one skill required in a Calm at Sea, another in a
Tempest: Though the Pilots good Will and Fidelity be constantly the same. Trust
to him for this, and he shall not fail. After he had parted from the King, so
deeply Charmed to bestir his Wits in this Negotiation, he was as Active as one
could be that had little to work upon. The Prince and his Paranymphus the
Marquess had wrote some Letters upon the way, how far they had proceeded in
their Journey. But the Buen Message, that they were come to the Cape of
Good-Hope in the City of Madrid, was not yet brought to the City of London;
where the conflux at this time was very populous; their Errand being to hearken
after News. And the particulars they longed to hear of were these; Whether His
Highness were Arrived at the Court in Spain? When he would return again? (their
Honest Affections ran too fast to look for that so soon) Whether he were not
Tampered withal to alter his Religion? And some were so reasonable, and well
pleased, (some were not) to ask, Whether he were Married, and would bring his
Bride with him for hope of Future Issue? As much Satisfaction was given to
these Scruples from the Lord Marquess, by the First Post that Arrived here, as
could be expected in so short a time, as he had spent abroad. Of which more in
due time. But before his Lordship's came, the Lord Keeper wrote again, and
again unto him to Assist the main business, and to pour in such Counsels into
his Lordship's Breast, as keeping close unto them, he might promise himself
more Grace with the King, and Commendation with the Subject. Philosophers, who
wrote the Practices of a Good life, agree, That unfeigned Love does Justify it
self in three Probations, or in either of them; when it is Faithful to a dead
Friend, who shall never know it; or to a Friend undone in misery, who cannot
requite it, or to an Absent Friend, who does not perceive it. As none that have
Faith and Candor will wish to declare their sincerity in the two former
Experiments, so neither will they fail in the opportunity of the latter. (...),
says Ancient Thales in Laertius. Remember your Friends as well far of, as near
you. And in Rome, says Lil. Giraldus; These two Adverbs were Written under the
Image of Friendship, Long and Prope. Be as Officious (nay more) to your Friend
remote from you, as when you are hand in hand together. I have drawn out the
Lord Keeper's Observance to his Raiser, my Lord of Buckingham, with this Pensil
of Morality. It would be tedious to fill up Leaves with those copious and
punctual Relations which he wrote to his Lordship of all Agitations in the
Court, of Suits preferred to the King, and how far he went about to stop them
all, till his Pleasure was signified in the next Return. That which comes to
the Institute I handle, was thus Endicted, bearing Date Marth 31.

My most Noble Lord,
I Do humbly thank your Lordship for your Letter, and all other your loving
Remembrances of me by the last Packet. It has much revived me to hear of your
Lordship's good Speed so far. I was Yesterday with His Majesty (the first time
I saw his Face since your Lordship's Departure) to know his Opinion of this
Letter to the Count Gondamar (which I send enclosed) to stir him up to
consummate the Marriage. His Majesty liked it exceeding well; yet I have sent
it opened, that if your Lordship, and my Lord of Bristow, who are upon the
Place, shall not allow thereof, it may be suppressed. Truly the Reasons are no
Colors, but very real; that if new and tart Propositions, sent from Rome,
occasioned by the Possession they have of his Highness's Person, should
protract this Marriage, the Prince is in great danger to suffer exceedingly in
the Hearts and Affections of the People here at Home, and your Lordship sure
enough to share in the Obloquies. Better Service I cannot do the Prince and
your Lordship, than to thrust on the Ministers of the King of Spain, with the
best Enforcements of my Judgment; who, if they dead this Business with a Calm,
it is almost as bad as a cross Gale. But, my Lord, I will not fail to continue
as faithful to your Lordship, as to mine own Soul. Which to do at this time, is
not thanks-worthy, his Majesty being so constant, or rather so augmented in his
Affections toward you, as all your Servants are extraordinarily comforted
therewith, and the rest struck dumb, and silenced. But if any Storm (which God
will keep off) had appeared, your Lordship should have found a Difference
between a Churchman and others, who has nothing to regard in this World, but
to serve God, and to be constant to his Friend; all the rest being but Trash to
him, who can confine his utmost Desires to a Book, and a little Chamber. But
God Almighty never imparted unto you a greater Share of his Majesty's
Affections, that at this Time.


131. This went by Sir J. Epsley: After whom, within three days, Sir George
Goring followed, who was stayed till April the 3d; the next day after, the
joyful Packet came, that his Highness saw Madrid by the 7th of March in our
Style, and came thither in Health and good Plight, after so much Travel by Day
and Night, so much hard Lodging, such slender Fare in base Village-Osteria's.
Away went Sir George, I said, with Alacrity, the next Day, and carried these
Lines to my Lord of Buckingham, from the Lord Keeper.

My most Noble Lord,
IN Obedience to your Commands (which I humbly thank your Lordship for) I do
write by this Bearer, yet no more than what I have have written lately by Sir
John Epsley. All things stand here very firmly and well, which may concern your
Lordship; only the Great Seal walks somewhat faster than usual, which is an
Argument that it was not my Lord of Buckingham only, that set it a going. We
hear the Affairs proceed well, where your Lordship is. And here is conceived
generally Great Joy and Acclamation for the brave Entertainment that the Prince
has received; which the People did yester-night very cheerfully express by
Bon-fires and Bells; only the Consummation of the Matrimony is wanting to
consummate our Joys. Yet the People spread it abroad, upon sight of the
Bonfires, that all is perfected. As they do also speak of your Lordship's
Dukedom, a Title, which will well become both your Person and Employment. The
Patent whereof, I believe, the King will shortly send to you, to testify his
Joy, and to gratify your Service. But, my Lord, I am still (against the
Opinion of many wiser Men) averse to your Lordship's Return hither (as desirous
as I am to enjoy your Lordships Presence) until you either see the Prince
ready for his Return, or that you may bring him along with you. I have sent
another Letter to my Lord Gondamar, to be delivered or suppressed as your
Lordship shall please; to let him know, by my Expostulations falling so thick
upon him, what is behoveful to be done. If they make us stay their leisure,
they will loose much of their Thanks. If they cloy us with new Articles, upon
Advantage that they have the Prince among them, they have lost their Wits, or
Honesty, and will loose their Purpose. Of which, yet I have but half a Doubt,
and his Majesty none at all. I have also taken liberty in that Letter, to speak
of your Lordship, I hope without Offense. I leave the rest to Sir George
Goring's Relation, and your Lordship to God's Protection.


Now was the time, now, when my Lord of Buckingham was in this eminent
Employment, that he did most need a Wife, and a trusty Counselor: For an Error
in so great a Eusiness, would be worse interpreted than the wilful Commission of
a Fault in a smaller thing. As Tully says, Lib. 4. de fin. If a Ship be wreckt
by Negligence, Majus est peccatum in auro quam in palca. Hereof the Lord Keeper
was more sensible than any of his Lordship's Creatures; and quite contrary to
those that had private Ends to make use of the Lord Marquess at Home, and
called importunately for his Return, he alone was bold to give him his sage
Opinion, not to stir from his Charge; withal, enheartning him with the Comfort
of the King's constant Favor, that it was kept for him against his Return, in
as great, or higher measure, as he enjoyed it when he took his Leave. And to
Count Gondamar, he gave a Character of his Lordship, which he desired the Count
would make known to the greatest Counselors of King Philip, that none did
exceed him in Generosity and Sweetness of Nature; that he deserved
extraordinary Civilities for his own Worth, and according to the Favor with
which his Master tendered him, and that he would pawn his Life upon it, that no
Man should go before him in Honorable Acknowledgments for Noble Usage. These
good Offices were part of the Lord Keeper's Retribution to his Advancer, which
he deposited as fast as he could lay them out: For perfect Thankfulness never
leaves bearing, never thinks it has paid its utmost Debt.

132. Now to follow the Chase: As Counsel and Forecast were very busy at the
Loom here, so Tidings from Spain did promise that there was a good Thread spun
there. All Expresses related, that the Entertainment was very pompous and
Kingly. (...), says Alexander in Plutarch, I have said all, when I said it was
done like a King, chiefly, like a King of Spain. But two Negatives were better
than this Affirmative. First, That his Highness should not be attempted to
recede from the Religion, in which he was grounded. Secondly, That he should
not be ^ned with unwelcome Prorogations. Nay, That a short time should (...)
the Nuptials. Truly. In defiance to Emulation or Detract^ (...) be granted that
the first Stone was well laid. His Highness's Welcome (...) full of Cost and
Honor, which was Decorum; for no Tree will bear Fruit in Autumn, unless it
blossom kindly in the Spring. The Entertainment was complete in all Points of
Ceremony, and Ceremony is a great part of Majesty. It will suffice to set down
a little that is published herein, and never contradicted. Cabal. P. 14. The
King of Spain and the State studied to do the Prince all the Honor that might
be. The first Decree that the Council of State made, was, That at all Occasions
of Meeting, he should have the Precedence of the King. That he should make
Entry into the Palace with that Solemnity, which the Kings of Spain do on the
first day of their Coronation. That he should have one of the chief Quarters of
the King's House for his Lodgings. One hundred of the Guard to attend him. All
the Council to obey him as the King's own Person. And upon all these
Particulars, Mr. W. Sanderson is exactly copious in the Reign of King James, P.
545, in laying the Relation with other high Civilities, which were very true.
That a general Pardon was proclaimed of all Offenses, and all prisoners within
the Continent of Spain released; and all English Slaves in the Galleys for
Piracy, or other Crimes, set at Liberty; and this manifested to be done in
Contemplation of the Prince's Welcome. The Windows of the Streets were
glorified with Torches three Nights together by Proclamation Most costly
Presents, and of diverse Garnishing, brought to him, were Testimonies of
Heroic Hospitality, such as were wont to be bestowed in Homer's Age, yet far
beyond them, and whose like none could give, but he that was Master of the
West Indies Abroad, and of the best Artificers at Home. That which weighed most
of all, was, That infinite Debt of Love and Honor, which the King professed to
be due unto him, with this long-wing'd Complement, which flew highest, That he
had won his Sister with this brave Adventure, and deserved to have her thrown
into his Arms. This was the Cork and Quill above, and I know of no Hook beneath
the Water. Some imagine it; but, turning over all Dispatches that came to my
Hand, I know of none; and that which outgoes my Knowledge, shall never undergo
my Censure. To speak out the Truth, where could the Spanish Monarch have done
better for his Sister, or for himself; that is, for Love, or Policy? since it
was a Business mixed of both. There was not a Deturdigniori among the Sons of
Kings in Europe, to whom he could give the Golden Aple. And, in Conjunction
with the Prince, the next Planet under him, the Lord Marquess had a Luster of
much Grace and Observance darted upon him. At first he was much esteemed, says
the Intelligencer, Cabal, P. 16. and remembered with Presents from the bravest
of both Sexes. Says another, He was a Person, whose Like was not to be seen
among the swarthy and low-growth'd Castilians. For, as Ammianus describes a
well-shap'd Emperor, Ab ipso capite usque ad unguium summitates reeta erat
lineamentorum compage. From the Nails of his Fingers, nay, from the Sole of his
Foot to the Crown of his Head, there was no Blemish in him. And yet his
Carriage, and every Stoop of his Deportment, more than his excellent Form, were
the Beauty of his Beauty. Another Sisinnius, as Socrates the Ecclesiastic
shows him out, (...). The Setting of his Looks, every Motion, every Bending of
his Body was admirable. No marvel if such a Gallant drew Affections to him at
Home and Abroad, especially at Madrid, which was a Court of Princes. But can
that Nation pass over such a Triumph as this Entertainment, without Pumpian
Words, and ruffling Grandiloquence? it is impossible. Therefore one Andres de
Mendoza wrote a Relation of all these Passages, which he dedicated to Don Juan
de Castilia, wherein he pities us poor English, that we had seen nothing but
Country Wakes, or Popit-Plays, compared with these Rarities, which were the
seven Wonders of Bravery. And that King Philip did vouchsafe to make King James
happy with his Alliance; as C. Caesar honored Amiclas the Water-man (called
Pauper Amyclas, Lucan. Lib. 5.) to be wasted over into Italy in his Bark. Thus
he went on with other flatuous Disparagements. One Copy of this, and no more,
came to the Leiger Ambassador of the Catholic King, of which the Lord Keeper
had the Use, and would never deliver it again; but wrote to my Lord Marquess,
April 20th, to bid the Earl of Bristow to take care, either to stifle it, if it
were not divulged, or to cause it to be called in, if it were published. Such
Scriblers should be informed against in the Ragguaglia's of Pernassus, and
amerced to pay for the the Loss of our Time.

133. Aste the gaudy Days of the Royal Welcome were past over, my Lord of
Buckingham obliged the Lord Keeper greatly unto him, with a Letter (Dated March
26, and came about the Declining of April) for the Comfort of the Contents,
which were these.

My good Lord,
HOwsoever I wrote so lately unto you, that I have not since received any
Letter from your Lordship; yet because you shall see that I let slip no
Opportunity, I do it again by this Conveyance, and must again tell you the good
News of his Highness's being in perfect Health. I cannot doubt but many idle
and false Rumors will daily be there spread, during the Absence of his
Highness; which I know your Lordship, and the wiser sort will easily contemn,
and believe only that which you shall find avowedly advertised from hence. And
here let me thus far prevent with your Lordship, any sinister Report that shall
be made in the main Point, which is the Prince's Religion; assuring you, that
he is no way pressed, nor shall be persuaded to change it, for so is it clearly
and freely professed unto him. I hope I shall shortly be able to advertise your
Lordship of the Arrival of the Dispensation, which will be the Conclusion of
our Business. And thus wishing your Lordship all Honor and Happiness, etc.


The Pearl, which came in this Letter, is that Satisfaction, purchased of God
with the Prayers of all devout Men, that the Prince should not be inveigled in
Conferences, or unquieted with Disputes, to strip himself of the
Wedding Garment of that incorrupt Faith in Christ, which he had professed from
a Child, for that Wedding sake which he came to conclude. How impudently have
some Trash-Writers out-faced this Truth, as if the Prince had been beset on all
sides, to make Shipwreck of his Religion in the Gulf of Rome? Ar. Wilson, of
all others, is the most forward Accuser, and therefore the Falfest. Taste him in
these Parcels, P. 230, that the Earl of Bristow insinuated it with this crafty
Essay to his Highness, That none of the King's of England could do great
things, that were not of that Religion. Yet he interfears in that same Page,
That Gondamar pressed the Earl of Bristow not to hinder so pious a Work, assuring
him that they had Buckingham's Assistance in it. Then belike Gondamar was
jealous of Bristow, that he was contrary to that, which he called a pious Work,
the Prince's Perversion. Certainly he knew Bristow as far as a Friend could
know a Friend: And as many Bow-shots wide is he from my Lord of Buckingham's
Sincority in that Action as a Liar is from Heaven. Is not his Lordship's
Handwriting, so solemn'y mentioned, an uncontrollable Testimony? The same
Author slanders Conde d'Olivares, and makes him utter that which never came
from him. That if the Prince would devote himself to their Church, it would
make him ^th way to the Infanta's Afflictions; and if he seared the English
would rebel, he should be assisted with an Army to reduce them. The Con^e Duke
carried no such threatening Fire in one Hand, nor at that time, any of his Holy
Water in the other: For he committed nothing to offend his Highness's Ears in
that ^ind, till his Passions made him forget himself about three Months after.
Not contented with this, he makes the Prince say that which he never thought,
as that when the Conde Duke propounded, That if his Highness would not admit of
a sudden Alteration, and that publicly, yet he would be so indulgent to litten
to the Infanta in Matters of Religion, when they both came into England: Which
the Prince promised to do. But what says true hearted Spotswood? P. 544. That
the Prince was steadfast, and would not change his Religion for any worldly
Respect, nor enter into Conference with any Divines for that purpose. Utri
credetis? Is there any Choice which of these two should rather be believed? I
am careful to praemonish conscientious Readers against Serpentine Pens, least
their nibling should ranckle. A Serpent, you know, from the beginning was a
Lodging for the Devil, Genesis 3. and so is a Slanderer. The Manual of Romish
Exorcisms, says Instruct. 2. that it is presumed for a sign, that he is possessed
with a Devil, Qui linguam extorquet miris modis, and eandem exerit ingenti oris
hiatu. I translate that to the Manners of the Mind, which is meant there of the
Body. And let the Living learn (the dead Man, whom I speak of, can take no
Warning) it is a divelish thing to loll out the Tongue of Contumely. These
being fore Times to outface the Truth, and willing to listen to Defamations,
no marvel if some take the Liberty to Lie, and have the Confidence to be
believed. But that Sectaries, that have quite overthrown the Church of England,
a right and pleasant Vineyard of Jesus Christ, that these should be the Men,
who, for the most part, have challenged the Prince, and the chief Ministers
that labored to effect the Spanish Match, for being lukewarm at the best, and
unfastned from the Religion then professed, is very audacious. The Accused were
Innocent, and never gave ground to any pernicious Alteration; but themselves,
the Accusers, have trodden down that Religion, of which, in their deep
Hypocrisy, they would seem to be Champions. The Prince and Buckingham were ever
Protestants; those their Opposites, you know not what to term them, unless
Detestants of the Romish Idolatry. As if all were well, so they be not
Popified, though they have departed from the Church in which they were
Baptized, and a Church, I will not say as sound as it was in its Cradle in the
Apostles Times; but as pure and Orthodox in Doctrine and Government (as far as
they were maintained to be of Divine Right and Constitution) as it was in its
Childhood, in the time of their Disciples, even that next succeeded them. And
are these the Declamers for Religion, and the Temple of the Lord? Ex isto ore
Religionis verbum excidere, ant clabi potest? as Tully said of Clodius, Orat.
pro domo sua ad Pontif. and so I give them no better Respect at parting.

134. But what will be said, when one that is greatly affected to our poor
demolished Church, does concur with those Snarling Sectaries of his own accord?
That in the flagrant expectation of that Match, some for hope of Favor began
to Favor the Catholic Cause. It is the Author of the Observations upon H. L.
his History of the Reign of King Charles, page 137. He has not bestowed his
Name upon his Reader; but he has a Name; (...), says Homer. Odyss. (...). I
ought not to put him to the first Question of our Catechism, Quo nomine
vocaris? For good Writers, nay Sacred Penmen, do not always Inscribe their
Names upon their Books Scholars do invariably Father the Work (and some of them
say they have it from the Printer) upon one that has Wrote and Published much,
favoring of Industry and Learning. And they give Reasons (which will come into
the Sequel, though a great while deferred) why he blotts the good Name of King
James; Why he grates so often upon the mild Nature and matchless Patience of
King Charles. And if Fame have taken the right Sow by the Ear, it is one that
had provoked the then Bishop of Lincoln in Print with great Acrimony Twenty
years ago, and that Anger flames out in him now as hot as ever. Panthera,
domari nescia, non semper saeuit. Yet when that Bishop came out of the Tower,
and this Adversary sought him for Peace and Love, because the Bishop was then
able to do him a Displeasure, he found him easy to be Reconciled. What should
move this Man to forget that Pacification so truly observed on the Bishops
part, who was the greater, and the offended Party? Natural est odisse quem
laeseris. And Malice is like one of the Tour Things, Prove. 30.15. That never
say it is enough. It Is Degenerous for the Living to Trample upon the Dead; but
very Impious, that he that was once a Christian, nay a Christian Priest, should
never cease to be an Enemy. The Words with which he wounds the Spanish Match
through his side, (though otherwise he is one that witheth it had succeeded)
are these: That that Bishop being in Power and Place at C^ the time of King
James, made himself the Head of the Popish Faction: because he thought the
Match with Spain, which was then in Treaty, would bring not only a Connivance
to that Religion, but a Toleration of it. And who more like to be in Favor if
that Match went on, than such as were most zealous in doing Good Offices to the
Catholic Cause? Here Is a Knot of Catter-Pillars wrapped in a thin Cobweb, so
easy it will be to sweep them of. The accused Person was always free of
Conference; Let any now living say that heard him often Discourse of the
adverse Church, if he did not constantly open himself, not for a Gainsayer
only, but for a Stiff Defier of their Corrupt Doctrines; (although he was ever
pitiful for Relaxation of their Penalties) And would that Party cleave unto him
for their greatest Encourager? Encouragement was the least their Head could
give them: Beside the Thing is a Chimaera. I never knew any Head of the Popish
Faction in this Kingdom. Others, and Bishops in Rank above him, have been
traduced in that Name; but who durst own that Office? especially in the end of
King James his Reign; when every year almost was begirt with a Parliament; and
every Parliament procreated an inquisitive Committee for Matters of Religion.
What Mist did he walk in, that neither Parliament. nor Committees, did detect
him for Head, or Patron, or Undertaker, call it what you will of the
Pseudo-Catholick Cause; could nothing but the goggle Eye of Malice discover him?

135. Perhaps the Contemplation of the Spanish Match might embolden him, so
this Author would have us think. It could not, it did not, take a little in the
highest Topics to both. It could not: For as the Anteceding Parliament was
much taken with King James's Words, That if the Match should not prove a
fartherance to our Religion, he were not Worthy to be our King; so this his
Majesty's near Counselor knew his meaning, (of which he often discoursed) that
when the Holy Days of the Great Wedding were over, his Majesty would deceive
the Jealousies of his Subjects, and be a more vigorous Defender of the Cause of
the True Faith than ever. And Judge the Bishop by his own Words, in his Sermon
Preached at the Funerals of that Good King, that his Majesty charged his Son,
though he Married the Person of that Kings Sister, never to Marry her Religion.
I said likewise he did not: Look back to the first Letters he dispatched into
Spain; but much more, let every Reader enjoy the Feature of his own Piety and
Wisdom, which he put into the Kings Hand, to have his liking, while his
Majesty's Dear Son was in Spain, to Cure popular Discontents, and sickly
Suspicions, which had come forth with Authority in October following, if the
long Treaty had not Set in a Cloud. The Original Draught of his Contrivances
yet remaining, is thus Verbation.

That when the Marriage was Consummated, and the Royal Bride received in
England, His Majesty should Publish his Gracious Declaration as follows.

First, To assure his Subjects throughout his three Kingdoms, that there is not
one word in all the Treaty of the Marriage in prejudice of our own Religion.

Secondly, To Engage himself upon his Kingly Word, to do no more for the
Roman-Catholics upon the Marriage, than already he did sometime voluntarily
Grant out of Mercy and Goodness, and uncontroulably may do in disposing of his
own Mulcts and Penalties.

Thirdly, That our Religion will be much Honored in the Opinion of the World,
that the Catholic King is content to match with us; nor can he Persecute with
Fire and Sword such as profess no other Religion, than his Brother-in-Law does.

Fourthly, That His Majesty shall forthwith advance strict Rules for the
Confirmation of our Religion, both in Heart, and in the outward Profession.

1. Common Prayer to be duly performed in all Churches and Chapels Wednesdays
and Fridays, and two of every Family required to be present.

2. Every Saturday, after Common Prayer, Catechizing of Children to be
constantly observed.

3. Confirmation (called Bishopping) to be carefully executed by the Bishop,
both in the General Visitations of his Diocese, and every Six months in his own
House, or Palace.

4. That Private Prayers shall no Day be omitted in the Family of him that is
of the Degree of an Esquire; else not to be so named, or reputed.

5. All Ladies; and all Women in general, to be Exhorted to bestow two hours at
the least every Day in Prayer and Devotion.

6. All our Churches to be Repaired, and outwardly well Adorned, and comely
Plate to be bought for the Communion Table.

7. Dispensations for Pluralities of Livings to be granted to none, upon any
Qualification, but Doctors, and Batchelors in Divinity at the least, and of
them to such as are very Learned Men.

8. Bishops to encourage Public Lectures in Market Towns, of such Neighboring
Ministers as be Learned and Conformable.

9. A Library of Divinity-Books to be Erected in every Shire-Town, for the help
of the poorer Ministers; and Leave shall be Granted from His Majesty to make
public Collections from such as are willing to set forward the same: Toward
every one whereof, His Majesty will bestow Ten Pounds.

10. The Lord Keeper to be required to provide for every Convert Priest, of
good Parts, and honest Life, that shall Renounce the Romish Church, and Embrace
our Religion, a Benefice of the first that shall fall in His Majesty's Gift.
And every Bishop, upon his coming to his See, shall lay aside two Benefices for
that use, to be Nominated by the Metropolitan of the Province, or whom else His
Majesty shall trust therewith.

Now it is an even Lay, whether the Observator will call him The Head of a
Popish, or a Puritan Faction, for providing such Bride-Laces for the Marriage.
He may call him what he will, (for his Tongue is his own) unless his Conscience
be subject to the Law of Charity. But these were the Directions provided for
their honest Satisfaction, who perhaps would be troubled to see some Connivance
granted to Recusants, and could not spy into the necessity of State-Practice,
while the Prince was in the Power of the most rigid Adherents to the Papacy. As
for a Toleration, it will be shown by me in its due Place, it never had an
hour's Approbation with the King, with this Prelate, so much struck at by the
Anonymus, or by any of the grave Council. Seditious Malcontents spread open
such a Jealousy at first, and this Author brings it to Light again; not that
he believes it, I presume, but to dishonor him whom he has Persecuted, both
Living and Dead, with a most unsanctified Disaffection. Or if he believed it,
bitterness of Mind put his Judgment out of Taste: And as Nazianzen says, De
Laud. Athan. (...): He that is not ready to do Ill, will not be ready to
suspect Ill. Perhaps I might have spared the labor of this Apology; for if the
Accuser be no more believed than he is beloved, his Pen will do no hurt. Yet he
has wrote Things worthy of Praise; but is not the World wide enough for one
man's Praise, unless he mount himself upon the Dispraise of a man, that
incomparably surpassed him? Of such a strange mixture was C. Gracchus, a
knowing man, industrious, well meaning to his Country, as this is to our
Church; but withal, Proud, Rough, and Turbulent. Ut dolerent boni omnes illa
tanta ornamenta ad meliorem mentem voluntatemque non esse conversa: Says Cicero
de Arusp. Respon.

136. This Quarrel has not put me out of my way; my Lord of Buckingham's
Letter is still in my Hand. His Lordship gave the Lord Keeper further Joy in
the close of his News, That the Dispensation from Rome was suddenly expected at
Madrid, which would be the conclusion of the Business. A Dispensation came
indeed, yet not very fast, but before April ended, for the Copy of it was
exhibited to King James in the beginning of May. The Discourtesie was, That
when it put forth a Hand out for the Womb, it drew it back again, like Zarah,
Genesis 38.29. For the Dispensation would not suffice to conclude the Consent of
the Conclave to the Nuptials, till upon submission to Articles interchangeable
between both Parties, a Ratification followed from the same Power. This
Ratification, a frivolous Interloper to cross a Lover's Suit, that went roundly
on before, though it came limping to Madrid at the end of June, it was by
Accident the Extermination of the Match. Delay is a fretful thing in all
Courts, especially in Cupid's. And two months Vacation to them, that thought
two days too long, and looked homeward with many a long look, found them
nothing to do, but to take Exceptions and Brabble. Morae dispendia tantae: Aen.
1.3. This is it which our King, full of Stomach, called the Spaniards dull
Diligence, first to depend upon Dispensations, then upon returns of Queries and
Objections. And the more the Papalins frequented the Vatican Oracle, to steer
by that alone, the further His Majesty recoiled from them; professing, He would
hearken to his Brother the King of Spain, if he did balance his Offers with as
good from thence; but He would do nothing upon dependence of the Pope's
Authority, or Advice: Of whose Overtures and Postils, as he calls them, he was
bid to beware by one of the Pope's Creatures. It was the Spaniards Error, of
which they repented, That no impending Danger to overthrow the whole Body of
the Transaction, would quicken their motion. It is a Policy that grows to their
State, as the Bark to the Tree, That they will ever dress their Counsels at a
slow Fire: For they are always gaping after those Benefits, which Alterations
may produce to their Advantage. Therefore the English and they were not well
matched in this business. (...); says Plut. lib. cont. Stoic. Adrastus was got
upon a speedy Horse, but was never the better, because he must keep pace with a
Tortoise. And as a hungry Stomach grumbles, that the shadow of the Sun creeps
slowly to the Meridian Line of high Noon: Odi illud tardigradum animal
horologium. So the Lord Marquess chid sometimes with the great Dons, that he
could pluck on the Treaty no faster, and plied Opportunity while it was green,
suspecting wisely that else it would never be ripe. Therefore the Lord Keeper
wrote on the 20th of April, both in the King's, and in his own Name, thus unto
him.

My Noble Lord,
I Am much revived with this last night's News by Mr. Killigrew,That your
Assurance from Rome is more quickened; although I shall not be satisfied in that
Point, until I hear his Highness is married. His Majesty does upon all
Occasions magnify your Lordships noble, wise, and vigorous Enforcement of this
great Business: And bad me write to your Lordship, That if it be dispatched,
(which is my If, and not His Majesty's,) he will ascribe the Activity thereof
very much to your Lordship.


It is observable, that many times the comfort of Assurance is strangely
suppressed in our Heart toward a matter which we greatly desire, when God has
ordained not to bring it to pass. Some such Instinct, that came from above,
possessed the Lord-Keeper's mind, that in all his Employments for this match,
wherein he was most hearty and serious, he never raised his Style higher when
he wrote, than with Ifs, and suppositive Unconfidence. The Lord Marquess was of
a more sanguine and better colored Hope, as in that which is related before
out of his Letters, March 26. So in another to the Lord Keeper from Madrid,
Still. Angl. April 17.

My noble Lord,
BE not angry with me that I write no oftener; I confess you deserve all Trust
of a Friend. I understand more of your Actions, than from your self. Others
have let me know exceeding much. And as I owe you much, I Will pay you as much as
I can: I know you will desire no more; And you shall have no less. Our Business
will end well, and soon. It lies not in my power to advertise you of all
Particulars, though it would be very useful to me. I end, etc.


If one should say to this, That young Heads hope for the best upon all
Expectations, because Experience has not taught them to Distrust. I take it
up, and Answer, That there was nothing then in appearance to be distrusted; no,
not the Remora of the Pontifical Dispensation, when it should come, with all
its Trinkets about it. The Prince had excellently prevented it: For, as it was
Reported before the Lords and Commons in our ensuing Parliament, 1624. his
Highness did utterly refuse to Treat with the King of Spain, or his Council,
until he was assured he might go on with the Marriage, if he satisfied them, to
his Power and Conscience, in all Particulars to be Debated, without respect to
any orders that should come from Rome. This was granted to his Highness, before
he would sit in Consultation, which caused the Lord Marquess unto that time to
bear up with cheerfulness.

137. The month of May coming in with its Verdue, his Lordship had a Garland
sent him, the most eminent Title of a Duke; to show, (says the Lord Keeper, in
his Dispatch May 2. That His Majesty is most constant, and in some degrees more
enslamed in his Affections to your Grace, than formerly, and (which is better
than all) unaffectedly, to remunerate your Diligence in the great Negotiation;
and that being the Princes right hand by the Trust you are in, your Honor
might be no less than the Conde Duke Olivares the Great Privado of King Philip.
It may be ('it is so small a Circumstance, that I have not searched about it)
that the Patent came with the Ships, that carried the Prince's Servants into
Spain to attend his Highness, who went with the King's Order, and their own
great Desire, a most specious Train of them, to visit their dear Master, and to
serve him in all Offices of his Family. Among these two were his Highness's
Chaplains, who were sent over to Officiate to him and his Court in the Worship
of God. These were Dr. Maw, and Dr. Wrenn, both of prime Note for Learning and
Discretion; very Learned to defend their own Religion; and very Discreet to
give no wilful Offense to the opposite part in a Foreign Dominion. The Spanish
liked not their company; yet they took it not so ill, (for they could not but
expect them) as that there was not one Romish Catholic declared for such a one,
among all his Highness's Attendants, Cabal, p. 15. Tully states the Proverb in
the Feminine Sex, Lib. 5. ad At. Ep. 11. (...): As you would say, Such as
Diana her self, such are her Nymphs about her. But it is better paralelled in
King David's Person, He that walks with a perfect heart, he shall serve me,
Psalm. 101.6. These were the Chorus of the Scene, that sung in Tune with the
chief Actor, and seconded his Part with their Symplasma, (as it is called by
ancient Musicians) in their adherence to sincere Religion: Yet some of these
brought Instructions with them to the Duke of Buckingham from his secret
Intelligencers, which not only disturbed all posteriour Treaties, but made the
Prince return for England with the Willow Wreath: Because the King, and they
that were faithful to his meaning, knew not of it till July next after; let it
squat till then, and it that order be started up. In this place it suffices to
glance at it, that the Duke was cunningly dealt with, and underhand, by some
whom he had lest behind, to be as it were the Lifeguard of his Safety, who
were to send him notice of common Talk, or secret Whispers that might concern
him. These persuaded him to set the Match back by degrees, and in the end to
overturn it. That this was the desire of most Voices in England. And his Grace
must look to stand by the love of the People, as well as of the King. Or if he
could not prevail in that, let him be sure to join the Restitution of the
Palatinate, with the Marriage in the Capitulations; or the Unsatisfaction,
which all would take, that pitied the King's Daughter and her Children, would
undo him. Upon these, and their subtle Arts, Sir W. Ashton Reflects in this
Passage, Cabal. p. 32. I believe that your Grace has represented to you many
Reasons, showing how much it concerns you to break the Match, with all the
force you have. This was the Junto at London that had done his Grace this
Office, and had gilded their Councils over with flourishing Reasons, That
these would procure him a stable continuance in Power and Sublimity with
everlasting Applause. Well, every thing that is sweet, is not wholesome. Cael.
Rhodoginus says, lib. 23. c. 25. That at Trevisond in Pontus, the Honey that
Bees make in Box-Trees breeds Madness, if it be eaten. So I mean, that the
Urgencies of those Undertakes, who pretended so far to the Duke's Prosperity,
were no better than Rhodoginus his Box-Tree Honey-Combs. Yet after they had
given the Qu, now began the Duke to irritate the Spaniard, to shut out, or to
slight the Earl of Bristow in all Councels, to pour Vinegar into every Point of
Debate; to fling away abruptly, and to threaten the Prince's Departure. These
boistrous Moods were not the way to succor the Prince's Cause: for Favor
cannot be forced from great Spirits by offering Indignities. And the Temper of
the Business in hand was utterly mistaken. For they were not met at a Diet to
make Articles of Peace and War; but to Woo a fair Lady, whose Consent is to be
sought with no Language, but that which runs sweet upon the Tongue. As Q.
Cicero wrote to his Brother de Peti. Consul. Opus est magnopere Blanditia. Quae
etiamsi vitiosa, and turpis sit in caetera vita, tam in Petitione est
necessaria. All Suitors are tied to be fair spoken, but chiefly Lovers.

138. No doubt but at this time, in the Prime of May, the Duke, with such such
others as the Prince did take into his Council, sat close, to consider upon
the Overtures that came with the Dispensation: For all thought that was the
Furnace to make or to mar the Wedding-Ring, and it asked Skill and Diligence to
cast it well. It is a Gibe which an Heathen puts upon an Amorose, that wastes
his whole time in Dalliance upon his Mistress, (...), that Love is an idle
Man's Business. But there was Business enough, beside Courtship and Visits,
which came thick, to keep this Love from being idle. The Dispatches that were
sent from Spain to employ those, that were in Commission here to direct the
great Negotiation, were many. First, The Dispensation came to the King from the
Prince his Son, May 2. But it came to scanning a good while after, as will
appear by this Letter of the Lord Keepers to the Duke, dated May 9.

May it please your Grace,
IT is my Fortune, and I thank God for it, to be ever rendering, and ever owing
Thanks to your Grace. The Dispensation is come, and with it good Tidings, that
your Carriage hitherto has been so discreet, and the Event so fortunate, that
our Master is wonderfully pleased. But we were formerly never so desirous to
see that Box, that carries this Dispensation, than we are now to open it, and
to know, by reading the same, what God has sent us. We all wonder at his
Majesty's Reservedness, for it came hither on Saturday last, this Day
sevennight But his Majesty has enjoined Mr. Secretary Calvert silence therein.
And I believe, for my part at the least, that Mr. Secretary has performed his
Commandment. We all think, and the Town speak and talk of the worst, and of
very difficult Conditions. My dear Lord, You have so locked up all things in
your own Breast, and sealed up his Majesty's, that now our very Conjectures
(for more they were not) are altogether prevented. If things succeed well, this
course is best; if otherwise, I conceive it very dangerous. But it were a great
Folly to offer any Advice unto you, who only know what you transact in your own
Cabinet. How then shall I fill up this Letter? To certify this only, that all
Discontents are well appeased, and will so remain without doubt, as long as
Businesses continue successful. But if they should decline, I am afraid the
former Disgusts of your appropriating this Service will soon be resumed. And
then how dangerous it is to leave your Friends ignorant of your Affairs, and
disabled to serve you, I refer to your Graces Wisdom and Consideration. I do
believe none of us all would keep your Counsel without a Charge to do so, (this
keeping Counsel is a thing so out of fashion) nor reveal it, if it be otherwise
required, etc.


The Lord Keeper in this Letter missed the true Cause, why his Majesty did not
yet impart a sight of the Dispensation to any of his Counselors. The reason
was, because it came to him in a private Packet. And he expected it to be
delivered to him, as it ought, by Public Ministers, the Ambassadors of the
King of Spain, who kept it dormant about a Fortnight in their Hands, whether it
proceeded from their Native Gravida, to retein that long in their Stomach,
which needed no Concoction; or to listen what the many-headed Multitude would
say in London; or out of some other State-juggling. As I have laid forth in
this, what was mistaken by the L. Keeper, out of his own Memorials preserved:
So in another Line he hazarded his Love to be ill taken, representing to the
Duke the Truth, That the King did somewhat disgust his appropriating the whole
Service to himself, that is, repulsing the Earl of Bristol, or restreining him
to silence, where their Counsels were held I know not, whether the Duke did so
soon regret at this; for it is the first time; and it is well plastered over
with mild Counsel. So Statuaries, says Plutarch, do not only hew, and peck the
Alabaster upon which they work, but smooth it likewise, which is the neatest
part of their Cunning. By another Letter from the same Hand, dated near to the
former, May 11. I perceive that the Duke, our Lord Admiral, demanded the Navy
Royal to be made ready, and to be sent to the Coast of Spain to conduct the
Prince and his Followers Home. Which the King gave order to be done. But the
Lord Keeper wrote to his Grace, if it were not with the soonest, the main
Matter not grown yet to any color of ripeness: That the Charge would be very
heavy to the Exchequer: Such a Fleet must be costly to be set forth, but far
more costly to be kept long abroad. As for Cost, it was the least thing that
was thought upon: It was no time for Frugality. The Stratagem was to have the
Navy lie ready at Anchor, in some safe distance from the Spanish Havens; That
if the Prince could recover no Satisfaction to reasonable Demands from stiff
Olivarez* and other Grandees: Or if they persisted to burden the Match with
insupportable Conditions, his Highness after a short Complement might take his
leave, and have all things prepared at a Days warning, if the Wind served, for
his Reduction into England. With this Fleet some precious Ware, never seen, no
nor heard of in Spain before, at least among the Laics, was transported
thither; the Liturgy of our Church, translated into the Spanish Tongue, and
fairly printed, by the Procurement and Cost of the Lord Keeper. The Translator
was John Taxeda, the Author of the Treatise called Hispanus Conversus, a good
Scholar, once a Dominican, whom his Patron that set him on work secured to our
Church with a Benefice, and good Prebend. He studied this Translation Day and
Night till it was ended. He that writes this was often at his Elbow to
communicate with him, when he put Questions how to proceed. But the Lord Keeper
himself, with other Overseers, that had perfectly learned the Castilian
Language, perused it faithfully, and, if there were not aptness in any phrase,
corrected it. With his Majesty's Privity, and great Approbation, two Copies of
it were carried, Religious Tokens, the one to his Highness, the other to my
Lord Duke, as the best and most undeniable Certificate that a particular Church
can show, to vindicate the right Profession of their Faith from all Scandals,
and to declare their Piety in all Christ's Ordinances squared, and practiced by
a public Rule after the Beauty of Holiness. A Book of Common Prayer (which all
call a Liturgy) is suitable to the Form of good Churches in all Ages; reduces
us to good Notions from wandering Extravagancies; preserves Harmonious
Conformity between all the Daughter-Churches, that are called from one Mother
in one Realm, or State: It is our Witness to assoil us, when we are spitefully
charged with Errors; so Chamieras, Gerardus, Camero, Spanhemius, Amyraldus,
and diverse more the best of Modern Writers in defense of the Reformed way, draw
their second Rank of Arguments, next to the Sacred Scriptures, out of their
Liturgies to justify their Tenants. Finally, with this Office of Divine
Worship, he that celebrates Gods Service, is ready at all times to offer up to
God the Sacrifice of Prayer, when some perhaps at some times are affected with
Languor of Health, and then not so sit to speak suddenly to God in the behalf
of the People; and when the most have Infirmity of Judgment, and are unsit at
all times. Beshrew the Tettar of Pride that runs over many Wits, and makes them
care for nothing that is made ready to their Hand; and puts them in love with
nothing but their own Conceptions. What have we lost? Nay, What has God lost
in the Honor due unto him? How is his Truth? How is his Name? How is his Glory
dis-reverenced over all this Land, since our Liturgy has been Mortgaged to
the Directory?

139. It would be remembered, that this comes in upon the mention of the Fleet,
called for and hastened to weigh Anchor at Chattam, and to ride near to St.
Anderos, to bring the Prince for England, if there were a rupture in the
Treaty. But if they should suddenly strike Hands, and make a Bargain, my Lord
Duke had his Thoughts upon a Question, which if it should be asked, he would
not be surpised as if he were ignorant what to answer, that is, What Dowry
should be granted to the Princely Bride? Therefore he consulted the Lord
Keeper, and required Satisfaction to be brought by a Courier, that must not
spare Horseflesh; who was hied away as fast as he could be with this Answer.

May 14. My Illustrious Lord,
THe Dowry about which your Grace requires the speediest Direction, must
consist in some of the Kings fair Mansion Houses, and in Revenue. For both
which, the Mannor-Houses, and the just Sum of the Jointure, I must refer to
you, and can do no otherwise to my Lord of Bristol's former Conclusions with
that Council. But whether it should be allotted in Land, or other Revenue, I
cannot yet convince mine own Judgment fully which were better. Sometimes I
consider it were good that a great part were named out of Customs, and such
other Incomes, lest our Poverty in Crown Lands be discovered. Sometimes I find
it for certain more advantageous to his Highness, to have all the Jointure in
Land, and that the choicest of our Kingdom, because being once in the Jointure
it is sure to be preserved in the Crown, and no longer subject to be begged, or
beggered by Fee-Farms, and unconscionable Leases. And I believe your Lordship
will so advise it. Or, if you please, the Sum being agreed upon, you may
suspend the rest till you return, that Counsel in the Law on all sides may put
their Cases upon it. Your Grace will give me leave to observe, that now is the
first time that any Daughter-in-Law of this Crown, had any other set
Maintenante than was granted to her voluntarily by her Husband. But your Grace
may reply, That this is the first Portion of so great a Bulk: And it is no way
inconvenient for his Highness, that she have a Copious Maintenance confirmed to
her in present, as I could tell your Grace at large, if I were present with
you. All is right here to your Lordship's Good, and I will be vigilant to keep
it so. Nor will I serve his Majesty in that place, wherein I shall not be so
heedful as to be able to yield an account of any Disservice, or Offer that way,
which may concern your Grace, etc.


By the same Messenger, at the same time, another Dispatch was posted to the
Prince, in answer to his Highness, who had signified his Pleasure was, That the
Recusants should be gratified for his sake warily, and not by broad Daylight,
to show that he was sensible of those Hospital Civilities, which he then
received from some Cards of their Suit. Whereupon the Lord Keeper writes;

May it please your Highness,
I Would I had any Abil^^^^^ to serve your Highness in this place, wherein you
have set me, and (what far more Grace and Favor) Countenanced and Encouraged
me. To observe your Highnesses Commands, I am sure the Spanish Ambassador
resiant must testify, that since your Highnesses Departure, he has been
denied no one Request for Expedition of Justice, or ease of Catholics,
although I usually hear from him twice or thrice a Week; which I observe the
more Superstiticusly, that he might take knowledge how sensible we are of any
Honor done to your Highness: And yet in the Relaxation of the Roman Catholics
Penalties, I keep off the King from appearing in it, as much as I can, and take
all upon my self, as I believe every Servant of his ought to do in such
Negotiations, the Events whereof be hazardous and uncertain. God Bless your
Highness, as in all other, so especially in this present Business of so main
Importance, etc.


These are the Negotiations which the Lord Keeper for his Share, at this
Season, brooded under the Wings of Fidelity and Prudence. How well let the Wise
and Unbiassed be Judges: Such will not be Cajoled into a wrong Belief by
Corruptors of History, as Heraclides served his Scholars: Quos duplo reddidu
sluitiores quam acceperat: ubi nihil poterant discere nisi Ignorantiam. Cicer.
Orat. pro Flacco.

140. It is enough declared how the great Matters about the Match went here.
The Dispensation of Pope Gregory the XV. turned them round in Spain, till they
were giddy with the Motion. It was expected it should come in the common Church
Style, an absolute and Canonical Dispensation, and no more; only for her Sake
that was in Submission to his Laws: But it was Compounded with so many
Reservations, and ill-visag'd Provisoes, that it swelled like a Tympany. The
Pope knew with home he had to deal: For there are none in the Earth more
Superstitious to do him Honor then the King of Spain and his People. That King
would make the Pope too big for a Priest, that the Pope might make him too
great for a King. Nor is there any other intent, to make that Patriarch of the
West the sole capacious Fountain, from which all Pipes of Grace and Indulgence
Ecclesiastical should be filled, and run abroad, but principally to Water his
own Garden. What between the Nuncio Resiant at Madrid, who was Commanded to
stop all Proceedings, till safety were granted; nay, and put in Execution, both
for English and Irish Catholics as much as they asked: What with the Charge
given to the Inquisitor General, to use all possible diligence to draw the
Prince to his Holiness's Obedience; What with Olivarez's frowardness, of whom
the Duke could not obtain to put a Postscript in his Letter to the Pope, that
to add these new and un-relish'd Conditions, with which the Dispensation was
Clogged, would be interpreted the worst of Unkindness; what with all these
together, his Highness might say, Fat Bulls of Basan have compassed me in on
every side. A little Honey, (God wot, a little) was allowed to to the Lip of
the Cup, if he would Taste of that Potion; that was, that from thenceforth his
Highness might have access to his Dearly Affected Mistress; not as formerly, a
bare Visitant, but now as a Lover; so some of their chief States were in
presence to hear all their Conference, a Rule which they say is never Infringed
in the grave way of the Castilian Wooing. The old Man Gregory the XV. gave
light himself to his Friends and Servants in Spain, what they should do by the
Flame of his own Zeal. For he sent a Letter to the Prince, Signed with the
Signet-Ring of St. Peter, to exhort his Highness with many words, to reduce
himself, and the Kingdoms of which he was the Heir, to the Subjection of the
Roman See. Hereupon, some of our Hot-Heads in England made it a Quarrel and a
Calumny, that the Prince sent an Answer of Civility to the Popes Epistle.
Civility, though it is a thing unknown among the Plebeians and Clowns, is a
Virtue among Gentlemen; And will they make a Virtue Criminal? But where lies
the Offense? Perhaps that his Highness showed no disrelish in his Answer to the
PopesMotion; Neither did he show Encouragement, so far the Terms are even. Fair
Language in that Case would cost the Prince nothing, it would save him much:
For the more Hurt the Pope could do, the less he was to be displeased with
Provocation. To go further, He that will Censure an Action, must not Judge upon
it Naked, but with all its Copartments. Many Things that were well done, if you
will peel away the Bark of their Circumstances, will seem Reproachful. The
Behaviors of Abraham and Isaac, Genesis 20.26. in the Courts of the Kings of the
Philistines, with the excuse of Fear are fall of Prudence; without that Plea
they are full of Frailty. No Deed was ever rigidly expended, into which a Man
was thrust by Necessity, unless it wanted a Wise Historian to scan it. The
Phocensians, when their Chief Men were in no better Condition in Asia, then if
they had been Hostages, did appear for the Persian Monarch, when he led an Army
to Invade Greece; but says Herodotus (...) (...), they did Medize, or Temporize
with the Persians, not with a good will, but out of a Compulsion. And Tully,
with me, one of the Wisest of the Heathen. Orat pro Quintio. Omnes qu^rum in
alterius manu vita ^sica est, saepius cogitant, quid possit is, cujus in
potestate ac ditione sum, quam quid debont sacere. He that is fallen into the
Power of others, and is demanded, not a wicked thing, which must not be
yielded, but an inconvenient, considers not what is absolutely expedient, but
what is expedient in that Case. And a sharp witted Christian, it is Grotius
writes upon that Passage, Deuteronomy. 22.25. If a Man sind a Betrothed Damosel in the
Field, and the Man force her, and lie with her, then the Man only that lay with
her shall Die, but unto the Damosel that shall do nothing; Thus he says, Docet
hoc exemplo Lex parcendam iis, qui vi ad cli aliquid peceaverint. He means,
they are not to be perished who are compelled to suffer a Sin, and are forced
into it. Therefore, if the Prince, (being at Madrid, not at London) wrote
things honest to the Pope, but as Meekly and Pleasingly as Paul spoke before
Festus and Agrippa, when he was in Bonds, Who can accuse him? For by Law of
Nature, no Man must deliver himself up to a danger, which he can innocently
avoid: The harmles^ Dove is not bound to forget the Wisdom of the Serpent. But
the strongest hold, which his Highness's Justification will maintain for ever
against all Assaults, is, That the whole Contents of his Letter were
unblameable, and yet very unpleasing to the High Priest, to whom he wrote. Take
the express Words, and only Controverted. The Exploits of my Noble Predecessors
have not been more, than the Care which I have, that the Peace of the Church
might be bounded in true Concord, and as the Glory of God requires our
Endeavors to unite it I do not Esteem it greater Honor to be Descended from
such Princes, than to imitate them in true Zeal of Piety. In which it assures
me much, to have known the Mind and Will of our thrice Honored Lord and
Father, to give concurrence to so laudable a Design. For it does not grieve him
a little to see that great evil grows from Division of Christian Princes; whose
peaceable Settlement, if this Marriage between the Infanta of Spain and my self
may procure, I shall the rather conclude my Happiness therein: For, as I have
been far from encouraging Novelties, or to be a Partisan in any Factions
against the Catholic Religion, so shall I seek occasion to take away
Suspicions, that I desire but one Religian, and one Faith, seeing we all
believe in one Jesus Christ; having resolved in my self to spare nothing that I
have in the World, my Estate and Life, for a thing so pleasing unto God, whom I
implore to give your Holiness Health and Happiness. A Synod, or an Assembly of
Divines, Togati vel Palliati, could not have handled the Pope with greater Wit
and Dexterity. Who is pincht to the quick in the Letter, and yet could not
justly complain of Uncivility, or Exasperation. The Prince promises to follow
the Footsteps of his Father; as Spartianus said of Geta, Son to Emperor
Severus, Paternarum sententiarum memor, he could not dress himself better than
by his Fathers Glass. And how does he promise to follow him in that which he
had begun? To accord the Variances of all Christian Churches, that their Peace
might be bounded in true Concord: Which is as much as to bring the Pope to be
Sub-Canonical; to Conform him to the Decrees of a free Council, called by
Christian Monarchs. This was the Helena for which King James contended; And
this was the Europia, or new sound Paradise, in the Fancy of Archbishop
Spalato, as is handled before, for which Revenge was taken by Fire upon his
Dead Carcass. I believe this Letter fretted his Crazy Holiness, and did his
Hectic no good, of which he died not long after. I am sure, after his Nuncio
had gotten a Copy of it, he could never endure the Prince more. From hence the
Embraces of Truth may see, how staringly false, and daringly impudent that
Report is, That the Prince had not come out of Spain, but that he lest his
Faith, as well as his Proxy behind him; and got thence with the very same Trick
that Sir Francis Mitchel said he got out of the Inquisition at Rome; which is a
Weldenism, p. 162. a familiar Trope in the Rhetoric of the blatant Beast.

141. Proceeding now to the Proceedings of June, There were many suspicions
here, how the Capitulations went ill in Spain, because Letters Arrived not till
after Five Weeks silence, as the Lord Keeper observes the exact time in the
next he Wrote. The most furmised things were at a standing Water, and did
neither Ebb, nor How; whereas indeed they were come to the High Water Mark, but
the Wind and Tide went as contrary as could be imagined. -- Carina, Vim geminam
sentit, paretque incerta d^obus. Nothing was dispatched; for every Oar-man
struck unevenly to the rest, that sat in the Transomes of the Galley. All the
Agents were Ruined together; for they complained both of the Resisting Council,
and of the assisting Council by their own part. How far they are to be believed
in Angry Reports they made of each other, and very unfriendly Relations, I
cannot decide. Therefore I pre-monish, Though I am not in a Labyrinth, yet it
is not such a ^n way, that all wayfaring M^n, though no F^ols, shall not err
in it, Isa. 35.8. The Humors which bred the Distemper, were the Popes
Dispensation; Con. Olivarez Insolent and Inconstant struggling: The Duke of
Buckingham disliking all things, and disliked of all: The Earl of Bristow
favored too much by K. Philips Servants, and too little by the Servants of his
own Master: Finally our English and Irish Papists, who filled the Courts of
Rome and Spain with Narratives of their grievous Persecutions (which they did
only fear) and Petitions to conditionate the Match with their mitigation. These
were the main Sticklers to do a real mischief, only to satisfy a Fantastical
Jealousy. The Tears of their Lamentation dropped upon the Popes tender heart, so
that, to comply with them, many a bitter Kernel was in the Core of the
dispensation. And I have Reason to suspect they were some Grains the worse,
that the French, employed at Rome at that time, did the worst Offices they
could, as the Lord Herbert, our Kings Ambassador in France wrote hither, Cabal.
page 301. Those of the King of France's Council at Rome will use all the means
they can to the Pope (in whom they pretend to have very particular Interest)
not only to interrupt, but to break Your Majesty's Alliance with Spain. Many
Rattle-Heads, as well as they, did bestir them to gain-stand this Match. But as
Pliny said in his Age, Not. Hist. l. 29. So may I in our time, Ingenicrum
Italiae slata impellimur, the Italian Wits are they, that will take it in
scorn, if they bear not all before them. For Example in this Dispensation, How
acute they thought themselves in their Policy? and how Imperious, I am sure,
they were in their Arrogance? It came to the Nuncio Residing at Madrid in
April, who was commanded to observe this Form in the Delivery; That it should
not be Opened and Communicated, before the King of Spain did take an Oath to be
a Surely; That the King of England should really perform all things required
therein; or if he failed in such performance, or in any of them, then the King
of Spain with all his might and Power to take Arms against him, What? Though
the Italians are so Witty for their own part, do they suppose all people beside
are fallen into a strong Delirium? Had they cast our Water so ill, to think us
so Weak, that before one Article was Published or known, we would be beholding
to Sureties to undertake for us? Or that we would submit to all with indefinite
and undiscoursed Obedience? It happened fortunately, that the Lord Keeper had
dealt before with Mr. George Gage, a full Romanist in Religion, but a Faithful
Subject to his King, to be diligent in the Court of Rome, and to spare no Cost
upon his Purse, to get a Copy of the Articles, as soon as the Dispensation was
Bulled, and to send them under hand by the greatest speed to the Prince. In
which Mr. Gage did not fail. (...) A Golden Key will open the strongest Lock in
the Gates of Hell. By this Providence his Highness knew what it was the Nuncio
held so close in his Fist, as soon as himself. Yet took no Notice, as if he had
seen particulars; but as if at adventure bad him suspend the Delivery of the
Powers, as long as he would, for he knew that his Father would fly from that
Offer, That the King of Spain should Engage for him, because his Majesty's
Conscience, and his Writings (divulged as far as Learning reached) would not
permit him to Subject himself to the Popes Propositions, which he had no
Authority to obtrude upon Free Princes, no nor upon any Man ^ut of the Verge of
his Suburbicary Jurisdiction. So much G^ndamar could have told them, one that
fate in the Spanish Junto, out of the Lord Keepers Letter (for it is his,
though his Name is omitted Cab. p, 236.) in these Remarkable Words. His Majesty
hopes that you are not Ignorant, that the Treaty is between Him and your
Master. He has no Treaty with Rome, neither lies it in his way to dispute with
them upon this Question. It troubled the Nuncio that the Peremptory Clause,
which the Dispensation brought with it, was thus slighted; and it would keep
stale no longer, business was in such Haste. Therefore they come to those, who
were our Princes employed Counselors, to require of them to give their best
help to roll away this Stone, which was the main Obstruction. On our Part
therefore we asked two Questions; First, Whether King Philip could take such an
Oath for another King? Guardians may take Oaths in the behalf of Minors, whom
they Governed; for it was in their Power, and it lay upon their Charge, to
perform that which they swore for Minors, till they came to Age. We had heard
of some, who were wont in some places, that procured the Causes of their
Clients in Civil Courts, to take an Oath in Animam Domini sui, vel in Animam
constituentis; but such as Weighed Religion more by Conscience, then by Custom,
detested it. For who can Swear before God to oblige the Soul of another? Since
an Oath must be taken in Judgment, as well as in Truth; Jerem. 4.2. The
Spaniards were be-gruntled with these Scruples. And their Recourse was to a
Convention of their soundest Divines, to deliver their sentence upon it; who
walked as slowly and gingerly, as if they had been foundered. They tossed over
Books; they search into the Code, the Casuists, and Canonists; Read tedious
Lectures, and cast up a Trench of a hundred Scruples to Besiege this little
Question. The Prince, whose Humanity and Wisely-Govern'd Temper was admired of
all, took the wast of time, that these Divines made, in great Offense. Now was
the first time that he spoke that unkind Word to Olivares, That he was Wronged,
and wished himself in his own Court again. Olivares Chased as fast; that their
Fatherhoods, with their Mountains of Learning, sat so long to bring forth a
Mouse, and blamed himself (as it was reported in our Parl. Anno 1624.) That the
Devil put it into his mind to call that Assembly. For all this the Divines
would be known in their Place, and would not break up their meeting, till they
had Resolved after twenty days, what they determined to Conclude from the first
hour, That King Philip might take the Oath; wherein yet we gained thus much on
our part, that a Point, which was Resolved by the Pope and his Conclave,
subscribed by them all, Committed to the Nuncio to be Advanced with St. Peter's
Authority; might be disputed twenty days by a Chapter of private Divines. Let
them sit twenty days more to satisfy us, whether it were good Theology, or
good manners, to serve him so, whose decisions, they say, are inerrable. When
the Grave Doctors of Salamanca had acquitted themselves so learnedly, his
Highness's Ministers moved another Question, Whether King Philip would take the
Oath as Procurator for our King, who nor required it, nor was privy to any
thing that was stuffed into the Procuration. To which a present Answer was
given, and no bad one; it could not be Resolved, before the Spanish Counsel
saw, how far our Prince and his Counsel would yield in points of Religion. And
how can we tell you that, said they of our part, before you bring forth the
whole Plump of your Articles? No Fence could thrust by this Question, but that
it would stick fast in the Cause. So we gained again, that King Philip was
restreined from making Faith for King James. And although the Froathy Formality
of promulging the Dispensation was kept back, yet the Articles came into Play,
that the Commissioners on both sides might fall to a Session.

142. But from Strife of Tongues, from Fundamental Contradictions, from
Clashings every day, what Fruit could be looked for? Do Men gather Grapes of
Thorns? If you will believe the Parties, what this Lord objected against that
Lord, there was none that did Good, no, not one. If you will believe their
respective Defenses to those Objections, there was none that did amiss. I
cannot take up all the Blots they made with my Pen, lest I make them bigger.
None of those Peers has Justified himself so well in his Letters, Apologies
and Reports, but that strong Inferences may be drawn from some Parts, to
disprove the rest. What was spoken at the Conference of the Junto was within
the Veil, and under Covert; but what is published out of it, is most uncertain.
For the Lord Keeper, after he had consulted with the Prince, and searched all
Papers to pass his Judgment what Countenance the Business should put on, when
the Parliament looked upon it; but ten days before, Feb. 2. 1623, He writes
thus to the Duke, Cabal, P. 90. That all the Reckoning must not be cast up
before the Parliament, for fear they should fall to particular Dispatches,
wherein they cannot but find many Contradictions. After whom, I glean up this
Handful, He that writes upon this Subject, what is reserved in the Memorials of
those Days, writes after the Canon of Integrity; but when he is monished that
there are Contradictions in those Memorials, he can never be secure, that he
has compiled an incorrupt History. Upon this Staff he may rest, That when the
Chief Counselors fell out among themselves, like the Midianites, every Man's
Hand against his Brother; as worthy Actors as I count them to be, yet every one
was out in his Part. Nay, He that will adjust the Course of any one in this
high Transaction in all things, will burn Truth in the Hand, and spare the
Guilty. He that aspired to be Dioscorus, the most preeminent in the Company,
let him be first considered. That is, Conde Olivarez, the Abner in the Service
of his Master Ishbosheth, whose Humor would brook to be crossed by no Man;
ingrained in Nature to be Aristotle's (...), a great Opiniator, a costive
Counselor, that would hold the Ground where he stood, and move for no
Persuasion. By the fortunate Gale of Court-Favour, he had lived in continual
Custom to carry all before him, without being stopped. As Vellei^s says of M.
Agrippa, Parendi sed uni, scientissimus, aliis sane imperandi cupidus; so he
was very servile to please King Philip, and looked that all beside should be as
servile to please him. Such a Spirit is intolerable in Counsel, and not to be
coapt with, that thinks it an indignity, unless he speak for all, and Vote for
all. Such a Statesman is like to bring nothing to a good End, but himself to
an ill one. Our Princes Reports may be held of all other to be most
Authentical; from whom take it thus. His Highness representing the Treatise of
Spain to the Lords of the Privy-Councel at St. James's October. 30. 1623. Begins,
that the first man that did give him great Profession of welcome into Spain was
this Olivares, and in the interview in the Garden assured him, that all
business should be dispatched as fast as his Highness wished: That the Temporal
Articles should straightway be Concluded; and the Spiritual Articles about
Religion should cause no delays, but be remitted to the Wisdom of the King his
Father, and his Gracious Promises. But, says his Highness, The longer I staid,
the less I found him my Friend, and the oftener I spoke with him, the less he
kept his Word. But our Duke of Buckingham, after a little acquaintance, found
the Conde Duke a great deal worse to him. They came in no place but with shows
of disdain at one another Persons; and like two great Caraques in a foul Sea,
they never met in Counsel, but they stemmed one another. In every Proposal, if
one said so, the other said no; if one liked it, the other slighted it. Could
it be expected that the Counsels of the whole Table should not be at a Fault,
when the two Presidents appeared in Hostility of Opinions? When the Malady of
disaffection lay not hid in the Veins, but broke out in the Body? When they
never brought their Offers within compass of Probability? One Observes for
their parts that run Races, Alex. lib. 2. c. 21. Quanto minor in corpore splen
foret, tanto perniciores homines esse. He that has the least Spleen will make
the best Footman. So in all Negotiations, he that is most Calm will dispatch
most work; but put Wise-Heads together, yet where there is much Spleen, there
will be little done. There was no likelihood but the Northern and Southern
Favorites, as the Lord Keeper foretold, would look proudly one upon another,
when they met in the same Cockpit. Courtesy was quite out of fashion with
them, that he that received it might not seem the greater; Emulation was all in
Fashion, to dim each others Light by casting Shadows of Opposition. Only these
Animosities between two high Spirits, so ill Matched were the Seed of the
Quarrel; which I press against a vulgar, and a scandalous Error, made Table
Talk in all England, that our Duke had Attempted the Chastity of the Condessa
Olivares, and was Cheated with a diseased Strumpet laid in his Bed, etc. This
is grossly contumelious. The Lady was never solicited by Buckingham to defile
her Honor with him, as Sir Wall. Aston will Testify in a Postscript of a
Letter to the Duke, Cabal. p. 33. The Condessa of Olivares bids me tell you,
that she Kisseth your Grace's Hands, and does every Day Recommend you
particularly by Name in her Prayers to God; which Salutation she durst not have
sent to his Lordship, no not for her Life, if the Duke had offered toward that
Indignity to make her a Strumpet. And for the Rest of this Obscene Tale, the
worthiest Gentlemen that waited upon his Person in that Journey have assured
me, that as well in Spain, as when he came from thence into England, his Body
was Untainted from that Loathsomness not to be Named, the just Recompense of
Rotten Lust. Yet perhaps more will Read these Reasons, then believe them,
though they cannot Answer them. Few have been so happy to be Redeemed from the
Rumor of a common Slander. For as the most Eloquent of Men says, Orat. pro
Plancio. Nihil est tam volucre quam Maledictum; nihil facilius emittitur; nihil
citius excipitur; nihil latius dissipatur. Especially a contumely cleaves the
faster, when he that is clean from the Defamation in one Person, has deserved
it in others; for as Octa. Minutius says, Oftentimes there is some likelihood
in a Lie, and not unseldom some unlikelihood in a Truth.

143. Other Errors, and many were charged upon the Duke, and a broad back will
not bear them all. Yet casting not an Eye upon the Earl of Bristol's Papers,
which he produced in Parliament, a Lap full of them, and no less. Their chief
purpose was to cast an Odium upon him, that he heightened the Spaniards at first
to ask worse Conditions in Religion, then were formerly Treated on. These were
Recriminations, wherein no man, no not the Wise Earl of Bristol is like to keep
a Charitable Moderation. Because his Miscarriages had been ripped up by the Duke
before, what followed but that wawardness which St Austin confessed to be
sometime in himself; Si deprehensus Arguerer, saevire magis quam caedere
libebat. Cofess. lib. 1. c. ult. But such as were no parties in Contestation
with my Lord of Buckingham, blame him that he was very rash in managing
business, turning about Councils in all haste upon the Wheel of Fancy, but
keeping no Motion of Order or Measure; which none could endure worse then that
Nation, with whom he Treated, who are the most Superstitious under Heaven to
keep that Politic Rule, Bona Consilia mora valescere. Tacit. Hist. l. 4. They
said also, That he was Offensive to the Crown of Spain in taunting Comparisons,
and an open derider of their Magniloquent Phrases, and Garb of stateliness;
which must be an intended provocation; for he was as well studied in
blandishments, and the Art of Behavior, as any Courtier in Europe. They
repined that he thrust himself into such a Room at their Masks, and Interludes,
as were proper to their King, our Prince, and the Train Royal; and was not
contented with that Honor which was given to the Major Domo, or prime Subject
of Spain; as if he were not satisfied to be Received as a less Star, but as a
Parelius with his Highness. And whatsoever the grudge was they vented it
craftily in that Quarrel, that he did many things against the Honor and
Reverence due to the Prince, as one has picked up, and offered it to King
James Cab. p. 221. That he was over Familiar in Talk, and in Terms with his
Highness. Yet David, so near the Crown, called himself a dead Dog, or a Flea in
respect of Saul. Nor is it omitted that he was sometime covered when the Prince
was bare, sometime sitting when the Prince stood, capering a lost in sudden
Fits, and Chirping the Ends of Sonnets; which was not Unmannerliness, he was
better bred; but inconsiderateness, which will creep upon him, who was too much
dandled upon the Lap of Fortune. Or as Budaeus better Expresses it Sap. Pand.
p. 331. Mirablandimenta genuit Aulici victus ratio, quibus praestantissima
virtus saepe consopita connivere visa est. And truly his Breeding in Budaeus
his own Country did him some prejudice in that kind. For the French Mode is
bold, Light and Airy. That which we call rudeness, with them is freedom, good
Metal, brave assurance. And that which we, and the Castilians call Gravity or
Modesty, with them is reputed Sneaking, want of Spirit, Sheepishness. But
between frets of Spite, and Fits of Levity, the Duke put the Treaty so far out
of Tune, that the Lovers were disappointed of their expected Epithalamium. So
that the Spaniards made it one of their Refranes or Proverbs: If the Prince had
come alone (without the Duke) he had never returned alone (without the brave
Castilian Virgin) they might say so freely; for I heard himself say no less in
the Banqueting House at a Conference with the Lords and Commons anno 1624. When
he endeared himself to the Hearers, That the Stout and Resolute way wherein he
went had overturned the Marriage, and did Arrogate the Thanks of all things to
himself, that were acceptable and popular: So be it; yet that which Canonized
him with the people then, was afterward made an Evidence against him, Cab. p.
227. To lay a Dram of Excuse against a Pound of Error, this is to be Alleged,
that Olivares and Count Montes-claros were ill Advised to spurn a young Lion,
as if he had been a Puppy-Whelp. For as soon as they saw the Duke soar so high
in his Opinions, and when Bristol spoke to mitigate him, disaccount of him
contemptibly, as if he had nothing to do, this Brace of Grandees called it in
Question, what Creature could have more Power in that Action, then an
Ambassador, that laid the first Stone of it, that had ample Letters of Credence
under the King's Broad-Seal, with the Confirmation of the Privy Council of
England, which was more then my Lord of Buckingham brought with him. The
Headship of the Treaty was in the Prince, and they bended to it, Extolling his
Wisdom as Capitolinus does Gordianus the Elder, Moribus it a moderatus, ut
nihil possis dicere quod nimie fecit. The next place they deemed to the Earl of
Bristol, upon the Reason premised, though he declined it. And should Buckingham
be degraded to be the third in Place, who held the Highest Place in Honor, and
the Supremacy both in the King's, and the Princes Favor: Ausonius in Paneg. ad
Gratian. tells a Story, That Alexander the Great Reading those Verses in Homer,
that Agamemnon was Named by the Common Soldiers to Fight the Duel with Hector
after Ajax and Diomedes, clapped out an Oath saying, Occiderem eum qui me tertium
nominasset, I would have cut his Throat, that should have Named two before me.
Truly Buckingham had so much Bravery in him, that he would take the third Place
in as great Dudgeon as Alexander.

144. The grave Earl of Bristol was passive in this Quarrel, and sunk it in
Silence with his best Dexterity. So he did allay all other Heats, which the
Duke's Passion raised against him, if his Letter to the Lord Keeper be of
Canonical Faith, Cab. P. 21. knowing how undecent and scandalous a thing it is,
for the Ministers of Princes to run different ways in a strange Court. But the
Envy of all Miscarriages was cast upon his Lordship by that mighty Adversary,
and by a greater than he. That he was wholly Spaniolized, which could not be,
unless he were a Pensioner to that State. That he sided with Olivarez in all
Consults. That he professed a Neutrality, and more, in all Propositions for the
Advancement of the Popish Religion. That he never Pleaded for the Restitution
of the Palatinate, but only pitied it with the Spanish Shrug. That he did not
so timely unmask the Spanish Councils to the Kings Advantage, as he might, and
ought to have done. That he entangled the Prince in Delays, to keep him from
returning Home. For these, and other the like, which will follow in the great
Report made in the next Parliament, a Noise was made, that his Lordship should
be offered up to Justice, as a public Sacrifice. But they that contest for his
Innocence, observe, that he was let loose to depart in Quiet, when he should
have been brought to the Horns of the Altar. And when the Bill drawn up against
him, was put into Sir Robert Philip's Hand, an active, and a gracious Member of
the House to manage it to his Ruin, Sir Robert writes to the Duke, Cab. P.
265. If Bristol frame a probable satisfactory Answer to any Charge, will it not
rather serve to declare his Innocence, than to prepare his Condemnation? Your
Grace may consult with your self, whither you may not desist with Honor, upon
having him further questioned. Afterward, when his Master King James was dead,
and when he was at the Stake, I may say, like to be worried in Parliament, by
his Accusers, he writes thus confidently to the Lord Conway: Cab. P. 20. As for
the Pardon, Jacob. 21. I should renounce it, but that I know the justest, and
most cautious Man living, may, through Ignorance or Omission, offend the Laws.
So that as a Subject, I shall not disclaim any Benefit which comes in general,
as it does usually to all other Subjects in the Kingdom. But as for any Crime
in particular, that may entrench upon my Employments in point of Loyalty and
Fidelity, I know my Innocence to be such, that I am confident I shall not need
that Pardon. A. Gallius, li. 12. c. 7.
Take the Earl's Case Pro and Con, it is very dubious; therefore I will deal
with it, as the manner of the Areopagites was in such Perplexities, adjourn it
to be heard an hundred Years hence. I say, not He, but They were the
Proprophets of Baal, that troubled our Israel. Our Corner-miching Priests, with
the Bloomesberry-Birds their Disciples, and other hot spirited Recusants cut
out the Way with the Complaints of their (no-grievous) Sufferings, which
involved us in Distractions. Rome and Madrid were full of them, and they
conjured Pope Gregory, and the Catholic King, to wind in their Safety and
Immunity in the Articles of the Match, as behoved a Father and a Friend. If
they had sat still, and let the Business go adrist with the Tide, it had been
better for them. They that force their Fruits to be Ripe, do but have them to
be rotten. Qui spretis quae tarda cum securitate, prematura vel cum exitio
properant, Tacit. Annal. lib. 3. The Word of the King and Prince would not
serve them, that they would be gracious to all of their Sect, that lived
modestly and inoffensively to deserve their Clemency. But they must have
public Instruments for it (and Acts of Parliament, if they could be gotten) to
debauch his Majesty in the Love of his People. For as the Lord Keeper writes
very prudently to the Duke, Cab. P. 105. The Bent of the English Catholics is,
not to procure Ease and Quietness to themselves, but Scandals against their
neighboring Protestants, and Discontents against the King and State.
Rhetorical Campian avows it in an Oration made at Doway. Note this Apostrophe
of his to our Kingdom. As far as it concerns our Society, we, all dispersed in
great Numbers through the World, have made a League, and Holy Solemn Oath, that
as long as any of us are alive, all our Care and Industry, all our
Deliberations and Councils shall never cease to trouble your Calm and Safety.
Yet when our pragmatical Bosom-Enemies had wearied themselves with
Solicitations, the Earl of Nitsdale, a main Prop of their Cause, confessed, It
may be Assurance sufficient to all Catholics, who have the Sense to consider,
that it must be our Master's, and the Prince's gracious Disposition, that must
be our Safety, more than either Word, or Writ: Thus he to the Duke, Cab. P.
250. But while the Recusant Petitioners had caused all Affairs with us, and
Abroad, to be obnoxious to Inflammation, the Lord Keeper, like a right
Lapidary, cuts a Diamond with a Diamond, and uses Sir Tob^ M^ (is it not a
Paradox?) the busiest Agent in that Cause, to Manifest, both in the Palace at
Rome, and in the Court at Madrid, that the Petitioners grasp at more Favors
than they could hold, either with the Peace of this Kingdom, or with the Laws
of it, which would endanger them to forfeit all that Connivance which they had
gained before. Give him his Due, he rode with great Celerity to those remote
Places, and did his Work to the Proof, and to his great Praise. S^stus est, at
mihi infidelis non est. As Plautus in Trinummo. The Lord Keeper failed not to
put Gold in his Pocket, but he paid him chiefly out of his Father's Purse. That
most Reverend Archbishop of York, his Father, being highly distasted with Sir
Toby's Revolt from the Protestant Religion, made a Vow to Dis-inherit him, and
to leave him nothing. The Lord Keeper plied the Archbishop with sweet and
pleasant Letters, which he loved, and with some Mediators in Yorkshire, not to
infringe his Vow, for he did not ask him so much as to name him in his last
Will and Testament; but to furnish him with Three thousand Pounds while he
lived, and the Sum was paid to his Son to a Penny. How Sir Toby be^ himself in
the wisest Counsel, which, I think, was given to the King of Spain, may be
read, Cab. P. 25^. importuning his Majesty not to entangle the Prince with the
Vo^o of the Theologos, to which he could not submit himself with Honor, but to
accept of those large Conditions for Catholics, which my Lord the King, and
the Prince have condescended to, that so the Prince may have some foot of
Ground, upon which he may stand without Breach of Honor, to comply with the
incomparable Affection which he bears to the Infanta. This is sure, that Sir
Toby's Industry was well taken, because he did what he could. And he that
employed him, held him ever after to be a Person of Trust, in any thing which
he promised to do.

145. Very consonant to the grand Particulars of the Praemises, are the
Contents of two Letters, both dispatched in June from the Lord Keeper to the
Duke's Grace. That which bears the former Date, June 15, and yet unpublished,
lays out Errors advisedly and mannerly, under the Heads of trivial Reports, and
furnishes the Duke with Counsel for all Exigencies of Advantage, especially
diseloseth the King's Opinion, if the Worst should come. It is long, but I
could not pare it, and not mar it. Thus it is.

May it please your Grace,
IF ever I had (as God knows I never had) any extraordinary Contentment in
the Fortunes of this World, I have now good Cause offered me to redouble the
same, by that exceeding Love and Affection, which every Man (in his private
Letter to others) does take Notice that your Grace does bear, and continually
express to your poor Servant. Nor is your Love incentred to me only in your own
Breast, but full of Operation, having procured to me a good Opinion with his
Highness, and now a very fair and favorable Aspect from my Royal Master. May I
never enjoy the one, or the other any longer, than I shall return them both to
their first Orignal, and employ them to the last Drap in your Grace's Service.
Having not yet spoken with Sir Francis Cottington, I shall not deliver my
Opinion of the State of your Negotiation, but go on with my Baeds, and pray
still unto God to bless and prosper it. Only we have here many odd Relations of
the same, agreeing in this, That the grand Business is much short of the
Forwardness we expected, and at this time in part dis-joynted. First, Some
Distasts between your Lordship and Count d'Olivarez, are reported to be of late
in some sort skinned over, rather than healed. 2. Your casting of the Earl of
Bristol from all Employment, before suspected only, is now freely discoursed.
3. That Porter drew on your Grace, and that your Grace drew on the Prince, and
pressed the King's Assent unto this secret Voyage; and all upon a Foundation,
either imagined, or mis-apprehended by Porter the first Mover. Upon these
Suspicions, and five Weeks Silence, taking a little Advice with my Lord
Hamilton, whom I observed most faithfully constant unto your Grace: I touched
upon his Majesty this Day Seven-night, to feel how his Majesty stood affected,
in case you should return without your Errand. And taking occasion to recommend
that vigorous and active Course your Lordship was reported to run, in pressing
and forcing some speedy Resolution; and averring, that however it sped, it was
the only true Service an Agent could now do unto his Majesty. His Majesty
replied instantly, That he did so interpret it, and that none bat Fools or
Knaves could otherwise censure it. Which, I profess before God, I was glad at
the Heart to hear fall from his Majesty: And your Grace may do well to keep
this Intelligence by you. If I have offended in being thus bold, I crave your
Pardon, it was the fervency of my Love and Affection: And if I offend in the
other Extreme, which is in omitting to say or do what I ought to do in your
Service, impute it to your own Silence and Reservedness; your Grace being
defective to your self, and injurious to my Lord Hamilton and me, if you shall
not impart unto us freely and timely any ill Success (which Good keep off) that
shall befall in this Negotiation. For the good News, I am content to take it
upon Retail from Paul's; but the worst I shall expect to hear at the first from
your Grace, I beseech your Lordship to take some Occasion to salute, in a
Letter to my Lord President, the Lords of the Council, who have ever been very
observant in public of you and yours; and are much dejected with notice of
some Letters, wherein your Grace should intimate the contrary. In good Faith,
your Grace has found all Respect with the Body of the Council, in all this
time of your Absence. And I hambly beseech you to take heed what Words you let
fall concerning the Lord Treasurer. All that are about you stand in need of his
Favor, as the World now goes. And in good Faith, I never observed him, since
his coming to this Office, more respectful to your Lordship, and your Friends,
than he is at this Instant, etc.


Truly no Proceeding could be more genteel, to win the Hearts of all the Great
Ones to his Grace, and to keep them sure unto him, than to persuade him that he
had no Enemy.

146. The Latter of the two Letters is come abroad in Cab. P. 78. whose Date
should be June 28, whereof, because it is in many Hands, some Jaggs will
suffice to be recited.

MY Love makes me sometimes write, and many times fear fondly and foolishly,
for the which, I hope your Grace will pardon me. I have been srighted more
three Weeks since, about Quarrels and Jars (which now Dick Greyham has related
in part to the King) than at this present I am. For God's-sake be not offended
with me, if I exhort you to do that, which I know you do; to observe his
Highness with all Lowliness, Humility, and dutiful Obedience, and to piece up
the least Seam rent; which Heat and Earnestness may peradventure seem to
produce -- If the great Negotiation be well concluded, let all private
Disagreements be wrapped up in the same, and never accompany your Lordship into
England -- I beseech you, in your Letter to the Marquess Hamilton, intimate
unto him your Considence and Reliance upon his Watchfulness and Fidelity in all
Turns, which may concern your Grace. I have often said unto his Lordship, that
your Grace has in many of my Letters expressed as much, and so have pacified
him for the time -- I have had an hours Discourse with his Majesty yesterday
Morning, and do find so disposed to yourdship, as my Heart desires, yet has
been informed of the Discontentments, both with the Conde d'Olivarez, and the
Earl of Bristol, etc.


It Is confessed that these Advertisements, so dutifully presented, were sullenly
taken. It offended, that the Lord Keeper looked through his Grace's Infirmities
with a quick Eye, though with a noble Sadness. He might have wrote somewhat
else, if he had been less Wise, or less Honest. Yet still he wrote, for the
Valuation of the Duke's Goodness to him was so great, that the Sowerness of
present Unkindness must be dipped in the sweet Sauce of former Benefits. It is
intoninus the Emp. Similitude, cast Dirt into a pure Fountain, (...), it will
purge it out, and supply clear and wholesome Water. Immemiately before, that
is, while the former of these Letters was upon the Way, the Duke entrusted the
Prince's greatest Secret, and his own to the Lord Keeper, with a Charge to
carry it with him to the King, being cautious that no Foot-step of it should
remain under his own Hand, or any other. Therefore thus he salutes the Lord
Keeper, June 17.

My Dear Lord,
THIS enclosed is a Letter from his Highness to His Majesty, I pray you deliver
it with your own Hands, and read it likewise to him; but when you are alone
with him. If you show him this Letter, he will, I am sure, give you leave. When
it is read, the Prince bids you either burn it, or keep it for him. I beseech
you excuse me for not writing oftener; I shall now every day be so busy, that I
shall have less Leisure than before. Yet I pray you let me hear sometimes from
you, and how his Majesty uses you in my Absence, for I am sure he knows you my
Friend, which I shall strive, while I live, to continue, etc.


That which was sit to be kept in tenebris for that time, may now come to light
without Injury, by his Gloss upon it, who, the King excepted only knew it. Our
Prince either was weary, or was persuaded to be so, with Articles upon
Articles, and Additions upon Additions in that Spanish Junto. Therefore he
desired Leave from his Father, that he might assay to depart from Madrid, as
secretly as he came thither.

-- Quando optima Dido
Nesciat, and tantos rumpi non speret amores.
Aeneid. 4. The Lord Keeper indeed had emboldned the Prince in February before,
to that Course; but the King thought the Motion was not so seasonable at that
time. For his Highness was attended in Spain with a great Household of
Followers, and God knows whither the Sheep would be scattered, or into what
Pin-sold they should be thrust, if the shepherd were gone. And his Majesty
still dreamt of of winning the Game, and professed he saw no such Difficulties,
but that Patience. after a while, would overcome Perverseness. Howsoever, it
would be inglorious for the Prince of Wales to run away from the Frown of the
Spaniards. But least the Safety of so dear a Person should seem to be slighted,
or his Welcome Home retarded, the Lord Keeper besought the King upon his Knees,
that his Majesty would write his Fatherly and Affectionate Letters, to require
his Son's Return, giving them no Date, but leaving that to be inserted, when
Business was crowned with Opportunity. This Counsel hit the Pin right, and was
followed; and by God's Will, who has the Hearts of Kings and Princes in his
Hand, it pleased on this side, and beyound the Seas.

147. Great was the Expectation what the Month of July would bring forth, as
well in England as in Spain. My Lord Duke had thrust himself into the greatest
Employment that was in Europe, when at first he had no Ground, now no Mind to
accomplish it. A sorry Apprehension, taken from Mr. Endi. Porter, carried him
forth in all have to make up the Match; but there were others, who desired his
Grace to gratify them with Concealment for their Good Will, that sent
Instructions into Spain, to adjure him to do his utmost to prevent the
Espousals. Their Reasons were the two principal Places of Divine and Humane
Wisdom, God's Glory, and his own Safety. For God's Sake, to keep our Orthodox
Religion from the Admixture of that Superstition, which threatened against the
Soundness of it. And no Corrosive so good to eat out the Corruption of Romish
Rottenness creeping on, as to give the Spaniard the Dodg, and to leave the
Daughter of Spain behind. To his own Safety this Counsel was contributed.
These, who made it their Study, and were appointed to it, to maintain the
Grandeur of his Lordship, met frequently at Wallingford-house, to promote the
Work. Who had observed, that some Impressions were gotten into the King's Mind,
and they knew by whom, that his Majesty was resolved to be a Lover of
Parliaments, that he would close very graciously with the next that was called;
nor was there Likelihood that any private Man's Incolumity, though it were his
Grace himself, should cause an unkind Breach between him and his People.
Therefore the Cabinet-men at Wallingford-House, set upon it to consider, what
Exploit this Lord should commence, to be the Darling of the Commons, and as it
were to re-publicate his Lordship, and to be precious to those, who had the
Vogue to be the chief Lovers of their Country. Between the Flint and the Steel,
this Spark was struck out; that all other Attempts would be in vain, unless the
Treaty for the great Marriage were quasht, and that the Breach of it should
fall notoriously upon the Lord Buckingham's Industry. For it was not to the
Taste of the English (if you will number them, and not weigh them) fearing some
Incommodation to the Protestant Religion These Jonadabs, 2 Samuel 13.3. the
Subtle Friends of beauteous Absalom, drew the Duke out of the King's Highway
into the By-path of Popularity. The Spaniards also stirred up his Fire to
struggle and appear against them -- For as the Earl of Bristol writes, Cab. P.
20. He was very little beholding to them for their good Opinion. Withal, he was
so headstrong, that all the Ministers of our King, that were joined with him,
could not hold him in. He had too much Superiority, to think them his Fellow
Servants, that were so indeed. And having nothing in his Taste but the Pickle of
those new Counsels, which his Governing Friends in England insus'd into him, he
plucked down in a few Weeks, which the other Part had been raising up in eight
Years. Centum doctum hominum concilia sola devincit Dea Fortuna, Plaut. Pseud.
Act. 2. This unfortunate Accident did both contravene, and overmatch the
Counsels of a hundred wise Men. A fatal thing it has been always to Monarchs,
to be most deceived, where they have trusted most. Nay, If they had all the
Eyes of Argos, their chiefest Confidents are able to abuse them on the blind
Side. Therefore the Observator is most injurious, that puts a low Esteem upon
King James's Wisdom. P. 14. That he was over-witted, and made use of to other
Men's ends, by almost all that undertook him. So he may put the Fool upon
Solomon, who was cousen'd in Jeroboam, whom he made Ruler over all the Charge
of the House of Joseph, 1 King. 11.28. A Solomon may be mistaken in a Jeroboam,
and like his seeming Faithfulness and Sufficiency to the Undoing of his
Posterity. Little did the old King expect, that the Man of his Right Hand, whom
he had made so strong for his own Service upon all Occasions, would forget the
Trust of his Gracious Master, and listen to the Voice of Hirelings. Which of
the Members of my Partition will make the Duke excusable in point of Honor and
Conscience? Did he do it for the best to the King? Did he think the Spanish
Alliance would be fruitful in nothing but Miseries, and that it would be a
thankful Office to lurch the King in his Expectation of it? Evil befall such
double Diligence. Perhaps it may be shifted off with the Name of a good Intent,
when it tampers with a Branch, or Circumstance of an Enjoyment; but when it
raises up the very Body of Instructions, it is no more competent with
Obedience, than Light with Darkness. The Heathen would not brook it, that had a
grain of Philosophy in their Disposition, that a Minister should alter the
Mandates of his Superior, upon Supposes to the better: Ne been consulta,
Religione mandati soluta, corrumperentur, Gell. lib. 1. c. 13. They thought
that those Services, which wanted the Religion of Obedience, let their Aim be
never so honest, would prove improsperous. Or did this great Lord do it for the
best to himself? I believe it. If the Hope of the Match died away, he looked to
get the Love of the most in England; but if it were made up, he looked for many
Enemies, for he had lost the Love of the best in Spain. Sir Wall. Aston foresaw
wisely, that there was no fear, but that the Princely Lovers might join Hands
in Sacred Wedlock, if that Fear of the Duke could be removed. So he writes,
Cab. P. 32. Would your Grace would commit it to my Charge, to inform the
Infanta what you have merited, and to accommodate all other Mistakes here
concerning that Proceeding. If your Grace would reconcile your Heart, I would
not doubt, but, with the Conclusion of the Match, to compose all things to your
good Satisfaction, and to bring them to a true Understanding of you, and of
their Obligation unto you. But his Lordship knew what he had deserved, and that
it was not possible to look for good Quarter from them: So he cut off the
Thread of the Match with these Scissors. The Love of the English must not be
lost; the Love of the Spaniard could not be gained. But it was passing ill done
of him to deal so with his dear Master, to whom he owed more than ever he could
pay; for whom he should not have been nice to hazard his Preservation. He knew
the bottom of the King's Bosom, that his Majesty accounted this great Alliance
to be the Pillar of his present Honor, and the Hope of his future Prosperity:
That all his Counsels with foreign States turned upon that Hinge: That he
looked for golden Days with it, which would fill our People with rich Traffic,
and spread Peace over all the Borders of Europe. He knew his Lord the King
desired to live but to see it finished, and cared not to live after he saw it
vanished. Crediderim tunc ipsam fidem humanam negotia speculantem, maestum
vultum gessisse, Valor. lib. 6. Let the Duke have his deserved Praises in other
things great and many; but let Fidelity, Loyalty and Thankfulness hide their
Face, and not look upon this Action. Let his Friends that did drive him to it,
and wrought upon his flexible Disposition, bear much of the Obloquy. For it is
not (...), but (...), not Man, but God that made the Law: He that kindled the
Fire, let him make Restitution, Ex. 22.6.

148. He that hates the Light, loves not to come to the Light, lest his Deeds
should be reproved, Joh. 3.20. The Politici, that carried the Duke athwart with
their excentrick Motion, were very impatient to be discovered. They thought
they had beat their Plot upon a quilted Anvil, and that their Hammer could not
be heard. But time is a Blab, which will tell all Secrets, and spared not this.
The Lord Keeper was much maligned, as the Author of the Detection: Yet he
deserved not the Glory, for it was the King himself by this Occasion. The
Ambassadors of the Catholic King, pressed that the Articles, assented to by
the Prince, and those about him, should be ratified. And Preparation was made
to give them Satisfaction. So the Lord Keeper assures the Duke, Cab. P. 78. The
King is resolved to take certain Oaths you have sent hither, and I pray God
afterward no further Difficulty be objected. These Oaths being brought to
discussion at the Council Table, there were among the Lords, that suppressed
their Consent, till better knowledge did warrant them, and some Aspect of
Necessity did make them resolute to Agreement. While these few of the Lords
were suspensive in their Judgment, it was brought to the King, that some,
professed Servants and Creatures of the Duke's, cavilled at certain Articles in
the matter of the Oath, and were very busy to puzzle those, who had not yet
completely deliberated upon them. The King laid this to other things he had
heard (and he was able to put much together in a Glance of Imagination) and
called one of them, that was employed in this unacceptable Office, to a private
Conference, whom his Majesty handled with such searching Questions, conjured
with such Wisdom, wound into him with that Sweetness, that he fetched out the
Mystery; yet giving him his Royal Word to conceal his Person. Sic suo indicio
periit sorex. So the Rat was caught by his own Squeaking. This his Majesty
imparted to the Lord Keeper and Marquess Hamilton, and was not a little
discomforted upon it; for here was a Danger found out, but not a Remedy. Yet he
went on (cheerfully to all seeming) to that which was come to a ripe Head, and
gave Command to the Lord Keeper to prepare all things for the solemn
Confirmation of the Covenants, that were brought from Spain. He went went about
it, and had about him those three Qualities which run together in St. Paul,
Romans 12.11. Not slothful in Business, fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord: That
is, Diligence, Courage, Conscience. Zealots, who are favorable to themselves,
that they think they have among them the Monopoly of Conscience, had been able
to discourage another, who in common Discourse, laid no less Crime than
Atheism, no Religion upon him that should give Furtherance to a Popish
Marriage; much more, if for Reasons of State-Compliance, he should refresh the
Party adherent to Rome with any Mercy or Favor. But this man regarded not
Rumors before Reason; God had given him a Spirit above Fear, which, he would
often say, had the greatest Influence in the Corruption of two brave things,
Justice, and good Counsel. So he was resolved, as Illustrius says of Theod
(...) the Philosopher, (...), to spend, or cast away some Wisdom, not only for
the Intelligent, but for their Sakes that were ignorant, and knew not how to
use it. The Precedent for this Work, he conceived would be to turn over the
Paper Stories of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, when the first and second Dukes of
Anjou were propounded for Husbands to that glorious Lady, of whom the latter
came so near to speed, that wise Burleigh, with others that had gray Hairs, and
grave Heads, drew up a Book for the Consummation of the Marriage. Lay that
Treaty with the French Monsieur, and this of Spain together, and there needs no
striving to bring them to great Resemblance in the Comparison. There was as
much Disparity in Religion between the one Pair, as the other. The Duke of
Anjou came as unexpectedly to the Queen at Greenwich, as the Prince came
unlooked for to Madrid. The Duke brought but two or three in Train, Camb. Eliz.
Fol. P. Ann. 1579. no more did the Prince. The French Treaties continued eight
years to obtain the Queen; the same Term of time had been spent in the Prince's
Behalf, to enjoy the Infanta. Eight years past, and nothing past beside, for
both the Lovers were nonsuited in the end. The Duke of Anjou courted the
Queen, when her People regretted, that he besieged the Protestants in Rochel at
the same time, Gladio ejus eorum cruore intincto, qui eandem quam Angli
profitentur Religionem, Camb. An. 1573. Our Prince solicited for his Mistress
in Spain, when the Palatinate was wasted with Fire and Sword by Spinola, which
was dearer to us by far than Rochel. Finally, Take three things more in a Twist
together. Did some of our good People fear a Prejudice to Religion, by the
Prince's intended Match? even so, Religionis mutationem ab Andino Angli
nonnulli timuerunt. Did a Bride from Spain go against the vulgar Content? So
did a Bridegroom from France: In Anglia optimi cujusque animum ab Andini
nuptiis esse aversum. In the behalf of the Spanish Consulto, did some of our
Counselors become odious, as if they betrayed both Church and Kingdom; so all
that wished the Queen to the French Gallant, Quasi ingrati in patriam and
principem sugillantur, Camb. An. 1581. All as like as may be. Mercury is as
like Sosia, as Sosia is like himself. And the People are like themselves in all
Ages, who commonly suspect some Evil from their Governors, when they will be
wiser than they: So that it is very rare to look to the Public, as it ought,
and to be in Possession of most Hearts; but as Tul. Orat. pro Flacco, said of a
mutinous Concourse of the Trallians, Patiamini me delicta vulgi a publica causa
separare: So I think not the worse of any Place, if the Herd of the People
break further than good Manners and Obedience. They know not how to Rule, nor
is it fit they should know how they are Ruled. For they have Noses and smell
not. The Wisdom of a Kingdom is to be valued, after it is calcinated from the
Opinion of the multitude.

149. Which presently is to be Tried, For the Articles gainsaid by a great
Outcry came to the Touchstone, July 20. being Sunday, and were presented
before to His Majesty to Swear unto, and to the Lords of the Council to
subscribe their Approbation; which were of two sorts. Some belonged to the
Infanta, and her Train of Household, and no further: Some belonged to all the
English, that had taken the Mark of the Church of Rome in their Hand. Of the
former, three, and no more, did seem to be Litigious.

First, That the Princessa and her Servants should enjoy the Use of their own
Religion, without Trouble or Molestation, and a Chapel to be built, adjoining
to her Court, for the more full and decent Exercise of it; which held little
dispute, for the provident Council of Q. Eliz. made no scruple to consent to
the like in express Words. Dux, and sui, modo non sint Nativi Angliae Subjecti,
suam liberi Religionem exerceant in constituto aliquo loco in suis aedibus,
sine impedimento; so the Foundation was laid of the Chapel, adjoining to St.
James's place.

Secondly, That the Princessa should be trusted with the Education of the
Children lawfully begotten between them, till they came to Ten Years of Age. A
string that grated harshly; yet heard by Wisemen with more Laughter, then
Fear. For Childhood is not apt to take any perilous impression in intellectual
Points; and they would be often with the Father, and those about him, and
unlearn corrupt Principles. Chiefly it was foreseen, that it was a
Gratification, that would die out of it self, and expire in process of so long
a time. And in all Councils much must be ascribed to the Foresight of Prudence;
as Nepos says in the Life of Atticus, Facile intelligi potest prudentiam esse
quandam Divinationom. Prudence sees so far before it, that it comes not short
of a kind of Divination. Much more was allowed to the Duke of Anjoy in the page
Appealed to before Camb. anno 1558. p. 320. Si Dux supervixeru Roginae, habebit
tutelam liberorum, si masculi non excesserint decimum Octavum Annum, and
feminae decimum quintum. I think those Counselors ran too far into Temptation.
I am sure we were far more Cautelous and Restrictive.

Thirdly, That the Clergy waiting upon the Princessa should be subject to no
Laws, or Statutes of England already made, or that should be made hereafter.

Methinks no Honest man, that lives in Humane Society, should ask such an
Immunity, though it were possible to be Granted. Yet their Clerks do not ask
it, but Arrogate it. So Bellar. lib. 1. de Cler. c. 18. Clericks are not under
the Laws of secular Princes by Obligation compulsory, but directory. That is,
they do well to conform to the Established Laws of any Nation, where they live,
for the maintenance of Peace, and usual Commerce: But if it seems better to
them to avoid those Laws, and not observe them, they cannot be punished by, no
nor cited to the Courts of Secular Magistrates. This Article K. James eraced
out, not only by his own, but by St. Paul's Authority, Romans 13. Let every Soul
be Subject to the Higher Powers; to those Higher Powers that Receive Tribute,
and bear not the Sword in vain, if any do Evil. Herein I commend the States of
the Netherlands, for that which I find in a Book, called, The Revolutions of
the United Provinces p. 175. A Peace but few years since being brought to
Conclusion between them and the King of Spain, they agree that the Subjects of
the King of Spain may Converse and Negotiate in all their Territories, but with
an express Prohibition of all Ecclesiastical Persons; for the Plenipotentiary
of the King of Spain maintained in a great Diet held at Munster, that they were
none of the K. of Spains Subjects, or Subject to any Secular Power, but only to
the Pope of Rome. A good work to thrust them out for Wranglers, as our King
thrust out this Article. All Concessions that were thought Honorable and
needful for the Infanta being passed over, a contract steps forth in the behalf
of all those in these Dominions, that were of her Highness's Religion, meaning
so much and no more, as was to be presently put in use. It is almost not
credible what strange Rumors ignorant Fear, or perhaps malicious, had buzzed
abroad. That some of our fairest Churches Parochical, nay Cathedral, must be
devoted to Assemblies of Papists for their Public Use. That Cloisters for
Votaries, Male and Female, should be Erected, etc. -- Mensuraque Ficti,
Crescit, and audit is aliquid novus adjicit author.
Ovid. The Demands were bad enough, yet much under that presumption. As they
came from the Ambassadors they were comprised under two Heads. The First, That
a general Pardon should pass under the Great-Seal for the benefit of all
Papists in this Land, to acquit them from the Penalties of such Statutes, as
might take hold of them for the time past, in case of Religion. To which good
words were given, and after many Rubs and Reservations (as shall be shown) the
Seal was put to an Instrument for that purpose, but kept in Lavender. The other
was the Gorgon's Head, which Frighted the Lookers on, that a Patent should be
drawn up copiously with the same Seal to it, to save the Recusants
Ecclesiastical and Lay, from the Penalties of all Statutes made against them,
for the time to come. This is the Star called Wormwood that fell into the
Waters of Debate, Revel. 8.11. Wherein the Spanish Agents were put off with
many Delays and Wise Representations; till in the End the Lord Keeper reduced
it to this Issue. That all Magistrates should be warned by Letters sent to them
severally, not to molest the Roman Catholics upon any Statute, till His
Majesty had signified his further pleasure, and that when the Princessa had
been Six Months in England, this Favor should be confirmed to her further
Content. The like was not yielded in the business Agitated with the Duke of
Anjoy, but a strict Exception was put in, Ut nulla Occasio Anglis ad leges
constitut as violandas praeberetur. It was an ill time for the Ambassadors to
ask such things; when not only seditious Spirits, but the best of Protestants,
who had nothing in them of the peevish and refractory, were sick of an ill
Digestion of Jealousies. It was a hard seeming work to overcome, for the Ravens
Croak'd, and the Doves mourned at it. Yet it was a worse time to deny them,
when the Pledge of our Future Happiness stuck fast in a Foreign Kingdom, and
nothing could Conduct him home with such Celerity and Safety, as some drops of
Grace Distilling from the Prerogative Royal, to stay the longing of the
Pontifician Faction. They are beguiled that think Marquess Inoihosa, or (...)
Carlos de Colonna plucked us over our Line, to get a Wife for the Prince; it
was to get him home.

Jam non de Gloria, sed de Salate pugnandum est. Curt. lib. 4. Let his Highness
look to it in Spain to come home with a Glorious Bride; but all Loyal Hearts
look earnestly for him, whether single or double was not the Chief Point. And
the Anxiety of his Majesty was, What shall I do for my Son! 1 Samuel 10.2. This
was the Compass that guided the Lords of the Council in their condescension, to
bring their young Master out of Peril, though it were with the Ransom of too
much Mercy to them, who were not the best that deserved it. But who it was that
set the Edge of the Razor upon the Hoane; who it was that surpassed himself in
this Negotiation; that cut off difficulties smoothly, leaving no Raggedness to
be seen in the Clest of his distinctions, will appear in the ensuing dispatch
of the Lord Keepers to the Prince; whose goodness will satisfy for the
Prolixity.

May it please your Highness,
150. IF I shall touch upon any Service, which I may seem to have performed
toward Your Higness, I humbly beseech your Highness to conceive, I do it not
to pick Thanks, and much less to put any acknowledgment upon your Highness; but
only to discharge my self of that part of Duty, which all the World knows I
do, above all Men in the World, owe unto your Highness. Before I did imagine,
that his Majesty would take any Opinion of mine in the Signing and Swearing of
this Treaty, Sir Fr. Cottington, your most worthy Servant, had acquainted me
with all the dispatch, and permitted me to Read the Papers over. Upon Saturday
last the 12 of July, the Council formerly warned to attend his Majesty the next
day at Wansted, were discharged, and some hour after my self commanded to
attend. Suspecting thereupon I might be questioned, to that Effect I sent for
your Highness Secretary, and heard from him it would be so indeed, and that His
Majesty was much troubled and perplexed about his Oaths. Presently Town-Reports
were Raised of great Opposition among the Lords against this Swearing. In so
much as the shameless people had made two Orations, the one to be of mine for
the Oaths, and the other of my Lord of Canterbury's against the same (which
they supposed prevailed with the King, and the whole Council) when neither of
us had heard or spoken one word in that Theme. I spent in a manner all that
Night in debating with my self the Streights that your Highness was unto; and
at the last fell upon this Resolution contained in this Letter, which I
delivered upon Sunday Morning in private to his Majesty, with an excuse for my
Boldness therein. His Majesty accepted thereof very well, and Read it over
three or four times that day, and seemed to me at that time to approve thereof
in all Points, and put off further Discourse till the Afternoon. I was so far
emboldned therewith, that after Dinner (because I found some whispring among
the Lords present) I stepped again to His Majesty, and delivered him an Opinion,
that for the Oath of the Lords, his Majesty should not leave it to their
Disputation, but command them to take (...), there being no matter of scruple
or moment in the same; as indeed there is not. This his Majesty well approved
of, and put in practice afterward, with good success. The Council being met,
whereof some were there by Reason of their Attendance, as my Lord Chamberlain,
Earl of Carlisle, Lord Fenton, and Mr. Treasurer, others warned, as the Duke,
Lord Treasurer, Lord Marshal, my self, Sir R. Weston,and the two Secretaries,
his Majesty made a Speech unto us full of perplexity, because of your
Highness's Streits, and his own Remorse of Conscience. Chiefly he insisted, it
would be frivolous to be put upon it, to move the next Parliament to abrogate
the Laws already Established against Recusants, which would not be Heard, much
less Granted; and that in point of Conscience and Religion, he could not
promise, that no Laws hereafter should be made against them. This his Majesty,
having uttered with much Passion and earnestness, left us to hear all the
Papers Read, and having Commanded us very passionately to give him our best
Advice, retired into his Chamber, and left us together for two hours. After the
End of the Reading, many odd and extravagant Propositions were made of Advice,
to be given to his Majesty, how to get your Person home again; wherein I durst
not say one word, finding none of my Opinion (unless it were Secretary Calvert)
nor my self to concur with any of theirs. At the last, pressed thereunto, I
said, that I conceived upon the Discourse of his Majesty, we could not deliver
any Advice, or Opinion at all. For if his Majesty made a Conscience of taking
the Oaths, and had already Framed unto himself this Conclusion, the immovable
Rule in this Case is, Quod dubitas ne feceris, nor there was no more in Policy,
or Divinity to be said therein. On the other side, if His Majesty would
otherwise declare himself, that he was not moved in Conscience, or Religion,
but only in Honor and Safety to Refuse those Oaths, I did hope no Lord in this
Company would Advise his Majesty to desert his only Son, and to desert him in
this manner in the Face of all Christiandom. For to pretend an excuse to fetch
him home, to b^lp^his Majesty to facilitate these Affairs, would never repair
his Credit, who had subscribed that which his Father would not make good, nor
was he himself any way able to accomplish. Beside that I made it a Question,
Whether the King of Spain, after all this wooing, would so easily be deceived
in Licensing him to depart. At the last his Majesty Returning, and calling upon
us for our Advice, all the Lords Assented to this last Opinion, and told his
Majesty, they durst not Advise him any thing, until he expressed himself more
fully in the point of Conscience. His Majesty turning to me (whom he said he
had made for this time his Counselor and Confessor) affirmed his Conscience to
stand, as he had said before, but that he was willing to hear any thing that
might move him to alter the same. To the which, as far as I can remember, I
spoke in this manner.


SIR,
151. IT is not for me upon a sudden to offer my Reasons unto your Majesty, to
alter a Conclusion of Conscience, once Resolved on by your Majesty, considering
how Guilty I am both of mine own Greenness and Interruptions in these Studies,
and of your Majesty's deep Learning, in that part of Divinity especially. But
because I do conceive that your Majesty's doubting in this kind is an absolute
Condemnation of the Prince, who has already Subscribed, and Presented these
Oaths in their Perfection and Formalities to be taken by your Majesty, and yet
continues (my Soul for his) as Zealous a Protestant as any Lives in the World
(which his Majesty by a short Interruption did with Tears acknowledge) I would
presume to say somewhat in defense of his Highness in this Case, tho I dare not
be so bold as to apply or refer it to your Majesty. Two things appear unto me
considerable in this Case, the advancing of the True Religion, and the
suppressing of the Adverse within this Kingdom. The former is a matter directly
of Conscience, and your Majesty is bound in Conscience to take care of the same
to the uttermost of your Power. And if your Son had suffered (as he has not)
one Syllable to be inserted into the Oaths or Articles derogating from the
Religion Established, he was worthily therein to be deserted, and God to be by
your Majesty preferred before him. The suppressing of the Adverse within this
Kingdom, is to be considered in two degrees; First, Ita ut non
praesit.Secondly, Ita ut non sit. For the first I think his Highness does make
it a matter of Religion and Conscience, that Popery do not praeesse, prove so
predominant in your Kingdoms, as that the Religion Established be thereby
disgraced, or dejected. For certain he makes it a Conscience not to Erect
Altar, contra altar. For as for the Leave he promises for Strangers to be
present at Divine Offices with the Family of the Infanta, it is per
conniventiam, and as his Highness shall approve thereof. For the second Degree,
Ita ut non sit, that the Popish Religion should be quite extirpated, or the
Penal Statutes for the suppressing the same, be strictly Executed; His Highness
dares not make this a matter of Conscience and Religion, but a matter of State
only. If the Prince should make this a matter of Conscience, he should not only
conclude the French King to be a false Catholic, for not suppressing the
Protestants; and the Estates of the Low Countries to be false Protestants for
not suppressing the Papists at Amsterdam, Rotterdam, and Utricht especially,
but should conclude your Sacred Majesty to have often offended against your
Conscience (an horrible thought from such a Son to such a Father) because your
Papists are not suppressed, and your Penal Statutes have been so often intended
and remitted. These things you may well do, this Point continuing but a matter
of State; but you may not do it, without committing a vash Sin, if now you
should strein it up to a matter of Conscience and Religion, against the Opinion
of all moderate Divines, and the Practice of most States in Christiandom, I
conclude therefore, that his Highness having admitted nothing in these Oaths or
Articles, either to the prejudice of the true, or the Equalizing, or
Authorizing of the other Religion, but contained himself wholly within the
Limits of Penal Statutes, and connivences, wherein the Estate has ever
Challenged and Usurped a directing Power, has Subscribed no one Paper of all
these against his own, nor (I profess it openly) against the Dictamen of my
Conscience. As soon as I had ended, the King spoke Largely and Cheerfully, That
in Conscience he was satisfied. To which the Lords likewise as generally, gave
their Applause. So the rest of the Counsel were Summoned against the next
Sunday, the Archbishop of Canterbury, Marquess Hamilton, the Earl of
Worcester, the Bishop of Winton, Viscount Grandison, the Lord Carry, the Lord
Belfast, with others whom I may have forgot. And all was dispatched before the
Ambassadors, as I need not to relate; because Sir Fr. Cottington can best do
it. And if this Service may conduce to bring your Highness with Speed and
Safety to all faithful ones, that desire it with their earnest Prayers; I shall
be the Happiest among

Your Highness's Most Humble Servants, etc.


152. So powerful and perspicuous was the Lord Keeper's Theology, that all the
Worthies of David, his Majesty's Secret Counsel, concurred in the Confirmation.
Among whom was Bishop Andrews, the Torturer of the best Roman Champion with his
mighty Learning. Another was Archbishop Abbots, about whom Mr. Sanderson is
most negligently mistaken, to write thus, Page 550. That he was then suspended
from his Function, and from coming to the Council Table. He sat that Day with
the Lords, and was the first that subscribed in the Catalogue, as himself
observes. It may be Mr. Sanderson could not reconcile, (nor I neither) how he
should sign to the Ratification, and undertake a long Letter to King James to
disprove it with many Flourishes, Cab. p. 13. The same Fountain cannot send
forth salt Water and fresh, Jam. 3.12. Therefore I deny the Letter, (I believe
justly) to have been written by him. Such Frauds are committed daily, to set
Credit to spurious Writings under a borrowed Name. A. Gell. picks out a fit
Merchant for such Ware, Sertorius, a brave Commander, but a great Impostor.
Literas Compositas pro veris legebat, Lib. 15. Cap. 22. But I will prove my
Conjecture strongly. First, So wise a Man would not shame himself with
Inconstancy; Act one thing to Day with his Sovereign Lord, and pluck it down to
Morrow. Secondly, The Letter crept out of Darkness Thirty Years after the
Prince came out of Spain, and Twenty Years after the supposed Authors Death. A
large time to hatch a Fable. Thirdly, The Lord Keeper, (vide supra) certified
the Prince, that before the Lords came together to consult about the ease of
the Oaths, two Speeches were in many Hands rise in London; The one for the
Negative, under the Archbishop's Name; The other for the Affirmative, under the
Lord Keepers Name, when no Colloquy had been begun about it. Was it not as
easy for the same Author, or such another, to forge a Letter, as well as a
Speech? Fourthly, The Archbishop was so stout in the Pulpit at Whitehal, as to
deplore the Prince's absence, and his departure out of the Kingdom. The ill
relish of that passage, (I know it by the Papers under my Hand) was sent abroad
as far as Spain by Sir Edw. Villiers. And I dare say the Tidings of that
Letter, had followed the News of the Sermon, if it had been a Chicken of the
same Brood. Finally, There was nothing done that needed a Recantation. Yet
Opinions were so various, that some spread it for a Fame, That the Prince
himself gave the Lord Keeper no Thanks for his Labor. But that which follows
will encounter it, to break the Chaw-bone of the Lie; as it is to be found in a
Postscript of his to the Duke, Cab. p. 85.

May it please your Grace,
I Troubled his Highness with a long Relation of the Consulto we had about his
Majesty's taking the Oaths. About which I was affrighted by Great Men, that I
had done his Highness a Displeasure, to press his Majesty to assent to the
same. And I protest I was so poorly accompanied in my Opinion, that I was truly
afraid I had not done well. And therefore I took occasion to write my Reasons
at large to the Prince; which I heard by Sir John Hipsley from your Grace was
well taken. I humbly thank your Grace, who I know forwarded the same. And so I
perceive by a Letter from his Highness, so full of sweetness, as I am
overwhelmed.


That sweet Letter is preserved, written every Syllable with his Highness's own
Hand, which will show the sufficiency of his Pen at those young Years, but much
more the Pleasure he took in those, that did him faithful Service.

My Lord,
THere are three Circumstances which double any Good Turn that one Friend does
to another; To be done in absence, being undesired, and in time of Necessity.
You have not only done me a Friendly Office, but in a time when my Reputation
lay at the Stake, I being absent (upon an Occasion that few are fully satisfied
with) and in a thing that I did not particularly ask your help in: And lastly,
With that which Crowns every Action, Good Success. I will not say how much I am
bound to you for this: For it were too much a Complementary way, which I
neither love, nor am good at; but only that I desire to have an Occasion to
requite, though not to put me out of this Debt. How things stand here, you have
known before this time. And I have nothing as yet to desire you to facilitate
with you. If you desire to know how soon I shall begin my Journey homeward, I
think certainly that it will be about the 27th of the next Month. But I fear
that the Infanta shall not go with me. So I end,

Your loving and constant Friend, Charles P.
Madrid, July 30. 1623.

This was sent away in 17 Days after the Agreement was struck up at Wansted.
Happy are they, who, being put to drudge at the Plough of State Affairs, do
reap the Harvest of such Gracious Acceptance. And a Prince will find it true,
that he gets as many Hearts, when he receives the Devoirs of his Subjects
comfortably and smilingly, as when he rewards them bountifully. So Pliny in the
Paneg. to Trajan, Non minus regium summaeque humanitatis parva lubenti
facilique suscipere animo, quam magna largiri: A King cannot always reward, but
he may always commend the well-deserving of his Vassals. Which is good
Interest, though it be not the Principal. For an Ingenuous Servant, that is not
yet gratified, is solaced with Hope: But he that is not stroak'd with good
Words, is discouraged for ever.

153. Enough is contained in this little touch, that his Highness in his Letter
of surpassing Love was just to himself, as well as gracious to his trusty
Minister. One Man's Wit wrought Miracles here to soder up all the broken pieces
of the business. Though the Prince had skilful Men about him, yet there wanted
such another Headpiece at his Elbow in Spain. I cannot but think of him, when
I remember what Cuiacius said of his great Master in the Caesarean Law, Nemo
unus erit unquam Papinianus. Neither let his Praise fall lower, because he was
not a Nestor in Years: For he was elder at this time, than Papinian was when he
died. He followed the Cares of the Prince in Madrid, when his Employment was
called for, but being far off, not altogether with the like success. It was hot
Weather now in that Torrid Climate, the Bocca Difurno, as they call it; and the
Treaty of the Match was not a little scorched. The Duke wrote to the Lord
Keeper, July 8. That he did not altogether distrust a good End: His Highness in
his, July 30. seems to presage That he hoped for a desired End. The Words are
sufficiently cheerful; but some Art was in them. For perusing the very Reports
of those gallant Persons, when they came into England, I find all things about
this time look very sickly, and with a Face of Consumption. The Earl of
Bristol, an understanding Author in these Affairs, writes, That the Match was
so really intended, that it was past all danger of miscarrying, if the fault
were not on our side; yet together he confesses, That the Spaniards have
committed many Errors in their proceeding with the Prince, Cab. P. 23. Right:
For it is easy to tumble forth an huddle of them at this time. The Ratification
of the Articles was ready to be published by the Nuncio after much ado: But the
Pope dies July 8. Been fecit Regulus quod mortuus est, melius si ante, says
Pliny, Lib. 6. Ep. ad Arn. But well had it been, if old Gregory had lived
longer, or died sooner. The Life of his Dispensation and Confirmations expired
with him. All the Ground we had trod must be trod over again; and we are
carried back to the beginning of the Race, from whence we started: And no
coming forward, no not a foot, till St. Peter's Chair was filled again. Whose
Successor was not chosen till August the 6th. Nor he at leisure to mind this
Matter in his new Pontificality till September. Nor a second Impression of a
Dispensation to be gotten, till November even spent. Who would not have
considered the Disdain that a generous Love, and a more generous Mind, must
conceive, to have the Cherry bob at his Lip, and to be snatched from him? Quo
propius accesseris ad spem fruendi, hoc impatientius careas, says the same
Pliny, Lib. 6. Ep. 1. But let a free born Spirit see what it is to wait upon
the Papal Pleasure, so lingering, so imperious, I know not which is worst.
Christianity bids us submit to them which watch over our Souls, Heb. 13. but it
does not make us Religious Slaves. Therefore the Prince declared it for his
resolute Mind, That he would not abide the delay of the next Missive from Rome,
nor stay for the Birth of another Elephant: Neither should all the Sirens in
Spain stop his departure. Which made them whisper, That his Highness would rob
them of his Company, and take no leave; and set some, though not openly, to
keep Sentinel to prevent him. Which surmise he confronted with a Message, equal
to the best of the ancient Apophthegms, That though he came thither privily out
of Love, he scorned to steal away privily out of Fear. But when he heard that
some were set in ambush to interrupt his Return, he bore it Heroically, and
without strife of Passion, because he knew no Remedy to help it, and wrote to
the King his Father to be courageous in the sufferance with these Lines: That
if his Majesty should receive any Intelligence, that he was detained in that
State as a Prisoner, he would be pleased, for his sake, never to think of him
more as a Son, but to reflect with all Royal Thoughts upon the good of his
Sister, and the safety of his own Kingdoms. That Family, and those Children,
with whom King Philip held less Amity than with the English, secured us
afterward from those fears. But for other things, the Grandees of the Consulto
(till their heat had vapoured out) stood upon such Terms, as had no Equity or
Moderation. For when Sir Fr. Cottington returned with our Kings Oath, plighted
to the annexed Conditions for the ease of the Roman Catholics, the Spaniards
made no Remonstrance of Joy, (says the Prince in his Report) or of an ordinary
liking to it. Therefore the Lord Keeper observing that they had an insatiate
and hydropical Malady, that the more they gulpt down the more they thirsted, he
tried if they would take this Julip as he prepared it in his Letter to the Duke
of Buckingham.

July 21. May it please your Grace,
I Have Received yours of the 8 of Julyby the Lord Andover, and heartily thank
your Grace for the News, though not so completely good, as we desired; yet
better then for many days together I expected; beside the hope I retain it may
still be better; His Majesty and the Lords have taken the Oaths, and the Laws
against the Roman Catholics are actually suspended (as upon my Credit and
Honesty they were a good while before;) Now July, August, September,and a piece
of October are left for a further Probation. This being so, what good will it
do that Wise and Great Estate, to Publish to all Christiandom their diffidence
of so just a Prince, especially being Sworn, and Deposed. Your Grace knows
very well (I would the State of Spain knew as much) that all our Proceedings
against Recusants is at our Assizes, which are holden at this instant, and do
not return again till after the first of March: So as all the probate of the
suspension of the Laws against them, betwixt this and the first of March, will
be seen and discerned by the last of our August. For between that and the first
of March, there can be no Trial at all. I know if this were understood in that
place, it were unanswerable. For the Proceedings in the King's Bench, which
only can be objected, are altogether depending upon Indictments at the Assizes;
so that the Spring once stopped (as now it is) these Rivers grow Dry, and run no
more. This will mollify all Stubborness, which is Resolved to stoop to Reason,
etc.


Here Is a Remonstrance then which nothing could be more placid, or more solid;
upon which I look, as upon Thaboren in Parthia, as Justin describes it lib. 41.
Cuius loci ea conditio est, ut neque munitius quicquam, neque amoenius esse
possit. Just at this time the Days of Trouble looked darker and darker in
Spain. The Prince, disgusted to Treat with a People that asked much and granted
little; and Wire-drew Counsels into Vexatious length, resolved to take his
leave: and showed the King of Spain his Fathers Royal and Indispensable
Pleasure, that no Proffer should interpose, but that he should hasten him, for
which his Navy did attend him upon the Coast of Biscay. That it was no fault of
his that he must depart when the Treaty was so imperfect, but in them that made
it a Justitium, or Intermission of all Proceedings, because upon the Death of
the Pope, the Court of Rome was not open. Olivarez to divert his Highness, made
Two Propositions; First, That the Prince would come in to the Conditions as
they came formerly from Rome, or to stay till new ones might be agreed upon,
and Ratified at Rome; Hoc illud cornucopiae est, ubi in est quicquid volo, says
Pseudolus in Plautus. Grant the Conde to make his Reference to Rome, and you
grant him all. That Is the Goats-Horn, or Jugglers Box, out of which he can
fetch any thing with a slight. The Prince answered him very gravely for one so
young, (as he made the Report at St. James's) The first motion he had declined
before, neither had he changed his Judgment; nor should they find him a
Shechem, to pass over into a New Religion for a Wife, Genesis 34. The other Motion
he accepted this way, He would go for England to perfect the Articles there,
and let them do the like at Rome. Olivarez admired at his Reply, but took it up
with this Answer, That to be gone so soon, and nothing Modeled to the Content
of any side, would be a Breach; therefore he humbly besought his Highness to
stay but Twenty Days, and he swore by all the Saints of Heaven, then he was
sure it would be a Marriage. The Duke of Buckingham standing by, said, It is
well, but it might have been as well Seven years ago: Which put the Conde to a
great Anger, and in his Anger made him Foam out a Secret, That there was no
Match intended Seven Months ago; and says he, I will fetch that out of my Desk
that shall assure you of it. So he produced a Letter, written to one Don
Baltasar, with King Philip III. his own Hand, as he Vowed. The Prince was
allowed to Read it then as much as he would, but not to take a Copy, (all this
was declared to the next Parliament in the Banqueting House:) His Highness,
with Sir Wall. Aston, better Skilled in the Castilian Language, Translated the
Letter, as their Memories would bear it away, and kept it for a Monument. This
is the Letter which I think Mr. Prinn was the first that divulged, out of the
Lord Cottington's Papers, which he had Ransacked. Whether it were a true Letter
of King Philip's lies upon Olivarez Credit, (it never came out of his Custody)
or whether the Prince and Sir W. Aston mist nothing of the right Sense of it,
through Frailty of Memory, when they came to Recollect the Sum of it in
private, is not yet decided. Solomon alluding to the Contradictions that are in
some Men's Parables, says, They are like the Legs of the Lame, that are not
equal, Prove. 26.7. Let the best Bone-setter in the Hundred set these Legs even
if he can. An Authentical Notary in Spain, Conde Olivarez shows it under Black
and White, that Philip, the Father of the Infanta, who died Anno 1621, held our
King in Hopes, but never intended to give his Daughter to the Prince of Wales.
Hear the Evidence of the other side: His Highness Remembered the Parliament,
That Sir Wall. Aston was struck Mute at the Reading of the Letter; for upon the
Death of the late King of Spain, being sent from his Master our Sovereign to
the King of Spain that now is, to understand his Mind upon the Treaty of
Marriage; he received this Cheerful Answer, That he was sorry he had not the
Honor to begin it, but now he would pursue it with all Alacrity. The Earl of
Bristol is another Witness, Cab. p. 27. I insisted that Two Millions for the
Portion were by the last King settled, and agreed with me. That this King had
undertaken to pursue the Business as it was left by his Father, and to make
Good whatsoever he had promised; Thereupon I desired that the Original Papers
and Consultoes of the last King might be seen; which very honestly by the
Secretary Cirica were produced; and appeared to be such, that I dare say there
was not any Man that saw them, that doubts of the last Kings real Intention
of making the Match: So I leave these Contradictions to blush at the sight of
one another: But to me, Olivarez his Fidelity is the Leg that halts. For as
Tully said of Roscius, the Comoedians Adversary, Quod sibi probare non possit,
id persuadere alteri conatur, he could never persuade that vigorously to
another which he disbelieved himself. It is a tedious thing to be tied to Treat
with one that cares not for his own Honor, nor regards his Modesty with whom
he Treats. I mean that same Person, that Bashaw of King Philip, the Conde Duke,
who entramel'd as many Devices as his Pate could bring together, to raise a
Dust; and made Demands merely to satisfy his own Pride, that he might boast he
had asked them, though his discretion taught him that he could never obtain
them. When Sir Fr. Cottington returned to Madrid with the great Article,
procured to suspend the Penal Statutes of England in favor of Recusants, he
presented it to the Conde, and expected, as the Casttlian Phrase is, Las
Albricias, a reward for bringing of good News; the Conde stooped not so low as
to give Thanks; but, having perused the Paper, told Sir Francis, it would be
expected the Prince should Negotiate a plain Toleration; for the Protestants
that endured that which was in his Hand, would patiently endure more. Sir
Francis Answered him with the Old Simile, That his Lordship was no good
Musician, for he would peg the Minikin so high, till it cracked. Concerning his
Attemptings upon the Prince, my supply is out of private Letters that came from
Friend to Friend. The Conde had Obliged his Honor to his Highness, when he
came First to the Court of Spain, never to meddle with him about his Religion.
He kept not his promise; but solicited his Highness, that as he loved his Soul,
he would return to England a Catholic in his Sense. Well my Lord, says the
Prince, You have broken your Word with me, but I will not break my Faith with
God. Another time he besought his Highness to afford his Company at a Solemn
Mass; No Sir, says the Prince, I will do no ill, nor the suspicion of it. Once
more this Idern told his Highness, that he would accomplish all that he could
desire from the Crown of Spain, if he would profess himself a Son of the Roman
Church; he should not only carry home the bravest Lady for Beauty, Birth, and
Virtue that was; but be made as great a King in Riches and Power as was in
Europe. But as the Prophet says, Isa. 63.5. Excandiscentia mea fulcivit me, my
Fury it upheld me; so the Prince was heated at the Offer, and gave this
provocation to him that had provoked him, that it was such a another
Rhadomontade, as the Devil made to Christ, All these things will I give thee,
if thou will fall down and Worship me. Next to matters of Religion, the
stiffest thing that was tugged for in this Month, was about the Restitution of
the Palatinate. The Secretary of the Elector came to Madrid with Letters to the
Duke about it, which were not first imparted to the King his Father-in-Law. But
all that shall be drawn up into one Process in the Transactions of August.

155. But in all Disputes for Sacred or secular Matters, the Ministers of our
King were the more Naked and Unarmed, when they came to the push of the Spanish
Subtleties, because they kept not the correspondence with themselves. If my
Lord of Buckingham could have fashioned his mind to draw the same yoke with the
Earl of Bristol, who was most conversant upon the place, and best knew the Arts
of that Nation, success had been more Fortunate. But those Civil Discords were
the Cause of many disorders and incivilities. Therefore the King imposed on the
Lord Keeper, to use his Pen once more to reconcile them, which he did not fail
to do the very next day, which was his Majesty's Remove to begin the Western
Progress.

July 22.

May it please your Grace,

I would not be troublesome with this Second Letter, but chiefly to let your
Grace know, that you never stood in your Life more uprightly in his Majesty's
Favor, then at this instant; and that I shall need to pour out no other
Prayers unto God, but for the continuation of the same. For Gods sake Write to
my Lord Hamilton, and acquaint his Lordship with some Passages of your Affairs.
For my self I shall be content to Rove, and guess at them. And I hope your
Grace will be pleased to pardon this Excursion, that is my running this second
or third time into business, which I am told (but cannot by any means believe
it) has already drawn your Grace's Offense against me. It is a most Humble,
Zealous, and earnest Petition to your Grace, to Seal up, and really confirm
that agreement and reconciliation, which to the great Contentment of all your
Friends (but the Regret of some among us) you have made with the Earl of
Bristol. What I wrote formerly might be ill placed, and offend your Grace; but
all proceeded from as true and sincere a Heart unto your Grace, as you left
behind you in all this Kingdom. But the renewing of it now again has a Root
from a higher Power, who has observed your Grace his Favor so abounding
toward me; and my acknowledgments, so far as my poor ability permits, so
returned to your Grace, that he was pleased to say unto me this Morning, upon
this Theme, That he knew you would regard any Representation that I should
recommend unto you. In good Faith his Majesty is more then Zealous, not only of
fair Terms of Friendship, but of a near Alliance, formerly spoken of, between
your Grace, and that Earl. Of whose Sufficiencies and Abilities I perceive His
Majesty to retein an extraordinary good Opinion; which in all Humility I thus
leave to your Lordships Wisdom and Consideration.

The Earl of Bristol had heard how the Lord Keeper had ventured to make this
Pacification, and writes to him, Cab. p. 20. That the Friendship of the Duke
was a thing he did infinitely desire, that he did much Esteem the good Offices
his Lordship bad done therein, but that he conceived that any motion he had
made in that kind, had been despised, rather then received with Thankfulness.

156. He might have said more then despised; for they were received with that
sad Interpretation, that upon it the Duke removed his Affections from the Lord
Keeper for ever; quite contrary to Solon's Rule, neither to choose a Friend
suddenly, nor to loose him suddenly. But after all the Lord Keepers
Faithfulness, and that he watched the good of the Dukes Affairs in his absence,
with as much tenderness, as a Nurse does a sucking Child at her Breast, his
Grace resolved to pluck down the highest Roof of his Dignity, as soon as he
could. Nor was he the surer to escape that Anger for fair Words. Tacitae magis
and occultae inimicitiae timendae sunt, quam indictae and apertae. Cic. 7.
Verrin. Yet the threatening broke out by one man, who was glad to cherish it.
For Sir John Michel did not hide it, that my Lord Mandevile, Lord President of
the Council, showed him a Letter from Spain, assuring that the first Action the
Duke would Embark himself in when he came home, should be to remove him out of
his Place, Cab. p. 89. With which the threatened party was not much daunted,
knowing what a Master he served; that King, whose Speech uttered at Sterling at
fourteen years of Age, has Wisdom becoming one of forty, Spotwoods p. 288. I
will study to be indifferent and to bestow my Favors impartially, and never
repose my self upon any one so much, as to deny others the regard that is due
unto them. The Duke was a generous, and incorrupt Patron; an exactor of great
Duty from those he preferred, or a great Enemy. Let him allow himself what he
could ask for all his Favors, this Man was ready to pay him. If he would be
deceived by crafty Underminers into the distrust of his truest Friend, when he
could not serve him in unfit ways, the fault is in the want of his Grace's
insight, or inconstancy. But as I find it in the Posthumous Meditation of the
most Noble Lord Capel, p. 21. Favor is a fine Thread, which will scarce hold
one tug of a crafty Talebearer. The Observator on H. L. lights upon this
Quarrel (I do not pursue the Lord Keepers Enemies: But if I meet them I will
not shun them) Thus, He being Drunk with Wormwood; Lam. 3.15. That he had done
many ill Offices to the Duke, when he was in Spain p. 36. Many? and yet Name
none? If he will pick his Ears clean from the filth of Hatred, I will tell him
what my Lord Duke took to be ill Offices. The First Displeasure (and never laid
down) was, That the knowledge came to the King by his means, who those
Gentlemen were, that importuned his Grace by their Expresses sent into Spain,
to rend the Treaty of the Match in sunder, or to Act against it with all Wit
and Power. The accused Lord protested upon his Salvation he was not the
Discoverer. The acclearment is fair, and the Proof nothing; who is able to make
Answer to Jealousy, that grows out of the Mud of a man's Brain, like a
Bull-rush? I will Relate what the Earl of Rutland, the Duke's Father-in-Law,
returned again, when he had gone between them often to dismount this Objection;
that the Duke said, Whenever I Disagree with him, he will prove himself to be
in the Right; and though I could never detect him hitherto to be Dishonest, I
am afraid of his Wit. The Second Offense taken was, That he would have
persuaded the Duke into a good Opinion of the Earl of Bristol; and Reason for
it; because he would have kept his Lordship in a good Opinion with the King. To
which all his Allies, all that Studied him, all that Honored him, did not
contribute so much, nor had the King's Ear so much as he had to effect it. To
sit Heraclides his Adagy to him, Nemo been merito bovem immolavit, praeter
Phariam. He was another Pharias, that offered the best Sacrifice to that Lord,
that had deserved the best of him. When I find the King had his part in that
which was so ill taken anent the Earl of Bristol, I can find no blame in it.
But if it had been an Error, it was a sanctified one, to labor to convert
Enmities unto Love unfeigned. And should a Talent of Anger be weighed against a
Grain of Offense? There was no Error; there was no Offense, but that Infelicity
which the Wise Man Bias observed to be in such Cases. That it is better to be
Judge in a Cause between two Enemies, then two Friends; for of two Friends I
shall make one mine Enemy; but of two Enemies it is likely I shall make one my
Friend; Laert in vita. The Third Scandal was, That he set forward the Treaty of
the Marriage with Oars, and Sails of Ingeny and Industry. A new Crime Caius
Caesar, and never heard before. He was a Servant in it. He was Conjured unto
the Care of it by the King; and he was as Trusty to it, as the Soul of his
Majesty could wish. The best Headpiece of our Council in Spain looked upon him
as the chief Adjutant, Cab. p. 23. Thus the Earl of Bristol: If there should be
any doubt, I am sure that your Lordship would put to a helping hand, to keep
the business from being overthrown, since you have done so much for the
overcoming of former difficulties, and the bringing it to the pass it is now
in. The Duke was fallen, by the wyliness of others, and by his own wilfulness,
into a contrary Motion; when the Lord Keeper saw the Councils of his greatest
Friend esloigned from those of his dread Sovereign, he had been a Beast if he
had not given the Right Hand to Loyalty. Patrem primum, postea Patronum
proximum nomen habere, says Cato in A. Gel. lib. 5. A King is a common Father;
Observance is due to thy Father first, and afterward to thy Patron.

157. Yet why should things subordinate be at odds, as if they were contraries?
The lesser Circle is not opposite, but within the greater. Moses, and his
Minister Josuah, the King and his Choicest Servants, are not Represented as
two, but as one person to Allegiance. The Lord Keeper held fast to them both,
that both might hold fast to themselves; nor would he leave the Duke to his own
^^king, as far as the King disliked him; but persisted to displease him into
the good Opinion of his Majesty. Vera amicitia est idem velle, and idem nolle,
says ^^elius. If this young unforeseeing Lord should persist to hate that which
the King loved, his vigilant Counselor knew, that the King would use him no
longer a Friend, but would remove him from that privacy wherein he had bred
him. This, and much more, was prosecuted in August.

Sancta Patres Augusta vocant, Ovid. Fast. lib. 1. In the Language of Old
Latium, August, and Sacred signified the same. 'Twere good if it would prove so
now. But it began with discontent on every side, and never mended. Our Wise
King no longer smothered his Passion, but confessed at sundry times a great
fault in himself, that he had been so improvident, to send the Duke on this
Errand with the Prince, whose bearing in Spain was ill Reported by all that
were not partial. He put the bafful so affectedly upon the Earl of Bristol at
every turn, that those Propositions which his Majesty had long before approved
with deep Wisdom, and settled with the Word of Honor, were struck out by my
Lord of Buckingham, only because Bristol had presented them. Nay, if the Prince
began to qualify the unreasonableness, he would take the Tale out of his
Highness's Mouth, and overruled it; and with such youthful and capricious
Gestures, as became not the lowly Subjection due to so great a Person, but
least of all before Strangers. It was an Eyesore to the Spaniards above any
people, who speak not to their King, and the Royal Stems of the Crown, without
the Complement of Reverence; nor approach unto them without a kind of
Adoration. The more the Prince endured it, the more was their judgment against
it. For every Mouth was filled with his Highness's Praise, and nothing thought
wanting in him to be absolutely good and Noble, but to know his own Birth and
Majesty better, and to keep more distance from a Subject. So the Earl of
Bristol Writes Cab. p. 20. I protest as a Christian, I never heard in all the
time of his being here, nor since, any one Exception against him, unless it
were for being supposed to be too much guided by my Lord of Buckingham; which
was no Venial Sin in their censure. For how much their gall Super-abounded
against that Lord, the same Earl could not hold to write it to the Lord Keeper,
bearing Date August 20. I know not how things may be Reconciled here before my
Lord Duke's departure, but at present they are in all Extremity ill, betwixt
this King, his Ministers, and the Duke. And they stick not to profess, that
they will rather put the Infanta headlong into a Well, then into his Hands.
One thing that filled up the Character of my Lord Duke before in this Work was,
that he had much of the brave Alcibiades in him: In this they differ; that
Plutarch's Alcibiades suited himself so well, to the Manners and Customs of all
Courts, where he came, that he gave satisfaction to all Princes; and they were
best pleased with him, that most enjoyed him. The great Lord Villiers was not
so Fortunate; for he thrived not in the Air of Madrid; and he brook'd the Air
of Paris as ill, about two years after upon the like Occasion. And no marvel.
For as Catulus said of Pompey in Paterculus, Praeclarus vir Cn. Pompeius, sed
reipub. liberae nimius. So this Lord was a worthy Gentleman, but too big to be
one in a Free Treaty with other Ministers. The Lord Keeper, who was the
Socrates to this Alcibiades, had Noted his Lordships Errors, and unbeseeming
Pranks before. For which he looked for no better, then he that rubs a Horse
that is gaul'd. Yet he resolved to shoot another Arrow the same way, that the
former went; though the Duke had threatened to break his Bow as soon as he came
Home. But he was too prudent to be scared from doing Duty to so great a Friend.
(...), says Aristotle. He is neither Wise nor Faithful, but a Flatterer, that
denies his Spirit ingenious Freedom. And it is a Speech worthy of Sir Ph.
Sidney, which the Lord Brook ascribes to him, Page 42. of his Life: That he
never found Wisdom, where he found not Courage. Therefore the Lord Keeper
writes to the Duke, Aug. 3. of which this is the Moral, to him that reads it
intelligently. That no Man living can keep Favor, who keeps not Conditions
that merit to perpetuate Favor.

May it please your Grace,
I Have no more to trouble your Grace at this time withal, than the Expression
of that Service, and those Prayers, which, as I do truly owe, so shall I ever
as faithfully perform to your Grace. New Comers may make more large and ample
Promises, but will in the end be found to fall short of your old Servants in
Reality and Performances. If your Grace has by this time thought, that I have
been too bold, and too near your Secrets, in those Counsels I presumed upon in
my last Letters; I beseech you to remember how easy it was for me to have held
my Peace; how little Thanks I am like to receive from any other, beside your
Grace, for the same; how far I am in these Courses from any end of mine own,
beside your Prosperity and Security. If your Grace would give me leave to
deliver my Opinion upon the main, though no Hunter after Court-News, it is
this. Your Grace stands this Day in as great Favor with his Majesty, as your
Heart can desire. And (if I have any Judgment) in far more Security of
Continuance, than ever you did, if you remain (as for ought I can perceive you
do) in the same State with the Prince, in the same Terms (as your Pains have
deserved) with the Princess; and out of Quarrels and Recriminations (which will
but weaken both Parties, and make way for a third) with the rest of his
Majesty's Agents in this Negotiation. I cannot but presume once more to put
your Grace in mind, that the nearer you are drawn to his Highness in Title, the
more you are, with all Care and Observance, to humble your self unto him, in
Speech, Gesture, Behavior, and all other Circumstances, yea, although his
Highness should seem to require the Contrary. This cannot be any way offensive
to your own, and is expected to the utmost Punto by that other Nation. I do
presume of Pardon for all my Follies in this kind, and that whatsoever is
wanting in my Discretion, your Grace will be pleased to make up out of my
Sincerity and Affection -- However your Grace and the Earl of Bristol shall
conclude, I hope your Grace will pardon my Zeal (though peradventure not
according to Knowledge) aiming only at your Grace's Service, the Amplitude, and
Continuance of your Greatness. For whatsoever your Grace shall determine and
conclude, I do, and shall implicitly yield unto the same. Yet am still of
Opinion, the way of Peace to be the broad way to enlarge and perpetuate your
Grace's Greatness and Favor with his Majesty, etc.


This was bold, but faithful and ingenious Dealing: The Duke's last Messenger,
whom he sent into England, before he arrived, Sir J. Hipsley, gave him a touch
of the same, Cab. P. 316. For God's-sake carry the Business with Patience
betwixt my Lord of Bristol and you. And again in the same -- For God's-sake
make what have you may Home, for fear of the worst: For the King's Face began
to gather Clouds upon the Quarrel between his Ministers in Spain, which did so
much disturb the Match. Sir John Hipsley, and such as he, the Duke could pass
them over for rash Writers, but he would never forgive it to the Lord Keeper,
who invited him to see his Errors. But like old Galesus in Virgil, Aen. 7. who
was knocked down while he went between the Latins and Trojans to reconcile them.
Dum paci medium se offert, justissimus unus,
Qui fuit. --
So it happened to him that pleaded in this Mediation, to be offered upon the
Sacrifice, and Service of making Love.

159. Nevertheless, to draw out the Thread of Favor to more length, which the
Duke had with the King, and that the Destinies might not cut it off, the Lord
Keeper wrote to his Majesty upon Sir John Hipsley's Arrival in the midst of
August, That he had heard more of the Duke's most laudable Diligence in Spain,
from Sir John, than ever he could learn before; that Malice it self could not
but commend his Zeal, and that Humanity could not but pity the Toil he had, to
reduce that intricate and untoward Business of the Palatinate to some good
Success. He might well call them intricate and untoward, for the Spanish
Motions were circular Nothings, much about, and nothing to the Point. Most true
it is, that the Articles anent the Marriage were drawn up, and restricted to
some Heads and Numbers (though not perfected) three years before the Emperor
had entered into the Palz with any Hostility. Therefore the Spaniards disputed
thus; Bring not the motion of it into this Treaty, as a thing born out of due
time. What were it else, but, as the Proverb says, Extra chorum saltare, to
Dance well, but quite out of the measure of the Mascarata? We answered, if
things had been, as they are now, at the beginning, this had then been a
principal Capitulation. Nor had we honerated the Articles with a new
Proposition, unless themselves, that is, the House of Austria, had cast us into
the Gulf of a new Extremity. Reduce the King and his Posterity to the same
Peace they were in, when we began to treat, and we ask no more. But as Seneca
says, Lib. 4. de ben. c. 35. Omnia esse debent eadem quae fuerant cum
promitterem, ut promittentis fidem teneas. But upon so great a Change, there is
neither Inconstancy, nor Encroachment, to fall into new Consultations. For all
this, though nothing but Pertinacy durst stand the Breath of so much Truth, the
others came no nearer to us, but kept further off, affirming (as it is in the
Report made at St. James's) that they conceived our King expected no
Restitution at all for his Son and Daughter, and that they supposed his Majesty
had already digested that bitter Potion. We told them, they must not dissemble
before us, as if they knew not the Contrary. For his Majesty never intermitted
to rouse up their Ambassadors to give him a fair Answer about it; and had stopped
the Treaty of the Match, if they had not opened the Way by Protestation made in
the Faith of their King, that the Palatinate should be rendered up with
Peaceable Possession. What Shape could Olivarez put on now? none but his own: a
stately Impudency. For he told us in the broad Daylight, that all former
Promises, spoken before the Prince's Coming, whether by Ambassadors to our
King, or by Count Gondamar, to my Lord of Bristol and others, were but Palabras
de cumplimiento, Gratifications of fine Words, but no more to be taken hold of,
than the Fables and Fictions of Greece before the Wars of Theseus. The Prince
came over him at this with a blunt Anger, that if there were no more Assurance
in their Word, it was past the Wit of Man to know what they meant; but he would
tell them really his Father's, and his own Meaning, That without his Sister's,
and her Husband's Inheritance restored, they neither intended Marriage nor
Friendship. When King Philip had heard with what Courage and Determination his
Highness had spoken, like Caesar in Velleius, Se virtute sua, non magnitudine
hostium metiens, it put that King and his Counsel to a middle-way, as they
called it, To treat upon the old Articles, and no other, as falling
perpendicularly on the Marriage, but to take into a concurrent Deliberation,
the Restitution of the Prince Elector's Country. Let Metaphysical Statesmen
scratch their Heads, and find a real Distinction, if they can, between these
Formalities. Yet Sir Walter Aston followed them in that Way, and paid them in
the same Coin with this Distinction, Cab. P. 38. That the King his Master pressed
for the Restitution of the Palatinate, and Electoral Dignity to the Prince, his
Son-in-Law, not as a Condition of the Marriage, but to be settled together with
the Marriage -- And again, Not as a Condition, but as a Fruit and Blessing of
the Alliance -- And to make the Coming of the Excellent Princess, the Infanta,
of more Esteem to his Subjects, bringing with her (beside the Glory of her own
Virtue and Worth) the Security of a perpetual Peace and Amity. These were
Punctilio's in Honor, but just Nothings in Wisdom; the Cause of the Palatinate
must not be tempered at the same Forge, but apart, not a Rush was gotten by it,
and time wasted; for our Ministers were resolved to conclude neither, unless
they perfected both.

160. The Sennor Duca Olivarez made such Work upon this Theme, and turned it
into so many Forms, that it makes him ridiculous in the History, Vertumnis,
quotquot sunt, natus iniquis. Horat. And so disastrous a Counselor, through
his Variableness, that it was his Fault that caused a Distrust in the main, as
wise Spotswood says, Page 544. The Prince conceived there was nothing really
intended on the King of Spain's Part, but that the Treaty was entertained only
till he (and the House of Austria) had reduced Germany into their Power, which
might be suspected without Injury, by looking upon this Vertumnus in all his
Changings. Seven Months before the Prince took his Journey, and came to cast
the Die upon the whole Stake, to win or loose all, Mr. End. Porter was sent to
Spain, and spoke with the great Conde, who snapt him up, and gave him this
unkind Welcome in a Chase, That they neither meant the Match, nor the
Restitution of the Palatinate. Presently the Earl of Bristol gave him a Visit,
and a Discourse about it: In a trice he winds himself out of his former Fury,
and vows he would do his best to further both. The next Discovery breaks out by
Mr. Sanderson's Diligence, Page 540. in a Letter of the Conde's to King Philip,
November. 8. 1622. That the King of Great Britain affected the Marriage of his
Son with the Infanta, and was more engaged for the Palatinate -- And as a
Maxim, I hold these two Engagements in him to be inseparable -- For us, though
we make the Marriage, we must fail in the other -- Then you will be forced to a
War with England, with which, all Convenencies, that were formerly thought
upon, will cease. The Remedy which he propounds, to fail without all these
Shelves, I never did light upon out of this Letter. It Is thus -- The Emperor,
as your Majesty knows by his Ambassador, desires to Marry his Daughter with the
King of England' s Son; and I doubt not but he will be glad to Marry his Second
Daughter to the Palatine's Son -- So all the Conventencies of Alliance will be
as full in this -- For it accommodates the Matter of the Palatinate, and the
Succession of his Grandchildren without Blood or Treasure. Here is a new Bride
appointed for his Highness, the eldest Daughter of the Emperor, which is
unlikely to be intended, because it comes from none but such an Author as
Olivarez, and in as much as when Count Suartzenburg came about eighteen Months
before Ambassador to our King from Caesar, this was not moved at that
Opportunity, and when the Prince came to Spain, no shadow of it remained, but it
was vanished like a Morning-mist before the Sun. Now follow their Whimsies and
their In and Outs at the Consulto, when the Prince was among them. The first
Onset that Olivarez gave, was, That they were ready to follow all the Demands
of the King of Great Britain, concerning the Match for his Son; to the Demands
for his Son-in-Law, he said, they were not in their Power to effect, his
Country was extended upon by the Emperor, his Electoral Dignity invested in the
Duke of Bavaria. And within this Charm they kept us long, till we were weary
with their Obstinacy, and sat down a while, as when Boys Scourge a great Top
till they make it sleep. At last, the Prince's Highness, offended that he could
gain nothing by this Alliance for his dear Sister's Good, offered to give King
Philip a Farewell, that he might look timely at Home for the Relief of her
Misery. On this, no man courts his Highness to stay, so much as Olivarez; and
to slacken his Return, revives the Consult of the Restitution, promises the
strongest Mediation that the King his Master could make with the Imperialists
and Bavarians; which if it were rejected (but they hoped better) he would be
forward, for his Part, to stir up his Catholic Majesty to give his Brother,
the King of England, Assistance by Arms, to procure him his Satisfaction. Yet,
whatsoever he said, his Heart lay a thought farther, and he had a Trick to
redeem himself out of this Promise; for he told his Highness, in a Weeks space
after, that he found their Nation so linked to the Love of the House of
Austria, that they would never march cheerfully into the Field against it. For
all this the Weathercock turned, and he was affrighted in a moment into a good
Mind again. So did his Highness report at St. James's, that a false Alarm
being brought to Madrid, that Count Tilly, with his whole Body of Foot and
Horse, was routed in Germany, instantly the Conde Duke came, with as much Fear
as Have, unto the Prince, and with as much Lowliness as his Knee upon the
Ground, vowed he would give him a Blank for the Restitution of the Palsgrave's
Interest; but when the Second (that is, the worst) News came, that the Duke of
Brunswick was quite defeated, the Mood was changed with the Man, and he spoke
as loftily from that Matter, as if the great Armada had been failing again upon
our British Ocean. Into how many Paces did Hypocrisy put him? Sincerity would
have got him Honor, dispatch the Work, and saved him all this Trouble; for
with the same Study, nay, with far less, men may attain to be such as they
ought to be, which they mis-spend, in seeking to be such as they are not,
Quibus id persuasum est, ut nihil mallent se esse quam bonos viros, iis
reliquam facilem esse doctrinam Cic. de orat. lib. 3. After that great Don
Jasper had put himself to the Expense of all this Folly, he riveted in two
Straws more like than Wedges, to cleave the Knot. First, Let the Marriage be
Consummated, and then despair not but the Princess Infanta would beg the
Palatinate with her earnest Prayers, that she might be received with Honor and
Applause among her Husband's People. That is, Seal their Patent, and we shall
have an empty Box to play with. Or else marry the Lady, and leave her behind,
till the Business for the Palsgrave's Patrimony were accommodated, which is
like Velez's Trick in Gusman of Alfarach, to (...) away both the Bride, and the
Bride-Cake. The great Projector held close to one Proposition at the last, that
since Prince Frederick the Elector, had highly offended Caesar, in the Attempt,
and Continuance of it, in the Matter of Boh^mia no Account should be had of his
Person, but Restitution should be made to his Eldest Son, by Marrying the
Second Daughter of the Emperor; in which Clause the Prince concurred. But the
Sting in the Tail was, that he should be bred up in the Emperor's Court, to
mold him into a Roman Catholic. Upon which his Highness broke off, the Earl of
Bristol (as a sharp Letter charge him, written by the Prince, Cab. Page 17.)
swallowing down that Difficulty at a Gulp, because without some such great
Action, neither Marriage nor Peace could be had. But Sir Wall. Aston flew back,
saying, He durst not give his Consent for fear of his Head. Now we have the
Duke Olivarez in all his Party-colours, who knew that the Breach of Alliance
with England would be transcendently ill for Spain, yet he would hazard a
Mischief, unless he might tear a Princely Limb from the Protestant Religion not
unlike to the Paeotlans in Justin, lib. 8. Tanto edio Pho^sunn ardentes, ut
obliti cladium (...), perire ipsi, q^am non perdere eos praeaptarent. How the
Duke Olivarez smoothed it, a Letter of his, which would make a Pamphlet for the
length, will manifest, which to this day has lain in Obscurity, but is worthy
to come abroad. It follows --

161. HIS Majesty being in the Escurial, I desired these, my Lords the
Ambassadors, that they would repair hither, to the end that we might treat of
perfecting those things which concern the Palatine; forasmuch as might be done
from hence, wherein we procure, as you know, to give Satisfaction to the King
of Great Britain, through whose Intercession, together with that of the most
Excellent Prince his Highness, we have procured to dispose things in Germany,
and have used those Diligences which you know. The Means which has ever seemed
most easy, and apt for the well addressing of this Business, is to Marry the
Eldest Son of the Palatine to the second Daughter of the Emperor, bringing him
up in the Court of his Caesareal Majesty, whereby the Restitution, both of the
States and Electorate to the said Son might be the better, and more
satisfactorily disposed. And in this Conformity, we have ever understood and
treated, and propounded it here. But now coming close to perfect the Business,
as I said before, those my Lords the Ambassadors say, that the thing which on
their Part has been desired and that which the most Excellent Prince, and the
Lord Duke of Buckingham did carry away in their Understanding; and that which
the Ambassadors themselves have written to the King of Great Britain, was, That
we must procure that the Restitution of these States may be to the Palatine
himself. This Point carries so great Difficulty with it to be conveyed to the
Emperor's Ears, that it may be feared, yea, and held for certain, that the
Persons who are interested in this Business, would procure to over-turn the
World, to make Complaints to the Pope, and to have recourse also to others
exaggerating that which they have done, for the Restitution of that to the
House of Austria, which had been taken from it. And they would also ponder that
which concerns Religion, whereby they might disquiet the Mind of Man, and
say, that they having acquired it by their Arms, or given Assistance toward
it, it is now taken from them, and given to one, who has been a Rebel (for
this is the Language they will hold) and is still an Enemy of the Catholic
Religion. And this being exaggerated (as they well know how to do) it may
perhaps breed such Difficulty in the Business, as that the Restitution even of
the Son will not be obtained; a thing which would be ill for us all, and worse
perhaps for the Palatine himself, and his Children. But this other may be
disposed with more Sweetness, and good Liking of all Parties: Since the
Marriage being once made, they who might now contradict, would be wholly in
Despair to have any Part in this Business, when they should see the Emperor
interessed in the Affairs of the Palatine, whereby they would grow not to
oppose any of those things, which his Imperial Majesty would think ^t to do
concerning him. And thus we should come to facilitate the Addressing o^ that
which is now desired concerning the Palatine in his Person, wherein my Lord the
King will use all the possible Endeavor by doing Offices to the Emperor to
obtain it and so to settle things with satisfaction, which the Pope, and other
Princes and Potentates may receive by this way, and which cannot be by that
other to which my Lords the Ambassadors do point. For as long as Men will speak
of the Individual Person of the Palatine, they have room to reprove his
Actions, and to hide their own Interests by the pretext of the Justifiableness
of his Punishment. And I conceive that although his Majesty will use all
possible Endeavor, yet the Business will be as it were impossible, if we use
not the Medium of depriving them of their Hopes, by placing all upon the Son.
And I resolved to say all this to you, to the end you may represent it to his
Majesty of Great Britain, assuring him that here is great desire to give him
Satisfaction in all that is possible; and that we must help our selves to
obtein this by not demanding things that are impossible; and whereby (besides
the difficulty which they would have) very great Inconveniences, and greater
Disquiet might result. And I hope that his Majesty, according to his great
Prudence, will consider and understand it after the same manner; and you who
understand the Business so, will give it so to be understood. Yet use it with
that Prudence, which you think convenient.

162. For by these means I hold the Emperor to be in a manner already reduct;
and by that other, although the thing be attempted, and though we for our parts
do all that possibly we can, as we will do, and this shall be given in Writing
to the Ambassador, if they press it: Yet I fear much, and I have much Ground to
do so, that we shall not be able to obtein it, and that we shall scandalize and
lose Reputation. And it will prove as ill-favored a piece of Work, as that
which happened in the Electorate of Bavaria, which we contradicted and France
favored. And if I may tell you freely what I think, that which is pressed is
much less, than that which I offer. Since by that which I say, the Restitution
of all the States is presently fixed upon the Grandchild of the King of Great
Britain, and the Electorate after the Life of Bavaria; yea, and during that
Life, all that may be done without affronting the said Duke. And in that other
way which is offered, we are to walk all the Days of our Lives in the Question,
Whether the Submission which the Palatine makes be sufficient or no? And they
who have Interests herein will be sure to except after a critical manner to any
defect which may be suspected. And as long as the State shall be undeliver'd,
the Business certainly will grow to nothing, and become subject to the Power,
which some interested Persons have with the Emperor. All which would cease, if
the Submission which the Palatine is to make were to be after the Estates, were
to be ordered to the eldest Son by this Match, so that the Palatine would in
fine make due Submission, and give convenient Satisfaction and Security for
true Friendship and Alliance with the Emperor, my Lord the King, and the Noble
House of Austria. I confess that I am a young Minister of State, and I show it
by desiring to redress Businesses by way of Effecting, and not of Delays, which
are ever used by old and prudent Ministers. And I know that without doubt, that
the Proposition, which is made by me, is the better way. And so you may
understand thus much for your self: And according to the dispatch which you
shall receive of the Ambassador, you may go walking on. The thing which I
conceive is the thing I relate unto you here, and that which I told you by Word
of Mouth in Madrid, although the Ambassador, as I said before, affirm, that
you, and they, yea and the Prince had mistaken this, by understanding that the
delivery of the States should instantly be made to the Person of the Count
Palatine, and not to his Son. And I would to God I might see this obtained of
the Emperor, who does so greatly desire the Peace of Germany, and the repose of
the House of Austria. For I for my part would be sure to do all that possibly I
could for the effecting thereof. Besides this, I have seen by a Reply of the
Earl of Bristol's, that he makes instance for us to ponder the Engagement
wherein the most Excellent King of Great Britain does find himself, by his
having obliged himself by public Writings to restore all entirely, or else to
put all that he has in adventure. It is here to be understood, that when it is
said that that King made this Writing, yet (in case he made it) the Palatine
had not then committed those things, which he executed afterward against the
Will and Counsel of the most Excellent King of Great Britain. Nor can any
prudent Man oblige himself to all those Errors, which may be committed. And if
the Count Palatine had followed the Counsel of the most Excellent King of Great
Britain, many of those things which have succeeded had been prevented, and the
Grace of the Emperor had been better disposed than now it is. Beside that much
has been spent, and that they have seen him so obstinate stirring up against
the Emperor both the Turk, and Bethlem Gabor, and as many others as he has
been able. I say not this to the end that we should forbear to do whatsoever in
this World we should be able to accommodate the Palatine, and to do in this
behalf that which the King of Great Britain does show that he desires. But to
say that which is certain, his Majesty of Great Britain does by no means find
himself in this Business any other ways engaged, than he shall find that
Engagement to be justifiable. God keep you as I desire.

From Madrid, 31 October. 1623. Postscript. If my Lord the King did not mean to
bring this Business to a final Conclusion with much Gust to the King of Great
Britain, we might sufficiently, with that which my Lords the Ambassadors
desire, by offering, and really interposing our Intercession with his Cesareal
Majesty. And we might also have excused the Writing of this long Letter, which
is full of Good will, and of this I can assure you.




163. This long, riddling, non-concluding Letter, (such another as Tiberius the
Emperor wrote from Capree to the Senate for the Trial of Sejanus) is not
endorsed. I conceive it was sent to Mr. Edward Clerk, who was sent from the
Prince on Shipboard to the Earl of Bristol, to stop the Powers he had for the
dispatch of the expected Desposories, this was put into his Hand against he
returned for England. But what is it worth if it were to be sold? Scarce two of
their Maravedies; and we requited them with that which came to as little as one
of our Farthings. We had looked after the Re-possession of the Palatinate till
our Eyes aked; and to feed them with a taste of their own Provender, a
long-breathed Delay, we made their Ambassadors in London tarry for the
Indulgences, which their Clients in Religion hoped for, till their Hearts aked.
It is opened sufficiently before, that his Majesty's End in subscribing to the
Articles in favor of the Papists his Subjects was, to second his Son in that
which he had begun in Spain, to bring him out of the Briars from thence. The
Ambassadors plied the Concession of the Articles very diligently, that their
Party might enjoy the sweetness of the Benefit. For better is the sight of the
Eyes, than the wandering of the Desire, Eccles. 6.9. It fell out well that the
King, never intermitting a Summers Progress, was out of the way. So the
Management of the Business fell upon the Lord Keeper, not by Usurpation, but by
Merit, and by Necessity too. For, whatsoever his Majesty pretended, he gave the
Keeper a secret Rule, to go no faster than needs, and to do no more prejudice
than was unavoidable. A Regiment of Plots would hardly be enough to be drawn up
together to win that Enterprise; though a good Sconce overcame all. Propertius.
Men's bona, si qua Dea es, tua me in sacraria dona, says a Heathen. As all
costly Ointments have Oil mixed with them, so Wisdom persumes all Undertakings,
as this under the File will demonstrate. The Ambassador used their Counsel
Learned in our Laws to draw up the effect, of that they had obtained, as near
as could be to his Majesty's Mind. Which was brought to the Lord Keeper; who
told them, The Papers were unsatisfactory; they had proceeded indeed by the
Articles signed in the private Lodgings at Whitehal; but the private Articles
show only the extent of his Majesty's Grace and Favor in the substance; not at
all the Manner and Form how they shall be conveyed; which must be chalked out
by a new and immediate Warrant from his Majesty. This held dispute till the
10th of August, his Majesty being at Salisbury; where Directions past to
liquidate the Doubts, how the Kings Grants should be applied, called from that
place the Articles of Salisbury. For which the Agents of the Ambassadors were
to resort to the Earl of Carlisle, and Mr. Secretary Conway, attending in the
Progress, and the Patents to be filled up with them by the Discretion of the
Lord Keeper, Lord Treasurer, Mr. Secretary Calvert, Sir Richard Weston
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Atturney-General, Sir Th. Coventry attending,
who were to sit at Whitehal for the more easy Expedition. Time is given to
draw up Copies of new Draughts. Interea aliquid fiet spero, says the Comic. In
these Intervals who could tell, but somewhat might fall out to cross all? On
the 18th of August the Lord Keeper sends the Form of the Pardon drawn up to the
King at Beawlie, to save the Recusants from all Advantages the Laws might take
for the time past; and a Dispensation to keep them indemnified from the same
for the time to come. But an Item was given, to bring the Dispensation lame
back, that his Majesty should signify his Royal Will, That the Pardon should
go under the Great Seal, the Dispensation under the Privy Seal: This from
Beawlie, Aug. 21. And there was a Color for it out of the Agreements of
Salisbury subtly drawn up. For the second Article says, That a Legal
Authentical Pardon shall be past under the Great Seal: And in the seventh
Article, There shall be a present Suspension of his Majesty's Laws under his
Seal. The word Great was wilfully omitted to puzzle the Transaction. But after
the Spanish part had debated with the Lord Keeper in Reason, he writes to
Secretary Conway at Tichburn, Aug. 25. That he confessed a Dispensation from the
Poenal Statutes could not be pleaded, but under the Great Seal. The Business
got off in that Point, but it hung upon another Tentar. He writes again to Mr.
Secretary then at Broad-lands, Aug. 27. That it troubled him much he was
enforced to such often Replies, but the Weight of the Business would excuse it.
He says, He was not instructed from the Articles of Salisbury, from what Day
the Dispensation was to begin, and how far it was to be limited in time to
come; from what time those are to be excluded that do not lay hold of it. To
which answer was given; but always the Dial stood. Once again he demurred upon
the Dispensation, which says, That the Papists Convict shall not pay their
Forfeiture for not coming to Church, nor be Indicted for not taking the Oaths
of Supremacy and Allegiance; whether it was not fit to divide these in several
Styles and Expressions. It was returned, and dictated from the Kings Lips; The
first Breach of the Laws should be signified to be absolutely pardoned; The
latter should go in another Form, that it should not be questioned, and Mr.
Attorney to provide accordingly for Legal Notions. When the Lord Keeper had
done with the Living, he began with the Dead; and scrupled how their Dead
should be Interred, so as to give no offense, nor be obnoxious to be offended.
The Resolution was brought to him that sent it, That their Burials should be in
their private Houses, as secret as might be, and without any sign of
Manifestation; but Notice to be given to the Parish-Clerk of their departure.

164. Never was Man so entangled in an Els-lock all this while, that could not
be unravelled, as Marquess Inoiosa, till he published his Choler in all sorts
of Impatiency. The Reader may take in so small a matter by the way, that the
Writer of these Passages said to the Lord Keeper, That the Marquess was the
most surly, unpleasing Man that ever came to his House. His Lordship answered,
They were his Manners by Nature: But he had been so vain to profess, That he
came an Enemy to us into England; and for this Dowty Cause: His Father was a
Page to King Philip the Second, while he lived here with Queen Mary, and was
discourteously used in our Court, perhaps by the Pages. Which was a Quarrel of
Seventy Years old, and bearing date before the Marquess was born. Which will
cause a Passage of Dionysius the Tyrant of Sicily to be remembered, who had
robbed and spoiled some of the Islands under the Protection of Athens; and when
the Injury was expostulated, he told them, Their Countryman Ulysses had used
the Sicilians worse 700 Years before, as he believed it to be very true in
Homer. This Ambassador was a restless Man, and held the Lord Keeper so close to
turn and plow up the fallow of this Business, that he would not give him the
Jubilee of a Day to rest. Yet the time, do what he could, had run at waste from
the 20th of July, to the end of August. Then, and no sooner, the Frames of the
Pardon and Dispensation were contrived and dispatched. Yet the Mill would not
go with this Water. The Ambassadors called for more: That two general Commands
should be issued forth under the Great Seal, the first to all the Judges and
Justices of Peace; the other to all Bishops, Chancellors, and Commissaries not
to execute any Statute made against the Papists. Hereupon the Spanish Faction
was suspected, that they had no hopes to bring some secret Drifts to pass, but
by raising a general hatred against our Government. The Lord Keeper repulsed
the Motion, and wrote to the King being at Aldershot, That whatsoever Instance
the Ambassador makes to the contrary, there was no reason why his Majesty's
Wisdom should give place to them. He propounded, That a private Warrant might
be directed to himself, to will him to write to the respective Magistrates
fore-nam'd, to acquaint them with the Graces which his Majesty had past for
Recusants in that Exigence, and to suspend their Proceeding till they heard
further. For as the Civilians say, Cessant extraordinaria, ubi ordinariis est
locus. Thus he contrived it, that the King, as much as might be, should escape
the Offense, and let the Rumor light upon his private Letters. For which he
never put the King to stand between the People, and his Error; nor besought
him to excuse it to the next Parliament: But as Mamertinus in Paneg. said of
his own Consulship, Non modo nullum popularium deprecatus sum, sed ne te quidem
Imperator, quem orare praeclarum, cui preces adhibere plenissimum dignitatis
est. Yet lest the Ambassador should complain of him to the Prince in Spain, he
writes to the Duke, Cab. P. 8. Aug. 30.

THat he had prevailed with the Lords to stop that vast, and general
Prohibition, and gave in three Days Conference such Reasons to the two
Ambassadors, (although it is no easy matter to satisfy the Capriciousness of
the latter of them) that they were both content it should rest, till the
Infanta had been six Months in England. For to forbid Judges against their
Oath, and Justices of Peace (sworn likewise) not to execute the Law of the
Land, is a thing unprecedented in this Kingdom. Durus sermo, a harsh and bitter
Pill to be digested upon a sudden, and without some Preparation. But to grant
a Pardon even for a thing that is malum in se; and a Dispensation with Poenal
Statutes, (in the profit whereof the King only is interested) is usual, full of
Precedents, and Examples. And yet this latter only serves to the Safety, the
former but to the Glory and Insolency of the Papists, and the magnifying the
service of the Ambassadors, too dearly purchased with the endangering of a
Tumult in three Kingdoms. His Majesty uses to speak to his Judges and Justices
of Peace by his Chancellor, or Keeper, as your Grace well knows. And I can
signify his Majesty's Pleasure unto them with less Noise and Danger, which I
mean to do hereafter, if the Ambassador shall press it to that effect, unless
your Grace shall from his Highness, or your own Judgment direct otherwise. That
whereas his Majesty being at this time to Mediate for Favor to many
Protestants in Foreign Parts, with the Princes of another Religion, and to
sweeten the Entertainment of the Princess into this Kingdom, who is yet a Roman
Catholic, does hold the Mitigation of the Rigor of those Laws made against
Recusants, to be a necessary Inducement to both those Purposes, and has
therefore issued forth some Pardons of Grace and Favor to such Roman
Catholics, of whose Fidelity to the State he rests assured. That therefore you
the Lord Bishops, Judges and Justices, (each of those to be written to by
themselves) do take Notice of his Majesty's Pardon, and Dispensation, with all
such Poenal Laws, and demean your selves accordingly.

This is the lively Character of him that wrote it, Policy mixed with Innocence.
(...), says Nazianzen, Cunning enough, yet not divided from Conscience: For
Wit, when it is not sheathed, as it were, in the fear of God, will cut like a
sharp Razor.

165. All his Art would be required to reconcile two things: That the
Ambassador should be put off no longer, (for so the King had now commanded by
Dispatches from both the Secretaries;) And that he would finish nothing, till
he had heard either his Highness, or the Duke's Opinion upon the Proceeding.
The general Pardon, and the Dispensation were both sealed: So he began. But
kept them by him, and would not open the least Window to let either Dove or
Raven fly abroad. The King being returned to Windsor, signification was given,
that none of the Lords should come to him, till he sent for them, and was ready
for Matters of moment. No Superstructure could go on very fast, when that Stone
was laid. From Windsor, Sept. 5. Sir G. Calvert writes to him, My very good
Lord, His Majesty being resolved to extend his Gracious Favor to the Roman
Catholics, signifies his Pleasure, That your Lordship should direct your
Letter to the Bishops, Judges, etc. to forbear any Moleslation of his said
Subjects in respect of their Religion. To send them forth with as much speed,
as conveniently may be, that his Majesty may be freed from the Complaints of
the Ambassadors. Thrice again he was charged with the same Command. To all
which he answered, He could do nothing without a private Warrant for it, and
that it was not possible to be agreed upon, till he spoke with his Majesty. On
the 6th of September, the same Secretary writes again, That an Exemplification
of the Pardon should be delivered to the Ambassadors under the Great Seal.
That Is not hard to be done: But upon what Limits and Conditions? So the Lord
Keeper rejoyns. Sir G. Calvert is troubled again to satisfy that Scruple, That
no Copy of it should go out to any of the Roman Catholics, nor any of them be
permitted to sue out their Pardons, until his Majesty's Pleasure be further
known. This came Sept. 8. The Lord Keeper held back yet, till he knew what
Assurance he should have from the Ambassadors to keep those Conditions: Which
held a Contest till Sept. 19. When Mr. Secretary Conway writes from Theobalds,
His Majesty's Pleasure is, That you deliver unto the Marquess Inoiosa an
Exemplification of the Pardon, and Dispensation. And his Majesty would not that
you should press him for a Note of his Hand for Secrecy and Stanchness, for
giving of Copies of the Pardon, or Dispensation, but only by Word to refresh
his Memory of the faithful Promises he has made in that Point to the King,
upon which his Majesty will rely. Indeed it was ordered at Windsor, Sept. 7.
as appears in a Letter of Secretary Conways, that when Marquess Iniosa had the
Exemplication, (all the Crast was in Catching) that he should communicate them
to none, nor give Copies of them, till we had knowledge from Spain of the
Marriage, or Desponsories. There was nothing about these days that mitigated
the Ambassador more, than a Trick, that, in sine, did him least good. Properly,
and without Levity, it may be called a Flop with a Fox-Tail. The Lord Keeper
closed in with him not to be so hasty for Exemplifications, which the Clerks of
the Crown must write over soft and fairly. A Matter of more weight should
presently be set on foot, not of Words, but of real Benefit and Performance to
his Party, and to the Choice of them, a Pardon for the Romish Priests that were
imprisoned; about which there had been struggling, and yet nothing effected. As
the Lord Keeper seemed forward, so (to see the ill Luck) it was cramped by a
Letter from Sir Edward Conway, Sept. 6. Dat. Windsor.

Right Honorable,
HIS Majesty has signed the Warrant that was sent for the enlarging of the
Priests out of Prison, that he may show the Reality of Performance on his Part,
in all that is to be done. Yet his Majesty commits the Warrant to your Keeping,
without further Use to be made, save only to pass the Great Seal (which you may
be pleased to expedite) till important Considerations be provided for, and
satisfied. As First, That his Majesty receive Advertisement of the Marriage, or
Desposories. Secondly, That Provision be taken for these Priests that have
expressed their Duties to the King, either in Writing in his Defense, or in
taking the Oaths; whose Protection his Majesty holds himself bound to continue,
and not to suffer them to incur any Danger for that their Conformity. Thirdly,
That Order be taken, that such Priests enlarged, be not left at Liberty to
execute their Functions publicly, or at their Pleasure; but only under such
Limitations and Restraints, as by the Pardon and Dispensations are provided.


166. Of these three Caveats, entered to modifie the Liberty which was
Petitioned for, and promised to the Priests, the middlemost was a brave one,
wherein the Lord Keeper revenged himself on Inoiosa, for all his Forwardness.
It aimed at one man, Mr. -- Preston, a Secular Priest, Honest, and rarely
Learned: The Author of the Works under the Name of Roger Widrington, for the
Oath of Allegiance. The Author of that solid Piece, called The last Rejoinder
to T. Fitzherbert, Bellarmine's Sculckenius, and Lessius his Singleton upon
that Subject, Printed An. 1619. This Man, for his own Preservation, lay quiet
in the Marshalsea, his Death being threatened by the rigid Papalins. This was he
that was set forth as the only Evidence of his Majesty's Royal Mercy toward
those that were in Holy Orders of that Religion, the present Pattern of his
keeping Promise according to the Articles. But such a Priest as that, if Marq.
Inoiosa had been consulted for his Release, perhaps he would have cried out,
Not him, but Barabbas. Preston had Leave that Summer twice or thrice to come to
the Lord Keeper at Nonsuch, where I saw them together discoursing as long as
Leisure and Business would permit. That Interview procured the Warrant for his
Pardon from the King, as follows.

James Rex.
TO the Reverend Father in God, Our Right Trusty, and Right Well-beloved
Counselor, Jo. Lord Bishop of Lincoln, Lord Keeper of Our Great Seal of
England. Right Trusty, and Right Well-beloved Counselor, We Greet you well.
These are to will and require, to pass one Pardon and Dispensation, according
unto the Warrant directed unto you concerning the Roman Catholics of this
Kingdom in general, for the Use and Benefit of -- Preston, a Secular Priest,
now a Prisoner in our Prison of the Marshalsea. And delivering unto the Spanish
Ambassador an Exemplification of the same Pardon under the Great Seal, to keep
the Original so Sealed, under your own Custody, until you shall receive from
Us some further Order.

Given at Our Court at Windsor, Sept. 8. etc.
The Releasment of Preston was accordingly dispatched, the first Fruits of the
Common Grace expected by others, sent as a Present to Don Inoiosa; nay, a
Precedent for consequent Releasments. So Secretary Conway to the Lord Keeper,
Sep. 17. His Majesty's Order to your Lordship was, That the Pardon for this one
Man should be exemplified, as the Limitation and Rule to the Form of all the
rest. So as without Dispute or Controversy, that was a present Possession, an
Act performed by the King, to be executed alike to each one, to whom it
appertains, at the Time, and upon the Conditions before specified; the Sight
whereof might give the Ambassador Contentment. But it was far from that, Don
John the Marquess durst not say he was mocked, but he fumed like Lime that is
slack'd with Water, to see, of all the Priesthood, that man only enlarged,
whom, above all, he most hated. Therefore his Violence augmented, pressed the
King so far, that his Majesty caused the same Secretary to write again very
roundly the next day to the Lord Keeper.

Right Honorable,
HIS Majest has received from the Spanish Ambassador, a large Declaration of
his Grievance, by the great Delays he finds from your Lordship, in point of the
Pardon and Dispensation; an Exemplification of which, your Lordship has Order
to deliver unto him. He complains further of want of Expedition in the Letters
to be written by your Lordship to those principal Officers, to whom it
pertains, for the Suspension of all Trouble and Molestation to the Roman
Catholics, his Majesty's Subjects, in matter of their Conscience. His Majesty
marvails not a little, that the Pardon and Dispensation are so long delayed
before they be delivered, and the Letters so long before they are written. His
Majesty being troubled and offended, that Cause should be taken upon these
Delays, by the Ambassador, to call into Jealousy his Majesty's Roundness and
Integrity in Proceeding. In all which Points, his Majesty now prays you to give
all possible Expedition, that his Majesty may be no more soiled with the
Jealousies and Suspicions of the Ambassador, nor importuned with their
Requests, for those things so entirely resolved on.


Albeit this Letter is so strict and mandatory, the Lord Keeper presumed on the
King's Goodness to write a Remonstrance to Mr. Secretary Conway, flat against
the Mandate; with sundry Reasons to show the high Expedience, that the
Instruments demanded should not yet be delivered. To the which, on the 9th of
September, Mr. Secretary sends back word.

Right Honorable,
I Have represented yours of the 18th to his Majesty, who interprets your
Intentions very well, and cannot but think it good Counsel, and a discreet
Course, had the State of the Business been now entire. But as Promises have
been past, the Truth of a King must be preferred before all other
Circumstances, and within three Days you must not fail to deliver the
Exemplification of the Pardon and Dispensation, with the Copy of the Letters,
etc.


Two Days after (see the Hand of God) September 21, a Post brought
Intelligence, that the Prince was departed with fair Correspondencies from the
Court of Spain, was certainly long before that time on Shipboard, and would
weigh Anchor as soon as Wind and Weather served him. So in good Manners all
Solicitations were hushed, and attended his Highness's Pleasure, against he
came into England. These are the Performances of the Lord Keeper upon the
Immunities, which the Papists contended for to be derived to them, by the
Prince's Marriage with the Daughter of Spain. Whither any Statesman could have
contrived them better, I leave it to be considered by the Senators of the
College of Wisdom, in my Lord Bacon's new Atlantis. If it be possible for any
to disprove these excellent Excogitations of Prudence with his Censure, he will
force me to say in this Lord's Behalf, what Tully did for the Pontiss of old
Rome: Orat. pro resp. Aurus. Satis superque prudentes sunt, qui illorum
prudentiam, non dicam ass^qui, sed quanta fuerit perspicere possint. The
Collection of all the precedent Passages were gathered by that Lord himself,
and stitched up into one Book, every Leaf being signed with the Hands of Sir
George Calvert, and Sir Edward Conway, principal Secretaries to his Majesty. If
it be asked to what end was that provided, it was to show he had a Breast Plate,
as well as an Headpiece. It was to defend his Integrity against any Storm,
that dark Days might raise about the Spanish Matters. It was a gathering thick,
when my Lord of Buckingham caused Mr. Packer his Secretary to write a Letter of
Defiance to him, Cab. P. 87. wherein every Penful of Ink is stronger than a
Drop of Vicriol: Take a Line of it, That in the Spanish Negotiation, he had
been dangerous to his Country, prejudicious to the Cause of Religion, which he
above all others, should have labored to uphold. But rip up all his Actions,
turn the Linings outward, show any Stain-Spot in his Fidelity, in his
Innocence, chiefly, in his Maintenance of the Reformed Religion. Therefore he
met the Lord Duke courageously, Page 89. I do not in the least beg or desire
from your Grace, any Defense of me, if it shall appear I betrayed my King, or
my Religion, in Favor of the Papist, or did them any real Respect at all,
beside ordinary Complement. Therefore I appeal to all Posterity, who shall read
this Memorial, how a Minister in his Office, and entrusted with the whole
weight of such a ticklish Negotiation, could come off better, with more Honor,
with l^ss Prejudice? Photius, in his Biblioth. says of Saluslius the Cynick,
that he was a worthy Man; but (...). He had listed himself into that Sect of
Philosophy, which was carved out, or exposed to Reproach and Contumi^y. So this
noble Councellor was as Harmless as he was Wise, as Honest as he was Active.
But the Business which he underwent for his great Master and the Prince, was
Planetstruck with an ill Opinion of many, and could look for no Thanks, but
from a few that were the Wisest.

167. Especially most circumspect and diligent Endeavors, if superior
Providence has decreed to make them barren, shall not be pitied (as they
deserve) but be insulted upon, because they cannot reach their End. The best
Angler that is, we commonly think he fished ill, if he caught nothing. Inde
plaerumque ead^m sacta modo diligentiae, modo vanitatis: modo libertatis, modo
furor is nomen accipiunt, Plin. lib. 6. Ep. Lucky Success makes a Fool seem
wise; and a wise man that is unfortunate, shall be called a Fool. It is a hard
Task to dig into the Mines of Po^icy, when Event shall be the Measure both of
Reward and Praise. Yet all this must be endured, after his Highness took his
Leave of Spain, the Donna H^rmesa left behind, the Stock of Love spent, and in
a while the Credit of it protested. Our King was not ill disposed to the News,
that is Son made preparation to come Home. The People began to be churlish that
he staid so long: And his Majesty looked for no Good from that Part of the
World, while our Duke was in it. He found, that so long as he was so remote
from his Tutorship, he was heady, a Novice in carrying Business, and very
offensive to the Crown of Spain. The Prince was desirous to make haste from
them, that would make no better haste; and could no longer endure the Pace of a
dull Spanish Mule. As a weary Traveiler's Inn seems still to go further from
him, so his Highness had attended long for a sweet Repose in Wedlock, till it
made him impatient, and think that every Consuito cast him further back from
the Fruition of his Joys. The Junto of the Spanish Statesmen were very
magisterial, and would not bate an Inch, but that every thing should be timed
to a day, as they designed it. These were the Links of the Chain, by which they
pluck all Power to themselves. First, A Disposorios, or Contract must go before
the Marriage: For that is a Rule from which their Church does never vary, unless
good Order be broken by clandestine Marriages. To the Contract they could not
go on, in this Case, till the Dispensation from the new Pope gave Authority for
it. That came to Madrid, November. 12. says Sir Wall. Aston, whom I believe,
though others say later. The tenth day, after the Dispensation made known in
the Church, let the Betrothing be Solemnized, and the tenth day after it the
Marriage. Then the Prince may take his own Time to return when he will,; but
the Lady could not make ready for the Seas, considering her Train that must
attend her, till March. The Prince did not like the Arithmetic of this
Counting-Table. More time than the first Week of September he was resolved not
to spend in that Land. The Coming of the Dispensation he would not await, which
might be failing thither upon the idle Lake in the Fary Queen: ^oth slow and
swift alike did serve their turn. To stay and Consummate the Marriage in his
own Person, he knew was unfit in two Respects. He must take a Blessing from one
of their Bishops in the Face of their Church, and submit to their Trinckets and
Ceremonies, which he had rather hear than see. Then if the Infanta had
Conceived, they would keep her, it is likely, till she was delivered: The Child
must stay till it was strong to endure the Seas, so it might come to pass to be
bred up and Naturalized a Spaniard in Religion and Affection. When the Clock
would not go right with those Plummets, the Junto cast the i am out ino another
Figure, that his Highness would, out of Courtship, wherein he excelled, and out
of great Love to his Mistress, which he professed, perfect the Desponsation in
his own Person, and trust no other with it; the Marriage and the Lady should
follow after, that is, upon the Certificate of their Ambassador out of England,
that Conditions were performed there, to which the King of Great Bri^ ain had
engaged. To this his Highness was short, That he would linger no longer, and
play at Cards in King Philip's Palace till the Messenger with the Port-mantick
came from Rome. Neither would he depend upon Ambassadors and their Reports,
when the Illustrious Damosel should begin her Journey toward England.
Ambassadors might certify what they pleased, and inform no more than their
great Master's Counsel inspired them. At last his Highness took upon him to
deside the Wrangling, and cast out the sacred Anchor from the Stern, to keep
their Counsels from further Floating, that he would be burdensome to the K. of
Spain no longer; the magnetic Virtue of his own Country drew him to it. Yet to
confirm that he lest his Heart behind with his Beauteous and high born
Mistress, he would Sign a Proxy, and Assign it to K. Philip, or his Brother Don
Carlo, or either of them, which should remain in the Custody of the Earl of
Bristol, that the Espousals between him and the Infanta might be ratified,
within ten days after the dispensation unstopt the way unto them; and he would
leave it to the Princessa to show her Cordial and Amorcuolous Affections how
soon she would prepare to follow after him.

168. Which stood for a Decree; agreed, and obeyed. The King of Spain would
have been glad, if the Prince might be persuaded to stay longer in his Court:
But since after Six Months continuance there, his Highness defir'd to breath
again in his Native Air, King Philip caused preparation to be made for it (for
freedom is the Noblest part of Hospitality) and was dismissed with as much
Honor, and Magnificence as he was Received. The Earl of Bri^ol, who certainly
knew the day when he took his Leave, writes to the Lord Keeper Cab. p. 21. That
he would begin his Journey for England the 9th of Sept. (others set it three
days back) and adds, the day before, I Conceive the contract will be; which is
false Printed; it should be, That the Day before, he would Sign and Seal his
Procuration for the Contract; which Intelligence is Authentic being so
Corrected. Now looking upon those that were the Magnificoes of Spain, when the
Prince took his farewell of them, and how dear they held him, how they Voiced
him beyond the Skies for the most express Image they had seen of Virtue and
Generosity, methinks his Highness should have behold it with his Eyes open, and
have inferred out of it, that he could not be more happy then to marry with
that Blood, and to keep Friendship with that Nation. He was most Gracious in
the Eyes of all, Great and under Great. Never Prince parted with such Universal
Love of all, Cab. p. 16. and Bristol to the Lord Keeper, p. 21. The Love which
is here born generally to the Prince is such, as cannot be believed by those,
that daily hear not what passes from the King and his chief Ministers. The
most concerned was the rare Infanta, of whom says one out of the Spanish
Reports Sander p 552. That she seemed to deliver up her own Heart at parting,
in as high Expressions as that Language, and her Learning could, with her
Honor, set out. Let not this Essay of her sweetness be forgotten, that when
the Prince told her, His Heart would never be out of Anxiety, till she had
passed the intended Voyage, and were safe on British Land, She Answered with a
modest Blush, That if she were in danger upon the Ocean, or discomposed in
Health with the rolling brackish Waves, she would cheer up herself, and
remember all the way to whom she was going. For which, she deserves to be
Honored with Theogena the Wife of Agathocles for that saying, Se nubendo ci
non prosperae tantum, sed omnis fortunae iniisse Societatem. Just. lib. 20.
When it came to the King her Brothers turn to Act his part of Royal Civility,
he carried the Prince with him to his most gorgeous and spacious Structure of
the Escurial. There he began, That his Highness had done him favor beyond all
compass of requital, that he had Trusted the safeguard of his Person with him,
and given him such an occasion in it, to show his Honor and Justice, to part
with him with as much Fidelity, as his Highness desired or expected; that there
he was ready to perfect the Alliance so long in Treaty, that he might call him
Brother, whom, above all in the World, he loved as a Friend. The Prince
Answered, He had a better Heart to conceive, then a Tongue to signify how much
he owed to his Majesty. He hoped the incomparable Infanta would thank him for
the unparalled Courtesy shown to him. And because a drop of true meaning was
better then a River of Words, his Highness, being encircled with the Noblest
Witnesses of that Kingdom, produced and Read his Proxy, interpreted by the Earl
of Bristol, and committed to his Charge, but first Attested to by the Hand of
Secretary Cirica, as a Notary of the greatest Place. That this much passed it
is certain. Much more is Reported; but it is contentious. This Obligation,
intending to the Contract, was thus dispatched in the Escurial, of which let me
say hereupon, as Valerius of the Senate House of Rome, lib. 6. Illam Curiam
quis mortalium concilium, ac non fidei Templum dixerit? It was become, from the
King's best Palace, the Temple of Faith. After this the Chase of a Stag, that
was breathed well, and fell luckily, brought his Highness on his way to the
Seaside. But he stopped a little while at a Magnificent Repast, provided in a
Wood, where the Table was Canopied with green Boughs; when King Philip and the
Prince had rose up from this Collation, and had walked a little further, a
Marble Pillar was Erected, a Monument of Alliance and Friendship between the
two Kingdoms. As when Laban said to Jacob, Come thou, let us make a Covenant I
and Thou, and let it be for a Witness between me and thee. And Jacob took a
Stone, and set it up for a Pillar, Genesis 31.45. There the two Potentates laying
their Hands first upon this Pillar, and then enfolding each other in Embraces,
took Congee and Divided. Yet the Ceremony continued with the principal of the
Nobles, and others of the Spanish Cavalry, who waited on his Highness to his
Ship; and Don Mendoza de Alcarness was appointed to go aboard with him for
England, to Congratulate before King James his Adventure to Spain, and his
Happy Return to his Majesty. Upon the whole Carriage King Philip might say with
his Honor, as Abimelech did to Isaac, We have done unto thee nothing but good,
and have sent thee away in Peace: Thou art now the blessed of the Lord, Genesis
26.29.

169. Thus far the view of the Design was marvellously serene; not a Cloud to
be seen about the Horizon. It smiled a little longer; for the Earl of Bristol
Writes to the Lord Keeper, Cab. p. 21. Since the departure of his Highness,
there have every day passed Letters of extraordinary Affection between the King
and the Prince, this is Sept. 24. The Grandees also, and others of the
Castilian Bravery that conducted the Prince to the Seas, were Feasted in our
Admiral, at a true English Table, Free, Pleasant, Luxuriously bountiful, with
that Store which few Countries but this Fortunate Island could afford. A Health
was Superstitiously began to the Glorious Princessa, and Proclaimed to the
Shore by the Thunder of the Great Ordnance; success fell short of the Premises.
The fault may be laid upon the Spaniards, with some partiality, who suffered
the Duke of Buckingham, to part with a sore grudge against the Conde Duke, and
did not take the best Course to heal it. They doubted that Buckingham would do
all he could to cross the Match, says Bristol in the same Letter; yet they were
so Stately, that they would not seek to a suspected Enemy. Belike they thought
they had made all fast, and that one man's Rash Defiance was inconsiderable.
But it behooves Wise Men says Isocrat. Orat. de Pace. (...); to Repose the hopes
of well doing upon their own Strength and Judgment, not upon the Adversaries
Weakness. The Duke Olivares was never the nearer, that Buckingham told him at
their farewell, That for his part, he had so disobliged him, that he would make
no profession of Friendship to him at all; but he would be an everlasting
Servant to the King of Spain, the Queen, and the Infanta, and would do the best
Offices he could, for the concluding the business, and strengthening Amity
between the two Kingdoms. Olivares was not certain of him upon these Words,
since he was not certain at that time what himself would have. For when our
Passions are out of Order, it is a hard thing for a Man to speak Truth to
himself. As soon as the Duke had the Prince at shrift, as it were, in his
Cabinet, Mr. Edward Clerk under Color to Attend the Spanish Nobles to Madrid,
was sent with Letters to the Earl of Bristol to suspend the Procuration for the
Contract, till further Order was given. One Scruple which must first be cleared
was, That a Monastery might not Rob the Prince of his Wife. For a Headless
Fable (unless Olivares his Salt Tongue had given occasion to it) was in many
Mouths, that after the Desponsories, the Lady would enter into the strict Order
of the Descalcas, or bare Foot Nuns. A Rumor that was Laughed out of
countenance; for she was a spriteful Virgin, and had nothing of Monastical
Austerity in her Complexion. Neither did she dissemble, but carried her
Affections undisguised, that she was stricken in Love with the Prince. Yet, to
prevent the worst, the Earl of Bristol was serious in Refuting that Folly, as
it is extant in his to the Prince, Cab. p. 24. I have set down to your Highness
all sorts of security, that may be taken before the betrothing, for preventing
a Woman Post vatum Matrimonium, non consummatum, to betake her self into a
Religious Life. The King of Spain, the Infanta, all the Ministers, would refuse
no kind of security that in Reason could be demanded in that behalf. This was a
slight pretense, and soon over. There was another thing of greater Consequence
Weaved into the mistrust I find it upon the Point wherein the Duke Expostulated
with Sir W. Aston Cab. p. 35. You might have observed the Explanation the
Prince made of himself to you by his Letters from St. Andreas, and have seen
his Care and Resolution, not to engage himself into the Marriage, without good
Conditions for the Palatinate, and Conservation of his Honor every way. More
light is opened to this in a Letter that an Ignote Wrote to K. James, Cab. p.
219. The same day that Buckingham Received Letters from the Illustrious P.
Palatine, he caused the Procuration to be Revoked. There needs no study upon
it, how the Structure of the Marriage, so far advanced, was overthrown in an
hour. An quae per totam res est notissima Lesbon,
Nunc ignota tibi est?
Metamor. 1.2. The Rude people of Madrid cried it about the Streets, says Mr.
Clerk, Piden el Palatinato, Cab. p. 307. All the hope of that Alliance, and the
comfort from it, was drowned in the Rhine.

170. God is Love, and delights in all the Bonds of Love. Marriage is the first
of Humane, and the strictest. It is common with the Great ones that Rule the
Earth, to Treat together to make such Links with their Children, Nay, with
their Infants. They confirm them with Embassies, with Articles, it may be with
their Oaths, and Holy Ceremonies. Yet when all this is done, if a greater
Benesit to the State spring up by a New Offer, a Curtain is drawn before
Conscience: The former Interest must give place to the later; and that shall be
excluded upon the like occasion for a fresh Emolument. One Reason, I believe,
though I write it fearfully, That often times they are but little blessed in their
Progenies. For can the most High forget it, Cui vincla jugalia curae. Virg.
They that uncover Stories of Realms and Common Wealths, let them apply it. I go
on to mine. At the Escurial of St. Lorenzo this was the last Speech and accord
about the Palatinate. The Prince making earnest obtestation for it, K. Philip
Engaged the Honor of a King upon it, That he would intermit neither fair
means, nor soul means with the Emperor, that it might be resigned into his
Hand, and then should be bestowed as a Gift upon the Marriage. Hereupon his
Highness seemed to depart well satisfied. Yet, having removed no further then
from St. Lorenzo, to St. Andreas, Expostulates to have the Palatinate surendred
to the Right owner, and the Espousals to be procrastinated till it was done;
the King of Spain tells our Messenger, He would do all he had promised upon the
last Agreement, and for his Life he could do no more. So the Earl of Bristol
remembers it to the Prince, Cab. p. 25. They go on cheerfully and confidently,
and I conceive, will punctually perform all that they have Capitulated with
you. The Prince knew well where he was now; when all their Capitulations were
held to be Star-shootings, Flashes, and Meteors, without the Bird in the Hand.
Plato has a Crotchet lib. 8. de leg. to show the Citizens of his imagined
Commonwealth, what they should do to escape all, or the most Suits in Law,
that trouble men with Charge and Delays; Marry, says he, Trust no Man without
ready Money in Buying, and Bargaining, wherein, if you fail, you shall have no
Action to recover your Debt. This Platonic dealing, with which the Spaniards
Challenged us, was a New Erection of Justice, by which, the Marriage was
consumed into no Marriage, but into a Platonic Love. Whether the Prince were
at Freedom, having said and done so much at the Escurial, to break off upon his
own Conditions, is such a Knot, as I cannot find the Ends of it. Therefore
whether we came off clear, or were sullied with some Dishonor, is too
intricate to be decided. In a Report made to the Parliament hereafter, the Lord
Keeper, being called unto it, stretched his Learning to prove, That any Man
might lawfully Revoke his Procuration; but he came not up to the Top of the
Question, whether it be Justifiable to Revoke the Obligation of Faith and
Honor. Aliud est jura spectare, aliud justitiam. Cicer. pro Balbo. Conscience
is a plain dealing Piece of Honesty, though the Laws have many quirks. Mr.
Sander has looked commendably into this Treaty; in this matter he is brief,
saying no more p. 552. But e're our Prince departed from that King, Promises
were made each to other, to make Espousals ten days after the next Dispensation
was brought. Promises trasht in with Restrictions, are absolute Debts. Let your
yea be yea, says our Savior to his Disciples. And Learned Grotius says, That
the most of the Disciples Converted to him were of the Sect of the Essens, of
whom Josephus Writes, (...), Negligent Men kept not their Oath so strictly, as
they kept their Word. Ar. Wilson most spiteful against the Match, and as
spiteful against the breaking it, flies high, p. 253. That the Prince had not
Power to re-call his Proxy, having tied up his Hands. -- That he Sealed the
Proxy at the Escurial, and Swore to perform the Marriage. The Earl of Bristol,
who knew the most of any English man, goes far, Cab. P. 23. That his Majesty
and the Prince stand engaged for it, as far as Princes can be: But much more in
his Letter dated Novem. 1. first Read by the Clerk of the Parliament at the
Report which the Lord Keeper made to the House of Peers, That the Prince had
engaged his Faith and Power not to retract the Procuration. Yet after all
these, hear one that was ever Honest, and understood himself. The Prince when
he came to take his Fathers Blessing at Royston October. 6. protested (says the
Lord Keeper in his Report) That he came from Spain an absolute Free man; but
with one Limitation, the Restitution of the Palatinate; then he was bound in
Honor to go on with the Deposories. All which I believe to be most true: Yet
the Scales still hanging upon the Beam of the Palatinate, this Question
Resolved will turn them, whether the Agreement between the other King and our
Prince was, that K. Philip should precise restore the Palatinate, or to
conditionate do his utmost to endeavor it?

171. Perhaps I am too Curious to hunt this Scent too far. Yet I find no
remorse in my self to have pressed Conscience and Honor, the Urim and Thummim,
with which the Noblest whom God has made, should consult in all things. It was
commonly said, That mis-understandings fomented by the Duke of Buckingham,
which had a small Relation to the principal business, disturbed all. Who was
not skilled in the Duty of a public Minister; that is, to contemn all
considerations concerning himself, that might hinder his Majesty's Ends, as Sir
W. Aston wrote to him. As Illustrius the Pythag. said of Stilpo, that he was
(...) made up well for a private man, and no further. so the duke was a gallant
lord to have the king's ear in private suits, but not to have the king's trust
in foreign dispatches, being ever in custom to carry all with violence before
him. some may be great by chance, but never wise. it is admired to this day,
that his lordship should have such a command over the princes affections, that
he could so quickly make his highness forget such an incomparable beauty, with
whom he was so passionately enamored, and she with him. so Bristol Cab. p. 26.
The World supposoth you infinitely Esteem her for her person; and questionless
for her Virtue, and settled Affections to your Highness, deserves you better
then all the Women in the World. Mr. Clarke likewise (a man whom the Duke had
Raised up for his own Use) Writes to his Grace, cab. p. 307. The Infanta's
Preparation for the Disposoria was great, but greater her sorrow, good Lady, to
see it deferred. She had Studied our Language, our Habit, our Behavior, every
thing but our Religion, to make her self English. She talked continually to her
Attendants of the Prince, and of her Voyage in the Spring. What could the Duke
say to blot the Image of such a person out of his Highness Heart? This is
strange to those that knew not his Highness, who had a Quality to his Lives End
(I will call it Humility, it is somewhat like it, but it is not it) to be
easily persuaded out of his own Knowledge and Judgment, by some whom he
permitted to have Power upon him, who had not the half of his intellectuals.
But for this Trick the Wag was Merry with the Duke, who writes to K. James,
Cab. p. 223. In this his Highness coming off from Spain, the Duke has Advised
him to no worse then he did himself. For how many has he abused and cozened
with Promise of Marriage, by his Grace in Court, and Power with your Majesty?
If afterward things had been carried in a full Stream of Luck, perhaps this
Breach would not have been called a Fault. Principally, because the Wedlock
that came in place of it, was most Happy in a thrice Noble Progeny. All beside
was Flat, and Unfortunate. Not an Inch of the Palatinate the better for us; and
we the worse for our Wars in all Countries. I say no more, but as Q. Curtius
does, Optime Miserias forunt qui abscondunt. They that hide their Miseries bear
them best. The Observator upon H. L. I will abet him, writes no more, then many
have Whispered, That the Ruin of P. Charles by the Spanish Match might have
been prevented; the Spaniard being for the most part a more steady Friend, then
the wavering French. I am not skilful in them to make Comparisons; thus far I
will adventure positively. The French are as brave a people as be under the
Sun: Yet, for my part I think we might better want them, then the Spaniard. The
Spanish Ladies Married to the Royal Seed among us, have been Virtuous, Mild,
Thrifty, beloved of all. Not such a one as Harry the Sixth had from the other
Nation, of whom Mr. Fuller says well in his Eccles. History, That the King's
parts seemed the lower, being overtop'd by such a High Spirited Queen. The
Spaniards are for the most generously bountiful, where Service has deserved
it; the best Neighbors in the World for Trades Increase: A Friend to his
Friend with his Treasure, and with his Sword. But withal, Refractory in his own
Religion, and a Hater of ours; and very False where he can take occasion to
enlarge his Dominions, wherein we had no Cause to fear him. But if the Daughter
of Spain had landed upon our Shore, I believe we should have had more Cause to
love him.

172. Which was not to be looked for, after the Prince put off from the Coast
of Biscay: From whence he made such haste home as the Wind would suffer; and he
had it in Poop till he came to the Islands of Silly, the remotest Ground of the
British Dominion in the West: whether some Delinquents were deported of old by
the Roman Emperors. Here the Navy was compelled to rest, because the Winds were
contrary. From thence the Courtiers brought home a Discourse about an old
Miller, who was, with long Experience, Weather-Wise to Admiration. For he told
them exactly how long they should continue there, and named the Hour when,
after one day and a half, the North-West would blow, and serve their turn. The
Seamen, who had resorted thither before, knew him so well, and how his
Prognostics came to pass, that they prepared to Launch against that
opportunity, which failed not, and attained Portsmouth on the Fifth of October.
-- (...).
(...)
Odduss. (...). Though our Noble Traveller left the Lady behind that should
have been his Penelope, yet he came well home to his own Ithaca, and to the
Wise Laertes his Father. His Highness left Portsmouth, and came to York-House
at Charing Cross, an Hour after Midnight early in the Morning, October. 6.
Praises were given to God for him in diverse Churches at Morning Prayer. The
Lord Keeper composed an excellent Prayer for that Occasion, which was used in
the Chapel of Henry the VII. and in the Collegiate Church at the accustomed
Hours in that Place: Bells and Bonfires began early, and continued till Night:
Alms, and all kind of Comfort were dispensed bountifully to the Poor; and many
poor Prisoners, their Debts being discharged, were Released. But too often, as
St. Austin complained, Publicum gaudium celebratur per publicum dedecus: So
Bacchanals of Drunken Riot were kept too much in London and Westminster, which
offended many, that the Thanks due only to God, should be paid to the Devil.
The Prince, after a little rest, took Coach with the Duke for Royston, to
attend the King his Father, where the Joy at the enterview was such, as
surpasses the Relation. His Majesty in a short while retired, and shut all out
but his Son and the Duke; with whom he held Conference till it was four Hours
in the Night: They that attended at the Door sometime heard a still Voice, and
then a loud; sometime they Laughed, and sometime they Chased, and noted such
variety, as they could not guess what the close might prove: But it broke out
at Supper, that the King appeared to take all well, that no more was effected
in the Voyage, because the Profters for the Restitution of his Son-in-Law were
no better stated by the Spanish; And then that Sentence fell from him, which is
in Memory to this Hour, That He liked not to Marry His Son with a Portion of
His Daughters Tears. His Majesty saw there was no Remedy in this Case but to go
Hand in Hand with the Prince, and his now prepotent Favorite. Ducunt volentem
fata, nolentem trabuns.
Sen. Trag. It is easier to be led then drawn.
Presently it was obtained, that is October. 8. That his Majesty should send an
Express to the Earl of Bristol, with his High Command, to defer the Procuration
entrusted with him, and to make no use of it till Christmas; whereas indeed the
Power of it expired at Christmas; for so it was limited in the Instrument which
his Highness Signed at St. Lorenzo. And by the next Post the Duke acquaints Sir
W. Aston, That the King himself had dictated the Letter then wrote unto him,
Cab. p. 36. which contained, That His Majesty desired to be assured of the
Restitution of the Palatinate, before the Deposorium was made, seeing he would
be sorry to welcome home one Daughter with a Smiling Cheer, and have his own
only Daughter at the same time Weeping and Disconsolate. My Lord of Buckingham
had his Advisers about him (yet he need not now be set on) to prevent with all
his Wit, that the Prince might never have a Wife out of Spain. (...); As soon
should a Wolf Wed a Lamb. Aristoph. Com. de pace. But the King had such Esteem
of the Spanish Wisdom, that he did verily look that his Letters, I mean these
last sent to his Ambassador Resident there, would quicken them to a short and
real Satisfaction for the Prince Palatine's Distress, and that the Treaty would
sprout again, which was withered with that obstacle.

173. Our Dispatches at Court went all together that way; so he that is
diligent may Trace them to the end of January. Some of the Letters of Mr.
Secretary Conway, at least somewhat out of them, are useful to be produced,
which will also confirm the good course that the Lord Keeper took with the
Spanish Ambassadors, that he reserv d the Pardon and Dispensation from them to
the end, against all Contests of Importunity: Nor suffered the Letters to the
Lord Bishops and Judges to go abroad for the Suspension of some Penal Statutes;
whereupon the Fat of the Project of the Papists dript insensibly away at a slow
Fire. After the Prince had rested at Roiston but one Night, his Majesty caused
Directions to be sent to the Lord Keeper for the Enlargement of the Roman
Priests, being Eleven of them in the Tower, Wisheech, Newgate, and no more.
This Favor had many Reasons to speak for it: First, To let all those, who were
inquisitive about the Event of his Highness Journey take notice, that there was
yet life in the Treaty by the motion of this Pulse. Secondly, To gratify the
most obnoxious of that Religion, for requital of the Entertainment his Highness
had among them. Thirdly, In Retaliation for the Prisoners that were set at
Liberty in Spain to Congratulate the Princes welcome. Fourthly, That his
Highness might keep his Word with those of that way, who had done him good
Offices abroad, to whom he had said, Cab. p. 251. That though the Marriage were
broken, his Catholic Subjects should not fare the worse for it. Therefore hear
what Mr. Secretary Conway Writes to the Lord Keeper, October 7.

Right Honorable,
HIs Majesty calling to Mind His promise to the Spanish Ambassadors for giving
Liberty to the Priests, requires your Lordship to prepare the Ordinance for
their Liberty, and to put it in Execution; the rest of the Pardons being
suspended till the Solemnizing the Marriage. And His Majesty would, that you
should signify so much to the Ambassadors in your own Person, to acquaint them
with His Mindfulness. And then that your Lordship will be pleased to move the
Ambassadors, as giving them a good opportunity to do an acceptable Work, that
they would move for the Releasement of Dr. Whiting from Imprisonment, who for
his Sermon Preached at Hampton Court stands committed; but His Majesty will
have him remain suspended from Preaching until His further Pleasure be known.


Now for the Letters which his Majesty was made to believe were dispersed to
the Magistrates Spiritual and Temporal, about the Suspension of the Laws,
because his Majesty was disobeyed in it, the Lord Keeper, after he had seen the
Inclination of the Court in three or four days, wrote to the Secretary, who
knew all the Passages, to put the Duke upon it to acquaint the King with the
Naked Truth, and fore-speak Displeasure. Upon which Mr. Secretary Conway
returns this, October. 11. from Royston.

Right Honorable,
SO soon as I received your Letter, with the like Observation that I will use
in all your Command: I took the Duke of Buckingham just as he was going to the
King, and had no more time with him, but to tell him that Point, touching your
Wise and Moderate Retention of the Letters to the Bishops and Justices. The
Duke prepared the King so well, as His Majesty gave me order to signify to
you, that those Letters should still be retained, unless some Complaints should
make change of Counsels; or the Accomplishment on the other side equal that of
ours, and occasion another step forward. That Wise and Moderate way of your
Lordships will ever get you Estimation and Ease. I am glad to see how brave a
Friend you have of the Duke. And I know your Lordship will give me leave to
make you as glad as my self, that absence has made no change toward my Lord
Duke in the Kings Favor; but his return, if it be possible, has multiplied
it. And the Prince and He are for Communications of Counsels, Deliberations,
and Resolutions, as if they were but One.


The King required but one Thing more of the Lord Keeper, that as he had
addulced all Things very well to his Mind, so the Ministers of the King of
Spain might not Grudge, that their Teeth were set on Edge with sower Grapes;
which he did effect most Artificially, albeit the Ambassadors by his means had
lost many Suits, and more Labor; as the Secretary was willed to acknowledge
from Hinchingbrooke, October. 25.

Right Honorable,
I Delivered to his Majesty the good Temper you left the Ambassadors in, which
gave his Majesty Contentment, and moved his Thanks to you. Your Humane and
Noble Usage, you may be sure, will best beseem your Lordship, and please
others. And when there is any Cause for you to take another Form on you, be
confident you shall have seasonable Knowledge: For my Lord Duke has as well a
Noble Care of you, as Confidence in you, and Affection to you, of which I am
assured, though a mean Witness. So much was contrived; and a great deal more,
to keep the Treaty from an utter dissociation, till the next Parliament sat.
For the Copy of the Memorials given January 19, by Sir Wall. Aston, to the King
of Spain, professes, That because the Faculty for the Use of the Procuration
expired at Christmas, the King my Master, that you may know the sound
Intentions of his Proceedings, with the good End to which it aims, has renewed
the Powers, and deferred the delivery of them, only to give time for the
Accomplishment and settling that which has been promised for the satisfying his
Expectations, Cab. P. 39.


Neither did the Spaniards return the Jewels which the Prince had presented at
the Shrine of Love, till the end of February; at which Surrendry, and not
before, the golden Cord was broken. Nothing is more sure, than that the
Prince's Heart was removed from the Desire of that Marriage, after the Duke had
brought him away from the Object of that Delightful and Ravishing Beauty. But
all the while the King had his Head full of Thoughts, brooding upon two things
(like the Twins that struggled in the Womb of Rebeckah) the Consummation of the
Marriage, and the Patrimony of his Son-in-Law to be regained, with the Dignity
Electoral. His Wisdom hovered between them both, like the Sun at his Noonday
Height. Meta distans aequalis utraque: He knew he should be disvalued, to the
wounding of all Good Opinion, if he did not engrast that Alliance into his
Stem, which he had sought with so much Expense of Time and Cost, to strengthen
and aggrandize his Posterity. And he knew he should loose Honor with all the
Potentates of Europe, beside other Mischiefs, if nothing were done for
re-possessing the Palatinate. Yet in sine, he sat down, and it cleast his
Heart, that he affected neither. As a Canker eats quickly into soft and sappy
Wood, so an Error was gotten into his gentle Nature, the same that Spartianus
says had crept into Didius Julianus: Reprehensus in eo praecipue, quos regere
authoritate sud debuit, regendae reipub. praesules sibi ipse fecit. He
submitted himself to be ruled by some, whom he should have awed with Authority;
but he wanted Courage to bow them to his own Bent. A Prince that preserves not
the Rights of his Dignity, and the Majesty of his Throne, is a Servant to some,
but therein a Friend to none, least of all to himself.

174. But he did so little bear up with an Imperatorian Resolution, against the
Method of their Ways, who thrust his Counsels out of Doors, that the Flies
sucked him where he was galled, and he never rubbed them off. He continued at
Newmarket as in an Infirmary, for he forgot his Recreations of Hunting and
Hawking; yet could not be drawn to keep the Feasts of All Saints, and the Fifth
of November at White Hall, being wont to show his Presence at those
Solemnities. Against Christmas he drew toward the City, and no sooner. Some
better Offers were expected from Spain by that time, or more certain
Discoveries be found out of Carriage on both sides, for hitherto all was
received upon second hand Faith Therefore his Majesty was no sooner at
White Hall, but he commissioned a Select Council to consider two things:
Whither the King of Spain had not been real to the last, to satisfy the Desire
of the Prince about the Marriage; and whither in the Treaty for the Restitution
of the Palatinate, he had violated the League between the two Kingdoms, as to
deserve an open War to be proclaimed against him. The Lord Keeper was one of
the Junto; but so far against his Mind, that he wished before a Friend or two
in private, that a Fever in his Sick Bed might excuse him. The Duke of
Buckingham was mortally Anti-Spanish, and his Anger was headed with Steel. He
assayed the Lord Keeper to hale him to his Judgment, as an Eddy does a small
Boat; and would have used him to the King, to incline his Majesty to renounce
Amity with that Nation; but he found him as inflexible as a dried Bough. He
vowed to his Grace, as he should have God to be his Protector, that he would
suffer all the Obliquy of the World, before he would be drawn to the least
Ingratitude against his Lordship, Cab. P. 89. But when the King asked his
Judgment, he must be true and faithful. Which was to say, to do the Duke a
Pleasure, he cared not to deserve ill of himself, but he would not deserve ill
of the King: which gave no Satisfaction. Oh! How better is a poor Man's
Liberty, than the golden Servitude of a great Officer? Must I lose my Patron,
unless I lose my Judgment? Can there not be a true Heart, where there is not
Sameness of Opinion? What a Structure is Advancement, which hangs in the Air,
and consists upon no solid Foundation? That great Lord desied the Keeper to his
Face, and in the hearing of many, threatened to sink him, because he could not
board him. And as Fulbertus said of Queen Constantia, Cui satis creditur, dum
mala promittit; Baron. Annal. 12 28. com. 12. If he promised an ill turn, he
would be sure to pay it, if he could. Once upon a time he could have done as
much as that came to, with half a Word to the King. Now, as his Lordship
conceived, his Strength lay among the Anakims, and the self-willed man plotted
to sacrifice his old Friend to the Parliament (the Intelligence came from the
Venetian Ambassador) to appease the Dislike of Immunities (which were none at
all) exercised toward the Roman Catholics. Yet there his Lordship faired, and
found it as hard to suppress him, as to drown a Swan. There is an Electuary
which Physicians give to comfort the Heart, called Pasta rogia; the Lord Keeper
was fed Lusty with this Royal Paste. The King had wrought him so apt to his own
Plight, that the Power of a mighty Favorite could not wrest him from the
Sanctuary of his Love. Ye still his Danger was, that the Duke thought (out of
Disdain more than Envy) that he wore too many Copies of his Majesty's Favor.
He took nothing more Scornsully, than what the King spoke to the Earl of
Carlisle in a Fit of Melancholy, That if he had sent Williams into Spain with
his Son, he had kept Hearts-ease and Honor, both which he lacked at that time.
So it was thought to be next to an Affront, that the first time the Lord Keeper
came into the King's Presence, after his Highness's Return into England (which
was a little before Christmas) his Majesty looking intently upon him, said thus
to the Prince: Charles, There Is the Man that makes us keep a merry Christmas.
His Highness looking as if he understood not his Father; Why, it is he, says the
King, that labored more dexterously than all my Servants beside, to bring you
safe hither to keep Christmas with me, and I hope you are sensible of it.
Another Act of the King's Goodness drew a greater Frown upon him: That in those
Holy Days, his Majesty, of his own Accord, no Solicitation preceding, caused an
Act of Council to be entered into the Book of that Honorable Table, that an
Archbishopric, and he named York, should be conserred upon him in the next
Vacancy. For which, the Lord Keeper most humbly thanked his Majesty, that he
was pleased to think of him, when his Majesty knew best, that he thought not of
himself. Yet my Lord Duke resented it ill, as if he climbed without his Hand to
lift him up. Archbishop Matthew understanding how his Place was designed, took
occasion to be pleasant upon it. It was a Felicity which Nature had given him,
to make old Age comfortable with a light Heart. -- Non ille rigoris
Ingratas lauds, nec nubem srontis amabat,
Sil. lib. 8. But that much beloved Prelate sending his Proxy to the Lord
Keeper, against the following Parliament, wrote to this Purpose, That he was
not a little troubled in former times, to hear that the Bishop of London,
Doctor Mountain, a decayed Man, and certainly near to the Grave, should look to
be his Successor. For either himself must die before three years expired, or
that Bishop's Hopes would be all amort, who must come suddenly to the Sea, or
not at all. But it pleased and revived him, that his Lordship was most likely
to take his Place after him: for he was young and healthful, and might stay the
Term of twenty Years, and take his Turn time enough at the end of that Stage.
Then he shuts up his Letter -- As the Psalmist begins, so I end, Dixi Custodiam
-- I love you Lordship well, but I will keep you out of this Seat as long as I
can.

175. Now let the Collections of the last Antecedency be observed, and there is
not to be found in them, why the Lord Keeper should forfeit a Dram in the
Benevolence of his great Friend. They are the Party-colored Coat, with which
Jacob appare^^ed him, and which himself put not out to making. But in the
Select Council, which met to resolve the two foregoing Questions, he was active
as any man. If he come not off well in that, let him be condemned. To the first
matter in proposal the Lords agreed, that the Prince came Home with great and
happy Renown, because he had resisted so many, and so strong Temptations to
pervert him in Religion, and that the Lord of Buckingham's Assistance was
praise worthy in excess, who held him steady, and counter-work'd all
Underminers. They conceived that the Proceeding of the Spaniards to the most
were generous; in some things rather subtle than ingenuous; as there is no
Pomegranate but has some rotten Kernels, and that in all they were so tedious,
that it was able to provoke the Meekness of Moses, though he had not a Dram
of Choler in his Complexion. Yet that it could not appear, but that the
Marriage on King Philip's part was very sincerely meant in all the Treaty; most
clearly when his Highness took his Farewell, most openly since his Departure.
Wherein the Earl of Bristol had much wronged that great Monarch, giving him a
Bastle insupportable. For when the Power of Revocation, or rather Repression of
the Proxy, was peremptorily in his Lordship's hand, he did not acquaint the
King of Spain, to stop him from erecting a Gallery (turned by the Earl's
Negligence into a Gullery) in the open Streets, covered with the richest
Tapestry, and set forth with all other Circumstances of Wealth and State, to
conduct the Infanta in open View, and with most magnificent Solemnity, to the
Deposorios; when by the Instruments and Commissions the Earl had lately
received, he knew these augustious Preparations would be ridiculously
disappointed; which was a Despite that a Gentleman, not to say an Ambassador,
should have prevented. For the Disgrace was so far blown abroad with Derision,
that it was the News of Gazette's over all Europe. The Intention of that Nation
to give the Infanta in Marriage to the Prince being not controverted: Yet his
Highness protesting on his part that he was free, unless the Palatinate were
surrendered, they were all satisfied with it, his Word was Justice to them, and
that which was in his own Breast, must alone direct him how to use his Freedom.
This Question dispatched, was upon a blown Rose, the next was upon a Bramble.
The Lord Duke was so zealous (say it was for the Palsgrave's Sake) that he
voted the King of Spain to be desied with open War, till amends were made to
the illustrious Prince Elector, for the Wrongs he sustained. The Lords
appointed for the Conference, that apprehended it otherwise, were the Keeper,
Treasurer, Duke of Richmond, Marquess Hamilton, Earl of Arund^l, Lord Carow,
Lord Belfast, who could not say that the King of Spain had done the part of a
Friend, for the Recovery of the Palatinate, as he had professed; nor yet could
they find, that he had acted the Part of an Enemy declaredly, as was objected.
Their Judgment was, the Girts of Peace were slack, but not broken. This is
couched in the Admonitions of an Ignote unto King James, Cab. p. 278. The
Conference or Treaty about the Palatinate was taken from the Council of State,
a Society of most prudent Men, only for this Cause, that almost every one of
them, had with one Consent approved the Propositions of the most Catholic
King, and did not find in it any Cause of dissolving the Treaty -- And a little
beneath, The Duke fled from the Council of State, and disclaimed it for a
Parliament, by way of an Appeal. Most true, that scarce any in all the Consulto
did vote to my Lord Duke's Satissaction; which made him rise up, and chase
against them from Room to Room, as a Hen that has lost her Brood, and clucks
up and down, when she has none to follow her. The next time he saw the Lord
Belfast, he asked him, with Disdain, Are you turned too? and so flung from him,
Cab. p. 243. To which the Lord Belfast answered honestly, in a short Letter,
That he would conform himself in all things to the Will and good Pleasure of
the King his Master. The greatest Grudge was against the Lord Keeper, who
seldom spoke, but all Opinions ran into his one, as they did at this time; and
the Duke presumed that his Sentence should never vary from his own Mind. An
hard Injunction, and all the Favor on Earth is too dear to be bought at such a
Price. But he declared, that he saw no Expediency for War upon the Grounds
communicated. For upon whom should we fall? says he, either upon the Emperor,
or the King of Spain. The Emperor had in a fort offered our King his
Son-in-Law's Country again for a great Sum, in Recompense of Disbursments; but
where was the Money to be had? Yet it might be cheaper bought than conquered,
before a War were ended. For the King of Spain, he saw no Cause to assault him
with Arms: He had held us indeed in a long Treaty to our Loss; but he held
nothing from us; and was more likely to continue the State of things in a
possibility of Accommodation, because he disliked the Duke of Bavaria's
Ambition, and had rather stop the Enlargement of his Territories. The King was
glad that some maintained his Judgment, and would not consent wantonly to raise
him from the Down Bed of his long admired Peace. Neither did he refrain to
speak very hardly of that Servant whom he loved best, that agitated to compel
him to draw the Sword, one of the great Plagues of God. His Censure upon him
was bitter, Cab. P. 92. but fit to be cast overboard in silence.

176. A King of Peace is not only sit to build Temples, but is the Temple
of God. Such a one does foresee how long, how far, how dangerously the Fire of
War will burn, before he put a Torch to kindle it. And as every Bishop ought to
have a care of the Universal Church; so every King ought to have a care of all
Humane Society. It is not such a thing to raise War in these Days, as it was in
Abraham's; Muster his Servants in one Day, and rescue Lot from his Enemies the
next. Nor such as it was with the old Romans, make a Summers (La^rt. in Vit.)
before he laid down his Office. The Charge in our Age, which usually for many
Years does oppress the People, will hardly countervail, if GOD should send it
the Gladness of a Victory. Nor is all fear over, when a War is ended: But, as
Solon says, (Lacrt. in Vit.) Great Commanders when they have done their Work
abroad, and are returned with Honor, (...), do more Mischief by their Factions
to their Country, than they did against their Enemies. And whosever escape well,
the poor Church is like to suffer two ways. First, as Camden says, Eliz. Ann.
1583. Schismatica pravitas semper bello ardente maxim luxuriat: Schismatical
Pravity will grow up under the Licentiousness of War: Some profane Buff-Coats
will Authorize such Incendiaries. Secondly, For some Hundreds of Years bypast
in Christendom, I cannot find, but where Wars have been protracted, the
Churchman's Revenue has been in danger to pay the Soldiers. If this affect not
those, that will not think that there is such a Sin as Sacrilege, yet all
acknowledge that there is such a Virtue as Humane Compassion: Then they that
would awake drouzy Peace, as they call it, with the Noise of the Drum, and the
prancing of Horses in the Street, let them, before they design their War,
describe before their Consciences the heaps of slaughtered Carcasses, which
will come after: That the Land which is before t^en sha^I look like the Garden
of the Lord, and that which is behind them like Burning and Brimstone. For all
this will they tempt God, and be the Foes of Humanity? Grotius, who best could
do it, has sweetly translated such a Contemplation out of Euripides, Lib. 2.
de Bell. and Pa. Cap. 24. Co. 4. Quod si in Comitiis funera ante oculos forent,
Furiata bello non p^risset Graecia. Some will adventure to say more; that every
Sheba that sounded the first Trumpet to Battle, has been unlucky in his own
Person. So Sir W. Aston to the Duke, Cab. P. 37. The most prosperous War has
misfortune enough in it, to make the Author of it unhappy. Else Isocrates was
mistaken, who lived to be an old, and a Prophetical Orator among the Athenians,
Orat. de Pace; says he, Your Humor, Athenians, is well known, (...), you like
them best that incite you to War. Yet I wonder if old Men do not remember, and
young Men have not heard, (...), that we never received hurt by listening to
them that exhorted us to preserve our Peace; but the Counsels of others have
brought Dishonor, and put us to Shifts and Calamities.

177. I would these Notions might be read considerately, when any rash Spirit
shall attempt to open Janus's Temple, after it has been long shut Yet woe be to
the Vicar that should have read this Homily to my Lord Duke. The Lord Keeper's
Name was in his black Book of Remembrance for it, till his Lordship did not
only cross him, but blot him out. Revenge is the effect of smothered Anger, as
Flame is but lighted Smoke. The Scene wherein an Argument of a kind of Tragedy
is couched upon it, is in the Lord Duke's Secretaries Letter, Cab. Page 86.
challenging the Lord Keeper, That at the select Council he had run a course
opposite to his Lordship, and (by consequent to sill up the Crime) dangerous to
the Kingdom, prejudicious to the cause of Religion. That the two last times
they met in Council, the Duke found that he took his Kue (from the Kings Mind)
just as other Men did, and joined with them in their Opinions, whose aim was to
tax his Proceedings in the managing of the Prince's Business. How imperious is
this? And how all that follows it like the roaring of a Lion? And for no more
offense, but because he would not condemn the King of Spain out of the proof of
his Grace's Mouth, and ammerce him with an implacable War, wherein an Hundred
Thousand Lives might be spilt, for a Quarrel begun between himself and
Olivarez, which was not worth a bloody Nose. Certainly the Lord Keeper could
not be afraid of the Duke being so much alienated, for any hurt that could come
of it at the present. I was not in his Heart to espy, whether he looked forward
upon another Age in the next Reign. One thing I am conscious of, that he
courted no Man but him with supple Submission, being unwilling to nothing more,
than that the World should observe him dissever'd from his Promoter, though he
were innocent as to making a breach, or the least thought of Opposition. The
best part he could act, was to protest how much, and how unseignedly he was
that Lords in a most Pathetical Vow, as it is to be found Cab. P. 89. Let this
Paper bear Record against me at the great Parliament of all, if I be not in my
Heart and Soul your Graces most faithful and most constant poor Friend and
Servant. Somewhat also may be picked out of that Letter by a sharp Censure, as
if he had sought the Duke with Phrases too low, and too Petitionary. And I am
my self within a little of that Opinion. But this was ever a venial Fault at
Court; where it was usual for Men in Place to drink down such hot Affronts, as
would scald their Throats, that could not endure the Vassallage which was tied
to Ambition. The best Apology is, That a Thankful Man looks for leave, (choose
you whether you will grant it, for he will take it) to lay himself under the
Feet of his Benefactor, to be reconciled to him. I learn it from Tully,
pleading for himself against Lateranensis, Orat, pro Plancio. Nimis magnum
beneficium Plancii exaggero. Quare vero me tuo arbitratu, and non meo, gratum
esse oportet. Lateranensis says, I do too much extol the Favors which I have
received from Plancius. As if it were not Reason that I should be Grateful by
my own Acknowledgment, and not by his Opinion. In short, that the Duke might be
the better aslur'd of the reading of so able a Minister in the Parliament at
Hand, the Prince, with his never-failing Sweetness, made up this Gap between
them; but with a loose Pale. Yet leave should have been given, where leave was
looked for. The Lord Keeper did not give the Duke content in this select Junto;
no more did the Duke give content to the King. In the same Measure that he did
mete, it was measured unto him.

178. Look back about a Twelvemonth, and a story will drop in, where the Duke
did hearken to the Party with more content. That which was acted a Year ago is
in season to be produced now, because it was published upon Consideration
against the Parliament that sat now. Those dangerous and busy Flies, which
the Roman Seminaries send abroad, had buzzed about the Countess of Buckingham,
had blown upon, and infected her. She was Mother to the great Favorite; but in
Religion become a Stepmother. She doated upon him extremely, as the Glory of
her Womb: Yet by turning her Coat so wantonly, when the Eyes of all the Kingdom
were upon her Family, she could not have wrought him a worse turn, if she had
studied a mischief against him. Many marvelled what rumbled in her Conscience
at that time: For from a Maid to an Old Madam she had not every ones good Word
for practice of Piety. And she suffered Censure to the last, that she lest the
Company of Sir Tho. Compton her Husband. It has been so with many others. But
why should a Libertine, that cares not to live after the way of the Gospel,
pretend to seek Satisfaction more than ordinary about the true Doctrine of The
Gospel? They that have Beams in their own Eyes, unsanctified Manners beyond the
most, why should they cavil at Moats in the Eye of the Reformed Religion? Let
them answer it to Him alone, who has Power to judge them. But diverse that had
sense of a Godly Fear, as they pitied the Revolt of this Lady, so they dreaded
the Consequents, that did hang upon her Power and Opportunity. Ar. Wilson
complains, P. 275. That the Countess of Buckingham was the Cynosura that all
the Papists steered by. I believe it was above her Ability to bear the weight
of that Metaphor. The common Jealousy was, that the Duke would be ringstreaked
with spots of Popery, by resorting to his Mothers Trough. Nay, there was a
trivial Gradation in Vulgar Mouths, which reached higher, That the Mother had a
great Influence upon her Son, the Son upon the King, and the King upon the
People. The Lord Keeper did not unforesee how far this Cord might be drawn: And
that those Discontents which were but Vapors in common talk, might thicken
into a Thunderclap in an ensuing Parliament. Which though it assembled not in
14 Months after, yet this Prometheus had learned his Lesson, That Safety is
easiest purchased by Prevention. An Instrument that is strung, may be used upon
a little warning. Having thus studied the Welfare of the Duke, he spoke to him
to this effect:

My Lord,
YOur Mother is departed out of the Bosom of the Church of England, into whose
Confession of Faith she was Baptized; a strong Schism in any to go away from
that Society of Christians, among whom they cannot demonstrate but Salvation
may be had. I would we could bring her Home so soon, that it might not be seen
she had ever wandered. For it is a favorable Judgment among Divines, Hormisda
in Epist. ad Anastasium Imperatorem.
Prope ab Innocentia non recedit, qui ad eam sine tarditate revertit: He seems
almost not to have fallen from Innocence, that returns into it without delay. But
my Care (I cannot dissemble it) is more for your self. Your Integrity, My Lord,
is wounded through your Mothers Apostasy. Perhaps you hear not of it: For I
believe it is late before any Truth meets you, that is offensive. It is one of
the greatest Miseries of Greatness, which Pollio imputes to Gallienus, Nemo ei
vera nec in bonis, nec in malis nuntiat. But it is time to let your Lordship
know, That the Mouth of Clamor is opened, that now the Recusants have a Potent
Advocate to plead for their Immunity, which will increase their Number. When
this is banded in the High and Popular Court by Tribunitial Orators, what a
Dust it will raise? I have touched a Sore with my Finger: I am furnished with
an Emplaster to lay upon it; which I presume will Lenifie: Only measure not the
Size of Good Counsel by the Last of Success. My Lord, Your Mother must be
invited, or provoked, to hear Debates between Learned Men, speaking to those
Points of Controversy that have staggered her. Let her Ladyship bring her
Champions with her. Entertain her with many of these Conferences. Let them be
solemn as can be devised; the King himself being ever present at the Disputes;
and the Conslux of great Persons as thick as the Place will permit. Let your
Lordships Industry and Earnestness be Conspicuous, to catch at every Twig of
Advantage, much more to give Applause to every solid Reason, which may bring
your Mother home to a sound Mind again. If her Ladyship recover of her
Unstableness by these Applications, you have won a Soul very precious to you,
and will raise your self up into the Fame of a Sincere Protestant. But if the
Light within her be Darkness, and that she frustrate all hopes of her
Reparation, the Notice of your Lordships Pious Endeavors will fill the Kingdom
with a good Report, and will smell to every good Nostril like a sweet Savor.
My Lord, Courage. I set my rest upon it, that this Counsel will not deceive,
because you will labor your Mothers Conversion, not as a Stratagem of
Counterfeacance, but, upon my Knowledge, from the very Mind of your Heart.


The Conferences went presently to work. His Majesty singularly versed in
Polemical Theology, was Superintendent. The Champion, in whose Sufficiency the
Lady most affied, was Fisher the Jesuit: With whom Dr. Francis White, then Dean
of Carlisle, first encountered, and gave him Foil after Foil; as the Colloquy did
let the World know, most impartially published. But Female Weakness was not
evinced by Manly Performance. The Logic of the Serpent had strong force upon
Eve; and that Infirmity is descended upon her Daughters. Another Meeting was
prepared, wherein the Lord Keeper entered the Lists with Fisher; because he had
advised to those Disputes, he was willing to be Active, as well as
Consultative. As the old Rule would have Precept and Example to go Hand in
Hand: Cum dixit quid faciendum sit, probat faciendo. He had observed when he
was an Auditor at the former Conflict, that if diverse of the Jesuits Postulata
were yielded to him, ( datis, non concessis) that the Church of England,
repurging it self from the super-injected Errors of the Church of Rome, would
stand inculpable: So he labored to evidence, if unnecessary Strifes were
discreetly waved, what little was wanting to a Conclusive Unity. Ut, quae non
licuit per omnia, ex necessariis partibus allegentur, as the Emperor Justin
wrote to Pope Hormisda. The King did greatly commend his Charitable and
Pacificatory handling of Controversies; which gentle usage, though it put the
Jesuit out of his ordinary trot, yet he fell into a shuffling pace, and carried
away the Lady behind him. The Lord Keeper exposed not his part in Print; as
Fulgentius says of Friar Paul, That he writ nothing with Intention to publish
it, unless Necessity constrein'd him. The third, (...), that contended with the
Jesuit both for the Palm of Victory, and to bring Eye Salve to the dim-sighted
Lady, was Dr. Laud, then Bishop of St. David's, who galled Fisher with great
Acuteness. Which the false Loiolite traduced, and made slight in his Reports
Whereupon the Bishop, for his just Vindication, Corroborated all that he had
delivered with very strong Enlargement, paying his Adversary both with the
Principal and Interest; and diverse Years after finished it with an Auctarium,
which has rendered it a Masterpiece in Divinity. But all this labor was spent
in vain as to the Countess's part, and she left to be numbered among those, of
whom Christ foretold, that they loved Darkness more than Light. Qui scis an
prudens huc se dejecerit,
Atque Servari nelit!
Horat. Art. Poet.

Yet on my Lord her Sons part, that which was desired was Achieved. He had
appeared in the Field an Antagonist to her Revolt, whom he Honored, and
Observed with the most of Filial Duty. So she was less Valued ever after, and
sent from the Court, for her Obstinacy. But he was Blazed abroad for the
Red-Cross-Knight that was Unas Champion against Archimago. Yet it was not
Printed to be Read, and Judged of, till the Parliament Sat, which was now
called.

179. And lest the precedents of the King's Writs should be lost, as his Houses
and Revenues are embezel'd, here follows the Copy of the Summons directed to
the Lord Keeper under the Signet.

James Rex.
TRusty, and well beloved Counselor we Greet you well.
Whereas we are Resolved to hold a Parliament at our Palace of Westminster the
Twelfth day of February next ensuing. These are to Will and require you
forthwith, upon the Receipt hereof, to Issue forth Our Writs of Summons, to all
the Peers of our Kingdom: And also all other usual Writs for the Electing of
such Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, as are to serve therein. And withal to
issue out all usual Writs for the Summoning of the Clergy of both Provinces in
their Houses of Convocation And this shall be your Warrant so to do.

Dated at our Palace of Whitehal in Westminster, this 28 December. 1623.

The Tenth of February was first appointed, being Tuesday; the day of the Week
which K. James observed to auspicate his great Affairs; but proving to be
Shrove-Tuesday, wherein the Younkers of the City used to exceed in horrid
Liberty, that day was scratcht out of the Writ, and Thursday the Twelfth was
chosen in the Room. But God scratcht out the Twelfth day, when the day was
come, Nay, when the King and his Train were putting on their Robes, so far in
readiness to begin their Solemnity. For the King looked about him, and missed
the L. Steward, Duke of Richmond and Lenox. He was absent indeed, absent from
the Body, and present with God, 2 Cor. 5.8. He had Supped cheerfully the Night
before, complained of nothing when he went to Bed, slept soundly, Et iter
confecit dormiendo, he finished this last Journey in his sleep. His Servant was
commanded to waken him, and hasten him to attend the King, but found that he
had breathed out his Spirit; about an Hour before, said the Sons of Art,
because his Corpse was but inclining to be Cold. What a do was made to no
purpose to suspect some foul means to rock him into this Everlasting Sleep?
which would never have been questioned in a meaner Man. And cannot God prepare
a Worm to smite the Gourd of our Body, that it shall wither in a moment? He was
deplored generally. I am in with them; for he deserved it. French he was born
and bred. You might have seen the Gallican Decency in his manners; of good
Aspect, and well shaped; Affable, Humble, Inoffensive, contented with so much
Favor as was never Repined: One that never Wrestled with the King's Privado's,
and was never near a fall: One whose Wit and Honesty kept him great, and much
beloved of all; which rarely meet: One that deserves the Elogy which Lampridias
gives to Quintilius Marcellus Counselor to Alexander Severus, Qs. Meliorem ne
Historiae quidem continent. More was spoken to his never-dying Honor, by the
Graceful Eloquence of the Lord Keeper upon a fit Text, taken out of the 1 King
cap. 4. verse 5. Zabud the Son of Nathan was principal Officer, and the King's
Friend, This was performed at his Funerals in Westminster Abbey April 27. Which
were the most costly, and set out with the most Princely Pomp for a Subject,
that ever I saw: His Duchess thinking nothing too sumptuous in his Obsequies
to do him the greatest Renown that could be. Which Love in her survived toward
him to her last hour. But good Lady, what a penurious House-Wife, and scorn to
the World, has Ar. Wilson made her p. 259. That her Tables in her Hall were
spread, as if there had been Meat, and Men to furnish them; but before Eating
time, the House being voided, the Linen Returned into their Folds again, and
all her people Grased on some few Dishes. Out of what Rascal Fame he scrapt up
this I know not. The Author lived not one day after he had Published his Work
to Answer it. But there are yet as many Living, that know this to be
maliciously false, as there are Pages in his Book. For my own part I knew the
Order, the Comeliness, the Bounty of her Housekeeping in Holborn, and at
Exeter-House; whether I came often on Message from a Lady of a great
understanding, and a great will, the Lady Elizabeth Hatton, to streiten an
Account of 8000 l. between them. I have been kept upon my business until
Meal-times very often, Noon and Night, and have staid with her Worthy Steward
Mr. William Bolton at his Table, which I could not Civilly Refuse. I never saw
but that every Board in the Hall was bountifully served, the Stewards Table
chiefly so costly in well Cook'd-Meats, so Rich in the Plate wherein it was
served, so well observed by the Attendants, as I preferred it before the like
in any Noble Family that ever I was present at in the Kingdom. I am bound. I
take it, to defend the Hospitality in Truth, where I have been a Guest. Neither
does it belong only to Knight Errands in Wildwitted, that is no Witted,
Romances, to defend a Ladies Honor, but it is due from every man that
professes Justice, and Ingenuity. Principally, as Aristotle Writes Prob. 9.
Sect. 30, Defunctis opitulari magis Justum est, quam vivis hominibus. The
Exequies of the Dead are called Justa; and it is more Just to defend the Dead,
then the Living. Let me Weave into the Fringe of this Paragraph a touch at as
Wise, and Faithful a Letter, as ever the Lord Keeper wrote to the Duke of
Buckingham. He that Reads it all, as it is Cab. p. 101. Shall find it no loss
of time; mending the Fault of the Date (a mistake very common in that Rhapsody
of Letters) it should bear the Style of Feb 13. 1623. instead of Mart. 2. 1624.
The Office of the Lord Steward of the King's House was become void by the Death
of the Duke of Richmond. The next Morning he writes to my Lord of Buckingham,
That it was a place sit to be accepted of by his Lordship. What, more Places?
but peruse the Letter, and the Scope of it all along will appear, to instruct
him upon the Assumption of this, to part with another place, the Admiralty,
more beneficial to his Followers, then to himself, who therefore kept him from
discarding. But how far had his Lordship been more Fortunate, if he had
followed better Counsel? First he had made himself a less Object of their
Malice, who looked with Meager Countenance upon him, for holding so many Places
of Public Trust, Mastership of the Horse, Admiralty, Wardenship of the Cinque
Ports: Justice in Eyer over all Chaces and Forests on this side Trent. Whereas
the Lord Steward serves the King only in his Household. Therefore the Lord
Keeper omits not to remember him there, Your Grace may leave any Office you
please to avoid Envy. The plurality of the Dukes Offices were one and the first
of the Grievances heard and Prosecuted in the Houses of the Lords and Commons
throughout all his troubles, while his Life lasted. Secondly, but for the Name
of Lord Admiral he had never withdrawn himself from Court, to head a Navy at
the Sea, where never any Commander of the English Fleet made so improsperous a
Voyage. As Renowned Camden, anno 1601. Eliz. says of Robert Earl of Essex, That
he was a Brave Warrier, but Fortune did much forsake him, and he would not say
with Astrologers, That Mars being Lord of his Nativity 'in the Eleventh
Station, Afflictissimus nascenti affulserat: So this Lord Admiral was Valiant
and feared not his Foes, but Mars was not a propitious Ascendant at his
Nativity. He that feared it, and knew him to be both wilful and unskilful,
advised him to take a White Staff instead of an Anchor; but the Duke returned
him no Gra-mercy, being Resolute to out Face envy, and as secure as a former
prosperous Life could make him, to suspect no Ignominy, or Infelicity.

180. The week that stayed the Parliament being over, it met as it were in the
Temple of Concord. Common presagements seldom fail. It came so welcome to all
Men, that they rejoiced for it according to the Joy of Harvest. The Solemnity
began with a Sermon in the Abbey of Westminster, made by Dr. Carew Bishop of
Exon. Even Idolaters did not omit to enter upon any great Work, without some
Ceremony of Religion, Omnia levius casura rebus Divinis procuratis. Tull. l. 2.
de divin. The Bishops Theme, upon which he raised his Exhortations very
prudently, was out of the Words of dying Jacob to the Head of one of the
Tribes, Genesis 49.13. Zabulon shall dwell at the Haven of the Sea, etc. From
which he Preached and Prayed earnestly it might be considered; Zabulon juxta
mare positus aliorum videt. naufragia, sed ipse salvus est. How Zabulon might
thank God that he saw Wars abroad, and none at home; and that he saw many
Shipwrack'd at Sea, while he was safe in his Haven. But the Stream of Opinion
was then against his Doctrine. For we think every thing good, whose Evil we
have not felt. Immediately from thence the Train removed to the Higher House,
where the King being set under his State, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
other Assistants of the Court Attending his Royal person, and the Lower House
being admitted to the Audience of that which was to be said, his Majesty
Feasted them with a Speech, then which nothing could be apter for the Subject,
or more Eloquent for the matter. All the helps of that Faculty were extremely
perfect in him, abounding in Wit by Nature, in Art by Education, in Wisdom by
Experience. Mr. George Herbert being Praelector in the Rhetorique School in
Cambridg anno 1618. Passed by those fluent Orators, that Domineered in the
Pulpits of Athens and Rome, and insisted to Read upon an Oration of King James,
which he Analyzed, showed the concinnity of the Parts, the propriety of the
Phrase, the height and Power of it to move Affections, the Style utterly
unknown to the Ancients, who could not conceive what Kingly Eloquence was, in
respect of which, those noted Demagogi were but Hirelings, and Triobulary
Rhetoricians. The Speech which was had at the opening of this Parliament; does
commend Mr. Herbet for his Censure: Which yet I Engross not here; for the
Reader that is Conversant in Books will find it often Printed. The Sum of it
was to ask Advice of the Lords and Commons, what was fittest to be done for
Advancement of Religion, and the good of the Common Wealth, how the Treaty of
the Princes Match would agree with these, and the good of the Children of the
Palatine, for restoring them to that which they had lost. As the whole
Contexture was a right Purple Robe that became Majesty, so there were three
Golden Nails or Studs in it, which even dazzled the Eye with their Splendour. In
the First he touchld modestly, that his Reign had not been unhappy to us, But,
says he, You have found the Fruits of my Government, if you consider the Peace
which my Kingdoms Enjoy, in the midst of the Miseries our Neighbors are
afflicted with. And though I cannot say my Government has been without Error,
yet I can avouch before God and his Angels, never King Governed with a more
pure sincerity, and Incorrupt Heart. In the Second, he Purges himself from the
Detraction of a false Rumor. Jealousies, says He, Are of a strange Depth; but
let them be far from you. It has been Talked of my Remissness in maintenance
of Religion, and Suspicion of a Toleration. But, as God shall Judge me, I never
thought or meant it, nor ever in Word Expressed any thing that Savored of it. It
is true, That at times best known to my self, I did not so fully put those Laws
in Execution, but did Wink and Connive at some things, which must have hindered
more weighty Affairs. Yet I never in all my Treaties agreed to any thing, to
the overthrow and disagreeing of these Laws -- For as it is a good Horsman's
Part, not always to use the Spur, ot keep strict the Reins, but sometimes to
spare the Spur, and to hold the Reins more slackly, so it is the part of a wise
King (and my Age and Experience have informed me) sometimes to quicken the Laws
with strict Execution, and at other times upon just occasion to be more Remiss.
Thirdly, The Shells of a Cockle could not lie closer and evener to one another,
then these last last words clasped with the Parliament: God is my Judge, and I
speak it as a Christian King, never any wayfaring men in the Burning, Dry, and
Sandy Deserts more Thirsted for water to quench his Thirst, then I Thirst and
Long for the Happy Success of this Parliament, that the good Issue of this may
expiate and acquit the Fruitless Issue of the former. The King having spread
this Banquet to the Taste of their Judgments, the Lord Keeper pro forma set on
the Grace Cup as follows.

My Lords, and Gentlemen all,
YOU have heard his Majesty's Speech, and find the extraordinary Confidence his
Majesty reposeth in the Wisdom, and loving Affections of this present
Parliament. You do hot expect, I am sure, any Repetition, or reiteration of the
same. A Lacedemonian being invited to hear a Man that could counterfeit very
well the Notes of a Nightingale, put him off with these words, (...), I have
heard the Nightingale her self. And why should you now be troubled with the
Croaking of a Chancellor, that have heard the loving Expressions of a most
Eloquent King: And indeed for me to gloss upon his Majesty's Speech, were
nothing else, then as it is in the Satyr, Annulum aureum ferreis Stellis
ferruminare, to Enamel a Ring of pure Gold with Stars of Iren. I know his
Majesty's Grave and weighty Sentences have left, as A^schines Orations were
wont to do, (...), a kind of Prick or Sting in the Hearts and Minds of all the
Hearers. It is not fit that with my Rude Fumbling I should unsettle, or
discompose his Elegancies. For as Pliny Observes of Nerva, That when he had
Adopted the Emperor Trajan, he was taken away forthwith, and never did any
Public Act after it, Ne post illud Divinum, and immortale factum, aliquid
mortale faceret, Least after so Transcendent and Divine an Act, he should
commit any thing might relish of Mortality: So is it fit that the Judicious
Ears of these Noble Hearers be no further troubled this day, Ne quid post illud
Divinum and immortale dictum m^rtale audirent. I will only put you in mind of
your Ancient and laudable Custom, to Elect one to be your Common Mouth or
Speaker. And whom his Majesty Assigns unto you for his Liking and Presentation
Mr. Secretary will declare.


181. So the first Day shut up. And Saturday following, the 21st of that Month,
was but a day of Formality to the Parliament; yet material to this History,
because the Lord Keeper had the greatest share about the Work of it, who is my
Scope; and this Parliament; no further, then as he is concerned in the Actions
and Occurrencies of it. On that day the King Sitting under his State in the
Lords House, incircled with the Senatorian Worthies of the higher and lower
Order, the Commons Presented Sir Tho. Crew, Sergeant at Law, for their Speaker.
As the Knights and Burgesses were Chosen for the public Service out of the
best of the Kingdom; so this Gentleman was Chosen for this Place out of the
best of them: He was warm in the Care of Religion, and a Chief among them that
were popular in the Defense of it; A great lover of the Laws of the Land, and
the Liberties of the People; Of a stayed Temper, sound in Judgment, ready in
Language; And though every Man, it is supposed, has some equals in his good
Parts, he had few or no Superiors. This was the Character which the Lord Keeper
gave of him to the King, whereupon he was pointed out to this Honorable Task.
Yet with all this Furnishment, out of a Custom which Modesty had observed, Sir
Thomas Deprecated the Burden, as Moses did when the was to be sent to Pharaoh,
O my Lord, I am not Eloquent, send I pray thee by the hand of him whom thou will send, Exodus 4.13. And he humbly besought the Royal Favor to Command a
new, and a better Choice for so weighty a Charge. Whereupon the Lord Keeper
going from his Seat to His Majesty, and Conferring with Him upon his Knee,
after a short time returned to his Place, and spoke as follows.

Mr. Speaker,
I Am Charged to deliver unto you, that no Man is to be excused from this
Service, that can make so good an Excuse as you have done. His Majesty does
observe that in you, which Gorgias the Philosopher did in Plato, Quod in
Oratoribus irridendis ipse esse Orator summus videbatur, That in Discoursing
against Orators, he showed himself the greatest Orator of them all: So fares it
in this Appeal of yours unto the Throne of His Sacred Majesty, Descendis ut
Ascendas, te ad sidera tollit humus: By falling down in your own Conceit, you
are mounted higher in the Opinion of all others: By your own excusing to be a
Speaker, you show what a Worthy Speaker you are like to be. The Truth is, His
Majesty does not only approve, but highly Commend the Judgment of the House of
Commons in your Election. And, Quod felix faustumque sit, for an Omen and good
luck to all the ensuing Proceedings of that Honorable Assembly, he does Crown
this first Action of theirs with that, Exivit verbum ex ore Regis, that old
Parliamentary Approbation, Le Roy le Veult.


Then Sir Thomas Crew Bowing down to the Supreme Pleasure, which could not be
declined, offered up his first Fruits for about the time of half an Hour, in a
way between Remonstrance and Petition, smoothly and submissively, yet with that
Freedom and Fair-Dealing as became the Trust committed to him. He could not
wish more Attention than he had from the King, who heard him favorably to the
end. For the Dispatch of that Work, presently the Lord Keeper went to His
Majesty, who Conferred together secretly that none else heard, and after a
quarter of an hour or better, the L. Keeper returned to his Place, and answered
the Speakers Peroration in His Majesty's Name: Which Answer will enough supply
what was said by them both; for it contains all the solid parts of Mr. Speakers
Harangues.

Mr. Speaker,
182. HIs Majesty has heard your Speech with no more Patience then
Approbation. You have not cast up the same to any General Heads, no more will
I. And it were pity to pull down a Frame, that peradventure cannot be set up
again in so fair a Symmetry and Proportion: Yet, as the Mathematicians teach,
that in the most flowing and continued Line a Man may imagine continual Stops
and Points; so in this round and voluble Body of your Speech, I may observe for
Methods sake some distinct and articulated Members. Somewhat you have said
concerning your self, somewhat concerning the King; somewhat concerning Acts of
Parliament, whereof some are yet to be framed in the Womb, and others ready to
drop into their Graves; somewhat of the Aberrations of former Assemblies;
somewhat of the Common Laws in general; somewhat of the ordinary supply of
Princes; somewhat (and very worthily) for the increase of True Religion:
somewhat of the regaining of that of our Allies; somewhat of preserving our own
Estate; and somewhat of the never sufficiently commended Reformation of
Ireland.These I observed for your material Heads. The formal were those Four
usual Petitions; For Privileges to come unto the House; For liberty of Speech
when you are in the House; For Access to His Majesty for the informing of the
House; And for a fair Interpretation of your Proceedings when you shall leave
the House. I shall from His Majesty make Answer to these Things, (...), step by
step, as they lie in order.

First, For your self, the King has not only stretched out His Scepter, but
lifted up his Voice with Ahasuerus, Quae est Petitiae tua dabitur tibi, He has
granted all that you have desired, and assures you by me of His Special Grace
and Favor from the beginning to the end of your present Employment.

Secondly, Concerning the King, it may not be doubted but Gods Blessing of us,
and our Blessing of God for his Royal Generation, his quiet Coronation, his
peaceable Administration, his Miraculous Preservation in this very Place, and
this our most comfortable Pledge of his future Succession, ibunt in saecula,
shall flow unto Posterity, and be the Hymns and Anthems of Ages to come.

Thirdly, For those Statutes of Learning which were here framed, 32 Henr. 8.
which you call, Parliamentum Doctum; And those Statutes of Charity, 39 of the
late Queen, which you Term, Parliamentum Pium, The Devout Parliament; And those
Statutes of Grace digested and prepared in the last Convention, which His
Majesty would have had been, Gratiosum Parliamentum, The Gracious Parliament;
And (...), That large Pardon you expect this time, which may make this
Assembly, Munificum Parliamentum, The Bountiful Parliament; The King gives you
full Assurance of His Princely Resolution to do what shall be fitting and
convenient to keep Life in the one, and to bring Life to the other, so as you
do, site obstetricari, play the Midwives in them both, as you ought to do.

Fourthly, For the Abortion of some late Parliaments, (from the which His
Majesty is most free) a Parliament Nullity, as you T^rm it, is a strange
Chimaera, a word of a Monstrous Compesition. I never heard of the like in all
my Life, unless it be once in the new Creed, Credo Ecclesiam Romano-Catholicam.
Parliaments naturally begat Entities, and the want of Parliaments produces
Nullities. Surely God and the King are must averse to such Parliaments. Mark
Gods Parliament, the first Parliament in the World, wherein the Three Persons
in Trinity are consulting together, Faciamus Hominem, and you shall find it was
to beget Entities: Therefore God is scarce present in that Consultation that
brings forth Nullities. (...), as the Philosopher begins his Ethics, Every
Consultation is for some Good, some End, some Entitie, and most opposite to an
Abortion, or Nullity. And therefore you may applaud those former Laws of
Learning, Piety, Grace, and Bounty, which you handled before: In my Opinion,
Mr. Speaker, you have kept the good Wine, and the best Law of them all till
now, which is Solon's Law, Lex Oblivionis, A Law of Forgetfulness, That by His
Majesty's Grace and Favor freely offered unto us the last day, all the Memory
of these Unfortunate Abortions may be Buried in the River Lethe, and never be
had in any further Remembrance. I will put you in Mind of a Story, which Tully
relates out of Thucydides, and leave the Application to this Honorable
Auditory. When the Thebans,having g^t the better of the Lacedaemonians, Erected
a Brazen Trophy for that Victory, they were complained of apud Amphictyonas,
that is, before the common Council of Greece, Eo quod aeternum inimicitiarum
Monumentum Graecos de Graecis Statuere non oportuit; Because it was most unfit
that between Greek and Greek there should remain any Record of perpetual Enmity.

Fifthly, For the Common Law of England, if we regard the Meridian for which it
is Erected, it is a Law, as was said of those of Lycurgus, Disciplinae
Convenientissimae, of a most apt and convenient Frame, and His Majesty has
ever so approved of it. Nay, He is so precisely affected, and disposed in this
kind, that as Paterculus writes of Cato, Id solum ei visum est rationem habere,
quod haberet Justitiam. He could never allow of any Devise or Project, how
plausible soever, that was not justifiable at the Common Law.

183. Sixthly, For the Supply of Princes in this Kingdom, His Majesty makes no
Question, but that by Parliament and Subsidy, is the most Comfortable to the
King, and most Favorable to the Subject. It Comforts the King, as issuing from
the Heart; and it Eases the Subject, as brought by the Hands, not of one, or
two, but of all the People. That which you call Benevolence, or Good Will,
brings unto His Majesty, neither so much Good, nor so much Will as the other
support. And therefore the Kings of this Land (though it has been accepted by
most of them) have made of Benevolence but Anchoram Sacram, a help at a dead
lift, when Parliaments being great Bodies, and of slow Motions, could not soon
be Assembled, nor Subsidies issuing from the Purses of Particulars, be so
suddenly Collected. And it is very well known with what Reluctance His Majesty
was drawn to shoot out this Anchor, never Assenting thereunto, until he was in
a manner forced by those intolerable Provocations from without, and those
general Invitations from whithin the Kingdom. Remember therefore that good
Lady, in whose Defense the Money was spent, that inimitable Pattern once of
Majesty, but now of Patience to the Christian World, and you will say, no Man
can be found of that Malevolence, as to find fault with this one Benevolence.

Seventhly, His Majesty Returns you most hearty Thanks for your Care and Zeal
of the True Religion. And is much Rejoiced to hear, That this Lower House, as
it is now Composed, is such another Place as Tully describes the Town of Enna,
Non Domus sed fanum, ubi quot Cives, tot Sacerdotes. It is no vulgar House,
but, as Originally, a Sacred Chapel, wherein are Assembled in regard of their
Zeal and Devotion, look how many Men, so many Churchmen. And his Majesty gives
you full assurance, that he nothing so much Regards the Airy State or Glory of
this Life, as he does that inestimable Jewel of our Religion, which is to
remain his only Ornament after this Life. If there be any Scandals to the
contrary, not given but taken for want of due Information, his Majesty wishes
(as Aphonso the Wise King of Aragon did) Omnes populares suos reges fuisse,
That every one of his People had been a King, for then they might soon
understand, and be as soon satisfied with the Reasons of Estate. His Majesty
has never spared the Execution of any Law, but for the Execution of a greater
Law, to wit Salus Reip. the Good, the Peace, and Safety of the Church and
Common Wealth. And you know that is the ultimus finis, all the rest are but
fines sub fine. For as the Orator well Observes, Nemo Leges legum causa salvas
esse vult, sed Reipublicae, We do not desire the Observing of our Laws for the
written Laws, but for the Commonwealths sake. And for those Statutes made for
the preservation of Religion, they are all (as you heard last day from that
Oracle of Truth and Knowledge) in full force, and in Free Execution. Nor were
ever intended to be connived with in the least Syllable, but for the further
propagation of the same Religion. What know thou O Man, if thou shall save
thy Wife, was a Text that gave no Offense in St. Paul'stime. Remember the
King's Simile, which indeed is God's Simile, Zach. 6. Kingdoms are like to
Horses, Kings resemble the Riders, the Laws the Spurs and the Reins by which
Horsemanship is managed: A good Rider carries always a sure, but not always a
Stiff Hand. But if Agar grow insolent by those Favors, then in Gods Name, out
with the Bondwoman, and her Sons. For his Majesty is fully Resolved, That as
long as Life remains in his Body, and the Crown upon his Head, the Sons of the
Bondwoman shall never be Heirs in this Island, with the Sons of the
Freewoman. And our Royal Master gives us his Chaplains free leave to put him
in mind of that of Synesius, (...), God is still careful of the Good of Kings,
and Kings cannot be too careful of the Good and Service of God.

In the Eighth place his Majesty exceedingly comforted with the just Feeling,
and Resentment you express against the Usurpation of that invading Enemy, who
has expelled our most sweet Princess from her Jointure, and her Olive Branches
from their Rightful Inheritance. Exoriare aliquis nostris ex ossibus ultor.
Surely if the Rule be true, Attollit vires in milite causa,That a good Cause
makes good Soldiers, it is no such impossibility to regain the Palatinate. You
say, Sir, Cato was positively of Opinion, Carthaginem evertendam, That,
whatever became of other designs, Carthage must be overthrown: And you are of
Opinion, and so are all good Men besides, Palatinatum reglutinandum, That the
Palatinate must be Glued again to the Right Owner, and plucked out of their
Clutches, that by Arms, or cunning Treaties do Usurp it. But the way and Manner
in Discovering the Couchant Enemy, in preserving that handful of our Friends,
in laying down some Course of Diversion, and the like, you do most wisely and
modestly refer to the proper Oracle, His Majesty's Wisdom, and Deep Counsel.
Yea, but I must tell you Mr. Speaker, Vinci in amore turpissimum, the King
cannot endure to be outvyed by his People in Love and Courtesies. What you in
Duty do refer to him, his Majesty in Confidence of your Wisdom and Loving
Assections returns upon You. You say you would have the King betake him to
sound Counsel. You are his Counsel, Consilium magnum his Main and Principal
Counsel. It is very true, That since the beginning of Harry the 8th, the Kings
of England have reserved those Matters to their own Conisance, and Resolution.
But it is as true, that from Harry the First, until that Harry the Last, our
Kings have in every one of those Questions Repaired to, and received Advice of
their Parliaments, Id verum quod primum. Our Master means to follow the former
Precedents. His Majesty Commands me to yield unto you Hearty Thanks for your
just Resentments of his Sufferings in this Cause; and to tell you withal, that
because the main of the Expedition is to be born by the Persons, and Purses of
the People, whom you do represent: He is pleased to accept of the Advice of the
House of Commons concerning the finding out of this secret Enemy, the
re-inforcing of our remaining Friends, and by what kind of Diversion we shall
begin the Enterprise. And God the Holy Ghost be present with you in all your
Consultations.

184. In the Ninth Place, That Well of Wood, our Navy Royal, wherewith you well
observed this whole Island to be most strongly fortified, we must all attribute
the well Rigging, and good Condition of it to the great Cost, Care, and
Providence of his Sacred Majesty. Hic tot sustinuit, hic tanta negotia solus.
And yet as that Carver that beautified the Temple of Diana, although he wrought
upon other Men's Charges, was suffered notwithstanding to engrave his own Name
in some eminent Places of the Building: So surely can it be denied by Envy it
self, but that most Noble Lord, who is now a complete Master in his Art, and
has spent his seven years Studies in the Beautifying of the Navy, should have
a glorious Name enstamped thereupon, though in a sitting Distance from his Lord
and Master, whose Princely Majesty., A long sequitur, vestigia semper adorans.

Lastly, For the Reformation of Ireland, this I am bidden to deliver. Pliny
commending the Emperor Trajan to the utmost reach of Eloquence, says, That the
most laudable, and most remarkable Point in all his happy Government, was, That
his Care was not consined to Italy alone, but Instar solis, like the Beams and
Influence of the Sun, it shed it self to many other Countries. Surely his
Majesty's Providence is of a large Extent; for where the Sun scarce darteth his
Beams, his Majesty has shined most gloriously by the Execution of wholesome
Laws, engrafting Civility, and Planting true Religion. And let this be our
Sovereign's Comfort, that though this poor Kingdom, though never so reformed,
shall add very little to his Crown of Temporal Majesty here on Earth, it will
be an Occasion of an immense Access to his Crown of Glory hereafter in Heaven.
And now for your four Petitions, Mr. Speaker, his Majesty grants them all in
one Word. What Privilege, Liberty, Access, or fair Interpretation was ever
yielded to the Members of that House, his Majesty grants them to the Knights
and Burgesses now assembled, fully and freely, without the least Jealousy,
Qualification, or Suspicion. I will only add a Memorandum out of Valerius
Maximus, to cut an even Thread between King and People, Quid Cato sine
Liberate? Quid libertas sine Catone? What is Wisdom without Liberty to show
it? And what is Liberty, without Wisdom to use it?


185. Hitherto the King spoke to the People by the Lord Keeper's Mouth, and
then the House rose: All rejoiced that such gracious Concessions were returned
to Mr. Speaker's Motions, which were the Beam that held up the insequent
Counsels, till the Roof was covered with Agreement. And it took the more, that
it was inlaid with such Mosaic Work, not to the Eye, but to the Ear, by a
perfect Orator. It was the greatest, and the knowingest Auditory that this
Kingdom, or perhaps the World afforded; whose general Applause he carried away,
to as much as Modesty could desire. Isocrates extolling the famous Acts of
Evagoras before the full Celebrity of the Athenians, exulted, that Evagoras was
approved by them, (...): whose good Opinion was more honorable to him, than all
the Earths beside. It was a happy sight at that time, to see the Patriots of
both Houses depart, with Hands held up to God, and with Smiles in their Looks,
that you might think they said one to another, as the Princes of the
Congregation, and the Heads of the Thousands of Israel said to the Children of
Reuben and Gad, etc. This day we perceive that the Lord is among us, Jos.
22.31. The Lord Keeper was summoned in three days after to a fresh Business,
and a larger Task than the former. So fine a Tongue was sure not to want Work.
The Lords and Commons were brought into the Banqueting House at White Hall,
Feb. 24. where the Duke of Buckingham spoke unto them, leading them into the
Maeanders of the Spanish Treatise, and lead them out of them by the Clew of his
own Diligence, as he spared not to give himself the Honor of it. For this time
he was the Alcibiades that pleased the Commonwealth. His Zeal and unremovable
Pertinacy, not to cope with the Spaniard in any Proposition, unless the Prince
Elector might be brought into his own Land again with an honorable Post
liminium, did enter inwardly, and into the Marrow of all pitiful Affections.
But when he unfolded how strong the Prince was to the Principles of the right
Faith, and how attendant and dutious himself was to see that no Emissaries
should poison his Highness's Heart, the general Suffrage was, that the Prince
had marched valiantly like a Captain of Holy Truth, and that the Duke deserved
a great Name as a Lieutenant, that maintained the Cause of God under him. For
it was ever easy to strike the good People of England half blind with the
Dazzling of Religion. So much did the Parliament thirst for the Report of this
Narration, that it was imposed on the Lord Keeper to make it the next day. All
that might be done, was, that he took him to his Memory, and to his Pen, and
drew up three Sheets of Paper upon it in a fast, and scarce legible Hand. He
must proceed by the Pattern. My Lord Duke's Oration was the only part of Speech
he must follow; and like a wise Man, whatsoever he thought, he must make good
the time. So he spent four hours in Repetition without Halt, with such
Assurance, such Gesture, such Carving and Gilding, that he might wonder at
himself what Spirit was in him that day. All that took the height of his Report
by a skilful Parallax concluded, that he had striven with his former Pieces,
and had outgone himself. Yet the fourth Part will suffice to be remembered,
because the Flower of it is anticipated in the Spanish Transactions after a
monthly Method. Beside, I cannot help the Reader to that which I never saw; the
several Letters which were read to the stronger Confirmation of every
Particular Business; the Contents of them must be supplied by him that is Wise
to make Conjecture, and not by my Pen. For though it be not according to
Nature, yet it is agreeing to Honesty, Vacuum potius relinquere quam verum; to
leave a void Space, rather than to fill it up with a Fable: as Barrenness is
incomparably to be less blamed than Adultery. So I go on to make such Room as
is fit for the Heads of that long Report, which should not seem to be unsavory
Coleworts, sod too often for their Taste, to whom they are well known already.
Debet enim talibus in rebus excitare animos, non cognitio solum rerum, sed
recordatio, as Tully speaks Philip 2.

186. The Lord Keeper plotted his Conceptions into that Order, wherein the Duke
of Buckingham, the Discoverer, had gone before him, beginning from Michaelmas
1622; when the King sitting close with his Council at Hampton Court, the
Dispatches of Sir Richard Weston, his Majesty's Ambassador at Brussels, were
scanned before them. Sir Richard being a Man, in whose Election to that Place,
the Spanish Ministers were greatly pleased, and commended the King's Wisdom,
that he did light upon him. Yet Sir Richard sent Packet upon Packet, that he
found nothing from the Arch-Dutchess, but inconstant and false Dealing. For
though she acknowledged she had Power from the Emperor to cause Cessation of
Arms in the Palatinate, and undertook to put that Power forth, yet with the
same Breath she blew hot and cold. For at that Instant, when no Excuse could be
made for the Cheat, Tilly fell to it spightfully, to besiege Heidelburg, when
the War was now between the Emperor and our King, for they had no body to
invade, but his Majesty's Subjects and Servants that kept it. And what spark of
Patience could be left us, when by every Post we received comfortable Words
from Spain, and contrary Effects from Brussels? Hereupon Mr. Porter was sent to
Madrid, and commanded to stay in that Court but ten Days for an Answer. The
Letters that he carried with him, were to signify, that this should be the
last Sending, if no less would serve the Emperor's Revenge, but the utter
Extermination of his Majesty's Children, both in Honor and Inheritance. That
the Neighbor Kings and States of Christendom did malign the Match between the
Prince and the Insanta, and labored to stop that Conjunction, which would make
England and Spain formidable to them. But they should not need to contrive a
way to prevent it: This unsufferable Unkindness would bring it to pass to their
hand. For what Comfort could the Prince have in such a Wife, the nearest of
whose Blood had utterly ruined his Sister, and her Progeny? The Messenger
carried this Arrand with him to the President of all Affairs in that Kingdom,
Conde Olivarez, one that may justly be censured to have more of Will, than of
Wit; one that played foul with us, and could not hide it. Sometimes he would
run back from our Propositions, as if he would never come near us: sometimes he
would run into our Arms, as if his Heart and all his Powers did grow unto us.
Nec constans in side, nec constans in persidia. Mr. Porter came back from him
with a half-sac'd Satisfaction; but withal, the King of Spain's Letters (which
were there read) contained a Talent of Hope; but we found not a Grain of
Reality. Upon this Journey Porter did so well remember somewhat, that sell
carelestly from the Conde Duke, wishing the Prince himself were there, to see
how ready the King his Master was to fasten an indissoluble Knot of Amity, and
embrace Alliance with him; that his Excellent Highness (I speak in his Presence
what he knows) hearing it with more Attention than was imagined, put on that
heroic and undauntable Boldness, craved Leave of his Father, that he might
visit the great Ingeneers at their own Forge, to see what they were working,
and how they would receive him, and as we use to say, Either win the Horse or
loose the Saddle. Here again, says the Reporter, my Lord Duke acquainted us how
acceptable, at the first, the Arrival of the Prince did seem to Olivarez, who
in the Enterview in the Garden, assured with great Oaths, that all should be
dispatched with sudden Resolution, and that his Highness should be pressed to
nothing that was not agreeable to Conscience and Honor, and stood not with the
Love of the People of England. Then it was related, That King Philip seemed
most sensible of the Courtesy, that such a Guest had visited him, and that he
would permit all to his own Asking, as he did express it at their Meeting in
the Prado. The Lord Duke was very copious upon all the Negotiations in Spain,
from his Highness's Arrival, to his Parting, and the Lord Keeper mist not one
Particular, but beautified all, and gave it Luster; which may here be spared in
Repetition, because nothing was added in Substance, to that which is methodized
upon it in the Months of the former Summer. Much of the Day was spent to show
how deceitful Conde Olivarez was, who, like a crafty Merchant, he gave a Taste
of one Wine, and upon the Bargain would sell of another. Swear us often into
the Possession of the Palatinate, and yet embroiled us at the same Instant more
and more with an Army: Waved all Differences of Religion between us and them at
the first, and presently turned the Wheel from the Top to the Bottom, and fell
into insolent Propositions, that the Prince could not make a fit Husband for
their Lady, unless he would become a Papist. Sometimes he would aggravate, how
far we differed from the Catholic Confession of Faith, as if the Gulf reached
from Heaven to Hell. Sometimes he colleagued as if we were near upon a Point,
and but a little Stride between us. Et Stoica dogmata, tantum
A cynicis tunica distantia.
Juvenal. Then the Articles for the Marriage were brought in play, and with
what a number of new ones his Highness's Commissioners were surcharged, and how
irrespectively they stuffed the Book with strange and undisputed Additions, and
commonly the last which they presented were the worst; Verres secum ipse
certat, and id agit, ut semper superius suum facinus novo scelere vincat, Tul.
Act. 7. in Verrem. But our Ministers rejected those bastard Slips, and all that
Conscience, English Honor, and Safety could not approve.

187. After this, says the Reporter, my Lord Duke has informed you of the
Dispensation, the Whirly-Gig of the Dispensation, which run round from Pope to
Pope, and never could be said to settle. And though an orbicular Motion is
fittest for the Spheres of Heaven, yet a circular Motion, which is ever
beginning, and never ending, is stark naught for dispatch of Affairs on Earth.
Both the Dispensation, and the Labor of the Junto of Divines upon it, and
their Fumbling Fingers were never fit to tie a Love-Knot. Nay, the Conde Duke
brake out into such a Chase against their Theologues, that he said the Devil
put it into his Head to commit the Matter to their Learning. So that it seems
the Resolution of the Divines came quite contrary to the Inspiration of the
Holy Ghost. The next thing (says he) reported out of his Grace's Digestions,
was the Loathing that the Prince did take at the Length of the Treaty, as well
as the Matter; but chiefly at that. In the Matter that he was offered the
present Conducting of the Lady into England, so he would sell his Soul for the
Favor, and be a Client to Saints and Images to beg a Blessing of them upon his
Marriage. And whereas his Highness had traveled into so far a Country, as well
to relieve a Sister and her Posterity, as to fetch a Wife, he was at such a
loss about the Loss of his Sister's Inheritance, that the Spanish Council would
fasten upon nothing to content him. Hereupon his Highness declared himself
plainly to the Conde in these Words, Look to it, Sir, for without this, you
must not conclude of either Marriage or Friendship. For I must go to my Father,
and acquaint him with your Resolution. Here the Lord Keeper grew warm, and
besought their Lordships to observe, how constant his Highness remained to the
principal Ground of all, the Restitution of the Palatinate, which was the Hinge
upon which all his subsequent Actions did move: Look to it, for neither
Marriage nor Friendship can be made without the Restitution of that Dominion.
Which Protestation effecting little good, his Highness looked homeward. But his
Purposes and Preparations for his Return were often slackned. But because the
King of Spain expected a Betrothing with his Sister before his going away, the
Conde Duke revived the Treaty for the Restitution of the Paltz. And after
Conference with the Emperors Ambassadors, there was projected a Restitution of
the Country to the Son, upon a Condition of a Marriage with the Emperors second
Daughter, which the Prince entertained: But then the stabbing Condition comes
after, That for his Religion he must first be bred in the Emperors Court, at
which his Highness stopped his Ears. But for the Electorate, it was a thing in
Nubibus, out of their Power, and it seems out of their Affections, for they
would not be drawn to meddle in it. And whereas they had once made a cheerful
Proffer, To assist us with the Arms, if the Emperor did not keep his Word to
put the Prince Palatine into his own again: Now they slew back, and confessed the
Emperor had been inconstant, and did not deal well with them; but if he would
beat and buffet them, they would not promise to employ a Leavy of Forces
against the House of Austria.

188. Now, says the Voice of the Reporter, since his Highness could prevail for
nothing to come on well, his wisest Project was to take care that himself might
come off well. For which there is not one of your Lordships, I presume, but
would have given much, and done much: And it cost you nothing, but the
Perturbation of some Suspicions and Fears. I say, Fear was the worst you
susser'd. For Religion, God be thanked, suffered not at all, though it was
greatly mistrusted. There the Lord Keeper delighted their Expectations in that
which they listened after, how the Kings Ministers, and himself principally (for
he shrunk not in his Head) did proceed from time to time in the last Summer,
about the Pardon and Dispensation, about which the Spanish Ambassadors
struggled for the Recusants sake: In Contemplation whereof the Prince had a
free and friendly Dismission, yet not a Joint of Religion sprained, nor a Law
actually dislocated. But as a Wound that is cured by a Weapon Salve sine
contactu, so the Law was never touched, only the Point and Edge of the Weapon a
little anointed, and by the Operation of it our Noble Prince past the Pikes of
Danger, and is come Home to his Fathers House from a far Land, without a Pater
peccavi: GOD be thanked he neither sinned against Heaven, nor against his
Father, nor against you, nor against the Laws or Religion, for which we have
cause to offer up a great Thanksgiving to GOD, because there is not a spot in
the Sacrifice. He goes on then, as the Tract of my Lord the Duke did lead him,
and enters into a large Field to rip up that which had been told them before,
how near the Prince and the Infanta were drawn together, where the Marriage
staid, and upon what Conditions they parted. Which though it had been many
Years in Destination, (as we were credulous, and do not yet lay down our Faith)
yet if Conde Olivarez may be trusted, until they had seen the Gallantry of the
Prince and his Deservings, being daily now in their Eyes, they held us with
fair Words before, but Performance till then was never meant. Which he made
good, at least to his own Opinion, by two Letters; the first bears date, Nov.
5. 1622. it was the late King of Spain's, as the Conde said, read over six
times by his Highness, and Sir Walter Aston, and presently out of their
Memories, (for they were not permitted to excribe it) set down in Writing, and
I hope, says the Lord Keeper, when you consider the Notary, you will hold it
authentical. The second Letter is written with Olivarez his own Hand, November.
8. 1623. Translated by the Prince himself very neatly and exactly. Let the
Clerk read them both. These declare the Resolution of the Spanish Court, at
least, in my Opinion, that the great Conde's Heart was not with us, till the
Prince lodged in their Palace, and sat in Council with them himself the last
Summer. But by that opportunity their Eyes were opened, and they perceived that
their Lady, whom they magnify so much, could never make a more happy Wife,
than with so brave a Husband. So that no doubt the Desposorios, and perhaps the
Nuptials, had been past by this time with mutual liking, if the scandal of
invading the Palatinate had been removed out of the way. This the Duke's Grace,
says the Lord Reporter, has impartially spread out, holding a just Balance in
his Hand: And most prudently, knowing that he spoke in the hearing of the
wisest in the Kingdom; and most faithfully; for as Valerian said of Posthumous
in the History of Pollio, if Posthumous deceive us, Sciatis nusquam gentium
reperiri, qui possit penitus approbari.

189. But the Unkindness of the Palatinate intervening, the Prince reserved
himself, till he were satisfied therein. And at his last Farewell engaged
himself to leave a Proxy, and did deposite the same in my Lord of Bristol's
Hand, who should keep it and use it as his Proctor, and by his Direction. His
present Direction was, That if the Confirmation came from Rome clear and
entire, (which it did not) then within so many Days he should deliver it to the
King of Spain. A second Direction was sent unto him the 8th of October 1623.
That for fear a Monastery should rob his Highness of his Wife, he should stay
the delivery till that were cleared, and that his Highness should send him
further Direction. Your Lordships may hear the Letter if you please. Read it.
Now because my Lord of Bristol in his Letter November 1. 1623. does press so
vehemently, that the Prince had engaged his Faith and Power not to retract the
same: And that Cirica the Secretary had put it into an Instrument, signed and
sealed Authentically, I hold it most proper in this place to clear that
Aspersion. First, His Highness told your Lordships plainly and directly, that
he had never by Oath or Honor engaged himself, not to revoke the Powers, more
than by that Clause, De non revocanda procuratione, included in the Instrument
it self. Secondly, I must let your Lordships know, that it is lawful by the
Civil and Canon Law, (and I Appeal herein to those Learned of that Profession
now Assistants to this Noble House) for any Man to revoke his Proxy, (and so
likewise his Resignation) notwithstanding that it has the Clause, De non
revocanda Procuratione inserted within it. Further and thirdly, I affirm unto
you, That though the Prince had sworn not to stay or revoke his Proxy, yet
notwithstanding that Oath, the Revocation is good in Law. Jurans non rev^are
procuratorem, si revocet, non obstante juramento valebit revocatio, Johan. de
Selua Tract. Doctri. Vol. 5. I have digressed thus far to let your Lordships
see plainly, that my Lord of Bristol in this Charge upon the Prince has
forgotten himself very much; and that his Highness might justly, honorably,
and legally, not only stay, as he did; but withal, if he had so pleased,
absolutely revoke his own Proxy. And now by the Mercy of God, and his own wise
and judicious Demeanor, his Highness is arrived at Royston, and has made his
Narration to the King how that he is returned an absolute Freeman, excepting
only this one Condition and Limitation, That if his Majesty may receive
sufficient assurance from the King of Spain, concerning the Restitution of the
Palatinate, then indeed he is obliged in Honor to go on to the Esposorios.
Otherwise free every way. Free, because of that which Olivarez had promised to
his Highness before the return of Sir Francis Cottington. Free, because of what
his Highness had said to Olivarez after the return of Sir Francis, being
constant to the same Principle in his dear Sisters behalf. And free, because
his Power was staid justly, legally, and honorably. His Majesty was glad (as
he had just cause to be) of this wise and very circumspect Carriage in so great
a Negotiation; and told his Highness that he had played his part very well. And
now his Majesty's part came upon the Stage: Which was to provide with all
Fatherly Love, that his only Son should not be Married with a Portion of his
only Daughters Tears. And therefore his Majesty likewise presently requires the
stay of the delivery of the Proxy, until he had sufficient assurance for the
Restitution of the Palatinate. Which your Lordships will remember to be no new
or springing Condition, but the very same that is urged before, and offered
once by Olivarez in a blank Paper to his Highness; which Paper was nobly
returned by his Highness in his last answer to Olivarez. The Provision his
Majesty took herein, your Lordships shall hear out of the Dispatch from
Royston, October. 8. 1623.

190. Your Lordships would conceive that upon this Dispatch the Earl of Bristol
would take all Hints and Occasions to put off the Esposorios, unless the
required Assurance were first obtained. But the Truth is, (and I am heartily
sorry to find it) he did not so.

First, The Confirmation came from Rome altered and mangled. And indeed of
stopping the Power thereupon, he labors with all his strength of Wit to hide,
and palliate the same.

Secondly, When they had altered the Portion from 600000 in ready Cash, to an
Yearly Pension of 200000, and a few Jewels, in stead of staying for all upon
this Impediment, he seems to approve, and applaud the same.

Thirdly, For the Assurance of the Restitution of the Palatinate, which is the
Foundation of the Marriage and Friendship, he is so far from providing for it
beforehand, that he leaves it to be mediated by the Infanta after the Marriage.

Lastly, In stead of putting off the Contract; as any Man in the World would
have done, he is come to prefix a precise Day for the Esposorios. These things
your Lordships will soon observe out of the Letters that shall be read in the
method that I will direct. E. of Bristol 's Letters, October. 24. 1623. and
November. 1. 1623.

Out of this rash fixing of the Day in Spain, which was controuled again by an
Express from hence, issued an unnecessary Discourtesie put upon that King by
the Earl of Bristol, and in a manner wantonly. From that Discourtesie thrown
upon them, followed others cast upon us, which being omitted the last Day, his
Highness commands me to mention them in this place. As the taking away of the
Title of La Princessa from the Lady; and the debarring of our Ambassadors from
any further Access unto her Person. And with these the greatest Discourtesie of
all, that when they returned unto us a poor, meager, and carrion Dispatch
concerning the Palatinate, (not worthy the reading, and therefore wisely
omitted the last Day) yet the Earl of Bristol sent it with this Item, That they
were fain to antedate it for their Honor, or else it would have been ten times
worse. Your Lordship may hear it, if you please. Madrid, December. 6. 1623. Well,
for all this bigblown nothing, they have taken their Pen in Hand again, and
have sent unto his Majesty a Project of a Letter, that if his Majesty shall so
desire it, shall be written unto him from the King of Spain; and this Letter is
the Hercules Pillars, and the Nihil Ultra in the whole Negotiation of the
Palatinate. Read it, Jan. 5. 1623. This Letter his Majesty has scanned to a
Syllable; and imagining there might be some hidden Virtue to be extracted out
of that Phrase, Alzar la meno, that King Philip will not take his Hand off the
Business, until our Master shall receive Satisfaction, his Majesty sent unto
the Spanish Ambassador for a Comment on the same; and behold this all that they
return to his Majesty. Not take off his Hand, id est, He will employ without
intermission his best Offices to procure Satisfaction to his Majesty. And
concerning Offices and Treatises, we have had too many of them already. Non
tali auxilio, etc. But, together with this written Letter, I must acquaint your
Lordships with an unwritten Tradition. Which was delivered to the Earl of
Bristol, together with the Project of the Letter by Secretary Cirica, but ill
concealed by his Lordship in that Dispatch, and sent afterward, probably by Mr.
Cl^rke, to my Lord Duke's Grace. That whereas the King of Spain did find his
Error in going on with the Treaty of the Marriage, before he had cleared the
Treaty of the Palatinate, he is now resolved to change his Method, and to
perfect this Treaty of the Restitution of the Palatinate, before he will
proceed any further in the accomplishing of the Marriage. So that these
Treatises, as they are carried in Spain, shall be quit one with another. As
formerly the Treaty of the Marriage did justle out the Treaty of the
Palatinate; so now the Treaty of the Palatinate has quite excluded the Treaty
of the Marriage. And indeed in stead of Wedding Garments, that King, as you
heard, has made a hasty Winter Journey to Andaluzia to provide his Navy. But
how they are to be employed, we shall hear shortly, (if we will still be
credulous) by Padre Maestro, who is on his way for this Kingdom. My Lords, to
conclude, As the Heathen say that the Golden Chain of Laws is tied to the Chair
of Jupiter; so the future Proceedings upon all this long Narration is tied to
your Consultation. Things past are exactly made known to you, that things to
come may be more wisely considered. An Historian says, Curtius.
Male humanis ingeniis Natura consuluit, quod plaerumque non futura, sed
transacta perpendimus. Nature has not well provided for Humane Wisdom, that
commonly we discuss upon things already done, rather than what may be done for
the future. But my Lords, you are not put to that streit. But your Lordships
speedy Advice is required for that which is to follow, specially concerning
this last Dispatch, that implies the Education of the Prince Palatine's Son in
the Emperor's Court, and that the King of Spain will promise no Assistance to
draw off the Emperor's Army from his Country, much less Assistance by Arms to
recover it. This is it which his Majesty expects from your Lordships mature
Advice, Whether this being the Product of all the Trouble, which I have opened
to your Lordships, it be sufficient for his Majesty to rest upon, both for the
Marriage of his only Son, and the relieving of his only Daughter.

This Report it was so grateful for the Theme, so gracefully handled for the
manner, so Clear, so Elaborate, so Judiciously managed, that the Author had
never more Praise in his Life for one days Work of that kind. So acceptable it
was even to the Duke, though turned a Cold Friend, That he said, He knew not
how to Thank him enough for it. Yet this was but as the White of an Egg, which
gets some Taste with a little Salt of Eloquence, but nothing in Comparison of
the Yolk of his Worth. But as Nazianzen said of St. Basil, Quae ab illo velm
obiter si^bant, praestantiora crant quam ea in quibus alii Elaborant. Such an
Orator was sure to have the Custom of the Parliament upon all the like
Occasions. Therefore when he had scarce taken Breath after the former Service,
he was Commanded to add the Supplement as it follows in another Conference.

Gentlemen,
THat are the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons. I am
directed by my Lords to open this Conference, with acquainting the House of
Commons (with whom their Lordships desire to hold all fair and sincere
Correspondence) with a double Preface.

First, with a Supplement to that Narration made by his Highness and my Lord
the Duke of Buckingham his Grace to both the Houses; and then with an Opinion
of their Lordships super totam Materiam, upon the whole Proceed of the great
business. Now because in this Consultation the Supplement did cooperate with
the Narration for the producing of their Lordships Opinion, I hold it the best
Method to begin with that. The Supplement is of a Threefold Nature;

The First Concerns the Treaty of the Marriage.

The Second, the Restitution of the Palatinate,

The Third a most Heroical Act and Resolution of the Princes Highness, which
their Lordships held necessary to be imparted, first to you the Universality,
and Body Representative, and then by you to all the Kingdom.

That Supplement which concerns the Treaty of the Marriage is no more but this,
That by a Letter of the Earl of Bristols written Nine Years ago, 3 Novem. 1614.
it appeared plainly unto their Lordships, that this Treaty of the Marriage had
the first beginning by a Motion from Spain, and not from England, even from the
Duke of Lerma, who promised all sincerity in the Match, and as little pressing
as might be in matters of Religion. Yet though the Proposal began so soon, and
was followed so earnestly, it is now like an untimely Birth, for which the
Mother endures a painful Travail, and it enjoys not the Fruit of Life.

That Supplement which Concerns the Restitution of the Palatinate is this, That
whereas in that Treaty a demand is pressed by his Majesty upon the King of
Spain, to promise us assistance by Arms, in case Mediation should not prevail,
it has appeared to their Lordships by the Papers of the Earl of Bristol,
preserved in the Councel-Chamber, that the King of Spain has formerly promised
Assistance by Arms, upon such a supposition, which notwithstanding he now
utterly refuses, and offers but bare Mediation. But as Symmachus says in an
Ep. to Ausonius, Pa. vis nutriment is quanquam a morte defendimur, nihil tamen
ad Robustam valetudinem promovemur. We may keep Life, and scarce that, with a
poor Diet, but we shall never grow strong with such a pittance. If the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses of that Honorable House desire a Sight of these
Dispatches, they shall be Read unto them.

Thirdly, That Supplement which tends so much to the Honor of his Highness is
this. Sometime in July last, when his Highness was in Spain, a Rumor was
scattered, that his Highness had provided to steal away secretly, insomuch that
some of the King of Spain's Ministers were appointed as a Watch to detein him
openly, and avowedly as a Prisoner. Hereupon my Lord's Grace was sent to the
whole Committee with this Heroical Remonstrance, that though he stole thither
out of Love, he scorned to steal away out of Fear, neither was his Heart guilty
of taking so poor and unworthy a Course. A brave and magnanimous Resolution;
yet short of that which follows. For the Prince made a dispatch to his Father
at that instant, and sent this Message unto him by Mr. Grimes, That if his
Majesty should receive any intelligence, that he was detained in that State as
a Prisoner, he would be pleased for his sake never to think of him more as a
Son, but to reflect with all his Royal Thoughts upon the good of his Sister,
and upon the safety of his own Kingdoms; Sic omnes unus amores vicit amor
patriae. And so far to the Supplements; I must now explicate their Lordships
Opinion; who having by the Command of his Majesty taken into their Mature
Considerations the whole Narration made by the Prince his Highness, and my Lord
Duke to both Houses in this place, and all the Letters and Dispatches read unto
them to corroborate the same. And Lastly these Supplements and Additions
recited before, are of opinion upon the whole Bulk of the matter; that his
Majesty cannot rely upon, or maintain any longer either of both these Treaties,
concerning the Match with Spain, or the Restitution of the Palatinate, with the
safety of his Religion, his Honor, his Estate, or the Weal and Estate of his
Grandchildren. And his Highness together with their Lordships, are desirous to
know, whether you Gentlemen, the Knights. Burgesses, and Citizens of the House
of Commons do concur with their Lordships in this their Opinion, which they
ever referred to this further Conference with your Honorable House.

192. As Plutarch said of the Laconick Apothegms, (...), they were Clean and
Sound Timber, with the Bark taken off: So the Reader may observe in these
Reports, that the Matter is Heart of Oak, the Style clear from Obscurity, and
disbark'd quite from superduity. But regarding the Auditors, and their
Affections at that Season, nothing could be more proper: for he spoke to their
Content as if he had been within them, with Sweet and Piercing Expressions,
resembled in the Harp, and the Quiver of Arrows, with which the Heathen Trimmed
up Apollo, their Deity of Graceful Speech. They that detract from such Worth,
would be glad it were their own, as says our complete Poet upon the like, A
good Man's Envied by such as would,
For all their Spite be like him if they could.


But this beginning presaged good Luck to the ensuing Counsels debated in that
Session. This is called to this day the Blessed Parliament, and so Posterity
will take it from us. Says Tully, very well 3. Philip. Magna vis est, magnum
numen unum and idem consentient is senatus. A full Senate, Head and Members
consenting in one, carries a Majestic and Oraculous Authority with it. This is
the Confirmation of it, when the people brought before the King the Fruits of
their Wisdom, which they had Studied: And the King did ratify him cheerfully
with the Wisdom of his Power. They opened their Purse to him; and, which was
more beneficial to them, then if they had spared a little Money, he let fall
some Flowers off his Crown, that they might gather them up, which indeed was no
more then desluvium pennarum, the Molting of some Feathers, after which the
Eagle would Fly the better. He opened his Ear to them in all their Petitions,
and they listened as much to him; and gave their Earrings to Jacob, Genesis 35.4.
So the King and the Subject became perfect Unisons. And as God does knit his
own Glory, and the Salvation of mankind together; so the King did imitate God,
and Married his Honor with the welfare of the Kingdom. Who is it that reads
the Statutes 21 Jacobi, and does not admire them? The Peers took it to be their
greatest Nobility to look well to the Public: And the other House did light
upon the True Companion of Wisdom, S^data Tranquillitas, a Calm Tranquillity, as
Rivers are deepest where they Foam least. And all the Land had cause of
rejoicing, that the House of Commons was never better Replenished in Man's
Memory, with Knights and Burgesses of rare Parts and Tempers, especially the
Gown-men of the Inns of Courts, who were extoli'd for Knowledge and political
Prudence, as no Age had afforded a better Pack. And I give the Lord Keeper his
Right and no more, knowing his Traces perfectly at that time, that he labored
as for Life to keep an Harmony between the King and this Parliament, to suck
out his Majesty's assent to all their Proceedings, that he might show himself
as good as he was great. Which I think was the greatest, certainly the happiest
part of Honor, that ever the Lord Keeper Merited. How he mitigated Discontents
and softened refractoriness, how he obliged the leading Voices with benefits,
how he kept the Prerogative of the Supreme Power, and the Extravagancies of
pretended Liberty on the other side from Encroachments, the Wise only knew (but
they that knew it not were the better for it) and that he was chiefly used in
Consultation for compiling those wholesome Laws, which had their double Resining
and Clarifying from Lords and Commons. In all likelihood prosperous success
might be expected from this Parliament, because it was Pious; and Pious because
it was a strict preserver of the Holy Patrimony Allotted to God. Quae (...)
erunt, quam quibus Deus praestitit auxilium; says Ansonius to the Emperor (...)
What Counsels are more complete, then those that are helped by God? Nay, What
Councels can be more complete, then theirs that defend the Right of God? As
worser times would let the Clergy keep nothing; so those times by their good
Will would let them part with nothing. Let the Trial be observed, as the Case
follows.

193. The Duke of Buckingham lacked a dwelling according to the Port of his
Title, and to receive a very populous Family. It must be near to Whitehal, and
it must be spacious. None could be found so fit as the Archbishop of York his
House: It was nigh to Charing Cross, and he came little to it. The Duke used
the Lord Keeper to move Archbishop Matthew for his Consent, and to make the
Bargain between them; causing him to make prosser of such Lands in the County
of York as should be equivalent, or better, then the House, Garden, and
Tenements belonging to the Archbishop's Place. For nothing was intended but
Exchange with considerable Advantage to him and his Successors. And that was
sure as touch, because the House was to be past by Act of Parliament to the
Kings Majesty. So the Duke had made it his humble Request, and drew on the King
hardly to make a Chop with those Demeasnes, to which the Name of God and his
Christ were made the Feoffees in the first Donation, for the use of that Tribe,
which peculiarly serves him in Sacred Offices. Yet with instance and much Suit
the King was wrought to it for the Duke's sake. As M. Antony said to his
Confident Septimius, Quod Concupiscas tu videris, quod concupieris certe
habebis. Tul. 5. Philip. So this Beloved Minion should be Wise to see what he
asked, for his Master had no Power to say him nay. His Majesty was most Nice
and Cautious to make the Composition profitable to the Church, and that there
should be no Violation of Justice in the Grant; for which he cast his Eye
religiously upon that Warrantable Rule, Levit. 26.19. He that will Redeem that
which is Sanctified, must add a fifth Part to the Estimation. So this Godly
King was superabundant in his Care, that the Sea of York should be Richer by
parting with this House, as is manifest by the Lord Keeper's Letter sent to
that Worthy Patriarch of the North, whose Age would not suffer him to come to
London.

May it please your Grace,
I Have been as Careful, as lay in my Power, to further your Wise and Religious
intent, which your Grace so really expresses, in making an advantageous
Exchange for your Successors, between York-House, with Warders tenement, and
the Manor of Brighton in the County of Ebor,together with the Woods; which
Woods I am assured are out of Lease. And I conceive that part of the Exchange
so well settled (if the particulars be true, as I probably presume, and your
Grace may better find then I) that your Successors shall have good Cause to
bless God for the same. Now His Majesty and the Duke are very willing to fetch
in the rest of the Tenements unto the House, and to deal with you and your See
Graciously, and bountifully in the Exchange. For when I kneeled before His
Majesty in the presence of the Prince, and others, to crave Pardon that I stood
so strictly upon Terms of Benefit and Good Accommodation to your Grace, who had
Trusted me in this Exchange, the King gave me hearty Thanks for doing so, and
desired me that for His sake and Buckingham's, to see that your Grace should
convey nothing at all to his Majesty, but that your See should receive back
again for the same, double Recompensation. Your Grace therefore shall receive
by your Son Sir Tobie(whom His Majesty and the Duke would needs employ
personally for the expediting of this Business with your Grace) two particulars
more proposed for an Exchange with the Tenements belonging to York-House. The
which particulars if they hold out in Value and Estates, as they be presented
(which your Grace by the Industry of one of your Servants may in two days
perceive, by Reason of their vicinity to the City of York) be of far more
profit to your Grace and Successors then these Tenements can possibly be, their
States and Demises considered. If those two particulars should dislike your
Grace, instance upon any other thing lying in Charge to the King, and in more
convenience to your Grace, and I find his Majesty so over good in this kind,
that I presume he will deny nothing that can be demanded without blushing. Your
Son, my very good and much respected Friend, has been so industrious for the
good of your See, as though he were the Son of that Church as well as your
Grace's, as I would he were, and I hope he may be; I rest ever --

May 4. 1624.

194. All things being agreed upon this Bargain on this side Trent, and beyond
it, an Act is drawn up, and brought into the House of Commons. The Provision
for the Exchange is apparent without Fallacy, or Fear of Wrong, and better than
the Redemption of a thing sanctified under the Levitical Prescriptions; yet it
stuck in the House of Commons, and struggled with great Opposition. The King's
Counsel pleaded well, that his Majesty's Lands were more profitable by a good
Size, than that which the Archbishop contributed in lieu; but it was answered
by a worthy Knight, Let Caesar keep that which is Caesar's, and let God keep
that which is God's. And that Scruple was held in dispute for many days
(although the Duke did then appear to be a Person that deserved to be
gratified) till evident Reason, like a Condensation of Light, did shine more
and more before them, that Love and Conscience, tender to preserve the Church
her Rights, ought not to hinder her Augmentation. Or had it been no more than
barely one for another, it would be no worse than with the Man in Famianus
Strada, that sneezed once, and blew out his Candle, and sneezed a second time,
and blew it in again. Therefore when the Commons had shown their Good will not
to violate Sacred things, as if the Spirit of thrice honored Sir Harry Spelman
had possessed them; when they had said much upon it, and received handsome
Satisfaction; when they were at a wit-stand, and could reach no further, the
Bill was carried by some Votes, and the Permutation concluded. A noble
Affection to the Bishops, and to that Portion which our virtuous Progenitors
had given them; and little followed within twenty years after, by such as the
Prophet describes, Isa. 50.11. That walk in the Light of their own Fire, and in
the sparks which themselves have kindled. Those Prelates that not long ago had
so many Friends to support their Demesns, are now like Abraham, when God sent
him into a strange Land, where he had no Inheritance, no not so much as to set
his Foot upon, Act. 7.5. Now those Manors and Houses which were kept entirely
for them, are sold to make Payment, it is well known to whom. But such Work,
such Wages. Public and Private, Civil and Sacred Lands, Civil Wars can gulp
down all. And yet the Grecians, that knew not the true God, invited all to take
Arms against the Phocenses, in the Quarrel of Sacrilege, and called it the
Sacred War. When the whole Estate of Pompey the Great was Confiscate, after
Caesar had prevailed in the Pharsalian Battle, says Tully, Philip 2. Qui ad
illud scelus sectionis auderet accedere, inventus est nomo praeter Antonium:
None could be found so impudent to buy his Lands, but Antony. But enough are
found in these Dominions that are ready to buy Gods Lands: Their Peny-worths
are cheap, if there were no Account to be made to the Lord of the Vineyard
hereafter. These Huxters cannot choose but think of it; and if any of them
should say he did not drive this Trade, at least with a doubting Conscience, in
good Faith I would not believe him It Is the Envy of the Devil, when he cannot
hinder Reformation, to discredit it with Sacrilege. And he is cunning at that
horrid Sin, ever since he mixed it in his first Temptation. For the Tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil, which was not to be eaten, had a Sacramental
Signification in it, and stood in Paradise for an Holy Purpose, and was an holy
Possession; in regard whereof, to eat of the forbidden Fruit, was Theft in the
Act, and Sacrilege in the Circumstance. But suppose a Church be unsound,
surfeited, and fit to be purged of Offenses; What Physician that undertook to
cure a sick Man, did ever plunder him of all that he had for his Fee? Who will
think else that his Heart was set upon the Good of his Patient, and not upon
filthy Lucre? He that reaps down Errors, and fills his Barns with golden
Sheaves, he works for Mammon, and not in God's Harvest. The ancient Christians,
that desaced Idols of Silver and Gold, would Purse none of the Metal, for fear
of giving Scandal to the Heathen. Stilico demolished some such Images, and he
and his Wife were found to wear the Ornaments that had belonged to them; for
which they were cried out upon, says Baronius, An. 389. c. 57. Quia apud
antiquae probitatis Christianos nefas erat in Idola grassari, ut in usum
privatum aliquid verteretur, ut appareat pietate nos ista destruere, non
avaritia: A very wise, and a pious Course; for an avaricious Zeal is a poisoned
Cordial. And few will captivate their Understanding to edify by a Sacrilegious
Reformer. I hope Loosers may have Leave to breath out their Sorrows, especially
for Sion's sake. However, I beseech God to preserve his Ark among us, though
the Pot of Manna be lost, to bless the pure Doctrine, and the Sacraments of the
Gospel to all, to whom they belong, that the Infant be not robbed of the one,
nor such as are of grown Age of the other. Then as the Earth is the Lords in
all its Fullness, so the true Church is Christ's in all its Penury and
Emptiness. And this is enough to let the Reader see what was intended to be
made good before, that a most Churchloving, was a most happy Parliament.

195. Yet no feast was ever so bountiful, but some went away unsatisfied; and
no Court was ever so Righteous upon Earth, but some Appellants thought they
were prejudiced. If any man had Cause to complain of the Justice of this
Parliament, it was the Lord Treasurer Cranfield. About whose Trial, if I should
ask, as the Pharisees did about Divorces, Is it lawful to censure a principal
Officer for eve-Cause? I must say as Christ answered them, From the Beginning
it was not so. A Parliament is a Judge among Gods; a Terror to Magistrates,
that are a Terror to any, but to them that deserve Evil; the only, or the best
Inquisitor into the Ways of them that Rule in high Places, that he that stands
may take heed least he fall. But if it grow common, if every Session make it
their Work, or their Recreation to hunt such Game down, and root up Cedars,
that might have stood without Offense; Moderation will be desired, and the
Prudent will think it is not fit, many a Week should be lost anent the
providing of good Laws, when a Month or two pass over in bringing a white
Staff, or some such Grandee, to the Stake, to be baited by Informers. The Lord
Treasurer had some Petitions preferred against him in March, which at first he
laughed at, and thought to scorn them down with Unguiltiness. For who regards
the first Grudgings of a Sickness? Yet none perish sooner than they that are
not provident against the first beginning of an Evil. The Petitioners were
countenanced, because he, whose Harm they sought, was one that was not beloved.
It Is true, he was surly, and of hard Access. But be it remembered, he sat in
his great Places, not to be popular, and get Affections, but to be Just, and to
Husband the Revenue of the Crown with Prudence. But subtle Knavery is like to
be longer unquestioned, than rough-cast Innocence. He was charged with
Corruption, and sordid Bribery; all the while many Sages contended that the
Proofs came not home to a full Discovery. One pressed it close, that he gave
him Five hundred Pound to break well through a long Suit in the Court of Wards.
To which the Treasurer answered, That the Money was paid him for a Place in the
Custom-House, for which the Complainant had often moved him, which his
Secretaries, and other Witnesses, made good, and that upon the Payment of that
Sum, one of the Six and thirty Portions in the Custom-House was reserved for
him. Albeit, the weight of this suspected Bribe (not a Bur hanging upon his
Gown beside) pressed him down in the Conclusion. This was not to turn Foxes
into Fleas a Bed, as H. Grotius does in his Notes upon the Canticles; but it is
to turn Fleas into Foxes, or rather Flea-bites into the mortal Spots of the
Pestilence. Whether the Treasurer had great Faults, it is uncertain, and waits
Report; but it is sure he had great Adversaries. The Duke of Buckingham and all
his Party appeared against him. Whereupon Sir A. Well. the most virulent Defamer
of the Lord Treasurer, writes, That a small Accusation, as his was, would serve
to turn him out of his Honor, whom the Duke did then oppose. But why did his
Grace heave at his Cousin by Marriage? it is very dark. It seems the Courtiers
had no Mind to let us know it. For as Lampridius Notes in Vit. Alex. Sev.
Secreta omnia in aula esse cupiunt, ut soli aliquid scire videantur. It is
perhaps, that the Treasurer would have brought a Darling, Mr. Arthur Bret, his
Countess's Brother, into the King's Favor, in the great Lord's Absence. Or
that he grudged that the Treasury was exhausted in vast Issues by the late
Journey into Spain, and denied some Supplies: Or that he dealt too plainly at
the Council Table, in giving no kind Ear to his Cousin's Relations of his
Doings at Madrid, having not the Art to catch his Affections in the Springes of
Flattery. But down the Duke cast him, as meseems, being not aware, how every
man has so many Relations, that he that destroys one Enemy, makes himself ten
more. Or as I heard another say long ago much better upon it, that my Lord of
Buckingham did never undo any of his Enemies, but he ruined many of his
Friends. And in this Lord's Overthrown, the Prince abetted him* was Privy to
the Undertakings of his Adversaries, and accompassed Suffrages to Condemn him.
The bitter Welden, P. 168. could not res^ain to Comment upon it. That the
Prince discerned so much Juggling in the Parliament, in Cranfield's Case, that
it was not much to be wondered at, being come to be King, that he did not affect
them. King James being all that time of this Storm, not at Newmarket, as our
late Mistakers say, but at Greenwich, was so sad, that a trusty Servant, and an
able, should be thus handled, forced from him and quipt every day with
ignominious Taunts that the kind Correspondencies between him and the
Parliament began to have a Cloud over them. He courted many to take side with
his Treasurer, and prevailed little, because the most did love to warm
themselves in the Light of the Rising Sun. He tutored his Son, the Prince, that
he should not take part with a Faction in either House, but so reserve himself,
that both Sides might seek him; and chiefly to take heed, how he bandied to
pluck down a Peer of the Realm by the Arm of the Lower House, for the Lords
were the Hedge between himself and the People; and a Breach made in that Hedge,
might in time perhaps lay himself open. But the Duke had thrust on the Prince
so far, that he could not retreat, else the Treasurer had been rescued by the
Power and Justice of his Royal Master. His Majesty perceived that the Actions
of this unfortunate Man, racked with the strictest Enquiries, were not Sins
going over the Head, scarce reaching to the Ankles, and why should he suffer
him to sink under the Waves of Envy? Therefore he sent for the Lord Keeper to
Greenwich, and gave him his Sense: That he would not make his Treasurer a
public Sacrifice. Sir, says the Lord Keeper, I have attempted, among my surest
Friends, to bring him off fairly. All shrink, and refuse me; only the stout and
prudent Lord Hollis adventured upon the Frowns of the Prince and Duke, and gave
his Reasons why Middlesex to him appeared an Innocent. I were mad, if, for my
part, I should not wish him to escape this Tempest, and be safe under the
Harbor of Your Majesty's Clemency. Suam quisque fortunam in consilio habet,
quando de aliena deliberat. Curt. lib. 5. When I deliberate upon him, I think
of my self. It Is his Fortune to day, it is mine to morrow. The Arrow that hits
him, is within an Handful of me. Yet Sir, I must deal faithfully: Your Son, the
Prince, is the main Champion that encounters the Treasurer; whom, if you save,
you foil your Son. For though Matters are carried by the whole Vote of
Parliament, and are driven on by the Duke, yet they that walk in
Westminster Hall, call this the Prince's Undertaking, whom you will blast in
his Bud, to the Opinion of all your Subjects, if you suffer not your old, and
perhaps innocent Servant to be plucked from the Sanctuary of Your Mercy.
Necessity must excuse you from Inconstancy, or Cruelty.

In the Close of this Speech, the Kings Reason was convinced, that he must use
this Counsel. (...). Iliad. (...). So the Treasurer suffered the Dishonor, or
rather the Calamity of a Censure. Himself was so comforted to his dying Hour;
as the engraved Posie spoke his Thoughts in his great Chamber at Copt-Hall in
Essex. Quae venit immerito paena dolenda venit. And I spoke with few, when it
was recent, that were contented with it, except the Members of the House, who
would not dislike their own Action.

196. Popular Favor continued a while with the Duke, and now he was St. George
on Horseback, let the Dragon take heed, that stood in his Way. The Earl of
Middlesex was removed, and he that presided over the great Accounts, did now
stand for a Cipher. The Lord Keeper perceived his turn was next; although he
wanted not fair Words, and fair Semblance from the Contriver. But an Ambush is
more dangerous than a pitched Battle, because it is hid, unless the Leader look
about him in his March, and search every Hedge by Vant-curriers, as he did. A
vigilant Man will not sleep with both Eyes, when he suspects Danger. Cauto
circumspectu vita quae variis casibus subjacet est munienda. Apul. instam. lib.
11. The Keeper knew he had deserved no ill; yet he trusted not to that, for he
knew likewise how a Judge that hears many Causes, must condemn many, and offend
many. And if Justice should shrink in, to decline Offenses, what were it so
like unto, as to one in the Fable, that would feed upon nothing but Spoon-meat,
because he would not wear out his Teeth? He was not ignorant of the laudable,
or at least the durable Custom of the Commons, to countenance all Prosecutors,
and to file the Medly of all Complaints. Therefore this Prometheus kept a
careful Watch to repulse Embroilments as much as he could; for though he had a
sound Bark, yet none but a phrantick Pilate would be willing to be tossed in a
Storm. And he had been an ill Keeper, if he had not been wary to keep himself;
to which I may fitly apply the Orators Words, Philip 12. Qui mul^^rum Custodem
se profitetur, eum sapientes sui primum capitis aiunt Custodem esse oportere.
He had made the Prince his fast Friend before; who was so ingenious, that when
he had promised Fidelity, there was no fear that he would start; chiefly
because he sought to lay hold on his Highness upon no other Conditions, than to
mortify those spiteful accusations (if any such happened) with his Frown, that
durst not stand the Breath of Truth. Concerning the Duke, he was not so silly
to look any longer upon himself, as growing on the former Root of his Favor;
yet he was not so rude to expostulate with him, according to the Merit of his
Unkindness, and provoke him further; but as it occurs, Cab. P. 80. He tells his
Lordship, That Suspicions of his Displeasure, transported him not a Jot
further, than to look about him, how to defend himself: that he begged
Assurance of his Grace's former Love, yet not in the least desire to crave the
Patronage of any corrupt, or unjust act of his, that should be objected against
him in Parliament; nor to take Refuge to him in any Cause or Clamor, otherwise
than according to Justice and fair Proceeding. A sufficient Number of other
Friends were made already to him by his Wisdom and Deservings, whom he never
requested (as he had no need of it) to make a Side for him; but to be intentive
to disclose such Winding Insinuations, which are apt to twine about some weak
Understandings. This Forecast made him stand unmovable and unaffrighted, when
Petitions and Remonstrances of Perdue-Causes were entered against him. They came
about him like Bees, and were extinct like Fire among the Thorns. And what were
they that made a Noise with their Grievances? Itane nihil fortunam puduit, si
minus accusatae innocentiae, at accusantium wilitatis? Boeth. de consol. It Is a
shame that Innocence should be accused; but what Remedy shall it have against
base and beggarly Accusers? against the very Kennel of the Fleet, and other
Goals? against such, whose Suits would admit of no good Order, and their
Forwardness of no bad. I knew a Plaintiff and Desendant, Morgan and Bouglar,
that complained one as much as the other of the same Decree to the Parliament;
and at the Hearing of the Cause, one of the Counsel protested, that Two hundred
and twelve Commissions, References, and Orders, had past upon it. After a
while, a Bundle of those frivolous Objections being read and examined, were
cast out of Doors, and the House, in the Afternoon, being put into a general
Committee, Seven and thirty of those Paper-Kites slew away that same day, and
were never heard of more. Some of the Members would have repaired the Lord
Keeper, and asked him what he would have done to his Adversaries? Nothing, says
he, for by this time they have all fretted themselves into Patience, and some
of them, perhaps, into Repentance. Which proved even so: For many of them came
privily to be admitted to his Favor, condemned their own scandalous Petitions,
and laid it upon a great Name, that they were encouraged to bring them in, whom
he cast off, as a Man would do a besmeered Dog, that desiles him with his
Fawning. Some, I know, will say, Why did he not bring those Caitives to
Submission, or to some open Disgrace? Because he had a stately Mind; and as
Craterus said to Alexander, Cito gloria obsolescit in sordidis hostibus, An
Eagle will not stoop to such Quarry. The better Reason is, that he was
un-revengeful, content to get the Better, and no longer displeased with those
he overcame. Yes, but they would not have served him so, very likely; but the
Folly of brutish Men is not to be imitated, but contemned.

197. There are two that impleaded him for wand of Justice, who are more
remarkable than others. There was one Morley, a Woodmonger, that kept a Warf in
Fleet Street, an Oppressor of the Court of Chancery, with Bills of all sorts,
for many Years. If any ask how long he had been in Law, I answer, as the Father
in the Gospel answered our Savior, How long the evil Spirit had haunted his
Son, (...), of a Child, Mark. 9.41. Morley observing that Seven and thirty
Venturers had lost their Labor in the House of Commons, printed his Case, and
preferred it to the Lords, wherein he did not spare to defame the Lord Keeper.
The Grave and Learned Bishop of Oxon Doctor H. was busy in dispersing these
Petitions. The Bishop had commenced a Suit against Sir H. Martin, for some
Demesus lying in Bray Parish, in the County of Berks, wherein he had not
Satisfaction to his Desire, by this Man's Decree, which wrought upon his Anger
to do this Office, not befitting one Bishop against another; but as Nazian.
deplores it, Orat. ad 150 Episc. (...). Prelates prove Anti-prelates one to
another, sometimes upon small Occasions. But Morley was past Redemption for his
Impudency, and was Condemned by the upper House to an infamous Punishment. For
whose Pardon the Lord Keeper sued, but with no Success; their Lordships telling
him plainly, That they would not be entreated in such a Varlets Behalf. Crates,
as Laertius relates it, was wounded in the Face by Nicodromus, a Fiddler: To
divulge the Injury, Crates clapped a Paper upon his own Forehead, like a
Plaster, and wrote upon it in great Letters, haec fecit Nicodromus: Nicodromus
had given him that Mark. A most hair-brained Revenge for a serious Philosopher
to take. But the Keeper made slight of the scratch that Morley had given him,
and interceded for the Delinquent, that his Forehead might not carry a
White-Paper upon it in the Pillory. But he was one of a hard Destiny, and the
Shame could not be shunned: Of which Grief Morley died within a Year after, and
on his Deathbed protested to a Reverend Divine, by what mighty Authority he
was set on. Which took with all Men's Belief that heard it; except this Lord,
who was most concerned.

198. All these Assays did more good than harm: For Innocence will stand its
Ground the better when it has wrestled with Antagonists. Linum Orchomenium
semper injuria fit melius, says Pliny, l. 19. N. H. The Flax growing in some
Fields of Baeotia, the worse you use it the better it thrives. So the Lord
Keeper had as much Success in these Combats, as he could wish; for all gave him
Honor by the Invalidity of their Opposition. There was one more that hunted
him close, Sed tergo decut it hastas. Aen. li. 10. It was a Lady, but a Virago;
And Abimelech would be loath to have it said, that he perished by the Hand of a
Woman, Jud. 9.54. It was the Lady Darcies Charge, which was the most dangerous
that aemulous Power could raise against him. For it was upon the stopping of an
Original Writ, which is every Man's Inheritance, and the only way by which the
Subjects wrongs are to be redressed, and these of course are issued out of the
Court of Chancery, which gives occasion to that Maxim in the Law, Nemo recedit
a Cancellaria sine remedio. The Case came to this Head. The Rectory of Sutton
in the County of Surry was void by the Death of the Incumbent. The Right of
Donation was in Mr. Ed. Darcy, but under Age, and the Kings Ward. The Lord
Keeper presents to the Rectory in the Kings Title, Jure minoris Aetatis, and
his Clerk had Institution and Induction before ever the Lady Darcy, Mother to
Mr. Edward, and Mr. George Wilmore, Guardians for the Minor, brought their
Claim. The Lady Mother, (for Mr. Wilmore stirred not) allegeth that she had
compounded for the Wardship of her Son, and had procured in her Composition the
Donation of that Living; which neither was so, nor ought to have been granted
both to the prejudice of the Lord Keeper, and the Master of the Wards. She
tries to enforce her Right by way of Quare impedit; which was the right way to
Commence her Suit, and to try her Title. The Lord Keeper Commands the Officer
not to issue forth the Writ, it being so appointed under the Kings Signet, as
it follows.

To Our Trusty and Well-Beloved Counselor the Lord Keeper, etc.
WHereas Our Chaplain Dr. Grant is presented by Us to the Rectory of Sutton, by
Reason of the Minority of E. Darcy our Ward, and is threatened to be Molested by
a Suit at Law, by Reason of a Title derived also from Us, and Our Court of
Wards by the same Right; These are to Will and Require you, that, to avoid all
Causeless Molestations of Our said Chaplain, and all Clashing of Jurisdictions
between these Our two Courts, you stay any Quare impedit that shall be Sued
forth in this kind. And this shall be your Warrant so to do, etc.

Sept. 6. 1621.

When these Proceedings were Canvass'd in the House of Commons, the Lord Keeper
makes Answer; First, That the Lady Darcy had no Injury done to her in her Title.

Nor, Secondly, Any Injury by the Quare impedit.

And Thirdly, Though it bad a show of Injury, the Court of Chancery was bound
to proceed so, least it should do it self a greater Injury.

To the former he declares, That the Lady Darcy, and G. Wilmore Ex. Committees
of the Kings Ward, took a Lease from the King of the Wards Lands, under the
Seal of the Court of Wards. And by other Indentures of the same date Covenanted
with the King as follows. That if any Spiritual Promotion belonging to the
said Heir happen to be Void, before he come and be of his full Age of Twenty
one years, that then the said Committees, or their Assigns, shall, within one
Month next after Knowledge by them had of any such Descent or Vacation, give
knowledge thereof to the said Master and Council of the Court of Wards, so as
the Kings most Gracious Pleasure may be known for the just Order and
Disposition of the same. And there is another Proviso in the Lease to the like
Effect, with some Alteration, that the Allowance of the Master and Council of
the Court of Wards be had, for a sit, and apt Clerk to be preferred to the
same. Hence it plainly appears by the said Covenant, and Proviso, that the said
Committees, as to the Advouson of the Church of Sutton, belonging to the said
Ward, are but Lessees in Trust, to present such a Clerk to the same, as the
King, or the Master and Council of the Court of Wards for the King, shall Name
or Appoint. Then it is Pregnant, That the Clerk being refused, whom the Lady
offered to the Rectory without the Kings Consent, etc. no Injustice is offered.

199. He rejoyns to the Second, That the said Church being become Void, the
Lord Keeper by Virtue of his Place, as time out of mind has been used,
presented Dr. Grant the Kings Chaplain in his Majesty's Name. The Master of the
Wards presented likewise. Dr. Wilson, in the Kings Name, to the same Church:
But Dr. Grant was first presented, admitted, and Dr. Wilson gave way. After
both these, the Committees present their Clerk in their own Name, and pray a
Quare Impedu to remove the Kings Clerk, and to have their own Clerk admitted in
his room. This Quare Impedit, by the Kings Commandment to the Lord Keeper, was
denied them. For which much is alleged. Lands in Question in Chancery were
Decreed by the Lord Ellsmore to Peacock, in Equity against Revell, who had a
good Title in Law. Revell would have had an Original Writ of Assise against
Peacock, to have recovered the Lands from him by Law. The Writ was denied him
by the Lord Ellsmore. If Revell would have made a Lease, or a Feoffment to any
Friend in trust, which Friend would have sued for an Original Writ, to have
recovered the Land, the Writ might as well be denied to him, as to Revell
himself. So the Master of the Wards presented a Clerk to the Church of Sutton
in the Kings Name, before the Lord Darcy presented: If that Clerk would have
sued for a Quare Impedit in the Kings Name, the Lord Keeper by the Kings
Appointment might have denied the Writ. And by the same Reason may he in like
manner deny the Writ to the Lady Darcy, who as to the Advouson is but a Lessee
in trust, to present such a Clerk, as the Master of the Wards for the King
shall name: As by the Covenant and Proviso in the Lease does appear. If Lands
in Question in the Chancery be, by Order of the Court by both Parties conveyed
to one of the Six Clerks in trust, that he shall convey the same, as the Court
shall Order upon the hearing of the Cause, who refuses to convey the Land
according to the trust, and prays a Writ of Assise to recover the Land from
him, to whom the Court has ordered the same, (for the trust appears as plainly
to the Court, as in the Case of a Decree;) This Writ may be denied. So the Lady
Darcy being a Lessee of the Advouson in trust to present such a Clerk as the
King, or the Court of Wards shall name or allow of, if she will present a Clerk
of her own, contrary to the trust reposed in her, and sue for a Quare Impedit
to remove the Clerk presented by the King, and to put in her own choice, this
Writ by the Kings Appointment may be denied her; for the trust appears of
Record. So if Bonds be taken of a Defendant in Chancery in the Name of a Master
of the Chancery, with Condition to perform the Order or Decree of the Court:
The Court Decrees Money to be paid by the Defendant to the Plaintiff at a Day,
who pays the same the next Day after, which the Plaintiff accepts, and the
Court allows of. If the Master of Chancery will pray an Original Writ of Debt
upon this Bond, to recover the Money to his own use, this Writ may be denied
him. The Lord Ellsmore presented a Clerk in the Kings Name Ratione Minoris
AEtatis; The Lady Mordant pretended Title to present, and having four Feoffees
in trust of the Manor or Lands, to which the Advouson did belong, as she
pretended, would have had four Writs of Quare Impedit against the Kings Clerk,
in the Names of her four Feoffees severally. The Lord Ellsmore denied them all.
There are many more Precedents to be showed in like Cases, where Original Writs
have been denied.

200. Yet since it is to be done with great Tenderness and Discretion, and
seldom or never, but when it appears that one Injury must be prevented
necessarily with another, he declares, Thirdly, That the Lady Darcy's
Proceedings thrust in so dangerously between two great Courts, that ordinary
Justice could not but be denied her, for fear an extraordinary Difference
should be raised between the said Courts, being thus laid open. When the Lord
Ellsmore was Lord Chancellor, and Robert Earl of Salisbury Master of the Wards,
there fell out a Contestation between these two Potent Lords, whose Right it
was to present to the Wards Livings, which were under Value of 20 l. in the
First-Fruit-Office: And the Contention grew so insoluble, that King James, with
all his Pacificous Wisdom, could not readily light upon a way to reconcile it.
Yet at the last it was compounded thus, That which soever of those two Officers
should first present to such a Benefice, his Presentation should be Valid for
the Possession of the Living. If both Presentations should come together to the
Bishop, (which perhaps would not happen in an Age) then there was Casus pro
amico on the Bishop's behalf, as the Canonists speak. This Agreement had
continued amicably to that very Day, and was then in danger to be infringed.
For if a Suit had commenced, as the Lady desired, the Lord Keeper could not
avoid to charge the Court of Wards with Fraudulency, in passing away the
Donations of Livings in the Compositions for Wards, which was a pre-occupating,
or rather plain deluding of the Patronage, which was in the Lord Keeper by the
Agreement. Wherefore he waves the strong and full defense he had made upon the
stopping of an Original Writ, and deprecates all offense by that Maxim of the
Law, which admits of a mischief rather than an inconvenience. Which was as much
as to say, That he thought it a far less Evil, to do the Lady the probability
of an Injury, (in her own sense) than to suffer those two Courts to clash
together again, and fall into a new Dispute about their Jurisdiction, which
might have produced a public inconvenience, which is most carefully to be
avoided. This Plea satisfied the House and cleared him in the general Opinion;
or as some Interpreted, excused him rather for his other good Parts, then
absolutely cleared in this intricate Point, as Livie li. 1. says, Horatius
escaped Sentence by the Voice of the people, because they loved his Person,
rather then liked the Fact upon which he was questioned, Absolveruntque
admiratione magis virtutis, quam jure Causae. Yet it goes strongly to justify
the Lord Keeper in the Fact, that all the Lawyers in the House did unanimously
concur to propugn him. And in fine this great complaint produced but small
Effect, toward that for which it was so vigorously followed. The close of all
is the best part of the Story. The Lady Darcy, ever impotent in her Passions,
and the more in this Case, because she could not endure the Calling, and hated
the Honor of a Bishop, was even distracted with Anger, that she was crossed in
her will; whom the L. Keeper mitigated with such Sweetness and Generosity, that
she came out of her froward Mood, and confessed she had had no cause to be his
Enemy. In the instance whilst the Cause was hot in Agitation, he sent to her
Ladyship to let her know, That if she would accept of the Living from him, and
in his Right he would dispose of Dr. Grant in some other Place, and present her
Clerk Mr. Glover. But her Ladyship would not hearken; her thoughts were too
high; for the cause was depending, she hoped to obtain it with Dr. Grant's
Ejection, and his Patrons Ruin. After all was cleared against her, and she
found her self at a loss of her expectation, the Lord Keeper sent to her upon
the Old Terms, That if she would submit to have right done her in the right
way, and take the presentation from him; let her send the Man to him for whom
she had contended in vain, and it should be effected; which she accepted of
very gladly, when necessity had taught her Wisdom, and a milder Temper. In all
this his Lordship showed that he had no particular Spleen against the Lady, not
the least aim to oppress her with his Power, but his Scope was to preserve the
Jurisdiction of his Court (in which he was ever stiff and unvanquishable) and
when that was acknowledged, it was an Heroic Spirit in him to pass by a most
violent prosecution, as if it had never concerned it. It was an Object sit to
prove all the dimensions of Christian forgiveness. For what more true then that
of Pliny to Sabinianus; as I have cited it before, Ep. lib. 9. Tune praecipua
mansuetudinis laus, cum ^rae causa justissima est; What more Charitable, then
not only not to return Offense for Offense, but to make a beneficent Requital?
For he found that Yoke of Christ easy to him, which is so heavy to others, Do
good to them that despitefully entreat you. Matthew. 5.45.

201. Let all now be drawn up into a Word; no Garland could look more fresh
upon a Magistrates Head then this, that being narrowly looked into by the Eyes
of all the Kngdom, nothing was amiss, nothing out of Frame in all his Carriage;
which Credit stuck so close to him in the next Parliament, in which he still
kept the Great Seal, That not so much as a Dog did open his Mouth against him,
Judith 11.19. Nor was awaked out of security with the least Whisper of a
Grievance. Yet I am as ready to say it as another, that to be acquit from
having done no ill, is a Testimony of harmless, not of fruitful Honesty. I
admire Coriolanus for that Elogy in Halicarn: Vix inter virtutes numeravit
innocentiam. He scarce reckoned Innocence for a Virtue. Innocence is none of
the Artillery of Virtue, with which it tries and shows it is strength, but only
a privy Coat, to keep a Man from being Wounded. I bring him forth therefore
from this shade into the light of Action, in an instance wherein he did so
well, that it will break forth, that he had a Wit which was such a sudden
Architect of Devises, so apt in a pleasant cunning, so full of Pit-falls to
catch the Bird he would snare, yet not to hurt it, as never a Headpiece in
this Nation could overtake him in that ingenuity. And the success suited with
the Stratagem, Fortune favoring it to the help of his best Friends, the
continuation of a Happy Parliament, and the enlightening of his Majesty who was
stricken far into Melancholy by a persidious contrivance, and illegitimate,
born in an ill day in the Spanish Ambassadors House; which Family was vexed to
the Gall, because their Nation was curried in Parliament, and most of all, that
the Match, the Treaty, and Friendship with them, were handled there, as the
Prince and Duke had set them on, with sharp and declamatory disdeigns.
Therefore they cast about to infect the King with an ill opinion of the
Proceedings and the persons; and like desperate men, they looked for Redress
from Malice, and safety from Confusion. Nothing did put them by their Piots so
long, as that they had not the freedom to speak with his Majesty, and could
never get an Audience in the Absence of Buckingham: So that Sir W. Aston
writes, That it was complained in Spain, that Marq. Inoiosa has lately
advertised hither, that he has several times desired to have private Audience
with his Majesty, and has not been able to procure any, but what your Grace
assists at, Cab. p. ^^. But after this Parliament had fate seven Weeks, and
toused their matters sufficiently, that Marquess, with Don Carlo de Colonna,
came adventurously to White Hall, and outreach'd the Spies that watched them.
For while Don Carlo held the Prince and Duke with earnest Discourse, Inoiosa
put a Paper into the King's Hand, and made a sign with a Wink of his Eye, that
his Majesty would thrust it into his Pocket, which was done, and not discerned.
Nothing can be more broken and imperfect; or more corrupt in time and other
circumstances, then what is Entered into the Cabal. p. ^7. and p. 90. out of
this Paper. There was a worse Pad in the Straw then is there discovered, or
else Inoiosa, that juggled the Paper into the Kings Hand, had not been so
roundly checked by the Lords of the Privy Counsel. And if for his part he put
no more into the Paper, then to procure his Secretary private Access to the
King to tell Tales, it would not have been disputed whether he should be
divested of the Privileges of an Ambassador; or whether the Speakers of both
Houses then sitting should call him to an Account. But he that is confessed in
the Cabal to be the Pioneer that blew up the Mine, and found out the Plot, has
lest a Note of the particulars in the Paper so Tragical and Scandalous, that
certainly the Spanish Don would never have stufft it with them, Si unquam jub
legum ac judiciorum potestatem se casurum putasset, as Tully said of Verres,
Act. 7. If he had ever dreamt to be Confronted for them, and brought Face to
Face.

First, He ter^isies the King, that he was not, nor could be acquainted with
the Passages either of the Parliament, or of his own Court; for he was kept
from all faithful Servants that would inform him, by the Ministers of the
Prince and Duke; and that he was a Prisoner as much as King John of France in
England, or King Francis and Madrid, and could not be spoken with, but before
such as watched him.

Secondly, That there was a strong and violent Machination in hand, which had
turned the Prince, a most Obedient Son before, to a quite contrary Course to
his Majesty's Intentions.

Thirdly, That the Counsel began last Summer at Madrid, but was lately ripened
and resolved in England, to restrain his Majesty from the Exercise of the
Government of his three Kingdoms; and that the Prince and the Duke had designed
such Commissioners under themselves, as should intend great Affairs and the
Public Good.

Fourthly, That this should be effected by beginning of a War, and keeping some
Troops and Companies on Foot in this Land, whereby to constrein His Majesty to
yield to any thing; chiefly being brought into Streits for want of Moneys to
pay Soldiers.

Fifthly, That the Prince and Duke enclosing his Majesty from the said
Ambassador, and other of his own Loyal People, that they might not come near
him in private, did Argue in them a fear and distrust of a good Conscience.

Sixthly, That the Emissaries of the Duke had brought his Majesty into Contempt
with the Potent Men of the Realm, traducing him for slothful and unactive, for
addiction to an inglorious Peace, while the inheritance of his Daughter and her
Children are in the Hands of his Foes; and that this appeared by a Letter which
the Duke had writ into Holland, and they had intercepted.

Seventhly, That his Majesty's Honor, Nay, his Crown and Safety did depend
upon a sudden Dissolution of the Parliament.

Eighthly, They Loaded the Duke with sundry misdemeanors in Spain, and his
violent Opposition of the Match.

Ninthly, That the Duke had divulged the King's Secrets, and the close Designs
between his Majesty, and their Master K. Philip, about the States of Holland,
and their Provinces; and labored to put his Majesty out of the good Opinion of
the Hollanders.

Tenthly, That the Duke was guilty of most corrupt dealing with the Ambassadors
of diverse Princes.

Eleventhly, That all things were carried on in the Parliament; with a headlong
Violence, and that the Duke was the Cause of it, who courted them only that
were of troubled Humors.

Twelfthly, That such Bitterness, and Ignominies were vented against the King
of Spain in Parliament, as was utterly against all good Manners, and the Honor
of the English Nation.

Thirteenthly, Is a flat Contradiction to the Precedents, wherein they made the
Prince privy to dangerous things; yet in this they say, That the Puritans, (of
whom the Duke was Head) did wish they could bring it about, that the Succession
of the Kingdom might come to the Prince Palatine, and his Children in Right of
the Lady Elizabeth.

Thus lay the Notes of the Lord Keeper. This is the Dirt which the Swallows, or
rather unclean Birds picked up, and made their Nest of it. And this is not all.
But that which remains shall be burnt in the Fire.

Latere semper patere quod latuit diu.
Saepe eruentis veritas patuit malo.
Senec. in Aedipo. In a Postscript the Paper prayed the King, That Don
Francisco Carondelet, Secretary to Marquess Inoiosa, might be brought to the
King, when the Prince and Duke were sitting in the Upper House, to satisfy
such doubts as the King might Raise; which was performed by the Earl of Kelly,
who watched a fit Season for Francisco at one time, and for Padre Maestro the
Jesuit at another time; who told their Errand so spitefully, that the King was
much troubled at their Relations.

202. He that says ( U. Sanderson, P. 562.) that not a day past, but that he
was present, and acquainted with all the Transaction (of these pernicious
Delators) to the end, should have said, he knew it at the end, when the Monster
was brought to light; then his History indeed will justify it self, that it
did not startle the King. But his Majesty's Sorrow increased, while it was
smothered; and Fear set in apace, till a wise Remonstrance resisted it. And it
was no Wonder that he was abused a while, and dim sighted with a Character of
Jealousy: For the Parliament was about to land him in a new World, to begin
and maintain a War, who thought that scarce any Mischief was so great, as was
worth a War to mend it. Wherein the Prince did deviate from him, as likewise in
Affection to the Spanish Alliance, but otherwise promised nothing but Sweetness
and Obedience. He stuck at the Duke most of all, whom he defended in part to
one of the Spanish Ministers; yet at the same time complained, that he had
noted a turbulent Spirit in him of late, and knew not how to mitigate it. Thus
casting up the Sum, he doubted it might come to his own Turn to pay the
Reckoning. The Setters on expected that their Pill could not choose but have a
most violent Operation. And it wrought so far, that his Majesty's Countenance
fell suddenly, that he mused much in Silence, that he entertained the Prince
and Duke with mystical and broken Speeches. From whence they gathered all was
not right; and questing for Intelligence, they both heard that the Spanish
Secretary, and the Jesuit Maestro had been with him, and understood that some
in the Ambassador's House had vaunted, that they had netled the Duke, and that
a Train would take Fire shortly to blow up the Parliament. While his Majesty
was gnawn with this Perplexity, he prepared for Windsor, to shift Ground for
some better Ease in this Unrest, and took Coach at St. James's-House-Gate in
the end of April, being Saturday Afternoon. He received his Son into the Coach,
and sound a slight Errand to leave Buckingham behind; as he was putting his
Foot in the Boot, which brought Tears from him, and an humble Prayer, that his
Majesty would let him know, what could be laid to his Charge, to offend so
gracious a Master, and vowed it, by the Name of his Savior, to purge it, or
confess it. The King did not satisfy him in it; it seems the time of Detection
in his deep Judgment was not come, and he had charged all that were privy to
the Occasion to be very secret. Cab. P. 77. But he breathed out this Disgust,
That he was the Unhappiest alive, to be forsaken of them that were dearest to
him; which was uttered and received with Tears from his own Eyes, as well as
the Prince's and Duke's, whom he left behind, and made have with his Son for
Windsor. The Lord Keeper spared not for Cost, to purchase the most certain
Intelligence of those that were his feed Pensioners of every hours Occurrencies
at Court; and was wont to say, That no man could be a Statesman without a great
deal of Money. Of this which had happened, his Scout related presently what he
could see, for he heard little. Which News were no sooner brought, but he
sought out the Duke at Wallingford-House, and had much ado to be admitted to
him in his sad Retirement: Whom he found laid upon a Couch, in that immovable
Posture, that he would neither rise up, nor speak, though he was invited to it
twice or thrice by courteous Questions. The Lord Keeper gave his Grace the
Faith of a deep Protestation, that he came purposely to prevent more Harm, and
to bring him out of that Sorrow into the Light of the King's Favor. That he
verily believed God's directing Hand was in it, to stir up his Grace to advance
him to those Honors which he possessed, to do him Service at this Pinch of
Extremity. He besought his Grace to make haste for Windsor, and to show himself
to his Majesty before Supper was ended; to deport himself with all amiable
Addresses, not to stir from his Person Night nor Day. For the Danger was, that
some would thrust themselves in, to push on his Majesty to break utterly with
the Parliament; and the next Degree of their Hope, was, upon that Dissolution,
to see his Grace committed to the Tower, and then God knows what would follow.
The Keeper adjured his Lordship to lock up this in his own Breast, which was
imparted as charily to him, as under the Seal of Secrecy; but to be quick and
Judicious in the Prevention, more was not to be said, because loss of time
might loose all. The Duke parted with many Thanks, and lingered not but came to
Windsor, before he was looked for. Though he suspected not so much Evil; yet he
knew the Danger might be the worse for being contemned. Nihil tuto in host
despicitur. Quem spreveris valentio rem negligent ia facies. Curt. lib. 6.

903. No doubt but all this was disclosed to the Prince. (...), says Eurip. in
Oenomao; we conjecture at unevident things by that which is evident. The Duke
stirred not from Windsor, but waited on his Majesty, and was inseparable as his
shadow. The Prince was early at the Lords House, before their Lordships began
to sit on Monday Morning. His business was with the Lord Keeper, whom he took
aside into a Lobby, and protested how well it pleased him, that he had given
Buckingham faithful warning for his safety; And you, says his Highness, that
have gone thus far, may receive greater Thanks of us both, if you will spread
open this black contrivance, which has lost him the Good Opinion of my Father,
and my self am in little better Condition. Sir says the Lord Keeper, Let my
Soul suffer for falsehood, if I know any more, than that some in the Spanish
Embassador's House have been preparing mischief, and infused it about four days
since into his Majesty. But the Curtain of Privacy is drawn before the Picture,
that I cannot guess at the Colors. Well my Lord, says the Prince, I expected
better Service from you; for if that be the Picture-Drawers shop, no Counselior
in this Kingdom is better acquainted then your self with the Works, and the
Workmen. I might have been, says the Keeper, and I am pang'd like a Wom^n in
Travail, till I know what misshapen Creature they are Drawing. But your Highness
and my Lord Duke have made it a Crime to send unto that House, and they are
afraid to do it, who are commanded from his Majesty. It is a Month since I have
forbidden the Servants of that Family to come at me. But, says the Prince, I
will make that Passage open to you again without Offense; and Enterprise any
way to bring us out of this Wood, wherein we are lost. Only, before we part,
keep not from me, how you came to know, or imagine that the Spanish Agents have
Charged Buckingham to my Father, with High Misdemeanors, or perhaps Disloyalty.
I would hear you to that Point, that I may compare it with other Parcels of my
Intelligence. Sir, says the Keeper, I will go on directly with you. Another
perhaps would Blush, when I tell you with what Heifer I Plow; but knowing mine
Innocence, the worst that can happen is to expose my self to be Laughed at.
Your Highness has often seen the Secretary Don Francisco Carondelet. He loves
me, because he is a Scholar; for he is Archdeacon of Cambray. And sometimes we
are pleasant together, for he is a Wallcon by Birth, and not a Castilian. I
have discovered him to be a Wanton, and a Servant to some of our English
Beauties, but above all to one of that gentle Craft in Mark-Lane. A Wit she is,
and one that must be Courted with News and Occurrences at home and abroad, as
well as with Gifts. I have a Friend that has bribed her in my Name, to send me
a faithful conveyance of such Tidings as her Paramour Carondelet brings to her.
All that I instructed the Duke in, came out of her Chamber. And she has well
earned a piece of Plate or two from me, and shall not be unrecompenced for this
Service, about which your Highness does use me, if the Drab can help me in it.
Truly, Sir, this is my Dark Lahthorn, and I am not ashamed to inquire of a
Dalilah to Resolve a Riddle; for in my Studies of Dlvinity I have gleaned up
this Maxim, Licet uti alieno peccato; though the Devil make her a Sinner, I may
make good use of her Sin. Yea, says the Prince Merrily, do you deal in such
Ware? 'In good Faith Sir, says the Keeper, I never saw her Face. So this
Conference Ended.

204. The Lord Keeper took his Place in the Lords House to moderate Affairs as
Speaker. But all the while his Fancy was Whistling to another Tune, how he
might play his Game discreetly: He held the Prince his Cards, and would not for
his Life that he should loose. He had well considered, and brought the Case to
this Touch stone of Judgment, that he should never know how the whole Scene had
been Acted but by Secretary Francisco He had requested him to refrain his house
above the whole space of a Month. If he sent for him on even Terms, nothing
would run freely from him. Well fare a good Invention, or a good Genius that
prompted him. For a knack came into his Head, to fetch Francisco to him without
any invitation, as if a Conjurer had brought him in a Whirlwind So he becken'd
to a Servant, and bad him, that his Pursivant Captain Toothbie should wait him
without fail, as soon as the House was up: The Pursivant at that hour took
punctual Directions from him to seize upon an English Mass-Priest, lodged in
Drury ^me, Named and Described exactly (for he had the Art to fetch such a Fowl
or twain out of the Coope at an hours warning) to receive him without any Noise
into his Custody; and upon Entreaty (as that, and proffer of Money would not be
wanting) to carry him to his own House, till further Order, and not to the
common Goal. The Priest was apprehended and laid up: The Man that was dearer to
Francisco (which the Lord Keeper know) then his own Confessor, or any of that
Coat; which made him wild when he heard of the mischance; for he knew the Law,
and how hard it would be to save his Life, if he came to be Tried at the
Sessions, the Parliament then Sitting. He was in a fort banished from the
Keepers House, and he a poor Stranger knew not to whom else to turn him, to
implore Mercy in his Friends behalf. Howsoever he saw it was no time to observe
the Niceness of Modesty, but sent his Request to the Lord Keeper to be admitted
that day, though he should never see his Face again. With a seeming
unwillingness it was allowed him, keeping a cautious limit, not to make his
Visit till Eleven of the Clock that Night, and by the back door of the Garden,
where a Servant should receive him. He came at his hour, and being brought into
a Gallery, fell into an abrupt Exordium, That nothing but a matter as dear unto
him as his Life, should have forced him to break Rule to Offend his Lordship
with his Presence. So he bewailed the disaster of his Confrere's Attachment,
and most passionately implored his Lordship to compass him Enlargment. And
would you have me, says the Keeper, run such a hazard, to set a Priest at
Liberty, a Dead Man by our Statutes, when the Eye of the Parliament is so
vigilant upon the breach of Justice, especially in this kind, to the sadding of
our Godly Men, who detest them that creep hither out of Seminaries, above all
Malefactors, because they come with an intent to pervert them, who have lived
in the Bosom of our Church. My Lord, says Francisco (and accented his Words
with passionate Gesture) let not the dread of this Parliament trouble you, I
can tell you, if you have not heard it, that it is upon Expiration. By this
hint the Keeper was got into the Outworks of the Project, and played so
Artificially with the Secretary, that he took the Main Fortress. Picked out of
him at that time, the Heads of all the Articles in the Paper, with all Reasons,
Circumstances, distorted Proofs, and Expositions to confirm them. The Copy of
the main Paper, scratched in some places with Don Carlo Colonna's Hand (for the
Keeper knew his Writing) was not brought him till four Nights after. He had
enough of their Brewing at the first running; for he kept Don Carendelet till
two of the Clock in the Morning, and let him not part, till he had squeezed him
dry. But to gratify his Information, he called for the Pursivant, a Reserve at
Hand, and bad him immediately Release the Priest, with Caution that he should
cross the Seas that Day, or the next, that he might not be produced to
Confront, if the matter should come to Light to be questioned. So the Lord
Keeper and Don Francisco parted with much show of Love, each having obtained
that which they met for. Some that will make us believe, that they are very
scrupulous and Conscientious, will snuff at somewhat related, as if it were not
plain dealing; but it is as good; for it is harmless Policy; it is profitable
and Pleasant. Et ista quidem sine noxa decipiunt: Quo modo praestigiatorum
acetabula and calculi; in quibus me fallacia ipsa delectat: They that do Feats
with slight of hand, delude us, and please us with their cunning, says Seneca.
So do men employed for the Public; their Motions may be like the Suns, oblique
but regular. Magistratus tentat, non decipit. A Magistrate may use by-ways and
pretenses, to prove others, not to deceive them. As Solomon did in the Case of
the two Harlots and the Child, which both challenged to be their own.

205. The Story lacks yet the latter Part; the Lord Keeper after the Good Night
given to Francisco, retired to his own Thoughts, and poured the whole
Conserence out of his Memory into his Papers, as if Francisco had stood by to
dictate every Line. He was so well gifted in a most happy Memory, that he
forgot nothing, but what he had a mind to forget. He digested the severals into
a Method, and confected an Antidote for every Poison, Christal-clear Answers,
well weighed in Judgment, to Gag the Spanish ill Framed Jealousies, and as
demulcing as shortness of time would permit, to make all sweet with the Old
King. He saw no Sleep that Night with his Eyes, nor stirred out of the Room
till about seven in the Morning he had trimmed up a fair Copy of all the
Proceedings, which he presented to the Prince in St. James's, and told him he
had the Viper and her Brood in a Box. His Highness Read the Charges, and
admired at the virulency; with the Anti-scripts of the Keeper, which were much
commended. So the Coach was called to be made ready for Windsor. Nay Sir, says
the Lord Keeper, let your Highness be pleased to take my Petition along with
you; Where is it says the Prince? 'In my Mouth says He; for I humbly beg, that
you will conceal me in all that I have done in this Matter; and as you tender
my Life, to keep the knowledge of my share in this from your Father. Vetus
Disciplina regum silentium vitae periculo sanxerat, Curtius; is an Old Rule. I
have committed two great Crimes in a Sworn Counselor.

First, To search into the King's Counsels, which he would not should be
opened.

Secondly, When I had found them out, to discover them, though to your Highness

The Prince thought there could be no hurt in that, which was good for all
perties, yet gave him assurance, he should not be drawn out of the Tiring
House, to the open Stage. His Highness came very cheerful to Windsor, and
calling Buckingham aside, reached him the Papers, with the counterfeit Brats in
one Column, and the Apology in the other Column which dashed them against the
Wall. The Writing was a Servants, whose hand was not known at Court. But the
Duke liked the whole Bulk extremely, and most humbly thanked the Prince, that
his Case was enwoven with his Highness, and their double Vindication put into
one Frame. And besought to know what Vitruvius had compacted a Piece of
Architecture; of such concinnity, in so short a time; but could not obtein it.
The Prince and Duke made no longer preparation, but forthwith desired a private
hearing with the King, and with a modest and comfortable confidence gave up the
Schedule to his Majesty's most Excellent Consideration. He Read all
deliberately, and at many stops said 'twas well, very well, and an enlivening
Spirit Danced in his Eye. Then he drew his Son and Buckingham near to him, and
Embraced them, protesting that it sorrowed him much, that he had aggrieved them
with a Jealousy somented by no better then Traitors. Assured them the
Exhalations were dispersed, and their Innocence shined as Bright as at Noon
Day. And that you may know, says his Majesty, How little you shall pay me for
Reconciliation, I ask no more but to tell me, who is your Ingeneer, that struck
these Sparks out of the Flint, and lighted the Candle to find the Groat that
was lost. The Prince stood Mute: The Duke avowed he knew not the Author. Well
says the King, I have a good Nostril, and will Answer mine own Question, my
Keeper had the main Finger in it, I dare Swear it was he that bolted the
Flower, and made it up into this Paist. Sir says the Prince, I was precluded by
my Promise not to Reveal him, but I never promised to tell a Lie for him. Your
Majesty has hit the Man. And God do him good for it, says the King. I need not
tell you both what you owe him for this Service; and he has done himself this
Right with me, that I discern his sufficiency more and more. All this the
Prince Related at his next Meeting to the Lord Keeper. This passage so
memorable has plucked on a Prolix Narration for diverse Reasons. It was a
secret managed between few persons, (though the greatest) and likely to be
buried for ever, unless it rise from the Dust, where it was smothered, upon
this occasion. It will expound to inquisitive Men; why, after this time, the
old King never retrieved the Spanish Match, as if suddenly it were sunk, and
set beneath the Horizon of his Thoughts; it demonstrates, why in a year after,
being the First of King Charles, there was such Willingness in the young King,
and such Readiness in the Duke, to Rigg a great Navy, and to send it with
Defiance of Hostility to Cales; for though the Grandee Inoiosa received a sharp
Rebuke here, to vex his Gorge, and suddenly packed up his portable Gods, and
went to his own Country in a Fume, yet he received no Disfavour or Frown upon
it from the Court of Spain. Nihil nefas est malitiae. It tells you what a Stone
of Offense was laid before the King, able to make him to Dissolve the
Parliament, just upon the Expectation of a happy Winding up, if the Lord Keeper
had not removed the Jealousy away, which is one of the best Offices of a
Christian; for it is God's own Attribute in the Prophets, to be a Repairer of
Breaches. Lastly, His Wit was in Conjunction with the Safety of his great
Friend the Duke, Et vincente Odenato, triumphavit Gallienus, says Pollio: The
Keeper had Content enough, that the Duke triumphed over those Foes, whom he had
vanquished for him.

206. Soon as those Hobgoblins, which haunted the King to fright him, were
frighted away themselves, and the Magicians which conjured them up, were
rendered odious, his Majesty was never in a better Mood to please his Subjects,
and the Subjects in Parliament, never, from that day to this, in so dutiful a
Frame to please their Sovereign. Fatebimur regem talibus ministris, and illos
tanto rege fuisse dignissimos. Curt. l. 4. As Alexander deserved such brave
Commanders under him; so they deserved to be commanded by so brave a Prince as
Alexander. Their long Counsels, which had been weather bound, came to a quiet
Road, and their Vessel was lighted of those Statutes, which are of immortal
Memory. The wise Men of those times asked for good Laws with Moderation (for
Moderation had not yet outlived the Peoples Palate) and they were brought
forth with Joy and Gladness. And that which was gotten with Peace and Joy, will
out-last that, were it ten times more, which is extorted in a Hurly-burly.
There were no Rents, no Divisions among the Members, much less did the Stronger
Part spurn out the Weaker. The Voices went all one way, as a Field of Wheat is
bended, that is blown with a gentle Gale, One and all. And God did not let a
general Concurrence pass without a general Blessing. Sic viritim laboraverunt,
quasi summa res singulorum manibus teneretur. Nazar. Paneg. The Laws devised
were confirmed in Clusters by the Royal Authority. And though one of them,
about the strict Keeping of the Sabbath, was then stopped, the Name of Sabbath
being unsatisfactory to the King's Mind, yet Amends were made, that the Kingdom
had a Sabbath granted it from many Suits and Unquietnesses. That which Crowned
all, was the Pardon, the most general that ever was granted, which was the
sooner got, because the Pillars of the Commonwealth had discharged their
public Trust without Offense. The next Session of this Parliament was
appointed in April following; and this Session shut up with the End of June.
The Lord Keeper was not a little joy'd with the sweet Close of it; for which he
had gained a noble Report. -- Praeter laudem nullius avarus, Horat. Ar. Poet.
And after three years Experience, having now spent so much time in the High
Court of Chancery, his Sufficiency was, not only competent, but as great as
might be required in a complete Judge. He was one of them, in whom Knowledge
grew faster upon him, than his Years. As Tully praised Octavius Caesar, Ex quo
judicari potest virtutis esse quam aetatis cursum celeriorem, Philip 8. In
eminent Persons, Virtue runs on swifter than Age. And it is a Slander (whereof
late Writers are very rank in all Kinds) which one has published, that this
Man's Successor, the Lord Coventry, reversed many of his Decrees, and corrected
his Errors. I do not blame Lawyers, if they would have us believe, that none is
fit for the Office of Chancellor, but one of their own Profession. But let them
plead their own Learning, and able Parts, without traducing the Gifts of them,
that are excellently seen in Theological Cases of Conscience, and singularly
rare in natural Solertiousness. Lord Coventry was a renowned Magistrate, and
his Honor was the Honor of the Times, wherein he lived, the vast Compass of
that Knowledge wherein he was always bred, and his strong Judgment in searching
into those Causes, did transcend his Predecessor; yet not to obscure him, as if
he were wanting in that, which was required to his Place. A good Carpenter
knows how to frame a House, as well as the Geometer that surveyed the Escurial.
Let me quote a couple of Witnesses, what they asserted herein, and they are
rightly produced, as God, the great Witness of all things, knows. The Duke of
Buckingham, in the beginning of the next Term, at Michaelmas, persuaded the
Lord Chief Justice Hobart, either to deliver it to the King with his own Mouth,
or to set it under his Hand, that Lord Williams was not sit for the Keeper's
Place, because of his Inabilities and Ignorance; and that he would undertake
thereupon, to cast the Complained out, and himself should succeed him. My Lord,
says Reverend Hobart, somewhat might have been said at the first; but he should
do the Lord Keeper great Wrong that said so now. After this Grave and Learned
Lord, I bring forth Mr. G Evelin, one of the Six Clerks, and, in his time, the
best Headpiece of the Office, who delighted to divulge it, as many yet living
know, that Lord Keeper Williams had the most towering, sublime Wit that he ever
heard speak; magnified his Decrees, as hitting the White in all Causes, and
never missing. That Lord Coventry did seldom after any thing he had settled
before him, but upon new Presumptions, and spoke of him always in Court with
due Praise, and Justification of his Transactions. He that has insinuated the
contrary, aiming to do Honor to none, but to the Students of the Laws, has
run out of the Ring. And is it not honester to say nothing, than to go about to
do good with a Mischief?

207. And that Man might see better to do Justice, who would never receive a
Bribe to blind his Eyes, 1 Samuel 12.3. This was known, not only to me a
Domestic, but to all that walked the Streets; who were informed, what Repulses
they had, who tempted him with Gratifications. This I am sure of, as I know
what is sweet by mine own Taste, and by the common Opinion. One thing I will
remember, not because it is of great Moment, but because it is pleasant. His
Lordship being retired to Nonsuch in the Summer, took the Air in the great
Park; and viewing from one of the Hills, the little Village of Malden, he
espied a Church new built, and asked at whose Charge it was done. Mr. George
Minors, that attended him, told him who was the greatest Benefactor. And has
he not a Suit now depending in Chancery? says the Keeper. The very same, says
the other. And the very same, says the Keeper, shall not fare the worse for
building of Churches. Which being related by Mr. Minors to his Neighbor, the
Gentleman the next Morning sent a Taste of the Fruits of his Orchard, and of the
Poultry in his Yard, to Nonsuch-House. Nay, carry them back George, says the
Keeper, and tell your Friend, he shall not fare the better for sending of
Presents. If any were so uncharitably suspicious, that this Lord sold Justice
for Gold or Silver, though not for meaner things, and gathered where he should
not, there could be no Ground to surmise it; but because he scattered much. For
he was magnificent in great Works, profuse in Hospitality, very expensive in
Liberality to poor Scholars, and decayed Persons. To maintain all this, he had
plenty coming in, which wanted not the Art of good Husbandry to lay it out. He
was as Provident, as he was Bountiful. He never feasted the King, and very
rarely exhausted himself upon Courtiers in lavish Entertainments. But according
to the honest, and thrifty Rule of Cassiodor, Fundit potius qui mittit in
plenum: and illud reconditur, quod vasis vacuis congregatur. He spread not out
his Compost upon rich Soil, but upon hungry Land. He gave so fast to Scholars,
that it was not possible his Lest-hand should know what his Right Hand did.
Quod momentum aut beneficio sterile? Aut vacuum laud? Plin. Paneg. If they
were young, he did it to encourage them; if aged, to reward them. And Gentlemen
that were brought low, not by their Vices, but by Misfortune, Poveri
vergognesi, as the Tuscan calls them, Bashful, and could not Crave, though they
perished, he prevented their Modesty, and would heartily thank those that
discovered their commiserable Condition to him. The Prisoners of the Gate House
found the way to their Neighbor's Purse every Week. It were endless to take
notice of his good Works, but in great Constellations. Fugiunt sine nomine
signa, Manil. lib. 1. Stars, that appear Small and dim, were never numbered. And
though he was better at Liberality than Patience; yet when he had overgone
three years in the Court of Chancery, he watched his Passions so well, that the
Heat of his old British Complexion was much abated, and carried all things
with far more Lenity, than Choler: Would chide little, and bear much. Vehement
he was often to recall Pleaders to the Point, and to press Order and Dispatch.
Vehemence is mistaken, if it be called Anger: As Cicero defends himself to
Fusius Calenus, Vehementer me agere fatcor, iracunde nego. Philip 8. But if his
Passion break out too far beyond the Measure of Vehemence, he never rested till
he had made some Amends to him, whom he had sadded or offended. which is the
Apology that St. Ambrose makes for the good Emperor Theodosius the Elder in his
Funeral Rites. Tunc proprior fuisset veniae, cum fuisset commotio major
iracundiae -- Optabatur in eo, quod in aliis timebatur, ut irasceretur. So the
Clients at the Bar had studied the good Nature of this Lord, and presaged, that
after he had chased at their Mis-usance, they might promise to themselves a
good Cast of his Office long before the Sun set, which never set before he was
returned to Patience and loving Kindness.

208. Difficulties in Parliament, Labors in Chancery were well passed over;
but to keep in long with the Duke of Buckingham was insuperable; unless the
Lord Keeper would be stupid, and oppose him in nothing, though the Dukes, as
well as his Ruin were upon Contrivance, and the notorious Hurt of them, that
were better than them both. Since his Grace's Return from Spain, you shall find
the Keeper in every of his Letters in the Cabal, few excepted, endeavoring to
take off the Edge of some late started Quarrel. As P. 96. in a Date July 21,
1624, in this Submission. If ever I have offended your Grace, I take Almighty
God to witness, it was for want of a perfect Understanding of those high
Matters (let the Reader be informed it was about the Earl of Bristol's
Recriminations) not out of any Corruption of Affections toward your Grace, or
the least struggling in a continued Resolution, to live and dye your Grace's
most constant, and most faithful Servant. But whether it would succeed to good
Liking or no, he was resolved to divert him from some desperate Courses, into
which his Grace was entering, to raise vast Sums of Money, the Nerves of a
sudden War with Spain, which he meant to begin, as soon as he could be
furnished with Coin. The Keeper was very sick of a Fevor and a Flux at this
time; and, after Danger of Life, recovered by that great Secretary of Nature,
Dr. William Harvey, being not able to go into the Air, he writes to my Lord
Duke, what he conceived about his former Project, October. 21.

May it please your Grace.
I Hear a Whispering, rather than a Report, out of Westminster Hall, that some
great Alteration is presently to be made of the small Remainder of his
Majesty's or rather the Crown Lands. Although I know not certainly, being
unimployed and unprofitable, whether I ought to take notice hereof at all, or
what to advise; yet presuming upon that Favor I have ever found, and of late,
as much as ever with your Grace, I have sent you this Ticket to read and burn.
If there be any Resolution taken for the general Alteration of the Crown Lands,
yet this is not a convenient time to go about it.

First, Because there is not yet a Lord Treasurer, that it may be Christened to
be his Act.

Secondly, Because it has not been debated at the Council Table; for want of
whose Advice, it will be appropriated to be your Grace's Act.

Thirdly, It cannot be ripe for Execution, till the next Session of Parliament
is dissolved; for otherwise it will undoubtedly serve as an Excuse for not
Granting Subsidies.

But setting those Considerations of Delay aside, I humbly desire your Grace,
that no Universal Alteration may be made of the Tenure of the Crown Lands.

And First, Because the Money got thereby will not be much, and will instantly
be gone.

Secondly, The Infamy in Chronicles will be eternal upon our most gracious
Master.

Thirdly, The Prince cannot cordially assent thereunto; or if he do, it is
impossible (his Wisdom considered) but that hereafter he should repent him, and
much abhor the Authors, and Actors of this Counsel.

Lastly, If the Prince should be of the same Mind with his Father, yet their
Successors will have good Pretenses to prosecute everlastingly the Names and
Posterities of all such Advisers.


In this It may be seen, that it is common with Projectors to Angle for Wit,
and catch Folly; to spread their Nets for a Draught, and to drag up nothing but
Weeds and Mud. What Brokerly Bargain was here about to be made? How unsuiting
to the King of Great Britain? fitter for a poor Merchant that was sunk, to sell
all he had, and fly his Country. What! depart with all, to make two or three
merry Years of it? Is it not like the Man that burnt his House in a cold
Winter, which should shelter his Head for ever, to warm his Hands? Would those
Vermin, that did eat up the Wealth of the Court, expose their Master to that
Tyranny, to have him live wholly upon the Common Spoils, when he had made away
his own Substance, and was driven to that Necessity? And were they not worthy
to be thought upon, that should live in the next Generation? Our Forefathers
were good Stewards, and treasured up for their Children; and shall we undo
Posterity before they are born, and spend their Part as well as our own, as if
we wished the World might die with us? One good Heathen was worthy twenty such
Christians, in Zeal, to the eternal flourishing of a Commonwealth. Says Tully
in the Mouth of his Laelius, Non minori mihi curae est, qualis post mortem
Respub. futura sit, quam qualis est hodie. Those that were not public Spirits,
but contrary to the succeeding Glory of this Monarchy, the Lord Keeper could
not brook; but as he had got Honor by being Wise and Faithful, so he was
resolved to be Wise and Faithful, though he lost his Honor.

209. The next Design made this sick Man hasten to come out of his Chamber, a
Letter would not suffice to oppose it. There is no Script of it remaining in
the Cabal, nor in any other Pamphlet, that I have read. It was a Mischief not
better prevented, than concealed from the World that it was prevented. But the
Relation of the Lord Keeper to him that heard it of him, when it was fresh and
in motion, has been preserved in the Desk, and comes forth now to public
Knowledge. Rem tibi auctorem dabo, as Plautus says; whereby the Men of these
times may see, how the Sale of Church Lands was plotted, before they were swept
away with an Ordinance, and that Earnest was offered for them long ago. Dr.
Preston, the Master of Emanuel College, entered far into such a Proposition, a
shrewd wise Man, a very Learned, and of esteemed Piety; but zealous for a new
Discipline, and given to Change. When I see good Parts not always well used; or
a worthy Scholar not well affected to the Church, that begat him in Christ, and
nursed him up, I cannot but remember a Tale in Baronius, Ann. 513. com. 27.
thoug I care not for believing it. That Theodorus Bishop of Seleucia, was much
in love with the strict Life and Piety of a Monk, a Syrian by Nation, that
cared not for the Communion of the Church; at which Theodorus was scandalized,
that so virtuous a Man should incline to be a Schismatic, till God satisfied
him in a Vision, for, says he, Vidi columbam super caput ejus stantem
fuliginosam and squalidam; he saw the Holy Ghost come upon him, but in the
Shape of a rusty sooty colored Dove. But before the Artifice of Dr. Preston be
displayed, Judgment must pass how the great Duke was prepared to be wrought
upon. When all men talked jocundly upon the next Session of Parliament,
appointed for April, they that were watchful for the Duke's Safety, saw Cause
to fear, least the Predestination of that Session might turn to be his Grace's
Reprobation. The King his Master was too Politic to seem weary of him, now
become the most affected of his Son; but half an Eye might discern he was not
fond of him. The Earl of Bristol, who had seen much Abroad, and knew much at
Home, was charged, in his Absence, from his Mouth, with great Errors, that he
had deluded the King with Hopes of a Marriage from Spain, never intended; and
with Crimes, that he had, if not Counseled the Prince to alter his Religion,
yet to temporize, as if he held it in a slip Knot, and could pass it easily
from him, if his Highness might win the Garland he came for. The Earl, in his
Replication defied the Duke, and vowed to charge upon his Head, that in his
Expedition to Spain, he had done the worst Service, and the highest Wrongs,
that a Subject could do to a Sovereign. His Majesty umpir'd between both with
that fatal Indifferency, that he would hear Buckingham against Bristol, and
Bristol against Buckingham before the two houses in due time. And his manner of
Justice was not unknown, that he would shelter no man against the General, and
Concluded Sentence of a Parliament. Antoninus was a wise Emperor, that never
stood out against the Common Vote of the Senate, and never varied from that
Saying, says Capitolinus, Aequum est ut ego tot ac talium amicorum consilium
sequar, quam ut tot and tales amici mei unius voluntatem sequantur. And if the
King should shrink from him, the Peers and Commons were like to receive him
unkindly. His Greatness, though it wained with the Father, it increased with
the Son, and was like to flourish ever by this latter Spring; but the more it
grew, the worse it was liked. He was the Top-sail of the Nobility, and in Power
and Trust of Offices far above all the Nobility. Whither the Lords maligned
this, because they did not share, or whither they conceived it dangerous to the
State, their own Hearts knew best. One thing is sure, that many of them did not
palliate their Dis-relish, but girded at it upon all Occasions. It was come to
pass, that he only turned the Key to all that were let in to the King or
Prince: And his multiformous Places compelled such a swarm of Suitors to hum
about him, that the Train, that continually jogged after him, looked like the
Stream of a Blazing Star, fatal and ominous. Therefore it was studied by the
wisest of those, that were upheld by his Grace, and resorted most unto him,
that either his Lordship must hope in a War, and that speedily, and be flush of
Money, to be prodigal among the Commanders: Or if he came to be tried in the
Furnace of the next Session of Parliament, he had need to make the Refiners to
be his Friends.

210. Here steps in Dr. Preston, a good Crow to smell Carrion; and brought
Conditions with him, to make his Grace malleable upon the great Anvil, and
never break. This Politic Man, that he might feel the Pulse of the Court, had
preferred himself to be Chaplain to the Prince, and wanted not the Intelligence
of all dark Mysteries, through the Scotch especially of his Highness's
Bedchamber. These gave him countenance more than others, because he prosecuted
the Endeavors of their Countrymen Knox. To the Duke he repairs. And be assured
he had more Skill, than boisterously to propound to him the Extirpation of the
Bishops, remembering what King James had said in the Conference at
Hampton Court, Anno 1. No Bishop, No King. Therefore he began to dig further
off, and to heave at the Dissolution of Cathedral Churches, with their Deans
and Chapters, the Seminary from whence the ablest Scholars were removed to
Bishoprics. At his Audience with the Duke he told him, He was sorry his
Grace's Actions were not so well interpreted abroad, as Godly Men thought they
deserved. That such Murmurings, as were but Vapors in common Talk, might prove
to be Tempests when a Parliament met. That his safest way was to Anchor himself
upon the Love of the People. And let him persuade himself, he should not sail
to be Master of that Achievement, if he would profess himself, not among those
that are Protestants at large, and never look inward to the Center of Religion,
but become a warm and zealous Christian, that would employ his best help
strenuously to lop off from this half-reformed Church, the superfluous Branches
of Romish Superstition, that much disfigured it. Then he named the
Quire-Service of Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, with the Appennages, which
were maintained with vast Wealth, and Lands of excessive Commodity, to feed
fat, lazy, and unprofitable Drones. And yet all that Chanting and Pomp hindered
the Heavenly Power, and Simplicity of Prayer: And furthered not the Preaching
of the Gospel. And now, says he, let your Grace observe all the ensuing
Emoluments, if you will lean to this Counsel, God's Glory shall be better set
forth, (that is ever the Quail-Pipe to bring Worldings into the Snares of
Sacrilege:) The Lands of those Chapters escheating to the Crown, by the
Dissolution of their Foundations, will pay the King's Debts. Your Grace has
many Alliances of Kindred, all sucking from you, and the Milk of those Breasts
will serve them all, and nourish them up to great Growth with the best Seats in
the Nation. Lastly, Your Grace shall not only surmount Envy, but turn the
Darling of the Commonwealth, and be reverenced by the best Operators in
Parliament, as a Father of a Family. And if a Crum stick in the Throat of any
considerable Man, that attempts to make a contrary part, it will be easy to
wash it down with Manors, Woods, Royalties, Tithes, etc. the large Provent of
those Superstitious Plantations.

Thus far the Doctor, and to these Heads, as the Duke in a good Mind revealed
it. The most crafty, and clawing Piece of all was, That the Destruction of
these Sacred Foundations would make a Booty for a Number of Gentlemen: And as
the Greeks say proverbially, (...), When a great Oak falls, every Neighbor may
scuffle for a Faggot. You may be sure the Duke sent this Doctor away with great
Thanks, and bad him watch the best times of leisure, and come to him often, who
did not lose the Privilege of that Liberty, but thrust into his Bedchamber at
least thrice a Week with a sly Audacity. The Lord Keeper heard of it, and
wondered what occasioned their private, and frequent Meetings; Nor could he
knock off the Bar of the Secret with his Golden Hammer, till it was revealed to
him by some of the nearest about his Majesty. For the Duke had cast forth the
Project in a dark imperfect Form before the King; and the King, muffling his
true Face that it could not be seen, heard him with a dissembled Patience,
because he was pleased to have him nibble upon this Bait, that he might divert
the Yonker as long as he could from forcing him to undertake a War, which was a
violent Caustic that seared up the Comfort of his Majesty's Heart. All this
was conveyed to the Lord Keeper, and being feeble, and scarce upon his Legs
again, it wrought upon his sick Spirits with great Anxiety. He was sure his
Majesty had no Stomach to devour such an unsanctified Morsel: Yet against that
assurance he objected to himself, That the Duke was wont to overturn all
Obstacles that stood in his way: And that the Imperial Eagle of Necessity would
stoop to any Prey. Then he took Cheer again, that he had never Noted in the
Lord Duke a Displicency against the Prosperity of the Church: Again, his
Comfort was rebated, that Self-Preservation will make a Saint a Libertine, and
that Nice Points of Religion are not usually admitted to give Law against it.
Howsoever, he resolved to hazard all to crush this Cockatrice in the Egg. Causa
jubet superes m^lior sperare secundos. He that stickles for Gods Cause sails by
the Cape of Good Hope.

211. At the first Onset he had small Encouragement: For he came to
Wallingford-House to break with the Duke upon this matter, who was then shut up
with Dr. Preston in close Consultation, where the Great Seal, and the Keeper of
it, waited two Hours in the Anti-Camera, and was sent Home without the Civility
of Admission. Next Day he got Speech with Dr. Preston, by Friends employed to
bring him to Westminster: And after much Pro and Con in their Discourse,
supposing the want of Preserment had disgusted the Doctor, he offered to him,
if he would busy himself no more in contriving the Ruin of the Church, that
he would the next Day resign the Deanery of Westminster to him. But the wily
Doctor did not believe him: For he came to cheat, and not to be cheated: So
they parted unkindly. The Lord Keeper saw now that this Nail was driven in far:
Yet he did not despair to pluck it out with his Wit: And thus he went into the
Adventure. He obtained an Opportune Conference with the Duke, and in the
Defense of the Church he could never be taken unprovided. He prayed his Grace
to believe, That no Man wished his Safety more cordially than himself, by whose
Hand he was lifted up to that Place of Pre-eminence wherein he sat. Therefore
it was his Duty to admonish him timely, that he was building that Safety upon
hollow Ground. He had spoken with Preston, who had offered his Grace flitten
Milk, out of which he should churn nothing. There were other ways to level
Envy, than by offending God: And if he meant to gather Moneys for War, let him
Wage it with the Prayers of the Clergy, and not with their Curses. That
Generation of malcontents, to whose Love an Evil Counselor woed him, was
ever false and untrusty; not suspected, but known, ever since the Faction was
first rocked in the Cradle, to be tied by no Benefits: Importunate Suitors, and
ever craving: And having sped, think their Cause, and their Deservings have
paid Thanks sufficient to their Patron. And look what Colors the King our
Master has laid upon them, (and they are in Oil, which will not be got out) in
his Instructions to his Prince Henry, where, upon bitter Experience, he tells
him, That he was more faithfully served by the Highlanders. Then what a
Merchant have you got of this spiteful Minister, who would have you to commit
your Stock to their Managing, who would bring you Hatred for Love, and Infamy
for Honor? But if your Grace conceive that I am hitherto rather upon the
Invective than the Proof, I will step into another Point, and clear it against
all Contradiction, That if your Grace appear in distracting the Church Lands
from their holy and rightful use, your Endeavors shall be cried down in
Parliament, not to terrify you, that your Adversaries will increase, and
batter you with this great Shot, that you attempted to dissolve the Settlement
of Church and Laws. You lose your self, says the Duke, in Generalities: Make it
out to me in particular if you can, with all your Cunning, what should lead you
to say, That the Motion you pick at should find repulse and baffle in the House
of Commons. I know not how you Bishops may struggle, but I am much deluded if a
great part of the Knights and Burgesses would not be glad to see this
Alteration. The Lord Keeper had a List of their Names in readiness, a Scrowle
which he always carried about with him, which he plucked out, and prayed his
Grace he might give him a Cipher of the Inclinations, either of the most, or of
the Bell-weathers. And having entered a little into that tedious Work, the Duke
snatched the Scrowle out of his Hand, and running it over with his Eye, said no
more but, I find abundance of Lawyers among them. Yes, Sir, says the Keeper,
most of them Men of Learning, and Renown in their Profession. I think by my
continual Negotiating with them, I know their Addictions in Religion, whether
they stand right, or which way they bend. I will not prejudge the Speaker, and
one or two more, God knows their Hearts. But for the rest, I know they will be
strong for the supportance of the Cathedral Chapters. Is it so, said his Grace?
And what do you think of Sir Edward Coke? Marry, says the Keeper, no Friend to
an old Friend. In the 39 of Queen Elizabeth, when he was Atturney-General, he
Damm'd a Patent, surreptitiously gotten before his time by those Lime-Hounds
employed for Concealments, by which they went far to swallow up the greatest
part of the Demeasns of the Bishop of Norwich, revived the Right of those
Religious Possessions by his own Industry and Prosecution, and for the most
part at his own Charge; and rested not, till for more Security, after the
Patent was overthrown, he had confirmed those Lands to the Bishop by an Act of
Parliament. Therefore I would we had no worse Strings to our Bow than Sir
Edward Coke. But whom does your Grace name next. Nay, says the Duke, you are
come to me, my Lord, in a lucky Hour. I was never further than in an Equipoise
about this Project; Now I have done with it. It Is still-born, and let it be
interred without Christian Burial. My Good Lord, says the Lord Keeper, I thank
God for it: And I would all the Kingdom knew as well as I do, how soon your
good Nature is brought to a right Understanding.

212. Both did well: The one pressed his Doctrine home, the other caught it up
quickly like a good Disciple. The best refuge to come out of an Error is
undelaying Repentance. And as Curtius speaks for Alexander, Lib. 10. Bona ejus
Naturae sunt, vitia temporum: So I am sure the times put the Duke upon these
Shifts, and not his own Inclination. If he had not been cleansed from those
pernicious Infusions, what a Sin had he drawn upon himself? What Folly? Worse
then Ahab's, that would cut down a poor Neighbors Vineyard to set Pot Herbs:
But this were to root up God's Vineyard to succor a War, that is, to set
Thorns and Thistles in the Room. They that care not to be good, will think how
to be wife. Yet did they ever think of that, that make away the Inheritance of
God's Holy Tribe in an Out-sale? It Is an unthrifty Sin: And in Twenty Years, or
in half the time, the Sacrilegious themselves will find, that the common Purse
of the State is the poorer by the Bargain. (...), says an Heathen, and to the
purpose, Athenae. Lib. 6. Cap. 20. Prudent Men will continue the Oblations of
their Forefathers Piety. They were ever readier to supply the public need in
the Custody of the Church, than in the Maws of Cormorants. But where was he
that taught the Duke so well? Where was he, you will say, in the hour of
darkness, when the Thief came in, and the Troop of Robbers spoiled without?
Hos. Chap. 7. Verse. 8. When all that had been given to God in a Thousand
Years, by them that had the Godliest, and the largest Hearts, melted like Wax
before the Fire of Hell. To the Friends of Sion, and to them that lament her
waste places, I return thus to them, and to their Question: Every one that wore
a Mitre and a Linen Ephod before the Lord, was driven out of that place, where
Wickedness was Enacted as a Law. He that was Courageous among the the Mighty,
did flee away naked in that Day, Amos 2.16. But what if he had been in the
Throng? He might as well have commended a Beauty to a Blind Man, or the smell
of Nard to him that has no Nostril, as to have contested with them not to
divide the Prey, whose Ears God had not opened.

Multum refert in quae cujusque tempora Virtus inciderit.

Plin. N.H. Lib. 7. Cap. 28. Virtue is beholding to Good Times to act its part
in, as well as Good Times are beholding to Virtue. Our most Laureat Poet
Spenser, Lib. 1. Cant. 3. tells of a sturdy Thief Kirkrapine, Who all he got he
did bestow,
To the Daughter of Corcea blind and slow;
And fed her fat with Feasts of Offerings,
And Plenty which in all the Land did grow.


To meet with him, and give him his hire, Una had a fierce Servant for her
Guard that attended her, a Lion who tore the Church-robber to pieces. And what
is meant by Una's Lion? That Is not hard to guess at. But rather what is become
of Una's Lion? The Poet says afterward that Sans-Loy, a Paynim-Knight had slain
him. Belike none is left now to defy Kirkrapine.

213. Also some Care is to be taken against them that are unworthily promoted
in the Church. Wherein the Lord Keeper interceded with the Duke to the
incurring a mighty Anger, as may be seen by the Letters of December. 24. and Jan.
4. Cab. p. 99. If Threatings had been mortal Shot, he had Perished; for he never
had such a Chiding before: but he kept his Ground, because he held the fairer
side of the Quarrel. Dr. Meriton the Dean of York, was lately Dead, and much
Deplored: For he was an Ornament to the Church. My Lord Duke, entreated by
great ones, named a Successor, that had no Seasoning or Taste of Matter in him,
one Dr. Scot: But a Doctor, Inter Doctores Bullatos, for he never stood in the
Commencement to approve himself; beside too many Faults to be ripped up. I have
known a Scholar in Cambridge so bad a Rider, that no Man for Love or Price
would furnish him with a Horse. I would have thought no Man would have furnished
such a Scholar as this with a Deanery, chiefly of York. It came about
strangely. Scot was a Prodigal Gamster, and had lost upon the Ticket to a Noble
Person far more then he was worth. Which Debt his Creditor knew not how to
recover, but by Thrusting him, aided with my Lord Dukes Power, into this Rich
Preferment. The Casuists among all the Species of Simony never Dreamed of this,
which may be called, Simonia Aleatoria, when a Gamester is Installed into a
goodly Dignity, to make him capable to pay the Scores of that which he had lost
with a bad Hand: And yet the Man Died in the King's Bench, and was not Solvent.
The Lord Keeper intending to put of Dr. Scot from this place, besought for the
remove of those most worthy Divines, Dr. White, or Dr. Hall, or to Collate it
upon Dr. Warner, the most Charitable, and very Prudent Bishop of Rochester. But
he was so terrified for giving this good Counsel, that he writes, now he knew
his Graces Resolution he would alter his Opinion, and would be careful in
giving the least Cause of Jealousy in that kind again. Yet it is a received
Maxim, Defuturos eos qui suaderent, si suasisse sit periculum, Curt. l. 3.
Certainly with others this might work to his Esteem, but nothing to his
Prejudice. And I dare confidently avouch, what I knowingly speak, (that I may
use the Words of my industrious Friend, Mr. T. F. in his Church History) That
the Solicitation for Dr. Theodore Price, about Two Months after, was not the
first motive of a Breach between the Keeper and the Duke, (the daylight clears
that without dusky conjectures) no, nor any Process to more unkindness then was
before, which was indeed grown too high. The Case is quickly Unfolded. Dr.
Price was Country. Man, Kinsman, and great Acquaintance of the Lord Keepers. By
whose procurement he was sent a Commissioner into Ireland two years before,
with Mr. Justice Jones, Sir T. Crew, Sir James Perrot, and others, to rectify
Grievances in Church and Civil State that were complained. In Executing which
Commission he came of with Praise, and with Encouragement from His Majesty,
that he should not fail of Recompense for his Well-doing. Much about the time
that the Prince returned out of Spain the Bishopric of Asaph soll void; the
County of Merioneth, where Dr. Price was Born, being in the Diocese. The Lord
Keeper attempted to get that Bishopric for Dr. Price. But the Prince, since
the time that by his Patent he was styled Prince of Wales, had Claimed the
Bishoprics of that Principality for his own Chaplains: So Dr. Melburn, and Dr.
Carlton, were preferred to St. David's and Landaff. And Asaph was now Conferred
upon Dr. Hanmer his Highness's Chaplain, that well deserved it. A little before
King James's Death, Dr. Hampton, Primate of Armach, as stout a Prelate, and as
good a Governor as the Sea had ever enjoyed, Died in a good old Age. Whereupon
the Keeper interposed for Dr. Price to Succeed him. But the Eminent Learning of
Dr. Usher, (for who could match him all in all in Europe?) carried it from his
Rival. Dr. Price was very Rational, and a Divine among those of the first Note,
according to the small skill of my Perceivance: And his Hearers did testify as
much, that were present at his Latin Sermon, and his Lectures pro gradu in
Oxford. But because he had never Preached so much as one Sermon before the
King, and had left to do his calling in the Pulpit for many years, it would not
be admitted that he should Ascend to the Primacy of Armach, no, nor so much as
succeed Dr. Usher in the Bishopric of Meth. To which Objection, his Kinsman,
that stickled for his Preferment, could give no good Answer; and drew of with
so much ease upon it, that the Reverend Dr. Usher had no cause to Regret at the
Lord Keeper for an Adversary; Neither did Dr. Price ever show him Love after
that day; and the Church of England, then, or sooner, lost the Doctors Heart.

214. It is certain that all Grants at the Court went with the Current of my
Lord Dukes Favor. None had Power to oppose it, nor the King the Will. For he
Ruled all his Majesty's Designs: I may not say his Affections: Yet the L.
Keeper declined him sometimes in the Dispatches of his Office, upon great and
just Cause. Whereupon the King would say in his pleasant Manners, That he was a
stout Man that durst do more than himself. For since his Highness's return out
of Spain, if any Offices were procured in State of Reversion, or any Advouzons
of Church Dignities, he interposed, and stopped the Patents, as Injurious to the
Prince, to whose Donation they ought to belong in just time, and preserved them
for him, that all such Rewards might come entire and undefloured to his
Patronage. Wherein his Highness maintained his Stiffness; for that foresight
did procure, that his own Beneficence should be unprevented. And he carried
that Respect to the Dukes Honor, nay to his Safety, (for notice was taken of
it) that he would not admit his Messages in the Hearing of Causes, (no not when
his chief Servants attended openly in Court to Countenance those Messages) to
carry him a-wry, and to oppress the Poorest, and whose Faces he had never seen,
with the least wrong. Judicii tenax suit, neque aliis potius quam sibi
credidit, as Capitolinus makes it a good Note of Maximus. He would believe his
own Judgment, and his own Ears, what they heard out of Depositions, and not the
Representation of his best Friends that came from partial Suggestions. Such
Demands as are too heavy to ascend, let them fall down in pieces, or they will
break him at the last, that gives them his Hand to lift them up. In this only
he would not stoop to his Grace; but pleased himself that he did displease him.
And being threatened, his best Mitigation was, That perhaps it was not safe for
him to deny so great a Lord, yet it was safest for his Lordship to be Denied.
It was well returned. For no Arrand was so privily conveyed in that kind, to
press an Injury against any Man, but might come about to be Scanned. Little did
a greater Man than the Duke, the Emperor Ludovicus, called the Holy, Dream,
That he should be Persecuted so far by his Son Lotharius. and Edo Bishop of
Rhemes, to set under his Hand an Acknowledgment of his Errors in forcing Judges
to do unjustly: Yet it was so, as it is in Baron. An. 833. Com. 17. Inter
Ludovici crimina quae public agnouit
Quod Judicantes ad falsum Judicium induxit.
Of two Evils the less was to be chosen by the Keeper, rather to provoke one
Man, then all Men; nay, rather to provoke Man than GOD: That some will be
provoked it cannot be avoided. It is best to instance in a whole Nation, to
give no Offense. Aristides in one of his Orations Censures the Old Romans, (and
the Modern are no better.) They held all that were under them for Slaves, and
all that would be Freemen, and not Slaves, for Enemies. The King heard the
noise of these Crashes; and was so pleased, that he Thanked God before many
Witnesses, that he had put the Keeper into that Place: For, says he, He that
will not wrest Justice for Buckingham 's Sake, whom I know he Loves, will never
be corrupted with Money, which he never Loved. His Majesty would have a Judge
to be such a one as Justinian aimed at, Novel. 17. Vir optimus, and purus, and
his contentus quae a fisco dantur: A good Man, that took nothing of the People,
but was contented with such Wages as the King gave him. He had found the Man.
And because the Lord Keeper had Husbanded that Stock Three years and half, and
lived fairly upon it, and was not the Richer by the Sale of one Cursitors Place
in all that time, His Majesty Granted him a Suit, by the Name of a
New-Years-Gift, after the size of the Liberality of that good Master, which was
enough to keep a Bountiful Christmas twice over. The Giver did not repent him,
but thought himself repaid, with a Conceit, that this most useful Counselor
produced at that Season, about the Children of the Prince Elector. The Spanish
Treaties were laid aside, and new Ones from France rose up in their Room; which
being Examined, it could not appear that they did portend any Comfort to the
Recuperation of the Palatinate. His Majesty bewailed that his Grandchildren,
then Young and Tender, would be very Chargeable to England when they grew to be
Men. It was their Sole Refuge. They might Seek their Fortune in another place,
and come home by Spills-Bury. Sir, says the Lord Keeper, Will you be pleased to
listen to me, taking in the Prince his Consent, of which I make no doubt, and I
will show, how you shall furnish the Second and Third Brothers with Preferments
sufficient to maintain them, that shall cost you nothing. Breed them up for
Scholars in Academial Discipline; keep them strictly to their Books, with such
Tutors as will Teach them, not to abuse themselves with vain Hopes upon the
Greatness of their Birth. For it is a Folly to gape after the Fruit hanging
upon a high Tree, and not to know how to Climb it. If they fall to their
Studies, design them to the Bishoprics of Durham and Winchester, when they
become void. If that happen in their Nonnage, which is probable, appoint
Commendatories to discharge the Duty for them for a laudable Allowance, but
gathering the Fruits for the support of your Grandchildren, till they come to
Virility to be Consecrated. George Duke of Anhault, having Ministerial Gifts,
was Ordained into that Holy Calling at Magdeburg, and yet put to no Shifts; as
Melancthon is my Author, and many more. The Priestly Office was esteemed from
the beginning fittest for the best Gentlemen; for the Firstborn among them
that served the Truo God. And the Romans, who served them that were no Gods,
learned it at Athens from Theseus, (Plut. in vita.) (...) That Citizens of the
Noblest Blood should be trained up in knowledge of Sacred Things, and be made
the Administrators of Divine Mysteries. And I am at another Benefit, wherein I
praise God that I am assured Your Majesty will concur with me, That the Office
of a Bishop, imprudently by many M^lign'd, (I might charge them with a worse
Crime) will be the more Invi^lable, when the Branches of Your Royal Stock have
so great an Interest in it. And such Provision is Needful against Schismatical
Attempts, both for Religious Sake, and the Public Weal. For if such great
Superstructions should fall, all would come to Ruin that is round about them. I
will yet go further: If Your Majesty think a Bishopric, though of the best
kind, too little for either of them; you may please to annex to each of them
one of your principal Offices of State, as You find them Trusty and Discreet.
When he had ended, As I Live, says the King, I will fellow this Direction: I
thank you heartily for it; and I attend it, that it will save me more then the
worth of a Subsidy. Thus far these Matters were well Chewed: But because they
were not followed, when others bore the sway, they never came to a second
Conc^ction.

215. The Peaceable Period of King James's Reign drew on, when the times were
active about a Marriage between our Prince, and a Daughter of France, the
youngest of Henry the Great's Posterity, (for she was a Posthuma) a Princess
eminently adorned with many Rays of Honor, celebrated far and wide for Beauty,
Wit, and sweet Disclosures of Behavior. The Lord Keeper was not used in
Counsel about it, till after many sendings to and fro: Yet what fell out at
last for his part, to the better Understanding of Conditions of Agreement, is
worthy to hang upon the File of Honorable Registry. Viscount Kers^ng^^^.
Created of Holland in the pursuance of that Service, was sent into France
almost a Twelvemonth before, to discover what Approbation was like to follow,
if this Match were offered. The Earl had an Amorous Tongue, and a Wise Head,
could Court it Smoothly as any Man with the French Ladies, and made so
Fortunate an account into England after Three Months of his Introductions, that
he saw no fear of denial in the Suit, nor of Spinosity in the Articles. But
because he was (...) put in Trust by the Lord Duke, and our King would scarce
acknowledge that he had given him Authority for all that he had done, He sent
the Earl of Carlisle after him, His Majesty much affying in that Lords Fidelity,
and put them both into the same Commission. They were Peers of the best Luster
in our Court, Elegant in their Persons, Habit, and Language; and by their
nearness to King (...), apt Scholars to learn the Principles of Wisdom, and the
sitter to improve their Instructions to Honor and Safety. While these Things
went on, the (...) made it is Thought and Study, what to do befitting a
Counselor, and (...) upon the prospect of the hopeful Marriage. When the Eyes
of all our (...) were set upon the Infanta of Spain, he took into his House, as
it is formerly remembered, a Spaniard by Birth, and a Scholar, John Taxeda, by
whose Conversation he grew expert in the Spanish Grammar, in the Castilian
Pronunciation, and in the Knowledge of those Authors, that in Ten Weeks he
could not only understand the most difficult Writers of that Nation, but was
able to Entreat with the Ambassadors without an Interpreter. How much will
Fruit upon in one Man's Intellectuals before another, who has the advantage of
so much Sun and Warmth in his Brains. Now, when the Glorious Nuptial Torch was
in Election to be lighted from the Neighbor Kingdom of France, he endeavored
to make himself expert in that quaint and voluble Language; and by parling
often with a Servant, whom he had listed into the Check of his House for that
purpose, a Frenchman, that was continually at his Elbow, in Three Months he was
as ready at it to Read, Write, or Speak, as he that had lain Liegier Three
years for it at Paris. And to Evidence that he had a public Soul in every
thing, where he put his Finger, as he had caused a Translation of our Liturgy
out of Latin into Spanish, to be finished by Taxeda, and Printed it at his own
Costs; so to go no less in his Preparations for this French Association, he
encouraged a most able Divine. Mr. Delaun Minister of the French Church in
Norwich, to turn that Excellent Liturgy into his Country Language, which was
effected, and the accurate Translator greatly both Commended, and Rewarded.
Hereupon how it happened that our Liturgy, now made legible to the French, did
clear the Church of England, even to the Conscience of its Enemies, especially
from the gross Slanders of Fugitives, that had gone out from us, is a passage
that may challenge Publication, with the Attendance of its Circumstances.

216. His Majesty having in the behalf of his Son, begun the woing part to
Madam Henrietta Maria, with due Ceremony of State: The Queen Mother, Moderatrix
of this and all other Solemn Negotiations in France at that time, bethought
seriously to have this Happiness, and high Honor settled upon her Daughter. And
her First prudential forecast was, not to loiter out time with a Spanish Pause,
nor to endanger the forfeiture of a Bond of such Royal Love, for want of
payment of Courtesy at the due day. Therefore she dispatched Marquess Fiatte,
afterward the great Financer, and Monsieur Villoclare, one of the principal
Secretaries, Ambassadors extraordinary into England, to remove all Obstructions
by their Commission, and wise management of it, and to entwine the Rose and
Lilly upon one Matrimonial Stem. When they Landed, the King had removed himself
from New Market to Trinity College in Cambridge, where he gave Audience to
those Ambassadors, providing to their welcome this Grace more then ordinary,
That he received them where his choicest Darlings, the liberal Arts were round
about him. Now that the Conferences about this Marriage were gone so far, and
seemed, as it were, to be over the last Fire, and sit for Projection, his
Majesty would have the Lord Keeper taken into the Cabinet, and to make him
known by a Mark of some good Address to the French Gallants, upon the return of
the Ambassadors to London, he sent a Message to him, to signify that it was
his pleasure, that his Lordship should give an Entertainment to the
Ambassadors, and their Train, upon Wednesday following, it being Christmass-Day
with them, according to the Gregorian Prae-occupation of ten days before our
Account. The King's Will signified, the invitement at a Supper was given and
taken. Which was provided in the College of Westminster, in the Room Named
Jerusalem Chamber; but for that Night it might have been called Lucullus his
Apollo. But the Ante-past was kept in the Abbey, as it it went before the Feast,
so it was beyond it, being purely an Episcopal Collation. The Ambassadors, with
the Nobles and Gentletlemen in their Company, were brought in at the North-Gate
of the Abbey, which was stuck with Flambeaux every where, both within, and
without the Quire, that strangers might cast their Eyes upon the slateliness of
the Church. At the Door of the Quire the Lord Keeper besought their Lordships
to go in, and to take their Seats there for a while, promising in the Word of a
Bishop that nothing of ill Relish should be offered before them; which they
accepted; and at their Entrance the Organ was touched by the best Finger of
that Age, Mr. Orlando Gibbons. While a Verse was played, the Lord Keeper
presented the Ambassadors, and the rest of the Noblest Quality of their Nation,
with our Liturgy, as it spoke to them in their own Language; and in the
Delivery of it used those few Words, but pithy, That their Lordships at Leisure
might Read in that Book, in what Form of Holiness our Prince Worshipped God,
wherein he durst say nothing savored of any Corruption of Doctrine, much less
of Heresy, which he hoped would be so reported to the Lady Princess Henrietta.
The Lord Ambassadors, and their Great Train took up all the Stalls, where they
continued about half an Hour, while the Quire-men, Vested in their Rich Copes,
with their Choristers, sung three several Anthems with most exquisite Voices
before them. The most honorable, and the meanest persons of the French
Attended all that time uncovered, with great Reverence, except that Secretary
Villoclare alone kept on his Hat. And when all others carried away the Looks of
Common Prayer commended to them, he only lest his in the Stall of the Quire
where he had sat; which was not brought after him ( Ne Margarita, etc.) as if
had forgot it.

217. At the same time among those Persons of Gallantry that came into England,
to make up the Splendour of the Embassage, and were present at this Feast
d'Amours, as some of themselves called it, there was an Abbat, but a Gentleman
that held his Abbacy ^lla mode de France, in a lay Capacity. He had received
the Gift of our Service Book, and to requite the Doner, having much of a
Scholar, and of ingenuous Breeding, he laid aside all other business to read it
over. Like a Vowed Person to another Profession he was not hasty to praise it,
but suspended his Sentence, till he might come in Place to see the practice of
it. It was well thought of by him, that the Trial of the soundness in Religion
consists not all together in the Draught of a Book, but in the motion likewise,
and Exercise of it. The Abbat made his mind known to the Lord Keeper by Sir
George Goring (now Earl of Norwich) that he would gladly be present in the Abbey
of Westminster upon our Christmas Day in the morning, to behold and hear how
that great Feast was solemnized in our Congregations, which heard very ill
beyond the Seas for Profaneness: Whereas the Book for Uniformity of Public
Prayer, which he had received, though it was not set off with much Ceremony to
quicken Devotition, yet it wanted neither a stamp of Reverence, nor the metal
of Godliness; Yet he would be careful in Launching out so far in Curiosity, to
give no Scandal to Catholics, whose Jealousy might perhaps suspect him, as if
he thought it lawful to use both ours and the Church of Rome's Communion.
Therefore he made suit to be placed, where none could perceive him, and that an
Interpreter of the Liturgy might assist him, to turn the Book, and to make
right Answers to such Questions, as fell by the way into his Animadversions.
None more forward then the Lord Keeper to meet the Abbat in this Request.
Veritas oculatos testes non refermidat. The Abbat kept his hour to come to
Church upon that High Feast, and a Place was well fancied aloft, with a Latice
and Curtains to conceal him. Mr. William Beswell, like Philip Riding with the
Treasurer of Queen Candace in the same Chariot, sat with him, directing him in
the Process of all the Sacred Offices performed, and made clear Explanation to
all his scruples The Church Work of that ever Blessed day fell to the Lord
Keeper to perform it; but in the place of the Dean of that Collegiate Church.
He sung the Service, Preached the Sermon, Consecrated the Lords Table; and
being assisted with some of the Prebendaries, distributed the Elements of the
Holy Communion to a great multitude, meekly kneeling upon their knees. Four
hours and better, were spent that morning before the Congregation was dismissed
with the Episcopal Blessing. The Abbat was entreated to be a Guest at the
Dinner, provided in the College-Hall, where all the Members of that
Incorporation Feasted together, even to the Eleemosynaries, called the
Beads-men of the Foundation; no distinction being made, but high and low Eating
their Meat with gladness together, upon the occasion of our Saviors Nativity,
that it might not be forgotten, that the poor Shepherds were admitted to
Worship the Babe in the Manger, as well as the Potentates of the East, who
brought Rich Presents to offer up at the shrine of his Cradle. All having had
their comfort both in Spiritual and Bodily Repast, the Master of the Feast, and
the Abbat, with some few beside, retired into a Gallery. The good Abbat
presently showed that he was Bred up in the Franco-Gallican Liberty of Speech,
and without further Proem, defies the English that were Roasted in the Abbeys
of France for lying Varlets, above all others that ever he met. We have none of
their good word, I am sure, says the Keeper; but what is it that does empassion
you for the present against them? That I shall calmly tell your Lordship, says
the Abbat, I have been long inquisitive what outward Face of God's Worship was
retained in your Church of England? What Decorums were kept in the external
Communion of your Assemblies. St. Paul did Rejoice to behold good Order among
the Colossians, as well as to hear of the stedfastness of their Faith, cap.
2.5. Therefore, waving Polemical Points of Doctrine, I demanded after those
things that lay open to the view, and pertain'd to the Exterior Visage of the
House of God. And that my Intelligence might not return by broken Merchants,
but through the best Hands, I consulted with none but English in the Affairs of
their own home; and with none but such as had taken the Scapular, or Habit of
some Sacred Order upon them, in Affairs of Religion. But Jesu how they have
deceived me! What an Idea of Deformity Limm'd in their own Brain, have they
hung up before me? They told me of no composed Office of Prayer used in all
these Churches by Authority, as I have found it this day, but of extemporary
Bablings. They traduced your Pulpits, as if they were not possessed by Men that
be Ordein'd by imposition of Hands, but that Shopkeepers, and the Scum of the
people Usurp that Place in course one after another, as they presumed
themselves to be Gifted. Above all they turned their Reproaches against your
behavior at the Sacrament, describing it as a prodigious Monster of
Profaneness: That your Tables being furnished with Meats and Drinks, you took
the Scraps and Rellicks of your Bread and Cups, and call upon one another to
remember the Passion of our Lord Jesus. All this I perceive is infernally
false. And though I deplore your Schism from the Catholic Church, yet I should
bear false Witness, if I did not confess, that your Decency which I discerned
at that Holy Duty was very allowable in the Consecrator and Receivers.

218. My Brother Abbat, (says the Lord Keeper with a Smile,) I hope you will
think the better of the Religion, since on Christ's good Day your own Eyes have
made this Observation among us. The better of the Religion says the Abbat
(taking the Words to relate to the Reformed of France) nay taking all together
which I have seen among you (and he brought it out with Acrimony of Voice, and
Gesture) I will lose my Head, if you and our Hugenots are of one Religion. I
protest

Sir, says the Keeper, you divide us without Cause. For the Harmony of
Protestant Confessions, divulged to all the World, do manifest our Consonancy
in Faith, and Doctrine, And for diversity in outward Administrations, it is a
Note as Old as Irenaeus, which will justify us from a Rupture, that variety of
Ceremonies in several Churches, the Foundation being preserved, does commend
the Unity of Faith. I allow what Irenaeus writes, says the Abbat, for we our
selves use not the same Offices and Breviares in all Places. But why do not the
Hugonots at Charenton, and in other Districts, follow your Example; Because,
says the Lord Keeper, no part of your Kingdom but is under the Jurisdiction of
a Diocesan Bishop, and I know you will not suffer them to set up another Bishop
in the Precincts of that Territory, where one is established before; that would
savor of Schism in earnest. And where they have no means to maintain Gods
Worship with costly Charge, and where they want the Authority of a Bishop among
them, the people will arrogate the greatest share in Government; so that in
many things you must excuse them, because the Hand of constraint is upon them.
But what constreins them, says the Abbat, that they do not Solemnize the
Anniversary Feast of Christ's Nativity, as you do? Nay as we do? for it is for
no better Reason, then because they would be unlike to us in every thing? Do
you say this upon certainty, says the Keeper, or call me Poultron, if I feign
it, says the other. In good troth says the Keeper, you tell me News. I was ever
as Tully writes of himself to Atticus, in Curiositate (...), apt to search
narrowly into Foreign Churches; and I did never suspect, that our Brethren,
that live with you were deficient in that Duty. For the Churches of the
Low Countries, of Heidelberg, Helvetia, Flassia, Breme, and others, do observe
a yearly Day to the Memory of our Saviors Birth. I conceive the like for
Geneva. For when Calvin had retired to Basil, some mutation about Holy Feasts
was made in Geneva. Upon his Return thither again, Hallerius both in his own
and in Musculus his Name, complains that the Celebration of that Memorable
Feast was Neglected. Calvin Returns him Answer (the Epistle is extant dat anno
1551. Jan.) Sancte testari possum me inscio, ac ne optante quidem hanc rem
^uisse transactam -- Ex quo sum revocatus, hoc temperamentum quaesivi, ut
Christi Natalis celebraretur vestro more. But will you have the Judgment of
Protest out Divines, when they were in a Globe, and Collection together from
all Quarters: At the Synod of Dort, convened about six years past, all the
Divines, with the Assessors from the States, intermitted their Sessions against
the Feast of Christ's Nativity with (...) Suffrages, and the Reason is given in
plain Words Sessio. 36. December. 1^. Quia to tempore Festum Natalis D. N. Jesu
Christi instabat, propter cujus celebrationem, etc. It will be the harder for
those of the Religion in France to Answer for this Omission. Yet Judge more
Charitably, then to think they do it only out of Crossness to disconform to
your Practice. He that runs backward further then he need from his Adversary,
plays his Prize like a Coward And I use to say it often, that there ought to be
no secret Antipathies in Divinity, or in Churches, for which no Reason can be
given. But let every House sweep the Dust from their own Door. We have done our
endeavor, God be Praised, in England, to Model a Churchway, which is not
afraid to be searched into by the sharpest Critics for Purity, and Antiquity.
But as Pacat. said in his Paneg. in another Case, Parum est quando caeperit,
terminum non habebit. Yet I am confident it began when Christ taught upon
Earth, and I hope it shall last till he comes again. I will put my Attestation
thus far to your Confidence, says the Abbat, that I think you are not far from
the Kingdom of Heaven. So with mutual Smiles and Embraces they parted.

219. Paulo Majora. The next was the greater grapple, upon Terms Political and
Scholastical, between the Lord Keeper, and Mounsieur Villoclare, who is
mentioned before. The King was now at White Hall; and the French Agents plied
it to concord Conditions for the Royal Marriage. And who so busy to trouble
the Scene, with a new part not concerned in the Plot of the Comedy, as our
Nimble-headed Recusants? The Secretary Villoclare was accounted, and not
mistaken to be a servent Zealot in his own Religion; which our English had
learnt, by resorting daily to Mass in the Ambassadors House. These found Access
unto him and sighed out their Grievances before him, that their Priests, who
adventured to come to them for their Souls Health, were Executed for Traitors;
and themselves were set such Fines for their Conscience, that they were utterly
impoverished. How happy should that Honorable Person be, that would skreen
them from the scorching of this Persecution? That his Lordship had Opportunity
for his Power, and his Piety could not want will, to enter into a Motion for a
relaxation of their Miseries, among such Articles as were to be Granted for the
Honor, and Happiness of the approaching Nuptials. The Secretary heard them,
and condoled with them; promised his Pains, and to be an earnest Proctor in
their Cause, holding it most meritorious, to go or run on such an Errand. And
he sell to his work in good earnest, and asked such large concessions for his
Clients, (or rather challenged such Grace with horrid Liberty, then Petitioned
for it) that the King was observed to begin to be cooler in the Treaty for the
Marriage, then he had been. The Lords that plied it beyond the Seas at the
L^^r, had not discouraged the Ambassadors before they set forward; but rather
pleased them with hopes of English Courtesies, and condescentions. And I fear
they were persuaded into too much confidence; for I have heard it often from
the Followers of the Earl of Carlisle, that after Articles had been drawn, and
Engrossed, some things were Erazed, some things Interlaced, which never had his
Lordships Approbation Our Courtiers at White Hall, through whose Counsels and
Resolves the Grants of Monsieur Villoclare were to pass, though directly they
did dot yield to him, yet, his driving was so furious, that they declined to
deny him, and shift for themselves that the first Storm of his Passion might
not fall upon them. Therefore they told him, they could not assure him he had
prevailed, till he had spoke with the Lord Keeper, whose Duty it was to Examine
such things, upon his Peril, what were sit, or not sit for the King's
Conscience, Honor, and Safety, before the Great Seal were put to. The Keeper
heard of all this, and sent to the Duke, as he had wrote to him before, Cab. p.
95. I shall be in a pitiful perplexity, if his Majesty shall turn the
Ambassadors upon me altogether unprovided, how to Answer. But he cast it up
into this short Sum, that the disappointment of this Vexatious Solicitor, so
far engaged, must light upon himself, and the displeasure of all the French,
that wished it good speed. He was not to learn, that a Magistrate in his Place
must have a strong back to bear the Burden of Envy. So he Collected his
thoughts into rational preparations, and was provided for a Bickering; which
began on the Eighth of January, and held long. And it must be warned, that the
Report of it which follows extends the length, above that which past between
them on that occasion. The Secretary Vill^are after he had parted from the Lord
Keeper, and brought his business to a justifiable Maturity, through the
direction of some of our best Lawyers, as the way was chalked to to him, had
Audience with the King, and Entreated with his Majesty upon Terms of greater
moderation, then formerly he had done; which he confessed was brought about from
a Conference with the Lord Keeper. And told his Majesty, That Counselor had
given him small content in a long Argument vexed between them; for he had
Preached to him till he was weary to hear his Divinity, though it was Learned,
and of more Acuteness then he expected in that Cause, but unsatisfactory to
Catholics, as could be framed: Yet he made him amends with such Counsel in the
end, that now he knew upon what Ground he stood; what Laws and Statutes were in
force against that model of Mercy, which he had urged; and how the Clemency,
and Power of his Majesty was retrenched by them. Therefore as he hoped to find
his Majesty Sweet and Gracious, so his Majesty should find him tractable, that
the Thrice Noble and Primary design, about which he came, might not hover any
longer in suspense. Blessed be the Reduction of things to this good pass, said
the King. And that Aequanimity might not slip the Knot, his Majesty Commanded
the Keeper to draw up the Discourse lately past between the French Ambassador
and him, and to bring it with him; which he finished carefully, but with
Enlargements in some Places, as he can remember that turned his Books, and
assisted the Expedition. In some things more, in some things less was spoken at
first, but thus goes the Draught which the King received.

My Lord Ambassador Villoclare gave me a Breviate of the Instrument of Grace,
which he agitated to pass in the Behalf of the Romish Recusants. When he
supposed I had read it almost to the End, he spoke thus to the Matter, That it
would be a great Token of Assurance, that their Lady and Mistress should be
received into this Realm with the Love of the King, the Prince, and all good
English People, if the distressed Catholics, combined with her Highness's
Obedience to the same Church, might obtain, for her Sake, Indemnity from our
grievous Laws, live in security of Conscience for hence forth from continual
Persecution, and call this Year the Jubilee of the long afflicted, and the end
of their Oppression. I told him to this, that I should reply to him in
stanumering, and ill pronounced French, but with clear English Satisfaction.
Our Laws, said I, against (...) whose Clientele you undertake, have been
disputed both by Churchmen and States. (...), the Books are well known: And by
Debate of Arguments, we have justified the Wisdom and Moderation of our
Parliament, to all that can correct prejudice by Reason. What Law is rigid
which impendent Danger extorts for the Safety of the People? The Storms looked
black over our Heads in those times, when such Statutes past, so offensive to
your Lordship, and were enacted not out of Revenge for Wrongs sustained, but
out of Forecast against Harms to be prevented; not out of Spleen toward
Adversaries, but out of Charity to our selves. So much, and without Pause or
Faultring, I am compelled to say for our Laws, because I am a principal Judge
by the Favor of the King my Master, and sworn to the Maintenance of the Law.
This Answer, though neither tart nor umbragious, yet it set my Lord
Ambassador's Teeth on edge, and he rose up to these high Words at one pitch,
That he could not imagine how our Laws could have been sharpened with more
Cruelty against the Catholics: For it would look like Mercy to take away their
Lives; or rather than to cut them so low with the Sickle of Penal Statutes,
that they had scarce Stubble to maintain their Bodies, and their Souls were
utterly starved for want of Priests to instruct them; none of them daring to
adventure to hold out Breasts of Apostolic Doctrine, to feed them with sincere
Milk; but that resolved to be ripped up, and quartered for their Holy Duty. Yet
(he goes on) I bewail not so much those Excellent Servants of God executed upon
your Gibbets, they are recompensed with the Crown of Martyrdom: But you murder
the Souls of the Lay-Catholicks; and if you pity them not to the Good of their
Salvation, all other pretended Favors light upon them like Mildews, which are
not a fruitful, but a fatal Moisture? You know my meaning Sir, you are Learned
in Cases of Divinity, and need not to be told that the Use and Fruition of the
Sacraments are the vital Part of Christian Religion in our Catholic
Apprehension. Who shall celebrate them? Who shall impart them to this People
robbed of Christ? Who shall satiate their Souls with those Comforts, if the
Priests, the Dispensers of those Mysteries, be utterly kept from them? You
commonly say, you have done well for the Generality of Catholics, that they
have Liberty of Conscience. I say your Gift is useless, if you permit them not
Teachers that are set over their Conscience. We are more clement to the
Churches of Hugonots, and allow them their Ministers. Without that Favor, a
Rush for all the rest. Should I send Cloth and Food enough to a Fraternity of
Religious Men, What Good shall they reap from that Charity, if none shall be
suffered to make them Garments with that Cloth? None permitted to dress the
Meat that is sent them? Or let me spread before you your Unmerciful Dealing in
this Similitude; you have not made a Law to pull out their Eyes, but you have
past a Law that they shall have no Light to see by. My Lord, Why should I make
it a Labor to contest with you, to have no such Statutes in Force? Methinks it
is enough to prompt you, that such Incongruities, of very bad Fame Abroad,
should be supervised and corrected upon so demulcing an Occasion as this
Marriage? Thus far my Lord Secretary: To whom I said in this Manner.

221. Provident Men, and the Learnedest in all Faculties, voted those Laws to
be in Power, and at some times to be put in ure, which your Lordship condemns
with a very stinging Invective. At which I less marvail, because you are a
Stranger here, and not acquainted with the Reasons and Motions that produced
them. And since you know not how they rose, you are no competent Judge when
they should fall. In Fifty Years after they were first ordained, they that have
succeeded in Power and Authority, have not repented of them; but all, to whom
the Care of the Kingdom's Welfare is committed, have continued them. Being
nevertheless as pitiful as any, that have soft Hearts, and Christian
Principles. For though the Terror of the Laws is great, yet the Execution has
been gentle. Such as are convict of Recusancy (who are no great Number in this
Land) they alone pay Pecuniary Mulcts; but upon such easy Compositions, that
they have both the Crust and the Crumb of their Estates to themselves, and the
King has scarce the Chippings. The Disbursments of the Crown are great, and
the more under a most Munificent King; so that the Exchequer sometimes expects
the Aid of a plentiful Tribute: Yet these, your Lordship's Clients, never
contributed the Fifth Part of that which might have been called for, least they
should say, We have made Abraham rich. But, my Lord, most Men live, as if they
lived to this World only, and therefore never think they have enough of Wealth.
I am willing to refer it to this Disease, which is common to most in corrupted
Nature, that they that put on this Complaint, fill your Lordship's Ears with
Whining that their Purses are no fuller. If they say they are become indigent,
or Bankrupts by the Issues of slender and mitigated Payments, the Lie is
written in their Foreheads: We live with them, we know their Possessions:
Their Seats are well repaired, and bravely furnished; their Credit is good with
our Merchants; They give Portions in Marriages with their Daughters, as great
as the best of the King's Subjects, considered to have equal Estates of Wealth.
Their Gallantry, their Feasting, their Revelling and Gaming are seen in the
broad Daylight. They bear their Heads as high as their Equals in all Expenses.
These then are no Symptoms of Poverty: Neither do I blame them for bestowing a
generous and liberal Part of their own upon themselves; I should rebuke the
contrary. -- Nonne est manifest a phrenesis
Ut locuples moriaris egentis vivere fato?
But let them be thankful for their Store, and not attempt by Murmerings and
Outcries to make the Government odious, under which they prosper; as if the
Chief Shepherd of the People had not shorn a Lock of Wool from their Backs,
but devoured them. But what if they had been diminished to a visible Share of
their Substance? No worse Man than a Pope, Gregory the First, has given us
that Counsel. Lib. 3. Ep. 26. To Januarius Bishop of Calaris in Sardinia: Si
quis rusticus tantae fucrit perfidiae, and obstinationis inventus, ut ad
Dominum venire minime consentiat tanto pensionis onere gravandus est, ut ipsa
exactionis sure poena compellatur ad reclitudinem festinare. But we are guilty
of none of Gregory's Exactions. And let not your Friends, my Lord, think they
walk in a Mist, as if the King and his Ministers of State did not know what
Sums they effund by dangerous Conduit-Pipes, both to the Impoverishing of their
own Substance, and the exhausting of the Kingdom. First, The Priests, that jog
about from Shire to Shire, from House to House, are great Grinders: I know how
costly they are to their Disciples, who are like those in a facetious Author,
H^min^^s c^itellarii, magni sunt oneris, quicquid imp^ni^ vehunt. Plautus
M^stella. I know they pay the Charges of the Priests Journey to and fro to the
utmost Penny, their Fraught by Ship hither, their Horses and Convoys by Land;
their Entertainment cut deep, Obits, Dirges, Masses are not said for nothing.
Then in every Family, where they are received, they disperse Books for
Meditations and Holy Exercises, for which they are paid he sold more than the
Value. And above all, those indefinite Sums, imposed for Satisfaction by the
Will of the Confessor, are the strongest Purgation. My Lord, the Priest's
little Finger is thicker than the King's Loins. What they pay by Virtue of our
Laws so remi^sly exacted, is but like an honorary Present to a Lord in Chief;
but what they pay to their Ghostly Fathers, by their own Canonical Customs, is
above a Rent of Vassalage. And all this while the overflowing Tide of their
Expenses is but coming in. I am not but now at the high Water-Mark. King Philip
the Second of Spain, founded two Colleges for Jesuits of this Nation, at Sevil
and Valledolid, and he gave a Competency to their maintenance; but their
Well-wishers in England reach forth such Liberality to them, as makes them
flourish above their Foundation. Who but the same Benefactors supply the
Seminaries of their Countrymen in Artois and Flanders? Gregory the Thirteenth
gave little more than bare Walls to the English College at Rome: Yet they are
able to keep Festival Days with Bounty, and relieve Strangers wit Hospitality,
so long as their Treasurers receive plump Contributions from England; let them
be once stopped, and their Kitchen Fire will go out. And now be Judge your self,
Sir, if these Men as you supposed, were cut so low with the Sickle, that their
Lives were irksome, and that they had scarce Stabble to maintain them.

222. Hitherto I have proved, that we have been just in our Duties toward Men,
as Men, and as we are accountable to the second Table of the Law. Your
Pontificians, though esloigned from us in the Way of God's Worship, yet their
Persons are our Neighbors, therefore we do not forget them in the Debentures
of our Love. I grant it, before a Challenge be made, that I have performed
little, unless I can justify our Piety in the Survey of the first Table. And
to make it perspicuous and intelligible, I will fall into your Lordship's
Method, according to my best Remembrance. Consider, Sir, that the Comp^ainants,
for whose Sakes this Ball of Contention is tossed to and fro, are they that live
among us, yet profess Obedience to another Church. This we reckon to be a
Disease, and a sore one. The Care of their Souls belongs to the Supreme
Magistrate, who is to provide for all that are under his Allegiance, that they
may lead Godly, as well as quiet Lives. He would cure the Ill Affected by his
own Physicians. The Patients, very confident that they can choose best for
themselves, will listen to none, but such as the Magistrate, no less strong in
Confidence than they, foredooms, that by their Applications, both such as are
unsound will be past Hope of Recovery, and some that are sound will fall away
by Contagion Both of these being fixed upon the respective Persuasions of their
Minds, Which of them should yield with least Offense, and most Reason? I speak
as to external Compliance. Surely a public Conscience ought to be more
scrupulous than a private. The Supreme Ruler is (...), if he permits that which
his Heart condems, his Sin is completely voluntary. If the Inferior and the
Subjected yearns for Instructions and Helps in Religion, which under great
Forfeiture are prohibited to them, they cast their Burden upon Necessity, and
he is very rigorous, that will not say they are excusable. The loudest Bell of
the Petitioners Grievances, and that which is furthest hard, is, that they are
Men in Danger of Shipwreck for want of P^ots; their own Priests, to whose
Oversight they commit the Care of their Souls, are kept from them, and cannot,
with Comfort and Confidence, light their Knowledge from any other Lamps.
Conscience reclaims it, and if they are blind, yet blind Men must not be i^
entreated for their Blindness, but be led by the Hand. My Noble Lord
Villoclare, This Complaint, above all that can be said beside, is apt to work
upon Affections, to compassionate the Breathings of a Soul, which protests it
languisheth for want of due Means to know God, and to worship him. But
Affections, and the most tender of them, which is pi^y, have no Taste in them,
till they be seasoned with the Salt of Prudence. The Simple believes every
Word, but the Prudent looks well to his going, Prove. 14.15. Conscience is
offered, and set out as it were for a Lan horn upon the Pharos of this Motion.
But your Lordship, so excellent a Statesman, knows none better, that the
greatest Cheats that are put upon the World, are in the good Names of Love and
Conscience. Who has the Power to hurt, so soon as he, that would be believed
that he loves, and does not? And who so dangerous to overthrow Peace, as he
that pleads that Conscience is the only Cause of his Discontents and
Disobedience? He that baits his Hook with Niceness of Conscience, may catch --
What my Lord? Gudgions, but not a Salmon, for the Delusion is stale.

I must enter further into the Closet of this Objection. What Outcries are
these, that if their own Priests be restrained from them, their Souls shall
perish for lack of Knowledge? They that refuse to serve God with the King, and
his liege People, either already they know a better way, or they do not. If
they do, Why do they complain, as if they were brought to the utmost Extremity
of Perishing for want of Instructions? If they do not, Why do they choose a
contrariant Religion blindfold? Christians commonly thirst for Knowledge, not
perceiving that the chief thing they want is Obedience? This Itch has
descended from our Blood Royal, from the Top of our Kindred in Paradise. I
amplify my self further, that I may not give Scandal, as if I did not magnify
Knowledge; and how shall they know and hear without a Preacher? Romans 10.14. I
do subscribe it is the Powerful Ordinance to beget Children unto Christ, to
enliven them that are dead in their Sins; and to keep them to the Motions of
Sanctity, that are raised up to Newness of Life. Whosoever may enjoy that
Blessing, and out of Pride contemns it, or out of Sloth difuseth it, it will
beget in him an erroneous Understanding, a decaying Faith, and a corrupt Life.
And where the holding out of that Light is withdrawn from a Church by Darkness
of Persecution, it is God's Curse upon a Nation. And where it begins to clear
up again, after the Interposition of a Total, or a partial Eclipse, God call it
his great Mercy. Thy Teachers shall not be removed into a Corner any more, but
thine Eyes shall see thy Teachers, Isa. 30.20. But where Christians know the
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, both for Faith and Holiness, yet are
restrained by Laws (whether Just or unjust, is all one to this Argument) from
Church Officers to be among them, do they look to be believed when they say,
they are quite starved, because none are among them, in their Sense, lawfully
sent, to feed them with the Bread of the Gospel? Is there no way to preserve
that which is committed to them by Meditation, by Conference, by Reading? We
exact severely upon them, as they cry out, because we permit them not the
Tongues of some Men to edify them: But who are more hard-hearted? Who are they
that in such a Case of Destitution, will not allow them the Reading of the
Scriptures, that is, the Voice of God, to speak to them? As the Rock, of which
the Israelites drank, is said to go along with them in the Wilderness, And the
Rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4. So the Essence of a Church goes every where with
them, that nourish the Tradition of the true Faith in their Heart. I say, the
Church (and Christ ruling in it) is with such, wheresoever they live,
wheresoever they wander, though it be not Organized, as a complete Church
should be, with Bishops and Teachers. Our English Merchants Trade many Years
together at Sevile, Madrid, Alicant, and in other places, wanting the Angels of
those Churches, to whose Trumpets only they will hearken: Yet, whether they
live or die, many of the most Virtuous are well prepared for the Lord, because
they carry his true Church with them. He may go along in the strength of the
Spiritual Food, which he has eaten, who was fed like Elijah by an Angel sent
from Heaven. Let the Plant that is newly set be staked to prop it up, let it be
watered every Day: Does a grown Tree require such Tendance and Labor? So a
People that have lived always in Gentilism and Idolatry, but have given
admittance to Evangelists newly to enter in among them, let them be swift to
hear: And those happy Messengers, that bring the Glad-tydings of Salvation into
those Regions of Darkness, let them be as swift to speak. Who would not blow
hard to make green Wood kindle? If I were in their Room, that came to lay the
Foundation of Faith, where no Builder had been before, I should allow my self
no intermission of Preaching, but for small Repast, and necessary Rest. If I
were in such a City as Athens, that worshipped an unknown God, I hope I should
do as St. Paul did at the same Athens, Acts 17.17. He Preached not only to the
Jews and deveut Persons in their Synagogues, but in the Market daily with those
that met with him. But to be instant with that Importunity, where a People is
sufficiently enriched already in all Knowledge, some perhaps would apply the
old Proverb unto it, That it were to bring Owls to Athens. I thank your
Lordship with all humbleness for your Patience and Attention: And I am sure
your Lordship understands, that it is not to be expected, that a Nation should
disorder the frame of their Laws, to heap Teachers for every Sect in Religion.

223. But the finest slight to make the restraint of Priests odious, is upon
the necessary use of their Hand to confer the Sacraments. And they that are
contented with no less than seven, will pretend sooner to miss their
Administration, than we that give God thanks for two. My Lord, I will give no
offense to your Lordship, upon any thing that is controverted Dogmatically
between us and you, nor maintain a vexatious Problem in your hearing. I leave
you to the management of your Sacraments in France and Italy, as they are
constituted in such Nations by the Laws of Holy Church. Sail in what Vessels
you will in your own Seas. I consider now, I have done it often before, and
with the joint advice of most judicious Scholars, whether those Disciples of
the Roman Church, that live upon our Soil, are so streitned in the use of their
own Religion in this Land, that they should account themselves to be violently,
and as it were sacrilegiously kept from the Kingdom of Heaven, (as in those
words some of them have complained, and your Lordship seems to think no less)
except that some of the Order of Priesthood be permitted to be Conveyors of the
Sacraments of Grace unto them. Which I conceive is not suitable to the
Provisions of Cases exempt, and milder Concessions of their own Doctrine. The
Lord Ambassador had been offered a Chair before, and refused it: But the Point
coming as it were to the Cuspis, or Horoscope of Fortune, he accepted it, and
said, My Lord Keeper, your smooth Wit has searched far into many Scruples, but
this Knot will not be unloosed with a gentle Hand, but with Violence, which is
foul Play to be used to the strictest Bonds of Eternal Life. To which I
returned, I fear no prejudice, where so much Reason fits Judge, as your
Lordship brings with you. So I went on. That Sacrament which is the
Introduction into Membership of the Church of Christ is Baptism. The Apostles
and their Successors were appointed Stewards of it by Christ, to impart it to
all Nations, which were called first to be his Disciples. This is the direct
way. Yet it is agreed in your Schools, That if any Christian Man or Woman
Baptize an Infant with the Element of Water in the right form, that is, in the
Confession of the Holy Trinity, the Child is sufficiently Baptized, and is not
excluded the Kingdom of Heaven, for want of that Ordinance. This shift is
vulgarly approved among you in all places of the World. Then let that content
Catholic Parents in England, which is so general a remedy among your own
Devotees in case of necessity. And this Bush will stop the first Gap. Next, If
the Baptized die without Confirmation, none ever made it a Salvation-hazard.
Especially that Ceremony being not stubbornly rejected, but privatively
intercepted, because the proper Instrument is not in the way to act it. For how
many Biscainers have never heard of it? In whose Craggy Mountains, I am told, a
Bishop appears as seldom as a black Swan. I presume your Lordship is a
Mainteiner of the Canonical Privileges of Episcopacy; and you know without a
Bishop's shop's Hand, the Blessing of Confirmation hand no Validity by the
Canons, and perhaps no Entity in the Doctrine of the best Antiquity. Now if
this Sacrament, which comes limping after Baptism, must have a Bishop's Crosier
to stay it up, I know not whether our Romish Male contents demand that? Then
here is a Tale of new Tidings comes to my Ears, that, to integrate Sacred
Offices, they would have the Presence of a Bishop, as well as of a Priest; and
then these Adonijahs fly so high to ask for Abishag, that they may ask the
Kingdom also. The Ministers of the King of Spain, upon such an Occasion as your
Lordship is employed in, offered at such a thing in their Propositions to my
Royal Master's Commissioners. It pleases the Castilian Mouth to speak big, and
ask high; but we checked them with repulse and disdeign. And good Cause for it.
A Bishop will think his Wings pinioned if he have not a Consistory for
Jurisdiction: Vexations of Jurisdictive Power will provoke Appeals to the Court
of Rome: And then my Masters People should crouch for Justice to a Foreign
Potentate. But that Beast shall never get the Head to run a Wild-Goose-Chase
where it lists, while he holds the Bridle in his Hand.

My Lord Ambassador, There is nothing discoverable, though the wideness of the
British Ocean flow still between us and your Bishops, that their absence should
cross their Party that is among us from entering into Eternal Life. Which makes
the Sacrament of Order not to belong to our Argument. But Marriage does, it is
Gods Ordinance, who joined Man and Woman together in Paradise, and is fittest
to be celebrated among Christians in the Paradise of the Church-Assembly: And
to be blessed by those Servants of God his Priests, who are to bless his People
in all things, especially in so great a Mystery. The Question is, Whether a Man
should scruple not to Wed a Woman, unless she were joined to him by the Priests
of his own Communion? My Lord, Let me set the shape of it before you in another
Glass. If a Roman born and bred made choice of a Greekish Woman for his Wife
among Greeks, in Morea or Thessalonica, would the Wedlock be esteemed
ineffectual, if a Priest of the Ordination of the Greek Church did tie the
Knot? The Ordination of our Clergy is nearer to you, than the Greeks. Indeed I
never heard but a good Wife, and a rich Portion would be welcome to a Recusant,
though a Minister made by Imposition of Hands in this Kingdom did join them.
And I never heard that such Married Ones, as departed out of our Church to
yours, were questioned among you upon the Truth of their Matrimony, which they
brought with them from hence. And it is well done of you, lest we should require
Exceptions, and make the Issue of the most of the Roman Catholics in the Land
Illegitimate. It is in our Power to do so, because they are not scrupulously
Married by that Form, which our Laws have provided, and with an even Obedience
to every tittle of our Prescriptions. But many things are lawful, which are not
expedient.

224. The Annoiting of the Sick may come in next, or in what Order you will, my
Lord. I know it is called Extreme Unction in some Writers sense, because it is
the Extreme Sacrament, when the Soul is about to take its leave of all
Sacraments As soon as I have named it, I am ready to shake Hands, and part with
it. What if some, in the infirmity of their Sickness, desire it, because the
Tradition of the Church has commended it? Yet none is so superstitious to
think, that Comfort cannot be infused into them, that are at the point of
Death, sufficiently without it. St. Stephen departed without Extreme Unction,
and yet the Lord Jesus received his Spirit. Men condemned by the Law, and led
to Execution, but well prepared for a better Life by their Ghostly Fathers,
neither have it, nor crave it. But they that are most impotent, most affected
with Languor, are subject to a most disordered Appetite. Why, suppose then one
that is sick, should have this Pica, and long to be Annoiled? Why might not a
Lay-Friend Annoil, as well as Baptize? Eckius would have us believe that the
blessed Virgin, and your peculiar Saint, St. Genouefa, have Anointed many that
were sick, and they have recovered. Yet lest it should be evaded, that these
were Persons of miraculous Endowments, hear the Words of Pope Innocent the
First, that are as large as can be, and allowed to be his, speaking of this
sick Man's Salve: Omnibus uti Christianis licet in sua aut suorum necessitate
inungendo. Which Papal Sentence our Countryman Bid quotes, and makes it full
on this wise, not only Presbyters, but any Christians may Anoint the Infirm in
case of necessity. Will you have the Judgment of some that are latter than
Innocent and Bid? Hear one, but a sound Card, Bonaventure upon the Sentences,
Potest dispensari in casu necessitatis a non Sacerdotibus. For the Sacrament of
the Altar, my Lord, as you speak in your Dialect, it is necessary Necessitate
Praecepti, non Medii, say both your Divines, and ours. That is in a longer
Paraphrase, the Commandment to Take, and Eat, I and to Drink too, must
necessarily be obeyed by them that can keep it: But it has not such a strict
tie with the Covenant of Salvation, That all they shall fail of final Mercy,
who are impeded to partake without any fault of theirs. Infants lack the taste
of that Heavenly Food, and are not prejudiced: For our Savior required it of
none, but of such as could actually believe that he died for the Sins of the
World. Is not the same Indulgence intended toward them, and far rather, who
believe in Christ's Death, and would enjoy the Sacrament that Annuntiates his
Death, but cannot. Your Gravest Authors do please themselves in the Words of
Rupertus, and they are grown to be the trivial Quotation upon this Case, Non
judicatur apud Deum non manducare, nisi qui manducare noluit, qui non curavit,
qui neglexit. The desire of the Heart supplies the defect of actual
Manducation. Time was more than 1300 Years ago, when those that sat at the
Helm of the most Dignified Churches, and steered the Conclusions of Divine
Truth, were more rigid upon this Theme, than they that hold the same Sees in
these Days. They were so literal in the sense of those words, Job. 6.53. Except
ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, you have no Life in
you; that an Infant Baptized was presently admitted to the Sumption of the
Sacred Elements: That believing People, in danger to be separated from their
Pastors in time of Persecution, were suffered to reserve the Consecrated Bread,
and to eat it reverently at Home. These Customs are utterly melted away into
disuse, and the latter overthrown by a Curse in the first Council of Toledo. At
this Day your Canons enjoin no more, But that every faithful Man and Woman
partake of Christ's Body once a Year at Easter. And how gentle are your Casuists
in their Copious Relaxations upon the Obligation to this Canon? You shall hear
but one speak, Navarr Enchirid. Cap. 21. Every Notorious Cause excuses those
that receive not once a Year. And it is allowed to be a Notorious Cause if
danger to lose Life, or Hmour, or Fortunes does distein a Christian. Therefore
a Woman that has a Child at her Breast is dispensed with for the Sucklings
sake. And a Widow in some places, who keeps the fashion to mourn a twelvemonth
at Home, before she appears in public. Nay, Caution is made to absolve them
that are raggedly, or meanly apparelled, and would be ashamed to have the Eyes
of some cast upon them in their homely Garments. You cannot go lower, unless
you could throw less than one Ace upon a Dye. Excuses you see are cheap,
because that Sacrament is not rated so dear, as if it were taken, or not taken
upon the price of Salvation.

225. And now, that your Lordship may undergo no longer Penance to hear me upon
this Subject, I will dispatch with the Consideration of your Sacrament of
Penance: For whose use and necessity the Priests contend more than the People.
And if we of the Reformed Clergy had not set before our Eyes the Naked
Simplicity of the Gospel, rather than our own Interests and Emolument, we would
never have ridden that stiff-headed Beast the Multitude without this Bridle.
The Power of the Keys, do you call it? And so ye may: For the Locks of all
Secrets fly open before it; and every Man's Coffers are at the Command of the
Confesson. Confession of all Sin, especially the most to be blushed at, though
lodged in the darkest Cellar of the Heart, is a heavy Burden: Yet any wise Man
will resolve not to be shame-faced, but to endure that, which he must bear by a
rigid, and peremptory Law. If there be no remedy, as the Confessors say, but
either reveal your Sin, even to all their Minutes and Circumstances, and obtein
Sacerdotal Absolution, or never look Christ in the Face, I cannot then blame
your Brethren to say, Give us Ghostly Fathers, or else we die. But hold there.
I will spread your own Doctrine impartially before you. Your severest Writers
say, That Confession of wasting and mortal Sins is to be made to a Priest upon
the Commandment of Christ. Such a Law they have fixed, partly by Consequences,
partly by their Exposition of the Text. Now it is fit to hear what may be said
upon this Law, when the Case is removed into a Court of Equity. I move then in
the behalf of a Sinner: Is he bound, as soon as he has committed a mortal Sin,
with all competent Celerity, to confess, that he may be absolved? Not so, says
the Chancery of Divinity. Let him prostrate himself before the Knees of the
Poenitentiary once a Year, and rehearse his Crimes. Is that resolved Scripture?
Is Confession once a Year of Divine Right? No, says old Navarr, there is no
Divine express Word, that charge the Penitent when, and how often to come to
that Sacrament; but by Human Authority all Offenders are obliged thereunto once
a Year.

I move once more at the Bar of Favor. Is that Canon as inflexible as the Laws
of the Medes and Persians? Or will it admit of Relaxation? Why not, says
Azorius, Lib. 7. Moral. Cap. 40. Quod quisque fidelium semel quotannis
confiteatur, Ecclesia Imperavit.
Et Autoritate Pontificia potest quis eximi a lege annuae Confessionis.
One Exception by all Votes is admitted, That a Person born dumb shall not have
his Sins retained for want of Confession, Cajet. Sacerd. Lib. 3. Cap. 6. And
are not their Mouths stopped, as if they were dumb-born, in whose Vicinage, nay,
in whose Country, none of Holy Orders out of that Tribe ought to be found by
the Laws to take their Confession? Or will it come to one effect, if they put
down such faults, as they call to mind they have committed, in writing? And so
send this blotting Paper to them that have the Tutelage over them in such
Cases. This Trick wants not those that applaud it: Especially among the
Jesuits; who I think would teach Pigeons to carry such Messages to and fro,
since they would have all the Work in their own Hands, and cannot be in all
places. But your sounder Divines condemn that Device: Either because the
Circumstances of Sins, which alter Cases exceedingly, cannot be Interrogated so
well in conveyance of Letters: Or least the Offender, while his Letter is under
the Messengers dispatch, should relapse into his former Sin, and abuse the
Grace of Absolution: Or principally, because that which is under a Man's Hand is
permanent; and if it miscarry, it may be produced afterward to his sorrow and
vexation by the Secular Power. Therefore this Rule must be the Coronis of all
this Dispute, That he that has not a Competent External Judge to confess his
Sins unto, may quiet his Conscience, when he confesses them to none but GOD.

226. What say you now, my Lord? Does Salvation necessarily depend upon your
Septemfluous Sacraments? Or do they depend all upon the Administration of the
Priests? O Sir, King David was cosen'd, for believing his Son Amnon, who
pretended he could eat nothing, unless his Sister Tamar dressed it. But
somewhat about Sacramental Confessions hangs yet in my Teeth; and I shall not
speak it, but spit it out. It is so reasonable, that I bespeak you not to be
offended. He that takes it ill, it is at his own adventure. Salus populi
suprema Lex esto: We must first look to common safety. And they that think to
build upon the Ruins of it, will find a false Foundation, I hope. Court us not
suffer Confessors to creep into Corners among us. For they profess they will
not discover Treason plotted against the King and Kingdom, if it be disclosed
under that Privy Seal. Nay, it has appeared by Examinations, by Witnesses, by
Letter under their own Hands, by all sorts of Proofs, that they did not reveal
it, when they knew the fatal Hour was at Hand, to blow up our Sovereign, the
Prince his Heir, and the whole Flower of the Realm with that Infernal
Powder Plot. Not reveal it, said I? Yes more, it was hatched in their Brain,
and confirmed with their Blessing. If Clanculary Confession was cast out of the
Church of Constantinople for one Man's Lust; What just cause have we to gagg it
for forty Men's Treason? I would have him hanged for his Wit, that should invent
a way to discharge a Pistol, that might give no Report. Now let me forfeit my
Credit, if wise Men will not say, That Conspiracies buzzed into the Ear, and
imposed never to be detected, upon the deepest Obligations of Faith,
Church-Love, Merit, etc. are far more dangerous than Powder and Shot, that kill
and crack not. Would you in good earnest have us Repeal our Laws of Correction
against such dangerous Flambeaux? Were not that to break down our Walls, and to
let in the fatal Horse with his Bellyfull of Enemies? If they plead that there
is no such danger in them now; Let them tell it to deaf Men. We know, and can
demonstrate, that the most of Contrivances against our State have been whetted
upon the Grind-stone of Confession. Our Sages that made the Laws to blow away
the Locusts into their own Red Sea, have given us a taste of their Malice in
the Preface of the Statute Eliz. 27. That they came into the Land to work the
Ruin, Desolation and Destruction of the whole Realm. Therefore marvel not if
some have lost their Lives, that have tempted the Rigor of those Laws. Neither
does it move us, that our Fugitives thereupon have sprinkled their Calenders
with new Martyrs. What if Jeroboam's Priests had passed their own Bounds, and
come to Jerusalem, where it is likely they would have been cut off for Enemies
and Rebels, should their Names have been crowded into the Catalogue of the good
Prophets, that were stoned by Tyrants? Beshrew your Superiors beyond Seas,
that Conjure up such Spirits, to come into our Circle. It grieves us, God knows
our Hearts, to Execute our Laws upon one ot two in Seven Years for a Terror to
others. But Prudence is a safer Virtue then Pity. And it is far better our
Adversaries should be obnoxious to our Tribunal, then we to theirs, by the
Thraldom of our Nation; which is the drift of those unnatural Emissaries. And
if the Venetians, that are under the Obedience of your Church, have banished
some of that Stamp, and irrevocably, out of their Territories: Nay, if your
selves in France did sometimes Expel the same Faction, accept it favorably from
us, who will never be under that Obedience, if we Banish all.

227. Hold out your Great Courtesy my Lord, to a few Words more. The Answering
of an Objection or two will not stay you long. And before I conclude I will
deal you a good Game to make your Lordship a Saver, if you will follow Suit.
You please your self, Sir, because you ask no more Liberty for your sacrifical
Priests in our Land, then the Reformed Ministers enjoy with you in France. But
the Comparison does not consist of equal Terms. The Protestants receive a
benefit of some Toleration in your Realm, to stop the mischief of Civil Wars,
and to settle a firm Peace among your selves. It is the Reason which your
Wisest and most candid Historian Thuanus does often give, and Mounsieur Bodin
before him, p. 588. Reip. Ferenda ea Religio est, quam sine interitu reip.
auferre non potest. If you did not so, you would pull up much of your own
Wheat, with that which you call Tares. But such a Toleration in this Kingdom
would not only disturb Peace, but with great Probability dissolve it. In the
next place you urge that such a memorable Favor might be done to gratify the
sweet Madam, our intended Princess, upon the Marriage. O my Lord you are driven
by Blind Mariners upon a Rock. If this could be Granted by the King, which you
contend for, and wereeffected; Sweet Lady, she would be brought in the Curses
of this Nation, and would Repent the day, that she drew the Offense of the
whole Land upon her Head. Let me say on the Husbands Part, what your
Countryman Ausonius says for the Wife, Saepe in conjugiis fit noxia, si nimia
est dos. If the Prince should make a Joynter to his Wife out of the Tears and
Sorrows of the People, it were the worst bargain that ever he made. His
Majesty's Consort of Happy Memory Queen Ann, did not altogether concord with
our Church. Indeed the Diversity between us, and the Lutherans, among whom she
was bred, is as little as between Scarlet and Crimson: The Colors are almost
of the same Dip. But she carried it so prudently, that she gave no notice of
any dissension: Neither ever did demand to have a Chaplain about her of the
Lutheran Ordination. This were a Precedent for the most Illustrious Madam to
follow, rather to procure the love of the generality, then of a few
Malcontents; from whom you your self, my Lord, will have Cause to draw off,
when I tell you all. They deal not with your Lordship sincerely. They thrust
your whole hand into the Fire, and will not touch a Coal with one of their own
Fingers. They that incite, and stir these Motions behind the Curtain, dare not
upon pain of their Lives ask it in Parliament, where they know the Power Rests,
and no where beside to ratify the Grant. And when they Solicit your Lordship
to obtain these indulgences for them in the Court, they know you beat the wrong
Bush. Upon my Faith the Bird is not there. Noli amabo verberare Lapidem, ne
perdas manum.
Plaut. in Curcul. Knock not your Fingers against a Stone to Grate them.


Perchance my Lord, you think I have pinched you all this while with a streit
Boot, which you can neither get on, nor off. Your Lordship shall not depart
from me with little Ease, if Truth and plain dealing will purchase me to be
called your Friend. None can Repeal our Laws but his Majesty, with the Votes of
the three Estates, as you term them, the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and the
people. And to dispense with the Execution of a Law absolutely, and
unrestreinedly, is as much as to Repeal it; which if the King should assay, it
were null in Law, and in Revenge of it in the next Parliament, it would be
faster bound, and perchance the Rigor of it increased. But Favor and Mercy
may be shown, Praeter sententiam legis, in some exempted Cases, and to some
particular persons. Clemency against the Capital Sentence of the Laws is the
Kings Prerogative; the Life of his Subject when it is forfeit to him, he may
choose whether he will take the forfeiture. Every Varlet, says Seneca, may kill
a Citizen against the Law; but then he turns to the Emperor, Servare nemo
praeter te, etc. None but the Supreme Majesty can save a Life against the Law.
Work upon that my Lord; and it were a good days work to extract advantage out
of it. But wherein lies the way? You shall have better Heads then mine to help
you, if you please to be directed by me. None can furnish you with the right
Art of it, but some of our sage Counselors of our Common Laws. I wish you
therefore my Lord to proceed with the special knowledge of the Roman Catholics
that stir most in this Project. Let them cull out some of the Learnedest
Practisers together. Let the King's Attorney General make one, for my sake: For
the rest let your Clients pick out as they like. An hundred Crowns among them,
that is, a Fee of five pounds a Man, will not be ill bestowed upon them. Let
them lay their Heads together. And I will lose all I am worth, if you do not
thank me for having referred you to those, who will fetch out by their Skill so
much to be Granted, that you will never be put to Contestation hereafter, that
you obtained much of the King, and are never the nearer. The Courtiers with
whom alone you have had to do to this time, have Complemented with your
Lordship. So could I do likewise; give you Large concessions in Words and in
Wax; but in effect nothing. Like Galley Pots Entitled with the Name of
Cordials, but have Cob-Webs in them, and no more. My Lord, all that I have to
say is no more but this, will you be lead by me? or will you wander still? Sir,
says the Ambassador, Use me honestly. I am a Stranger, and while I am in
England, I will surrender up self to your Directions. Nay, I will possess our
Virtuous, and Illustrious Madam, that you are a clear dealing Man, and of good
Faith, and most worthy of her Trust, when she comes into a strange Land. And
after a very civil Farewell at the present, Mounsieur Villoclare made use of
those Instructions; For though he Climbed not so High as he looked, yet he
Climbed better; for he stood sure, where he could not fall.

228. Which Papers came to the King, with more satisfaction, as he was pleased
to say, then he could have expected. Not any Line of Wisdom or Learning could
be lost to him, who saw as far, and as soon as any Man, into the Intellectuals
of another. For, as the Lord Bacon wrote, his Majesty had a light of Nature,
which had such readiness to take Flame, and blaze from the least occasion
presented, on the least spark of another knowledge delivered, as was to be
admired. And this was the last present in that kind, that the Lord Keeper sent
to the King; who finding some indisposition of Health, retired for fresh Air
and quietness to his Manor of Theobalds, Where Jacob gathered up his Feet
into the Bed, and yielded up the Ghost, Genesis 49.33. The Lord Keeper on March
22. being Tuesday, received a Letter from the Court, that it was feared his
Majesty's Sickness was dangerous to Death; which Fear was the more confirmed,
for he, dispatching away in all haste, met with Dr. Harvey in the Road, who
told him, That the King used to have a Beneficial Evacuation of Nature, a
sweating in his left Arm, as helpful to him as any Fontinel could be; which of
late had failed. And that argued, that the former Vigor of Nature was low, and
spent. This Symptom of the Kings Weakness I never heard from any else. Yet I
believe it upon so learned a Doctors Observation. And this might well cause a
Tertian Ague, and a Mortal, when the Spring had Entered so far, able to make a
commotion in the Humors of the Body, and not to expel them, with accustomed
vaporation. After the L. Keeper had presented himself before his Lord the King,
he moved him unto cheerful Discourse, but it would not be: He continued til
Midnight at his Bedside, and perceived no Comfort; but was out of all Comfort
upon the consultation that the Physicians held together in the Morning.
Presently he besought the Prince, that he might acquaint his Father with his
Feeble Estate, and like a faithful Chaplain mind him both of his Mortality, and
Immortality; which was allowed and committed to him, as the principal
Instrument of that Holy and necessary Service. So he went into the Chamber of
the King again upon that Commission, and Kneeling at his Palate, told his
Majesty, He knew he should neither Displease him, nor discourage him, if he
brought Isaiahs Message to Hezekiah, to set his House in Order; for he thought
his Days to come would be but few in this World, but the best remained for the
next World. I am satisfied, says the Sick King; and I pray you assist me to
make me ready to go away hence to Christ, whose Mercies I call for, and I hope
to find them. After this the Keeper, now of his Majesty's Soul, kept about him
with as much Diligence, as a Body of Flesh could endure. He was ever at hand;
helpful not only in Sacred, but in every kind of Duty; never from that time put
off his Clothes to go to Bed, till his Master had put off his Tabernacle, which
appeared in his Looks on Sunday Night, when he returned to Westminster;
employed himself Night and Day, unless the Physicians did compose his Majesty
to rest, in Praying, in Reading, most of all in Discoursing about Repentance,
Faith, Remission of Sins, Resurrection, and Eternal Life. To which the King
made Answer, sometimes in Latin, always with Patience, and full of Heavenly
Seasoning; which Hallowed Works were performed between them on Wednesday, as a
Preparation to the Passover on Thursday, the Fortifying of his Majesty's Soul
against the Terrors of Death, with the lively Remembrance of Christ's Death and
Passion in the Holy Communion. At which the King made most humble Consession of
his Sins, craved Absolution, rendered the Confession of his Faith before many
Witnesses, Professed he Died in the Bosom of the Church of England, whose
Doctrine he had defended with his Pen, being persuaded it was according to the
mind of Christ, as he should shortly Answer it before him.

229. All this while God did lend him such Strength, to utter himself how well
he Relished that Sacred Banquet of Christ's Body and Blood, and how comfortably
the Joy of the Holy Ghost did flow into his Soul, as if he had been in a way of
Recovery. And his mournful Servants that saw and heard it, rejoiced greatly,
that unto that time Sickness did not compress his Understanding, nor slop his
Speech, nor Debilitate his Senses, and submitted more willingly to God to have
their Master taken from their Head, because they believed the Lord was ready to
receive him into Glory. The next day his Soul began to Retreat more inward, and
so by degrees to take less and less Notice of external things. His Custos
Angelus, as I may call him, his Devoted Chaplain stirred very little out of the
Chamber of Sorrow, both to give an Far to every Word the King spoke in that
extreme condition, and to give it him again with the Use of some Divine
Meditation; as also to Repulse those who crept much about the Chamber Door (he
was sure for no good) Nay, and into the Chamber. They were of the most addicted
to the Church of Rome, whom he controuled for their Sawciness, and commanded
them as a Privy Counselor further off. Impostors, that are accustomed to
bestow Rubric Lies upon the best Saints of God, and whom they cannot pervert
living, to challenge for theirs when they are Dead. So, being rid of these
Locusts, he was continually in Prayer, while the King lingered on, and at last
shut his Eyes with his own Hand, when his Soul departed. Whatsoever belonged to
Church Offices about the Royal Exequies fell to his part afterward. He
performed the Order of Burial, when the Body was reposed in the Vault of King
Henry the Sevenths Chapel, appointed only for that famous King's Posterity,
and their Conforts. He Preached the Sermon at the Magnificent Funeral, out of
the 2 Chronicles. c. 9. v. 29.30. and part of the 31. Now the rest of the Acts of
Solomon First and Last are they not written in the Rock of Nathan the Prophet,
and in the Prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite, and in the Visions of Iddo the
Seer against Jeroboam the Son of Nebat? And Solomon Reigned in Jerusalem over
Israel Forty Years. And Solomon slept with his Fathers and was Buried in the
City of David his Father; and no further. Out of which Text he fetched two
Solomon's, and Matched them well together. And I conceive he never Studied any
thing with more care, to deliver his mind apud honores, exactly to the Truth,
and Honor of the King. He enquired after the Sermon which Bishop Fisher made
at the Funeral of King Henry the Seventh, and procured it; likewise for the
Oration which Cardinal Peron made for King Henry the Fourth of France, and had
it by the means of Dr. Peter Moulin the Father. These he laid before him to
work by, and no common Patterns. It Is useless to Blazon this Sermon in the
Quarters; take it altogether, and I know not who could mend it. It is in the
Libraries of Scholars that are able to judge of it. And such as Read it shall
wrong King Charles his Son, if they conceive any Passage Reflects upon him,
because Eloquence in the Body of the Sermon, and in the Margent is commended in
King James, and Extolled to be very useful in Government. Does this derogate
from the Honor of the Succeslor. Chrisippus non dicet idem, nec mite Thaletis
ingenium. Juvenal. Sat. For King Charles might be allowed for an Elegant
Speaker, and choice in his matter, if he had not stood so near to his Fathers
Example.

230. To whose Memory I stand so near, having been carried on to Record his
Happy Departure, that I am pressed in Conscience to do some right to his
Worthiness. He was a King in his Cradle, -- Aequaeva eum Majestate Creatus,
Nullaque privatae passus contagia sortis.
As Claudian of Honorius Paneg. l. 7.

As he was born almost with a Scepter in his Hand, so he had studied long to
use it; which made him much contest to keep Regal Majesty intemerated; which
was as good for us, as for him. Summum dominium est Spiritus vitalis, quem tot
millia Civium trahunt, says Grotius out of Seneca. de Ju. B. and P. l. 2. c. 9.
con. 3. Which will Expound that Phrase in the Book of Lamentations, That Josiah
is called the Breath of the Jews Nostrils. Some thought that the good King
studied to Enthral the people; far from his mind God wot. But his speculation
was, that Northern Nations love not a Yoke upon their Necks, and are prone to
Anarchy; that they will ruin themselves, if they be not held down to a good
temper of Obedience; and that, by too much Liberty, Liberty it self will
Perish. It is is an Excellent Speech which Artabanus makes to Themistocles in
Plutarch. We hear of you Greeks (...), that you love Liberty and Parity; but
among many good Laws, this is the Chief in Persia, (...), etc. To Honor our
King, and to Worship him as the Image of God. And I trow the Persian Monarchs
have lasted longer then the Burgo-Masters of Greece? The Grast will have no
Cause to Repent, that it is bound close to the Stock, it will grow the better.
But as King James did rather talk much of free Monarchy, then execute it: So no
people did ever live more prosperously then we did under him, and he made no
ostentation of it. If all were not turned upside downward of late, I might
declame out of the Paneg. to Constantine, Quis, non dico reminiscitur, sed quis
non adhuc quodam modo videt, quantis ille rebus auxerit, ornaritque rempub.? To
what an immense Riches in his time did the Merchandise of England rise to above
former Ages? What Buildings? What Sumptuousness? What Feastings? What gorgeous
Attire? What Massy Plate, and Jewels? What Prodigal Marriage Portions were
grown in fashion among the Nobility and Gentry, as if the Skies had Rained
Plenty? The Courts of Laws Civil and Common never had such practice, nor the
Offices belonging to them such Receipts upon their Books. The Schools in the
Universities, and the Pulpits, with Wits of all Arts and Faculties, never
flourished so before over all the Land. Let Zion and the Clergy be joyful in
the Remembrance of their King. God bestowed with him upon the Land the Gift
which Homer says Jupiter promised to Ulysses his Reign in I^haca, (...), Odyss.
a. Enough of Wealth and Peace. And they that suck at those two Breasts, and are
forward, they know not what is good for them, and are insensible of a Benefit.
Let them keep silence with shame enough, that Ball aloud, we were corrupted by
them; whose Fault was that? Therefore God has taken them away from us, and
will give them to a people that will use them better. Neque jugi pace, aut
longo otio absoluta ingenia corrumpis, says Capitol. of M. Antonius. A Soul of
good Metal will never Rust in the Scabbard of Peace. O with what money would we
be content to buy so many years of Peace again, now Wars have trodden us under
foot like Dirt? If there be a Milky Circle upon Earth, a Condensation of many
comfortable and propitious stars, it is Peace; which this Peacemaker preserved
at home, and pursued it for his contemporary Potentates abroad; till his
Son-in-Law made an Attempt upon Bohemia, unfortunate to himself, and to all
Christiandom. But what says Ar. Will. to this p. 160. His maintaining of Peace,
howsoever the World did believe it was out of a Religious Ground, yet it was no
other but a Cowardly disposition, that durst not adventure. Like as when L.
Opimius had suppressed C. Gracchus, with the rascal Rabble that followed him, and
Opimius having pacified the uproar Dedicated a Temple to Concord. The Seditious
flouted it with this Verse, (...).
Plut. in vit. Grach. Opus vaecordiae Templum concordiae facit. So if such a
Monument had been Raised by this King, the Temple of Peace and Unity had been
with the Malicious the Temple of Sloth and Vanity. It Is a Buff Coat Objection,
that his Majesty consumed as much in Embassies to settle differences by accord,
and did no good, as would have maintained a Noble War, and made him sure of his
Demands. Nay, hold Sirs, assurance is only in the Power of God; And the Die of
War, says the Proverb, casts an uncertain Chance. Howsoever, was it not more
Christian to buy a Child's Portion with Money, then with Blood? Gallantry has
made Embassages very chargeable; but they devour not like War. I shall make
some Smile to tell them, that Aeschines accused Demosthenes for putting the
Commonwealth to the Expense of two Servants to carry his Sumpter, when he went
Ambassador. And in the time of C. Gracchus, lately spoken of, the Romans says
Plutarch, allowed Nine Obols, or Fifteen Pence a day to him that was sent
Abroad upon a public Treaty. A Parsimony as bad as our Prodigality. But attend
to the Opinion of our King Harry the Eighth, as I take it from Lord Cherbury's
History, Page 171. The Maintaining of a sure Peace at Home, was almost as
costly as to make War Abroad. Yet he had rather spend his own Treasure that
way, than to expose his People to Slaughter, and to Miseries, that are worse
than Slaughter.

231. But our King James did not weigh which was cheapest or dearest, Peace or
War; but which was more answerable to times of Grace, and the Aeconomy of the
Gospel. For Thrist and Saving, he could never be brought to think of them. I
have heard, that he never loved a Servant till he had given him enough for a
Livelihood; and suspected those that were modest, and did not ask, as if they
loved not him. It might rightly be said of his Exchequer, what Salmasius notes
upon Lampridius Diadumenns, Praefectus aerarii comes largitionum vocatur; quasi
ad nullam aliam rem princeps aerarium haberet, quam ad largiendum. The chief
Treasurer was called the Count of Largess, as if the Prince's Revenue served
only for Bounty and Largess. But as wise Spotswood says upon Malcolm the
Second. Necessity is the Companion of immoderate Largition, and forces to
unlawful Shifts. Therefore it is better for a Prince to proportion Gists to his
own Revenews, than to the Expectation of public Supplies. Thus far King James
may be magnified, he spent to please his Mind in gratifying and obliging many,
not to please his Body. His Clothes were thristy, and of better Example than
his Courtiers would follow. He was temperate in his Diet, says Sir An. W. and
to be believed, because in every thing almost he is an affected Defamer; but
this he knew well, for he was Clerk of the Kitchen, and waited at the Table.
Where, as an eye Witness, he adds, that he was temperate also in his Drinking,
drinking often, but very often not above one or two Spoonfuls at once, which
Strangers observing, and not knowing the small quantity he sip'd, carried away
an Error with them, which grew into a false Fame: But I never spoke with that
Man that saw him overtaken. Take him for a Scholar, and he had gathered
Knowledge to astonishment; and was so expert to use it, that had he been born
in a private Fortune, he might have deserved to be a Bishop of the highest
Promotion. Let the Learnedest of the Nobility, the Lord Bacon, speak for the
Learnedest of Monarchs. There has not been since Christ's Time, any King,
which has been so Learned in all Literature and Erudition, Divine and Humane.
And let him win and wear that in Auson, Paneg. which cannot be denied him, Quid
aliud es quam ex omni bonarum artium ingenio collecta perfectio? Piety is the
Basis of all Virtue, and the Basis of Piety in corrupted Nature, is rather
Repentance than Innocence. When this King called to mind in his
Retiring-Chamber, or in his Bed, that he had been that Day overtaken with
Passion, As he that offends not in Word, the same is a per-Man, Jam. 3.2. he
used to send for Bishop Montague, the only Prelate that ever was sworn of his
Bedchamber, or for Dr. Young, the Dean of Winton, whom he would exhort to Pray
with him for the Forgiveness of his Sins. He was infinitely given to Prayer,
says Sir Ant. W. but more out of Fear than Conscience. That Is Satan's Gloss
upon a good Text. What Fear should move him to Prayer, but that which is the
beginning of Wisdom? Few dye Saints, that live Libertines. God would not have
empowered him to express such good Effects of Religion, at his parting out of
this Life, if he had not been his faithful Servant in his Life before. To
trumpet these, and many more Triumphs of Praise, Fame, will wake for him, now
he is fallen asleep. And the more Ages to come that will study him, the more they
will renown him. I have read it quoted out of Galen, that the Surentine Wine is
never mellow for the Taste till it be seventy years old; and because few will
keep it so long, the Goodness is little known. So the longer the World keeps
this King's Memory, it will be the sweeter. Perhaps it is yet harsh to some
malevolous and unthankful.

232. It is the Virulency of wrathful Writers, that the Dead, that should be
spared, are most traduced by them. They cannot bite again, when they are
bitten; as Budaeus said of Portius, Lib. 5. de Ass. Fol. 169. That Portius
would not write against him while he was living: Placabilius homo peritus actum
iri meis cum manibus a sese, quam mecum intelligebar. And the miserable
Condition of Kings deceased is above others, especially if their Posterity be
not in a Condition to do them right, they are most like to be wounded in their
Honor by all those (who must be many) that have been offended in their own
Persons and Suits; or in the Injuries, as they interpret them, of their Friends
and Relations. Especially it is to be deplored, and defied, that some are so
touchy upon the nicest Points of Religion, that they will not spare the Good
Name, no, not of the Lord's Anointed, if he have distasted them with Opposition
of Opinions, if he not dogmatize with them in all abstruse and intricate
Problems of almost unsearchable Truths. For which, they that sue their
Adversaries hotly, and, as it were, go to Law for every Quirk and knotty Point,
are no better than common Barretters in Divinity. This was King James's hard
Fortune, to be blotted with the Inks of Parsons, Schioppius, Scribanius,
furious Papists, and as many more of them as would sill Justice-Hall in
Newgate: by the Precise, that were alienated from the Ceremonies and
Discipline of the well framed Protestant Church; as Wdden, Wilson, Payton, and
a Sanhedrim of Scots, that contended against the Articles of Perth; and (which
I did not look for) by one (and no more I hope) devoted to those Corollaries of
Theology, which in this last Age are named from the Belgic Doctor Arminius. It
is the Observator on H. L. If King James had not stopped the Current of those
Opinions, especially, as he says, P. 23. in his Declaration against Vorstius:
Or, if for Reasons of State, he had not joined himself to his dear Confederate,
Maurice Prince of Orange, to call the Synod of Dort, to suppress a Party under
the Countenance and Command of Jo. Olden Barnev^, by him used to undermine the
Power of Maurice; I doubt not but he had escaped free from the Observator's
Censure. But since he was vigilant to attend the Affairs of the Protestant
Churches in all their Harbors, and looked circumspectly to quell Commotions in
the Netherlands, he must by no means pass for Great-Britain's Solomon; nay, it
is no hard matter to prove, that he was over-witted, and made use of to other
Men's ends, by almost all that undertook him. This is too large a Field to run
over; but many wise Princes have been abused in some Treaties; as Queen
Elizabeth at St. Quintins, about the Restoring of Calis in 88, by the dodges of
the Prince of Parma; and over and over by King Henry the Fourth of France. So
was this King foiled at Madrid, about the Marriage of his Son, upon which his
Chief Plots did depend, by the Cro^ness of his own Ministers. I have heard some
observe, like this Censurer, that his Wisdom wanted Pertinacy and Severity,
which proceeded from the Gentleness of his Nature, not apt to keep others in so
hard, as he should. In this Kingdom, I am sure his greatest, and most dangerous
contriving Enemies found his Wisdom, that maugre all Devices to oppose his
Title, he took the Crown of England so quietly, and enjoyed it so peaceably,
that it was the Amazement of all Princes. Ireland found his Wisdom, so
admirably civilized, so enriched with Trade by the Plantation at Londonderry,
so furnished with true Religion, and excellent Learning, and Means to nourish
it; so quiet from Rebellion in all his Days, that whosoever does not praise it,
must be stupid, or envy it. Scotland found his Wisdom, whose Borders he scoured
from Thieves, whose Fewds he reconciled, whose Ecclesiastical Government he
settled, whose Mouths (a small few excepted) he kept from Murmering, and whose
Swords he kept sheathed, so ready to be drawn upon every Alarm; that those
Days were Halcyonian Days from Tweed to the Orcades. But for England, says the
Observator, he neglected the Affairs of State, and Care of Government, to hunt
after Pleasures, deserting the Imperial City, to sport himself at Roiston and
Nowmarket, and such obscure Places, which were to him as the Isle of Capreae
was to Tibarius Caesar. What! the Isle of Capreae, where Tiberius practiced his
odious Lasts not to be named, which the well-moralized Romans did abhor? Hac
v^ro ni P. Clodius dixit unquam. Cic. Phil. 2. The Devil and the Jesuits durst
not say so, the most venomous Scorpion did never touch him with that Sting. And
did ever any Christian in the first Ages of the Church, when their Blood was
shed like Water on every side? did ever any of them stigmatize the most
loathsome-liv'd Emperor and Tyrant with such Words? Never. And let the great
Annalist be heard. Baron. an. 75. com. 4. Nunquam, in tot acerbissimis ab
Imperatoribus illatis in Christianos persecutionibus, quem piam illorum ob
diccitatem conventum esse judicio, quis poterit invenire. I will give this
Complaint over, though it deserves a long Invective; for I treat of a most
merciful King, who was most remissive of Wrongs, no Spiller of Blood, but of
Beasts in Hunting, that never showed himself unsavory with the Froward, 2 Samuel
22.27. Nec quicquam est gloriosius Principe impune Les^, Senec. lib. 1. (...).

233. It is said, but mistaken, that Government was neglected at those
Hunting-Houses; and by the way, Why are they called obscure Places? Royston and
Newmarket, petty if compared with London; but they are Market Towns, and great
Thorow-Fares; where the Court was so frequented, both for Business and
Recreations, that many of the Followers could not find a Lodging in that Town,
nor scarce in the Villages round about it. I held Acquaintance with some that
attended the Principal Secretaries there, who protest they were held to it
closer, and sat up later in those Retirements, to make Dispatches, than at
London. The King went not out with his Hounds above three Days in the Week, and
Hunting was soon over. Much of the time his Majesty spent in State
Contrivances, and at his Book. I have stood by his Table often, when I was
about the Age of Two and twenty Years, and from thence forward, and have heard
learned Pieces read before him at his Dinners, which I thought strange; but a
Chaplain of James Mantague, Bishop of Winton, told me, that the Bishop had read
over unto him the four Tomes of Cardinal Bellarmine's Controversies at those
Respites, when his Majesty took fresh Air, and weighed the Objections and
Answers of that subtle Author, and sent often to the Libraries in Cambridge for
Books, to examine his Quotations. Surely then, whatsoever any Caper witted Man
may observe, neither was the King's Chastity stained, nor his Wisdom lulled
asleep, nor his Care of Government slackned, by Lodging in those Courts remote
from London, where he was freer from Disturbances. But as I^ocrates said of
Evagoras, (...), He had the Dexterity to purchase less Labor with much Ease,
and to shift the Toil of a King sometimes into the Pleasure of a Scholars
Studies. Neither would I have had the Observator tax him, that he ict loose the
golden Reins of Discipline, held by his Predecessors with so strict a Hand, and
opened the first Gap unto these Consusions, and what Discipline King James is
charged to slacken, the Observator best knows his own Meaning. I am no Phormio,
to teach Hannibal how to Govern. But to draw our fatal Confusions from the
Prosperity enjoyed by his Mildness and Peace, must be stretched out of long
spun Deductions; like that in Tully, Woe to the Mountain Ida, where the Trees
grew, whose Timber made the Ships, that carried Paris to Rape Helen, which
stirred up the Greeks to revenge it, and to Sack Troy. Or thus: Wae be to
Joseph, that sent for his Father and Brethren, and planted them in Egypt, in a
fat Soil, where their Stock increased, whose Increase was dreaded; which caused
the Male Children to be drowned, and the Israelites to be oppressed by
Pharaoh's Taskmasters. This was visible before our Eyes, the precious Things
of Heaven, and the precious Things of the Earth, and the Fullness of the Earth
abounded in his Reign, and many years after, by the Good Will of him that dwelt
in the Bush. All that has fallen out since, is from the Hand of the Lord, upon
a People, the most Unthankful, and the most Guilty of their own Ruin, that
ever was heard of in any History. And now let a Man of more Authority, Judgment
and Experience than the Observator, speak upon the Wisdom of my Lord the King.
It is the most Reverend Spotswood in his last Page. He was the Solomon of his
Age, admired for his wise Government, and for his Knowledge of all manner of
Learning, for his Wisdom, Moderation, Love of Justice, for his Patience and
Piety (which shined above all his other Virtues, and is witnessed in his
Learned Works he left to Posterity) his Name shall never be forgotten, but
remain in Honor so long as the World indureth. We that have had the Honor and
Happiness many times to hear him discourse of the most weighty Matters, as well
of Policy as of Divinity; now that he is gone, must comfort our selves with the
Remembrance of those Excellencies, and reckon it not the least Part of our
Happiness, to have lived in his Days. It is well that King James passes for a
Solomon with that Holy Bishop, and wise Counselor. Now that I may decline an
overweening Opinion of any mortal Man, Nazianzen minds me very well, Orat. in
laud. Athenas. that among God's Worthies, he commends (...), Solomon in some
things, not in all. No Man ruled the least Principality so well, much less
three Kingdoms, with Isles adjacent, and remote; but the Modest and Impartial
might have required somewhat to be amended in the Administration, for it is
true what Pliny says in his Paneg. Nemo extitit, cujus virtutes nullo vitiorum
confinio laeder^mur. If small Motes be discerned by piercing Eyes, yet such
Minutes are easily covered over with egregious and heroical Virtues. And the
hard Heart of Sir An. W. softened into this Confession at last. Take him all
together, and not in pieces, such a King, I wish this Kingdom have never any
worse, on the Condition not any better.

234. I have borrowed thus much Room to set up a little Obelisk for King James,
out of that which is only intended to the Memorials of his Lord Keeper; which
Servant of that King's ((...)) if he had any Sense of it, would be willing to
lend that, and more to his good Master: With whose Death, the Day of the
Servant's Prosperity shut up, and a Night of long and troublesome Adversity
followed. Which if I can compass in my Old Age, and decayed Health, to bring
into a Frame, for the Reader to behold, he may say as Socrates did of
Antisthenes in Laertius, (...), that two Athenians would not make up one so
Noble as Antisthenes. And two Men would never have discharged those two Parts
so well, as this one Man performed them. Which Representation may meet with
some, perchance, that will not be favorable to it; whom I wish to take heed of
the Character which Theophrastus gives of an impure Man, (...). I will lengthen
it thus, he acts his own Part ill, that Hisseth at him that deserves to be
applauded.

FINIS.
A MEMORIAL Offered to the Great Deservings OF JOHN WILLIAMS, D.D. Who
sometimes Held the PLACES of LORD KEEPER of the GREAT-SEAL OF ENGLAND, Lord
Bishop of LINCOLN, AND Lord Arch - Bishop of YORK.

Written by JOHN HACKETT, Late Lord Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield.

PART II.

Isocrates ad Evagoram, page 80. (...).

Salust. de Caio Caesari, In te, praeter caeteras, artem unam egregie mirabilem
comperi; semper tibi majorem in adversis, quam in secundis rebus auimum esse,

page 171. LONDON: Printed for Samuel Lowndes, over against the Exchange, in
the Strand, MDCXCIII.

A MEMORIAL Offered to the Great Deservings OF JOHN WILLIAMS, D.D. Who
sometimes Held the Places of the LORD KEEPER of the GREAT-SEAL of England, etc.
PART II.
CAmerarius Writing the Life of Melanchthon, Paragraph 1.
the Darling of the Champions of the Reformed Religion, divided his Work into
two Parts, and gave no reason for it, but because he would make his Web of a
new piece, after the Death of Luther. It is the Pattern which I set before me,
to make a new Exordium, as he did, upon the Subject which I handle, after the
Death of King James. Especially since I must take his Shadow, whom my Pens
draws forth, no more by a Noontide Light, but by an Evening declension.
Manilias.
His Prosperity, or shall I say his Honors, and Court-Favours, were now in
their Tropic, Cum lucem vincere noctes incipiunt. But Virtue is not Fortune's
Servant. He rose with great Light: and he set with as great Brightness as he
rose. And as Paterculus writes of Mithridates I may refer it to him, Ali^uando
fortuna, semper animo maximus; He was once high in Fortune: but always strong
in Courage, and great in Worth. It Is common to see a Stock ingrafted with two
forts of Fruits. The Almighty Planter shows greater differences, when he
pleases, in Moral, than in Natural Plantations. As he ordained the Noble
Williams to become two contrary Parts, as well as any Man had performed them in
five Ages before him, keeping the golden Mean in the Trials of the Righthand,
and of the Lest, being neither corrupted with the Advancements, nor the
Persecutions of the Times: As Paul and Barnabas were neither transported with
the Honors which the Lycaonians did intend, nor deterred with the Stones which
they cast at them, Acts 14. But the latter is most to be remarked. For if this
Lord Keeper had not dressed himself with Virtue, when he was clad in Honor: nor
rendered a sweet Air in every Close, when the Diapason of Peace, Wealth, and the
King's Love were all in tune, he had abused Fortune, which had given him his
pay in hand. Nec tam meruit gloriam, quam effugit flagitium; as Pliny has it:
But to stand upright, when he was dismounted: to cross his Crosses with
Generosity and Patience: to pass through a hot Furnace of Afflictions, which
was heated with all kind of Malice, and no smell of Fire to remain upon him,
Dan. 3. v. 27. this deserves to be Canonized, and will keep green in the Memory
of more Ages than one. From the Forty third Year of his Life to the full term
of his Sixty eighth Year, trouble upon trouble, mischief after mischief had him
in chase; and yet the Huntsmen, those Salvaggi could never blow the Death of
this well-breathed Heart. Fifteen Years the pursuit came from them, that made
use of the Frown of the King. When they were a fault (But when were they
otherwise?) One Woe was past, but there came two Woes (or rather a thousand)
after it, Apoc. 9.12. (...), the Parliament of Destruction, or of absolute
Reprobation, Sine praeviso peccato, which spared none, suppressed him, oppressed
him, and he was under that Sufferance ten Years. Was not the Ship well built?
Were not the Ribs of it heart of Oak, which endured a Storm of twenty five
Years? and in that long time never enjoyed a calm Sea? He was made for such a
Trial; which was sanctified by Gospel-Promises, giving unto just Men assurance
of vigor to endure them. Every one pittieth himself: everyone covets Ease, and
Prosperity: which is more Childish than Manly. And a Design that is commonly
mistaken. Adversity, out of doubt, is best for us all, because we would not
carve it out to our selves, but God chooses it for us: and he chooses better
for us, than we can for ourselves. By his Providence some Men's Sorrows are
greater than others: and few had a deeper Cup to drink than this Prelate. But
every Man's Calamity is fittest for himself: trust the Divine appointment for
that. And if all Adversities of several Men were laid in several heaps, a wise
Man would take up his own, and carry them home upon his Shoulders. H^rmolaus
Barbarus in an Epistle to Maximilian, King of the Romans, Polit. Epis. p. 447.
distinguishes between Happiness and Greatness: Secundae res felicem, Magnum
faciunt adversae. But if he, that is beset round with distresses, bear them to
the Estimation of good Men to appear great in them, then is he happy, as well
as great. Which is to be demonstrated in the Subject that I write of, as
follows.

2. King Charles began his Reign Mart. 27. 1625. The next day he sent for the
Lord Keeper to his Court at St. James's: who found his Majesty and the
Lord-Duke busied in many Cares. The King spoke first of settling his Household:
among whom the Keeper commended two out of his own Family to be preserr'd; but
it was past over without an Answer: only his Domestic Chaplain was taken into
ordinary Service, for whom he had made no suit. But to begin the well-ordering
of the new Court, he was appointed to give the Oath to the Lords of the
Privy Council, Sir Humphrey May taken into the Number, a very wise States man,
and no more of a new Call. Then likewise order was given for the Funerals of
the deceased King, and the Keeper chosen to Preach on the occasion: of which
enough is said already by a convenient Anticipation. The Coronation was spoken
of, though the time was not determined. Yet the King told the Keeper he must
provide a Sermon for that likewise: but he that bespoke him was of another
mind, before the Day of the Solemnization was ripe. That which was much
insisted upon at this Consult was a Parliament. His Majesty being so forward to
have it sit, that he did both propound, and dispute it, to have no Writs go
forth to call a new one, but to continue the same which had met in one Session
in his blessed Father's days, and prorogued to another against that Spring. The
Lord Keeper showed, That the old Parliament determined with his death that
called it in his own Name, and gave it Authority to meet. Since necessity
required a new Choice, the King's Will was, That Writs should be dispatched from
the Chancery forthwith, and not a day to be lost. The Keeper craved to be
heard, and said it was usual in times before, that the King's Servants, and
trustiest Friends did deal with the Countries, Cities and Boroughs, where they
were known, to procure a Promise for their Elections, before the precise time
of an insequent Parliament was published; and that the same Forecast would be
good at that time: which would not speed, if the Summons were divulged, before
they looked about them. The King answered, It was high time to have Subsidies
granted for the maintaining of a War with the King of Spain, and the Fleet must
go forth for that purpose in the Summer. The Keeper said little again, lest
Fidelity should endanger a Suspicion of Malice: and he little dreamt that the
Almanac of the new Year, or new Reign, was so soon calculated for the
Longitude of a War, and the Latitude of vast Sums of Money to pay the Service.
Yet he replied in a few words, but with so cold a consent, that the King turned
away, and gave him leave to be gone. He that was not cheerful to say good Luck
have you with that Expedition, was not thought worthy to have an Oar in the
great Barque, which was launching out, and making ready for the King's Marriage
with the sweet Lady of France. Yet who but he to treat with Ambassadors of that
Nation, and on that Score, in his old Master's time? Among all the Cares that
came into Consideration that day in the sulness of business, this had the
start, and was hastened the same Morning with Posts and Pacquets. Cupid's Wings
could not possibly fly faster. Yet his Majesty spoke nothing of it to this able
Counselor, although the Rumor of it in a Week was heard from Thames to Twede.
And the Duke began to hold no Conference with him: neither from that day did he
call for this Abiathar, and say, Bring hither the Ephod to ask Counsel of the
Lord. Evident Tokens to make any Man see what would come after, that was far
less than a Prophet. Which this wife Man past over, and seemed to observe
nothing that was ominous, or unfriendly. But as Lord Mornay says in his Answer
about the Conference at Fountain-bleau, when Henry of France, the 4th. forbad
him coming to the Louver. Specto eclipsin, and expecto intrepidus, securus quid
illa secum vehat: So the Lord Keeper was better acquainted with Heaven, than to
be troubled at an Eclipse, which is an accident prodigious to none but to a
Fool, but familiar to a Philosopher. And he had learnt in the Morals by heart,
that the way to lose Honor is, to be too careful to keep it.

3. While the great Assairs did run thus, the Keeper went close to his Book, as
much as public business would allow, to frame a Sermon against the Obsequies
of blessed James. He did not conceive, that the Counsels which he gave to the
King, on the second day of his Reign, were so ill taken, as he heard not long
after. He that speaks with the trust of a Counselor, and, which is more, with
the Tongue of a Bishop, should be privileged to be plain, and faithful without
offense. As St. Ambrose minds Theodosius, Ep. 29. Non est imperiale
libertatem dicendi negare, neque sacerdotale quid sentias non dicere. But News
knocked at his Study-door two days after, that my Lord-Duke threatened before
many that attended, to turn him out of his Office. And the French Ambassadors
were not the last that gave him warning of it. These Rumors he looked upon with
his Eyes open, and saw the approaching of a Downfall, and so little dissembled
it, that he warned some of his Followers secretly, who were in best account
with him, to procure dependence upon some other Master, for his Service e're
long would not be worthy of them. It were to small purpose to enquire, why the
Duke's Grace did so hastily press the Ruin of one, that had been his old
Friend and Creature. It was his game, and he loved it. I have seen a Manuscript
of Archbishop Abbots, stating the Reason of his own Relegation to Ford in Kent
(the Papers were written with his own Hand to my knowledge) wherein he paints
the Fickleness of the great Duke, to set up and pluck down, with these Lines.
First, He wanted not Suggestors to make the worst of all Men's Actions, whom
they could misreport. Secondly, He loved not that any Man should stick too long
in a Place of Greatness. He hit the Nail in that. For this Keeper continued the
longest in a great Office, of any that he had lifted up, and did live to use
them. Which proceeded not from his Grace's Constancy, but from the good-liking
of the old King. But as Symmachus said of Polemio, Lib. 2. Ep. 14. Sic amicis
utitur, quasi sloribus, tam diu gratis, quam diu recentibus. So my young Lord
changed his Friends as Men do Flowers; he liked a Scent no longer than it was
fresh. Indeed he looked from his Vassals for more than they could do, and
hurried to make trial of those that would do more. Thirdly, says the
Archbishop again, He stood upon such fickle Terms, that he feared his own
Shadow, and desperately adventured upon many things for his own Preservation.
Too true, for by this time he had lost the People: in whose good Opinion he
thought he stood for the space of Nine Months. Alas, he had a slight fastening
in them: for he never got their Love, further than his Hatred to Spain procured
it. And that was spent out, upon an exacter Information of his bearing at
Madrid. This was the Jealousy which gave the Lord Keeper the deadly Stoccada,
who would not abuse his own Knowledge so far, to extol my Lord for his Spanish
Transactions, which broke the Peace, the Credit, the Heart of his King, and his
Patron, never to be requited. Therefore that he was fallen in less than a Year
from the abundance of a great Esteem, he thought he might thank the Keeper,
whose downright Honesty gave the Example. More may be said: but once more
shall suffice; the Duke had attempted with King James, that which he threatened
now: but his Majesty that then was did not allow of it: and charged them both
to unite, and to work friendly together for his Service. But that mighty Lord
waited the opportunity to root up the Tree, which he had gone about to
unfasten. For commonly the offended Person is an Eye-fore to him that did
offend him. And such as have done great wrongs, are afraid of those, whom they
have provoked, and can never after affie in them: So it was among the Rules of
Michael Hospitalius (the best of the Chancellors of France, and yet in a Pet
cashiered from keeping the Great-Seal) as Thuanus remembers it, Anno. 1568.
Principum documentum esse, ut iis nunquam serio reconcilientur, quos temere
offenderint. This, as it is related, was our Duke's Temper. And the Keeper
understood that no Peace was to be had from an Adversary seeded with such
Qualities. All that he could do to help himself, was not by preventing, but by
retarding a Mischief. For though with the Stoick's Fate was inevitable: Yet
Servius says in 8. Lib. Aen. that his great Poet thought, it might be deferred,
though not avoided. Two things stuck to the Keeper like Sorrows, and gave him
all the unrest that he had. First, He wished that his deposing might have come
from any hand, but his Patrons that raised him: before whom he would fall,
rather than wrestle with him as an Enemy. Secondly, He had read much to teach
him, and seen the Proof of it, that when Princes call back their Honors, more
Misery ensues. But as yet he stood his ground, and did become his Place as well
as ever.

4. He never made use so much of his whole stock of Worth, and Wisdom, as in
matter of Religion; which appears before in the Mazes, wherein he led the
Spanish Ambassador, with whom he shisted so cunningly, that they could obtain
nothing for the Toleration of Popish Recusants, but Delays and Expectations
from time to time. Neither could the Monsieurs squeeze any more out of him,
against the Ratification of the French Marriage, as appears in a bare Fortnight
before K. James died, witness the Letter written to the Duke, March 13. 1624.
Cabal. p. 105. If your Grace shall hear the Ambassador complain of the Judges
in their Charges, of their receiving Indictments, your Grace may answer, that
those Charges are but Orations of course, opening all the Penal Laws: And the
Indictments, being presented by the Country, cannot be refused by the Judges.
But the Judges are ordered to execute nothing actually against the Recusants,
nor will they do it during the Negotiation. And your Grace may put him in mind,
that the Lord Keeper does every day, when his (the Ambassadors) Secretary calls
upon him, grant forth Writs, to remove all the Persons Indicted in the Country
into the King's Bench, out of the Power and Reaches of the Justices of Peace.
And that being there the King may, and does release them at his Pleasure. In
all this there is no bar against the common Course of Law, but Mercy reserved
to the Royal Pleasure. Now what cause had my Lord Duke to defy him by his
Secretary, Cab. p. 87. That his Courses were dangerous to his Country, and
prejudicial to the Cause of true Religion? Forsooth, because he proffered a Gap
to be opened to the Immunities of the Papists in a desperate Plunge, to bring
the Prince home safe out of Spain, where he stuck fast for want of such a
Favor to be shown to those Complainants. Which was a liberal Concession in
Promise, but no Date set, nor observed for the Expedition of it. And so all
that Indulgence which hung in nubibus, and never dropped down, is frankly granted
now, and he is commanded by this Warrant that follows, to signify to all
Officers, to suspend the Laws which are grievous to the Romish Profession,
dated 1 Car. May the first.

Charles Rex,
RIght Reverend, and Right Trusty, etc.
Whereas we have been moved, in Contemplation of our Marriage with the Lady
Mary, Sister of our dear Brother the most Christian King, to grant unto our
Subjects, Roman Catholics, a Cessation of all, and singular Pains, and
Penalties, as well Corporal as Pecuniary, whereunto they be subject, or any way
may be liable by any Laws, Statutes, Ordinances, or any thing whatsoever, for,
or by reason of their Recusancy or Religion, and every matter or thing
concerning the same: Our Will and Pleasure is, and we do by these presents
Authorize, and Require you, That immediately, upon the receipt hereof, you do
give Warrant, Order and Directions, as well unto all our Commissioners, Judges
and Justices of the Peace, as unto all others our Officers and Ministers, as
well Spiritual as Temporal, respectively to whom it may appertain, that they,
and every of them do forbear all and all manner, and cause to be sorborn all
and all manner of Proceedings against our said Subjects Roman Catholics, and
every of them, as well by Information, Presentment, Indictment, Conviction,
Process, Seizure, Distress, or Imprisonment, as also by any other ways, or
means whatsoever, whereby they may be molested for the Causes aforesaid. And
further also, That from time to time you take notice of, and speedily redress
all Causes of Complaints, for, or by reason of any thing done contrary to this
our will. And this shall be unto you, and to all to whom you shall give such
Warrant, Order, and Direction, a sufficient Warrant and Discharge in that
behalf.


There was no scrupling of this Order, but it must be dispatched. For though,
as a great Counselor, the Keeper was to be watchful over the Voices and
Affections of the People, and that he knew this was not the Course to keep the
Subject in terms of Contentment, yet he had no power to stop the Tide, as in
former days. My Lord of Buckin. would not stay to hear the Arguments of his
Wisdom. Altissimo orb, and praecipua potentia stella Saturni fortur, Tacit. 1
list. lib. 5. The Planet of Saturn was in the highest Orb, and ruled all the
Influence of the Court. Where was now the Cavil against the Spanish Match, that
in the Treaty for it, it encroach'd too far upon Religion? Indeed my Lord of
Kensington writes from Paris, Cab. p. 275. The French will not strain us to any
unreasonableness in Conditions for the Catholics. And as much again, p. 284.
Their Pulse in matter of Religion beats temperately. So he told us in another
Packet, p. 292. That the French will never abandon us in the Action for the
recovering the Palatinate. Which of these Engagements were broken last? a more
solid Question than to ask, Which of their Promises were kept first? They kept
none. Some chop out Promises, as Nurses tell Tales to Children, to lull them
asleep: As it is in the neat Phrase of Arnobius, Somno occupari ut possint,
leves audiendoe sunt naenioe. The Histories of Spain, and the Netherlands, as
well as of England, do not spare to touch that Noble Nation, that none have
taken greater liberty to play fast and loose with Articles and Covenants. And
as the French were inconstant to us, so new Symptoms, and new Apprehensions
made us variable, and inconstant to our selves. Now a Letter must be sent to
all Magistrates Spiritual and Temporal, to cause them to suspend the Execution
of all Laws against the Papists. At the Term at Reading in November following,
Divulgation is made in all Courts under the Broad-Seal, that all Officers and
Judges should proceed against them according to Law. After the Second
Parliament of King Charles was broken up, that is, in the Summer that followed
the Term at Reading, by the Mediation of the French Ambassador, Marshal
Bassampere, new Letters come from the King to redintegrate Favors to the
Recusants, and that all Pursevants must be restrained, and their Warrants to
search the Houses of Papists taken from them. And this continued but till
Winter. It was safe and just to return quickly again into the Highway of the
Law: for the shortest Errors are the best: Especially in God's Cause. Which
Vincen. Lirin. well advises, Nos religionem, non quo volumus ducere, sed quo
illa nos ducit sequi debemus. We must take up the Train of Religion, and come
after it, and not lead it after us in a String of Policy.

5. Private Men may better keep this Rule, than such as are publicly employed
in the State. But though the Keeper had no remedy, but the preceding Warrant
must be obeyed: Yet he tried his Majesty how his Service would be taken; in
stopping a Warrant upon another occasion, bearing date May 23. Because the
sumptuous Entertainment of the Queen, and her magnificient Convoy being ready
to land, would be very chargeable, he thrust in his Judgment to advise the King
against disorderly Liberality. And though he knew the Secretary Conway for no
other than a Friend, yet he liked not his Encroachment upon the Royal Bounty,
but signifies it in this manner.

Most dread Sovereign, and my most gracious Master,
I Received this Morning a Warrant from your most Excellent Majesty, to pass a
Grant under the Great-Seal of England, of the Sum of Two thousand Pounds, out
of the Court of Wards, to my Lord Conway, for Twenty One Years to come. The
which I durst not for fear of infringing my Duty to your Majesty, and drawing
some danger upon my self, pass under the Great-Seal, before I had made unto
your most Excellent Majesty this most humble Representation. First,The issuing
of so great a Lease of such a vast Sum of Money is (under your Majesty's Favor
and Correction) disadvantageous to your Majesty's Service, in regard of the
time, being in the face of that Parliament, from which your Majesty is to
expect a main Supply. Secondly, It is (I believe) without Prsident or Example,
that Pensions have been granted in Contemplation of Services for Years: But for
the Party's Life only. My Lord of Middlesex his Lease of the Sugars is the only
President in that kind, which has happened during the time of my Service in this
Place. Thirdly,The Assigning of this Pension upon the Court of Wards, or any
other Place, than the Receipt of the Exchequer, is directly against the Rules
and Orders, taken, upon mature deliberation, by your Father of Blessed Memory.
Fourthly, This great Lord (for so be is indeed) is in the Eye and the Envy of
many Men, as your Majesty (I fear it) will hear e're long. As having received
more great Favors within these two Years, than any Three Subjects within this
Kingdom. Although I do believe (looking up to the hands that conferred them) he
may well deserve them all. Most gracious Sovereign, I am not ignorant of the
danger I incur in making this Representation. But I have put on an irremoveable
Resolution, that as long as you are pleased to continue me in your Service, I
will never from this time forth, out of Contemplation of mine own Safety, or
any other carnal Respect, neglect voluntarily any part of my Duty to my God, or
my King. Which I suppose I had greatly forgotten, without presenting your most
Excellent Majesty with this Remonstrance. And having performed this part of my
Duty, I shall most punctually obey your Majesty's Direction in this particular.


For this good Service it was well he had no check: yet he had no gra-mercy, to
seem wiser than those that had prepared the business. And though the Patent for
that Pension was a flat Violation of good Order, yet the Plea was, it would be
unkind to revoke it. (...), as Plutarch in the Life of Agis observes it in some
Men's Humors, Though a thing be ill undertaken, it is held a shame to go back.
This Lord Secretary was the Keeper's cold Friend upon it; but he lived not
long, and quitted his Office before he ceased to live: Only some deckings of
empty Titles were given him, that he might not faint. The most that was
disliked in the Letter was, that it warned the Secretary, that he was like to
hear himself named among the Grievances of the ensuing Parliament. Wherein he
did not fail. It was no hard thing to Prognostic such a Tempest, from the
hollow murmuring of the Winds abroad. There was not such a Watchman about the
Court as the Keeper was, to espy Discontents in the dark: nor any one that had
so many Eyes abroad in every corner of the Realm. What hurt was it? Nay, Why
was it not called a Courtesy, to awaken a Friend, pursued by danger, out of
prudent Collections? Says a wise Senator, Tul. Act. 7. in Verrem, Judex esse
bonus non potest, qui suspicione certa non movetur, He is no sound judge of
Rumors, that gleans not up a certain Conclusion out of strong Suspicions.

6. To speak forward. After the Queen had been received with much luster of
Pomp, and Courtship (which had been more, if a very pestilentious Season in
London, and far and wide, had not frowned upon public Resorts, and full
Solemnities) a Parliament began. Stay a while, and hear that in a little, which
concerns much that followed. This is the highest and supereminent Court of our
Kings. The University of the whole Realm, where the Graduates of Honor, the
Learned in the Laws, and the best Practicers of Knowledge and Experience in the
Land do meet. Horreum sapientiae, or the full Chorus, where the Minds of many
are gathered into one Wisdom. And yet in five Parliaments, which this King
called, there was distance, and disorder in them all between him and his
People. Amabile est praeesse civibus, sed placere difficile, as Symmachus to
his Lord Theodosius. Our Sovereign had not the Art to please: or rather his
Subjects had not the Will to be pleased. And we all see by the Event, that God
was displeased upon it. If he had won them, or they had won him, neither had
been losers. Pliny's Fable, or Story of the Two Goats, Lib. 8. c. 50. Suits the
Case; The Two Goats met upona narrow Bridge; the one laid down his Body for the
other to go over him, or both had been thrust into the River. In the
Application, who had done best to have yielded is too mysterious to determine.
Both, or either, had done well. But now we see, and shall feel it, I believe,
it is not Love, nor Sweetness, nor Sufferance that keeps a Nation within the
straits of due Obedience: it must be Power that needs not to entreat. The
Scepter can no more than propound: the Sword will carry it. This Truth was once
little worn: but now it is upon our backs, and we are like to wear it so long,
till we are all Threadbare. Thucyd. lib. 2. says of Theseus, (...), Theseus
governed Athens, being as potent as wise. His Wisdom taught the Athenians to
keep a good pace: but Awe and Potency did bridle, and compel them to suffer
their Rider, or else they would have thrown him. King Charles knew how to
govern, as well as Theseus. But he was not so stout: I am sure not so strong.
His Condition in the present stood thus. When he was Prince he was the
Messenger, and the Mediator from the Parliament to extort a War against Spain
from his Father. Of which Design he was but the Lieutenant before: is now
become the Captain. He sets the Action on foot, and calls for Contribution to
raise, and pay an Army. Instead of satisfaction in Subsidies (two alone granted
toward the charge of the great Funeral past, and the Coronation to come) they
call for Reformation in Government. One lifts up a Grievance, and another a
Grievance, and still the Cry continues, and multiplies. As they spoke with many
Tongues, so I would they could have taken up Serpents, and felt no harm. The
plain Sense of it is, those subtle Men of the lower House put the young King
upon the push of Necessity, and then took advantage of the Time, and that
Necessity. They had cast his Affairs into want of Money, and he must yield all
that they demanded, or else get no Money, without which the War could not go
on. Here was the Foundation laid of all the Discontents that followed. A capite
primum computrescit piscis, says the Proverb. If they had answered with that
Confidence and Love, as was invited from them, England had not sat in sorrow as
at this day. And I will as soon die as retract these words, that all Affairs
might have been in a most flourishing Estate, if the People in that, or in any
Parliament, had been as good as the King: Optimos gubernatores hand mediocriter
etiam manus remigum juvat, Symmach. p. 128. The Pilot spends his breath in
vain, if the Oar-men will not strike a stroke: A good Head can do nothing
without their Hands. If I should hold yet, that this King was to be blamed in
nothing, I should speak too highly of Humane Nature. They that pass through
much business, cannot choose but incur Errors, which will fall under Censure;
yet it were better under Pardon. The most that aggrieved the Council of
Parliament was, that the King's Concessions for the good of the People came not
off cheerfully. He wanted a way indeed to give a Gift, and to make it
thank-worthy in the manner of bestowing. A small Exception: when one grave
Sentence from his Mouth did mean more reality, than a great deal of Volubility
with sweetness and smiling: to which, I confess, they had been fortunately
used. But when all is done, as the Poets say, The Muses sing sweeter than the
Sirens; and a sullen something is better than a gracious nothing.

7. And these are instead of Contents: For the Chapter, that is the business of
the Capitol, follows. The Parliament began, and the whole Assembly stood before
the King: So there was a day when the Sons of God came to present themselves
before the Lord, Job 1.6. but there was another thrust in among them. What his
Majesty spoke than is printed more then once: It was not much, but enough: it
was not long, but there wanted nothing. Good Seed it was, yet it came not up
well, although it was watered with two showers of Eloquence by the Lord Keeper,
the first directed to the Lords, and Commons; the other to Sir Thomas Crew the
Speaker. Which will tell the Reader more Truth, than is yet come abroad; whom I
would have to remember Baronius's Caution, in his Epistle to the first Tome of
his Annals, Nihil periculosius est in historia, quam cuivis scribe^^ in
quacunqae re fidem habere. But hear what the King willed to be published to his
Parliament by the Mouth of his great Officer.

My Lords and Gentlemen all,
YOU have heard his Majesty's Speech, though short, yet Full and Princely, and
rightly Imperatorious, as Tacitus said of Galbas: Neither must we account that
Speaker to be short, Qui materiae immoratur, that keeps himself close unto his
Theme, and Subject. For as Pliny made his censure of Homer and Virgil, Brevis
uterque est, sed facit quod instituit:Either of them seem to be short, for they
do their work so succinctly, there falls not a word besides the purpose. His
Majesty has himself abundantly expressed the substance, of what he offers to
your Consideration at this Meeting. Some few Circumstances I shall, by his
Royal Command, add thereunto, as touching the time, the manner, and the end of
that loving and dutiful Expression, which his Majesty may, without any fear of
Immodesty, as he conceives, promise unto himself from this first Session of his
first Parliament. The main reason of his calling the Parliament at this time
(beside the looking upon the Faces of his Subjects in this perfect
representation, which he is resolved to make his most pleasant Theater under
Heaven, as long as God shall give him Life) is to let you understand those deep
Engagements for the recovery of the Palatinate (that is for the Honor of the
British Nation) by Leagues, Alliances, Diversions, Wars by Sea and by Land
which his aying Father has imposed upon the King; or peradventure the King in
part upon his Father: or rather, to speak truly and historically, your selves
(but upon grave and just Consideration) upon them both. For the breaking of
both the Treaties with that potent King, that of the Alliance, and that of the
Restitution, moved originally from you, mediately by the King our Sovereign,
finally to the King his Father of Blessed Memory, accompanied in all the Ways,
and Passages with your Promise, and Assurance, to feed the Enterprise from time
to time with all fu^ing, and necessary Supplies. Hereupon our late Sovereign,
that is with God, to the very time of his recovering Heaven, had no other
Object of his Consultations, Resolutions, and Actions, than the recovery of the
Palatinate. The Foreign Treaties and Alliances, the Supply of the Low
Countries, the Forces under the Conduct of Count Mansfield, the Reparation of
the Forces in England, the Troops sent over into Ireland, lastly, this great,
and (by God's Assistance) invincible Fleet, and Navy, though they show like so
many Lines scattered, and divided in the Circumference, yet do they meet and
unite themselves in the Recovery of the Palatinate, as in the Center that
bears, and supports them all. These great Designs the Holy Ghost, I hope, has
inspired into you, you to the King our Sovereign, he and you to the King his
Father. He before his Death had so ripened, and prepared, as the King our
Master finds himself so wrapped, and engaged in the Enterprise, as it fares
with his Heroical Heart, as with that Pompey, Necesse est ut eam, non ut vivam.
He would more willingly go on to his Grave (which God of his Goodness will not
permit) than not go onward with this brave Design. Now all your Subsidies, and
Fifteens: and fully (to speak in measure and compass) as much more of the Means
of the Crown being spent in the Preparation, forward the Action cannot move
without a new Support, and Supply; which is the Substance of all which his
Majesty has now recommended unto you.

9. The first Circumstance remembered unto you, is that of Time. A most
pressing, and important Circumstance, (...), as Sophocles calls it, the
greatest Commander of all our Actions. For as Dion Cassius observes, Lib. 11.
Non rebus tempora, sed res temporibus inserviunt, Actions do not govern Times,
but Times govern Actions, be they never so weighty. And as Quintilian says
wisely, Plaerumque sera pro nullis sunt, That Supply, which comes too late,
proves many times no supply at all. His Majesty knows very well that you are
wise, and provident to observes Times and Seasons. You cannot but observe, that
Europe stands this day like the Pool of Bethesda, the Waters are stirred every
where; and we hope by a good Angel. The Honor of England, which has
languished for these late Years, stands at the brink, and now, or not in haste,
is to be healed, and repaired. His Majesty therefore desires you to conceive,
that this Meeting in this Session is but as a Meeting in a General's Tent, a
Consultation in the heat of an Action, which will endure no long Debate. He
expects therefore that you will be pleased to bestow this Session upon him, or
rather upon this Action, and to hasten for that Cause. And his Majesty will
appoint the next as soon, and as long, as you please, for yours, and our own
home Affairs. This much concerning Time: The second Circumstance is for the
Manner, which looks upon the Time, as the Time does upon the Action. For if the
manner of gathering this Supply should prove heavy, and slow, Time, as
Callistratus in his Statutes sets him forth, has (...), a Pair of Wings at his
Feet, and will quite outrun it. If therefore, in your own Judgments, and
Resolution, you shall find the usual way, and manner of Supplies by Subsidy to
be too slow, and backward for these present, and undelayable Occasions, his
Majesty, (no friend to Innovation, Etiam cum illi necessitas lenocinetur, not
now when necessity might seem to privilege the same) does rather desire to
hear, and to receive from you, then to project, and propound unto you the
manner of supplying this present Action. This is the second Circumstance: The
Last is the End, and the Issue of the Action, which has no meaner Consequence,
than the Fame, and Reputation of our sweet, and gracious Sovereign, for many
Years after. For as Theodoricus, that brave King of Lombardy, was wont to say,
Ipsa initia plantare debent Principis nominis famam, as a King sows his
Reputation in his first Actions, so shall he reap his Harvest of Glory in the
Progress of his Life, And therefore I must say of our gracious Master, as the
Orator said of himself, Haec actio illi aures hominum, haec famae januam
patefaciet. His Majesty at this time puts his Fame, and Reputation (that is all
that he has of a King: For what is a King without these?) very much upon your
Love and Affections. And this, not as Caesar upon his Army at all Adventures,
with a Jacta est alea, a Mum-chance, a cast of a Dye, but with the greatest
Confidence, and Assurance that ever was placed by a loving King, on a most
loving and indulgent People. Witness that Posie of his in his new stamped Coin,
not to be engraven, as it is, in Silver or Gold, but in the solid Substance of
Loyal Hearts, Amor civium regis munimentum; showing that he cares little for
other Forts, being so well assured of the Love of his People. And therefore as
in Nature, Rex and subditus, the King and the People are proper Relatives, and
consequently simul natura, of one and the same Date and Existence: So does his
Majesty little doubt, that as soon as himself shall be known in Europe to be an
actual King, you also shall be known by advancing his, nay your Enterterprize,
to be a valiant, faithful, and obedient People. And now you are directed to
choose your Speaker, and present him to his Majesty.


Which was Sir Thomas Crew, so well tried for his worth in the Precedent
Parliament, that he was elected again in this. To whose Oration the next day
the Lord Keeper answered as follows.

Mr. Speaker,
YOU have endeavored to excuse yourself from this place of great Trust. But I
perceive, by his most Excellent Majesty, that I was not much amiss, when I took
you to be in the same Case that Evathlus was to Protagoras, as Gellius reports
it, Lib. 5. c. 11. That is, sure to be denied, and to lose your Cause whether
you argued strongly or faintly. St. Paul was called Mercurius by the
Lycaonians, because he was the chief Speaker, Acts 14.12. But to whom shall I
liken you? Truly to nothing but to yourself; who have spoken more too
learnedly, and pithily; the manner whereof has confuted the Matter: and your
Rhetoric has spoiled your Logic. For no Man that has heard you speak, can
believe your unfitness to be a Speaker. His Majesty therefore does applaud and
confirm your Election, and commands me to return an Answer to some parts of
that you have delivered. Which, though it was (as all great and excellent
Bodies are observed to be) round, and sphaerical in the Composition, without a
nook, or a corner for a Man to lay hold upon, yet as some late Mathematicians
have born us in hand, that they can find Quadraturam circ uli, some corners in
a Circle, so for Method, and Memory's sake, Aut inveniam, aut faciam, where I
do not find, you must give me leave to make some parts, and to run them over
briefly, distinctly, and orderly. You have said somewhat concerning yourself;
somewhat concerning the last Parliament, somewhat of the Primus motor, and
Divine Intelligence which enliv'd the same: somewhat of his Majesty's Entrance
upon his Government, and that in five several Respects. First in respect of the
Way, which is by Parliament. Secondly in respect of his Blood, as the Son of
Nobles, Thirdly in respect to Succession to so worthy a Father. Fourthly in
respect of our Hopes of a rare and religious Government. And Lastly in respect
of his great Delivery in his famous Journey by Sea and Land. Somewhat also you
have said of our Religion, as much recommended unto the King, and much
prosperous and profitable to the People: Somewhat of the ancient Common Law:
somewhat of cherishing our Friends abroad: Somewhat of abating our Foes at
home: Somewhat of the Four Petitions presented to all Kings, Immunity of
Persons, Liberty of Speech, readiness of Access, and benign Interpretation, the
four corner Stones, which bear up the Structure of the House of Parliament. I
shall from his most Excellent Majesty make answer to these things according to
your Sense, and with my Method, as they lie in order.

11. First for your self you say little, but you do much in yielding thus to
his Majesty's Pleasure. You offered a Sacrifice before, the Sacrifice of your
Lips, an excuse from this Service: and that was refused. Now you offer up
Obedience, and that is amply accepted. For Obedience is better than Sacrifice.
Quod felix faustumque sit, a most happy Concatenation to open a Parliament,
when the Hearts of the People are in the Hands of the King, and the Heart of
the King in the Hand of God. Secondly, for the last Parliament it was happy
indeed: so accounted by our late, so esteemed by our present Sovereign, so
denominated by the Effects which it produced. For therein (as you well observe)
those male-sida foedera, and unfaithful Treatises were dissolved, the King and
his People indissolubly united, the Flowers of the Crown a little pruned, but
with the Love of the Subjects better scented and perfumed: Lastly, if not more
Bills of Grace, yet surely more Bills from pure Grace passed, and were enacted,
than in that Session of Magna Charta: Gratia enim non est gratia, si non sit
gratis data. And surely as Pliny said of Nerva, Debebatur maximo operi haec
veneratio, ut novissimum sit, autorque ejus statim consecraretur It became a
Prince, who was now ready to be Sainted in Heaven, to close in that manner his
Government here on Earth. For I could never learn, in all my Reading, any other
way for King or Subject than this one, by the Kingdom of Grace to pass along to
the Kingdom of Glory. Thirdly for the part the King our Master bore in the late
Parliament, surely he was Actus primus, the very proper Soul of that Politic
Body, Tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part, now in the Committees as in the
Members, by and by with the Lords as in the Heart, anon with the King his
Father as in the Head of the Body, and every where the principal Author of
Life, Motion, and Resolution. So that we may say to our now Sovereign, as the
Romans did by their Orator to the Emperor Trajan, that he is no stranger to our
Assembly, Meminit quae optare. quae sit queri solitus, he cannot forget the
Desires of the Commons, nor the ^ishes of the upper House of Parliament.
Fourthly your five Circumstances (for so I number them) of his Majesty's
Entrance into his Reign are very well noted, and observed. 1. That he begins it
with a Parliament. It is a sign indeed of his Love to that way. Those Actions
of Men are most pure, and sincere, Quae singendi non habent tempus, that are
done in such haste, as admits no Fiction. His Majesty was scarce proclaimed,
when the Writs went out: and before the Solemnities of his Coronation, behold
him present in the midst of his People. 2. That he comes into it with the Blood
of Nobles. Yes, Mr. Speaker, Deus est in utroque parente. No King in Europe,
that breaths this day, can show so fair, and so Royal a Pedigree. 3. That by
his Succession he has sweetened much our loss of his Father. A great, and a
glorious Act indeed. And such an act, as I will be bold to say in his Majesty's
hearing, could never have been done by any King, not by himself, had he been
the Son of his Body only, and not withal of his Mind, and Virtues. Herein
indeed he equals his Father, Neque enim de Caesaris actis -- Ullum majus opus,
quam quod Pater extitit hujus. 4. For our hopes they have good cause (God make
us thankful to him for the same) to sore high, and to expect a King, that shall
exceed Hezekias in Policy of State (for our Master, I hope, will never discover
the Secrets of his Dominion to Foreigners, and Strangers) and equal him, at the
least, in the Advancement of Religion. You heard his Profession the last day.
His God above him, his People under him, his Heart within him, and his Kindred
about him must inflame his Zeal to this true Religion, Et pater Aeneas, and
avunculus excitat Hector. Lastly, for his great delivery by Sea and Land, which
so filled our Mouths with Laughter, and our Tongues with Joy, it showed him
betimes a Child of King James, and withal a Child of God, and being so, Nolite
tangere, no Evil might touch him. As God was with Moses, so he was, and will be
with him, non deseret, aut derelinquet, he will never fail him, nor forsake
him; To the which Prayer all we his representative Kingdom will never fail to
say, Amen.

12. What you said of the true Religion is most apparently true, that it has
been very piously charged upon our King, and hitherto full of Blessings upon
our Kingdom. For the first his Majesty well remembers (what I ill forgot in
another occasion) that the last Blessing of all his Father gave him (and I
think upon a Motion of mine) was with a Recommendation of his Religion, and of
his People to his special Care, Love, and Protection. And I nothing doubt but
that Blessing shall so bless him, that he shall see Jerusalem in Prosperity all
his Life long. And for the effect of our Religion, it has hitherto produced in
this Kingdom a very Kingdom of Heaven, not only after this Life, but even in
this Life, for the space of sixty Seven Years, wherein it has been most
constantly professed. All that time Peace has been within our Walls, and
plenteousness within our Palaces. Non fecit sic omni nationi, God has not
dealt so with many, nor with any Nation in Europe, that I know, or read of.
Sixthly, what you recommended to the King concerning the Laws of the Land, the
King has already in private, and does now in public recommend to his Judges,
and by them to the Professors, and Students of the Laws, to wit, that they
would spend their time, as their Forefathers did, in the ancient Common-Laws
of the Kingdom, and not altogether, as the Complaint has been of late, in
Statutes, new Cases, and modern Abridgments. In the former Studies you meet
with Reason created by God, in the latter with Opinion only invented by Men.
Here you find peradventure some strong Conclusions, but upon weak Grounds, and
Premises: there you learn strong Premises, that can never produce a weak
Conclusion. In a word, to borrow the Simile of St. Basil, there like Ulysses
you Court Penelope herself; here, like the foolish Wooers, but her Handmaids
only. Seventhly, that just Resentment you express of the Dishonor of our
Nation, in that hostile Acquisition, and Detension of the Palatinate, you
cannot imagine, Mr. Speaker, how much it contents his most Excellent Majesty.
Now he finds indeed his People to be lively Members of this Politic Body,
because they sympathize so seelingly with the grievous Pains, and Troubles of
their Head. And surely he is no true Part, but an Excrescency, or dead Flesh
upon the outside of the State, that is not sensible of his Majesty's Sufferings
in those Affairs. God forbid, against all these Professions, this Kingdom
should prove to a People so allied, either a Meroz, as you term it, for
Inhumanity, or an Egypt for Infidelity, or a whit inferior to Caesar himself
to aid, and relieve them. You heard the full Measure of the King's Resolution
the last day, Ire oportet, vivere non oportet; He does not desire to live
otherwise than in Glory, and Reputation. And so he cannot live, you know it
well enough, till somewhat be vigorously effected in that great business of the
Palatinate. Eighthly, for the abandoning of those Sons of Bichri, the Priest and
Jesuits, his Majesty returns you this Answer. As he does approve your Zeal, and
Devotion herein, and acknowledges that of St. Ambrose to be true, Quod in
religionem committitur, in omnium vertitur injuriam, that the meanest Subject
in this Kingdom has a great right, and Interest in the Religion, so being
appointed by, and under God, Custos utriusque tabulae, the Guardian, and Keeper
of both the Tables, he desires you to trust him (whose Zeal was never yet
questioned, or suspected) with the ways, and means to propagate the same, Yet
in this Petition of yours his most Excellent Majesty does absolutely grant the
Effect, and the Matter, that is to be most careful of our Religion, or (which
you more desire) to improve, and better the Form, and Manner. But as St. Austin
says of God himself, Non tribuit aliquando quod volumus, ut quod malimus
attribuat. Lastly, for your four ordinary Petitions, for Immunity of Persons,
liberty of Speech, readiness of Access, benign Interpretation, his most
Excellent Majesty grants them all, and will have them limited by no other
bounds, than your own Wisdom, Modesty, and good Discrietion. So his Majesty
bids God Speed the Plow.

13. I look upon him that spoke so well for the King two days together, as
Antiquarius did upon the L. Picus Mirandula, Ratio, and oration cum ipso ex
codem utero natae videantur, Ep. 279. Here Is strong Mettle, and a keen Edge,
able to cleave the hardest Knot. Here Is Reason to convince Judgment, with store
of Eloquence to delight the Affections. Which could not be past over without
this censure: for it is an ill thrift, to be parsimonious in the praise of that
which is very good. The King reposed much upon the Success of this Meeting,
because his Mind was so well delivered, and so strongly put on. The Cause of
the War was made the Kingdoms: The Counsel that began it was the Parliaments,
and were they not bound to find the Succors? As our Poet Mr. Johnson says upon
Prince Henry's Barriers, He does but scourge himself his Sword that draws.
Without a Purse, a Counsel, and a Cause. But the Registers of all Ages, I
believe, will not show a Man, in whom Virtue was more perpetually unfortunate,
than in this King. The Influence of those ill Stars, that reigned over all his
Reign, began thus soon. The Parliament was told, as if a Dictator had been
nominated for this War, that all must be consulted and executed together; that
the present Sacrifice must be eaten in haste, like the Lord's first Passover:
for in that juncture slow help was no help. Yet in five Weeks (so long they sat
at Westminster) there was not an Arrow to any purpose shot toward that Mark.
These were they that thrust his Majesty upon a War, to the mortifying of his
Father's part: and now his Enemies were awaked with the Alarm, they let him
shift for himself. Being told enough that there must be Gold, as well as Iron
to play this Game, and that a good Purse made a good Army, they gave him such
discouragement, that they dropped no more than two Mites into the Corban. An
incredible disproportion between what was found, and what was looked for: and
suitable to a Passage in an Italian Comedy, where a Guest complains of his ill
Entertainment at a Miser's Table, that there was not enough to make a good
Supper, nor scarce enough to make a good Salad.

14. Yet the hardest Remedy had been the best Patience. For by the second Week
in July the Plague was in its rage about London, and Westminster. The Members
of both Houses were half slunk home, and they that staid it out, wished every
hour the Session were ended. The King was in a mervellous strait: neither knew
how to hold them, nor to let them go. His mind was much upon it, to try them,
though not there, yet some where else, for an augmentation of Supply. Whose
excuse was the same, which the Queen of Carthage made to Aeneas, Lib. 1. Aen.
Res dura, and novitas regni me talia cogunt -- Moliri. His Majesty thought
change of Air would do good, and proposed to some of his Council at
Hampton Court, July 10. to adjourn to Oxford against the first of August. A
Proposition mainly favored by the Lord-Duke, so that he grinn'd at the
Lord Keeper, all the while he dissuaded it. But take away liberty from Speech,
and take away Bitterness from Wormwood, nay take away Spirit from Wine. Yet he
went on, and spoke to these two Heads, that it was not another place, but
another time that must speed the Work. First, the Infection of the Pestilence
had overspread the whole Land: that no Man, that traveled from his own home,
knew where to lodge in safety: that the Lords and Gentlemen would be so
distasted, to be carried abroad in such a Mortal time, that it is likely, when
they came together, they would Vote out of discontent, and displeasure: that
his Majesty was ill counseled to give Offenses, though small ones, in the bud
of his Reign, Quae nulli magis evitandae sunt, quam juveni and Principi, cujus
gratia cum aetate debet adolescere, as Symmachus, Lib. 1. Ep. writes to his
Master Theodosius. Secondly, the Parliament has given two Subsidies at
Westminster, though they remove to Oxford it is yet the same Session: and if
they allege, it is not the use of the House to give twice in a Session,
(though I wish heartily they would) yet how shall we plead them out of their
Custom, if they be so stiff to maintain it? It is not fit for the Reputation of
the King, to fall upon a probable hazard of a denial. The Duke, who had heard
this with impatience, said, That public Necessity might sway more than one
Man's Jealousy. Hereupon the Keeper besought that he might commit a few words
to the King's Ear in private: which was granted. And he acquainted his Majesty,
That the Lord-Duke had Enemies in the House of Commons, who had contrived
Complaints, had made them ready to be preferred, and would spend the time at
Oxford about them. And what folly it were to continue a Session, that had no
other aim, but to bring the Duke upon the Stage? But if your Majesty think that
this is like a Hectic, quickly known, but hardly cured; My humble Motion is,
that this Malady, or Malice, call it which you will, may sleep till after
Christmas. There is no time lost in whetting the Sithe well. For I hope to give
such account by that time, by undertaking with the chief Sticklers, that they
shall supersede from their Bitterness against your great Servant, and that
Passage to your weighty Councils shall be made smooth, and peaceable. And why
do you conceal this from Buckingham, says the King? Good Lord Sir, says the
Keeper, fain I would begin at that end, but he will not hear me with
moderation. Which was rightly foreseen. Erasmus in an Epistle to one Gonel
asks, How a good turn can be worse bestowed than upon ungrateful Men? Yes, says
he, Magis perit quod praestatur non intelligentibus. It Is worse placed upon
them, that will not understand. Because it was the mishap of this Man to give
the first notice of that Storm that was a gathering, the Duke as in defiance,
bid him and his Confederates do their worst, and besought that the Parliament
might be continued, to confront that Faction; though he looked upon himself in
that innocence, that he presumed they durst not question him. Here began the
Downfall of the Lord Keeper; mistrusted to set that Wheel a going, whose Motion
he discovered, and offered to put a Spoke into it. But Truth fails: And he
that departs from Evil makes himself a Prey, Isa. 59.15. And here began the
Troubles of mighty Buckingham: who would not gain six Months time, which might
have made Mischiefs mellow, and rot. But to show the Greatness of his Power, he
made haste to destroy himself: being in one Character too like to Pope Julius
the Second, Nunquam ab eo, ad quod ingenio feroci impellebatur; recedendum
putavit. He would never retreat from that, to which the Violence of his
Passions hurried him.

16. He had his Will, and August the 1st. the Session continued at Oxford. Of
which place it may be said as Cassiodor did of Athens, Aeris puritate peruncta
lucidissimos sensus ad contemplationem felici largitate praeparavit. But it
appears by experience it has been more renowned for good Wits, than for good
Parliaments. The Commons sat in the Divinity-School, who for the most part
begin with a Grievance about increase of Popery. And on the first Morning, no
sooner had the Speaker taken his place, but a Western Knight enlarges the
Sense of his Sorrow, that he had seen a Pardon for six Priests, bearing Test,
July 12. Whereas, but the day before it, when they were to part from
Westminster, the Lord Keeper had promised in the King's Name before them all,
that the Rigor of the Laws against Priests should not be deluded. Many of the
Members were sore offended, and veyed who should blame it most. What! their
Hopes blasted in one Night? What the King's Promise so early broken? Nunquam
major spes est quam in bonorum Principum sponsione, Symmachus, Ep. to Theodos.
Lib. 1. But for a Lord Keeper that brought the King's Message, and knew it
best, and for a Bishop to set the Seal to such a Warrant, for him to do that
wrong to Religion, it was enormous. But for his part he was secure enough.
Indeed it was a Pit-fall set to crush him, but it fell upon another. God had
given him Wisdom to know the Violence of Winds, and the Reasonings of Men,
Wisd. 7.20. The Warrant was twice brought to him, but he would not pass it. Mr.
Bembo, a Servant to the Clerk of the Crown, confessed before the House, that he
brought the Writ to be sealed, but it was stopped. Mr. Devike, Servant to Sir
Edward Conway, confessed he brought it from his Master: but it could not speed.
It was my Lord Buckingham's hard Hap, to move the King to command the Warrant
to be Sealed in his sight at Hampton Court the Sunday following: which being
evidenced, the Vote of the Commons turned about to clear the Keeper, and to
commend him: which did him hurt at Woodstock (the Court was there) to please
the Parliament, which had not pleased the King. An Error like to that of
Adrians in Spartianus, Non admisit Terentium Gentianum: est eo vehementius,
quod a Senatu diligi eum videret. But the Commons, while they were in heat,
asked a Conference with the Lords Afternoon in Christ's-Church-Hall: where Sir
Edward Coke opened the Complaint sharply against Secretary Conway: and like an
Orator did slide away with a short Animadversion upon the Duke. It was not so
well for his Grace, that the noise of the Grievance had entered into both
Houses. Arcus cum sunt duplices pluviam nuntiant, says Pliny, Lib. 2. N. H. c.
59. If our Rainbow multiply another by its Reflection, it prognostics a
Shower. And the Storm burst out in the lower Region: when he was rather
declam'd against, as I would call it, than accused, because the Gentlemen that
did prosecute contained themselves in generals. The most upon which insistance
was made, was, that he held the most, and the most important Offices of Trust,
and Honor by Sea and Land. Though it was foolish and superstitious in the
Heathen Romans, to think it was not for the Majesty of their Commonwealth to
serve but one God, Majestatem imperii non decuisse, ut unus tantum Deus
colatur, Tull. Orat. pro Flacco: Yet it were to be desired, if it might be
dutifully obtained, that one Subject should not possess all those Places, which
require the Sufficiency of many to discharge them. Much to this purpose is that
of the Lord Herbert, Harry. 8. p. 318. That it was a great Error, that such a
multitude of Offices was invested in Woolsey: as it drew Envy upon the
Cardinal, so it derogated not a little from the Regal Authority, while one Man
alone seems to comprehend all. The King may be satisfied, to settle the Choice
of his high Promotions in one Minion: so will never the People. And the
Advanced is sure to be shaken for his height, and to be malign'd for
over-dropping. He that sees a Stone-wall swelling, looks every day when it will
fall. And one Stalk is not strong enough, to hold a cluster of Titles hanging
at it. Salmasius has a Note upon the first Book of Solinus, That if a Man grow
so fast, that it exceeds the usual way of Nature, he will fall into sickness.
His Instance is in the Son of Euthymenes, that grew three Cubits in three
Years, Et immoderatis aegritudinum suppliciis compensasse praecipitem
incrementi celeritatem. But what Grandee will believe this? Because there is
more in our corrupt Nature that will obey Ambition, than Wisdom.

16. Yet to speak to the other side, Might not this have been forborne to be
objected by the Parliament to this great Lord at this time? When his Head, and
his Hands were wholly taken up to prepare that War, which was their own
Creature. He was at their Plough, he was under their Yoke, if it were well
remembered. Now Grotius marks well from the old Law, Deuteronomy. 21.3. That Beasts
that had been put to labor, might not be sacrificed ( Elisha's Act was hasty
and singular) (...), as he quotes it out of Chaeremon: They were privileged by
the Work, in which they had been profitable. Nay, could it be objected as a
Fault at any time? I say as a Fault: for I plead not for the Convenience. What
Pharisee would be so corrupt to ask, Master who sinned? This Man, or his
Parent, that he was made a Duke, as Lord Admiral, a Master of the Horse, etc.?
No Inch of Sin is in ten Cubits of Honor, that are lawfully conferred. But
there is a Fault for which Budaeus knew no direct Name, Lib. 2. Pandec. fol.
10. Cum milites Imperatori infensi vincere nolunt. Let it be termed (...), says
he, when Soldiers will lose a Victory wilfully, because they are discontented
at their General. All was tending much this way at Oxford. The great Expedition
in hand, and the Fleet ready at Plymouth lost its season, the Soldiers and
Sailors disheartened for want of Pay, yet not the Supply of a Subsidy could be
drawn, to give courage to the Onset, because the Generalissimo, that managed
the Voyage, had lost their Favor. Numbers there were, some Friends, some
Flatterers, that brought Fuel to the Fire to inflame the Duke against these
Dealings. The Lord Keeper was not sought to. Yet came, and offered himself to
confer about it. And certainly all that knew him would say, no Man could pluck
the Grass better, to know where the Wind sat: no Man could spy sooner from
whence a Mischief did rise. I Will begin thus:

My Lord, I come to you unsent for: and I fear to displease you: Yet because
your Grace made me, I must and will serve you, though you are one that will
destroy, that which you made. Let me perish: Yet I deserved to perish ten
times, if I were not as earnest, as any Friend your Grace has, to save you
from perishing. The Sword is the Cause of a Wound: but the Buckler is in fault,
if it do not defend the Body, You have brought the Two Houses hither, my Lord,
against my Counsel. My Suspicion is confirmed, that your Grace would suffer for
it. What Is now to be done? but wind up a Session quickly. The occasion is for
you; because two Colleges in the University, and eight Houses in the City are
visited with the Plague. Let the Members be promised fairly and friendly, that
they shall meet again after Christmas. Requite their Injuries done unto you
with benefits, and not revenge. For no Man, that is wise, will show himself
angry with the People of England. I have more to say, but no more than I have
said to your Grace above a Year past at White Hall. Confer one or two of your
great Places upon your fastest Friends: so shall you go less in Envy, and not
less in Power. Great Necessities will excuse hard Proposals, and horrid
Counsels. St. Austin says it was a Punick Proverb in his Country; Ut habeas
quietum tempus perde aliquid. At the Close of this Session declare your self to
be the forwardst to serve the King and Commonwealth, and to give the
Parliament satisfaction. Fear them not, when they meet again in the same Body:
whose ill Affections I expect to mitigate: but if they proceed, trust me with
your Cause, when it is transmitted to the House of Lords, and I will lay my
Life upon it, to preserve you from Sentence, or the least Dishonor. This is my
Advice my Lord. If you like it not, Truth in the end will find an Advocate to
defend it. The Duke replied no more but, I will look whom I trust to, and flung
out of the Chamber with Minaces in his Countenance. Yet the other did not think
he had played the Game ill, though he lost his Stake by it. Dangerous
Faithfulness is honester than cunning Silence. And once more he was bold to
wrestle with this Potentate in high Favor, before he fell. The Commons of this
Parliament was censured at Woodstock for spiteful, and seditious: therefore not
fit to continue, but to be dissolved. Which Resolution being brought to the
Clerk of the Crown, to dissolve them on the 12th. of August; the Keeper did
never so bestir him since he was born, as to turn the Tide, with Reasons, with
Supplications, with Tears, imploring his Majesty to remember a time, when, in
his hearing, his blessed Father had charged him to call Parliaments often, and
continue them, though their rashness sometimes did offend him; that in his own
Experience, he never got good by falling out with them. But chiefly Sir, says
he, let it never be said, that you have not kept good Correspondence with your
first Parliament. Do not disseminate so much unkindness through all the
Counties, and Boroughs of your Realm. The Love of the People is the Palladium
of your Crown. Continue this Assembly to another Session, and expect alteration
for the better. If you do not so, the next swarm will come out of the same
Hive. To this the Lords of the Council did almost all concur; but it wanted
Buckingham's Suffrage: who was secure that the King's Judgment would follow him
against all the Table. So this first Parliament was blasted, Et radicis vitium
in fructibus nascentibus ostenditur. The Root failed, and the Fruit was
unsavory in all the Branches that grew up after it. I would the Builders had
laid a better corner Stone: then the Lord had not smote the great House with
Breaches, and the little House with Clefts, Amos 6.11. Yet I would the King's
Aequanimity had suffered it to stand, that Concord might have cemented the
Hearts of all the Nation to his Government. It is a Trivial, but a dangerous
Oversight, Senec. lib 3. de pra.
Initia morborum quis curat? Providence is not sensible of a little harm when
it begins; and when the increase is felt, the Evil is incurable.

17. Now the time came that as the Parliament had chased the Duke, so the Duke
chased the Keeper, Torva Leaena Lupum sequitur, Lupus ipse Capellam. Was it for
Michaias's Crime, he does not prophecy good concerning me but evil? 1 Kings
22.8. His Fidelity would not let him conceal it. Or did his Grace doubt him for
under-dealing? He could never prove it. And he that can leave to be a Friend
for Suspicion, is justly suspected that he was never a Friend. What shall we
say to such Men, as would fall out, and are angry when they cannot find a
justifiable occasion? This was the Misfortune: like Caelius the Orator in
Seneca, Lib. 3. de ira, c. 8. meeting with one that observed him in all that he
said, and longing for a Quarrel, says Caelius, Dic aliquid contra me, ut duo
simus. The Keeper could not be provoked to give the Duke the least jostle:
All Is one, when Power contests, there is no safety for Innocence: great Men can
maintain their Violence by some color of Right. So the Accusation broke out,
that this Man had fomented Suggestions against my Lord of Buckingham, among the
chief Tribunes of the Parliament. Wherein the King was satisfied to the
contrary, while he staid at Woodstock, by an Apology that follows, drawn up
hastily in an hour, into short Heads. Yet it stuck in the Credulity of those,
that were remote from the Scene, and saw not the Part acted. Therefore I
believe that some intelligent Man might tell so much to the Observator, p. 36.
Yet he knows, that for an intelligent Man to judge upon Report, is worse than
to take Judgment of a sick Man's Distemper only by his Water. And as
intelligent a Man as the Observator himself may have the Infirmity which
Longinus imputes to Timaeus, (...), p. 8. (...), censorious of others, partial
to himself, and insensible of his own Errors. But let truth break forth by a
Paper, which the Lord Keeper put into the King's Hand, Aug. 14. which
discloseth all, Judex ipse sui totum se explorat ad unguem. Ausonius.

REASONS to satisfy your most excellent Majesty concerning my Carriage all
this last Parliament.
18. First negatively, That I did nothing disserviceably to your Majesty, or
the Duke. For first, I never spoke at Oxford with any of the stirring Men, as
was untruly suggested to your Majesty, excepting once with Philips, with the
Privity, and for the Service of the Duke. And with Wentworth at his first
coming to Town, and before his coming to the House. Who promised (and I do
verily believe he performed it) to carry himself advantageously to your
Majesty's Service, and not to join with any that should sly upon my Lord Duke.
The rest are all Strangers to me: and I never spoke with any one of them
concerning any Parliamentary matters. Secondly, I did cross the popular way,
more than any of the Council; which I durst not have done, if I had intended to
run along with them. 1. In advising your Majesty, knowing how you were engaged
to the Queen, to reserve to yourself the Execution of the Laws against
Recusants, at leastwise for a time, as at Rycott. 2. In maintaining this
Advice afterward before the Council at Oxford. 3. In lingering and staying the
Bill against Recusants. 4. In direct Opposition to the Lord Say, in staying
the Bill of Tonnage and Poundage, which was the Darling of the Active part in
the House of Commons. Had I intended to run any way with the People, I had been
a Madman to have appeared in any of these. Affirmatively, I offered my poor
Service to your Majesty, for the executing of any Directions, should be given
me in private. First, I waited upon your Majesty three or four times before
your Journey to Dover, to know if you would give me any private Directions, but
received none. 2. I waited upon your Majesty and the Duke three several times
while the Parliament sat at Westminster, and my Answer was still, you had
nothing to say to me. 3. I waited to know if your Majesty had ought to command
me privately at Windsor, at Bissam, at Ricott toward the Oxford Sitting; and
was ever answered as before. 4. I did the like to my Lord-Duke at Oxford,
desiring his Lordship to send me his Commands by any trusty Servant, and I
would serve him to the utmost of my Power from time to time. His Grace said he
would send, but never sent to me. So that if I had any Power in either House (I
had much the less at this time by reason of the Paucity of the Lawyers, who
were in the Circuit) what use could I make of it without Directions? And to
tell the plain truth, I durst do nothing for fear of offending the Duke,
otherwise than by Direction. Only it is known, that they that were for giving of
Subsidies, repaired to me as often as to any other Lord, who can witness of my
Care, both in Matters of Subsidies, and the Business of my Lord-Duke.
Rationally it was unsafe for me to stickle at this time without Countenance and
Employment by, and from your excellent Majesty. First your Majesty knows, I
was threatened before your Majesty to be complained of in Parliament, on the
third Day of your Reign. And though your Majesty most graciously promised to do
me Justice therein: Yet was I left under that Minacy, and the Minacer, for
ought I know, left to his course against me. 2. My Lord-Duke confessed he knew
the Complaints, and Complainants; and gave me leave to suspect his Grace (which
indeed I had cause to do) if within three days, and three days he should not
acquaint me with the Names of the Parties. Which I desired to know, not to
expostulate, but to watch, and provide to defend my innocence. His Grace failed
me in his promise herein. I employed Sir Charles Glemham, and Mr. Sackvile
Crow to press him for an Answer; which was such, as they durst not in modesty
return unto me. 3. Sir Francis Seymore (a Knight whom I know not by sight) told
many of that House, who imparted it unto me, that upon his first coming to
Oxford, he was dealt with by a Creature of my Lord-Dukes (whom I can name) to
set upon the Lord Keeper, and they should be backed by the greatest Men in the
Kingdom. Who gave this Answer, That he found nothing against the Lord Keeper,
but the Malice of those great Men. 4. Sir John Eliot, the only Member that
began to thrust in a Complaint against me: the Lord-Viscount Say, who took
upon him to name Sir Thomas Crew to succeed in my Place: Sir William Stroud,
and Sir Nathanael Rich, whom my Friends most noted to malice me, were never out
of my Lord-Duke's Chamber, and Bosom. 5. Noblemen of good Place, and near your
Majesty, gave me often intelligence, that his Grace's Agents stirred all their
Powers to set the Commons upon me. 6. I told the Lord-Duke in my Garden, that
having been much reprehended by your Majesty, and his Grace in the Earl of
Middlesex's Trial, for thanking the last King at Greenwich, for promising to
protect his Servants, and great Officers against the People and Parliament, I
durst not be so active, and stirring by my Friends in that House, as otherwise
I should be, unless your Majesty, by his Grace's means, would be pleased to
encourage me with your Royal Promise, to defend and protect me in your Service.
If I might hear your Majesty say so much, I would venture then my Credit, and
my Life, to manage what should be entrusted to me to the uttermost. After which
he never brought me to your Majesty, nor any Message from you. Standing
therefore upon these doubtful terms, unemploy'd in the Duties of my Place
(which were now assigned over to my Lord Conway, and Sir J. Cook) and left out
of all Committees among the Lords of the Council (which I know was never done
by the direction of your Majesty, who ever conceived of me far above my Merit)
and consequently fallen much in the Power, and Reputation due to my place, I
durst not at this time, with any Safety, busy my self in the House of Commons,
with any other than that measure of Zeal, which was expressed by the rest of the
Lords of the Privy Council. Gracious and dread Sovereign, if this be not enough
to clear me, let me perish.

19. The King was a Judge of Reason, and of Righteousness, and found so much in
that Paper, that he dismissed him that presented it graciously for that time, his
Destiny being removed two Months further off, though it was strongly urged, not
to delay it for a day. But in St. Cyprian's words, Nemo diu tutus est periculo
proximus. About a Fortnight after, at Holdbery in New-forrest, the Duke
unfast'ned him utterly from the good Opinion of his Majesty, and at Plymouth,
in the midst of September, obtained an irrevocable Sentence to deprive him of
his Office. If the Queen could have stopped this Anger, he had not been removed:
with whom he had no little Favor, by the Credit he had got with the chief
Servants of her Nation, and by a Speech which took her Majesty very much, which
he made unto her in May, upon her coming to White Hall, and in such French as
he had studied, when he presented his Brethren the Bishops, and their Homage to
her Majesty. His Friends of that Nation showed themselves so far, that Pere
Berule, the Queen's Confessor, and not long after a Cardinal, was the first
that advertised him, how my Lord-Duke had lifted him out of his Seat. It Is
custom to Toll a little before a Passing Bell ring out: and that shall be done
in a Moral strode; as Chaucer calls it. Such as would know the true Impulsion
unto this Change, shall err, if they draw it from any thing, but the Spanish
Negotiation. Not as if the Lord Keeper had done any one, much less many ill
Services, to the Duke, as one mistakes. For I take the Observator to be so
just, that he would have done as much himself, if he had been in place. King
James was sick'till that Marriage was consummated; and died because he
committed it to the Skill of an Emperick. The Keeper served the King's
directions, rather than the cross ways of the Duke, which was never forgiven.
Though the late Parliament had wrought wonders to the King's Content, as it
gave him none, this innocent Person had received the Blow, which was aimed at
him, before the Parliament sat. He bestirred him in the former King's Reign, to
check the encroaching of the Commons, about impeaching the great Peers, and
Officers of the Realm, which the Duke fomented in the Earl of Middlesex's Case.
Since that House began to be filled with some, that were like the turbulent
Athenians, (...), Meursius, Ath. Attic. p. 79. It grieved him at the Heart,
that more time was spent by far, to pluck up an honest Magistrate, than to
plant good Laws. There was no Sin, I think, that he hated more, than that
Epidemick violence, which he saw was come about, that the People extolled them
most, as it was once in the Days of Marius, that endeavored to thrust down the
most noble Patricians. This is the right Abstract what was, and what was not
the Cause of this Mutation.

20. There were yet other things, that did concur to precipitate his Downfall.
First, My Lord of Buckingham's honest Servants would say, that he gave their
Master constantly the best Counsel: but that he was too robustious in pressing
it. Vim temperatam Dii quoque provehunt in majus, Horat. lib. 3. Od. Well, I do
not deny it. But the more stout in that Point, the more true, and cordial He
that loses such a one, that comes to prop him up, who had rather offend him,
than not save him, Navem perforat, in qua ipse navigat, Cicer. pro Milone, he
sinks the Bark, wherein himself fails. The Scythians were esteemed barbarous;
but this is wise, and civil in them, as Lucian reports in his Toxaris, They
have no wealth; but he is counted the richest Man, that has most Friends. And
that is a Friend, that will incur Anger, rather than leave his Friend to sooth
himself in a Mischief. It had been well for the Duke, if his bold Friend had
persuaded him to take that Counsel, which Christopher Thuanus gave to the
Cardinal of Lorain, being in great Favor with Henry the 2d. of France, Si
potentiam suam diuturnam cuperet, moderate ea uteretur, and in politica
administratione leges regni conservaret; alioqui fore ut publicae invidiae
impar, Procerum regni, and Nobilitatis contra se concitato odio, aliquando
succumberet, Aug. Thua. An. 1568. Secondly, Some of the Lords of the Council
were willing to spare the Keeper, for that having a mighty standing Wardrobe of
Reason, likely he bore down that side which he opposed. Why would not Plato
endure Homer in his Utopia? because he was too great a Citizen for his City.
And Aristotle. lib. 3. Polit. c. 4. Says the Argonautes were weary of Hercules,
and dismissed him, (...), his main strength at the Oar was above his Fellows, his
parts were unequal in supere minence. Nor did his Majesty like it well, that he
would never give over, till he was Conqueror in the Argument that he held: and
he ever held him to be too nimble, and versatile in his Discourses. For the
Taste of that good King's Mind was much like to his Palate, he never loved
Sauce with his Meat; nor Sharpness in his Counsels. He desired to see all his
way before him, and not to be led through Windings, and Allies. Another King
was of that Conceit, says, Thua. lib. 11. Franciscus magna ingenia suspect a
habere coepit. Thirdly, The blaff that helped to blow down this Cedar, was the
Breath of Obtreclators, and Tale bearers. Who are too much about great Men, as
it may be said by Allusion from the 66 Psalm. v. 3. After the vulgar Latin, For
the Greatness of thy Power shall the People be found Liars unto thee. These
were too thick about the Duke, and cherished with his Countenance, and
Liberality. For Reward not Minstrils and you shall be sure to be rid of them.
If any are loath to put Bishop Laud in this Number, I must either reform their
Knowledge, or write against mine own. They are yet living that have heard it
confessed by the Lord Buckingham's Mother. And these words are in the Manuscript
remembered before, Penned by Archbishop Abbot, That the Countess of Buckingham
told the Bishop of Lincoln, that St. David's was the Man that did undermine him
with her Son, and would underwork any Man in the World, that himself might
rise. St. David's saw no Man in the prospect of likelihood but this one, to
carry the highest Miter from him. Interna crevit Roma Albae ruinis, as Livy
says. Fourthly, my Lord-Duke was soon satiated with their Greatness, whom he
had advanced. It was the inglorious Mark of those Thirteen Years of his Power
to remove Officers. Which was like a sweeping Flood, that at every Springtide
takes from one Land, and casts it upon another. In two Years of King Charles's
Reign, Williams, Lee, Conway, Suckling, Crow, Walter had their Topsails pulled
down by him: and if Sir Henry Yelverton had lived, not only Sir A. Welden
writes it, but common Rumor noised it, that he had been promoted to the Place
of the Lord Coventry. Which was very prejudicious to the true Discharge of
those Dignities. As Theophrastus complains in Tully, Men were so short lived,
that by the time they began to know the World, Death snatched them out of it:
So a Magistrate can yield no great Fruit, that is plucked up before he be well
rooted. Antonnius, called the Philosopher, provided better for that, as
Capitolinus has it, as he was wise in all his Government,

21. Still the Plot was busy against the Lord Keeper, to displace him with
some color of Charge. And the King being come to Salisbury in September with a
full Court, it came to a Catastrophe. He that was hunted after, was at harbor
at a House of the Lord Sand's in Barkshire, five Miles from Windsor, called
Foxly. Where he was surely informed, that after much sifting spent, after all
that ever he did, since his high Promotion, the old Matter was renewed, how he
stirred up those that lifted at the Duke at Oxford: which was urged with
strange, and punctual Confidence; and was the weakest, and least grounded
Surmise, that ever was hammered. Therefore it was supplied with another
Objection: That at the same time and place he had abused the King with ill
Counsel, advising him to vail his absolute Sovereignty too much, to a social
Communication with his Subjects. Which being divulged, got him that was accused
a strong Gale of popular Favor, did his Majesty no right and cast the Duke
upon such a Shelf, as no High-tide could bring him off, while he lived. The
Keeper hearing every day what Cavillations were fomented, and heard, to put him
to blame and shame, found it in vain to coast the Season any longer, to have
the Great-Seal tarry with him. Only resolved on the 21st. of September to
prepare his way by his Pen, before he went to Salisbury, to salute the King's
Ear with softness, and to show, that he did not despond, but that he was ready
for a Justification, if he were called to answer. Which for all his Labor
would hardly be believed. For all Treasure hid in the Ground is the Kings: But
how will he find it? So all truth that concerns his Justice and Prosperity is
his: But how will he know it? This Man is not the first that made it true,
which Sidon. Apoll. observes, Lib. 3. Ep. 3. That it is dangerous serving of
Kings in a near place: who are compared by him to fire, Qui sicut paululum a se
remota illuminat, ita satis sibi admota comburit. It is a good Element or light
and warmth, to those that stand aloof, but sings that which comes too near
it. Yet nothing venture, nothing have. One Arrow must be shot after another,
though both be grast, and never found again. In aequo est amissio rei, and
timor amittendi, says Seneca. Nay, he loses more quiet of Mind, that looks
every day to lose that which he loves, than in the Minute, when he is deprived
of it. One says, When the Brunt is over, the Heart will recover. Time and long
day will mitigate sad Accidents: it is a slow Medicine, but a sure one.

22. Now let the Letter to his Majesty be observed, which was his Harbinger.

Most gracious Sovereign, and my dear Master,
WHile I spare my self at home for a few days, to be quite rid of an Ague,
which I brought from Southampton, I do humbly crave your Majesty's Pardon, to
make my Address in these Lines, which I will contract to so narrow a room as
the Matter will possibly give me leave. First, as touching the Information of
the Access I should give at Oxford, to those dangerous Persons of the House of
Commons, which your Majesly was pleased most graciously to intimate unto me at
Woodstock (for which Goodness I am obliged to serve you faithfully and
industriously as long as I live, and am able, and to pray for you, when I can
do no more) as I remonstrated before, so I vow again to Almighty God; I never
spoke directly or indirectly to above three of them in my Life: nor to any one
of them (that one time to Philips excepted, with the Privity, and as I hoped,
for the Service of my Lord-Duke) during the Continuance of the Sitting at
Oxford. Were it otherwise, it were impossible in a Family of Sixty Persons, as
mine was, to have it concealed. I add farther, That if it can be proved, that I
let fall the least word to any Person of the one, or other House, opposite to
any known, or revealed end of your Majesty's, I am content to remain guilty of
whatever the Malice, or Suspicion of any Man shall suggest against me.
Secondly, If I have offended your Majesty in that bumble Motion I made at
Christ-Church, that your Majesty would say in your Speech unto the Parliament;
that in your Actions of Importance, and in the Dispositions of what Sums of
Moneys your People should bestow upon you, you would take the Advice of a
settled, and a constant Council, I do humbly submit my self to your Royal
Judgment therein, and do beg your gracious Pardon, for any thing I said amiss
in matter, or manner. But I take God in Heaven to witness, I had no aim at all
to draw your Majesty to asperse thereby either the times past (for that was now
past all Counsel) or the time present: for your Majesty is but entered into your
Reign: Or to admonish your Majesty, for I take God to witness, I held it no
ways necessary: but did, and do believe, it is your absolute Resolution to
govern by Council. And much less was it to make you go less in your Power. For
many Kings in Parliament have said as much, Se actumo^ majora negotia per
assensum Magnatum de Conciliis, who intended not to turn Dukes of Venice, but
(as they proved indeed) great and mighty Monarchs at home, and abroad. But my
only aim was (as I shall answer it at the last day) to save my Lord of
Buckingham from those Invectives in this kind, which I saw falling upon hi^^,
and to dispose the Commons, by that Clause of your Majesty's Speech, to a
short, and a giving Session. If I had not been free herein from all Sinister
ends, I had never dealt so earnestly with my Lord-Duke the night before, that
he himself would be pleased to move it to your Majesty. Lastly, what
Protestation I have made for your Majesty, I do now, before God and you, make
the like for my Lord-Duke's Service, a Person so much, and so deservedly
favored by your Majesty, that I have not run any way at all with any Person of
the one, or the other House, for the stirring, fomet^ing, or countenancing of
any Accusation, Aspersion, or other disservice whatsoever against his Lordship,
either in the first, or the second Access of this last sitting. Nor have I ever
wished his Grace any more hurt, than to my own Soul, from that very hour your
Majesty's most blessed Father sent me unto his Grace at Royston, to this very
instant. And this I avow to be true, as I desire to find Favor from God, and
my King. I write unto your Majesty under these Protestations to give your
Majesty only) not any Man else) all fitting satisfaction, to whose Goodness I
confess my self unexpressibly bound. Les me not, I beseech your Majesty, in
point of Justice lose your Favor, upon groundless Suspicious of other M^n, who
may themselves hereafter be better informed: But let me stand, or fall upon
year Majesty; own Knowledge derived from the Information of indifferent, and
dis-interossed Persons; upon which I will most willingly, and thankfully repose
my part in your Favor, and mine own Happiness. In Confidence whereof I cast my
self at your Majesty's Feet, etc.


23. This came to Salisbury, and was shown to my Lord-Duke: which put his
Cabinet to meet together again. And 'twas a notable Shift which came into their
Heads, and wrought upon the King's Judgment, as that which had likelihood of
Reason. Which was thus, that as the Keeper had been complained of, so he should
be charged home with his own Words; nay, with his own Letters: But none durst
accuse him, till he was out of his Greatness. Upon the Expiration of that, the
Proofs should be brought in: who coming about the first Week in October to
Salisbury, and hearing this, told such, as were desired to carry it to the
King, and the great Lord, that he would not sly the Tilt, nor start from any
color of Accusation. That the World would see how preposterous it was first to
punish, and then to bring to Judgment. Multis minatur, qui uni facit injuriam.
The wrong that was done to one Man, would affright all others with that
Oppression. What Lord, or Gentleman in England, that had Place and Means, would
think himself safe upon the Example of such Proceedings? From the hour that the
Keeper committed this Message to trusty Friends to deliver it, the Gorgen's
Head had a Veil drawn before it, and it never confronted him either at the
Council Table, or in any Court of Justice, but was laid still for ever. Yet was
not a jot the better for it. The Suspicion was smothered, and yet lived, and
wrought as much to his prejudice, as if he had been tried before the Court of
Areopagites, and convicted by their Verdict. Only this Happiness did live with
him, and does survive him, that such as have no Interest in it, but the
discovery of Truth, do see, it was Crimen sine accusatore, Sententia sine
Concilio, damnatio sine defensione, Tul. Act. 7. in Verrem. He that was
degraded without hearing, Trial, Proof, Witness, Judges, is overthrown by
Calumny, not by Accusation. For Accusation admits a fair, and a legal Process:
Calumny is believed without a Contestation. After this, it was not long before
some quick Eye espied a way to execute the King's Resolution, for divesting the
Party of his honorable Place, but with such Moderation, as would load him with
no impeachment of his Service, but barely recalling the Great-Seal from his
Custody, because it was committed to him at first upon triennial Trust, and no
longer. Which was no unwonted Revocation, says the great, and learned Luminary
of Records, Sir Henry Spelman in his Glossary upon the word Cancellarius, Non
perpetuus olim fuit honor, sed triennalis, vel quadriennalis. This device
struck the Tally for all Debts, and Claims: and left the loser a more light
Heart, though he parted with a heavy Purse. For he took his farewell without the
least Charge of Trespass, or Miscarriage: he was cast down, but fell not in the
Dirt. Sua vulnera ridet -- Germanam comitata fidem, as Pruden. in Psychom. upon
the Persecuted Church. Yet, though nothing was altered in him to appearance,
when he was doomed to resign his Office with such a plausible Dismission,
pruning away the Circumstances of it, I cannot see how the substance of the Act
could choose but displease him. For whether it come from a white, or a black
Whip, the Wound will be blew. The Transactions, with which all that remained
were wound up, were first between the Lord Conway, and the Lord Keeper: Lastly,
with his Majesty, if they belong, let him skip them, that does not like them.
He that would satisfy Posterity, knows not how to leave them out. And it will
be worth the noting, to learn from a wise Man, how to manage a broken Fortune.
One of the first things that Comines praises in King Lewis his Master is,
Optimorationem tenebat ex adversis rebus eluctandi. To be fallen into great
disfavour, and yet to come off with no blot of Credit, proves him that could do
it a great Master in State-wisdom. A Boat-swain will tell you, That a rotten
Ship had need of a good Pilot.

On the 15th. of October the Lord Conway came to the Lord-Keeper's Lodgings in
Salisbury, and began thus: My Lord, His Majesty, some four days ago, gave me a
Command to deliver a Message unto you, the which because it was sharp, and
there might be occasion for change of Councils, I forbore to deliver till this
Morning. That is, That his Majesty understanding that his Father, who is with
God, had taken a Resolution, that the Keepers of the Great-Seal of England
should continue but from three Years to three Years, and approving very well
thereof, and resolved to observe the Order during his own Reign, he expects
that you should surrender up the Seal by Allhallowtide next, alleging no other
cause thereof. And that withal, that having so done, you should retire your
self to your Bishopric of Lincoln.

Answer. I am his Majesty's most humble Servant and Vassal, to be commanded by
him in all things whatsoever: The Great-Seal is his Majesty's. And I will be
ready to deliver up the same to any Man, that his Majesty shall send with his
Warrant to require it. And do heartily thank God, and his Majesty, that his
calling for the Seal is upon no other ground. (No indeed, said Mr. Secretary,
no other ground that I know.) Only this last Clause seems strange unto me,
that I should be restrained to my Bishopric, or any place else. And I humbly
appeal to his Majesty's Grace, and Favor therein. Because it is no fault in me
that his Majesty or his Father, has made such a Resolution: Nor do I dispute
against it; although the King that dead is continued me in the Place after the
three Years ended: and the King that now is delivered me the Seal without any
Condition, or limitation of Time. And therefore deserving no restraint, I
humbly desire to be left to my discretion, which I will so use, as shall be no
way offensive to his Majesty. Lord Conway. I conceive it not to be a restraint,
but to mount in effect, that his Majesty intends not to employ you at the
Table, but leaves you free to go to your Bishopric. Answer. My Lord, I desire
your favorable Intercession for an Explanation of that Point. And I beseech
your Lordship to move his Majesty, that I may attend upon him (considering
there is no offense laid to my charge) to present unto his Majesty two humble
Petitions, nothing concerning this business in hand, but in general, the one
concerning my Reputation, and the other my maintenance. Lord Conway. I shall
move his Majesty in the best Fashion I can, for your content therein. Answer. I
thank your Lordship, and I doubt not of it: and the rather because I vow before
God I am not guilty of the least Offense against his Majesty, and am ready to
make it good upon my Life. And I make the like Protestation for any
unworthiness done against the Duke: whose Hand peradventure may be in this
Business. Lord Conway. I am ever ready to do good Offices: and if my Lord of
Middlesex had been persuaded by me, I believe I had saved him: I am the Duke's
Servant, but no Instrument of his to destroy Men. My Lord, I being latly
demanded by a great Personage, if it were true, that your Lord was guilty of
such unworthy Practices toward the Duke, I answered plainly, I knew of no such
things. For which my Lord Conway having received due Thanks from me, he
repeated my Answers, and my Petition to the King in few words, that he might
not be mistaken. At the parting, my Lord Conway spoke about the time of
Resignation. I said it was all one to me, if it were before Christmas, as good
soon as late. Then I asked his Lordship if I was restrained from the Board
before the delivering of the Seal: His Lordship answered, He knew of no such
Intent.

25. October 16. Waiting on his Majesty by my Duty and Place to go to Church,
my Lord Conway told me, He was now for me: I thanked him, and past on to the
Church, heard the Sermon, and at the Anthem after Sermon, desired him to tell
me my Answer. He said, Well, do you long for it? And so we went on to the
upper-end of the Quire, and said to this effect. This Morning entering into our
dispatches with his Majesty, I desired him to stay a while, that I might relate
your Answer to him: I told his Majesty, that you yielded to his Command with
all possible Obedience: that you said the King remanded but his own, which you
were very willing, and ready to restore. That for the Condition of three Years
you would not dispute against it: being a way, that once you had your self
recommended to the late King his Father. But for the Clause of retiring to your
Bishopric (which seemed to be a restraint, and no cause of Offense expressed) it
wounded you much: and you sent it back to his Majesty's Consideration. Then I
acquainted his Majesty with your Lordship's desire, to wait upon him, and to
present his Majesty, without touching upon things settled and resolved, two
Petitions; the one concerning your Reputation, the other concerning your
Estate. His Majesty said, for the first, which is your retiring, he meant no
restraint of Place: but for some Questions that might be renewed, and for some
Considerations known to himself, he intended not to use your Service at the
Council Table for a while, until his Pleasure should be further known. And for
your Estate, you had no Wife, and Children. You had a Bishopric; and his
Father, to help you to bear the Dignity of your Office, gave you leave to hold
the Deanery. His Majesty intended not to debar you of any of these, until he
should provide you of a better. But he was content to admit you to speak with
him when you pleased, so as you endeavored not to unsettle the former
Resolutions. I gave his Lordship hearty thanks for his friendly, and faithful
Carriage of my Petitions, and speedy return of an Answer, and assured his
Lordship it was as much Favor from him, as I could expect, or desire. Then I
took occasion to kneel afterward, and thanked his Majesty for his gracious
Message sent by my Lord, who presently told my Lord Conway of it, and my Lord
told me of it again. And that the King left it to me, when between this and
Allhallowtide to deliver the Seal: which he desired for the manner to be done
most to my Content, and Reputation: and to have some time to send for him that
was to succeed. I answered I was ready whenever his Majesty would send his
Warrant. Which my Lord desired I would draw up; and so we parted.

26. I sent upon Tuesday the 18th. of October, to desire leave to speak with
the King, and Mr. Tho. Carry sent me word, his Majesty would speak with me the
next Morning. But after Sermon the King told my Lord Conway what I had done,
and was in a long, and serious Discourse with him. Then my Lord Conway (the
King being gone to dinner) followed me into the Cloister, and told me what the
King had told him: And that he conceived his Majesty was afraid, that I would
press him to yield Reasons of those two Acts of his, the removing me from the
Seal, and my abstaining from the Board. That his Lordship found the King much
troubled thereat: and as a Friend, nay as a Christian man, he advised me by way
of Counsel, not to do so: because it would much perplex the King, and do me no
good. I answered, That I should falsify my Word to his Lordship, if I should
speak unto his Majesty upon any other Points, than those of my Reputation, and
Means. And should not come near those forbidden Rocks, unless it were in one
Point, which I did intend to move, but with his Lordship's Approbation: and
that was to preserve as much the Honoar of the King, as mine own, that for the
manner of wishing my forbearance for a time from the Council Board, his Majesty
laying nothing to my Charge, would not be pleased to lay it as a Command by his
Secretary, but leave it to my Discretion, who would be sure to use the matter,
as to give his Majesty no Offense. That the rest of the Points were matters of
means, which I repeated to my Lord Conway one by one. And his Lordship said, He
thought verily the King would grant them every one. And his Lordship telling me
again of his fear of the King's Offense, if I should endeavor to unsettle his
Resolution, and that the King might fall sharp upon me, I answered, That his
Lordship knew I had neglected the time to wrangle with the King, which should
have been done upon the first message: Against which I had two unanswerable
Objections. The first, that the King that dead is, released me of the Restraint
to three Years in my Office, and continued me in the Place four Years. The
second, that the King my Master delivered me the Seal as absolutely, as his
Predecessors did to other Keepers, and Chancellors, without reviving or
mentioning any such Condition. But that I had waved of all Objections, and
submitted at the first word to relinquish my Place. And for sharpness, or the
like word, which passed from his Lordship on Sunday last, or that the King
wished my absence from the Board, lest Matters might be further questioned (his
Lordship said he remembered it not) I said, Nec timeo, nec opto, it was a thing
I did neither fear like a guilty Man, nor rashly desire like a vainglorious
Man. But my wishes were to retire to the Country, as without a Charge, by the
King's own Confession, so, as near as may be, without any punishment: which
concerned the King in Honor, I thought, as much as it did me. For God never
destroys his Creature, but for some Sin. And if his Majesty did think the
losing of my Place did disquiet me, to give him satisfaction, I vowed, and
protested it did not: which my Lord-Duke also had under my hand. And that with
his Majesty's leave and favor, and some consideration had of my Fortunes, I
was willing to leave the Seal. Only I expected I should remain a Councellor,
though lest to my discretion, when to attend, and be respected by the Lords from
time time, as a Member of the Board. My Lord said, He conceived it no
otherwise, and that I might promise my self all respect from that Table, and
his Majesty in that kind. Then said I, my Lord, There remains no more, but that
I show a Letter to your Lordship written to his Majesty, if you like it, which
shall speak all my mind, because I will be utterly silent, when I come at
Evening before his Majesty, save in preferring my Petitions, in which your
Lordship did encourage me: Which Letter in the Copy his Lordship read over, and
carried the Authentic with him. And so we parted.

27. After Dinner his Majesty took the Letter, and read that which follows:

Most gracious Sovereign,
HAving done your blessed Father the best Service I was able while he lived (I
am sure such as was acceptable to him) and some good Service at his Death; and
being now fitted with a great deal of Industry, to do some Service to your
Majesty in your great Affairs, yet it is your Royal Pleasure to displace me,
not for any Crime or Unserviceableness, but to satisfy the Importunity of a
great Lord. But I am ready with all Submission to bow myself to the Pleasure of
God and my King. It is in your Majesty's Power to say to me your Vassal, as a
Greek Emperor did to an Archbishop, Ego te Furne condidi, ego te destruam. I
cast my self down at your Majesty's Feet, and do render your Majesty my
unexpressible Thanks, that it has pleased your Majesty to discharge me of this
great Place, without giving me any cause at all to use an Apology. Yet being
still haunted with the old Aspersions in Court (the which were they true in any
part, would fret, and tear my Soul in pieces) give me leave, dread Sovereign,
to make this last protestation, in the sight of that God, who must judge you,
and my Accusers (if any such there be) another day, that in all my Carriage in
the last Parliament I am not guilty in Thought, Word, or Deed, of any one Act,
Advice, Speech, or Counsel disserviceable to your Majesty, or any way diverting
that end, which your Majesty proposed unto us concerning that Assembly. Upon
the same protestation I likewise avow before God, and your Majesty, that I am
not conscious of the least Unfaithfulness against my Lord-Duke, by way of
insinuating, encouraging, or abetting any one Clamor, or Aspersion against his
Grace, or by omitting any one friendly Word or Action upon any opportunity I
found to do him Service. Your Majesty can tell how I put my Life into his Hand
and Power above a Year since in the Business of the Spanish Ambassadors. And
what Plot could I have against his Grace in the Meeting at Oxford, when I
opposed it at Hampton Court, and Ricot, and would have had it put off at
Woodstock? That I am as mere a Stranger, as any Lord that serves your Majesty,
to all those disaffected Persons that appeared so opposite to your Royal ends
in the House of Commons. That I never spoke in all my Life with any of them
(excepting one, and at one time only, and that by Order and Commission)
concerning any Parliamentary-business whatsoever. That I am content, if at any
time admitted to my Answer, I shall be sufficiently convicted in any of these
Premises, or any other Particular included under any of these, to renounce your
Majesty's Favor as long as I live, and (which is the only Hell upon Earth to
me) never look on your face again. But if all these Informations against a poor
Bishop, that so served your Father in his Life, and at his Death, be grounded
only upon Suspicion, Malice, or Misapprehension, and be cried down (as they
needs must be) by all the Members of the one, and the other House, pity me,
dread Sovereign, and let me retire with the comfortable Assurance of your
Majesty's Favor, that I may spend my days quietly in the Service of my God, in
serving whom, as I resolve to do, I shall never fail to serve your Majesty,
whom God Almighty prosper with all Success in this World, and with all
Happiness, and eternal Glory in that to come.


28. The Letter being read, He was called for to the King immediately and had
access to make his Petitions. His Requests were just, modest, and suitable to
his Condition: and the King's Answers Princely and Prudent. The Petitioner
asked first for his Majesty's Grace and Favor in general. His Majesty granted
it, and gave him twice his Hand to kiss. 2. The Petitioner humbly thanking his
Majesty for his gracious Promise, to take away none of his Church-Preferments,
till he had given better in lieu thereof, besought his Majesty to keep the same
benevolent Mind toward him: The King said, It was his Intention. 3. The
Petitioner besought his Majesty to remember his Father's Promise, made before
all the Lords, that whenever he took away the Seal, he would place me in as
good a Bishopric, or Archbishopric, as he could: a Promise not only
seconded, but drawn from your Father first by your Majesty. The King said,
There was no such Place yet void: when any fell then it would be time to make
this Request unto him, 4. The Petitioner besought, that his Majesty would
dismiss him freely and absolutely without any Command from the Table, but to
leave it to his discretion to forbear: The King said, He ever intended it so,
and never said a word to the contrary, but expected he would not offend by
voluntary Intrusion. 5. The Petitioner besought that his Majesty would declare
unto the Lords, that he had willingly, and readily yielded to his Majesty's
Pleasure, and that I part in your Favor and good Opinion, and am still your
Servant. The King said, He would, but says he, I look that no Petitions be made
for you by any Man at that time, but only for my Favor in general. 6. The
Petitioner besought that his Majesty, in his good time would make his Atonement
with my Lord-Duke, either upon, or without Examination of those Informations,
which the Lord-Duke had received against him. The King said, It became not him,
a King, to take up the Quarrels between his Subjects: And that the Duke had
never expressed any such Enmity against him before his Majesty. The Petitioner
thanked his Majesty for the last part of the Answer, which revived him not a
little, as did a short Letter lately received from the Countess, his Grace's
Mother, which he besought the King to read, and 'twas this.

Noble Lord,
I Must not forget my Promise to your Lordship: I have had large Conference
with my Son about you. And he tells me that the King is determined to put
another into your Place. But for his own part he (...) he is in Love, and
Charity with your Lordship: And that he thinks your Lordship (...) leave the
Place better than you found it; and that you have done the King good (...) in
it. For the rest I shall give you better Satisfaction when I see you next, than
I (...) do by Letter. In the mean time, I am sorry there should be any
unkindness betwixt your Lordship, and him that is so near to me, and that
wishes you both so well,

Mar. Buckingham.
Burleigh, October. 12.

The Petitioner went on, and besought, that whereas, by the King his Father's
direction, he had bought a Pension, no new one, but the fame that was paid to
Viscount Wallingford, of 2000 Marks per Annum, and had disbursed 3000 l. down
for it, with which his Majesty was acquainted, and liked it, that his Majesty
would be pleased, either to buy the Pension of him for the Sum laid out, and
extinguish it: or to assign it to be paid him out of the Tenths and Subsidies
of the Bishopric, as before he had appointment to receive it out of the
Hamper. The King said, Assignments were naught, but he would take order with
his Treasurer, either to pay it, or buy it, as should be found most convenient.
8. The Petitioner besought, that his Majesty would please to bestow the next
Prebend in Westminster, that was void, upon his Library Keeper, as his Father
had promised, or to let him resume his Books again. The King said, it was full
of Reason. 9. The Petitioner besought, that his Majesty would please to ratify
a Grant made by his Father of four Advousons to St. John's College in
Cambridge, whereof two he had bought with his Money, and two the King gave him
for the good of that Society. The King said, He would ratify the Grant, and
give way to amend any Errors in the Form, or in the Passing. 10. The Petitioner
besought, that he might have leave to retire to a little Lodge lent to him by
the Lord Sandys, where my Lord Conway may receive the Seal, when his Majesty
commanded it, in his Journey toward Windsor. The King granted it. Lastly, The
Petitioner besought, that the King would not be offended at him, if upon his
discharge, reports were made that he was discontented, which he protested he
was not, giving over so comfortably in his Majesty's Favor. The King said, He
would do him that Justice, and that he little valued Reports: And, with a sweet
Countenance, gave him his Hand to kiss with a gracious Valediction.

29. Poets use to have quaint Allusions in their Fictions: as when they tell
us, that Pallas struck Tiresias blind, but gave him a Staff to walk with, Quo
veluti duce vestigiis inoffensis graderetur, Politia. Miscel. p. 80. So the
King had set the Keeper but a Week's Period to keep his Office, but gave him
good words to carry him merrily home. And certainly his Majesty meant real
Performance of all his Answers, both because, he limited them so warily, in all
his Concessions; and because, if he were left to himself, he loved to keep his
Word. For he was observed in all his Reign, that he seldom trod awry, but by
mistrusting his own Judgment, and falling from it for their Persuasions, that
came short of him a great deal in Wit, and Honesty. It was an Error: For a King
should appear in that Magnitude, that no Man should expect to deceive him, or
remove him from his Sentence. If he be too passive, he will be counted, at the
best, but in the middle Rank of Men: who should not be contented with
mediocrity of Reputation. For a Prince that is not valued for great, and
excellent, will be contemned. Yet blame not that which came not from Sin, but
from Softness. And say of his Majesly, as Eudaeus did of his Master Francis the
first, Vir ad omnia summa natus: dignusque qui su^e naturae magis, quam
hiantibus aliorum cupiditatibus indulgeret. The forlorn Keeper felt the
Heaviness of this Lightness, who thought he had obtained much: but (excepting
the four Advousons confirmed to St. John's College) he mist all that he sought
for, and expected. After he had lest Salisbury (which was the next day) he
could never receive a Farthing of his Pension, nor bring it to an Audit, to his
dying day. Was it not a Debt? True: But it must be forborne to be paid, because
he did not want it. Must the Rich, if they ask their own, be sent empty away? A
Rule for none but the Conscience of a Leveller. But I press it for him, that he
wanted it, and more than it, to do Works of Piety and Bravery: to do Works of
Splendour and Bounty; which was all the Use that he knew to be made of Wealth.
As all is superfluous in a burning Candle, but that which the Snuff sucks up to
maintain the Light: So the Life of every Man, especially of a temperate Man, is
maintained with little: What should he covet more, than so much as will keep
his Lamp in burning? Nor was the King's Scepter after that day held out to
becken to him, to come toward his Majesty. The Favor of a Prince is seldom
found again when it is lost; like Plautus his Captive Maid, Semel fugiendi si
data est occasi^, nunquam post illam possis prendere; if she take her to her
Heels, and be gone, she will run away so far, that she will never be taken. The
Attendants about a King are in the fault for this. Who will grow Strangers, and
worse of a sudden to those that were lately in their Bosom, if a King send them
off with disgrace. A cashiered Courtier is an Almanac of the last Year,
remembered by nothing but the great Eclipse. Look for gentle Strains, and
Civilities among them, from the No^^es to the Huishers; but he that trusts to
their Faith, and Friendship may go seek. That which this dismissed Lord did
most pretend for, was to be called again, after some pause of time, to the
Council Board. But he was utterly forgot: and his grief must be the less,
because he was no Counselor in the Management of those Contrivances, which
bred the Troubles, as it is thought, wherein the Kingdom miscarried: So he
resolved not to offer his Presence, where he should be checked for appearing. It
is sagely noted by Symmachus, Ep. p. 91. Qui excludi per improbos possimus,
abesse interim velut ex nostro arbitrio debemus. Let it be my own act, says he,
to refrain from the Imperial Palace, and let not haughty, and churlish Men have
their Wills to exclude me. But before five days were run out, this relinquished
Lord had intelligence, how the Duke talked so minaciously and loudly, that it
made him throw all expectation of future Kindness overboard, into the dead Sea
of Despair. Since this Disaster began, he was never courageous, and in good
heart till then. Now, as Plato began, he was never courageous, and in good
heart till then. Now, as Plato says of Socrates his Hemlock-Cup brought to him
to drink it, (...), he did not sip it, but carouse it off. So much does it
profit a Man toward a settled Mind, to let no false Comfort in, when he is in
the darkness of Misery. Hermolaus Barbarus had many Troubles rushing in upon
him, after he was made Patriarch of Aquileia: Whereupon he writes, Politia. Ep.
p. 405. I am surrounded with Terrors, and Opposition: and I look for no better
Times hereafter: which is the best, and only true Valor. Non est fortis, qui
fortis est in spe: qui perfert mala, etiam si duratura viderit, fortis est. He
that looks for better times, his Hope is his Compensation: but without Question
it is too slack for Fortitude.

30. The Sun is now Setting. Upon the 25th. of October Sir John Suckling
brought the Warrant from the King to receive the Seal; and the good News came
together, very welcome to the Resignant, that Sir Thomas Coventry should have
that Honor. From whom the Kingdom looked for much good, and found it. Between
both those two Worthies in that Office, I may state the Comparison, as
Quintilian has done between Livy and Salust, Pares eos magis fuisse, quam
similes; rather Equals than altogether like in the Management of the Place. The
Warrant under the Signet went thus.

Charles R.
TRusty and Well-beloved Counselor we greet you well:
You are to deliver, upon the Receipt hereof, our Great-Seal of England,
whereof you are our Keeper, unto our Trusty and Well-beloved Counselor Sir
John Suckling, Controuler of our Household, the Bearer hereof: And this shall be
a sufficient Warrant unto you so to do.

Given under Our Signet at our Court at Salisbury, the 23 d. of October, in the
first Year of our Reign.
Which was instantly obeyed: And the Seal being put into a costly Cabinet, in
Sir John Suckling's Presence, the Key of the Cabinet was enclosed in a Letter,
closed with the Episcopal Seal of Lincoln: The Copy whereof remains in these
Words.

Most gracious, and most dread Sovereign,
HAving now no other Meditations left, than how to serve God and your Majesty
in the Quality of a poor Bishop, I do humbly crave your Majesty's Favor in
this last Paper, which I shall present to your Majesty in this kind, that I may
president my self by two grave Bishops, St. Ambrose, and St. Chrysostom. In the
former I find myself disposed for this Civil, as St. Ambrosewas for his natural
Death. Non ita vixi ut me vivere pudeat: nee mori timeo, quia bonum habemus
Dominum. That as I have not lived in my Place so altogether unworthily, as to
be ashamed to continue in the same: so am I not now perturb'd in the quitting
of the same, because I know I have a good God, and a gracious Sovereign. For
the other, I present this my last, and dying Request, in the very last Words of
St. Chrysostom: Moriar ego, sed me mortuo vigeat ecclesia* Let me retire to my
little Zoar, but let your Gracious Majesty be pleased to recommend ^^^o my most
able, and deserving Successor, an especial Care of your Church, and Churchmen.
To call upon the Judges, who (God's Name be praised) are ready enough to hear
such Motions, to relieve the poor sort of Churchmen, publicly affronted in
their Persons by factious, and insolent Justices: or judicially wronged in
their Causes by wilful and partial Jurors. Likewise to entertain, and
countenance their just Plaints in that great Court of Chancery, the which, of
all the rest in Westminster Hall, as not proceeding upon the Verdicts of Lay
and Country Juries, has been ever by those of my Coat held most equal, and
indifferent. Also to mingle always some few of the Clergy of best Means, and
Discretion in the Commission of the Peace: who with their very Presence, and
sitting in that place, are a great Countenance to their poor Brethren. And
withal to keep and preserve poor Ministers from the Oppressions of malicious
Informers, in that great and chargeable Court of the Star Chamber. Lastly, to
afford all the Clergy of England that Solace and Relief, which his Lordship
knows well they will expect from your Majesty, such a Son of such a Father.
So may God make your Majesty more victorious than David, more wise than
Solomon, and every way as good a King as your Majesty's blessed Father: It
shall be the continual Prayer of,

Your Majesty's poor Subject and Chaplain, JO. LINCOLN.
Foxly, October 25.

This is the Dirge with which that Swan expired: Being careful of nothing, but
that his poor Brethren might not be trampled upon over his back: especially
those that served in Country Cures, among bad Pay-masters, and narrow-hearted,
contentious Chuffs. So I have done with the ex-authorized Lord Keeper, not
fallen in his worth, or in himself, though fallen from a great Place. Be it
justly ascribed to him, which Pliny does to M. Cato, lib. 29. c. 1. Cujus
autoritati triumphus, atque censura minimum conferunt, tanto plus in ipso est.
There was enough in him still, to keep him as great as King James had made him.

31. The Subject which is now under the Quill is the Bishop of Lincoln. A few
late Writers, who want the Polishing of Humanity, and the Meekness of
Christianity, have done him high reproach in some Occurencies. They shall
answer for it to God. I will only put this little Syrup into the Reader's
Mouth, to take away the ill relish of those Defamations, that the Fire of Envy
would have gone out by this time, but that there is a Pile of Virtue left
behind, to keep it burning Yet even those Men have scarce given him a little
scratch, or no more, anent his Episcopal Administration of his Diocese: He made
that Office a good Work, 1 Timothy 3.1. Neither did he hold any Pre-eminence of
Place, without an eminence of Worth, and Prudence. For four Years after his
Consecration, he was not in Condition, through the great Burden of other
Employments, to appear among his Clergy. But it is well known to them that
lived under his Charge in those days, that both Ministry, and Laity were
greatly satisfied with his Government. For his Encouragements to the
Best-deserving were very kind, his Dispatches were never intermitted, and his
Directions strictly looked after, to be observed by those that were under him,
in any part of his Jurisdiction. Yet to reach no further than Truth, from this
time forward his Presence wrought more, than his Substitutes in his absence:
his Light shined clearer, and the Influence of it was stronger, when he was
six'd, and resident in his own Orb. As Columella commends it wittily to an
Owner, to live upon his own Ground, if he would thrive; says he, Fimus optimus
in agro est Domini vestigium: So the Vineyard of Christ in every part of it
will prosper best, when the Vine-dresser himself does walk about the Field. Or
to go higher, as Moses said of the promised Land, Deuteronomy. 11.12. It is a Land
which the Lord thy God cares for: the Eyes of the Lord thy God are always upon
it, from the beginning of the Year, to the end: So it runs like a Verse set to
the same Tune to say, that the Eye of God is all the Year long upon that
Portion of his Church, where the Diocesan is not a Stranger, but a Co-habitant,
or, if you will, a Companion with his Brethren. And the Bishop having now no
more to do with civil Distractions, bethought him instantly of the Duty of his
Pastoral Staff, made Provision for an Household, which attended him in a great
Retinue, and removed from Barkshire, without touching at London, to Bugden in
Hunting donshire. His Privacy at Foxly concealed his Double-diligence, to make
haste to be gone, lest more Anger should shower upon him if he tarried. Wherein
I espy into Salmasius his Note upon Solinus, p. 327. That a Lion never runs
away fast from his Enemies, but when he has got into a shady Wood, and cannot
be seen: Ubi virgulta sylvasque penetravit, acerrimo cursu fertur, velut
abscondente turpitudinem loco. Beside, he that felt the Frowns, or rather the
Despite of the Court, by being near to it, knew it was wholesome to change Air,
to be rid of that Disease, as well as Hippocrates prescribes it for the worst
Symptoms of the Body, Aphor. 20. (...), To go to a new Soil, is good to
mitigate an old Sickness: No question but being lodged now in his Episcopal
Palace, his most proper Watchtower, he found it best for the best Health, that
of a quiet Mind, and a good Conscience. He was in the way to know himself
better, when he was more alone to himself, than in late Years. He was at rest
to make use of the Verse of a judicious Heathen, Tacitum sylvas inter reptare
salubres,
Horat.
Curantem quicquid dignum sapiente, bonoque est.


He might now do, as well as know the meaning, what the Scriptures intend, when
they say that Rulers go in, and out before the People. For how can they go out
unto them, that are never in among them? Else they may be out, but never in.
Here this History has found him, and shall recount things most memorable that
there concerned him, speaking after the rate of enough, and not a jot beyond
it. This many, both Friends and Strangers to him, have desired often from the
Author of this Piece to be informed in. And it is a quaint Rule which fell from
Pliny, Lib. 35. c. 2. N. H. Nullum majus est felicitatis specimen, quam omnes
scire cupere, qualis fucrit aliquis. He is happy that has lived so, that many
desire to know how he lived. Into which every one that looks, will like this
Order to proceed by, to rank things praiseworthy on the right hand, as it
were, by themselves; and all things on the other hand, which fell upon him by
malevolent, and vexatious Accidents. Many of the one sort, and the other were
coincident in time, yet it is no error to part them in the Relation, because
they are distinct in Condition. His Virtues were ever in motion; and so were
his Crosses. For the first he was not exalted in Mind, because he knew they
were the Gifts of God: For the second he was not dejected, for he knew they
were the Trials of God. Joseph's party-colored Coat might portend many.
Changes in his Life; but it was an Ornament; and he wo^e it with distinction
from his Brethren, because his Father loved him.

32. I open the Door now to let the Bishop in to his Exchange. He came to his
Seat of Bugden at disadvantage, in the Winter. And Winter cannot be more miry
in any Coast of England, than it is round about it. He found an House nothing
to his content to entertain him. 'Twas large enough, but rude, waste,
untrimm'd, and, in much of the outward Dress, like the grange of a Farmer. From
the time of his Predecessor, Dr. Russel, that was Lord Chancellor of England,
and sat there in the Days of Edward the Fourth, and laid out much upon that
place, none that followed him, no not Splendian Woolsey, did give it any new
Addition: but rather suffered it to be overgrown with the Decays of an
ill-favored Antiquity. This Bishop did Wonders in a short time, with the Will
of a liberal Man, and the Wit of a good Surveyor: For, in the space of one
Year, with many Hands, and good Pay, he turned a ruinous thing into a stately
Mansion. The out Houses, by which all strangers past, were the greatest
Eyesore; these he plucked down to the Ground, and re-edified with convenient
Beauty, as well for use, as uniformity. These were Stables, Barns, Granaries,
Houses for Doves, Brewing, and Dairies: And the outward Courts, which were next
them, he cast into fair Allies, and Grass-plats. Within Doors the Cloisters
were the trimmest part of his Reparations: the Windows of the Square beautified
with Stories of colored Glass; the Pavement laid smooth and new: and the Walls
on every side hung with Pieces of exquisite Workmen in Limning, collected and
provided long before. The like, and better was done for the Chapel in all
these Circumstances; and with as much cost as it was capable of: For the
oversight from the beginning was, that it was the only Room in the House that
was too little. He planted Woods, the Trees in many places devised by him into
Ranks and Proportions: But Woods are the most needful Supplies for Posterity,
and the most neglected. He fenced the Park, and stored it with Deer. He
provided for good Husbandry, and bought in the Leases of the Demeasnes, for
them that would stock the Grounds; which improvidently, and for hunger of
Moneys, were let out to the very Gates. And though Aristotle 4th. Eth. say of a
magnificent Man, that he is not (...), costly upon himself: yet here was one of
that Quality, that laid out much for his own Delight, and Satisfaction. He
loved stirring and walking, which he used two hours or more, every day in the
open Air, if the Weather served: Especially if he might go to and fro, where
good Scents, and Works of well-form'd Shape were about him. But that this was
his innocent Recreation, it would amount to an Error, that he should bury so
much Money in Gardens, Arbors, Orchards, Pools for Water-fowls, and for Fish of
all variety, with a Walk raised three Foot from the Ground, of about a Mile in
compass, shaded and covered on each side with Trees, and Pales. He that reports
this knows best, that all the Nurseries about London for fair Flowers, and
choice Fruits were ransacked to furnish him. Alcinous, if he had lived at
Bugden, could not have lived better. And all this, take it together, might have
stood to become five Ages after his Reparation. But what is there that appears
now; or what remains of all this Cost and Beauty? All is dissipated, defaced,
plucked to pieces to pay it, I mean for them that sing with grace in their
hearts to the Lord, Colos. 3.16. First, Well-tuned Music was intermingled in
the Liturgy of Prayers, (...), says Basil; Notions of Piety will sink further
into the Mind, through delightful warbling; and a Lesson so pleasantly
delivered, lodges surer in the Memory. Therefore the Agathyrsians, in Plato's
days, put their Laws into Songs, to prevent it in every Plebeian, that he might
not forget them. Secondly, It must be very profitable to sing some part of holy
Service, Quia cantans diutius super codem moratur, says Aquinas, 2.2. Qu. 91.
Art. 2. the Understanding dwells the longer upon all that it pronounces, and
knows that best, which it rehearses with leisure and distinction. Nihil in
transeursu oportet a Dris petere. It is one of Numas's Laws in Plutarch, and
none of the worst of them; not to run over Prayers in haste, as a Bowl tumbles
down a Hill, but with pause, and sober deliberation. Thirdly, all that love to
have Church-work done with some of those holy Carols, appeal to experience,
that they feel them now with a full Tide into their Heart sooner than plain
reading. Aristotle in his 19 Probl. gives the Cause, why there is no Impression
from Odours upon the Passions of the Mind, and but little from Colors, because
the Objects of those Senses are conveyed into the Fancy without stirring, or
agitation: but there is a great Consent between the Music, and the Spirits,
because so much Motion concurs with the Harmony: how then shall the Affections
be unstirr'd, when God is praised by Asaph, and the Quire? Will not the Heart
be more passionate, when it applies it self to God in such tunable Solemnity,
than by that which is uttered in the vulgar Mode of Elocution? Fourthly, David
requires it of the Saints, to make a cheerful Noise to the God of Jacob. This
is the use of Anthems, to make us merry, and joyful before the Lord. Can Flutes
and Trumpets inspire a Resolution into the Breast of Soldiers? Or why do they
carry them to Battle? Did Cornets, and other Wind-instruments animate the
robustious Greeks, to stand out their Games with a Courage more than Manly?
(...), Arist. lib. 8. Polit. c. 5. It cannot be denied, says that Philosopher,
but such Music comforted them in their Conflicts, as if it had been an
Enthusiasm. Turn it into a Church Way among good Christians, and will it not
have alike Operation there? Will not a skilful Hymn made to God, enliven and
penetrate as far to a Heavenly end, as other Minstrilsie had its effect in
civil Applications? But this Seraphical Devotion is shut out of doors, and more
than this, (O Lord thou see it) until he open the Way again, who has the Key
of David.

34. Some will not be brought to like this, and some of later growth cannot
easily be brought to understand it; it being hard for them to miss that, which
they never knew. But in those days, when God was so worshipped, the Concourse
was great that came to the Bishop's Chapel for Devotions. So he had more
Guests at his Table of generous and noble Extraction, than any Prelate in a
long Memory before; for the Music of his great Chamber, which did feed, and
relieve the Ear, was sought unto, more than the Cheer which was prepared for
the Belly. A Bishop, say the Scriptures, must be a Lover of Hospitality: and so
said Melito, the ancient Bishop of Sardis, who wrote a Book, Entitled, For
Episcopal Hospitality, Eusebius. lib. 4. c. 25. To which there was no need to
exhort our Bishop. Mr. IV. S. that gives him not a good word beside in his
History; allows him to be laudable in this. Bugden is a Thorough-fare into the
great Counties of Lincoln, and York; whose Nobles and Gentry, with their
Retinues, called in at that Palace in their Passage, and found a sumptuous
Table, and a Cellar free, if not too open. The House, as great as it was, was
likely well sill'd. The Master of it delighted not in Solitude: for he loved
not to save Charges. Beside such Passengers, he seldom sat to Meat without some
of the Clergy, commonly a Coovy. The very Yeamanry of Fashion of the adjacent
Towns were welcome, not only to his Hall, but to his Board. And though the
Resort was such, yet he lived in that Order and Method, that his more serious
thoughts were seldom interrupted with Domestic Affairs. The Poor were sharers
in this Hospitality, more than any for their number, with whom he desired to
divide the Goods of the Earth, that he might divide with them the Joys of
Heaven. Aeque pauperibus prodest, locupletibus aeque, Horat. He has been heard
to say, that he would spend his own, while he had it: for he thought his Rivals
would not always let him enjoy it. As the Athenians making merry with their
Story, when Xerxes led his Army against them, would talk in a Frolic, that the
Medes should not eat up this. Many thought a great Debt would grow upon him for
his wasting. But he was too wise to need another to audit his Estate for him.
The Spaniard has a pretty Refrain, Mas save el loco en su casa, que el guerdo
in casa axeno: A Fool knows more in his own House, than a wise Man in another.
But here was one whose Providence held up his Bounty. He run out far: but he
knew where to stop; as he that takes a strong Purge, repairs it with a Cordial.
Circumstances in some things are as much as Substance: every whit as much, nay
more than the half of Hospitality. Some will have the Praise of the Entertainer
to begin from the Cheerfulness of the Countenance. Ante omnia v^ltus --
Accessere boni, Lib. 8. Metamor. of Philemon and Baucis, wherein the Bishop had
as singular Grace: A (...) in his Person, a grave and a smiling Garb compounded
together, to being Strangers into liking of their Welcome. The Honorable and
the Mean had that share of Courtesy which belonged unto them. Well expressed by
Aemilius Probus, in the Character of Pom. Atticus, Hic Athenis sic se gerebat,
ut communis infimis, par principibus videretur. Cheerfulness at the Threshold
must continue with pleasantness to the parting, or else a Guest does penance:
Wherein the Bishop won greatly upon all that he received. He demonstrated that
his Mind was the lighter, because his Friends were about him: and his facetious
Wit was true to him at those Seasons, because his Heart was true to his
Company. If neat Apophthegms, and sallies of Ingenuity deserved to be book'd,
his would have made an elegant Cluster. (...), says Eunapius in his Proem: the
Sports that drop from Virtue are observable.

35. These are Conditions looked for in every discreet Man. A great deal more
is required in the Hospitality of a Bishop. Possidonius says of St. Austin,
Anagnosten admensam adhibuit. So at this Table a Chorister read a Chapter in
the English Translation at Dinner, and one of his Gentlemen another in the
Latin Translation at Supper. For there was none of them but was bred at least
to so much Learning. After that, Discourse took up the time: which was the
Bishop's delight, and the Hearer's profit. It is the chief end of repast with
Friends. Propter Sermonis de lectationem tempestivis convivits delector. Cicer.
de Senect. Let dumb Beasts hold their Heads in the Crib: But Man, that is a
rational Creature, should be a rational Feeder: Herein the Bishop excelled
himself. For none could give better content in Discourse to all that sat with
him at Meat. As Symmachus said of the like, coming from a learned Man's Mouth,
Lib. 2. Ep. 6. Nihil quod non meum vellem, nibil quod non admirarer audivi. The
old Fathers said the same things, or that which was like the same things in
their Colloquies. He could make himself all things to all Men, and close with
all sorts, according to their Argument, and Capacity. If a Barly-corn were
fitter for some than a Pearl, he would scrape it out for them. Where it was
vain to sound the shallowness of some with a deep Line, he instructed them with
Perspicuity, after their own measure. But when he had the Society of them, that
were of good Reading, and strong Notions, he would propose, and hear, and
reply, and canvass a Question with that Reason, and Instances of Antiquity, yet
with such a Gust of Hilarity, that he contented all with his Judgment, and
endeared them to him with his Civility. Far more might be said than this to his
praise: but it is better to supply it with Admiration. And because his Breasts
were full, and had need to be drawn: the choicest, and most able of both
Universities came thick unto him; as Erasmus in an Epistle to Sixtinus, p. 140.
writes of some learned Men, that invited themselves to a Meal with him,
Ejusmodi homines, qui Academiam possint facere, non modo convivium: So such
company was often about the Bishop, as made Bugden look like an Academy, and
the Cheer like a Commencement. None could reach himself out with more Humanity
to please them all, unless any thought it troublesome, as I think they did not,
that he continued Discourse till Midnight, or after. From Cambridge, that being
so near, and he so hospital, he was daily visited. But when Dr. Ward, and Dr.
Brownrigg (now the Right Reverend Bishop of Exon) came to do him Honor with
their observance, it was an high Feast with him. These were Saints of the red
Letter in the Calendar of his Acquaintance. Occurrunt animae, quales neque
candidiores -- Terra tulit, Horat. This noble Pair were both most Godly, most
Learned, most Humble; fit to make Friends with the most virtuous, and chiefly,
(for so it was) between themselves. The first was of a sad Temper: the second
more cheerful. The first slow, and profound: the second quick, and acute. Dr.
Ward in the Chair a rare Determiner: Dr. Brownrigg in the Schools an
unparalled Disputant, and in the Pulpit a most divine Preacher: As Tully said
of Crassus and Scevola, In aliquibus dissimiles erant inter se, statuere tamen
ut non possis, cujus te malles esse similiorem. So these two in some things
were Matches, in some things unlike, in all things excellent: and happy were he
that could be like to either. He that received such as these under his Roof,
might be comforted, not that he received Angels unawares, but Christ himself in
his Disciples. This Matter might have broken off here, but that Mr. W. S. who
likes the Gallantry of the Bishop's Housekeeping, adds that which was very
true, that Watches were set to note, and espy him. Warning was given by some,
that were appointed to it. The Court is not always the closest Cabinet to keep
Secrets: As Budaeus observes it, Lib. 3. de Ass. fol. 105. Aius ille Locutius
arcanum nihil sinit esse eorum, quae in Aula geruntur. But the Bishop would
take no knowledge, that such a Snare was laid; esteeming of it as Physicians do
of Cancer Occultus, that it is more safe to let it alone, than to go about to
cure it: nor was it easy for him to keep in his Freedom: Which yet many times
had subtlety mixed with it; such as Fulgentius says was in Padre Paulo, That he
would seem open in his Talk, out of an admirable Dexterity to make others speak
freely. But more often custom did make his Words run from him, without regard
to those that might be suspected: As Camerarius writes of Melanchthon, Oration
ejus erat libera, etiam sine circumspectione, and consideratione eorum, coram
quibus illa haberetur. Where much Knowledge, and a sweet Nature meet with
intelligent Company, Discourse will flow without an over-anxious advertency
upon the Hearers. Yet Offense could never be grounded upon his Words, if a
candid Interpretation judged them. Doubtless he that had lost one Eye, would be
more tender to keep the other. As for those Spies, and State-rats that are set
to run, and scent in every corner; Budaeus, a great Courtier as well as a
Scholar, in his Work cited before, Fol. 188. Accounts them to be most ignoble
Instruments, bred at first under the ragged Princes of Asia. But he that did
most employ them was Midas, King of Phrygia, which gave occasion to the Fable,
that he had Asses Ears. Quem narrant asininas aures habuisse, quod multos
otacoustas, auricularios, and sermonum captatores haberet. Thistles were fitter
for such Asses to feed on, than the sumptuous provision of a most bountiful
Lord.

36. Though the good Fare remembered was much seen, and much talked of, yet
there were Issues of Liberality from the same Purse no less, or more, to be
approved. The Lordly Senators of Rome sed the Bellies of their Clients, that
came officiously to salute them; Fructus amicitiae magnae cibus, Juven. Sat. 5.
And that was all the good they did. But as this Bishop's Table was free and
open, so was his Hand: Except Bishop Andrews, who was sublime in all Virtue,
there was not so great a Giver of his Order, to the Supply of the Learned, and
of Gentlemen of hard Fortune: whom he gratified with no small Sums. Beside some
poor Scholars of eminent Hopes in both Universities, whom he cherished with
sufficient Pensions to maintain them modestly. A Servant of a worthy Family
that looked to his Disbursements, Mr. John Mostyn, will avouch it, that in such
charitable Out-lets, he spent a Thousand Pounds every Year at the least,
sometime Twelve Hundred. Whatsoever Colors you lay upon the praise of a great
Man, certainly such Works are the best Metal of his Coat. Titulis and fascibus
olim -- Major habebatur donandi gloria, Juven. ut supra. And that is Truth in
Ar. Will. History p. 196. That this Bishop was of a bountiful Mind to Men in
want, being a great Patron to support them, when there was Merit that wanted
supply. The same Author has instanced in one of the best, to whom he did
minister out of his store, the Man whose Renown will ever be fresh, Dr. Peter
Moulin, the Elder; Who flying from the mortal Threatenings of his Enemies at the
time of the Siege of Mount-Alban, and finding harbor in England, was not only
furnished for his present use by this compassionate Providor, but he sent also
for his Son Dr. Peter the younger out of France, ordained him a Deacon, to make
him capable of his Patronage, instituted him into a Donative, one of the best
in North Wales, and caused him to engage, that Provision should be made out of
it for his Mother-in-Law, as it were in the way of a Jointure, if the survived
his Father. A Benefit which the Father, that great Pillar of the Reformed
Churches in France, neither sought, nor expected. For he had never seen his
face that conferred it: and came so welcome to discharge him from all further
care of laying up for his Family, that among his other rate Gifts, he proved
the most acknowledging, true-hearted, and constant Friend, that ever the Bishop
had to do with. From whom he was presented every Month with all those Rarities,
which the Gallican Church, and State set forth. Neither were the Moulins, the
Father and Son, the All, and the only ones among the Worthies of the
Transmarine Churches, that were Debtors to his Courtesy. But, as our holy
Fathers Grindal, Whitgift, and Abbot had done before him, many in the
Universities of France, and the Netherlands, that were (...), Men of Fame and
Industry, were greeted from him with ample Tokens of Benevolence. For though
the Government, and comely Order of our Church is far better contrived than
theirs, through the good Hand of God upon us, yet he was not pufft up, like
some, that think their Imperfections make them unworthy of Communion with us.
Is there but one Tree of Knowledge in all the Paradise of the Church of God? Or
must all be despised that are not reformed ad amussim? The good God pardon
every one, that prepares his heart to seek the Lord God of his Fathers, though
he be not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary, 2 Chronicles.
30.19. Alas, yet many of these, or their Colleagues, since they were filled
with good things from our Right Reverend Fathers, have turned against us, and
have brought fuel to kindle the fire, which has burnt up the houses of God in
our Land. Lord lay not this sin to their charge. They have received good things
from us: and we have received evil from them. The white stone is on our side:
the blot is on theirs. But our Bishop's End was good, the Coagmentation of the
parts of the Building of God's House, and to oblige the Master Builders; His
Prudence, and Humanity went far to close up Breaches, and to advance Unity. And
as the Showers of the Clouds drop upon Thistles, as well as Wheat, so a frank
Spirit will not be overcurious to examine, into whose hands it puts a little
Dust. Let it fall on the right-side, or on the left, let God look to that, who
knows the Heart. This the Bishop believed, and knew that what he received from
the Church, was not given for the Interest of one Man to lay it up for himself.
St. Ambrose tells us so, Ep. 2. ad Valentini. Nihil ecclesia sibi nisi fidem
possidet: possessio ecclesiae sumptus est egenorum.

37. Let me proceed a little further, and the Readers will wonder, out of what
Mine the Bishop dug the Wealth to expend so much. It was never observed by
those about him, that he gathered much in his great Office. He was provident
indeed, and let nothing run waste: and honest Thrist will help to save a few
Spoonfuls, but not so much as to fill a Cistern. I can refer it no better, I am
certain, than to the unknown Blessing of God, who multiplied his Substance the
more, because he gave it cheerfully. For in the midst of his Profuseness he
fell upon Works of great Munificence, which could not come into a narrow Mind,
nor be finished by a narrow Fortune. (...), says Plutarch out of Menander,
Happy is he that has a good Inheritance, and a good Will to use it. He looked
first upon the Palace at Lincoln, built for none but the ancient Bishops of the Sea, that had Four and Thirty rich Manors belonging to them, which were
alienated in Dr. Holbech his time, though not by his fault, and were never
recovered: beside a vast Jurisdiction of great Profit, derived into other
Channels. This Palace, fit for the Pomp of those great Potentates, was
formidable to their poor Successors, that could not keep it warm, with the
Rents that remained. But it was come into the Possession of one, that did not
stick at such Considerations. For although it did seem irreparable in the
Dilapidations; and Workmen did ask so much, as the Neighbors of the Close did
think it would deter the Master of it, yet in three Years he brought it on, and
up, to as much strength and comeliness, as when it was first inhabited. And
because he found a decay of Learning in those remore Parts, for want of good
Books, he designed it among his good Deeds to provide a Remedy, another
Storehouse for Authors of all Arts and Sciences, like those of Westminster,
and St. John's in Cambridge, (...), as Athenaeus calls the Alexandrian
Biblotheque, Lib. 1. c. 9. The Flasket, or coffer to put in the Jewels of the
Muses. Presently he bought the Library, and caused it to be conveyed to
Lincoln, belonging to Dr. Day, sometimes Rector of St. Faith's in London, whom
the Stationers, his Parishioners, had furnished with a full Study, fitting for
such a Scholar, that knew how to use so great a Magazine. Timber was hewn out,
and disposed in the Yard, to make a capacious Room to hold these Books. Other
Benefactors were ready to garnish it with their Oblations. But unkind Troubles,
that came thick upon the main Founder, stopped the advance of it so long, that
the Timber came into the Hands of Soldiers, to make Fortifications; and the
Books became a Prey to every Vultur that could catch them. A Work of better
success shall complete this Paragraph. A great Wit, and one that made this
Bishop his Executor in his last Will, the Lord Bacon, says well in his Essay of
Parents, That none have such care of Posterity, as they that have no Posterity:
Which appears in this Prelate; who added to the rest of his famous Deeds, the
repairing of one side of Lincoln College in Oxford, especially the Building of
a most elegant Chapel, which it had not before. The Form of it was Costly,
Reverend, and Church-wise. The sacred Acts, and Mysteries of our Savior, while
he was on Earth, neatly colored in the Glass-windows. The Traverse, and lining
of the Walls was of Cedar-Wood. The Copes, the Plate, the Books, and all sort
of Furniture for the Holy Table, rich and suitable. All which he did with the
greater Willingness, because the Society flourished at that time with Men of
rare, and extraordinary Learning. These so many costly pieces of Charity and
Magnificence, are not Opuscula, but Opera, great Matters to be performed by one
Man, in the compass of Seven Years: And it being, as I may say in the Words of
Amos, Cap. 7.1. the latter growth of his Estate, after the King's Mowing. Such
Works a Bishop should aim at, because therefore God gave him his high degree,
says St. Jerome, Lib. 1. Con. Jovin. In majore ordine conslitutus, possit, si
velit, occasionem exercendarum habere virtutum. Let our Bishops of old times
have their due praise, they were great Benefactors to Churches, and Colleges. I
say more, they did well, and left a Pattern to their younger Brethren, that
rose up in their places, to do well by their Copy: And as Symmachus says, p.
205. Author est bonorum sequentium qui reliquit exemplum. They are a kind of
Co-founders with the good Men of after Ages, that gave them an Example to
imitate their Fore fathers. But be it considered, without disparagement to
their Piety, that their Wealth was great; they were at Cost upon the Houses of
God, when their Wings were covered with Silver, and their Feathers were of
Gold. But this Man had but a Scan^ling of their ample Fortunes. Others we know
larded all over with the Fat of the Earth, who are not Competitors, with the
Bishop in this Glory. Such as by Profession of the Law, or Traffic by Seas
have gathered up Gold like the Stones of the Streets, and leave it all to their
own House; Qui usque ad centesimum nepotem se animi obstinatione propagant, as
Budaeus tells them de Ass. p. 105. Who reckon that all they have is little
enough, to bequeath to their Seeds seed, for an hundred Generations. And yet
are no better than Persian Eunuchs, full of Honor and Riches, and leave no
Memory behind them. And if they give one Sheaf out of a full Barn, they have
not the Heart to do it with their own Hand, and see it well employed with their
own Eyes; but commend it by their Will to the Execution of their Survivors.
Whereas one Sacrifice of Alms, done for God's sake, offered up in our own Life,
paid down in our own Person, and not by Proxy, is more acceptable, than five
Legacies of posthumous Liberality. But I will stop, and will say no more of the
Bishop's pious Benignity, than a Word out of Tertullian's Apology,
Quantiscunque sumptibus constet, lucrum est, quicquid pietatis nomine fit. He
shall receive more than he gave; for Godliness is great Gain.

38. It was free for him to do what he would with his own, to be or not be a
great Benefactor, or a great Giver: but it was his Duty to be a good Governor.
Put him then into that Scale, and weigh him, and begin from his own Family:
Wherein very effectual and imprinting Passages are not wanting. A Bishop should
be blameless, and of good Report. Good Reason then for a Bachelor to walk very
strictly, to shun the Defamation of his Chastity: Therefore this Man would
suffer no Womankind to do any Service within his Gates. Though they are
siner-handed than Men for Cleanliness, yet better to endure a little Dust in
the Rooms, than that a single Man should have their Company. This was his
Order, more for his Follower's sake, than for himself. Who was privileged from
his Childhood from suspicion of Incontinency: and needed no Compurgation, but
such as Methodius had, says Baroni. Anno. 843. c. 3. Methodius de fornicatione
accusatus, prodidit seipsum eviratum esse. This will stop the Mouth of Slander,
unless his Credit came before such as had rather hear the worst of Men, than
the Truth. Fame is too hard for Innocence. If it get abroad, it will never
stand still, till Age have made it weary. For whose prevention the Heathen knew
no other way, but to set up an Altar to it, that it might befriend them. So
Aschines in his Oration against Timarchus, (...). Their Forefathers did those
divine Honors to same, as to the mighty Goddess, that carried all before her.
Not insisting to a Word more in the Negative, what they were, whom a discreet
Governor could well want in his House: In the Affirmative it was taken up to
be the School, or Academy of young Nobles. Such was the Fatherly respect that
our ancient Prelates had, to the Sons of our greatest Peers, that their Palaces
were the Nurseries of their Children: where they were bred to serve God, and
the King; and to shun the Stains of Honor, Vice and Ignorance. The two, and
only Male Branches of Charles Duke of Suffolk were brought up with Dr. Holbech,
in this Mansion of Bugden, and died there both in one day of the
Sweating-sickness, greatly lamented, as it is engraven upon their Tomb in the
Chancel of the Church adjoining. So Pope Adrian the Sixth, says Onuphrius,
carried the Sons of some great Princes of Germany to Rome, when he was elected
to the Papacy, and kept them under his own Eyes, till the Italians, guilty of
their own Filthiness, made Pasquins of the Pope, who meant well alla Todesea,
and never dreamed of the odious Lust of that Nation. Which good Custom was
revived among us by this honorable Person who lived in manner and order of the
good Bishops, as Mr. W. S. confesses, and made an Academy of his House,
receiving into it many hopeful Branches of Honor, the Sons of Marquis
Hartford, of the Earls of Pembroke, Salisbury, and Leicester, with many others
of the Gentry, of the same tender Age, to bear them company, whereof some were
of his own Blood and Country. These had Preceptors, who accounted often to the
Bishop, how their Charges were seasoned with Piety, and prosper'd in Learning.
To such as grew ripe to be removed to the Universities, he read himself a brief
System of Logic, and sent them from him, beside the Verbal Art of Grammar,
tinctured with the Syllogisms of Reason. His own Servants resorted to the
Exercises of this Education, as they were capable.

39. Chiefly his Care was Great and Godly, to ground them thoroughly in the
Principles of Religion. Whom he committed not to a Chaplain, to oversee them in
a point of that Consequence, which concerned the Life of their Souls, but
proved them one by one himself, from the most honorable, to the meanest in the
Kitchen and Stables, what Answers they could make to the Fundamental Questions
of the Catechism. A most Christian Exercise for young and old: but the sweetest
Milk that Youth can suck in. Sic lacte relicto -- Virtutem gens tota bibit, as
Sidonius has it in his Panegyric. Good things that are soonest learnt, are
longest remembered: As the Figure will continue, which the Seal imprints upon
soft Wax. And it was thought of old, that the Catechist, waving this Offering
of first Fruits before the Lord, did derive as much Benefit to himself, as to
his Disciples, (...), that of Clemens is very elegant (...). Lib. 1. If he be a
sound, and sincere Man, he does best learn the Doctrine of his own Questions,
and is the best Hearer of his own Exhortations. The opportunity which this
Bishop did observe, constantly to instruct his Domestics in their Catechism
was Lent. He that is a Lover of Antiquity, will the better love Piety. Look
back Fifteen Hundred Years, which within one Century is at the top of the
Primitive Church, and we find, that the best Practicers of Mortification, that
lived in those blessed Times, made a more solemn use of Lent, than of any part
of the Year, for Austerity of Temperance and Repentance, for Catechizing and
Preparation to keep the great Feast of Easter, with the unleavened Bread of
Sincerity. Whom should we imitate? or if you will, whom should we emulate,
rather than those whom Basil calls (and he was one of them) (...), the live
Images of holy Profession? Which way do we walk, if we shun their Footsteps?
Were not Men of the best times, best to set out the choicest times for
Devotion, and remembrance of Christ's mighty Works? Suppose we did not appeal
to those Examples: yet our modern Turn-abouts cannot evince us, but that we
feel we are best affected, when the great Mysteries of Christ are celebrated
upon Anniversary Festivals. He that will make no use of their Practice, that
were famous above all, that lived in a most sanctified Generation, is very
proud. But he that will check Experience, and will not trust to the Testimony,
which millions of good Christians will protest that they feel in the inward
Sense of their Hearts, is refractory: I must speak roughly, is impudently
contumacious. Whom I will encounter with the Words of Paraeus in 14 Cap. ad
Roman. p. 372. Utile est praecipuas Dei patefactiones, and beneficia in
ecclesiam collata, stato tempore public repetere, and populo inculcare, -- Ut
sint notissima, and in perpetua memoria. Magis enim movent, and haerent in
memoria juventutis and populi, quae solenniter, anniversarie, simul, ab
omnibus, and uno consensu fiunt, quam quae alias ab aliis fiunt, and dicuntur.
See more there. But see, and say what you will, Novelists had rather be talked
of, that they began a Fashion, and set a Copy for others, than to keep within
the Imitation of most excellent Presidents.

40. I have not done with the Governance of this Family. Which was the worse
thought of by some strict Censurers, because the Bishop admitted in his public
Hall a Comedy once or twice to be presented before him, exhibited by his own
Servants for an Evening Recreation. Some, that lived in nothing but Pleasure in
the Court, objected, that such Pleasure did not befit him, that was under a
Cloud. But he that had cast all Hopes and Fears aside, did answer, What have I
done to live the worse, for their sakes, that do not love me? Others did
condemn all Stage Plays, and him that did allow them. These are small Quarrels,
that cannot blemish so much desert. Atomi in sole natantes non augent pondus
bilancis, says one. No Scale is the heavier for Atoms that fly about it. Nor
will I put his Worthiness to a Compromise, for such a triffle. Young Men must
have their Delights: and old Men must countenance them. Pliny the younger wrote
but that which was equal to his Father, Lib. 9. Ep. Demus alienis
oblectationibus veniam, ut nostris impetremus. There are diverse ways of Solace,
according to the taste of Sanguine, or Phlegmatic Complexions: of fine, or
obtuse Wits. Allow others their acceptable Mirth; and then presume to be
allowed your own. But it comes home to the Person, what Erasmus sent to
Archbishop Warham, Lib. Ep. p. 386. Cur vitio detur Summatibus viris, si
quando curis delassatum animum risu resiciant? He that will not permit the
gravest Senators to refresh themselves, and to laugh at Toys, deserves to be
laughed at. No Man more wise, or more serious than Archbishop Bancroft, the
Atlas of our Clergy in his time: and he that writes this has seen an
Interlude, well presented before him at Lambeth, by his own Gentlemen, when I
was one of the youngest Spectators. But it was imputed to this Bishop, what
Matchiavel notes in Scipio Affricanus, That he knew better how to keep himself
from Faults, than to correct the Faults of those whom he commanded. Or, at the
best, that the Bishop was more vigilant to prevent disorders in his House, than
to punish them. The Exception is material: for those two things, Thou have
loved Righteousness, and hated Iniquity, Psalm. 45.7. are conjunctive, and not
to be separated. Yet consider, his Retinue was great. The Sons of no mean Men
were preferred to wait upon him, not for Wages, but to learn Fashions, as the
Style runs: who did not look to be bridled in with such attendance, and
strictness, as their Fellows. Suppose some Trespass should fall out among them;
commonly the Master of the House is the last that knows it. Dedecus ille domus
sciet ultimus, Juven. sat. 10. Yet this Pen shall not spare him: but will Vote
with them, that think he did exceed in Oeconomical Clemency. As Camerarius
would not excuse Melanchthon for it, p. 37. Qui conniveret ad familiarium
suorum nimiam aliquando licentiam. This Bishop could not put off a charitable
Propension, and Patience, to hope for their return at length, that had wandered.
He could chide, and aloud, but he could not easily put away a Delinquent. The
Gentleness of the Parable stuck close to him, These three Years have I come,
and found no Fruit, but let the Tree stand one Year more, and it may prove
better. He that proceeds impartially against Vice, is a righteous Phineas, Uni
aequus virtuti, atque ejus amicis, Horat. Lib. 2. Ser. 1. And he that forgives
much, is a meek Moses. Mercy, as I may say, is the Parelius that shines out of
the Light of Sanctity. A difference is to be made of the size of Sins. Such as
Hophni and his Brother committed, are not be slubber'd over with their Father
Heli's Daubing; Nay my Sons, I hear of your evil dealing, it is not a good
report, 1 Samuel 2.24. Or as Pope Paul the Third carried himself to his
ungracious Byslips (an Incubus could not have begot worse) who made no further
Inquisition after their horrid Facts, but to say, They learnt it not of him:
This were to take part with Sinners against Heaven and Earth. But if the
Offense be no worse than Negligence, or Rashness, it is not Mercy, but Justice
to pass it over. A small Cut in the Finger will heal of it self. If a
Misdemeanour were done, that had apparent Corruption in it, and with
Recidivation, which made it far worse, the Bishop was very eager, and full of
Minacy in his Reprehension. Yet a little Submission, perhaps too little, would
mitigate him. If the Offender did blush, which is the color of Virtue; much
more if he wept, which is the Syrup of Virtue, he was restored to his Place,
and too soon to Favor. A dry Eye in a Delinquent he could not well brook: it
is a sign of a dead Heart. Therefore some say, that Witches neither upon
Examination, or Torture, were ever seen to shed a Tear. The most that wrought
upon him (his Discourse discovered it) was, that there is somewhat that is good
in the worst Men: and he looked, and hoped that in time it would eat out the
Rottenness of the bad part. As one should say, take a Brand's end, not by that
part which is burnt, but by that which has not taken fire, and you may hold it
safely. This, the Impunity of lewd Ones, is not held out to be excused, but to
be avoided. He that used it, I am certain, got no good by it. (...), says the
Orator, ad Demon. Employ no wicked Man in your Affairs; for some Judgment will
retort upon you. Not to leave the Bishop altogether at blame for his Remisness,
he cashiered one or two that were incorrigible in their Riot, and one for
Treachery. I would as bad had not come in his room. It was Mr. N. T. a
Musician, and a Divine: one that could make better Music upon an Organ, than
upon a Text. He had leave to use the whole House, to go into the Bishop's
Bedchamber, or Study. Our Naturalists say a Lion suspects no fraud. Unawares
the Organist transcribed some Letters which he found, and sent them to an
Enemy, who compassed this Bishop about with such Toils, Saltusque indagine
cingit, Virgil. The Romans thought it was possible by Incantation to draw the
Tutelary Gods out of a City, which they besieged, Plin. lib. 28. c. 2. So this
Inchanter thought it feasible, to draw Intelligence out of Closets, and
Cabinets, by such as wanted a Fortune: and that he could force open any thing
with the Petard of Preferment. He missed not his aim in this false Brother,
upon whom he caused a Prebend to be conferred in the Church of Woster. Wherein
the Corruptor was worse than the Corrupted: as Malice is worse than
Covetousness. I will say for N. T. as Isocrates does for Euthynus in his
Oration called (...). Nec Euthynus Niciam laesisset, si alium quempiam tanta
fraudare pecunia potuisset. So this Musician would not have abused so kind a
Master, if he could have got a Prebend by an honester Course. The Coronis to
this Matter is thus: Some bad ones in this Family were punished strictly, all
rebuked, not all amended. Curam exigeris, non curationem. The Bishop was not
wanting in Care, but the Cure was in the Power of God.

41. Government the more public, and the further it extends, it gives the
greater Luster: Whereof the Candle put upon the Hill that could not be hid, was
his own Example, directing his Clergy to their Duty by his own often Preaching.
Injunctions, Articles, Orders, Advertisements, and the like. I have heard wise
Men say, expire with the Prince's Life, that appointed them: saving that their
Prudence and Equity do never expire. But Canons oblige till they be lawfully
repealed. The first Canon among us, that I know, past by Convocation, and
confirmed by Royal Authority, is that of 1571. That all Bishops should
diligently teach the Gospel, not only in their Cathedral Churches, which they
govern, but also in all the Churches of their Diocese, where they shall think
it most needful. And principally they shall exhort their People, to the
Reading, and Hearing of the Holy Scripture, etc. Which Canon this Bishop did
awake in his frequent Practice. He had good Gifts to preach withal, and good
Gifts are given to prosit others. None of God's Talents must be hid in a
Napkin, nor in a Rochet. And who does hide them? Qui percepto dono sub otio
torporis abscondit, says Gregory, Past. cu. Lib. 1. c. 9. Which Sin had been
the greater in this great Divine, who was so apt to teach, so able by found
Doctrine to exhort, and to convince Gainsayers. Who excelled his Brethren in
that Faculty, as much as he did transcend them in Dignity: It is not to set him
forth at an Hyperbolical rate; but that this Testimony may be given him, that
the best, that were famous in the Pulpit, might learn Method, and Perspicuity
from him. He had not his fellow in that Point of Art. And he spoke as one that
delivered the Oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4.11. His Notions were not vulgar, but
found and weighty, smelling of Pains, and of Piety. Many a Sabbath Days Journey
he took to the adjacent Towns, to let them see, and hear their Diocesan: not
omitting the Punctilio of the Canon, to stir them up to the Reading, and
Hearing of Holy Scriptures, but taught it with much variety from Luke 16. v.
31. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded
though one rose from the dead. The sound of Aaron's bells were to be heard when
he went into the holy place, and when he came out, that he died not, Exodus
28.35. Iram judicii exigit, si sine sonitu praedicationis incedit, says Gregory
again, Lib. 2. c. 3. Be it that place be eminently meant of Christ our High
Priest, who was heard of God in his Mediation, and of the People in his
Instruction. Yet it belongs, by way of Pattern, to all them, whom Christ has
sent, as his Father sent him. Sweet is the Sound of their Golden Bells. Gold
does not give a shrill noise, like sounding Brass, or tinkling Cymbals: but it
is rich, and precious. The Multitude, by ill custom, look for Clamor, strong
Lungs, and weak Doctrine. But happy are those Auditors, that can try which is a
golden Bell, upon the Touchstone of their Understanding; and run not giddy
after them, whose words are hot in the Mouth, and cold in digestion. Those Ages
did afford the best Disciples, that learnt their Principles from the gravest
Fathers. And the People did profit most, where the Bishops preached most. As St.
Austin says, that so long as he staid at Millain, every Sunday he heard the
great Doctor, St. Ambrose. Millain, or any other City; Bethany, or any Hamlet,
would forsake others to hear them. It was so with us in England, to the brink
of our great Change. High and low, of all sorts and degrees came with their
greatest Attention to hear the Sermon of a Bishop. Their very Habit, which set
them forth with Comeliness, did affect some: the Authority of their high
Calling did move others: the Contemplation of their Learning and Wisdom, which
had advanced them, did work more: their painfulness in their Duty did please
all. Upon which of these hinges the Delight of the People did turn, I dispute
not. It is enough that it was apparent, that the Message of God was heard with
most reverence, when it was delivered by one that looked like an extraordinary
Ambassador. Above all, those chief Pastors were the best Trumpets to sound a
Retreat from Innovations. (...); As I take it from Longinus, p. 10.
New-fangledness makes us giddy at first, and in time mad: and none were so
powerful as the good Prelates, to warn the People of them. Experience, and Age,
and Knowledge did plead on their side, that they best knew the Tradition of the
Fathers.

42. Nor could it but have sped well, if it had been considered, that constant,
or at least frequent Preaching, would have made our Bishops been rightly
understood, that their Judgments adhered to the Doctrine of the Church of
England, as it is settled in opposition to Popery. Some of our Reverend
Fathers, that stated our Controversies moderately, and with no more than due
distance (which is an infinite advantage to a Disputant) were had in Jealousy
for almost Apostates, by those that shot wider from the Mark, which both aimed
to hit. A Jealou^ie which some Diligence in the Pulpit had prevented. For when
did you hear of a Lecturer suspected for it? But this is the Imperfection of
mortal Affairs, that when one inconvenience is removed, another will rise up in
the room. For the good Office of Preaching, performed often by a Bishop, was
called Puritanism by some in those times, that fomented such a Faction, that
made the Name of Puritan the very Inquisition of England. Not using it, as
formerly, to preserve the good Order, and Discipline of the Church; but to cast
any Man out of Favor, that was so innocent, as not to be able to be charged
with any thing else. Thrust a worthy Man between the first and second Censure,
and how hard did we make it, by such uncharitable Traducings, to live evenly in
the indivisible Point of Protestantism? This Bishop being not indiligent to
preach the Gospel, for which St. Paul, and our own Canons had provided, was
deciphered to the King for an upholder of Non-conformitants. Neque sapere
Principi potest, quod his praegustatoribus non ante placitum sit, and probatum,
Bud. Pand. Lib. 2. c. 14. The King's Tasters had disrelish'd him to his Majesty
with that unsavory report, that he could not be believed, with proof sufficient
made against the prejudice. Which made no alteration in him, but that he would
follow the Plough, to which he had put his Hand. Like the Resolution of
Alexander, Curt. Lib. 9. that would not be deterred with Rumors, from finishing
his Expedition in Asia, for says he, Fugissemus ex Asia, si nos fabulae
debellare potuissent -- So stout Lincoln would give no ground to Scandals,
taken, but mistaken. No Discouragements could remove him from great Designs:
from two especially. The former, that he began, and purposed to go on, to write
a Comment in Latia upon the whole Bible. Are there some that will not believe
it? stay, and take the Proof, and it will be the better it was not believed: As
St. Austin says, de Vit. Cler. Sermon. 2. Beatus homo qui tam bonum opus fecit,
ut non crederetur. Happy is the Man that did so good a Work, that the World
would not imagine it. And wherefore should it be thought that he would not go
in hand with a Work of so great Learning, and Labor? Even for that reason,
which Tully gives, Hoc usu plerumque venit, ut in rebus diversis eundem
praecellere nolint homines. It is the Malignancy of Men, that will not conceive
it possible for one Man to excel in many Endowments, because themselves fall
short of all. But for satisfaction not to be controlled, he did not only
discourse sometimes, that he would dedicate his Industry, and his Wealth to
compile so excellent, and voluminous a Piece, but he left much of the Materials
behind him. Much of the Wool was ready, yet not spun out, for the Garment
intended, because his Loom was broken. To speak it out distinctly; Mr. Richard
Gouland, Keeper of the Library of the College of Westminster, (till Men of good
Parts in all kinds, himself not the least, were deprived) he has in his
Custody the Bible in three Parts in a large Folio, with the Translation of Jun.
and Tremell. bound together, wherein are Notes upon all the Scriptures (except
the Apocaclyps which is untouched) written with the Bishop's own Hand: in which
are drawn out of all kind of Authors, of the first, middle, and chiefly the
latter Age, and out of all Languages, as the prime of Hebrew, Greek, and Latin,
with the modern of Italian, Spanish, and French, whatsoever is the Choice and
Flower of their Commentations. All this I have seen, and turned over, and
observed so much Judgment in the Extraction, so much Industry in the Mass of
it, that I admired one Man could compass so much: but more astonished, that he
could find leisure for any business, or time for any Study beside. All is not
barren Land that lies fallow. Nor all Scholars idle, that have not discovered
their precious Treasures in Print. But the increase of this Knowledge increased
his Sorrow, with the great Declension of his Health; As the Poet says,
Attenuant juvenum vigilatae corpora noctes. Ovid.
His Lamp burnt many Nights till Morning (the constant time of his Study)
before he had gathered in this rich Harvest. Yet neither Colic, nor Catarrhs,
nor the Stone, the sharpest of Pains, could stay him from his main purpose. The
Count Mirandulan in Politian writes of Marianus, a Divine whom he valued above
all, Corpus habet invictum, infatigabile, ut non aliunde magis reparare vires,
quam de laboribus ipsis videatur. So the more feeble the Bishop was, the more
he toiled; as if he thought to repair his Strength by Watching, and assiduity
of Labor. Yet he knew, that to expound the whole Scripture learnedly, was
above the Powers, and Parts of one Man. Therefore he reserved both the filling,
and finishing of it, to the assistance of Twelve, or more, of the ablest
Scholars in the Land, whom he had in his Eye, and Thoughts, and purposed the
Recompense of a great Stipend. For he has said it to his Friends, that he
would not stick at the Sum of Twelve, no, nor of Twenty thousand Pounds to
perfect that Masterpiece of Divinity. But this young Feature, like an
imperfect Embryo, was mortified in the Womb by Star Chamber Vexations. A Letter
from King Ataxerxes caused Ezra, and the Builders with him, to cease from
working. Yet so much of the Stuff, as was made ready with his own Pen in Three
Volumes, if it be not deposited in the Library at Westminster, the Author will
be wronged in his Fame, and Posterity in the Profit. His invincible Mind was
not satisfied with this Task alone. But as Pliny spoke to Trajan; Paneg. p. 57.
Inter refectiones existimas mutationem laboris. So to pass from one Study to
another, was not a new Labor, but the Bishop's Recreation. Therefore he laid
out for the Works of his Predecessor, Robert Grost head; made Scrutiny for them
in all Libraries of England, and in France, where he had Credit, and his
Friends could furnish him. Bishop Grost head living in the Reign of Henry the
Third, was a good Linguist, a famous Philosopher, a Divinity reader, an
assiduous Preacher, a painful Writer of Two Hundred Books, says, Bale, wherein
the Ambition, and Covetousness of the Church of Rome were his chief Subject.
These being in Manuscript, and many obscured in blind Corners, this Bishop
collected, digested them, had wrote Arguments upon diverse parts of them, which
others have read, as well as my self: expected daily more and more of the same
Author, that all that could be got, might be printed fairly together. And as
Symmachus writes, Lib. 2. Ep. Quodam modo societatem laudis affectat, qui
aliena been gesta primus enuntiat. He that is the first that publishes the
worthy Acts of another Man, is a Sharer in his Praise. But by his Eclipse
Bishop Grost head's Works remained in darkness. The Success was unfortunate,
but he that set it on, had a public Soul, and a studious Head. There is not a
better Pattern of a noble and industrious Spirit, or of worse proof in the
Up-shot. Fortunam ex aliis, says Aeneas in Virgil. Whose Fault was that?

43. Such, of whom, as a Bishop, he had most right to say, they were his Work
in the Lord, 1 Cor. 9.1. were they, upon whom he conferred Holy Orders by
Imposition of Hands. Those blessed days did not last long, when the Apostles
themselves appointed some over the Household of Christ, to give them their
Portion of Meat in due season. They could discern, by the Gifts of the Spirit,
who were sit for that high Calling. Such as Timothy, that was set apart,
according to the prophesies that went before upon him, 1 Timothy 1.18. And Mich.
Syncellus followed the Tradition, that Dionysius was made Bishop of Athens,
(...): Looked into by the Eyes of St. Paul, who could see him through and
through. After which trial by Illumination, it was fit that the want of that
Spirit should be supplied by the testimony of many, and by as much heed, and
diligence as could reasonably be taken, by those that laid their Hands upon
them, that were vouchsafed to be Stewards of the manifold Graces of Christ.
Wherein (I rejoice in the truth) he that is before us was as strict an examiner
of Novices, as any of his Order. Some that were not admitted by him in his
first Ordinations, because they were found Light upon the Weight, saved him
much work afterward. Divinity is a deep, and a copious Science; wherein he that
feared he could not answer his expectation, would not venture upon his repulse.
For he was so constant, and regular, that they knew what to trust to, before
they came to him. Whether the 34th. Canon, Anno. 1604. ambiguously penned, will
allow one to be made a Deacon, or Priest, that can yield an account of his
Faith in Latin, according to the Articles of the Convocation 1562, though bred
in no University, is disputable. He that had not been bred in one of them; or
in those of Scotland, and Ireland, and a Graduate to boot, could not be
accepted of him. His Answer was, It was not his Custom. To which the Churches
of Germany held close, as Camerarius has published it, Vit. Melanch. p. 161.
Testatur consuetudo literarum publicarum, quas formatas vocant, and aliquae
Synodi decreverunt, ne sine progressu in Scholis, and Collegiis reciperentur
ulli sacerdotes. I think our Canon intended no others, except in case of
Chanters, and Vicars Choral, ministering in Cathedral Churches, who yet had no
License given them to preach. And certain it is best to admit none, but such as
have walked before the Learned of the Kingdom in their Education. It is a
Resolution which will fall on its feet, and stand sure. It pieces well with
that of the Prophet, Hos. 4.6. Because thou have rejected Knowledge, I will
also reject thee, that thou shall be no Priest unto me. It discountenanceth
Mechanics, and the lowest of the People, that they intrude not to teach more
than they had ever learnt. Barricadoes of empty Barrels, whose sound is the
louder, because they have no Liquor. Let me bestow a good Story upon them, who
never read Arts, or Stories. Thessalus, a mere Quack, told Galen, that he would
teach Men in a Month or two to become good Physicians, that had not the
Elements of Philosophy. Oil-men, Butchers, some of the Gentle-crast left their
Trades to learn this compendious way of Thessalus, to administer Physic, Sed
in perniciem generis humani, says Galen. The Empyricks got Money, but their
Patients got their death. It Is far worse when such Thessalians Practice upon
the Soul, that never came out of the Schools of the Prophets: and amuse poor
People with Confidence, and Boldness. And great Boldness was never without
great Absurdity. Now every one that is a Candidate of Holy Orders, brings a
Testimony with him to the Bishop, for the Commendation of his honest Life:
often Subscribed formally, and with little Advice, and when Men are prevailed
upon in their Weakness, I mean when they are over entreated. Yet he that
receives it can hear with no other Ears. Then why should he be protested
against, if other Names have broken with him? If some are so easy to pass
their Names under such Letters of Commendation, as if a Libertine in Life were
like to be transformed, nay tranfigur'd, by that sacred Calling, he is greatly
out: allbeit those words were pronounced, when Hands were imposed, receive ye
the Holy Ghost. Which is not spoken of the Grace, which makes Men gracious with
God, but of the Office of Grace. Isocrates in Areopag. Oration says, That a
loose Man, chosen to be a Judge in the Court of Mars-hill, incontinently became
strict and temperate. Which was a Flattery that Budaeus flouts at, Pr. pars
Pandec. p. 283. Tanquam loci genio afflatus ex ingenio suo migrasset. I would
not believe but a Wolf would be a Wolf still, if he were chosen a Shepherd,
though all the Beasts in the Wilderness should Vote the contrary in his behalf.
This is the blind side on which the Bishop could not see so perfectly himself,
whether he that came to be adopted into the Ministry, were unblamable in his
Life. He might discover whether he were sound, and orthodox, especially not a
Babe in Knowledge. Wherein he expected such a Talent, that one that was a
Minister, a Master of Arts, a Wit, a Resident, presented to a Cure of good
value in Bedfordshire, could not obtain Institution of him, for his slenderness
in Learning, till he had respited him for Three Months, to read an whole
Systeme of Divinity (the Scholar might name which he would) who, at the time
expired, was apposed by the Bishop, and had accompassed such Knowledge in a
Quarter of a Year, that he gave satisfaction, and liked his Book so well, that
from thenceforth he was taken for a Scholar. Here is the Collection of this
Theme. The Ordinations of this Bishop past thirty Years ago, are famous in the
Discourse of diverse yet alive, who call to mind with what Judgment they were
prepared, and examined: how the Bishop preached himself sometimes at that
Solemnity: with what due Ceremony it was done: with what Grace and Gravity:
with what bounty he feasted them: with what civility he took the most into his
acquaintance: That I may truly say of him as Dr. Saravia does of Samuel, de
Christian. Obed. p. 11. Samuel, deposito magistratu, prophaterum princeps, and
rector erat, dum vix^^. He had to be the great Magistrate, the Lord Keeper, but
he was like Samuel, when he had acquitted his Government, he lived in
Estimation like the chief of the Prophets, and most beloved of the Sons of the
Prophets.

44. And if he would ordain none that were unlearned, what manner of Men were
they like to be, whom he presented to Dignities and Cures upon his own
Collation? It is a mighty Trust to be a Church-Patron, no less than to be a
Feo^ee for Christ. Which this Bishop executed with that Conscience, that
neither Friend, nor Favor, nor Consanguinity swayed him: I east of all Lucre;
for he was so clear from Simony, and so well understood, that I think he was
never tempted to it. Caslus quem nemo rogavit. Commonly he found out such to
take his Patronage, as never sought him. Such whose Worth was great, but
Humility had obscured them, Quantum eruditorum aut modestia ipsorum, aut quies
operit, and subtrahit: As Pliny noted, Ep. Lib. 7. His, whom he made his, were
such as commended him that gave: for they were among the best that could
receive. Such as deserved to sit at the Helm, yet some of them that survive, in
these days have scarce a Room in the Pump. Let no more be named but a Handful,
whom the Bishop gathered out of one Society, Trinity College in Cambridge, and
guess at all by their proportion. Dr. Simson, the Author of the great
Chronology, Dr. War, Mr. G. Herbert, Dr. Meredith, Mr. H. Thorn^dick, Dr.
Creic^on, Dr. Fearn, Mr. J. Duport, Mr. A. Scattergood, Mr. C. Williamson.
(...). Here are Ten Nestors in one Militia, according to Aga^^^^'s Wish. These,
and far more that might be ranked in the same File, were his Donees, such as
God might reap Glory by them. In the beginning of King Charles's Reign, an
Opposition in Doctrine began to show it self among the Fathers of our Tribe,
and others of great Learning, some approving, some disproving the Conclusions
of the Synod of Dort. Which had not exceeded to that Heart-burning, and open
Emulation (as may be thought) if the disaffected to the Synod had not stickled
to prefer them only who were of the same Judgment with themselves, and quite
neglected others, who were seldom gratified by their means but with driblets.
If a great Dignity fell void, Virro sibi, and reliquis Virronibus illa jub^bit
poma dari, Juven. sat. 5. It had been better not to commit Affairs to the Sway
of small Moments, as they might seem, which insensibly breed great Mutations.
Our great Prelates were great observers of Unity; Whitgift, Bancroft, Harsnet,
Andrews, Barlow, Overal, who pleased all sides indifferently, because as
touching Opinions about Predestination, Converting Grace, etc. they made no
discrimination, which, or which Propugners should be gratified in their
Advancements. Whose Footsteps our Bishop followed; who thought it the best
Divinity to offend neither; and the most Christian Charity to indulge his
Favors, and Preferments to both; as it was open to the World. He had read as
much as most Men in those Controversies: he discerned Reasons Pro and Con to
tilt one at another, and each to stagger the other to the Ground. He thought
them worthy of Study, but not of Faction: worthy of crashing in the Schools,
but not in the Church, and State: in no wise to make as thick as a Wall of
Partition between the Champions, as between Piramus and Thisbe. Give the
Protestants their due, on both sides they hold themselves within the Channel of
the Scriptures in their Problems: but the Dominicans and Jesuits, tossing the
same Argument too and fro, have cut a Thousand Ditches out of the great River,
wherein there is more Mud by far, than clear Water. Such as Erasmus Scoffs in
an Epist. to one of the noble Family of the Greys, p. 250. Quid 'tu Epimenidem
somniasse reris: quid aliud, quam subtilitates quibus se jactitant sophistae?
Let Epimenides dream of them Fifty Years, and think of them as long when he was
waking, he should never find out the Abstruseness of that, which God would not
suffer to be comprehended. Because both Parts appeal to Melanchthon, let them
imitate Melanchthon, of whom thus in Thuanus's Hist. Anno. 1568. Cui maximum
tranquillitatis, and quietis studium, ut nisi de necessariis minime
contendendum putaret. Many that think the Bishop not the worse Patron for this
Neutrality, blame him that he gave Hospitality, showed equanimity, afforded
kindness, and sufferance to Puritans. That Is ever the burden of the Satyr made
against him, by them that think it a Sin, to speak well of any Faction, but
their own. For certain St. Paul might be followed in a good Sense, who was made
all things to all Men, that by all means he might save some, 1 Cor. 9.22. There
is a way to comply with the weak, and with the strong. Our Bishop was very
communicable, I have seen it, with dissentient Brethren, that did not conform;
whom he gained first with kindness, and then brought over with Argument.
Antisthenes was cavil'd at for using to visit some Men that were not liked, he
defended it thus, (...), Laert. p. 368. I go like a Physician to the Sick, and
catch not a Fever of them. If the Favors be grudged that the
Anti-disciplinarians received, let it stick upon his good nature: for he could
do no otherwise. If a ^^rk, or a Scyth^^ had tried his Gentleness, he would not
have been uncivilly received: As Carull^ said of old Men, whose Heads shake
with the Palsy, Omnibus omnia annuunt -- So a Suitor had mostly some nod from
the Bishop, with which he went away pleased. But whatsoever he did for those of
that part, it was not much that came to their share: for if a Vessel be
suspected to leak, the Cooper will pour in Water, and not Wine, to make
experience. Yet it was his Judgment, and he revealed it to the King, to allure
some of the chief in Name, and Worth among the Non-conformitants, with some of
the Dignities of the Church conferred upon them, that it might draw more than
themselves into a good Opinion of the Hierarchy. It Is wisely noted by
Isocrates, in his Oration for Peace, (...). All will wish that Polity to
subsist, wherein themselves are honored. And he that will consider how
circumspect the Nicen Fathers were, to indulge Titles of Dignity to the
Novatians, or Cathari, Can. 8. And how the African Fathers provided the like
for the Donatists (except the Bedlam Circumcellios) Can. 68. Ut etiam ipsorum
infirmitas lenius excepta, intus sanabilis fieret, says St. Austin, Epist. 162.
will not dislike such Meekness and Wisdom, to allow the Chair of Government,
and some Pre-eminence to them, that have been stubborn, that we may obtain
their Fellowship, and Labor, and addulce their Sourness. And after Examples
cast an Eye to a Simile, that no Man ever lost by keeping a Coy-duck.

45. The Seam of a slight Objection is sowed up; but will unrip again: because
the Bishop is now to be brought into his Court of Jurisdiction. He that had the
common Laws and Statutes at his Fingers end: he that was a great Canonist: a
learned Civilian: a Master of Reason: a dextrous Wit at dispatch: that knew the
fair and foul Dealings of the Spiritual Courts, was as sit a Man, as ever our
Church had, to be President of a Consistory. In that Circle he was like Onias
the High Priest, as a morning Star in the midst of a Cloud, Ecclus. 50.6. For
Clouds there were, and dark ones; as no place of Judicature is without them.
The Bishop loved the Profession of the Civil Laws, as Valentine to Divinity:
and pitied the Advocates, that were shut up to meddle with so few Causes, that
they could neither show their Learning, nor thrive by their Studies. Yet he did
often tell them (all are not dead that heard him) that unless they proceeded in
their Courts with Incorruption and Integrity: with Impartiality in Causes, and
making choice of such Quarrels to come before them, as virtuous Men thought
fittest to be redrest, a little would come to nothing. Himself would not let
Churchwardens be cited, for the placing of the Holy Table: nor the People for
not coming to the Rail, at the receiving of the Elements of the Lord's Supper.
It is a good Proviso which an Heathen gave Symm. Ep. p. 14. Si adjiciantur
insolita, forsan consueta cessabunt. By thrusting in new Ordinances, old
Obedience might be shaken. Nor indeed are they, or the like, among those
notorious things in the 109 Canon, for which Offenders should not be admitted
to the Communion, till they were reformed. And such Injunctions are so
obscurely, and deducted so far off out of our known and established Rules, that
they were to be offered, and persuaded, rather than commanded. Constraint, and
Violence are not means to bring such things to uniformity. More often by
Sufferance, Obedience will break in between their Wishes. Likewise it was Vox
populi, and therefore not to be contemned, that Officers Ecclesiastical did
prosecute Presentiments, rather against Non-conformitancy of Ministers and
People, than for Debaucheries of an evil Life, mentioned in the 109 Canon.
Wherein the Bishop did not commend the Proceedings of his deputed Judges.
Though it might be said in favor of them, that Humane Laws are strictest
against them that act contrary to public Peace. Or that Crimes are punishable
by Statutes, and are fitter for Trial at a Quarter Sessions. Some spied into
another Reason, that Proctors and Registers wanted not those Scandals
themselves, for which, in the Eye of the World, they were fit to be presented.
Yet when all is said, it were more laudable in Courts Christian, to be more
severe against Evils which the Light of Nature had made Evils, than against
Evils, which were made Evils by the Laws of Holy Church. Both were to be
corrected: but rather Works of Commission against known Light, than Trespasses
of Omission for want of Light of Understanding. The hardest Task which the
Bishop had, was to persuade his Officers to live by honest Gains: to moderate
their Fees: to wash their Hands from bribes, and filthy Lucre: the only way to
live in clear Fame, that Men might speak well of them, and of their Authority.
Covetousness is not a Branch, but a Root of Evil, says St. Paul: all that grows
may be seen in a Plant, but not the Root. Whose Example is more fit to show it
than Tribonius, who digested the Code of the Civil Law? of whom Suidas says,
(...): He was most subtle to shadow and cover the Disease of Covetousness. From
thence proceed the Delays, that consume the Substance of Appellant, and
Defendant, and make them curse such expectative Proceedings. Whose Clamors
incited the Bishop to Passion sometimes, and to call upon them instantly for
dispatch. For how long will an Horse-leach suck, if it be not pulled off? A
little is taken to enter a Cause: but the Price increases at every turn, when
it is brought to Examination. Like German Toss-pots, that drink small Cups at
first: and quaff down great Bowls when they are drunk. Similer says of the
Cantons, where he lived, that the People liked Expedition in their Causes, as
much as Justice. Quod si in judiciis nostris error aliquis committitur, -- in
causis implicicis, and obscuris; nequaquam tantum damni inde datur, quantum ex
litium diuturna prorogatione accipitur, Res. ^^el. p. 140.

46. If a Curse were of moment, as when a whole Parish were in a Broil about
it, the bishop appointed a Consistory to rule it with his own Presence, and
Judgment. He trusted not his Chancellor and Commissaries upon old Experience,
but, like a wise Governor, he looked upon them with a new Probation in every
great Cause, as if he had never known them. What greater Praise could Symmachus
have given to Theodosius in point of using his Counselors than this? Solenne
est ei singulos ut novos semper expendere, nec consuetudini condonare judicium,
Ep. p. 124. A Magistrate that will not research his Deputies, but leaves them
to their Work, with an indefinite Confidence in their Honesties, does as
absurdly, as Tanner the Jesuit, spoke absurdly in the Colloquy at Reinsberg,
That the Pope might err, unless he did use all due, and ordinary means, but
without all doubt and question he did ever use those means. The Bishop had a
deeper insight into Man: and never failed to be Rector Chori, in Causes that
required a more special Audience. Wherein he spared himself so little, and gave
so much ease to the People, that he did often ride to the parts of his Diocese
remotest from his ordinary home, as Leicester, Buckinghamshire, Wellen in
Hartfordshire, etc. and kept his Courts, where all the Complainants were at
hand to attend them. A way of great content, and much neglected. Yet the 125
Canon provides, That all Officials should appoint meet places for the keeping
of their Courts, as should be expedient for entertainment of those that made
their appearance, and most indifferent for their Travail, -- and that they may
return homewards in as due season as may be. But these Courts, which kept Peace
among the Sons of the Church, and super-intended over Delinquents are quite
ex-authorized: taken in pieces as musty Vessels, wherein nothing kept sweet,
that was put into them. The Fault was in the Demolishers, that had no better
Scent: they had Noses and smelt not. For whereas the Grievance pretended was,
that they had too much Power; the Truth is on the contrary, that they could not
do their work as they ought, to satisfy the People, and to beat down Sin,
because they had too little. Take their highest, and in a manner their only
censure, Excommunication (terrible in it self) What does a profane Person care
for it? Prosecute them with Writs de Excommunicatis capiendis, and all the
Grist that came to their Mill would not pay the cost of it. What a Coil has
been made, to set up Consistories of Ministers, and ruling Elders, that should
proceed against Scandals with rebukes, suspension from the Sacrament, open
penance, and lastly, as they expound it, let him be unto thee as an Heathen,
and a Publican? Make the Sinner liable to Imprisonment, to destraining, to a
Forfeiture, to some loss in his profit, and he will be sure to feel it, and sly
from the occasion. Confess the Truth: will not many look better to outward
Honesty, if you discipline them in their Purse? Bucer fell upon this in an
Epistle to Luther. Scrip. Anglic. p. 657. Excommunicationis loco egregiam in
multis civitatibus disciplinam, and poenas sceleribus dignas sancitas esse. And
Erastus writes like a wise Man, that noted other ways, than Presbyterian
Censures, to rectify the common Disorders of Christians: as to straiten them
in Privileges of Reputation, and Matters of Gain, which none should
communicate in, but the obedient. Simler says, Helv. Hist. p. 148. There was
not a Minister admitted into the Consistory of Scaphuse; but the most Judicious
of the Laity exercised that Authority; because their Punishments did chiefly
extend against the Body, or the Fortunes of the Peccant. What little good has
the Stool of Repentance wrought, among the fierce natured Scots? They have sat
so long upon it, that they know not how to blush at it. We should be
shame-fac'd: Nay, which is better, we should be innocent: but we are neither.
Plato says in his Protagoras, that, lest Men should fall into the Confusion of
all Sin, God had given them two Blessings to restrain them, (...). Shame, and
Justice. But since we have lost Shame, Justice must take another course, and
let us blood in that Vein, which may most probably cure us. Ploratur lacrymis
amissa pecunia veris, Juven. Sat. 13. Set a Fine upon their Heads that deserve
it; and it will vex their Hearts. But no more of Jurisdiction dissolved. Rosa
hyeme non est rosa. It was yet to be remembered for his sake, that was the
Honor of it, whilst it stood.

47. For it was murmured a good while, before the Authority of the Pastoral
Staff was broken, that the Tribunals of Bishops stretched themselves beyond
their measure: that many were troubled for not obeying new Articles. In the
Third Parliament of King, Charles, in a Petition of Grievances two Bishops were
named for offering at Innovations: and others escaped the Imputation by Luck.
But all, that loved not Asperity, took it well, that none of this blustering
was heard of in the Diocese of Lincoln. Which was malign'd then, and observed
lately to disparage the Bishop, by such as feed on him, and his corrupt part
like Worms now he is dead. It was never in his Thoughts to sooth the Humor of
the People, but to please them for their good. He had no word more common in
his Mouth, That it was not sit for a Subject, but only for a King to be
popular. That was not the Reason why he gave no countenance to the new Wine,
which other Prelates broached: or call it their Pregnancy to revive old things,
which had long lain still. But because he saw, that Bancrost, Abbot, Matthew,
King, Bilson, Andrews, Morton, Overal, Lake, Felton, Davenant, and many such,
gave great content, and received great content from their Colleges and
Bishoprics, which they governed respectively, by keeping them in that
Obedience, wherein they found them. Says Augustus in Dion, Things that have
continued well, (...). That which is settled by Custom, though it be not so
good, it is fitter than that which would alter it into another mode: and to try
experience upon the Body of a Church, which was crazy, was Mala (...), a
dangerous Endeavor. For the rest of the Charge the Bill is confessed, the Bishop
was a very slack Punisher, using the Power which God had given him to
edification, and not to destruction, 2 Cor. 13.10. God says his Covenant with
Levi was to walk in Peace and Equity, and to turn many from iniquity, Mal. 2.6.
And every High Priest must (...), Hebr. 5.2. Be moderately affected toward the
ignorant, and them that are out of the way. So did this worthy Person, who
would chide aloud like Thunder against Malefactors, but without the Bolt of
Censure, which tears the Tree, and rends the Stock in pieces. The Spirit of
Humanity has its angry Sallies and Emotions, and he was, to his dispraise, in
that very obnoxious to them. Huic uni forsan poterat succumbere culpae, Aen.
Lib. 4. But Heat, and a great Wit were never parted. And though Man have most
reason of any living thing, yet Choler abounds in him, because he has most
Fancy, and most Will. Water is a common Element to all Beasts, none strike
fire, and use it, but Man: That Is a Privilege belonging to the noblest
Creature. Herein the Bishop's Anger was as pardonable, as anger could be, that
it left no more impression, against the Person that moved him, than if he had
never been angry. As Budaeus says of Guido Rochfort, Chancellor of France, Lib.
3. de as. Fol. 105. Minime omnium iracundorum malitiosam habuit iracundiam.
Cursed be their Wrath which is cruel, Genesis 49.7. Cursed be the Anger that is
malicious. For Anger is a Mote, Malice is a Beam in the Eye. They are the
Plagues of Mankind, who, once heated with Displeasure, will never cool, neither
with the sweet Air fanned out of the Lord's Prayer, engaging them so deeply to
forgive: nor with the Blood in his Sacrament; which quenches not the Fire of a
revengeful Mind, and yet is able to quench the Fire of Hell. What shall be
given them but hot Coals of Juniper? Psalm. 120.4. Prunae juniperi per annum
integrum ignem servant, modo cinere cooperiantur, says Pliny, Lib. 13. c. 22.
Juniper Coals will keep Fire a Year, if they be covered with Ashes. Therefore
they that cover Wrath, and keep it warm with long and profound dissembling,
shall be rewarded with Fire, like Coals of Juniper, that never goes out.
Clemens in (...). 5. has divinely resolved one of the Riddles of Pythagoras,
That when a Pot is taken off the Fire, no print of it must be seen in the
Ashes. So meaning, says Clemens, (...): To let no print of Anger remain; to
blot out the Characters of it, that Revenge may never read them. So the
Bishop's Anger would sometimes break out too fast: but Words were Wind, and
Clemency blew away his Threatenings beyond the River of Oblivion. If one of the
Extremes should be laid to his charge, it must be that of too much Mercy. Which
Camerarius could not deny to be in Melanchthon, p. 109. Facility, Remisness in
correction of Faults, a Spirit promiscuously indifferent to gratify deserving,
and undeserving. But as St. Chrysos. says upon that of the High Priest, Hebr.
5. apt to pass over the Ignorance, and Errors of others, Non ne satius est
propter misericordiam rationem reddere, quam propter severitatem? Is it not
more comfortable to the Conscience, to answer unto God for a dram too much of
Mercy, than for a Stone weight too much of Rigor, and Severity? Yet I have
heard it said, and read it, If Discipline had been observed by all the Bishops
as strictly, and without connivance to any, as it was by some, the Contumacy of
that Faction had not got the Head, which oppressed us all. The smart of the Wound
may incline them to that Judgment: Yet others have considered, that the
Opposition of the disorderly part was in an appearance so little, that their
Contradiction was rather in their Heart, than in their Practice: suspected for
no fast Friends to our Weal, and Ceremonies, but not declared for Enemies. Who
should understand them better than King Charles, in his last, and heavenly
Letter to the Prince? The Presbyterian Faction was great neither in Church or
State to Men's Judgments, says he. There was enough beheld in them to make our
Rulers vigilant, but not violent. For nothing is worse than to take too high a
strain, to trample upon that, which is not yet exalted. The Lord is angry at
Priests that are too hard, and imperious, Ezekiel. 34.4. With force and cruelty
have ye ruled them. And St. Hierom applied it to some rigid Overseers of his
own Age, by this Note upon it, Quod proprie ad supercilium Episcoporum
pertinet. Charity suffers long, and is kind, 1 Cor. 13.4. Suffering of those
that err is but a part of Duty: the disaffected must be won with kindness. To
suffer is praiseworthy before Men: to be kind also is praiseworthy before
God. It is a Point that may be argued plausibly on both sides. Justice will
say, Dum immoderate custoditur virtus humanitatis, solvuntur jura regiminis,
Greg. Past. Cu. Lib. 2. c. 6. A Bit must be put into the Mouth of the
Headstrong. Superiors shall have less trouble with Schismatics, if they hold
a strait hand over them. And he that shows them too much Favor, teaches
Innocents to offend. Mildness will say, Woe to them that turn aside the way of
the Meek, Amos 2.7. They that are compelled may cease to be contumacious, and
will begin to be Hypocrites. Terror may make them stoop, but gentleness will
sooner make them yield. Says Seneca, Iracundus Dominus quosdam ad fugam cogit,
quosdam ad mortem. A cruel Lord makes them desperate that are under him: but
another shall gain their Persons, if not their Consciences, by the benefit of
Facility. Certainly God directs the Magistrate that keeps the golden Mean.
Qualem nequeo monstare and sentio tantum, Juven. Sat. 7.

48. Episcopal vigilance has the Object best before it in Visitations. Which
were chargeable indeed to the poor Parsons and Vicars, in Linwood's days, as
appears in his Provincial, by such a sweeping Train as quartered upon them for
Hospitality. But our Bishops in their Triennials, taking but a slight and
inconsiderable Procuration for Homage, eased them of the Burden, and continued
the Benefit. They came to visit, and to water the Earth, Psalm. 65.9. not to dry
up, but to moisten the Furrows with the River of God: or as Symmachus
translates it, (...), to bring all to Maturity, which was sown by the Labors
of their Brethren. The like unto it was very ancient. For such were the (...)
in the oldest Canons; as the Word is taken for Circumspection, not for
Circumvention: Such as were commissioned to perambulate the Countries, where
Churches were gathered together, to behold their Order and stedfastness of
Faith, Coloss. 2.5. Upon that Head I will give account what Bishop Williams did
in particular Cases, two, and no more: Then his Discharge in the general
Meetings shall bound, and shut it up. The former was the Discovery of a
Mischief; and the killing of it in the Birth, in April, 1629. with which Jane
Hawkins teemed, a Prophetess (for she would go for no less) in the Parish of
St. Ives in Hunting donshire: Who took her Bed for a Sickness, and was in
perfect Health: and in that sickness had her Ecstasies, as it was bruited: and
in those Ecstasies uttered Verses in Rythm, full of Detraction and Injury to the
Authority of the Bishops, to the Church Way of England in the Liturgy, and not
sparing some Occurrences of the Civil Government. This was a Cheat, like that
of Mr. R. Hadocks in Oxford, in the beginning of King James's Reign Who was a
learned Impostor, preaching Latin Sermons of a very elegant Style in his sleep,
as the cunning Man would have it believed, as if those Enthusiasms were vented
by his Tongue, but he had no Sense of them in his Mind. And this tended to make
his Auditors conceive, that God caused him, like Balaam's dumb Beast, to teach
another Discipline, than that which was established. But this Woman, though
taught her Lesson by some more knowing than her self, uttered such Brainless
Verses, as might justify the common Ballads of the City; and was as bad at an
English Verse, as the old Monks were at a Latin, stufft with such frigid Jests,
as were able to cool the Bath. Ut proprius spectes lacrymosa poemata Puppi,
Horat. Ep. 1. Yet the more vile and plain, they liked the better with the rural
Hobs: and would have spread into Fairs, and Markets, and been sung by Fiddlers
Boys, if it had not been prevented. The Ecstasy, or Inspiration, believed by
some, was the offense like to do harm. Which the Bishop perceiving to be a
devised Villainy, disguised himself in his Face, and Habit, and obtained to
thrust in, with two more, among the Crew, at such a time, as they came to watch
for Oracles from the Mouth of this Poetress. Blind Guides are fittest for them
that would wander. When the Fit was upon her, one of her Intimates took her
Vapourings, as they came from her, Et jungere carmina curat, Virgil. Aen. lest
they should be lost like those of Virgil's Beldame. Which the Bishop taking out
of his Hand, found them altered for the better, and at that juncture revealed
himself to their Amazement, and made it evident to them, that were present,
that all their Feats were stark Juggling: that they took God's Name in vain, as
if those Notions came from God, which came from Fraud, and from Satan: false,
in much bitter without Charity: bold and rude, not savouring of the Style of
God, nor of any wise Man, but Mr. Wise the Curate. And although their
Conditions would excuse all that could be done to them in Severity, yet the
Bishop required no more, but that Mr. Tooky the Vicar, upon pain of Suspension
should read the Contents of a Paper sent to him, the next Sunday, April 29.
after the first Lesson in the Parish Church; then his Suspension to be staid,
otherwise to be declared. Which Contents are these: In those Sayings uttered by
Jane Hawkins of this Parish, either of late, or heretofore in her Sickness,
which seemed for the Manner strange and extraordinary, and expressed in Verse
or Rhyme, I do not conceive any Miracle at all: or for that manner in Verse or
Rhyme any Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, added over and above the Gifts, and
Parts of Nature: Nor would I have any Man or Woman of this Parish, to have a
higher Opinion, or Conceit of any Saying so uttered by the said Jane Hawkins.
And whereas my self, Mr. Wise my Curate, and my Son have taken and excerpted
many of these Sayings in Verse from the Mouth of the said Jane, in the Presence
of many Men, and Women in this Parish, and put the same in Writing, which is
conceived to be an Act that may prove scandalous to the Church, and State, I do
promise not to do so again, and am truly sorry that this Act of mine is any way
liable to such Construction, and will be grieved at the Heart, if by occasion
of the same the least Scandal, or Aspersion may fall upon this flourishing
Church or State, wherein I live: which I voluntarily profess in this open
Assembly. This was read, and the Offense was past over with this gentleness.
But the Vicar fell either into this Error again, or some other Contumacy. For
in fine he was deprived, as I find it in the Bishop's Papers. Their own
tatling, and venting their Malice by a talkative Woman, brought all this shame
upon them. They might have been as wise as the wild Geese that fly over the
Mountain Taurus, who carry a Stone in their Bills, to keep them from gaggling,
lest the Eagle should hear them, and seize upon them.

49. It is a slight occasion, yet an occasion to consider in a little the
Sibylls, and their Predictions from hence, because I have started a Feminine
Versifier, and a Prophetess (yea, what else?) among her Copes-mates. To come to
a short Trial, I lay nothing forth of the Fatidical Books, which Tarquin bought
of his resolute Chap-woman. They were consumed to Ashes in the Social War, and
not a Fragment saved. Nor of those Pieces which Tully quotes, Lib. 2. de Divin.
and Virgil, Ecl. 4. the two great Masters of the Roman Learning. It is not
certain whither they be extant in the Remains that are published, and to be
seen at this day. I meddle with nothing which their Messengers collected in
Asia and Greece, to furnish their Capitol with new Oracles. I look on no other
than those eight Books of Sibylline Prophesies, with the Fragments annexed, set
out by Opsopaeus, and others, and stand first in the Third Volume of the Greek
Bibliotheca Patrum. I look I say upon no more: and move no more than one
Question upon them. Whether all that is in them, nay whether any part of them,
was penned by Prophetesses living among the Gentiles, and living before the
coming of Christ Jesus in the Flesh? What I resolve in it I branch into seven
Conclusions. First, That some part of these Oracles, which we have in our Use
and Possession, were endited before the Incarnation of our Lord; and in some
Verses where Christ is foretold, that he should come, and reign upon the Earth,
together with the Dissipation of Idolatry, and other Heathenish Rites. For
albeit in those Passages they had not Credit with some in Eusebius's time: and
in St. Austin's time, the Prophesies of others, that were not Jews, concerning
Christ, were thought to be forged by Christians, Ci. Dei, Lib. 18. c. 47. Yet I
cannot incline to that Diffidence for this reason. Eusebius says they were
quoted by Clemens, known to Peter and Paul, either in an Epistle lost, or lost
out of that Epistle which is now come to light: Likewise by Justin Martyr,
bordering upon the Times of the Apostles. And they quoted them, as attesting to
the Honor of our Christian Cause. Therefore somewhat of the Evangelical relish
was in them, ante-nated, and in being before the Gospels were written.
Secondly, Antiquity has voiced it, that Women were the Authors of them; which
none has contradicted: The Wits of that Sex have excelled in Odes and
Madrigals. In holy Hymns also. As Deborah and Barac are named, Jud. 5. but
first Deborah, for chanting that Triumphal Song, which has as much Art, and
Dithyrambical Loftiness in it, as is in any Syrick Poetry, Greek or Latin. And
if we had more of Miriam's Song, Exodus 15.21. it would not come behind them.
And God did open great Secrets by such Instruments, as his Handmaids; who ever
did his wonders by weakest means: and provoked the World to attend to such
Conveyance, as was strange, and to which they were not wonted. Thirdly, They
were Gentiles: the Jews never owned them; and it is already proved, that they
lived before the Disciples were called Christians at Antioch. The very learned
Bishop Montague should have looked to it in his 3 Cap. of Acts and Monuments,
how he disputed, that they were all Gentiles; and casts about that the first
and chief lived in the Days of Abraham, It could not be Satan that provoked
them to utter such ^olywords: for then his Kingdom had been divided against It
self.
to have received her Instructions from Sem, when as there was no distinction
of Jew and Gentile. I would bring them nearer to the times of Grace, upon this
thought; that as some note of the Jews, that after their return from Babylon,
about Five Hundred Years before Christ's Nativity, they were in Limine
Ecclesiae, as it were in the Porch of the Church, and saw into the Mystery of
Salvation, more clearly for the generality of the People, than before: yet no
Prophet was among them: So the nearer the time drew, that the day spring from
on high did visit us, the more did Divinations abound among the Heathens, to
prepare them for that Blessing: as it may be enlarged from the Magi of the
East, that came to visit our Savior. Fourthly, I leave these Prophetesses to
God that knows the Heart, whether they had the Spirit of Belief, and of the
Knowledge of that they uttered; That is, whether they were impulled like
Balaam, Saul, and Caiaphas to vent that which they could not keep in; or
whether they were inspired like Esaias, and the Prophets of the Lord. There is
no History how she, or more she is lived, or what end they made, which were the
means, and none else, to decide it. Fifthly, Take the Sibylline Oracles in a
lump, so as now they are delivered to us, and they have a great of deal of
Addition, and Fraudulency in them: The Interlinings of a Christian Pen are as
manifest as the Sun at Noonday. Quo apertiora sunt, co mihi suspectiora, I
consent to Casaubon, Number. 17. Exercit. Is this Prophetical, or the Paraphrase
of the Gospel, that Christ should be baptized in Jordan, and a Dove descend
upon him? that he should feed Five Thousand with Five Loaves and Two Fishes,
and Twelve Baskets of the Fragments should remain? The very Words of St. John
put into Hexameters. What Prophet in the O.T. did ever collate Types, and
Antitypes together? Yet in these Poems ye may find that Moses lifting up his
Hands; when the People fought with Amaleck, did figure the Arms of Christ
stretched out upon the Cross. What a World of open, and direct Passages?
Gabriel by name saluting the Blessed Virgin: the Star appearing: the Shepherds
greeted by Angels, as they kept watch over their Flocks by Night. A very
Breviate of some Chapters in the N.T. Nor could they be of any other Profession
than Christian, that betray themselves, that Nero would persecute (...), our
part, which contends with the Heathen. But in the Fragments all is discovered,
(...); We of the holy, and heavenly Offspring of Christ. The learned Bishop
thinks to bear this down with a fieri Potest. God might make one, or more of
these, speak clearer than Moses, or any Prophet. But, with favor, he has not
done his Work, that makes a Conjecture possible, but that makes it probable.
Which the best Wit alive is not able to do in this case. Sixthly, The time when
these additional Verses were thrust into the Sibylline writings, appears to me
to be about the Year 170. For Lib. 5. Every one of the Caesar's is described by
a Numeral Letter, the first of his Name, from Julius the Dictator to Adrian,
whose Name is opened from the Adriatic Sea. Some small Intimation of each,
Antoninus follows. But then all that comes after, is shuffled up, nothing
clear, nothing particular, not a glance made at a succeeding Emperor, I have
heard good Antiquaries discourse, that our British Prophecies ascribed to
Merlin, were the Fruit of some Writer in the Days of Henry the Second. Merlin
the Fay, supposed to be a Wizard contemporary to King Arthur, lived Seven
Hundred Years before. But this Pseudo-Merlin handles many great Occurrences
punctually, and explicitly to the days of Henry the Second. In all that
follows are Tragelaphi, Satyrs and Griffins, Cocks and Bulls. The
Fortune Tellers casts Figures; but names no Person in the Sequel. So these
interloping Verses discover themselves to be the ^e of some that crowded them
in about the Reign of an Antoninus, where he had spent his Powder, and vented
all that he had seen with the Fore-face of Janus: but Postica caecus: he was no
Prophet, and could not see behind him. Seventhly, Far be it from my thoughts,
to have a Jealousy of the Holy Fathers, that lived about that time, for
dressing up the Sibylline Oracles with new Ornaments of their own patching.
They were full of Faith, and never feared, that Christ's Kingdom did need a Lie
to advance it. I have read of Stratagems military, and political: but Martyrs,
and Saints would never give countenance to Stratagems Theological. But who
looks most suspiciously, of all that lived in that Age, to bear the blame of
such a Forgery? It is an hard thing to find a Father for a Bastard. But,
Reader, What think you of Montanus, and his Baggages about him, Maximilla,
Prisca, Quintilla, called Cata-Phrygians from the place of their wont? These
put forth to be known, says Eusebius in his Chronicle, under M. Antoninus,
Anno. 1^^. That Is well for the time. Though Heretics, they were Christians,
and which is more, divulged for Prophetesses: and which is more than that,
famed for being great dablers in Verse. They bemoan the Phrygians thrice in
Sixteen Verses, Lib. 3. (...). The Phrygians will miserably perish. And further
they have not revealed themselves, that I find, in any thing that favored of
Montanus his Paraclete, or the Cata-Phrygian Heresy. I am only dubious
therefore in this last Conclusion. Perhaps I have not the Door by the Ring. He
that likes it not, let him bite a Bay-leaf, and make a better Divination. I am
not peremptory, that I have found out such Sibyls, as I looked for in Phrygia.
But I am sure our prudent Bishop discovered that Sibyl, that he looked for in
St. Ives.

50. His second and particular Visitation made amends for the former, at Little
Giding in the same County: where he found a Congregation of Saints, not walking
after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. Let this History give Glory to God in
their behalf: showing in a Touch, o^ what religious Grounds their Polity was
sounded: and how uncharitably suspected, and how unhappily dissolved. A Family
of the Farrars, the Mother, with Sons and Daughters of both Sexes in the plural
Number, other Branches of the Kindred, with Servants fit to be about them, were
collected into a House of their own at Giding aforesaid, purposing, and
covenanting between themselves to live in as strict a way, according to the
Gospel of Christ, as good Rules could chalk out, and humane Infirmity undergo.
This pious Design was proposed, and persuaded to them by the eldest Son, in
Holy Orders, bred in Clare Hall in Cambridge, an humble, diligent, devout
Servant of God, learned in the Theory, more in the Practice of Divinity. Their
House, fit for their Contemplation, stood alone. All were single Persons in it,
to the best I could learn. The Church was so near, that it was next to the Pale
of their Yard: the easier for them that frequented it so often. The whole
Village of Giding had been depopulated: or I am misinformed: the House which
contained them remaining for an whole Parish. The Tithes had been impropriated:
but were restored back again by the Mother, to the use of the Rector then, her
own Son; and to the succeeding Rectors, by a firm Deed, as Law could make,
which in its time shall be declared. They kept much at home: their turns of
Prayer, and Watching, which they observed, required it. Yet Visits, perhaps
once a Month, they made abroad: but shunning such Diversions, as much as they
could, which rob us of a great part of the Employment of our Life. Non horam
tecum esse potes: non otia recte -- Ponere: as an Heathen complained, Horat.
Sermon. 7. Strangers that came to them were fairly received: all the Tribe was
meek and courteous, and did let none depart, before they gave them an account
of their Conversation, if they asked it. And withal offered to read to them,
what was written in a Table hanging up in their Parlour, as follows: He that
by report of our Endeavors, will remonstrate that which is more perfect, and
seek to make us better, is welcome as an Angel of God. He that by cheerful
participating, and approbation of that which is good, confirms us in the same,
is welcome as a Christian friend. He that any way goes about to divert, or
disturb us in that which is, as it ought to be among Christians (though it be
not usual in the World) is a Burden while he stays, and shall bear his
Judgment whosoever he be. He that faults us in absence, for that which in
presence he made show to approve, shall by a double guilt of Flattery and
Slander, violate the Bands both of Friendship, and Christianity.

Subscribed, Mary Farrar, Widow, Mother of this Family, aged about Fourscore
Years: who bids adieu to all Hopes and Fears of this World, and only desires to
serve God.

Their Apparel had nothing in it of Fashion, but that which was common: yet
plain: and much of it for Linen and Woollen spun at home; such as modest
Christians thought to be the best Habit. Fateor vobis de pretiosa vest
erubesco, says St. Austin. Inter sermon. de diver. They gave no Entertainment but
to the Poor, whom they instructed first, and then relieved, not with Fragments,
but with the best they had: and having sufficiency did abound to every good
work, 2 Cor. 11.8. Their business was, either they were at Prayer, or at work;
nothing came between: the Devil had the less Power to tempt them, that he never
found them idle. They had the more leisure for work, because they fasted so
much: and their diet at their meals was soon dressed; beside, their daily
temperance was such, as they fat not long at them. It was not by fits, but by
constancy, that they subdued their Bodies by Sobriety. Their Bread was course,
their Drink small, and of ill relish to the Taste: that it was sure they
strived for nothing, that a dainty Appetite might long for: As Alms and Fasting
were frequent with them, so Prayers and Watching, with Reading and Singing
Psalms, were continually in their Practice. Note, The Word continually: For
there was no Intermission, day, nor night. Four times every day they offered up
their Supplications to God, twice in the Words of the Common Prayer in the
Church: twice in their Family, with several Petitions for their own needs, and
for such as desired, upon some special occasions, to be remembered by them to
God. At all times one, or more, by their Constitutions were drawn aside to some
private Holy Exercise. By night they kept watch in the House of the Lord, and
two by turns did supply the Office for the rest, from whence they departed not
till the Morning. Their Scope was to be ready like wise Virgins with Oil in
their Lamps, when the Bridegroom came. This was the hardest part of their
Discipline, that they kept Sentinel at all Hours, and Seasons to expect the
second coming of the Lord Jesus. Archbishop Spotswood tells us of the like,
Anno. 510. p. 11. That St. Mungo founded a Monastery in Wales, and took order
that the Monks had day and night divided among them, one Company succeeding
another: so that there were some always in the Church praying, and praising
God. In which, and in all the rest, What was there offensive? Nay, What not to
be admired? To leave it off, or to lessen it for the Girds of lavish Tongues,
were like the Man in the Dutch Epigram, That would eat nothing but Spoon-meat,
for fear of wearing out his Teeth. God be glorified for such, whose Prayers
were powerful and uncessant to pierce the Heavens. The whole Land was the
better for their Sanctity. They fasted, that Famine might not be inflicted upon
our common Gluttony. They abridg'd themselves of all Pleasures, that Vengeance
might not come down upon the Voluptuousness of this riotous Age. They kept
their Vigils all Night, that the Day of the Lord might not come upon us like a
Thief unawares, that sleep in security. The whole World was the better for
their Contempt of the World. As Philostratus says of the Hilobii, Lib. 3. vit.
Apollonii, (...). They were in the World, not of the World. All their Practice
was heavenly; a great deal of it had some Singularity, by the Custom of our
corrupt ways, who do not strive to enter in at the strait Gate, to come to
Blessedness.

51. The Fame of the Dispensations of this worthy Family, the further it was
heard abroad, the more it sounded like Popery. Envy or Ignorance could guess no
better at it, but that it was a Casa Professa, a Convent packed together of
some Superstitious Order beyond Seas, or a Nunnery, and that the Sufferance of
it looked toward a change in Religion. After the Sentence of Salust, Boni quam
mali sus^ectiores sunt: semperque aliena virtus formidolosa est. A Crew of
Bawds, and Gamesters might have set up a Standing with less prejudice than
these Devotionaries. But God help us, if the best Protestants (for these may be
called so) do look like Papists. Had they been hired with Gold, that so mistook
them, they could not have done more Credit, and Honor to our Adversaries.
Speak Sir Cenjur^r, we the true Children of the Church of England, were we not,
without departing from our own Station, capable of Mortification? of vowing our
selves to God? of renouncing the World? of Fasting? of Vigils? of Prayer
limited to Canons, and Hours, as any that say, and do not, that call themselves
from St. Basil, St. Bennet, or such other Institution? Not our Reformation, but
our Slothfulness does indispose us, that we let others run faster than we, in
Temperance, in Chastity, in Scleragogy, as it was called. The Diocesan, and
their Neighbor to this Family in a few Miles, was ashamed at these Scandals,
which he knew to be spiteful and temerarious. He knew the Occurrences of his
Precinct; as Apelles was wont to fit behind the Pictures hung up in his Shop,
to hear what Passengers that went to and fro did approve, or discommend. These
were known to the Bishop by right Information, from the time that they sealed a
Charter among themselves, as it were, to be constant and regular in their
Spiritual Discipline. But their Heavenly mindedness was best discovered to him,
when two Sons of Mrs. Farrar, the Mother and Matron of the Household, treated
with the Bishop, to endow the Church with the Tithes, which had been
impropriated: this was in Sept. 1633. as appears by a Smack of that which fell
from the Pen of the Donor, as follows: Right Reverend Father in God,
THE Expectation of Opportunities, having some Years whealed me off from the
Performance of this Business, I now think it necessary to break through all
Impediments, and humbly to present to your Lordship the Desires, and the
Intentions of my Heart. Beseeching you on God's behalf, to take them into your
Fatherly Consideration, and to give a speedy Accomplishment to them, by the
Direction of your Wisdom, and the Assistance of your Authority.




The rest is too much to be rehearsed, save a little of her Prayer to God in
the end of the Papers.

BE graciously pleased, Lord, now to accept from thy Handmaid the Restitution
of that, which has been unduely heretofore taken from thy Ministers. And as an
earnest, and pledge of the total Resignation of her self, and hers to thy
Service, vouchsafe to receive to the use of thy Church this small Portion of
that large Estate, which thou have bestowed upon her, the unworthiest of thy
Servants. Lord redeem thy Right whereof thou have been too long disseized by
the World, both in the Possessions, and in the Person of thy Handmaid. And let
this outward Seizure of Earth be accompanied with an inward Surprizal of the
Heart, and Spirit into thine own Hands: So that the Restorer, as well as that
which is restored, may become, and be confirmed thine Inheritance, etc.

The Bishop prayed to God that many such Customers might come to him: so
commended her free will Offering to God, and confirmed it. To make them some
amends for their Liberality to the Church, he devised how to give them
Reputation, against ad Detraction. Therefore in the Spring that came after, he
gave them warning on what Sunday he would Preach in their Church: whither an
extreme Press of People resorted from all the Towns that heard of it. In his
Sermon he insisted most, what it was to die unto the World: that the Righteous
should scarce be saved: that our right Eye, and our right Hand, and all our
fleshly Contentments must be cut off, that we may enter into Life. All tended
to approve the dutiful, and severe Life of the Farrars, and of the Church that
was in their House. After Sermon the Bishop took their Invitation to Dine with
them. But they were so strict to keep that day holy, that they left not a
Servant at home to provide for the Table. Yet it was handsomely furnished with
that which was boiled, and baked, that required no Attendance, to stay any one
from Church to look to it. By this visit the Bishop had the Means to see their
way of serving God; to know the Soundness of Doctrine which they maintained, to
read their Rules which they had drawn up for Fasts, and Vigils, and large
Distributions of Alms: In which he bad them proceed in the Name of God, and
gave them his Blessing at his departing. From thenceforth these faithful ones
flourished in good opinion. For it is certain what Quintilian has stated in
Gratory, Lib. 5. Nulla sunt firmiora, quam quae ex dubiis facta sunt corta. The
more a Case was doubted, the clearer it is, when the Doubt is resolved.

52. Yet nothing is so sound, but in time it will run into Corruption. For I
must not hold it in, that some Persons in Little Giding had run into excess,
and incurred offense, if the Bishop had not broken the Snare, which they were
preparing for their own feet. For after he had spoken well of the Family in the
Pulpit, and privately to diverse, some of them could not see when they were
well, but aspired to be Transcendants above their measure. For two Daughters of
the Stock came to the Bishop, and offered themselves to be veiled Virgins, to
take upon them the Vow of perpetual Chastity, with the Solemnity of the
Episcopal Blessing, and Ratification. Whom he admonished very Fatherly, that
they knew not what they went about. That they had no promise to confirm that
Grace unto them; that this readiness, which they had in the present, should be
in their will, without Repentance, to their Life's end. Let the younger Women
marry, was the best Advice, that they might not be led into Temptation And that
they might not forget what he taught them, he drew up his Judgment in Three
Sheets of Paper, and sent it them home, that they might dress themselves by
that Glass, and learn not to think of Humane Nature, above that which it is, a
Sea of Flowings, and Ebbings, and of all manner of Inconstancy. The Direction
of God was in this Council: For one of the Gentlewomen afterward took a liking
to a good Husband, and was well bestowed. Nothing is more suiting to this
Passage, than a Story out of Gregory the Great, concerning his Three Ants,
Homil. 38. Uno omnes ardore, codemque tempore Sacratae -- In domo propria
socialem vitam ducebant; and a little after he reports, that after this
admission into State of Virginity, one of them became a Wife. There are some
says Christ, that have made themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven's
sake, Mat. 19.12. with caution as they are able to receive it. (...), as
Eusebius has it: Virginity with free, and voluntary Destination, and
Continuation. A single Life, and grant it with a State of Prosession, is a
noble Course to serve God in: but limited to that time, as it serves for a
Help, and not turns to a Wound in the Conscience. God will not be cheated with
a Vow, to let one of his great Commandments be broken for it. St. Ambrose, who
knew the Heathen Customs of the Romans, writes to Valentinian. Vestales
habuerunt praescripta pudicu^^e tempora. The Vestals attended in their Maiden
Service but to a prescribed time. Baronius Appar. An. Par. 10. testifies for
the Pharisees, out of Epiphanius, Pharisaei determinatum castitatus, aut
continentiae tempus habebant. They devoted themselves to Chastity, or
Continency, not for ever, but to a determinate day. Grotius, in voto Pacis,
tells me more than I knew before. Optimum mihi viderur institutum patrum
Oratorii, and quorundam caetuum virginalium, ut libertas ducendi maneat. Grant
them but that liberty; or as the Council of Gangra calls it, Humanity from
their Governors, and the Scandal cease. Sir Roger Twisd^n, a noble Scholar,
goes further in his Apology against the Imputation of Schism, p. 97. That the
Kings of England reserved to themselves to dispense with Nuns, that they might
marry. They that yield to that Dispensation are on our side. As old as the
Widow Anna was, who departed not from the Temple, but served God with Fastings
and Prayers night and day, Luke 2.37. She was no Votary, that appears. Non
clare indicat sequesirationem, says Bishop Montague, Orig. Eccl. P. 2. page
163. But she left the World: that is, she used it, as if she used it not. Here
let the Danghters of Giding stay: and so they did. But nor they, nor the rest
staid many Years after, in that Godly repose. Otia bona frustra disseruntur,
ubi quiescere non licet, says Grotius, Belg. Hist. p. 314. It was out of season
to confine themselves to Holy rest, when Civil Dissentions began to flame, and
there was no rest in the Land. In those days there was no peace to him that
went out, nor to him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the
Inhabitants of the Countries, 2 Chronicles. 15.5. Religion, and Loyalty were such
Eye-sores, that all the Farrars fled away, and dispersed, and tock joyfully the
spotling of their goods, Hebr. 10.34. All that they had restored to the Church,
all that they had bestowed upon sacred Comeliness, all that they had gathered
for their own Livelihood, and for Alms, was seized upon as a lawful Prey, taken
from superstitious Persons. Procrin habe, dixit. Quod si mihi provida men's est,
Non habuisse voles, Metamor. Lib. 7. What will the Cruel, and the Covetous say,
when God shall require it at their hands?

53. With these Businesses at St. Ives, and at Little Giding; the Relation of
two particular Visitations is dispatched. Others were of things nothing
strange, nor of such moment and use. And for the Visitations general to the
whole Diocese, held according to triennial Spaces, a Collation, made by the
Bishop at one sitting, shall supply enough for all the rest. It was delivered
at Bedford, in the end of the Year, 1634. Which is so wise, and weighty, so
learned and pious, that the Maker himself could searce have mended it. No
excuse is offered that there is so much of it, because it is so good. The City,
which Ascanius built in Latium, was called Alba longa, says Livy, Lib. 1. So
this Speech is long, but so pure and white, that the beauty will plead for the
Bigness: or rather Bigness, and Beauty will make two several Praises: So he
begins. I must not tax the learned Preacher, as Alexander did his Father
Philip, that his Father had conquered and engrossed so much, that he had left
him but little to do. But I do really and heartily thank him for it. And
conceiving that part of our Duty, concerning the Preaching of God's Word, to be
gravely and sufficiently discharged by him, I must frame my Speech upon other
Heads, which would hardly, without much forcing be bidden, or invited into one
Text, and yet have been seldom omitted by Prelates of former times, when they
have held their Visitations. Not that I mean to trouble you with the Bead-roul
of Particulars cognizable by Bishops on such an occasion: for this is the Work
of Chancellors and Commissaries, who are also wearied with these Recitations.
But as the ancient Aristotelians were want to keep off their (...), their
Singularities from the Knowledge of the Understanding, and to leave them wholly
to the Survey of the Senses: So it is the Fashion of modern Visitors to digest
their (...), or Singularities into a Book of Articles, to be perused by the
Eyes and Ears of such, as may be concerned so to do, without drawing these
particular Points to any further Discourse, or settled Oration. What therefore
I shall insist upon, shall be some few Generals, which reflect either upon the
Visitation it self (the Act we have in hand) or the Persons visited, and
subjected to this Visitation. And those are either my Brethren of the Clergy,
or my good Friends, and Neighbors of the Laity. When I have spoken somewhat to
either of these in general, and recommended to the Clergy a particular I have
in charge, I shall trouble you no longer, but go on to the business of the day.

54. The Visitation of Bishops is no Jonas gourd, no filia noct^s, started up
in a Night of Popery: but a Tree set by the Apostles themselves, and watered
from time to time by the Canons of general Councils, in the fairest Springs of
the Primitive Church. For so I find Protestants of no mean Esteem, to wit, the
Four Writers of the Centuries, to retrieve the Root hereof from Acts, cap. 14.
And if you will observe the Place, there is scarce one particular prescribed by
the Canon Law, as essential to a Visitation, but you shall find it put in
Execution in that Chapter, you have them first (...), v. 22. they that
confirmed the Souls of all the Disciples, must among them confirm Children.
Secondly, (...), laying hands on Priests and Deacons, v. 23. Thirdly, (...), v.
24. Peragrantes, says Beza, a Word used for a Bishop's Visitation in the
Council of Chalons, under Charles the Great. Fourthly, (...), v. 25. making
their Sermons, or Collations. And Lastly, (...), returning back to Antioch from
whence they came, v. 26. Nor are we now forced to such a leap, as Dr. Mocket
out of Gratian would put upon us, for the Visitations of Bishops: To wit, from
these Acts of the Apostles, to the Synodus Tarraconensis, or the fourth Council
of Toledo, which is a (...), a huge wide Gulf of more than Five Hundred Years,
but are able to trace them all along in that interim of time, in most
Authentical Authors, and Histories. For, to say nothing of those Books of
Clemons Romanus, called by the Ancients (...), the Circuits of St. Peter,
because they were abused by old Heretics, as Epiphanius, and Athanasius often
tell us, that is most certain, that many Years after the Epoch of the Acts of
the Apostles St. Peter (...) (where you have the Word of art used to this day)
did often visit Pontus and Bithynia, says Epiphan. in his 27 Heresy, which is
that of the Carpocratians. And about the Year One hundred, after the Death of
the Emperor Domitian, Eusebius reports out of Clemens Romanus, (...), a Tale
and no Tale, but an unquestioned History, that St. John leaving Pathmos, went
up and down Asia, (...), setting Churches in order, Lib. 3. Hist. c. 23. From
hence indeed I must transport you to the 57 Canon of the 3 Counc. of Carthage,
that you may hear Aurelius, and his Brethren excuse themselves, for not
visiting Mauritania, and those other Provinces. But you must not dwell upon
this Council, being by the Canon it self turned back again for four, or five
Years, to that famous Council of Hippo, which opened to St. Austin, as yet a
Priest, Famae januam, the first Gate, and Entrance, as it were, to his Fame,
and Glory. For in this great Council at Hippo, says that other Council of
Carthage, it had been expressly determined, (...), that every Province, or
Diocese should be visited, in the very time of holding the Synod. Which Words
are to be well observed: For the Canon does not say, they were to be visited at
the Synod, or the Synod sitting. For the Law does not admit of that. Quia
multum operatur persona -- The Person of the Prelate bears a special part in
this kind of Visitation. But a general Synod was first called, and therein the
manner of the Reformation was settled, and agreed upon. Presently after that
the Fathers did (...), sever themselves (as Zonaras writes upon that Canon) and
fall in hand with their peculiar Visitations. And here I have brought you,
without all question, to the Fountain and Well head of our Canon Law, which
requires according to this Revisement of the Council of Hippo, that a Synod of
the Diocese, or Province be first called before they begin the Episcopal
Visitation. And however the Synods themselves be much out of use (in this
Kingdom especially, where none can be held, but by leave of the Prince) yet may
you still find upon your Accounts some few Splinters, and Remainders of the
same, when you do not pay your Procurations only, but your Cathedraticals, and
Synodals also. From this Third Council of Carthage, the righting of these
Visitation, was taken up by the Synodus Tarraconensis, by the Council of
Bracara, by the Fourth Council of Toledo, and diverse others in their Ages. From
these Councils they were fetched by Gratian into his Decrees: from the Decrees
by the Popes into their Epistles, and Decretals; and so continue to this day
our Jus Commune, our ordinary Law in that behalf. Nor were these Visitations of
Bishops sooner enjoined by the several Popes in their Laws, and Decretals, but
as things of sovereign, and principal use, they were taken up, and incorporated
into the Municipal Laws, of all our chief and best ordered Monarchies. Hence we
find them commanded the Prelates of Spain in the first Partida of King of
Alfonso's Laws, Title 22. Hence likewise enjoined the Bishops of France, by
Charles the Ninth, Henry the Third, and Fourth, in those general Estates of
Orleance, Bloise, and Paris. Hence also Visitations were to have been erected
here in England, by our Statute Laws, if those Thirty two Persons had ever met,
as appears by those preparations made by Archbishop Cranmer, and others,
Titulo de Visitationibus. Lastly, Upon the beginning of the Reformation in
Saxony, they kept a Visitation by the Super-intendents, An. 1527. much approved
of by the Lutherans of those times Osiander, and Bucholzerus. And therefore we
may not conceive of these Visitations, as of some imperfect and equivocal
Creatures, begotten but the other day ex fimo and limo, out of the Dregs and
Corruptions of the Church of Rome: but as of things of a more noble, and
ancient Descent, begun by Paul and Barnabas when they were Apostles, continued
by St. Peter and St. John as great Bishops: settled and righted in the Council
at Hippo, Anno. 393. From thence transcribed into the Third Council of
Carthage, Anno. 397. From thence revived at Tarraco under Hormisda, An. 517
From thence received into the Council of Braccara, Anno. 602. From thence into
the Fourth of Toledo, Anno. 633. From those Councils they were taken in by
Gratian into his Decrees. So into the Decretals: and from the Decretals, and
their Glosses, infused into the municipal, or common Laws of all the chiefest
Christian Monarchies. So much of a Visitation in general.

55. In the second place I am to make a short Exhortation unto you, my Brethren
of the Clergy. The Effect whereof shall be no more than what St. Hierom wrote
long ago in his Epistle to Nepotian, Qui servit ecclesiae, interpretetur primo
nomen suum. We that are received into any Place of Office in God's Church, must
before all other Lessons, be sure to understand aright the Titles of those
Offices, whereunto we are received. And that being once apprehended, Niti esse
quod dicimur: To endeavor with all might and main to be no other than we are
said to be. We Bishops are said to be Visitatores, the Temporary Visitors: You,
the Incumbents of Churches, to be Visores, the perpetual Seers of Christ's
Flock. Our Visitation is a frequentative Word. Frequentatio autem non est unius
actus continuatio, sed actus intercisi multiplicata repetitio, says Grosthead,
(once a famous Bishop of this See) in one of his Epistles. Frequentation does
not import any whole frame, or thread as it were of a continued Act, but the
Repetition, and often taking up of a broken, and interrupted Act. And therefore
in this spiritual Flock of Christ, being in their nature individua vaga, Cattle
of a scattering, and wandering Condition, there must be some to have an eye upon
them continually, some to attend from day to day, beside those Over-lookers
from year to year: Or where the Sheep are many, and the Pastures of a large
extent, from three years to three years, there must be Visitores, says
Grosthead, as well as Visitatores; continual Seers, as well as triennial
Overseers. And these are you, my Brethren of the Clergy, as by your
Institutions, Inductions, and Licenses may appear. Remember therefore in the
Fear of God, the Titles of your Offices, that you are those Videntes in
Israele, those continual, and immediate Seers of Israel. You are those that are
to see to the praying, to see to the Hearing, to see to the reverend and awful
Receiving, to see to the Manners and Living, to see to the Peace, and good
Agreeing, and, if you would see the Comfort of any thing you set, to see
thoroughly to the catechizing of your People.

56. Primum omnium fieri orationes, says St. Paul, Above all other Duties of a
Christian Man, bring your People as much as you can, to delight in praying.
When all is well, and thoroughly weighed, you shall find it the only Duty,
whereby a Christian does most resemble an Angel on Earth, and most ascertain
himself of being hereafter a Saint in Heaven. Say what you can (and you cannot
overreach or say too much) in the Commendations of Faith; yet must you confess
it is the Gift of the Holy Ghost. And behold Christ tells you plainly the Holy
Ghost it self is the Gift of Devotion, and Praying. And when we have read, and
studied, and heard never so much, yet tantum scimus, quantum oramus (as Luther
was wont to say) we may have more Notions, and Ginglings in the Head: but we
have no more, true feeling, and pricking Divinity at the Heart, than we have
Inclination to Devotion, and Prayer. And of all Prayers none so fit for
Devotion, as the Prayers of the Liturgy, understood by all, and known of all,
and therefore putting the poor People to no straining of the Understanding, but
to an intuitive Discourse, as it were of their Wills and Affections to Almighty
God. Whereas the long and tedious Prayer of a Preacher (especially where it is
crude and extemporary) sets the Mind of a Countryman on hunting so fast after
the unconth Words, which are the Body, that it loses all the Mellowness, as it
were the Ardency, and Devotion, which is the Spirit and Soul of true Prayer.
And the Laws do call upon us, to call upon you, to cause your Parishioners to
conn by heart these Prayers of the Liturgy, especially the Confession, and
Collects. That when they are assembled in the Church militant, a Type and
Representation of the Church Triumphant, they may not be musing, and studying
(for you do not read that the Saints and Angels do so in Heaven) but
sympathizing, and uniting their best Affections, with the Devotion of their
Minister. Secondly, You that are daily Seers of Christ's Flock must see to
their Pasture, that is their Hearing. For it is a fond and novel Conceit, to
cry up Praying, and with the same breath to cry down Preaching. That most
excellent Form of Prayer, How was it taught but in an excellent Sermon? Lord
teach us to pray: teaching is a necessary Forerunner of Praying. It is a kind
of new Monster, not heard of in former times, that Preachers should preach
against Preaching. And yet I must correct this Assertion. I confess it was
heard of long ago in the middle Ages, in the time of ignorant and stupid
Popery. Jo. Gerson preaching a Visitation Sermon before the Archbishop of
Rhemes, in the Year, 1408. says, that the Clergy of his times bent all their
Studies to enable themselves for Ruling, and Governing, leaving the Mendicants,
and the Curates only to supply their Preaching. But, as I told you before, this
was in the time of the gross and dull, not of the refined, and quintessential
Popery. The Dominicans of Spain, the Minors of Italy, the Oratorions of France,
and the Jesuits over all the World are more than sufficient Preachers: So that
this is no Age for us to preach against Preaching. I will conclude this Point
with a Saying, not out of Calvin, or Beza, who may be thought partial, but out
of a Prosne or Homily, made on purpose to be read before the Clergy and Laity
in all Visitations, as I find it in a Book of this Subject written by one Jo.
Franciscus Pavinus two hundred Years ago. Says he, Fides sine operibus vana,
sine verbis nulla. Faith without doing will prove little: but without Preaching
it will prove nothing at all. Thirdly, You that are the Seers of God's People
must see to their due, and awful receiving of the high Mysteries. (...), as
Damascen calls them, those pure and hallowed things of God. Especially that
(...), that (...), as St. Chrysostom. terms it, that Super-coelestial Food in the
Lord's Supper, which a Christian ought not once to think of, without a sacred
kind of Horror, and Reverence. Here is an Action, I confess, wherein you can
hardly exceed, either by expressing in your selves, or by exacting from others,
any Circumstance of Awe and Reverence. I know it is safest for a Child of the
Church, to hold him still to the Canons of the Church. But if in any one thing,
surely in this, the Canons are rather to be out-bidden, and exceeded, than any
way neglected or abated. The Fear, or rather the Experience, of the Peoples
falling from extremity to extremity in this case, from an extremity of
Superstition (which the six Articles had bred in the Hearts, or at leastwise in
the outward Gestures of Men) to an extremity of Profanation, did much trouble
the Magistrates in the beginning of the Reformation: You may see it clearly in
the Letters of the Lord Protector, and the rest of the Council, which are
printed in the Book of Martyrs: In the Injunctions of King Edward: in the
Injunctions of Queen Elizabeth: And especially in that Act of Parliament still
in force, which enables the King from time to time, to add what Ceremonies, and
Decencies he shall hold sitting, for the awful and reverend, as well
administering, as receiving of this heavenly Sacrament. And be not afraid to be
accounted herein too too diligent and ceremonious. For we know, that in
Mysteries of this high Nature, Ceremonies wait close upon the Substances. They
may as well say (and peradventure will ere long) that an Action of this kind
may be done without a Priest, as without a troublesome solemn Ceremony. Gerson
in his Sermon de Coena Domini says, Spiritualia sine temporalibus diu esse non
posse, that things Spiritual would wax cold without things temporal, was a
Proverb cried up by the worst of the Prelates: but I am sure that in these high
Mysteries, Spiritualia sine temporalibus esse non posse: that the Spiritual
Graces (not essentially for want of any Virtue in them, but accidentally, by
reason of such Weakness, and Imperfection in us) will fail of their Operations,
without temporal Ceremonies, is the Doctrine, not of the worst, but of the best
both of the Greek, and Latin Fathers.

57. Fourthly, You that are the Seers of Israel must see into the Lives, and
Manners of your People. Which is the sooner done, if you look well to your own.
For it is most true on this case, what Gerson says, Vox operum fortius sonat,
quam vox verborum: the sound of your Sermon strikes nothing so shrill in the
Ears of your Parish, as the sound of your Life and Conversation. Take heed
therefore you do not Lingua struere, and manu destruere, as St. Bern. speaks,
build with the Tongue, and pull down with the Hand. For the Woman's Frump,
which Gerson, often cited, writes of, runs as well in English, as in other
Languages; who being demanded, Si sermo factus esset, if the Sermon was done,
answered, the Sermon was ended, but it was not done. Dictus quidem est sermo,
sed non factus, It was said by rote, but it was not done. Dicunt emm hic
sacerdotes, and non faciunt: For the Priests with them used only to say, but
seldom to do, or to perform their Sermons. Fifthly, If you be those Seers the
Canons require, you must see to your Peoples peace, quietness, and good
agreeing: That your Neighbors do not spend their Bodies, their Minds, their
Estates, and Childrens Bread in brabbles, quarrelling, and Law-suiting. Truly I
am afraid, that Churchmen in England have much to answer, for the Calamities
of the Laity in this kind. Yet have you one by one, by the Pole as it were, in
the Presence of God, and your Mother the Church, promised the Bishop better
things at your Ordinations, to wit, that you would, as much as lay in you
maintain Peace, and Quietness among all Christian People, and especially among
those, that were committed to your Charge, your Friends and Neighbors of the
Parish. And I shall not need to strain my Logic to let you see, how properly
and essentially this civil part of a Justice of Peace, is woven into the Duty
of every Pastor, and Minister. For without this Peacemaking, you may preach
indeed, but in effect to no Parish, or Congregation. Because Countrymen,
distracted with Lawsuits, receive little good by you. And being sometime in
the midst of the Church, are as though they were not there. Let them say what
they will, it is too true, that in saying the Lord's Prayer after you, they
pray for Forgiveness without forgiving: and too often, God knows, hear your
Sermons with little heed, or listening. For the poor Souls, all that while the
Hourglass runs, have Manum in Aetolis, animum in Cleopidis, as it is said of
one in Plutarch: they have their Eye, it may be, upon the Preacher, but their
Mind upon their Attorney, Proctor, or Solicitor. Yea but you are most of you
learned Men, and can undeceive your People from these Fantasies. You can show
them out of Schoolmen, Quodlibets, and Casuists, that Men may go to Law, and
yet be in charity. And I must be bold to tell you back again, that People will
be People for all your distinctions, and unless you can persuade them to be in
Charity without Law, for all your Schoolmen, Quodlibets, and Casuists, the
poor Swains will be as they were, in Law without charity. To conclude this
Point, where Brother goes to Law with Brother, and Neighbor with Neighbor
about Matters of small moment, I dare not say as St. Paul does, that there is
not a wise Man, but I will be so bold as to suspect, that in that unhappy Town,
there is scarce a wise and conscientious Minister. Lastly, If you be Seers of
Christ's Flock, do as Jacob did, that thriving Shepherd, look well to your
Sheep, when they are in conceiving. What Color and Tincture you give them in
that hint, you shall know them by it for many Years after. Never look that that
Man should profit at a Sermon, whom you never seasoned in his Principles of
Christianity. A Sermon (says St. Cyril) is a good thing, but not so
conditioned as a Catechism. Some Lessons, forgotten in the one, are but loose
Stones in a Wall, which may be fastened again upon a second opportunity: but
Ignorance in those Principles is a certain great Stone mis-lay'd in the
Foundation, which hazards the ruin of the whole Building. And again says that
Father, the erecting of a Christian, is like the planting of a Tree; if you
give it not Earth, and rooting at the first, you can never repair it with
watering, and pruning. Catechism, as St. Basil calls it, is (...), the
preparing Colors, wherein you must dip the People, without the which, for all
your Sermons, you shall never find them Purple in grain: but pale and wan as
long as they live: as ill-grounded Colors use to do, ever and anon staining,
fading, and decaying I will conclude this Point with an Observation of that
grave Divine Jo. Gerson, in a Sermon of his, which I find also in a little Book
of Peter de Aliaco, De reformatione ecclesiae. Ecclesiae reformatio debet
inchoari a parvulis: If ever you will reform this Church of Men, you must begin
with that Church of Children. And this is all that I shall say unto you in
general, my good Brethren of the Clergy.

58. For you my honest Friends and Neighbors of the Laity, I shall say nothing
to you of any Particulars, whereunto you are to answer by reason of your
Offices, but transfer you wholly in that respect to those Articles, which you
have already received. But by way of general Exhortation, I am by the ancient
Forms of Visitations in this kind, to recommend unto you, for your Souls good,
two principal Instructions, the one in point of Belief, the other in point of
Practice. In point of Belief, I must require your assent, without wavering or
hesitation, and to continue the remembrance of that Article of your Creed, the
Resurrection to Judgment at the last day. And for your Practice, I shall desire
you for your own great good, as well in this, as in the Life to come, to
meditate day and night upon that Sentence of our Saviors, Mat. 7.12. All
things whatsoever you would that Men should do to you, do ye even so to them.
For the Resurrection to Judgment, it was an Article decried by the Heathen,
from the first hour it came to be preached: it was mocked at in St. Paul's
time; Risus gentium, the Flout of the Nations in Tertullian's time; (...), an
universal Laughter in St. Basil's time: and the Point of Christianity least
brook'd in St. Austin's time. And therefore, peradventure, enjoined the Bishops
to be inculcated thus into the People, ever since the Braccaran Council. But
however you may conceive it, perhaps, unnecessary at this time, or in this
Auditory. For, God be praised, you are all good Christians, can say your Creed,
and use to repeat it orderly after your Minister. That Is well done. Yet must
you know further, that it is not enough to say this Article with the Priest,
unless you remember to practice it with all the People. This is an Article, not
penned for the Tongue alone, but for the Hands also of a true Christian. It is
not enough to say it in Confession, if you act it not in Life and Conversation.
Do you therefore continually mind that dismal sound, that St. Hierom speaks of,
Arise you Dead, be changed you Living, and come to Judgment. If you all do so,
I shall confess my Exhortation needless, and shall believe, that you believe
indeed the Resurrection to Judgment. But on the other side, if upon every
slight Motion and Temptation, you surrender up the Members of those Bodies of
yours, that shall rise to Judgment, as Servants to Sin, your Tongues for Lying,
your Hands for Stealing, your Brains for Cheating, your Hearts for Malicing,
your Feet for running to shed Blood: if you make the Members of Christ the
Members of an Harlot: if you have all the reason in the World, upon the
sounding of that Trump, to call for the Mountains to fall upon you, and the
Hills to cover you, that you may not come to Judgment, I must tell you, that
showing your Faith no better by your Works (as St. James bids you) I may
believe that you can rehearse; but I cannot believe, that you do mind or
believe (at leastwise while you are in flagranti crimine, in the height, and
meridian of your Sins) the Resurrection to Judgment. It is not enough for you
to believe, but also with all your might and power to live the Resurrection to
Judgment.

59. And were you but once past this first, you would quickly take out your
second Lesson, whatsoever you would that Men should do unto you, so to do unto
them, it being impossible for a Christian Soul to do otherwise, that were
actually and thoroughly seasoned, with a practical Belief of the Resurrection to
Judgment. This Sentence, and Rule of Justice, and Charity, found out of purpose
by our Savior Christ for plain and simple Men, that are able to bear away no
longer discourse, to direct them to live peaceably in this Life, and happily in
that to come, if you can remember, and put in use that one Sentence, it is
enough, Do as you would be done unto. Why then, will some say to me, you are
come to this Visitation to bring us nothing, or almost nothing, a short
Sentence to make a Posie in a Ring. O for all that do not disrespect the
Littleness. It is Sententia bracteata, a Sentence to be written in Plates of
Gold. And heretofore it has been written in the Palaces of Kings and Emperors.
It is a Sentence that procured ease with Anton. Pius, and respect to the
Christians with the Emperor Severus, as Historians report. Julius Capitolinus
indeed makes some question, whether that Emperor learned this Sentence from the
Jews, or from the Christians. But we make no question at all, but he sucked it
with his Milk from his Mother Mammaea, the Scholar of that great Origin, as
Casaubon notes upon that Author. I tell you (dearly Beloved) Do as you would be
done unto, is a Sentence, which once put in practice, would make an end of a
World of Sentences: nay of all the Sentence; in this World, and peradventure of
those we fear in the World to come. You are many of you afraid of the
Ecclesiastical, and many more (as you have more reason) of the Temporal Courts.
Your Purses may suffer in the one: and your Persons, beside your Purses in the
other. And yet do all the bitter Sentences of either Court issue from this
Spring, from this only Spring, that either the Plaintiff, or the Defendant, or
the Witness, or the Advocate, or the Proctor, or at the furthest the Judge
himself has quite forgotten this little Sentence, to do as he would be done
unto. Yea, but is not this University Learning, and above the apprehension of a
plain Man? No; St. Chrysostom. says you need not repair to any Man to learn it. You
have it (...), at home in your own breast. It is a Flower that grows in your
own Garden. It is a Notion, or Apprehension planted by the Finger of Nature in
your own Bosom. As for Example, Would you know whether you may not, parle
droict de bien-seance, as the Trench Masters use to say, by a certain Point of
Law, which I may call your better fitting and accommodation, make bold with
your Neighbors Goods in such a case, with his Lands in such a case, his Fame
in such a case, his Wise in such a case, or any thing that is his, as you will
make the case? And yet do all these Feats cleanly and handsomely, with a color
at the least of some Law, or Equity? You need not study Ulpian, Bartolus, or
Baldus in this Point. You need not turn over the Reports of the Law; or the
Year-books of the Judges. Unclasp only the Book in your own Bosom, in your own
Conscience, and mark well what is written therein. You have your Demurrer
argued there without Judge, or Counselor. Do you find it there registered, that
upon the putting of the like case, your self would be content to have your own
Goods, your own Lands, your own Fame, your own Wise, or any thing that is yours
taken from you? and withal to make the Matter a little worse, and more
picquant, to have a flourish of Law or Equity cast upon the Case, to bereave
you of that poor, and last Comfort, the Pity, and Compassion of the Beholders?
If you find there no such case reported from yourselves, moot it not upon any
other: but listen unto Christ's little Sentence, and do as you would be done
to. Yea, but perhaps I would be done to in my Temptations, what you will not
admit, I should do to another as in the Case of Fornication, or Adultery; shall
I do in that case, what I desire to be done to me? And therefore the Rule is
not so safe as it is represented. Yea, but then if you will any thing, as this
Rule would have you to will, you must will voluntate rationali and discreta,
says Alexander Ales, with a rational and discreet will, and then you shall not
miscarry. Or you must do as you would have Men do, homines, non bruta, as you
would have Men, and not Beasts do unto you, says Albertus magnus. But those
that will do unto you any such filthiness, as you speak of, are as St. Paul
calls them, Men after the manner of Beasts. And therefore in all your Actions
whatsoever, remember still this little Sentence, as you desire to avoid those
other Sentences, some in this Life, and some in the Life to come. Which is all
I shall say unto you my good Friends, and Neighbors of the Laity.

60. Now that particular thing, which I am to recommend to you, my Brethren of
the Clergy, not falling properly within the Limits of a Visitation, but put off
by my self for a Year or two, in hope of this, or the like opportunity, is
Subsidium charitativum: which, so as it tend to a public, and no private end,
Bishops by Law may move unto their Clergy. It is a charitable Benevolence, or
Contribution for St. Paul's Cathedral Church, seated in London, which, as you
know, is our (...), as he said he of Athens, our England of England, and our
Landscape and Representation of the whole Island. For here strangers no sooner
arrive, but they first take unto themselves, and then vent abroad unto others,
a Scantling and Platform of the British Government, as well in Matters
concerning the Church, as in those that touch upon the State, and Commonwealth.
Here if God's worship be decently performed, his Word learnedly Preached, his
Sacraments reverently administered, his material Houses polished, and repaired,
especially this great and huge Fabric, the City, as it were of the City it
self, and a place of continual resort both to our own and other Nations, then
presently omnes omnia bona dicere, the Mouth of Detraction is quite stopped,
the Priests and Jesuits are blank and silenced, the Government in Church and
State is generally approved: And (which is more considerable than all the rest)
God himself is magnified and glorified, for giving a Nation Eighty years of
Peace and Plenty, which had the Heart to return some little Share, somewhat at
the least, unto him again. But should this Minster still remain (as of late it
did) a great heap of mouldering Stones, or rather a little Mountain of Dust and
Rubbish; were our Churches in the inner places of this Isle never so repaired,
as I doubt it much, yet would Strangers, out of Error, and Seminaries, out of
Rancour, possess the World, That since the Reformation God's Houses in England
are become the Habitations of Dragons, and a Court for Owls; that Satyrs do
dance in them, and Beasts of the Field do roar in them. Lastly, That when Pater
Noster had reared them up to touch the Heavens, Our Father has pulled them
down to the Dust of the Earth. And is it nothing thus to become a Reproach and
Proverb in all places? Nothing that God's Glory should be thus impaired?
Nothing that his Gospel should be thus blasphemed? God forbid, but we should
all be sensible of it. And thus it must needs be, unless these great Fabrics,
reared at the first, for the main of the Work, by Indulgences and Superstition,
be repaired again by the bountiful Devotion of King and People. But the Misery
of it is this; that People in all Ages are sound to be People, that is far more
easily noosed and cheated, than taught, enlightened, or persuaded. Whereas the
Case, God be thanked, is otherwise, with you, my Brethren of the Clergy, whose
advantage of Breeding makes you better understand a Motion from your King, so
vigilant and attentive to any Motion of yours, especially when it comes upon
you as this does, backed and accompanied with all the Reasons and
Demonstrations of Piety and Policy. Beside that, the Care of our Metropolitan
has been such, that your Contribution may, without offense, be so minced and
distributed to Years and Half-years, as that it shall become very easy and
portable, doing good abroad, without hurting at home, or impairing in any
sensible measure your private States or Fortunes. I will leave it thus unto
your own Considerations, without accumulating more Reasons or Motives, left I
might seem to doubt of your Affections to any reasonable Proposition, whom I
have found for these Fourteen years, as loving a Clergy to any Motion of mine,
as I have been unto you, by reason of some Misfortunes, an unuseful and
unprofitable, yet a most affectionate, Bishop.

61. Thus he ended; and thus was the Visitation perfumed with the sweet Gums of
his Eloquence: Perhaps the Smell is too strong for them that loved him not, and
whose contumelious Writings and bitter Words eat into his Credit like
Quicksilver. They will be wiser when Truth and Charity meet together in them,
which Graces they had need to pray for. Envy, like a Kite, sits upon the top of
the tallest Tree in the Wood. A drowsy Bishop, that had bestirred himself in
nothing to be known to Posterity, no better than a silly Consul, that served
for nothing but to know the Fasti by his Name, this man should have escaped the
Lash, it may be, had the good word of our common Jeerers; but offer another
unto them that has lived in Action and Renown, as our Prelate did, they will
pull him out of his Grave, as one Pope served another, to censure him. How
ready have they been either to raise or take up Reports to wound him? Reports
spread far and wide by the King's unfortunate Regiments, that reveli'd it with
all kind of Insolency round about him in Wales, whose ungoverned looseness the
Bishop could not endure, but opposed them stiffly; wherein, it may be, he lost
his Judgment, considering their Strength and Rudeness. He loved the King's
Cause, but not his Army, whose debauched Carriage and little Hope of Success,
methinks I read in Tully's Epistles, lib. 7. epist. 3. to M. Marius, concerning
Pompey's Swordmen, Extra Ducem, paucosque praeterea (de Principibus loquor)
reliqui primum in bello rapaces: deinde in oratione it a crudeles, ut ipsam
victoriam horrerem. Maximum aes alienum amplissimorum virorum: Quid quaeris?
nihil boni praeter causam. These are they that brought up Tales and Tidings of
the Bishop in their Knapsacks, to London; and on such Stuff our History-men,
Ecclesiastical and Civil, are pleased to insist. Why did they pretermit the
noble parts of his Episcopal Government, digested in this Work in so many
Paragraphs? which are so unquestionable, that they were seen and known to
Thousands. Nam lux altissima fati-occultum nihil essesinit, Claud. Paneg. 4.
Honor. What Spite is this, to be silent in that which was certainly so, and to
engrave with a Pen of Steel that which was ignominous, uncertain, nay, a
falsity which has traveled hither out of the Mountains, 200 Miles? So Jos.
Scaliger revealed his Disdain against some Critics, in his Notes upon Manil.
p. 175. Ubi reprehendendi sumus, tunc nominis nostri frequens mentio; alias
mirum silentium. I need no Pardon, that I could not hold in to leave this
Admonition behind, at the last Stage of his Episcopal Work, his general
Visitation, which was applauded much by all, except two sorts of men. Some that
had not done their Duty, and were mulcted, Quid tristes querimoniae, si non
supplicio culpa reciditur, Horat. Od. 24. lib. 3. such could not escape
Censure, who suffered with moderation, by one that appeared in his temperate
Judicature rather to be above the Faults than above the Men. Two others, and of
the Ministry, were sullen, because they did not speed in their Presentiments
according to their mind; the reason was, the Complainants were found to be
rugged and contentious, not giving good Example of Yielding and Peace.

62. Let me cast in a small handful of other things fit to be remarked: In
adject is mensura non quaeritur. The Bishop of Lincoln is a Visitor of some
Colleges by their local Statutes in both Universities: This Bishop visited
Kings-College in Cambridge, upon the Petition of the Fellows thereof, anno
1628. when he showed himself to be a great Civilian and Canonist, before those
learned Hearers; but the Cause went for the right worthy Provost Dr. Collins,
in whose Government the Bishop could perceive neither Carelessness nor
Covetousness. The most that appeared was, That the Doctor had pelted some of
the active Fellows with Slings of Wit: At which the Visitor laughed heartily,
and past them by, knowing that the Provost's Tongue could never be worm'd to
spare his Jests, who was the readiest alive to gird whom he would with innocent
and facetious Urbanity. The Provost of Orial-College in Oxford, Dr. T^lson,
with others of his Society, visited the Bishop at his Palace of Bugd^, with a
Signification to the Bishop, that they might eject one of the Members of their
Foundation, Mr. Tailour. The Bishop saw there was small reason to raise such a
Dust out of a few indiscreet words; yet he satisfied Dr. Tol^on, that Mr.
Ta^our should depart, so it were with a farewell of Credit; and he liked Mr.
Tadour so well, that he took him into his own House, till he had provided the
Living of Hempsted for him. As (...) said of his own Brother in Erasm. Epist.
p. 417. Illius mores tales sunt, ut omnibus possint congruere. A benevolent
Nature will agree with all men, and please the Adversaries of both sides. Those
of young and tender years were much in his Care, as appeared, that he seldom
traveled, but Notice being given before, he staid at some Town or Village, to
confirm such as were but even past children, to lay his Hands on them, and to
bless them, and did it ostener than the 60 Canon requires: An ancient and an
admirable Order, when such were presented as were before made ready by being
exactly catechized. And for Childrens sakes he listened much, what good
Schoolmasters he had in his Diocese, that bare the irksome and tedious Burden,
to rear up a good Seminary for Church and State; such he valued, and thought
their Place was better than is usually given them in the World. They are the
tertia that make up a happy Corporation, as Charles the Fifth thought, who
entering into any Imperial City or Burough, was wont to ask the Recorder that
did congraturate him, Have you a good Magistrate? Have you a good Pastor? Have
you a good Schoolmaster? If he said Yes; Then all must be well among you, said
the Emperor. Our Bishop had the opportunity to consecrate Churches new
re-edisied, and Chapels erected, which he performed with much Magnificence and
Ceremony, that the Houses of God, his Houses of Prayer, might be had in a
venerable regard. Nothing was more observed in that Performance, than that at
the hallowing of a Chapel, belonging to the Mansion-place of Sir Gostwick in
Bedfordshire, the Knight's Son and Heir being born deaf and dumb, and
continuing in that defect, no sooner did the Bishop alight, and come into the
House, but the young Gentleman kneeled down, and made signs to the Bishop, that
he craved his Blessing, and had it with a passionate Embrace of Love. A sweet
Creature he was, and is, of rare Perspicacity of Nature, rather of rare
Illumination from God, whose Behavior, Gestures, and zealous Signs have
procured and allowed him admittance to Sermons, to Prayers, to the Lord's
Supper, and to the Marriage of a Lady of a great and prudent Family, his
Understanding speaking as much in all his motions, as if his Tongue could
articulately deliver his Mind. Nor was any of the Prelacy of England more
frequented than this Lord, for two things: First, by such as made Suit unto
him, to compound their Differences, that they might not come to the chargeable
and irksome attendance of the Courts of Law. Aversos solitus componere amicos,
Horat. Sermon. 5. And so many Causes were referred to him, and by no mean ones,
that he continued, like a petty Chancellor, to arbitrate Contentions. Secondly,
Sundry did appeal to his Judgment for Resolution of Cases of Consciences (and
most in Matrimonial Scruples) and of intricate Points of Faith, as about
Justisication and Predestination; in which, when he thought the doubting Person
would not be contented with Discourse, he gave them his Resolutions very long
and laborious, in Writing; which gathered together, and as I have seen them
digested, would have made an handsome Tractate, but the worst Visitor that ever
came to a Bishop's House seized on them, and never restored them. This was
Kilvert, a vexatious Prosecutor of many in the Court of Star Chamber, for the
King, whose Lineaments are drawn out in the Ninth Book of Apul. Metam. Omnia
prorsus, ut in quandam comorum latrinam, in ejus animum vitia consluxerunt.
Every Beast has some ill Property; this Beastly Fellow had all. He stands too
near so good a Subject as is in hand, for this is the lively Image of a
renowned Bishop, the Image but of one, though the good Parts of many may be
concentred in this one; as the Agrigentine Painter made Juno, by the Pattern of
five well-favour'd Virgins. All that I have drawn up of his Pastoral Behavior
was seen in the Daylight; therefore, as St. Paul said of the Corinthians, whom
he had commended, so I may with Modesty apply it to my Subject; If I have
boasted any thing of him to you, I am not ashamed, 2 Cor. 7.14. Nor is this all
of him in that Holy Charge, not by a great deal, but so much as is preserved in
Script and Memory after the ransacking of his Papers: Therefore, as Tully
writes, lib. 3. de Orat. Majus quiddam de Socrate quam quantum Platonis libri
prae se ferunt, cog^andum: That Socrates was a braver man than Plato had made
him in his Dialogues. So I have not made Dr. Williams so complete a Bishop as
he was; he was more than I have described him, and would have been far more
than himself had attained to, if the Messenger of Satan had not been sent to
busset him in many Troubles and Trials, lest he should have been exalted above
measure.

63. After much that has been dilated in this Book, pleasing for Peace and
Honor, Praiseworthy for Merit and Virtue, I must make room for Grief; it will
thrust in into every Registry and Chronicle, into the remembrance of any man's
Life, which is continued from the beginning to the end. Says ^lato in his
Phaedon (after his way of a Fable-frame of Philosophy) when Jupiter could not
make Joy and Sorrow agree, (...). He yoked their Heads together, that they
could never be parted: Therefore those things which God's Providence has
joined inseparably, no Pen can put asunder; so that the Current of this
History, hitherto clear, must fall into a dead Sea-like Jordan. The Good which
this famous Bishop did, must be continued with the Evil which he suffered: As
Polusiote writes of Jeremias, that he was (...), the most passive, the most
persecuted of all the Prophets: So of all that this Church had preferred to the
like Dignity, (except them that resisted to Blood) none was wounded with so
many Darts of Despite as this man, or aviled with so many Censures, or stood
so long in chase before his Enemies. Having delivered up the Great Seal, from
the first day that he removed to Bugden, all Promises were broken, which gave
him Assurance of Countenance and Safety; and the place to which he was bidden
to go, as to a Sanctuary, assorded him no more shelter, than an Arbor in the
Winter against a Shower of Rain. Therefore to keep off Mistakes, be it noted,
as to the time, it was the same, wherein he lived so like a Bishop, and wherein
he suffered so like a Confessor. But Method distinguishes those Troubles by
themselves, like Tares gathered from the good Wheat, and bound in their own
Bundles. Some are greater, practiced upon no Subject before, nor fit to be done
hereafter. Some are lesser matters, yet not unworthy my Hand: When they are
disposed Limb by Limb, and in order as they were done, there will be much of
them (I would they had been less) and be known to be enforced, without Shame of
the World) with so much Wrong and Rancour that an indifferent Reader will
depose, there needs no Fiction nor Color, to make them worse than they were.
Those that were outdone in the first place, were outgone by them that came
after: Quid prima querar? Quid summa gemam? Pariter cuncla deslere juvat. Seen.
Her. Oet. What the last and greatest should have been is unknown, because they
came not to that Birth: It was decreed by Men, but undecreed by GOD, who sent
his Judgments upon all, and brought both Actors and Sufferers to utter Ruin by
that Parliament, which held us as long as the issue of Blood held the Woman in
the Gospel, Twelve years, Mat. 9.20. It was no thanks to his Foes to give over
then: It was strange they would not give over till then, when one black day,
like a Doomsday, blended the whole Hierarchy, and (with their Lordships Leave)
the Nobility in one mass of Destruction. Those underfatigable Enemies that
pursued him, knew that he could never fall so low while he was alive, but that
there was Worth, which was like to get up, and rise again: He had never felt
such Sorrow if he had been contemned. It was his ill luck to be feared, because
of the great Powers of his Mind, whom none had cause to fear, since he never
fought Revenge. Then they saw he would stand upright, and never stoop, after
they had loaded his Back with so many Burdens, which made them obstinate to
proceed, and labor in vain to crush out that which was not Wind, but Spirit.
The Mountainous Country of Wales, wherein he was born, breeds hardy men, but
sew his Equals, which Courage is no more to be forgotten, than the twelve
Labors of Hercules. Let Xenophon speak for Socrates, so must I for this Hero:
(...) Apolog. in sine. Observing the Wisdom and Generosity of the Man, I cannot
but remember him; and when I remember him. I cannot but praise him. Neither
were it useful (I will subscribe to it) to bring up his Sufferings from the
Dead, now he is gone, unless the People that come after may be made the wiser
and the stronger by them, if they fall into the like: But noble Examples are
like the best Porcellan Dishes of China, which are made in one Age, laid up in
the Earth, and are brought forth to be used in another. That Is the Goal I drive
to: And those Circuitions which are brought in for those Applications sake,
will make that, which might be shut up in a little, swell into a Volume.
Casaubon gives us this Warning of Polybius, in his rare Preface before him: Ita
narrat ut moneat: Personam historici cum assumpsit Polybius, non in totum exuit
philosophi. Folybius was a Philosopher in his History; so would I be, and more,
a Teacher of Christ, and the Laws of his Church, as I am by Ordination.

64. For an entrance, I take my method from a wise Artist, concerning the long
and dangerous Adventures of his Aeneas, to search into the Cause, Quo numine
laeso, which way it came about, since there was no man living, whose Harm this
Bishop wished, that he could never find his Peace and Prosperity again, when
once he had lost them? Why, principally I cast it upon his Sins; What Man is
without them? And his were not many, but those some were great ones; a lofty
Spirit, whose motion tended upward, restless to climb to Four and Honor; And
not one among an hundred of great Aspirers that live to see quiet days. And
this was joined with too much Fire in the passion of his Anger, in which Mood
indeed, which is strange, he would reason excellently, and continue it in the
very Euro-clydon of his Choler; as the Low Germans are most cunning at a
Bargain, when they are more than half tippled. But in such an evil ecstasy of
the Mind, words would fall from him, or from any, which pleased not Men, and
were hateful to GOD: Let these stand for the Fore-singer, that points to the
cause of his bitter Encounters. Every man's evil Genius, that haunts him, is
his own Sin, which wipes not out any paat of the Good which has been written
of him before. The same man appears not the same, but another in some
miscarriages. Polybius, lib. 16. commends Philip the Son of Demetrius very
much, and anon dispraises him, but reconciles it thus: (...). It is necessary
for a true Reporter, one while to extol, in another case to discommend the same
person. Take one Advice beside; No man that has read God's own Judgment upon
the Trial of Job, will censure him for the greatest Sinner, that has been the
greatest Sufferer. To take up the Cross had not been an inseparable Accident
with receiving the Faith of the Gospel, unless it were rather a Badge of Favor
than of Punishment. He is happy, if he knows it, whose Faults enter their
Action against him in this Life; he is a Prisoner of Hope, Zech. 9.11. and his
Heart is blind, if he do not seek Mercy, and sind it: Afflictions are Fetters
for a Fool, and Bracelets for them that know how to wear them. And it is finely
said in the Essay, That the good things belonging to Prosperity are to be
wished, but the good things belonging to Adversity are to be admired. This
being a true and a divine Sentence, That Sin, and nothing else, makes the Stock
of every man's Comfort to dye in the Ground, as Job loves to speak, it hangs
well together, that God knows best in what manner to punish every man's Sin;
who gave this Prelate great Favor with King James, but took King Charles's
Affection from him. The Lord H. Howard, in his Book against Judicious
Astrology, turns these Turnings into this use: Change of Princes breeds change
of Favorites; but they that are once dear to God, are ever dear to him. I
protest to the Reader, that Bishop Williams could not be brought to believe,
that the King bad any Willingness in his own Heart to afflict and bruise him,
but that such things came from the Infusion of those that had too much of His
Majesty's Ear, and by Importunity transported him from the lenity of his own
Judgment. And when the greatest Sorrows compassed him about, he desired only to
be brought to the King, with the advantage of half an hour, to declare his
Injuries and Innocence, so much he persuaded himself that he was right in his
gracious Opinion. He knew him to be a Prince Pious and Just: He presumed his
Noble Soul would never forget with what Success his Counsel and Contrivance
removed all Obstructions, to bring him as safe out of Spain as he desired: He
had received a Promise of everlasting Love and Kindness, for tracing the
Jugglings of Inoihosa, and bringing them to light, whereby the dangerous
Jealousies of the old King were removed, and His Highness received sweetly into
his Father's Bosom. An honest man could not be suspicious, that the memory of
such faithful Service was lost. But standers-by thought they saw more than the
Bishop did, who might soonest be mistaken in the Crisis of his own Disease,
because flattering Hope is but a waking Dream. If the King had not been pleased
in his Sufferings, why did he let them swell so far? As his Royal Name was used
in all, so his Good liking went to all, or after so many Bruisings, Gentleness
had not been forgotten. The Instruments next to be named were most guilty of
the Violence; yet the highest Power did more than permit and look on. As it is
the Sun that scorcheth in July, and not the Dog Star; it is a popular Error,
which conceives as if that Star, when it rose, did cause the heat of the
Weather: Yet still the Bishop would not think his Case was in that extremity,
that the King's Anger was in it: For as it is spoken of Padre-Paulo, in his
Life, That he was less sensible of Fear than ordinarily men use to be; so this
man would affright himself with nothing, least of all, with that which was
close and uncertain, and would often say in a Frolic, That Miseries are like
the Plague, if you fear them, you draw them to you. But, which will give great
light to the Subject now handled, once he was startled at a word which fell
suddenly from the King, in a few weeks after the death of his Father; one told
him, that came from the French Court, as it is in the Cabal, p. 203. That the
Spanish Ambassador spoke openly there, when the Marriage with the Princess Mary
was to be finished, That he could not have two Wives, for their Infanta was
surely his: To which the King replied, There are some English, as well as
Spaniards, that are of that Opinion. Which being carried from the King's Mouth
to this Bishop, he said with a low Voice, I know no such; but if he mean me, it
will be the worse for me while I live. From which let a wise man find out what
he can, so he find no more than he should. Either this, or some such hard
Conceit, lay hid in the King's Stomach, against a most deserving Churchman.
And every Age had some such Example, at which it was astonished. No History
speaks any ill of the Empress Eudoxia, but that she could not agree with
Chrysostom. Harry the Seventh, one of our best Kings, was very iniquous to Lord
Stanly, one of his best Subjects: Not a better Lady than Q. Elizabeth, nor a
better Peer than the Duke of Norfolk, yet Statesmen thought that neither were
safe while the other lived. The Hand of the Just may be heavy against the Just,
by woeful Experience: The greatest Claw-backs of the Pope confess, Though he
cannot err, say they, in an Opinion of Faith, he may err in the mistake of a
Person; as to canonize a wrong Saint, and excommunicate a right one. Which
shows, that my Conscience is in no such straight, to derogate from the Glory of
a most blessed King, because his Displeasure, darkened by human Error, lighted
upon a Mephibosheth, a faultless person.

65. The Duke of Buck. (Who knows it not?) was the Bishop's strong and
protested Enemy, who vowed, that of all he had given him, (but with as much
good liking of K. James as of his Lordship) he would leave him nothing; who
when he threatened an ill turn, had Power to do it, and did not often forget it:
Which made the Bishop shelter himself under the King's Grace and Benevolence,
of which he did never cease to have a strong Persuasion, begging, as it is
Cabal. p. 109, for God's sake, and for his blessed Father's sake, that His
Majesty would allay the Duke's causeless Displeasure, who was so little
satisfied with any thing that he could do or suffer, that he had no means left
to appease his Anger, but Prayers to God, and his Sacred Majesty. In the mean
time that one Foe made the distressed Party get many Friends; like Rabirius's
Fortune in Tully, Nihil aeque ac judicis accrbitas profurt; who had nothing to
help him so much, as that Caesar did hunt after his Ruin with so much violence.
Now that which made the Duke's Defiances grow fiercer day by day, was not the
Bishop's stoutness, (to which he was sufficiently prone) for he had sought him
with all Submission, which was on this side of despicable Baseness: But because
being sent to for his Opinion, both by his Grace's Mother, and his
mostsollicitous Friends, he had faithfully express, That he did not like the
ways wherein he magnified himself to serve the King: Who did not foresee the
Envy that his Magniloquence bred, ranting it sometimes, That he would make His
Majesty the greatest Monarch in Europe. I doubt not but his Head did work about
it, and was so noble, that he would have died to effect it: And some that
fawned upon him with all obsequiousness, did seem to admire him in it; as the
Earl of Holland, among others; such are the Contents of his Letters, Cab. p.
297. I hope nothing shall light upon your Lordship, but what you deserve, the
which, to my knowledge, is of more Value and Esteem, than any man in the World
could, or ever can merit from this Kingdom. The Bishop, that would not concur
to destroy him, by misguidance of Flattery, who had been Copartner with King
James in his Preferments, sung quite to another Tune: He liked not his
Preparations against Cales, but presaged a dishonorable Return; and pressed that
Maxim home to divert him from it, That a King must make himself sure in the
Love of his own People at home, before he bid War abroad to such a rich and
mighty Nation. Next, the second Parliament being summoned, and this Bishop
demanded what was best for the Duke's abearing in it, he resolved it to those
Friends that asked it, His best way will be, not to come near it; for it will
be impossible for him to close with this Parliament, who, contrary to my
Advice, offended the former, and broke it up: Let him remove himself, by some
great Embassage, till the first Session be ended, into Germany if he will, as
far as Vienna, if he dare trust the King of Spain's greatest Friend and nearest
Ally. This was disrelish'd, for they of E. Buck. Counsel, rather than send him
so far from the King, would hazard him in the Parliament, in which they thought
they were strong enough, by the Party they had made, to keep him from all
Offense, as well in his Honor as in his Person. The Bishop persisted to remove
them from their Confidence; for nothing is more fallacious than such
Expectation. Many that are bespoken, and promise fair, are quite altered when
they are mingled with their fellow-Judges in the House. As Matchiavel says it
was a Florentine Proverb, Populus alurm animum in foro, alium in Senatu habet,
De Rep. lib. 1. c. 47. All that he said followed as right as ever Lucas
Guaricus drew up a Scheme of Predictions; for, that Parliament discharged such
a Volley of Complaints against his Lordship, that the Votes of the Declinators
could not be heard for the noise. And his Grace plucked hard for Peace and
Popularity with the Commons, but could not encounter them. But, what a
struggling he kept with his hard Destiny, to be enflamed the more against the
much abused Bishop, because his Predictions were so prophetical! A good
Chaplain would have told him, that God's Wisdom is seen by his Fore-warnings,
and his Goodness in giving them. Nor was it Justice to account him a Foe,
because he was wiser than an ordinary Friend: But, who had the worst of it in
the end? Or rather, who had the worst of it from the very beginning? Miserior
est qui suscipit in se scelus, quam qui alterius facinus subire cogitur, Tul.
Phil. II. He is more miserable that does a Wrong, than he that suffers it. Yet,
by the Mediation of wise men, the Duke continued not full two years more in
this Uncharitableness; for he promised, at a secret Meeting, two months before
he died, to repossess the Bishop in Favor, and designed a time for the open
profession of it; so that the Sun of his Life did not go down in Wrath: And God
did appear in it, who will not always chide, neither will he keep his anger for
ever, Psalm. 103. v 9.

66. Of all men, Bishop Laud was the Party whose Enmity was most tedious, and
most spightful against his great Benefactor Lincoln. He battered him with old
and new Contrivances fifteen years: His very Dreams were not without them, as
they are enrolled in his Memorials, drawn out with his own Hand: I will touch
that Fault, that great Fault, with a gentle Hand, because of that Good which
was in him; because in other things, I believe, for my part, he was better than
he was commonly thought; because his Death did extinguish a great deal of Envy.
I meet with him in his worst Action that ever he did, and cannot shun it: If I
should draw him in purposely to defame him, now he is at rest, I were more
sacrilegious than if I robbed his Tomb. Qui cineres atque ossa perempti
insequitur, Virg. Let it be the Character of a Miscreant: But his Part is in
every Act and Scene of a Tragical Persecution of 15 years: Hoc etiam ipsi
culpabunt mali, Plautus in Bacchid. Perhaps it began from an Emulation to keep
him back, who was only like to be Bishop Laud's Competitor, for the greatest
Place of our Church. Had it gone no further, it might be cenfur'd moderately,
for a common Temptation. No wonder if the Seal and the Sword-fish never swim
quietly in the same Channel. But, to discontinue Brotherly Love upon that
score, to throw it aside, to further all pernicious means, tending to the
Infamy and Ruin of his imagined Rival, it is past Excuse, and can bear no
Apology. O how many are in Safety of Conscience, that should not be so! For he
that loves not his Brother, much more he that hates him, abides in death, 1 John 3.14. That opinion which my self and many have of his Sincerity, appearing
not in a little, and the Proofs of his Bitterness being so evident in this
Cause, it deserves a little Direction, to take away suspense of Judgment.
Experience, one of the plainest Teachers, does demonstrate, that some Drift, or
Delight, may creep so far into the Heart of him that fears God, that he will
not look upon the Deformity of it as he should, to think it a Sin: Which I take
to be the reason of Polygamy in the Patriarchs, and the best Kings of Juda.
Most of all, an evil thing may soon be attempted, when we think we may do it
without hazarding our Salvation; and we dare yet do more, when we have no Fear
to be answerable to the Justice of Men. Spalat. says, lib. 4. Ecc. Reip, c. 7.
par. 13. That John Bishop of Constantinople, that assumed to himself the Title
of Universal Bishop, or Patriarch, was a good man, given greatly to Alms, and
Fasting, but too much addicted to advance the Title of his See; which made a
plausible Prelate seem to be Antichrist to Gregory the Great. Pick out of this
to the present Subject, what a Provocation it was to the ambitious Spirit of
Bishop Laud, a man of many Good Works, to blow out his Light, that in common
Opinion did outshine him: Which I may allude to, in way of Parody, from the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.10. He that was made glorious, had no glory in this respect,
by reason of the glory that excels. And what a Temptation it was to follow
his Thrust, when he was persuaded, that the removing of one suspected would be
the bottom of his Safety? Therefore according to the Prudence and Charity that
God has given me, I will neither altogether shake off the good Esteem I had of
him, nor think too highly and absolutely of human Infirmity. And this is
inserted, to do him Justice, who was the chiefest cause, under God's Providence
and Permission, of all the Injustice and Troubles that did light upon Lincoln.
It is an old Rule in Gregorius Thaumat. in Orat. Paneg. ad Originem, (...). I
think it not fit to praise one man, with the reproach of others; for it implies
a Contradiction, to think to do Right to one, by doing Wrong to another: Which
is enough to bring off the mention of the Causes, that dealt not well with an
innocent man: And though, for all he suffered, he had no reason to thank his
Enemies, I may cheerfully write it, he had reason to thank God for his Enemies.

67. The Particulars at which the person aggrieved took Unkindness, are now to
be remembered, keeping near to the Shore at first, before we launch into the
Deep: And had the Bishop's humble Petition been heard, which he made to His
Majesty, Cabal. p. 118. that deep had never been sounded.

I Beseech your Majesty, for Christ Jesus sake, not to believe News or
Accusations against me, concerning my Carriage past, present, or to come, while
I stand thus enjoined from your Royal Presence, before you shall have heard my
Answer and Defense to the Particulars. They that inform your Majesty, may, God
knows, be oftentimes misinformed. It was time for him to supplicate for this
Justice, for he knew that his Name was abused in the King's Bedchamber, with
continual Scandals; Lies that were untraceable in their ground and original.
And he had reason to suspect, that of such Stuff there was more than came to
his Knowledge: But Jealousies had better sigh themselves away, than crave
Redress from Princes; against such secret Stingings there is no prevention, but
great Fear; for they that go a Batt-fowling in the dark, to seek matter of
Crimination, and inject mistrustful and uncharitable Reports day by day, to
undermine the man they aim at, fetch that about by many Fly-blowings, which
they cannot do at once: As a little Sand gathers into a body by many Tides, and
in time becomes a Shelf, and at last a Bar, or Quick-sand, able to drown the
best Frigate. It is fit that Kings should have Intelligence, but upon the Peril
of him that brings not a Truth. It is fit they should know their Subjects, but
not in a false Glass. He that abuses a Kings Ears, robs not from the Sheaf, or
from the Stack, but from the Seed-corn, which is treble Thievery. A man that
spreads Libels corrupts the People: A Delator that whispers invented Tales into
his Sovereign, is worse, for he corrupts him that is worth Ten thousand of the
People. Bishop Hall's sweet Passage is worth the learning; That it is good to
be Led, not to be Carried by the Ears: That is, it is good to use the Ear, not
to trust to it. These Blob-tales, when they could find no other News to keep
their Tongues in motion, laid open our Bishop for a Malignant, because he gave
Entertainment at his Board, to such as carried a Grudge to the Lord Duke's
Prosperity; who, if such, came in their course to his House upon old
acquaintance, but upon no factious design, that ever was proved. Hard was the
Condition of Archbishop Abbot, as he complains in his Manuscript, That he was
accused for Sir Tho. Wentworth's resorting to him, who had been with him but
once in three quarters of a Year, and then to consult about Sir George Savile's
Son and Heir, to whom jointly they were both Guardians. This Superintendency to
watch every man that goes in and out in a great Family, is too mean for the
Care, and too base for the Fear of a Generous Ruler. Listen to Caesar's Mind,
as Mutius reports it to Cicero, in the familiar Epistles; Caesar nunquam
interpellavit, quin quibus vellem, atque etiam quos ipse non diligebat, tamen
uterer. Admit there was no Harm, for there was none, in the Society that this
Bishop kept, yet the Case is altered when a man is despighted, and when
Grievances are blown out to their utmost wideness, by the Hatred carried
against him. Yet welfare Circumspection, and Innocence, that these privy
Suggestions went out one by one, like Sparks that fall upon dank and unprepared
matter. More Harm was expected to come from a Commission of Thirteen, who had
Order from the Duke to meet together, to sift into every part and passage of
the Bishop's Transactions, and to collect what was culpable, and would bear
Censure in the King's Bench, Star Chamber, or High Court of Parliament. The
chiefest of the Thirteen in Place, was Sir Rob. Heath Attorny-General, but an
honest man, and a fair dealer. This was carried with that little noise, that
for a good space the vigilant Bishop was not awaked with it, till some of his
old Officers broke it to him, who were called, and interrogated upon some of
his Decrees and Dispatches. Sir Anth. Welden (I borrow the Testimony of an
Enemy) expresses it thus, p. 174. His Rum was determined, not upon any known
Crime, but upon Circumstances and Examinations, to pick out Faults committed in
his whole Lifetime. And, as it were to confront the Tribunal of this unusual
Inquisition, the Bishop writes to His Majesty, just at the time when it sat,
That no use might be made of his Sacred Name, to wound him; but that he craved
no Protection against any other Accuser or Accusation whatsoever, Cab. p. 118.
See the stoutness of a clear Conscience: He knew how the Bushes were beaten,
and how the Beagle ranged the Field for Game. He heard the Cry of the
Bloodhounds, that nosed the Ground where he trod. Qui si non cecidit, potuit
cecidisse videri, Metam. lib. 2. But all was well; that Commission ended at
Labor in vain; not as the old Emblem is, to go about to make a Black-moor
white, but to make him that was White to appear like a Black-moor. That
Inquisition could find no Fault in him, but it is easy to find Fault with that
Inquisition. A Magistrate must try him that is accused for a Delinquent,
because he is a Judge; but he must not try how he may make a Delinquent,
because he is a Father. There was nothing good in that privy Search, but that
the Patient was no Patient; and, that his Enemies looked far into him, and found
nothing which they fought for. Like them that delve into the bottom of the Sea,
and fetch up Sponges; so The Righteous shall hold on his way; and he that has
clean hands shall be stronger and stronger, Job 17.9.

68. Neither did it deject the Bishop to be made a Gazing-stock by
Disparagements. The King's Coronation, and his second Parliament, began
together at Candlemas; and he was warned by Letter to serve at neither. A
Coronation being usually accompanied with a General Pardon, should have cast a
Frown upon none: Yet his Place was not granted him, to do his Homage among the
Spiritual Lords, nor to assist the Archbishop, at the Sacred Parts of that high
Solemnity, as Dean of Westminster. It is arbitrary, and at the King's Pleasure,
to range that Royal Ceremony as he likes best; to follow former Presidents, or
wave them; to entrust what Ministers he likes, in the Management, except some
Tenure or old Charter give admittance to some persons without exception.
Otherwise in the very principal performance, says venerable Saravia, De Christ.
Obed. p. 139. Ab Episcopo traditur corona, quod potest furi a proceribus. But
the Dean of the Collegiate Church of Westminster did attend, as a specal
Officer at the Coronation of K. James, after the manner of Deacon to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, (it was Dr. Andrews) which could not be granted him
by Prescription; for there was no Dean, nor any such Dignity in the Church, at
the Coronation of Q. Elizabeth. But upon the new Foundation, Anno 3. of that
Queen, the Dean was entrusted with the Custody of K. Edward's Crown, and the
other Regalia, and Decorum was kept thereupon, to give him a great Employment
of Assistance on that day. Yet the Regalia were kept in a strong place of that
Church long before: For, I find in Baron. anno 1060. par. II. That Pope
Nicholas the Second gave a Charter to that Abbey, Ut sit repositorium regalium
insignium. What a busy Fisher was this, that would have an Oar, or a Net
rather, in every Boat? Could not the Kings of England, without him, appoint the
fittest place for the Custody of the Ornaments of their Imperial Majesty's? He
that was so kind to dispose who should keep the Crown, did mean, That the King
should not wear it without his Leave and Courtesy. And let it be his Fault to
be impertinent, and to meddle with the keeping of Royal Treasure, that did not
concern him: What is their Crime, that have carried them quite away, both
Crown, and Scepter, and Robes, from their ancient Sacrary? (I would that had
been all.) This was wont to be the Mark of him that opposes and exalts himself
above all that is called GOD, Dixi Dii est is, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. But, what is the
matter that I have almost lost my self in this Loss? I was about to tell, that
Bishop Williams must not wait in the Honorable Place of the Dean, at the
Coronation, but in a Complement he was sent to Name one of the Twelve
Prebendaries, to serve in his room. This was devised to fret him, and to catch
a Wasp in a Water-trap. Bishop Laud was a Prebendary at this time, and the
Substitute intended at Court, to act in the Coronation. If Lincoln should Name
him, he had been laughed at, for preferring the man that thrust himself by; --
And if he did not Name him, and no other, he had been checked for inscribing
one of a lesser Order in the Church, before a Bishop, to so great a Service.
But his Wit saved him from either Inconvenience: He sent the Names of his
Twelve Brethren to the King, resigning it up to His Majesty to elect whom he
pleased. A Submission which Climacus would call Sepulchrum voluntatis, a dead
Obedience, without a sensible Concurrence. And he stirred no more, either by
Challenge or Petition, to do that eminent Office of the Deanery in his own
Person, but says in his Letter to the King, That he submitted to that
Sequestration; for so he calls it. It is wise to sit down when a man can
trouble no Body but himself, if he moves. Especially I affect the Lesson which
Erasmus gives in an Epistle, p. 222. Pulchrius est aliquando modestia, quam
cansa superare. It is handsomer sometimes to excel in Modesty, than to win a
Cause.

69. Other Reasons swayed this circumspect man, to carry it with no such
Indifferency, that he was not called to the Parliament: But to do Honor to the
King, and to save his own Right (nay, the common Right of Peers) he took a
middle way between Crouching and Contumacy. He called it His Majesty's Gracious
Pleasure, (and was in earnest, that he esteemed it so) to spare his Presence at
the Parliament; but he expostulated to have a Writ of Summons (denied to no
Prisoners, no, nor condemned Peers, in the late Reign of his blessed Father,
Cab. p. 118.) that accordingly he might make a Proxy; which he could not do,
the Writ not received. And he struggled, till he had it in his own way, and
entrusted it with the Lord Andrews, Bishop of Winchester, it being the last
Parliament wherein that famous Servant of God sat, and the last year of his
Life. But the -- Mr. W. Sanders tells us, p. 143. of his Annals of King
Charles, That Lincoln, at this time, continued not a Peer, but a Prelate in
Parliament. Res memoranda novis Annalibus, atque recenti -- historia, Juven.
Sat. 2. This is a pitiful matter; for, what Bishop of Lincoln could be a
Prelate in those days, and not a Peer? Is it his meaning, that he did not sit
among the Peers? Nor did he sit among the Prelates in Convocation; but by Proxy
he sat in both places as Peer and Prelate. A Letter sent from him to the King,
and dated March 12. will clear this matter, and greater things, or else it had
not been published. It Is large and confident, searing the Duke's Greatness no
more than the Statuary Work of a vast Colossus. But as Portius Latro says in
Sallust, Gravissimi sunt morsus irritatae necessitat is; It Is no marvel if
Necessity break good Manners; which will break through Stone Walls, says the
Proverb: And much Provocations attends not much whom it displeases. The Letter
follows.

Most Mighty and Dread Sovereign,
IT becomes me, of all the rest of your Subjects, having been so infinitely
obliged to Your Majesty, to cast my self down at your Feet, and oppose no
Interpretation Your Majesty shall be pleased to make of any of my Actions
whatsoever: Howbeit, before the receipt of my Lord Keeper's Letter, that I had
carried my absence from the Parliament with as much Humility and Respect to
Your Majesty, as ever Subject of England did toward his Sovereign. The
delivery of my Proxy to the first Bishop Your Majesty named, I excused mannerly
to Your Majesty, but with a private Reason to my Lord Keeper, not to be replied
against. The second Lord Bishop is directly incapable of that part of my Proxy,
which concerns the House of Convocation. These two Lords, now named by Your
Majesty, are without exception: Were it not divulged in the Upper House, that I
am to have a Proctor thrust upon me, against all Presidents; and that I dare
not refuse him, because I am guilty of (I know not what) Crimes? When I wrote
unto Your Majesty humbly, as became me, my Letter, delivered by Your Majesty to
the Duke, was published by him, as an Effect of a dejected and guilty
Conscience. When I shall obey your Majesty in the disposal of my Proxy, my L.
Duke may use that Act also, not only to serve himself (which I desire he should
with all my Heart) but principally to wound and deprave me. Displeasures of
Favorites, which are without Ground, are also without End. Hoc habent animi
magna fortuna insolentes, quos laeserunt, and oderunt. His Grace has told Your
Majesty, that I called the Chapter at Westminster, against the12 th of May,to
have a Color to come to the Parliament; whereas the Chapter is appointed to be
held at that day, by the Statutes of the College. He has told Your Majesty,
that I held correspondence with the Earl of Bristol; from whom I have received
neither Letter or Message these two years, as I will answer it with my Head. He
has told Your Majesty (and all the World beside) that I stirred the Lower
House at Oxford, and have my secret Instruments against his Grace even in this
Parliament. If he be able to prove either of these Charges, I will lose not
only my Bishopric (which his Grace has threatened, against the fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom, to take away from me) but withal my Life also. My Case (
Dread Sovereign) is miserable, and the more, because it is not mine alone. Your
Commands come immediately in your own Name, and therefore must be readily
obeyed. Your Graces are streined through the Hands of another, and therefore
are either not at all, (as in my Case) or not so purely, and sincerely
received. And when Your Majesty punishes, (pardon a Truth plainly delivered,
which you were wont to love, Dread Sovereign) you do it not like your self,
because you do it not your self. A King, be he never so severe, when he
chasteneth his Subjects, does punish them with Justice, because they are his
Subjects; but yet with Mercy, because they are his own. An angry Lord, that
makes bold with the King's Authority, lays on Load, as upon Men, and that
without Mercy, as upon the Subjects of another. It was a Complaint of Vinius
Galba's Favorite, and it is most worthy Your Majesty's remembrance, Minore
licentia grassatus esset T. Vinius, si ipse imperasset: Nunc and subjectos nos
habuit, tanquam suos; and viles, ut alienos. And in my case for the present, if
I should stand upon my Right, and refuse Your Majesty, I must expect all
Severity, because another has your Rod. If I shall yield and obey, I must hope
for no acceptance, because another holds the Garland. And for this other, if I
seek him, my Letters are showed, and I am made foul and guilty: If I let him
alone, I am deprived of the Sun and the Rain, the ordinary Graces and
Influences of Your Majesty. Lastly, When I know, and all the World beside, that
I sink only under the causeless Malice of a Subject, yet does that great man
wash his Hands, and publish (to the vexation of my honest Soul) That I lie
buried under the immediate Hatred of my Sovereign. And therefore, with an
humble Protestation against Fear of Punishment, which cannot fall upon my
Innocence, or Hope of Favor, sure to be kept back by the Greatness of my
Adversary; I do, out of religious Duty, and mere Obedience to Your Sacred
Majesty, and no other Respect whatsoever, send this Proxy for my L. of
Winchester, which I humbly beseech Your Sacred Majesty to direct not to be sent
to his Lordship, until such time as there shall be Use thereof, etc.


70. Such as knew the Duke of Buck. Metal, will say, that this was like to be
answered with a Mischief. But it may be his Grace gave the other the more
Liberty to write what he would, because he had stopped his Mouth from speaking in
Parliament. Which was a Benefit: For Athenagoras was not deprived of Athens,
but Athens was deprived of Athenagoras. There is much Weight in the worth of
one man: And much might have been expected from one that was so active, and
well versed to stop the Breaches of Contentions, if he had been used and sought
to. The Duke was ill advised, to keep them out of the House by threes and
fours, of whose Opposition he was jealous, and could not tie up their Tongues,
that fell upon him by hundreds. Sir Edward Cook, Sir T. Wentworth, Sir Robert
Philips, were pricked to be High-Sheriffs of Buckingham, York, Somerset Shires,
to put them into Incapacity to be Members of the Commons-House. What said our
Bishop to it, being in a merry Pin, when one told him, For certain he should be
restrained from his Place in the House of Peers? What then? Am I made
High Sheriff of Huntington-shire? Such minute Policies are frivolous, and may
serve among Huntsmen, to save the life of a Hare, when a sew of the old Dogs
are tied up, and not brought into the Field. But were there now enough able men
in both Houses, though half a score were spared, to follow their Game without
changing? This was that Parliament, that spent the best part of 18 Weeks in
drawing up a Charge, and prosecuting it against the L. Duke. What should this
Bishop have done there, being neither fit for the offensive nor defensive part?
How far he was from intending to offend, he expressed in a Passage about his
Proxy, that he desired the Duke should serve himself by it with all his Heart.
And I heard him my self dispute it with one of the sharpest Antagonists of his
Grace, in the time of the Session, and stagger him, That it was the safest way
for the Public Good, to desist from that vexatious Charge with this subtle
Similitude; That if a Beast were got into a Field of Wheat, if the Neighbors
ran in, and hunted it about with their Dogs, they would tread down more Corn
than five Beasts could devour, if they were let alone. So, to spend so much
Time and Pains upon a Charge against one Peer, did let Opportunity run by,
wherein many good Laws might be made, and lost the Commonwealth more than it
could gain by this Impeachment. Neither would he displease the King, to appear
against a Lord that was unto him in a manner his whole Court. Una fuit nemus
arbor, Ovid. And as Illustrius the Pythagorean records it, that Tyberius the
Emperor wrote his Letter thus for Polemo the Philosopher, (...). He that will
do Polemo wrong, let him consider if he can give me Battle. So His Majesty had
wrapped up the Lord Duke, as it were, in his own Royal Robe, to preserve him: Yet
if the Bishop had been in the Parliament, and had stood up to defend him, where
there was openly such defiance of Enmity between them, he had been censured by
all Judgment for double-mindedness, or sawning. And as Lanfrank charged one of
his Predecessors, Remigius Bishop of Lincoln, Quod officio emerat Episcopatum:
So the World would have censured this Prelate, that he kept his Place by
Service; Simony, as Mr. Fuller calls it. And with what Safety and Liberty he
could appear, let one Passage demonstrate: The Duke demanded, that the
Attorney General might plead for him, in the House of Peers, against the Charge
transmitted by the Commons; which was opposed, because the Attorney was one of
the King's Learned Council, and sworn to plead in Causes concerning the King,
and not against them: And the King is supposed to be ever present in the noble
Senate of the Lords. It was rejoined, That His Majesty would dispense with the
Attorney's Oath: It came to be a Case of Conscience, and was referred to the
Bishop's Learning. Some of them judged for the Duke, that this was not an
Assertory-Oath, which admits no alteration, but a Promissory-Oath, from which
Promise the King, if he pleased, might release his Learned Counsel. Bishop
Felton, a devout man, and one that feared God, very learned, and a most
Apostolical Overseer of the Clergy whom he governed, argued, That some
Promissory-Oaths indeed might be relaxed, if great cause did occur; yet not
without great cause, lest the Obligation of so sacred a thing as an Oath should
be wantonly slighted. And in this Oath, which the Attorney had taken, it was
dangerous to absolve him from it, lest bad Example should be given to dispense
with any Subject, that had sworn faithful Service to the Crown; for which plain
Honesty he was wounded with a sharp Rebuke: And the reverend Author told me
this with Tears: Yet the Archb. Abbot said as much, and went farther, for whom
Budaeus would stand up, a great Scholar, and a Statesman, De Ass lib. 3. fol.
102. Neque turpe esse credo cos homines observare, quibus apud Principem gratia
slagrare contigit, si non cosdem apud populum and ordines infamia and invidia
slagrare videamus: As who would say, it is Duty to love a Favorite for the
King's sake; and, it is Duty to desert him when he becomes a public Scandal;
For, no man will be happy to stick to him, who is so unhappy to become a common
Hatred. All that Parliament was a long Discontent of eighteen weeks, and
brought forth nothing but a Tympany of swelling Faction, and abrupt
Dissolution; whereby the King saved that great Lord, who lost His Majesty in
some expeditions Honor abroad, and the love of his People at home. This was
another Firebrand kindled, after the former at Oxford, to burn down the Royal
House, and the most piously composed Church of England. For a wife Orator
says, it is Isocr. Orat. (...). p. 243. The cause of an Evil must not be
ascribed to things that concur just at the breaking out, (...); but to the
forerunning Mischiefs, which were soaking long to ripen the Distempers. Well
was it for Lincoln that he had no hand in this Fray; for as the Voyagers to
Greenland say, When the Whale-fishing begins, it is better to be on the Shore,
and look on. E terra magnum alterius spectare laborem, than to be employed in
the Ships to strike them, and hale them to Land.

71. Say then, that he neither did harm, nor receive any, by being shut out of
this turbulent Parliament: Yet his Advice had been worth the asking, because of
the Plunges that His Majesty was put to upon the Dissolution; but he heard of
no Call to such a purpose: For no man looks on a Dyal in a cloudy day, when the
Sun shines not on it. God's Mercy was in it; for he sat safer at home, than he
could have done at the Council Board at this time, where much Wisdom was tried,
to help the King's Necessities out of the Peoples Purses, by a Commandatory
Loan, and with the least Scandal that might be; for not to run into some
Offense was unavoidable. Pindar the Poet was called out of his House, to speak
with some Friend in the Street, ( Castor and Pollux, says the Taleteller)
searce was his Foot over the Threshold when the Building sunk, and all that
were within perished. Thus, upon a time, the least Shelter gave the most
Safety; as did the lesser Honor procure this man the more Peace. But as
Camillus in Livy thrust out of Rome, and retired to Ardea, prayed that they
that had cashiered him might have no need of him, so this forlorn Statesman
would have been satisfied to have his place at the Council Table supplied by
others, if the King's Affairs had not wanted him at this instant, when he
suddenly slid down from his former value in the love of this People. The
Bishops (most likely it came from them) advised His Majesty first to fly to
God, and to bid a public Fast first at Court, then over all the Land about the
fifth of July. Bish. Laud, whose Sermon was printed, preached before the King
upon the 21st Verse of the 17th Chapter of St. Matthew, This kind goes not out
but by Prayer and Fasting. The Preface of the Book, and the Exhortation
published to the observing that solemn Fast, stirred up all good Christians to
entreat God, not to take Vengeance on the Murmurings of the People; to keep
their Spirits in Unity; to divert the plague of immoderate Rain, like to
corrupt the Fruits of the Harvest; and chiefly, to preserve us from the Bloody
Wars that Spain intended against us. Intended, says the Book; for depredation
of Merchants Ships was the worst they had done us. Let the Reader gather this
by the way, That a public Fast had not been indicted before by the Supreme
Authority, upon the Alarums of our Enemies Preparations. In Eighty eight an
Order came out, called, A Form of Prayer, necessary for the present Time and
State, to be used on Wednesdays and Fridays; that is, certain Collects to be
added to the Common Prayer. Yet no Fast was bidden, saving thus far, That
Preachers, in their Sermons and Exhortations, should move the People to
Abstinence, and Moderation in their Diet, to the end they might be more able to
relieve the Poor, etc. The first Form to be used in Common Prayer, with an
Order of public Fast for every Wednesday in the week, for a time, was set out
by Queen Elizabeth's special Command, in Aug. 1563. when the Plague, called The
Plague of New Haven, was rise in London. In which Book is a passage to
illustrate our Common Prayer Book, for the first Rubric prefixed to the Order
for the Holy Communion; That so many as intend to be Partakers of the Holy
Communion, should signify their Names to the Curate over night, or else in the
morning, either before the beginning of Common Prayer, or immediately after.
That ( immediately after) means, that in the first settling of our Church in
the Queens days, Morning Prayer stopped at the end of the three Collects after
the Apostle's Creed; then the People had leisure, before the Litany began,
either to retire, or to betake them to private Prayers. In this Interspace some
Communicants had time to give in their Names to the Curate; this is plain in
that first Order for a public Fast, anno 5 Eliz. the words are, After the
Morning Prayer ended, the Minister shall exhort the People assembled, to give
themselves in their private Prayers and Meditations; for which purpose a Pause
shall be made of one quarter of an hour and more, by the discretion of the
Curate, during which time as good silence shall be kept as may be. That done,
the L^tany is to be read, etc.

Now, after the pause of scarce a minute, made by this digression, let the main
scope of the King's Fast, indicted in July, be remembered, that great
Humiliation, with Fasting and extraordinary Prayer, should be joined together,
to avert the Peril of a Spanish Invasion; therefore, that we, on the defensive,
should be ready, with our Bodies and Purses, to avert the Fury of our Enemies.
Though the Land was admonished of this in a religious way, yet they
condescended to part with Money very hardly. They did only hear of an Enemy,
but they saw their Coin collected from them. Well did Tully write, lib. 3. Ep.
24. Nulla remedia tam saciunt dolorem, quae vulneribus adhibentur, quam quae
maxim salutarta. Say it was a Wound to our great Charter to call for
Contribution without a Parliamentary way; yet it was not the worse for the
Wound, that the Injection was sharp that cured it. What we lost in the
Privilege of Liberty, it was presumed we got in Safety.

72. But the most did want that charitable Presumption, and paid the irregular
Levy with their Hand, and not with their Heart. A Prince that grieves his
Subjects with a sconcing Tribute, takes up Moneys at a dear Interest; who
should not live extempore, but upon premeditation to act to day what shall be
safe and honorable for ever. Grotius is very political in a Passage to be
found in his Proleg. De jure belli and pacis. Qui jus civil pervertit
utilitatis praesentis causa, id convellit, quo ipsius, and posteritatis suae
perpetuae utilitates continentur. The People are unpleas'd upon this Levy, and
the Ink of a Remonstrance could not kill the Tettar. A third Parliament is
called, to justify the King's Act from Necessity, in the face of the Kingdom.
It was determined by some about His Majesty, that our Bishop should not sit in
it: The great Favorite knew his Discontents were increased; the Bishopric of
Winchester had been void, and conferred upon another. Archbishop Abbot, removed
for some months to Ford in Kent, is brought to Lambeth, to the Court, to the
Parliament. Lincoln not only wanted these Sweetnings, but was tired with
defailance of Promises, and defied with Threatenings; so it was thought best to
keep him out of the Parliament, against all Right, rather than suffer one, with
the Powers of his Parts, to argue and vote against exorbitant Persons and
Causes. The Bishop stood upon his Place as a Spiritual Lord, and resolved to
let his Right be infringed no longer. Utrumne est tempus aliquod, quo in
Senatum venire turpe sit? says Cicero, pro domo ad Pontif. It can be no shame
to come into the Senate; it is a Disgrace to be kept out. Therefore yielding
all Obedience to Sovereignty, unto the utmost of that which was due, he
disputed the Right of his Order so stoutly, that he came to the House and
continued in it to the last; which he obtained the more resolutely, because he
looked upon the King's Affairs with a desire to help him. The L. K. Coventry
had order to stop him by a Letter, if he could, which the other answered in
these words.

R. H. and my very good Lord,
I Have received your Lordships Letter of the 17. of February but this day,
being the 25. of the same; and although I could not desire more comfortable
News from your Lordship, than Leave of Absence from that Parliament, in which
my presence may be suspecled, either by the King (which my Innocence will not
suffer me to believe) or by any other near unto His Majesty; yet being the
Right of a Peer in this Kingdom, that never convicled, imprisoned, or
questioned for any Offense, is not withstanding now, against a second
Parliament, kept from his lawful and indubitable Right of sitting in that
House, and may be (for any Comfort he does receive from your Lordship) intended
to be debarred for ever from the same. I must crave some time to resolve, by
the best Counsels God shall give me, whether I shall obey your Lordship's
Letter, though mentioning His Majesty's Pleasure, before mine own Right, which,
by the Law of GOD and Man, I may in all Humility maintain. Especially His
Majesty's Writ and Royal Proclamation of a far later date, do either of them
imply, as your Lordship best knows, an authentical Command. I do know that of
my Obedience to my Gracious Sovereign, as of late I have found small
acceptance, so could I never find any limit or bottom: And therefore I beseech
your Lordship to make this no Question of the Act, but of this Object only of
my Duty and Submission: But if I find I may without prejudice absent my self, I
will deal clearly with you, my noble Lord, in the second point, I do refuse,
with all humble Duty and Vassalage unto His Majesty reserved, to appoint for my
Proctor the Bishop proposed. And so I humbly take my leave.


The Courtiers knew not what would follow upon this Answer; but a Course was
followed by the Bishop, as in the like Case before, to cut a way between two
Extremes; Inter abruptam contumaciam, and deforme obsequium: For the Parliament
newly sitting, the L. Keeper being demanded by John Earl of Clare, whether this
Bishop had a Writ sent to him, and that being affirmed, the Peers called for
his Assistance, and without more ado, the Parliament beginning March 17. he
came to it before the end of that Month, breaking the Restraint upon him, not
by attempt of his own Will, but because it was the Pleasure of the Lords; and
as soon as he came, he was quickly set a work; for the upper House appointing
to meet together at the Holy Communion, Apr. 6. 1628. he preached the Sermon at
that Solemn Occasion, the Text being Gal. 6.14. and at the next Session he
preached again, by their Lordship's order, at a Fast kept on Ash Wednesday, Feb.
18. 1628. in the same Church, upon Job 42.12. entitled, Perseverantia
Sanctorum. Both these Sermons were printed by their Lordships direction; two
pieces so full of Learning and Piety, that they were fitter for a longer
perusal, than for the short time wherein they were uttered.

73. At this great and high Assembly our Bishop is censured for over-doing his
part in Popularity, yet only by such as will calumniate all, that act not
according to their mind. Some things were offered at him, which might have
transported him to that excess; for, the Van-curriers of my L. Duke's Militia
had prepared Petitions to disorder him in a light Skirmish, but were never
preferred. Since no Fault could be charged upon him, when he delivered up the
Seal to the King, Malignants had small encouragement to slander his Footsteps
before a Parliament. To borrow Pliny's Similitude, lib. 28. c. 2. A scorpione
aliquando percussi, nunquam postea a crabronibus, vespis, apibusque feriuntur.
He that happens to be stung of a Scorpion, and escapes it, the smaller Insecta
of Hornets, Wasps, and Bees will never trouble him. Beside, in Equity they
could not have blamed him to be sure to himself, since that Lord that preferred
him, and that Bishop whom himself had preferred, did push with all their
Violence against him: Yet his Good bearing between the King's Power and the
Subjects Rights (the great Transaction of the high Court at this time) needed
no such Answers. Though he was earnest, yet he was advised in all his Actions,
and constant, as any man living, to his general Maxims. Tua omnia gest a inter
se congruunt, omnia sunt una forma percussa, says Casaubon to K. Henry the
Fourth, before his Edition of Polybius. So the Bishop never varied, whether in
favor, or out of favor, in his Counsels to the King, to hang the Quarrel even
upon the Beam of Justice between him and the Commonwealth: As it was his
Saying to K. James, so he went on with the like to K. Charles; Rule by your
Laws, and you are a Complete Monarch; your People are both sensibly and
willingly beneath you: If you start aside from your Laws, they will be as saucy
with your Actions, as if they were above you. The Fence of the great Charter
was lately thrown down, by taking a Loan by Commissioners, without a Statute to
authorize it. And says the Remonstrance of December. 15, 1641. Diverse Gentlemen
were imprisoned, for refusing to pay it, whereby many of them contracted such
Sicknesses, as cost them their Lives, p. 10. When the Body of the Lords and
Commons were at work, to redintegrate the empailment of the Laws, if the Bishop
had not appeared, that the King would return, to walk upon the known and
trodden Cawsey of the Laws, he had forsaken himself, and left the nearest way
to do him Service. His care was, that no Dishonor should be cast upon His
Majesty's Government, nor Censure upon the Commissioners of the Loan, his
Ministers, and yet to remove the public Evils of the State: To mend them,
would bring a Reformation to be blushed at; not to mend them, a continued
Confusion to be grieved at. The Bishop had the Praise from the Wisest that his
Dexterity was eminent above any of the Peers, to please all parties that would
be pleased with Reason. He distinguished the Marches of the two great Claims,
the Prerogatives of the Crown, and the Liberties of the People; and pleaded for
the King, to make him gracious to all; as it is in his Sermon on the Fast, p.
55. That he was a man as like Virtue it self, as could be pattern'd in Flesh
and Blood; and justified him for good Intentions in all his Proceedings. The
Errors that were to come to pass, he named them to be Errors; for what
Government was ever so straight, that had no crookedness? With this Cunning
Demetrius appeared for his Father Philip of Macedon, before the Roman Senate,
Justin. lib. 32. The Senate accused his Father for violation of the last
Articles of Peace; to which Demetrius said nothing, but blushed. Et veniam
patri Philippo, non jure defensionis, sed patrocinio pudoris obtinuit. And how
unreasonable was it, that the emulous Bishop, who did upon all occasions
derogate from this man, blamed this person to the King, for doing no more good
to his Cause, whereas himself did him no good at all? Like to Critias in
Xenophon, and his Dealings against Theramenes, lib. 2. Hist. says Theramenes, I
labor to reconcile divided Factions, and he calls me a Slipper to fit the
right Foot, and the left, because I set my self to please all sides. (...):
What shall I call him that pleases no side, that can do a pleasure to no side?
They that were present at all Debates, did discern, that no Service could be
done to the Crown, without a mixture of Moderation. A dram of such Wisdom was
worth a pound of Flattery: For, as one says wittily, A besmeared Dog does but
dirty him upon whom he fawns.

74. When the Commons fell roundly to sist the exacting of the Loan, the
Illwill gotten by it touched none so near as the Clergy: So ill was it taken,
that their Pulpits had advanced it, and that some had preached a great deal of
Crown Divinity, as they called it: And they were not long to seek for one that
should be made an Example for it. But to make that, which was like to be by
consequent less offensive, they unanimously voted a Gist of five Subsidies,
before the King's Servants had spoke a word unto it. A Taste of Loyalty and
Generosity, that willing Supplies should rather come from a sense of the King's
Wants, than be begged. Straitway they called Dr. Maynwaring the King's Chaplain
before them, for preaching (but rather for printing) two Sermons delivered
before the King, the one at Oatland's, the other at Alderton, in the Progress
in July; neither of them at St. Giles in the Fields, as Mr. W. S. might have
found in the Title Page of them both. These being in print, no Witnesses needed
to be deposed, the Doctrine was above the Deck, sufficiently discovered. The
Sermons both preached upon one Text, Eccles. 8.2. are confessedly learned,
(...), wherein Art and Wit have gone about to make true Principles beget false
Conclusions. It was not well done, to hazard the dangerous Doctrine in them,
for the Learning sake, to the view of the World; for not the Seeds of a good
Melon, but the good Seeds of a Melon should be preserved to be planted. No
notice was taken of the King's Special Command to publish these Tractates, but
severing the Author by himself, he is designed to be censured; as Keepers beat
Whelps before their Lions, to make them gentler: And the Charge is brought up
to the Lords, That the Sermons were scandalous, feditious, and against the good
Government of this Kingdom. The Reverend Bishops, one and all, left him
undefended. Yet that was not enough to correct the Envy which the Clergy did
undergo upon it; so the Bishop of Lincoln stood up, and gave reprehension to
some Points of both his Sermons, in this manner: In the former of these
Sermons, page 2. Dr. Maynwaring begins his Work upon the Loom with these
Threads; That of all Relations, the first and original is between the Creator
and the Creature, the next between Husband and Wife, the third between Parents
and Children, the fourth between Lord and Servants. From all which forenamed
respects there did arise that most high, sacred, and transcendent Relation
between King and Subjects. A strange Expression! which calls the last a
transcendent Relation arising out of all the former, when the first of the four
was between the Creator and the Creature. God is a great God, a King above all
Gods. A good King indeed is a petty God, as a Tyrant is a great Devil; but far
be it from us, to call the King's relation to his People transcendental, the
Maker of all things, and his Workmanship being brought in before. Yet let that
go not for a wilful Fault, but for an unwary Expression. In the 19th Page he
breaks out thus into a transcendent Error: If any King shall command that which
stands not in opposition to the Original Laws of God, Nature, Nations, and the
Gospel (though it be not correspondent in every Circumstance to Laws National
and Municipal) no Subject may, without hazard of his own Damnation, in
rebelling against God, question or disobey the Will and Pleasure of his
Sovereign; for as a Father of the Country, he commands what his Pleasure is,
and out of Counsel and Judgment. So on to the end of that Leaf. The first
words, If any King have a great failance, as if all Kings, all alike, had the
same Command over their Subjects, without distinction of Government, mere and
absolute from mixed and restrained. The body of the Doctrine is worst of all,
that it concerns us upon our Loyalty, nay, upon our Salvation, (for else
Damnation is threatened) to yield not only Passive Obedience (which is due) but
Active also, if the King's Will and Pleasure be notified in any thing not
opposite to the Law of God and Nature: Wherein if he had insisted upon those
same things, that do not appear to be yet determined, and have no evil Sequel,
it might be allowed him: But, that we are bound to act whatsoever a King
requires, where the Law and his Will are diametrically opposite, and be damned
if we draw back or question it, is as corrupt as it (...) ble. Under the same
Monarchy in Spain an Arragonian will not believe that he is obliged to those
Edicts of his King, which are directed to a Castilian; the Laws have
differenced them in the mode of their Duties. What Privilege is it to be born
Free, and not a Bondman, but that the Freeman knows how far he is to serve,
and a Bondman does not? If Subjection is due as much to the King's Pleasure as
to his Laws, there is no bottom in Obedience. Says Stamford the learned Lawyer,
Misera servitus est ubi jus est vagum and incognitum. And is it but a
Complement that a King swears at his Coronation, to govern by his Laws? Nay
sure, if Contracts and Promises bind GOD to Man, much more they bind the King
to his People. The Anchor at which Obedience rides is the Law; it is good
Divinity, Where there is no Law, there is no Transgression: And it is good
Morality, Vir bonus est quis? Qui consulta patrum, qui leges, juraque servat.
This Dr. tells us again, page 26. That this Sacred and Honorable Assembly is
not ordained to contribute any Right to Kings to receive Tribute, which is due
to them by natural and original Law and Justice: That our meeting is only for
the more equal imposing and exacting of Subsidies: If the supreme Magistrate,
upon Necessity extreme and urgent, require Levies of Moneys, beside the
Circumstances which the Municipal Laws require, he that does not satisfy such
Demands, resists the Ordinance of God, and receives Damnation to himself. The
Foundation is well laid, but his Superstructure is crazy; for where it were Sin
to say, that Reliess and Aids were not due to some persons, it is no Sin to say
they should not be their own Carvers. Testatus a great Bishop, a great
Counselor, a great Scholar, writes upon the noted place, De jure regio, 1 Samuel
c. 8. That Tribute is due to a Prince by his original Right, but with
moderation for the quantity, and with the Consent of the Subjects for the
manner, time, and other circumstances. Says St. Paul, Who goes a warfare at his
own charges? 1 Cor. 9.7. yet as well the General, as the Rout of the Army, must
not prescribe their Pay, but be contented with their Wages, as John Baptist
told them, Luke 3.14. A Son does not honor his Father, if he do not succor
him in his Poverty; but the Son is not bound to let him take what he will in
purveyance for himself. The Author whom this Dr. quotes, Saravia has instanced
in Samoisius, in the Poets Iliads; (...). He was slain a young man, and lived
not long, because he did not cherish his Parents. A Passage to make us think,
that Homer had read the first Command of the second Table. Those (...),
fostering Allowances were due to Parents, because they were Parents, yet by
free apportionating them according to the Duty and Wisdom of the Children, as
they might provide for their own Posterity.

75. More of this is ingeminated in the second Sermon, from page 24, to 26. as
in these words: Religion does often associate God and the King; First, from the
communion of Names; Secondly, from the near bordering of Offenses that reflect
upon God and the King; Thirdly, from the parity of Beneficence, which men enjoy
from God and sacred Kings. Upon this last he does expatiate in three points: 1.
That as Men cannot, in way of Justice, recompense God, nor Children their
Parents, so nor Subjects their Kings for legal Providence. 2. Justice, so
properly called, intercedes not between GOD and Man, nor between the Prince,
being a Father, and the People as Children: It cannot be a Rule or Medium to
give God and the King his Right. 3. Justice is only between Equals. To begin at
the last, this Position, Justice is only between Equals, is a mistaking of
Arist. lib. 5. Eth. c. 6. Who there makes them Equals, which are not under one
man, for that he denies totidem verbis, but under one Law, to the which he
does subject the Magistrate, as all the Schoolmen do the King; that is, to the
direction of it, not to the penal coaction. And if Justice be not, but between
Equals, how can there be any Justice at the King's Bench, Exchequer,
Starchamber, Court of Wards, etc? To go back now to his other two Positions,
mingling them together, observe two things; First, All that he speaks of God,
and his being unrecompensable by ordinary way of Justice, he borrows it out of
Suarez, as his Margin confesses, lib. 3. de Relig. c. 4. and of his own Head
applies to the King without Suarez, or any other Writer. Nor can Suarez Reason
be applied to the King, which is this: Man, for his weak Condition, in
comparison of God, and because all that he is and has is God's, cannot render
what he owes unto God, in equality of Justice. And all that he speaks of a
Father, in regard of his Children, between whom Justice in one Acception does
not intercede, he borrows out of Suarez, Suarez out of Cajetan, Cajetan out of
Aquinas, 2 vol. qu. 57. art. 4. not art. 8. as he misquotes him. But he adds,
The King, out of his own Brain, (who is but a metaphorical Father, Benevolentia
and animo pater est, natura rex pater non est, says Saravia, lib. 2. c. 12.)
without the Authority of his Authors, nay, flatly contrary to Aquinas in that
place; for he allows, that Justice and Law may be stated between Father and
Son. Says he, As the Son is somewhat of the Father, and the Servant of the
Master, Justum non est inter illos per commensurationem ad Alterum: sed in
quantum uterque est homo, aliquo modo est inter eos justitia. He goes on, That
beside Father and Son, Master and Servant, there are other degrees and
diversities of Persons to be sound in an Estate, as Priests, Citizens,
Soldiers, etc. that have an immediate relation to the Commonwealth, and
Prince thereof, and therefore toward these, Justum est secundum perfectam
rationem justitiae. So Suarez, lib. 5. de leg. c. 18. Some will say, that
Tribute is not due by way of Justice, but by way of Obedience: Hoc plane falsum
est, and contra omnes Doctores, qui satentur hanc obligationem solvendi
tributa, ubi intervenit, esse justuiam. And which is more than the Judgment of
mere Man, it is St. Paul's, Romans 13.7. For this cause pay your tribute, render
therefore to every man that which is his due. Redditio sui cuique is the very
definition of Justice. And he makes (...), Justice to intercede between Fathers
and their Children, Ephesians. 6.1. Children obey your Parents in the Lord, (...),
for this is just. This is the first Observation how he falsifieth his Learning.
The next is this, That his end to bring us to the case of Creatures, and
Children toward the King, is to take away all Propriety; as it appears
clearly, by what he must draw out of his own Authors. Suarez, ubi supra, Man
cannot render to God his due by way of Justice; Quia quicquid est, vel habet,
totum est Dei. Apply it with Dr. Maynwaring to the King; Whatsoever the Subject
is, or has, is all the King's by way of Property. Aquinas in the place before,
Quod est filii est patris, ideo non est proprie justitia patris ad filium.
Apply it to the King, Justice does not interceed between the King and his
People, because what is the Peoples is the King's. This is the Venom of this
new Doctrine, that by making us the King's Creatures, and in the state of
Minors, or Children, to take away all our Propriety: Which would leave us
nothing of our own, and lead us (but that God has given us just and gracious
Princes) into Slavery. As, when the Jews were under a mere Vassalage, their
Levites, their Churchmen, complain to God, The Kings of Assyria have dominion
over our bodies, and over our cattle at their pleasure, Nehem. 9.37. Thus far
the Bishop making very even parts between all that were concerned in the
Question. And because the Chaplain's Doctrine had drawn up a Flood-gate,
through which a Deluge of Anger and Mischief gushed out, His Majesty left him
to the Censure of his Judges. No Wonder if one of the best of Kings did that
Honor to his Senate, which one of the worst of Emperors did to that at Rome;
Magistratibus liberam jurisdictionem, and sine interpellatione concessit, says
Suetonius of Caligula. Neither had it been Wisdom to save one Delinquent, with
the loss of a Parliament: Lurentius Medices gave better Counsel than so to his
Son Peter, Magis universitatis quam seorsum cujusque rationem habeto, Polit.
lib. 4. Ep. p. 162. Yet Dr. Maynwaring lost nothing at this lift; his Liberty
was presently granted him by the King, his Fine remitted, the Income of one
Benefice, sequestered for three years, put all into his own Purse, and was
received in all his ordinary attendance again at Court, with the Preferments of
the Deanery of Worcester, and after of the Bishopric of St. David's; so willing
was the King to forget that Clause in his Sentence past by the Lords, which did
forbid it.

76. No man else suffering for so common a Grievance, it made a glad Court at
Whitehall. The Parliament used their best Counsels and Discretions at the same
time to secure their Lives, Livelihoods, and Liberties from such arbitrary
Thraldom thereafter, Nunquam fida est potentia ubi nimia est. We must live
under the Powers which God has set over us, but are loath that any man should
have too much Power. Sir Ed. Coke made the motion (which will keep his noble
Memory alive) to sue to the King by Petition, the most ancient and humble
Address of Parliaments, that His Majesty would give his People Assurance of
their Rights by Assent in Parliament, as he uses to pass other Acts, viz. That
none should be compelled to any charge of Tax or Benevolence, without agreement
of Lords and Commons; nor any Freeman be imprisoned, but by the Law of the
Land; with some such other-like, which are entered into many Authors. The Duke
of Buck. was forward to stop this Petition in the House where he sat; for
which the Commons, having not yet meddled with him, resolved to give him an ill
Farewell before their parting. Neither did he recover his old Luster, nor carry
any great sway among the Peers, since his dishonorable Expedition to The; for
evil Successes are not easily forgotten, though prosperous ones vanish in the
warmth of their Fruition. And not only that Duke, and the Lord Privy Seal, with
other great and able Officers, did repulse this motion with all main, but the
King's learned Council were admitted to plead their Exceptions against it. Six
weeks were spent in these Delays, and Hope deserred made their hearts sick,
Prove. 13.12. and their Heads jealous, who followed the cause, that there was no
good meaning to relieve their Oppressions. At last the difficulty was overcome;
the Petitioners had one Answer from the King, and looked for a fuller, and had
it in the end: So much sooner had been so much better; as our Poet Johnson
writes to Sir E. Sackvile, of some men's Good-turns, They are so long a coming,
and so hard. When any Deed is forced, the Grace is marred. The Subjects asked
for nothing now which was not their own, but for Assurance to keep their own;
which had it been done with a Smile, benignly and cheerfully, and without any
casting about to evade it, it had been done Princely. It is not impossible to
find an honest Rule in Matchiavel, for this is his: Beneficia illa, quibus
conciliatur plebis animus co usque ne differantur, donec ea praestare cogi
videantur. Passing right is Sir J. Haward's Hist. of H. IV. p. 4. says he, The
Multitude are more strongly drawn by unprofitable Courtesies than by churlish
Benefits. Among those that argued for this Petition de Droit, I shall remember
what past from two eminent Prelates: Archbishop Abbot offered his own Case to
be considered, banished from his own Houses of Croydon and Lambeth, confined to
a moorish Mansion-place of Foord, to kill him, debarred from the management of
his Jurisdiction, and no cause given for it to that time; harder measure than
ever was done to him in his Pedagogy, for no Scholar was ever corrected till
his Fault was told him. But he had fuller'd the Lash in a Message brought by
the Secretary, and no cause pretended for it: And what Light of Safety could be
seen under such dark Justice? The Bishop of Lincoln likewise promoted the
Petition, but he was a great Stickler for an Addition, that it might come to
the King's Hands with a mannerly Clause, That as they desired to preserve their
own Liberties, so they had regard to leave entire that Power wherewith His
Majesty was entrusted for the Protection of his People (which the Commons
disrelish'd, and caused to be cancelled). This caused the Bishop to be
suspected at first, as if he had been sprinkled with some Court-holy-water,
which was nothing so, but a due Consideration, flowing from his own Breast,
that somewhat might be inserted, to bear witness to the Grandeur of Majesty. A
Passage in Xenophon commends such unbespoken Service, lib. 8. Cyrip. says he,
Hystaspus would do all that Cyrus bade, but Chrysantus would do all which he
thought was good for Cyrus before he bade him.

77. In the Debate of this great matter among the Lords, this Bishop has left
under his own Pen what he delivered; partly in glossing upon a Letter which His
Majesty under the Signet sent to the House May the 12th, partly in contesting
with the chief Speakers, that quarreled at the Petition. As to the former;
First the King says, That his Predecessors had never given Leave to the free
Debates of the highest Points of Prerogative Royal. The Bishop answered, The
Prerogative Royal should not be debated at all, otherwise than it is every Term
in Westminster Hall. Secondly, the Letter objects, What if some Discovery
nearly concerning Matters of State and Government, be made? May not the King
and his Council commit the Party in question, without cause shown? For then
Detection will dangerously come forth before due time. Resp. No matter of State
or Government would be destroyed or defeated, if the Cause be expressed in
general terms: And no danger can likely ensue, if in three Terms the Matter be
prepared to be brought to Trial. Ob. 3. May not some Cause be such as the
Judges have no Capacity of Judicature, or Rules of Law to direct or guide their
Judgment? Resp. What can those things be, which neither the King's Bench nor
Star Chamber can meet them? Obj. 4. Is it not enough, that we declare our Royal
Will and Resolution to be (which, God willing, we will constantly keep) not to
go beyond a just Rule and Moderation in any thing, which shall be contrary to
our Laws and Customs? And that neither we nor our Council shall, or will, at
any time hereafter, commit or command to Prison, for any other cause than does
concern the State, the Public Good, and Safety of our People? Resp. Not the
Council Table, but the appointed Judges, must determine what are Laws and
Customs, and what is contrary to them. And this gracious Concession is too
indefinite, to make us depend upon that broad Expression of Just Rule and
Moderation. Especially be it marked, That all the Causes in the Kingdom may be
said to concern either the State, the Public Good, or the Safety of the King
and People. This, under Favor, is abundantly irresolute, and signifies nothing
obtained. Obj. 5. In all Causes hereafter of this nature, which shall happen,
we shall, upon the humble Petition of the Party, or Signification of our Judges
unto us, readily and really express the true cause of the Commitment, so as
with Convenience and Safety it be fit to be disolosed: And that in all Causes
of ordinary Jurisdiction, our Judges shall proceed to the delivery or bailment
of the Prisoner, according to the known and ordinary Rules of this Land, and
according to the Statutes of Magna Charta, and those six Statutes insisted on,
which we intend not to abrogate or weaken, according to the true intention
thereof. Resp. To disclose the cause of Imprisonment, except Convenience and
Safety do hinder, are ambiguous words, and may suffice to hold a man fast for
coming forth. And if all Causes be not of ordinary Jurisdiction, (as I hope
they are) who shall judge which be the extraordinary Causes? We are lost again
in that Uncertainty. So likewise for the Intention of Magna Charta, and the six
Statutes, who shall judge of the true Intention of them? That being arbitrary,
we are still in nubibus for any assurance of legal Liberty. So the Concessions
of His Majesty's Letter were waved as unsatisfactory.

78. And the Bishop went on to show, that the Contents of the Petition were
suitable to the ancient Laws of the Realm, ever claimed and pleaded, expedient
for the Subject, and no less honorable for the King, which made him a King of
Men, and not of Beasts; of brave-spirited Freemen, and not of brokenhearted
Peasants. The Statute in 28 Edw. 3. is as clear for it, as the day at
Noontide; That no man, of what state or condition soever, shall be put out of
his Lands or Tenements, nor taken, nor imprisoned, nor disinherited, nor put to
death, without being brought to answer by due process of Law. I know one Lord
replied to this lately, That the Law was wholesome, for the good of private men,
and sometime it might be as wholesome for the Public Weal, that the Sovereign
Power should commit to Custody some private man, the cause not being showed in
Law, upon more beneficial occasion than a private man's legal Liberty: And
though the Hand of Power should seem to be hard upon that one person, a Benefit
might redound to many. First, be it considered, if no Law shall be fixed and
inviolable, but that which will prevent all Inconveniences, we must take Laws
from God alone, and not from men. Then be it observed, that to bring the
exception of a Sovereign Power beside the Laws, in Cases determined in the
Laws, takes away all Laws, when the King is pleased to use and put forth this
Sovereign Power, wherewith he is trusted, and makes the Government purely
arbitrary, and at the Will of the King: So shall this Reason of State eat up
and devour the Reason of Laws. Show me, he that can, how the affirmation of a
Sovereign Power, working beside the Law insisted upon, shall not bring our
Goods and our Lives to be liable and disposable by this Sovereign Power, and
not turn England into the case of Turkey. And if you affirm, that a man may be
taken and imprisoned by a Sovereign Power, wherewith a King is trusted, beside
the Law expressed in the Statute; why should you not grant as well, the Law being
one and the same, that a man may be put out of his Lands and Tenements,
disinherited, and put to death by this Sovereign Power, without being brought
to answer by due process of Law? I conceive this Reason may be more fortified,
but will never be answered and satisfied: Bore one hole into this Law, and all
the good thereof will run out of it. Next I show, that nothing was ever
attempted against the Magna Charta, without great Envy and Grudging. Now, since
a man's Liberty is a thing that Nature most desires, and which the Law does
exceedingly favor, the 29th Chapter of that Charter says, Nullus liber homo
imprisonetur nisi per legem terrae. What word can there be against these words?
Why, it was said here with Resolution and Confidence, That Lex terrae is to be
expounded of Actions of the King's Privy Council, done at the Council Table
without further Process of Law. But did ever any Judge of this Land give that
interpretation of Lex terrae in Magna Charta? Indeed, a great learned Lord in
this House did openly say, That all Courts of Jurisdiction in this Land
established, and authorized by the King, may be said to be Lex terrae. Which is
granted by me, although it was denied by implication, by the resolution of the
House of Commons. But then the Question still remains, whether the
Council Table at Whitehall be a forum contentiosum, a Court of Jurisdiction? I
ever granted, they may commit to Prison juxta legem terrae, as they are
Justices of Peace, and of other legal Capacities. And I grant it also, that
they may do it praeter legem terrae, as they are great Counselors of State,
and so to provide where the Laws are defective, ne quid detrimenti respub.
capiat. Secondly, It was much pressed, that my L. Egerton did expound this Lex
terrae to be Lex regis, which must mean somewhat, in his Post-nati, page 33. I
have read the Book, and it is palpably mistaken: That great Lord says only
this; That the Common Law has many Names secundum subjectam materiam,
according to the variety of Objects it handles. When it respects the Church, it
is called, Lex Ecclesiae Anglicanae: When it respects the Crown, Lex Coronae,
and sometime Lex Regia: When it respects the common Subject, it is called Lex
Terrae. Is not this his plain meaning? It must be so, by his instance p. 36.
That the cases of the Crown are, the Female to inherit, the eldest Son to be
preferred, no respect of Half-blood, no disability of the King's Person by
Infancy. If his Lordship should mean otherwise, his Authorities would fail him.
Regist. fol. 61. the word Lex Regia is not named, that is my Lord's Inference,
but the Title is, Ad jura Regia; that is, certain Briefs concerning the King's
Kights, opposite to Jura Papalia, or Canonica, all of them in matters
ecclesiastical, as Advousons, Presentations, Quare-impedits, etc. all pleaded
in Westminster Hall, things never heard of in the King's dwelling Court, since
the fixing of the Courts of Justice. Thus much for the Authorities. Now the
reason offered out of them, which will never be answered, is this: By the Lex
Terrae in Magna Charta, a man may be not only imprisoned, but withal outlawed,
destroyed, tried, and condemned; but a man cannot be outlawed, destroyed,
tried, and condemned by any Order of the Lords of the Council; therefore the
Orders of the Lords of the Council are not Lex Terrae. At this, and upon other
occasions the Bishop spoke to this matter, (till the Petition was most
graciously consented to by the King in all the Branches of it) and was more
attended to upon the Experience of his Knowledge and Wisdom, than at least any
of his Order. And as Theocritus says of his principal Shepherd, (...). From
that day Daphnis was accounted the Chief of his Calling, which filled the Court
with the Report. But some men are in danger to be traduced with too much Praise.

79. One thing struck in unhappily, which made this Session rise without a good
close in the shutting up; it was a Remonstrance presented to the King by the
House of Commons, of many Complaints; the most offensive being those that were
personal, against two Bishops that were about the King, and against the L.
Duke, That his excessive Power, and abuse of that Power, was the cause of all
Evils and Dangers among us. Though this came very cross to the King's
Affections, yet the worst word that he gave to the Remonstrance was, That no
wise man would justify it. How many Kings of England had treated both Houses
more sharply upon less provocation? Yet now the chief Tribunes spoke their
Discontents aloud, That they had given a bountiful Levy of five Subsidies, and
were called Fools for their labor. The Gift was large, the Manner, the
Allegiance, the Willingness were better than the Gift; yet might not His
Majesty touch mildly upon a Fault, without such a scandalous Paraphrase? The
Galatians would have pulled out their own Eyes to do Paul good, yet he spared
them not for it, but upon Errors crept into the Doctrine of their Faith, he
called them foolish Galatians. The sowrest Leaven, not seen in the
Remonstrance, but hid in the House, was, That some seditious Tongues did blab
their meaning, to cut off the payment of Tonnage and Poundage, by the
concession of the Petition of Right; against which His Majesty spoke, and
declared, That his Predecessors had quietly enjoyed those Payments by the Royal
Prerogative, which both Houses did protest to leave inviolable; That the Grant
of the Petition did meet with Grievances, said to entrench upon the Liberty and
Property of the People, to give them assurance of quiet from paying Taxes or
Loans without Order of Parliament. To go further it was not his Meaning nor
their Demand. The Bishop of Lincoln appeared very much to concur with the
King's Interpretation, and was very zealous to have had an Act past for it
before the Parliament was prorogued: Nay, he forbore not to chide his Friends
in the lower House, whose Metal he found to be churlish, and hard to be wrought
upon. Ut erat generosae indolis nihil frigide, nihil languide agebat; as
Clementius says of renowned Salmasius, in his Life, p. 61. But the Bishop's
Motion was laid by, and with no good meaning: Yet since it was seen, that his
Endeavors were real, to have wound up the Bottom at that time, without that
scurvy knot in it, he had the Favor to kiss the King's Hand, and to have Words
both with His Majesty and with the Duke in private. O hard Destiny! this he had
long sought, and now the Words which past between the King and him in
Conference, were the Seed of all his Troubles in the Star Chamber; for the King
conjuring him to deliver his Opinion, how he might win the Love of the Commons,
and be popular among them, the Bishop answered readily, That the Puritans were
many, and main Sticklers; if His Majesty would please to direct his Ministers,
by his secret Appointment, to show some Connivance and Indulgence to their
Party, he might possibly mollify them, and bend their Stubbornness; though he
did not promise that they would be trusty very long to any Government. The King
said. He must needs like the Counsel, for he had thought of it before, and
would use it. Two months after the Bishop regulated his own Courts at
Leicester, with some such Condescentions, and told Sir J. Lamb and Dr. Sibthorp
the reason, that it was not only his own, but the Royal Pleasure. These two
Pick-thanks carried these words to Bishop Laud, and he to the King, being then
at Bisham. The Resolution was, That upon the Depositions of these two, (no
Saints in my Almanac) a Bill should be drawn up in the Star Chamber, against
the Bishop, for revealing the King's Counsels, being a sworn Counselor. But
that he was sentenced, because his Tongue betrayed him into Speeches that
entrencht upon Loyalty, as the Historian H. L. says, p. 152. (upon whose Trust
W. S. writes the same) is utterly mistaken, upon the word of Holy Faith; and
let all Ear-witnesses of the Cause, and Eyewitnesses of the Records, judge
between us. Nor do I say, that the Bill of disclosing the King's Counsels held
Water, for it was laid aside: There the Troubles began, and did run through
Motions, Meanders, and Alterations, till ending at last in tampering with
Witnesses, as will be shown in due place.

80. To make this seem a Jubilee to our Bishop, wherein all Bonds of
Malevolence should be cancelled, he had a very courteous Interview with the L.
Duke, nothing of Unkindness repeated between them, his Grace had the Bishop's
Consent with a little asking, that he would be his Grace's faithful Servant in
the next Session of Parliament, and was allowed to hold up a seeming Enmity,
and his own Popular Estimation, that he might the sooner do the Work. Blessed
be God, that they parted then in perfect Charity, for they never met again; the
horrid Assassine J. Felton, frustrated whatever might have followed; a mean,
despicable, unsuspected Enemy: Sed nihil tam firmum est, cui non sit periculum
ab invalido, says Curtius, lib. 7. What Strength is there in a Cedar, since
every weak Arm can cut it down? And though I am persuaded none but the Devil
and this melancholy Miscreant were in the Plot, yet in foro Dei, many were
guilty of this Blood, that rejoiced it was spilt. Tully confessed of himself,
that he was as much a Murderer of Caesar as Brutus and Cassius, 2 Philip. Quid
interest utrum voluerim fieri, an gaudeam factum? So did God see that Thousands
were guilty of this Sin, which made the whole Land Nocent, for the violent
death of an Innocent; for every one is innocent in right of his Life, till the
Law has tried him. Felton's Impulsive was impious, from the allegation of the
late Remonstrance, that the Duke was the principal cause of our Evils and
Dangers. As the Commons had no power to take his life away, so they never
intended it, but to remove him from the King, if it were possible. I will be
bold to censure the Romans, that many things were uncivil in their Laws,
barbarous in their Valor, and odious in their Justice. Let this be the
Instance out of Budaeus, lib. 2. Pandec. c. 28. Si quis eum qui plebiscito
sacer sit occiderit, homicida non est. As if every man had the power of a
Magistrate, to cut off him whom the People had devoved: A Maxim for the Sons of
Cadmus, or for the Sons of Romulus, not for the Sons of God. Be they Jesuits,
Anabaptists, or of whatsoever Race of new Zealots, they have not learnt so much
good Divinity as is in Aristotle, 3 Erh. (...). No Pretense can justify
Manslaughter, no End or Intention can excuse it. Was it so lately enacted in
Parliament, that no Freeman should be imprisoned without due course of Law, and
did Hell break loose at the other end, to make it meritorious, or popular, to
kill without Law? For such another Outrage had passed but two months before,
upon the Body of one Lamb, in the daylight, and in the Skirts of the City
beaten cruelly to Death by a scum of Vagabonds, being no Conjurer for certain,
(though the Fry fell upon him for that suspicion) but a notorious Impostor, a
Fortune Tellers, and an employed Bawd, (two Qualities that commonly make up one
pair of Scissors to cut Purses) as was evident by his Books, Papers, Schemes,
Pictures, Figures, Glasses, the Utensils of his Trade, found in his Lodgings
near the Horse-ferry in Westminster: But, that he was a Creature of the Duke's,
and commended to him by Bishop Williams, the Historian is strangely out again.
It is possible an Ear-dropper might hear such things talked at Cock-pits and
Dancing-schools, miserable Intelligence to thrust into an History. This Lamb
living in the Verge of the Deanery, was once admitted to speak with this Bishop,
and as soon as he began to impeach some of the Bishop's Acquaintance for
Falsehood, he was bidden be gone, for a meddling Knave, and a Sower of
Dissentions, and had Warning to come near him no more. And for the Duke, his
domestic Creatures have avowed to me, that Lamb was so little their Lord's
Creature, that they were ready to take an Oath of Credulity, that the Duke
never saw him. I would all the Tales that got his Grace Ill will had been as
false as this: That which did undo him, was chiefly that which made him, the
immoderate Favor of two Kings, and not moderately used; as many a Ship is
lost, that is overset with too much Sail. After Thirteen years triumphing in
Grace and Gallantry, one Stab dispatched him. So Symmachus speaks of the sad
Catastrophe of such a mighty man, Fortunae diu lenocinantis perfidus finis,
quem ultima sui part ut scorpius percussit, lib. 2. ep. 13. Great Felicities
not seldom go out suddenly in a Flash, like a Silkworm, that dies in three
months after it is quickened. God would have us look after better things, when
we behold the sudden and prodigious Eclipses of Human Glory, and brought to
pass, like Buckingham's, by vile and wicked Instruments. A foreign Writer gives
very hard words to our whole Nation upon it, that we are savage and frentick in
our Fury: And will he say as ill of the Kingdom of Israel, for Joab's sake,
that murdered Abner? It might be replied to him, That the Loyalty of his Nation
is besmeared with the Blood of two Kings of France, deadly wounded with a
Knife. But that we have worse to answer for, I will depart with this mournful
matter, adding only, that the Duke being taken away, our Bishop never desisted
to do Observance, and such Help as he could, to his desolate Kindred and
Family; which the Countess of Denby his Sister would often confess to me, and
speak of it to his great honor. At this time, presently upon the dismal
Tidings, he dispatched a most melting Letter to the Countess, his Grace's
Mother, whose Answer to his begins thus: My Lord,
IT is true Nobleness that makes you remember so distressed a Creature as I am,
and to continue a true Friend in harder Fortunes. You give me many Reasons of
Comfort, for which I kindly thank you, for I have need of them all.


The rest is long, and very choicely endited under her own Hand, which I pass
over more willingly, because her Ladyships revolting to the Romish Religion was
none of the least causes, that brought her Unfortunate Son into the distaste of
the People. Pace tua fari haec liceat Rhamnusia Diva, Catullus.

81. The Duke being now at rest in his Grave, it was conceived this Good at
least would come of it, that the next Session of Parliament would be very
quiet, which began on the 20th of January: Yet they that thought the Ship was
lightened of Jonas, saw the Storm increased: Let them that will know the
occasion of a wide Breach, read it in the Histories and Life of King Charles,
especially in His Majesty's Declaration to all his loving Subjects, printed
1628. wherein the intelligent shall find, that the Commons were rather stubborn
than stiff, rather violent than eager against the King's Affairs; and that the
King was so provoked with the heat of one morning, that he would not allow a
day, nor an hour, to let them cool again, but dismissed them with Menaces, and
thrust them away from him with such displeasure, that in twelve years he sent
out no Writs to call another Parliament. It is too late to wish it had been
better then, it is not too late to give Warning that it may be better
hereafter. Who did best or worst many will take the liberty to determine, as
their addictions carry them to loyal Duty or popular Liberty. I judge neither
so high above me in their potential Orbs, but relate what the Prudent did
observe upon their Passages: This was the Bishop of Lincoln's Opinion, who wept
the ruin of the State, and was able to see through the present to the future,
that it was ill in the People to offend so good a King, and unhappy for the
King to close again no sooner with a bad People. The open face of both these
shall be seen. The Commons were no sooner come together, but like Ajax's
Rhetoric in the Poet, Proh Jupiter inquit, they were as hot as an Oven in
their exordium, and spoke loudly, That the Petition of Right was not
maintained, because Tonnage and Poundage were taken, and Merchants Goods
distrein'd for non-payment, a Revenue not due to the Crown till passed by Bill.
The King's Council showed Presidents, that it had been taken in a provisional
way before the Parliament had granted it; but that His Majesty did desire to
receive it by the Grant of his People, and prayed a Bill might confirm it, to
remove this Block out of the way, in which all Controversies would be sopited.
Hereupon it was promised it should be considered, and the framing of a Bill be
referred to a Committee; yet they drew back their Hand, till they had gathered
a Particular of things distasted in the Ecclesiastical and Civil Government: An
Affectation which Appius Claudius discovered in the Tribunes, Live. dec. 1. lib.
5. Qui semper aegri aliquid in Rep. esse volunt, ut sit ad cujus curationem a
vobis adhibeantur: Which the King has put into English, Declar. p. 25. Like
Empericks, that strive to make new Work, and to have some Diseases on foot, to
keep themselves in request. Their Inspections about Religion were not only
troublesome, to make the Bill stick in the Committee, the only means to keep
all quiet, but so inauspicious, that I fear God was not near. Arminianism was
complained of, that it was openly maintained, not suiting with the Articles of
the Churches of England and Ireland: A strange Spell, which raised up the
Spirit that it would conjure down. As they that mark the increase of Nile can
tell at what day it will begin to overflow, so they that watched the increase of
Arminianism, say considently, that from this year the Tide of it began to come
in. Then they complained, that the Bishops of London and Winton, prevailed to
advance those to great Preferments that spread those Errors, while the orthodox
part was deprest, and under inglorious disdain. Never was this verified by a
clear and notorious distinction, till this Challenge was made, That all
Preferments were cast on that side. Then it began to be palpable, that there
was no other way to fly over other men's Heads in the Church, but with those
Wings: And here the forlorn part might say to the Parliament as Balak said to
Balaam, What have then done unto me? I took thee to curse mine Enemies, and
behold, thou have blessed them all together, Numb. 23.11. Thirdly, They did
regret at the obtruding of some Ceremonies, which waxed in more request and
authority upon that opposition; as some Flowers open the more, when the Wind
blows strongest upon them. I believe such Remorse as was in Joseph's Brethren
would make some of them say, We saw the arguish of the King, when he besought
us, and would not hear, therefore this Distress is come upon us, that all our
Counsels are improsperous. The prosecution of Civil Grievances miscarried as
much, and as wise men guessed, because Sir John Ellict stood up to manage them.
Few lead on to remove the public Evils of a State, without some special
feelings and ends of their own. Nor was it any better now, so far as an action
may be known by vulgar passes, and every bodies Discourse. (...), says
Menander. High Probability is the second degree of Truth. Sir J. Elliot of the
West, and Sir Tho. Wentworth of the North, both in the prime of their Age and
Wits, both conspicuous for able Speakers, clasht so often in the House, and
cudgel'd one another with such strong Contradictions, that it grew from an
Emulation between them to an Enmity. The L. Treasurer Weston picked out the
Northern Cock Sir Thomas, to make him the King's Creature, and set him upon the
first step of his rising; which was Wormwood in the taste of Elliot, who
revenged himself upon the King in the Bill of Tonnage, and then fell upon the
Treasurer, and declaimed against him, That he was the Author of all the Evils
under which the Kingdom was oppressed. Some body must bear that Burden as the
Duke had done; yet this Lord was not like to be the man, who had been in his
great Place but about six months, unless he could conjure, and work Miracles in
a trice. The Bishop of Lincoln, who had Spies abroad in many private
Conferences, informed the L. Weston before, who was his Adversary, what Coals
he was blowing at the Forge, and proffered himself to bring Sir J. Elliot to
him, to be reconciled, and to be his Servant; for which Sir T. Wentworth
spleen'd the Bishop, for offering to bring his Rival into favor; but L. Weston
took it as a Courtesy as long as he lived, and bade the Bishop look for more
Favor from the King than it was his luck to find; for the Treasurer was noted
to be a Servant to his Master of great use and diligence, but a Friend to his
Friends of small assistance. Now, when great Affairs did run upon the Wheels of
these private Grudges, what was like to become of the Public Weal? To be
overturned in the hurry.

82. For such a Dust was raised about the Bill of Tonnage, etc. that the way
could not be seen for that Cloud, to come to a quiet end. Long Speeches, full
of hydropical swellings, took up the time to delay it. Of which Aristotle gives
warning to all Political Governments, Polit. lib. 5. (...), that nothing
overthrows them so soon, as the petulancy of their Orators. Let impartial
Posterity sit in the Chair of Judgment, and examine these things. The Lords
unanimously dissented from the Commons: looked sadly at the slowing of the Bill,
at the quarrels against the Accomptants of the Custom-house. Insomuch that the
King told their Lordships, That he took as much content in their dutiful
demeanor, as he was justly distasted with the proceeding of the others. And
what bred all this Anger? was it a new Project? alas no; but an ancient Supply
of some hundred years old, never grudged at, but cheerfully granted for the
Safety of the narrow Seas. Quod a principio beneficium suit, usu atque aetate
fit debitum, says Sym. ep. p. 58. That which was free Gift at first, being
constantly given, Custom makes it a Debt. The King's Actions were strongly
warranted with the wisdom of former Ages: for the Subsidy of Tonnage and
Poundage was not granted to Edward the Fourth by Parliament, till the end of
the third year of his Reign, yet answered to him from the first year. And, to
say more, all Kings and Queens enjoyed it from the day of the precedent Princes
Death, before ever a Parliament sat: and the legitimate receiving it was never
questioned. And yet now the Commons pleaded, That until the King would put
himself out of all the Right of it, the Subject stood not in sit case to grant
it; Decl. p. 28. That is, shut himself out of Doors, and stay till, God knows
when, they let him in again. And wherefore was the Petition objected? which was
granted to secure all men in their Property for the Subject's Right, not for
the King's wrong. They that were reasonable and thankful men will allow him to
interpret his own meaning, which was not to take from his Liege people what he
should not, but not to give from himself what he would not. As eloquent Lysias
says, (...). The mind of them that judge by a Law, must be the same with his
mind that made the Law. It Is all the right in the World. His Majesty was
willing to take this Payment as the Gift of the Parliament, would thankfully
embrace it with that Formality. But it were folly to let them polish his
Revenue, and file away the best part of it. They knew he could not want this
Stock, as well to guard the Kingdom, as to support his own Dignity. Take heed
they thrust not upon that Necessity, which loving Compliance might avoid. Omnia
quae reipub. salutaria sunt, legitima and justa habentur, Tull. Philip. 12. To
render good for evil, and to bring them all within one Circle of Love and
Clemency, a gracious and general Pardon was appointed by the King to be drawn
up, which past the House of Lords; but the Gentlemen beneath did not so much as
read it. Yet no Innocence is so safe, which may not desire to be looked upon
with the Eye of Mercy. Some of the Members did want it after their Dissolution.
Which straightway followed upon shutting their Door against the King's
Messengers, and holding the Speaker by violence from obeying his Majesty's
Order to leave the House. So dying Lamps expire with enlarged Flames. This was
unwonted, and no honor to so wise a Senate, if the Rule of the Orators be
true: Quae potest esse homini major poena a Diis immortalibus furore and
dementia? Dehosparus. Our Bishop was wont to say, That Queen Elizabeth 's
Parliaments were most tractable, which sat but a short time, ended before they
were acquainted with one another Interests, and had not learned to Combine.
Which makes me allude it to Theophrastus Date Tree, (...). The young Trees bare
Dates without Stones, but the older they grow, so much the harder is the Stone
that is in them. Woe is to us, this Rupture was not a Date-stone, but a
Millstone, whose Consequences have grounded us to Dust. Which the King's
troubled Spirit did divine. Will you hear the Swan sing his own Dirge, Cantator
funeris ipse su^? Declar. p. 41. All this is done to abate the powers of our
Crown, and to bring our Government to obloquy, that in the end all things may
be overwhelmed with Anarchy and Confusion. Prophetical, or rather Oraculous,
for Miseries are sometimes foreseen, never prevented by the Dictates of Oracles.

83. Look now in the procedure upon the way that the King chose to go in, with
an Eye of Reverence, but with an Eye of Reason. The Bishop of Lincoln moved the
Lord Weston to carry his mind to the King, much after this sort: That the
Parliament might meet again for all this, and that there might be a Conference
between them and the Lords, to debate upon Differences. He hoped that their own
House would give a check, if not a censure to some that had exceeded in such a
rude and unparliamentary uprore: that they would in no long space of time be
ashamed of their own work, and make amends with submission. Neat that run
about, as if they were mad in the Pastures, stroke them, and they will come of
themselves to the Milk pale. Fury wastes as Patience lasts. He would not
pray for them if their sin were a sin unto death, whereof they could not
repent. Pliny can tell us of an Image in Chios, Cuyus vultum intrantes tristem,
exeuntes exhilaratum vident, Lib. 3. Not. Hist. cap. 5. It seemed to frown on
those that came in to behold it, and to smile upon them when they departed. To
show what variety may fall out in the first and last Experiment of Human
Affairs. God alone knows what the event of this Counsel might have been. The
King would not know it, for he would not use it. Kings have another Sentiment
of Wrongs then common People. Yet one Rulo is as good for them, as for their
Vassals, to let Counsels mellow, and to grow unto a taste by leisure: waiting
for time and opportunity are such advantages, as tire out the spirits of
others, till we have melted their metal. As every sweet thing mixed with Oil
will keep its odor the longer, so Deliberations, the longer they are
compounded with Patience, in the end they will be the sweeter. The King says
for himself, Declar. p. 40. He would have expected longer, if there had been
any hope in them to return to their duty. It is as the Spanish Proverb says, A
crooked Cucumber will never grow straight. But are all crooked? What was in his
heroic Mind to think, that no Parliament would be right for ever after? which
appeared because he summoned none in twelve years; nor then, but when extremity
forced him. When did he expect a better Generation, that despaired of all for
so many years? This was to fall out with a whole Nation. But says Cyrus to
Cyaxares in the Cipher of an absolute King, Lib. 5. Cyr. P. (...). It is a
great fault in a Ruler to be at odds with all his Subjects. He may have his
will by taking all Empire into his own hands, but with no good will of others.
The last Tarquin robbed the Senate of their power: omnia in domo regia privatim
tractabantur, Match. Resp. lib. 3. cap. 5. for which Brutus and his party take
up Arms, till they prosper'd in their sin. In more recent memory H. Grotius
writes, Hist. Belg. lib. 1. p. 7. That the disusing of the Assemblies of the
States by Philip the Second, was the beginning of the Revolt of the
Netherlands. Discontents that fell in should not abolish Courts fundamental for
the Maintenance of Justice. We have had most corrupt general Councils for some
Ages in the Church; therefore shall we never hope to obtain a good one? Well
did Warsovius speak in his Oration to Stephen King of Polonia, Millies licet
homo defraudetur ab homine, utique hominem cum homine vivere debere: Though we
have been cheated over and over, we must trade again with men. It is to be
praised and admired that while Parliaments were laid asleep so long, we could
not say that we wanted Justice, Peace, and Plenty, much less the true worship
of God. But for want of that politic Court, the People thought they were under
a new shaped Monarchy, like to an Arbitrary Government, which lost the King
their Affections, more then he could lose them by a seditious Parliament. For
better to endure frowardness then hatred. As Suetotonius says of Caesar, De
ampliando imperio plura and majora indies cogitabat: so great Ones, both Male
and Female, carried such Tales out of the Bedchamber, that a more absolute
Empire was intended then England had known since the Norman Line. All that the
King's incomparable Virtues could plead for him, would not satisfy for that
Suspicion. Men love themselves, and like a good Governor better then a Godly.
Our Bolton writes, That not a year of Nero' s Reign but was stained with some
foul fact of manners; but the Senators finding content in his Government, he
was redeemed into their sufferance, and the tolerable Opinion of the People.
Faults of an impious Life oppress not the Subjects, but oblique ways of
Government gall them. Holy King Charles was full of constant and great Virtues,
all of them Pearls of a clear water, but he did not study to oblige the
Generality, to gratify, to insinuate, nay to go down so low as to slatter
them: (...), Arist. Eth. lib. 5. cap. 3. That is, some are of rare worth, take
them single and alone, that fall short of that persection in those things which
they do, that relate to others. Our King would not buy Applause so cheap, as
with Blandishments and Courtesy. He would not dissemble with the Nobles that
had offended him, and win them in with Art to recover them. He would not
purchase the People with fineness of words, but purposed a more real
satisfaction. Yea, a few drops of water infused into Wine makes it not cease to
be Wine, nor do a few drops of Cunning ^^er the Essence of Honesty. A King of a
most nice Conscience shall still ^^^^in the Servant of God, and yet, by the
verdict of wise men, he should be the Servant of the People. The Duke of
Millain, the King of Naples about our Grandfathers days, lost their
Principalities for not woing their Citizens, and espousing their hearts
strongly to them. The Scepter of the old Latin Princes was a Lituus, an Ensign
of Majesty crooked at the stronger end, because a little bending Policy is
necessary in a Magistrate. Which Xenophon makes to be the Opinion of his exact
Cyrus, (...), lib. 8. That sometime he must couzin the Multitude into good
frame, and quiet obedience. So might our Josiah have done with good success,
and sincerity of heart preserved. Such as saw to what he was inclined, made him
abhorrent the more from Parliaments, by remembering them with all disadvantage
of flirts and contumelies. And what did they in it, but piss into the common
Well, from whence all the Neighborhood drew water? John Major pleading for the
Authority of a General Council breaks off, and says, he knew that many more
would plead very stiffly for the Pope, Quia Concilium raro congregatur, nec dat
dignitates Ecclesiasticas: Councils met seldom, and gave no Preferments as the
Pope did. So Flatterers and Ambitious Persons stuck to the surer side, and
desired the King would forget Parliaments, and act all himself: for the King
could promote them, so could not a Parliament. But in fine, to say a very
little upon the whole case; as St. Austin is quoted by Gratian for this
Sentence, That it is too great an attempt for Church Discipline to
excommunicate a Nation of People; so it was no fit Punishment to exterminate,
or lay aside the Parliaments of a Nation. No Parliament for twelve years, and
too much Parliament for twelve years put all out of order.

84. Which Court, formidable to Opposers, being like a Bow so long unbent, some
eminent ones, that abused the greatness of their power, and some ignoble ones
that lived upon the impurity of secure Times, seared not the Arrows of its
Jurisdiction, nor to come under account for their Actions at that Tribunal.
Says Quintilian lib 12. Quaedam animalia, in angustiis mobilia, in campo
deprehenduntur: Some Creatures can shift in their own holes, but are snapt up
easily in the open Fields. So such as could do mischief in their Court, had no
hope to escape in so public Examination. The Bishop of Lincoln felt it, who
fell into troubles, not for want of Innocence, but for want of a Parliament to
keep him from Malef;icence. The cause of his uncessant Molestations for twelve
years would discover himself, though I should conceal him, by an open
affectation to be known his Enemy, I mean Bishop Laud. Could he so soon forget
him that first made him a Bishop? and in twelve years could he not forget an
Injury (I know of none) if the other had trespassed against him? The undoing of
his Brother and Colleague in dignity did so run in his mind, that it was never
out of his dreams, to be seen in the Notes drawn with his own hand in Mr.
Prinn's Breviate. He dreamed the Lord Keeper was dead October. 23. 1623. that is,
being interpreted, in the Duke's Affections. June 14. 1626. He dreamed the
Bishop of Lincoln came, he knew not with whom, with Iron Chains, but, returning
freed from them, he leapt upon an Horse, and departed, neither could he
overtake him. March 17. 1627. Sir G. Wright whispered in his Ear in his sleep,
that he was the cause that Lincoln was not admitted again into Favor in the
Court. Jul. 13. 1633. He dreamt at Anderwick that this Bishop came and offered
to sit above him at the Council Table, Tibul. lib. 3. El^g.
(Quae Deus in melius ^rudelia somnia vertat) that the Earl of Holland came and
placed him there. Some hearken to Dreams which themselves caused to be dreamed,
says the Prophet Jeremiah, cap. 29. v. 8. Sabini quod volunt solent somntare,
says the Adagy: The Sabines dream what they would have. But for this Vision at
Anwick, it was not what my Lord wished, but what he feared. Let Babie; be
frighted with such Visors, Ecquid, ait, vani terremur imagine visus? says the
Preacher Eccl. 5.3. A Dream comes through the multitude of Business. That
which the Fancy is troubled with most in the Day, it rencounters in the Night,
yet without any deliberation of Reason; and therefore must be most groundless
to collect an observation from it, of any act that has an intellectual touch
in it. I except the infusions of Prophetical Inspiration, which commonly who
can suppose he has attained without Enthusiastical Presumption? Juggling
Astrologers, that will fly at any game for profit and credit, held the People
in a Dream, how they could interpret Dreams, which would hit, and which not by
the Planet; as Salm^sius says Clymact. p. 789. that it was Hephestions
prosession to unfold, (...), in what nights of every Moon they will happen to
be true. But he that records his Dreams, as if he weighed a thing so light in
the Balance of Observation, his Wits are built upon Fairy Ground, and needs no
other Astrology to deceive him, but his own Superstition. Isaiah says, That
which shall come to nothing, shall be as the dream of a night vision, c. 29.7.
Ens siclum, a Toy of no Entity, that has no place in a Predicament. The
greater is their Sin, that make it some part of a Quarrel, if they dream that
another was ominous to their Life or Honor: As Plutarch relates in Dion's
Life, how Dionysius the elder dreamt, that one Marsyas had killed him, which
made him take opportunity to kill Marsyas to prevent it. I am certain it was
for no Good Will, that the Bishop of Lincoln was notch'd so often upon the
Tally of ill-boding Dreams: God did promise, that old men should dream Dreams
of holy revelation, Act. 2.17. But these came from the old man, which is
corrupt, Ephesians. 4.22. who had Art and Part, as the Scottish Indictment runs, in
all our Bishops Persecutions. After my L. Bishop Laud had begun to go a sharer
with the Duke to suppress him, he knew not how to sound a Retreat and desist;
like to Pope Julius the Second in his Character, Nunquam ab eo, ad quod ingenio
feroci impellebatur, recedendum putavit, Match. Prin. c. 26. Whatsoever he set
himself about, though unpleasing and dangerous, he never looked back to
Repentance; and it was beyond his Sufferance to let a parallel Line side with
him, but he saw, if he did not cut this man down, he was like to grow to as
much height of Glory as himself: Beside, being dazzled with too much Light of
Royal Favor, he did not see that he needed to make Friends, least of all to
fear an Enemy. Whether he had little or sufficient insight into Government, is
disputable, but he knew how to govern the King: Like Anaximander the Soothsayer
to Alexander the Great, Cui credulitatem suam rex addixerat. Alexander believed
any thing that Anaximander told him, Curt. lib. 7. Mediators were not wanting,
that endeavored a renewing of Friendship between these two Prelates; which the
Haughtiness, or perhaps the Dissidence, of Bishop Laud would not accept; a
Symptom of Policy more than of Christian Grace, not to trust a reconciled
Enemy: Which is not approved by a good Heathen, Tul. Ep. lib. 3. Ep. 37. Si
quis est qui neminem in gratiam putat redire posse, non is nostram persidiam
arguit, sed indicat suam. He that will not trust, is not to be trusted.

85. Many did suspect that there was small hope to unite these, because the one
was hard Wax, the other soft: Bishop Laud would not connive at the Puritans,
nor seek them with fair Entreaties, but went on to suppress the Ringleaders, or
to make them fly the Kingdom. Bishop Williams perceived that this made the
Faction grow more violent, to triumph against Justice, as if it were
Persecution, that the cutting of some great Boughs made the Under woods grow
the faster. His way to mitigate them, was to turn them about with the fallacy
of Meekness: If they came to him, they had courteous Hospitality; if they asked
his Counsel in Suits of Law, he gave them all assistance; if some Ceremonies
would go down with them, he waited till their queasie Stomachs would digest the
rest; he thought it no dishonest thing, if he might win his weak Brethren, to
shift a Point of the Compass, when the Winds blew overthwart, and to fetch them
in, not always by a straight course, but sometimes by Obliquity. Another
Disunison was this: Bishop Laud was not only a great Patron of them that
maintain Arminius, or, as they would have it, Melancthon's Doctrine, but a great
discountenancer of the opposite part. And since he shook the Box, they were but
Duices and Trays in all Church-Preferments. The Indraught of this Partiality
waxed into a new Faction, never known before he sat at the Stern: The King's
Declaration, page 21. speaks not a little to it, that Bishop Montague's Book
did open the way to those Schisms and Divisions, which since have ensued in the
Church. Some, both then and at this day, are so alien'd from the Followers of
Calvin, as they call them, that the Samaritans were not more strange to the
Jews; (...). They will not shake Hands with a dissenting Dogmatist. This our
prudent Bishop did both dislike and despise, as a very causeless Breach
maintained by them, Qui eruditionem discordia metiuntur, as Aventine says of
the Schoolmen, Annal. lib. 6. And therefore he says in his Sermon at the Fast,
p. 56. We have a knowing, learned, and right venerable Clergy, the busy
Meddling of some few in matters of no moment excepted; for though it is not
about so small a thing as a strife of Words, yet it is so great a thing, as no
Words could ever determine. Even Knot the Jesuit writes so to Dr. Potter, upon
those Questions eagerly contended in, between the Dominicans and his Order, Who
has assured you, that the Point wherein these learned men differ is Revealed
Truth, and capable of a decision? Or, is it not rather by plain Scripture
indeterminable? Or by any Rule of Faith? There came out an Order from the King,
(and every one knew who suggested it) to suppress all Preaching, or Reading in
the Universities, upon the Questions decided at Dort, which was straightway
paralleled with an History in Baronius, A. 648. N. 12. That Paul, Patriarch of
Constantinople, seeing his Opinion of a Monothelite decried every where, he
persuaded the Emperor to set out an Edict, to silence the disputing on either
side. This Direction of His Majesty's our Bishop obeyed, but with a foresight,
that such a Restraint would make Zealots of each Opinion be more importunate to
advance their Doctrine, and that every Spark would kindle another, and spread
apace to a general Combustion. We are told by Camerarius, Mel. 6. p. 270. that
Charles the First had Melancthon most in Jealousy, for declining his Interim,
though he said nothing. So my L. of Lincoln was most suspected for a Gain-sayer
of the King's Order, though none did keep it with stricter Duty: Neither did it
make him innocent to sit quiet, since he did not appear to favor it: He that
did not tune his Mind, as well as his outward Carriage, to the present Harmony,
was censured to be out of Tune, and not fit for the Quire. So it was contrived,
that this Prelate, no meddler that way, must be knocked down, as the Supporter
of the Adherents to the Dort Synod, and others for fear would veil their
Top-fails. Like to Agelaeus's Speech in Homer, to his Fellows the Suitors of
Penelope, Let us throw all our Darts together at Ulysses, and kill him: (...),
Odyss. X. No matter for the rest, if he were fallen. Whereas the way to keep
him from all opposition, had been to grant him his Peace as a Top goes down of
it self when it is no longer scourged: Or as Charmides said in Plautus, Nunquam
aedipol temero tinniit tintinnabulum: nisi quos illud tractat, aut movet, mutum
est, and tacet. If you will not hear the sound of a Bell, let it alone, and do
not pull the Rope. These are the true Disclosures wherefore Bishop Laud took
the other Bishop not to be a man after his own Heart, and thrust him out of
Favor, out of Power, out of House and Home, and out of all he had. I find more
page 10. of Mr. Prinn's Breviate, that the potent Bishop showed Reasons to the
King for printing the Papers of Bishop Andrews (Cujus memoria recreor)
concerning, that Bishops are jure divino, contrary to that which the Bishop of
Lincoln miserably, and to the great detriment of the Church, signified to the
King Which is a great mistake; for Lincoln ever defended the divine Right of
his Order, that it was necessary in a Church rightly constituted, that it was a
main defect in them that had not that Presidency among them, but the less, if
they did desire it, and could not enjoy it: Yet he would not unchurch those
Christians, but wished them a better Mind, that had set up another Discipline.
If Bishop Laud was more rigid, he did worthily incur the Rebuke of Dr. Holland,
in Oxford, anno 1604. for maintaining, there could be no true Church (vera, non
verax) without Diocesan Bishops. These being all the Incentives of his
displeasure against this Brother and Advances, what little Grains they be! what
small Occasions! and the Evil he brought upon him being so great, and
prosecuted so many years, how indefensible is such Anger? His ablest and best
Friends did wish it had never been: If among many whom he preferred and
obliged, some will dress it with Extenuations and Excuses, I do not condemn
their Ingenuity; for, as Xenophon writes lib. 7. hist. (...): Commonly men
would have those appear to be good, who were their Patrons and Benefactors. But
I conclude it as Seneca did upon the Praises of Alexander the Great, when you
have said all you can for him, Calisthenem intersccit.

86. After our Bishop was cut off from all Place in the State, and withered
away in a happy Retirement, he that watched him a^l the harm he could, assisted
many (and they were many) to pelt him with slight and bald Complaints, like the
Clowns about Virgil's Ash-tree, Crebrisque bipennibus instant certatim eruere
agricolae: With all their hewing they got not a Chip from the Defendant, but
had their Wages from him that was the Setter; as Fulgentius says in the Life of
Friar Paul, Many showed Hatred against the innocent Father, looking to get
Favor for it from the Court of Rome. It was hard, and yet not strange, for
ours, that being vexed with many Suits, he could not obtain Orders, or not so
full as his Causes did merit; for Archbishop Abbot, his Copartner in
Sufferings, cries out in his Manuscript, That his own Suit for the Privileges
of his Church, against the Townsmen of Canterbury, was slopt, and wanted that
Justice which was not to be denied to any Subject. Had he, good man, such a
Sentiment of one Wrong? How then did Lincoln take so many? The Heathens say,
That Constancy in Suffering wears out the Cruelty of the Gods. I will not
compare a polisht Statue, that has no life, with a living Man; yet the Heathen
presumed of better things from their Imagegods, than he could find among the
living gods, that sit in the Congregation of Princes, Psalm. 82. Is it worth it,
to take his Wrongs in a general sum? Expect them. He could not censure a
Misdemeanour in his Ecclesiastical Courts, but he was called in question for it
by Reference, Petition, or Appeal; and yet the Appellants very Rake-hells upon
Fame and Proof: But, as we say of ill Clothes, they are good enough for the
Dirt; so these could not be too bad to be taken into the Service for which they
were used. And yet Xenophon did esteem it a Baseness in the Athenians, lib.
Abb. Resp. (...); because they would cherish those that were sit and helpful to
them, though they were Knaves. He could not institute a Clerk to a Benefice of
value, but a Quarrel was raised by one Scholar, or more, that pretended to it,
knowing it would be well looked upon by no little body. What an Unease it was to
be troubled with the humming of so many Gnatts? Pliny relates it for a
mavelous Story, That Cato major answered against Indictments four and forty
times, lib. 7. c. 21. Compare him with this Lord, and he escaped well; whose
Suits hung upon him like Fruits on the Citron Tree, as Servius says upon
Virgil's Ecloges, Omni tempore plena est pomis, quae in ea partim matura,
partim acerba, partim in store sunt. It bore some ripe ones, and some sour
ones, some in the Knot, and some in the Blossom altogether. No matter though
the Bishop came off without a Scratch in Credit, it was enough that he was
impoverished, for Costs he could get none. And it was held to be a Shred of
Policy, to make him spend away his Substance; for, by taking away as much Earth
as they could about the Tree, it would cool the Root. The Bishop looking into
the Throng, and variety of such bad Humors and Dispositions, was ashamed to see
so many in holy Calling brought up in Faction and Flattery: Qui pro hierophant
is sycophantae, esse decreverunt, as Erasmus writes to Bovillus, Ep. p. 61. Yet
further, he could let no Lease, chiefly if it were devolved to him, by
expiration of Years or Lives, but that the Tenants, or their Heirs, sought to
enforce him to their own Conditions, before His Majesty and Privy Council. Who
ever saw such a thing in the face of former times? A Gentlewoman, by the
Interest of a Daughter, matched to one of a mean Place in the Presence Chamber,
pursued him many years, to enforce his agreement to her own asking, and never
prevailing, had leave to take out her Penniworths in ill words: Like the Poet's
Frogs, lib. 6. Metamor. Quamvis sint sub aqua, sub aqua maledicere tentant: But
of all Attempts, those Suspicions plied him on the weak side, that chased him
upon the wrong scent of Corruption, and taking Rewards. He had undergone as
strict an Inquisition as ever was, of Thirteen Commissioners, to search if he
had taken but one Bribe, while he kept the Seal, and they broke up with a
Non-inventus, yet is now impeached for taking the Gratuity of a Saddle, a
piddling Trifle; for all that, the Enquiry about it cost more than a good
Stable of Horses, with all their Furniture; and when all came to all, it was
found the Prosecutor importuned the Steward of the House to receive it, who
laid it by, and never presented it to his Lordship, because it was too gaudy
for his use. The Complainant was a Doctor, preferred by this Patron to a good
Parsonage, through the intercession of Sir W. Powel the Bishop's Brother-in-Law.
For the rest, I leave the man in Obscurity, without a Name, as St. Hierom said
to Heliodor, Grown into note by defending an Heresy; Quis te oro, ante hanc
blasphemiam noverat? So let this Party sink in Forgetfulness, that his Memory
may not be preserved by the advantage of his Vice. If Homer had spared a few
Verses, Thersites had never been known. Any one may gather now out of the
Premises, that when one single person was beset on every side, it was not an
ordinary Fortitude, nor an ordinary Wisdom, that broke all their Ranks: But was
it not a craven Spirit that turned loose so many Mirmydons against him? Honor
is least where Odds appear the most, says our great Poet Spencer, Lib. 2. Cant.
8. He had no Favor, but Innocence to bear him out; as those places under the
Poles have no Light in Winter, but from the whiteness of the Snow upon their
own Ground, not the least ^eam of the Sun shining upon them. And which is
eminent, charitable, and generous, he never showed himself offended against any
of these Adversaries when the Brunt was over. An Observator, as he calls
himself, the Wolf that howls against this Bishop both living and dead,
remembers what pleasant and courteous words he had with him, anon after he came
out of the Tower. Upon which I will compare him once again with Melancthon,
according to Camerarius, p. 57. Nullum dictum aut factum alicujus tam duriter
unquam accepit, ut ab illius benevolentia, ac familiar itate recederet. And my
L. Bacon tells us well what a Gallantry it is; For in taking Revenge a man is
but even with his Enemies; in passing them over he is superior. Had this
Example been followed by Churchmen, and by Theophilus Churchman, our Foes had
not entered in upon us at those Gaps, which our selves did cause. Bishops
driving out Bishops was that which the Devil watched for, says Eusebius. lib. 8.
Praep. Evan. cap. 1. (...). By the Jars, and Jostlings, and ambitious
Contentions of the chief Fathers among themselves, their Inheritance was given
to Strangers.

87. Our Bishop being Storm-beaten without intermission, he requested the Lord
Cottington to inform him what he should do to get his Peace, and such ordinary
Favors as other Bishops had from His Majesty; this noble Lord returned him
answer in two Points: First, the Luster wherein he lived, the great Company
that resorted to him, and his profuse Hospitality were objected; that it was
not the King's Meaning, that one whom he had plucked down should live so high.
Secondly, His Majesty did not like that he should be so near a Neighbor to
Whitehall, but would be better contented if he would part with his Deanery. In
the first he took him out a Lesson, which he would never learn, to live in a
dark and Miser-like fashion. The Italians have had a meeting of Academicks at
Rome, called Compagna della Lesina, the thrifty Congregation, of which
Profession he could never have been a Member. Nor did he abate from living in
Decorum and Liberality in the worst Times; as Mr. A. Cowly writes to him in his
Miscellanies, p. 13. You put Ill Fortune in so good a Dress,
That it out-shines other men's Happiness.
Yet this was no ill Counsel if it had been followed; for Princes will dislike
(it must not be called Envy) if any live fortunately under their Punishment: As
both Dion. lib. 58. and Tacitus, An. lib. 6. have made it known in the Case of
Junius Gallio, that being banished, he was brought back to Rome, and confined,
Quia incusabatur facile toleraturus exilium, delecta insula Lesbo nobili and
amaena. As to the other touch, to relinquish his Deanery, he was utterly deaf
unto it; whosoever asked it was a hard Chapman, but he did not stand so much in
need of his Ware, to grant him his Price. St. Austin, it may be, would teach
him otherwise, out of a Punick Proverb, which was used, he says, where he
lived, Ut habeas quietum tempus perde aliquid. And they tell us from the
Caravans that travel in Arabia, if they meet a Lion, they leave him one living
Creature for a Prey, and then they may go on their Journey without Fear. But
this man thought otherwise of a most wakeful Eye, and able Observation: (...).
Oduss. w. Mnestorides, that saw behind him and before him: For, says he, what
Health can come from such a Remedy? Am I like to be beholden to them for a
settled Tranquillity, that practice upon the ruin of my Estate, and the thrall
of my Honor? If I forfeit one Preferment for fear, will it not encourage them
to tear me piecemeal hereafter? Memet ipse non deseram, was well resolved of
Philotus in Curtius: Nor will I set so great a Mulct upon mine own Head. What
hurt can my Neighborhood do to the Court, and being so seldom in Town? No
greatness of Power, when it would extremely abuse it self, which is not glad to
think of Means how to avoid the note of Injustice. In this there is not one
syllable to accuse me, much less to make me guilty. It is not my case alone,
but every man's, even his that is the prompter, and puts it into the King's Head
to ask it: If the Law cannot maintain my Right, it can maintain no man's. This
was his Constancy: Nor did he let go his fast-hold in this Deanery, till the
King received it from him in Oxford, anno 1644. As Livy says of Spain, Hispania
primo tentata est a Romany, sed postremo subacta; It was the first Kingdom the
Romans invaded, and the last they conquered: So this was the first of Lincoln's
Preferment set upon, and the last which he delivered up. Since he would not be
forced out of it, it was carried with a Stratagem to keep him from it; for in
four years he was not admitted to preach a Sermon in Lent before the King, the
course for his Place being usually on Good Friday; and three years together,
when he came to the Chapters, or to the Election, to see it fairly carried for
the choice of the best Scholars, he could not rest above a day in the College,
but Secretary Coke, either viva voce, or by his Letters, which are yet saved,
commanded him from the King, to return to his Bishopric: As terrible a Prophet
as Elisha was to the Nobleman of Samaria, upon the Plenty of Corn predicted,
Thou shall see it with thine eyes, but thou shall not eat of it, 2 Kin. 7.2.
This might fret the Bishop, but not affright him. And he asked the Secretary so
stoutly, what Law he brought with him to command him from his Freehold; that
the good old man was sensible that he had done an Injury. In fine, the chief
Agitant saw, that this Trial, upon so firm a Courage, was uneffectual and
ridiculous: Neither was it a little Breath that could shake him from his Stalk,
like a Douny Blow-ball.

88. Yet the more he did thrust off this Importunity, the more it did follow
him, and a finer shift was thought of to esloign him from Westminster.
Archbishop Abbot had Directions from the King to press him to Residency upon
his Bishopric by the Statute; the Archbishop of the Province having the
oversight of the said Statute, to see it put in execution. And some words were
dropped in the Archbishop's Letter, to signify, that it was presumed, that being
in the Place of Lord Keeper, he had passed a Dispensation under the Great Seal
for himself, to enjoy the Commenda of the Deanery, for his better accommodation
in that Office. His Answer hereunto, as follows, is his own in every word.

Most Reverend, etc.
TO that Apostyle touching my Dispensation to reside upon the Deanery of
Westminster, the said Deanery being, as all Commenda's are in the Eye of the
Law, united for the time of my Incumbency upon this poor Bishopric, I can say
no more than what your Grace knows as well as I, that I use the said
Dispensation very modestly and sparingly, and that I am resolved in this, and
every thing else, to give His Majesty all Satisfaction, in a due and reasonable
order to his Royal Orders; which no Bishop does yield more exactly than myself.
He breaks no Law who pleads a Privilege; nor does that Subject transgress in
Order, who produces a just and lawful Dispensation to exempt him from the
same, as your Grace by daily experience well knows. For other matters, that
proceed from wrong and sinister Informations, I do intend to procure one or
other of my good Lords of the Council, to let His Majesty understand how these
things are misconcerved, as soon as I can: As first, to represent unto His
Majesty, that no L. Keeper can issue forth a Dispensation of this nature, nor
any other person whosoever, but either His Majesty, immediately by his Regal
Right, and Eminency of Power, or your Grace by the Act of Parliament: So as my
being Lord Keeper did contribute no more to this Patent, than it did to all
others; that is to say, Wax and Impression. Your Grace may call to mind, we
were four Governors of several Colleges made Bishops at one time, and two of
these had their Colleges put into their Commenda's, as well as myself. And in
your Graces Memory also, in the most exact times of Ecclesiastical Government,
when those Promotions were managed with the Advice of that great and wise
Prelate the Lord Bancroft, a Bishop of Bristol kept the Deanery of York
together, and a Bishop of Rochester this of Westminster, during his Incumbency,
with many others the like. Neither did the then L. Keeper procure the Faculty
to hold this Deanery; for the late King, my dear Master, of Blessed Memory, was
not about London, but at Rutford in Nottingham-shire, when he granted me this
gracious Favor. Nor, to deal ingenuously with your Grace, was it gained by
mine own Power, or Interest with His Majesty, but by the Mediation of His
Majesty now reigning, and by the Duke of Buck. together with some inducement of
the deceased King, not unknown to some yet living; and howbeit my Faculty is
without distinction of Time, yet am I no chaser of mine own Time, but do
confine my self to those particular seasons, which the local Statutes of the
College, and my express Oath to perform the said Statutes, do enjoin me: That
is to say, the two Chapters, and the great Festivals. All which space of time
does not, being taken in the disjunct spaces, make a Bishop a Non-resident by
any Law I know of, nor consequently infringe his Majesty's Instructions, though
a man had no Dispensation; which Instructions require only that Bishops should
reside: but we presume that it is no part of his Majesty's gracious intention,
that they should be confined, or as it were imprisoned in their Bishoprics. I
hope to procure a fair representation of these particulars to his Majesty, and
thereby to obtain his gracious approbation, of as much residence as I intend to
make in the Deanery. Where (as your Grace knows as well as I) in regard of
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical and Temporal, of preventing Ruins and
Dilapidations, of Hospitality, of Suits in Law, of the Church, the School, the
College, and the like, I have no less necessity of abiding sometimes then upon
my Bishopric, and somewhat more, because of my Oath.

So most humbly, etc.


This was enough to satisfy both Statute and Reason. Unto which it may be
said, as Politian wrote to Herm. Barbarus of a Question wherein he had pleaded
for himself, Ita argutum ut defendendi, ita defensum ut arguendi non sit locus,
Ep. p. 260.

89. Can he that has run over these Passages imagine, but that such as
encamped against the Bishop would beat up his Quarters no more to make him fly
his Deanery? It is the worst of Miseries to be incurable, the height of Malice
to be implacable. The stubborn Spartans had a Proverb, says Plutarch Vit. Agis
and Cleom. (...), Though they were in a wrong pursuit, it was base to give
Ground. For this work was never like to be given over, but was shifted after a
few years into new hands. These were a few of the Prebendaries of the later
Instalment. Volucres ad jussa paratae, winged Posts that would fly as far as
they were sent, who may as well be known by Character, as by their Names.
(...), as Aeschylus would say no more of a Fool, but that he was his
self-undoing. Another, whom I have heard called General Wrangler, the
Challenger that undertakes all Modern Writers, of as much ingenuity as
Tertullian's Hermogenes, Maledicere singulis officium bonae conscientiae
judicat. These preferred Articles to his Majesty, and the Lords of the Council,
against their Dean for (...) government, three dozen of Articles (yet none to
the vantage) that their number might supply the nothingness of their weight; a
few Auger-holes are of too small a bore for a Nest of Wasps to breed in; add
these Alledgments, though Archbishop Laud did manage them at the hearing, were
of no tack to hold, yet sharpened against all Modesty with Insultations and
Revilings. Some of great magnanimity have been heart-broken, that they were
drawn to contest for their Honor with a Faction of Grooms, or a Conspiracy of
more honorable Impeachers. To begin with Scipio; says Quintil. lib. 11. Prior
Affricanus Patria cedere, quam cum tribuno plebis humillimo contendere de
innocentia sua malluit: He would retire, and leave his Country, rather than
contend with a Plebeian. L. Philip Chabot Admiral of France, took such grief,
says Thuanus, at the unkindness of Francis the First, to let his Chancellor
Poet sift him for Trespasses committed in his Office, who had ever been most
noble and faithful, that he sickned and died. It is no longer since than the
Twentieth of King James, says Archbishop Spotswood, Hist. p. 541. that
Information being put on by the Lord Ochiltry against Sir Gideon Murray,
Treasurer-Deputy, and remitted to the Trial of certain Counselors, Sir Gideon
having ever given great proof of his Integrity, contracted so deep a
Melancholy, as neither Comfort nor Counsel could reclaim him, and in a few days
he departed this Life, the King sorrowing that ever he had given ear to such
Delations. Aemilius Scaurus sped better with his Judges in the Roman Senate,
that let him say nothing, but cast a Scorn upon his Adversary Varius, and
acquitted him. Varii Sucronensis atrocissimam calumniam Aem. Scaurus summa
gravitate contempsit, solo contemptu refutavit; which Jo. Camero opposes in
his own behalf against one Elias an Advocate of Paris, Oper. p. 855. Our Bishop
did not look for the Privilege of Scaurus, but was held to his Answer, which
did no more disquiet his Spirit, then to say the Paternoster, nor one gray
hair grew on his head the sooner; but made himself merry with the Conceit, how
easy it was to stride over such Urchin Articles. No Man would find leisure to
read the whole 36, they are so frivolous. Taste them all in these. First, They
complain that he came not always in his Habit, and came late to Divine Service.
(Answer, sometimes both, not always.) 2. He stays Singing-men with him at
Bugden. (He did not invite them, and they came with the Sub-deans leave.) 4. He
is not resident often. (The Charge in former days was, that he resided there
too much.) 5. He did not preach in propria persona; (because he was frowned at
if he were there in propria persona). The 15th, The Dean and Treasurer did not
ride progress to keep Courts; (who was not to ride otherwise by Statute, than
si velit.) 23. He made Dr. Hacket his Vicar in the Election 1632. (The three
Electors may choose their Vicar, whom they will at their own pleasure.) 24.
Verses were not hung up in the Hall upon the King's day, Anno 1634. (The
Scholars were corrected for the Fault.) 26. He calls the Schoolmaster often
away, keeps him many weeks in the Country, and imploys him in his great
Affairs, to the neglect of his Scholars. (He never staid with the Bishop above
two nights at a time: his great business he does is to buy a Book, or to convey
a Letter; and the School by his Attendance is in an excellent case.) The daring
Courage of Mr. Osbalston troubled the Bishops ill-willers, more then all his
Friends beside that did negotiate for him. For, as my Lord Bacon observes, A
bold person may serve for great use at the direction of a wiser man. All the
rest of the Articles were goll-sheaves, that went out in a sudden blaze, and
the Bishops triumph was, Adversis rerum immersabilis undis, Hoart ep. l. 1. But
because there is nothing new under the Sun, I will pluck for a parallel to this
in the Life of Padre Paulo: Soto and Archangelo his professed Enemies objected
against him to Cardinal Severino the Grand Inquisitor: First, That sometime he
kept Company with Heretics. 2. That he wore a Cap upon his head. 3. That he
wore Slippers after the French fashion 4. That he did not recite Salve Regina
at the end of the Mass. Flea-bites, like the former, of which you can see no
mark in an hour. But says St. Austin Sermon. (...) de diver. Quid refert utrum te
plumbum premat, an aren^? Nay, with good leave, it is not all one. The Lead
will not be removed so soon, as the Wind may blow the Sind into their faces
that laid it. To stay no more upon this; the Articles flew away over the Abbey,
like a flock of Wild-geese, if you cast but one stone among them: yet the
Promoters were not one whit dismayed; they had laid their Betrs so sure, that
they would get, whether the Game were won or lost. If their Articles succeeded,
they got the day: if otherwise, it would be worth a Hen and her Chickens to bid
defiance to their Dean. For every one of his Adversaries had a Recompense given
them, like a Coral to rub their Gums, and make their Teeth come the faster.

90. Readers impartial must judge of these things, and will be tried at the
great Assize of common Discretion, whether he that had been so liberal to the
structure of the Church and Library, had erected some Scholarships, their
number being a great deal short of the Foundations of Eaton and Winchester,
whether he deserved that they should fly at his Throat to worry him, who had as
much relation to the place as himself, where these good Deeds were done. But
there is a Writer, (and not one year scapes him, but that he publishes
somewhat to bespatter the Bishop of Lincoln's good Name; Odimus accipitrem quia
semper vivit in armis, Ovid. Art. Amand.) he it is that would cover all the
Monuments of his Bounty with one Blot, if he could find Readers, such as he
wished, that would take all that he vents without examination. Mr. Fuller in
his Church History of Britain, after he had given some unhandsome Scratches to
this Bishop, parts with him thus; Envy it self could not deny, but that whit
hersoever he went, he might be traced by the footsteps of his Benefaction --
That he expended much in the repair of the Abby-Church of Westminster, and that
the Library was the effect of his Bounty. This is truth, and praiseworthy in
the Historian; and yet I say not the Bishop is beholding to him for it, because
it is truth. That Is Politian's judgment in an Epistle to Baptista, p. 197. Pro
v^ris laudibus, hoc est pro suis, nemo cuiquam debet. Quis enim pro suo debeat?
But what says one of the Swallows to it, that built under the roof of the Abbey?
Just like a Swallow, carried all the filth he could pick up to his Nest. But
worse then a miry Swallow, he resembles those obscene Birds that use to flutter
about the Sepulchers of the Dead, and insults extremely over the Grave of the
Deceased in his Animadversions upon the Church History, p. 273. That Lincoln
received so much out of the Rents of the College, in the time when he was Lord
Keeper, four years and more, that the Surplusage of all that he paid out in
several sums respectively, amounted to more then he laid out upon the Church
and Library. (...), says Demost. orat. (...). about the end; The very Enemies
of the dead cease to hate them when they are dead. But as Anabaptists and
Quakers say they are above Ordinances, so it seems the Conscience of some
Divines is above moral Niceties. As to the Calumny, squeeze it, and in round
Russian Language you shall wring out a great lie. First, before the Dean was
Lord Keeper, or dreamt of that honor, that is, before the Chapter had
committed the Rents to his management, he had repaired the great Ruins of the
south side of the Church, abutting upon the stately Chapel of Henry the
Seventh. If the Animadverter knew this, why did he not separate it from that
which was expended in those four years wherein he lays his Challenge^ If he did
not know it (for it was done ten years before he was hatched into a Prebend)
then when blind men throw stones, whose head is not like to be broken? For that
which was laid out by the Lord Keeper to strengthen and beautify the north
side of the Abbey, to the end that the right Play Master may be known, and the
mouth of all Detraction stopped, the Chapter shall testify in their Act, as
follows: Whereas there has lately been divulged, as we have heard, an unjust
report, that the Right Honorable and Right Reverend Father in God, the
Lord-Bishop of Lincoln our Dean, should have repaired and new-built our Church
on the north side of the same, and south side of the Chapels belonging to it,
out of the Diet and Bellies of the Prebendaries, and Revenues of our said
Church, and not out of his own Revenues; We therefore the Prebendaries of the
same, with one consent do affirm, That we verily believe the same to be a false
and injurious Report. And for our selves we do testify every man under his own
Protestation, that we are neither the Authors nor Abettors of any such
injurious Report, untruly uttered by any mean man with intention to reflect
upon his Lordship. And this we do voluntarily record and witness by our Chapter
Act, dated this present Chapter December. 8. 1628. Theo. Price Subdeacon,
Christopher Sutton, George Darrel, Gabriel Grant, Jo. King, Rob. Newell, John
H^lt, Gr. Williams. Whether will we believe eight men in their right minds, or
one in his rage? -- To slight the Bishops erecting such a beautiful Pile, the
Library of St. John's College (and put that of Westminster with it) he is as
froward as a Child that has worms in his Stomach, and tells us that it
possibly cost him more Wit than Money, many Books being daily sent unto him;
Vis dicam tibi veriora veris; Martial. It was not only possible, but very true.
For what Library, no not the Bodleian, the choicest of England, but grew up,
and does grow by contributory Oblations? as Athenaeus says Lib. 8. (...). The
Symbols or Portions that many Friends bring in to furnish a public work, have
good influence into it, but the Founder is the Lord of the Ascendant. A great
deal of the like the Author has crowded into a few Leaves: I do not accuse it
for want of Salt, it is a whole Hogshead of Brine. Wisely and mildly
Melanchthou was wont to say, Answer not Slanders, but let them vanish; Et si
quid adhuc in hujus saeculi levitate quasi innat at, brevi interiturum est cum
autorum nominibus, Camer. p. 79. The worthy Works of the Bishop's excessive
cost at Westminster, and in both Universities, will stand, when Pamphlets shall
be consumed with moths. The liberal devises liberal things, and by liberal
things he shall stand, Isai. 32.8. A fair Walnut-tree the more it bears, the
more it is beaten, as it complains in the Greek Epigram, (...). But such as
yield the fruits of good works in this world, shall become Trees of Life
hereafter: as I have read it from some good Pen, He is well that is the better
for others, but he shall be happy for whom others are the better.

91. Method has digested the troubles about the Deanery altogether, which is
the reason why this Paragraph recoils five years back, that is, to 1630 to make
a transition into the next disturbance. A Commission was directed this year to
very honorable and knowing persons, the Lord Privy Seal, Earl of Arundel,
Vicount Wimbleton, Lord Wentworth, Sir Hugh Middleton, Sir W. Slingsby, Sir
Hen. Spelman, Ed. Ascough, Th. Brett, Th. Bridgman, to question the oppression
of exacted Fees in all Courts and Offices, Civil and Ecclesiastical, throughout
all England. A noble Examination, and full of Justice, if due and convenient
Fees thereupon had been straightened and appointed; which was frustrated two ways:
First by indigent and craving Courtiers, who enquired after such as were
suspected for Delinquency, and of great Wealth, with whom they compounded to
get them Indemnity, though not a Doit of a Fee were abated. Secondly, By
vexatious Prosecutions of abundance, that were Innocent, before Sub-committees,
where Promoters got a great livelihood to themselves, to redeem them from
chargeable Attendance; which deserves such a Complaint as Budaeus makes of his
Master's Court. That it was a Divine Privilege of the Kings of France, that
they had the gift of healing, and could cure the Stromosi by the touch of their
hand; Si dedisset providentia ut consilia publica auspicato inirentur, and if
they could thrust away flattery and false clamours with their hand, it would be
the happiest Government in Europe, Lib. 2. Pandec. fol. 36. This Commission
sitting, the Bishop of Lincoln's Adversaries thought they had him sure, and had
found his Laire, presuming they could ripen some Trespasses of his in that kind
for a Sentence in the Star Chamber. Jungant ur tum gryphes equis, etc. that had
been strange to catch him in an oversight about the Mammon of Iniquity: For
the Elogy which Grotius gives, Lib. 1. Hist. Belg. to William of Nassau, was as
much this Bishop's, as it was that great Prince's, Crudelitas, and avaritia
nullo ab ingenio longius abfuere. But what cannot great Men bring about, when
there are no Parliaments to overlook them? As Tully says of Brutus, Philip. 12.
Multis in rebus ipse sibi Senatus suit; All must be as Brutus will, if Brutus
will be as absolute, as if himself were a Parliament. Who but Mr. Ratcliff the
King's Attorney for York (and we know the Orestes to whom this Pylades was so
dear) was instructed to prepare a Bill to be put into the Star Chamber against
the Bishop, who had laid his ear to the ground to hark after the digging of the
Mine, and knew the Substance of it, before the Draught was fully penned. Such,
as are so fortunate in their Discoveries, and have intelligence of all
Practices against them, are the Moral of those fabulous People that are called
(...) in the Greek Tongue, some of a strange plantation, that could cover all
their body with their Ears. The charges upon which mr. Ratcliff was devising an
Information, were two; the one about the Fees of the Clerk of the Hamper,
(which is, according to Sir H. Spelman's Glossary, Sport a grandior cui
inferuntur pecuniae e sigillatione diplomatum, brevium, chartarum regiarum
proveni^ntes, which were as good as fixed before he came to be Lord Keeper The
other was about Fees in the Episcopal Registry at Lincoln, presented for undue
in the persons of some Officers, but without reflection on the Bishop, whom one
thing puzzled; for he knew not whether there were a Mystery* or Madness in it.
A Prelate or twain were consulted about this Bill of extorted Fees, and they
bid it good speed; which was no less than to pull an old House upon their own
heads; for the Sums, according to the Tables of their own Registries, were the
same or greater. Did they think he would not plead it? Communis culpae cur reus
unus agor? Proper. l. 2. el. 10. Did they conceive but he would declare his
Cause was theirs, and theirs was his? Or would they blow up themselves upon
their own Deck to blow up him? As Justin shows how desperate the Boeotians were
in their malice against the Phocians, lib. 8. Baeotii tanto odio Phocensium
ardentes, ut perire ipsi, quam non perdere eos praeoptarent. Better had it been
for the Reverend Fathers of Holy Orders, rather to strengthen, than to weaken
one another; for the Kite might come (O holy Lord he came to soon) who would
make but one Morsel of them altogether.

92. But before any Suit could begin, the Bishop represented the Case in a
Letter to the King: May it please your most excellent Majesty;
BEing much wounded by a pinching and uneven Report drawn up by some Officer of
your Majesty's Commissioners for the Fees, and presented unto your Majesty;
Jul. 1630. though but very lately come to my knowledge, without any touch of
the full and satisfying Answer, which I had given some three weeks before unto
the Lords Commissioners, and to others in that behalf. Although I am content,
as Men of My Calling ought to be, to pass with the rest of the World through
good report and bad, yet I am not able to endure that impression which the said
Relation may peradventure have wrought in your Majesty's breast against me; a
Bishop that has served your Father in so near a place while be lived, and
closed his Eyes when he died, and remains still in the number of your poor
Chaplains, free from the least suspicion of such sordid Avarice, as might cause
him to spot his Roche^, with the exaction of so mean a Sum as 20 l. a year,
which is the utmost of that pretended Extorsion. The Charges pressed upon me with
many Words, but no Matter at all, are two: The first concerning an Order for
Increasing the Clerk of the Hamper's Fees, 19 Jac. The second about Fees for
Institutions, and Resignations taken by the Bishop of Lincoln. My Answer for
the Clerk of the Hampers Fees consists of these Heads: 1. That the King may
justly and legally increase the Fees of all Offices in his own immediate
donation, not limited by Act of Parliament, and has ever been done so; which
was granted by all the Lords. 2. His late Majesty, before my coming to the
Seal, had referred the suggestions of the Clerk of the Hamper for this increase
of Fees unto those four great Lords, who had the Seal in their custody, and
that their Lordships by their report did allow the same, and returned a
Certificate unto his Majesty of all the Species wherein the Fees were to be
increased; which was confessed by two of their Lordships then present. 3. This
Certificate was recommended to me both by word of mouth from his Majesty, and
by direction upon a Petition, subscribed, to my Remembrance, by the Secretary
of State, which Petition the Commissioners might call for from the Clerk of the
Hamper, who had it for the instructing of his Council, and fortifying his
Evidence. 4. Upon my doubting of the form, how this might be done by Law and
President, the King's Council learned, to wit, the Attorney and Sergeant, did,
not in the Clerk of the Hanpers only, but in the King's behalf, satisfy the
Court fully in both those particulars, which is express in the Order. 5. That
thereupon the Court being assisted with one or two Judges, without examining
the Suggestions, (which the Court supposed to be sufficiently done by the
former Referrees) the Order was made; which Order for the ease of the Subjects,
does retrench and cut short very much of the Fees allowed by the former
Certificate. 6. For Orders made in the High Court of Chancery, the Judge for
that time being, does not conceive that he is responsable to any Power under
Heaven, beside the King himself. And this was the effect of my Answer
concerning that Order for increasing the Fees of the Clerk of the Hanper. My
Answer concerning the Fees in the Diocese of Lincolnis wholly omitted in the
Report, as though I had been only called before the Commissioners, but for
form; and it was to this effect, 1.That the Certificate from the Country lays
nothing to my charge. 2. That I never gave Direction for receiving of any Fees,
but took those only which were delivered to me by the Register. 3. That I
conceived the Fees of Lincoln Diocese to be much lower than of any other in
England, which the L. Wentworth seemed to confess to be so. 4. That if the
Register did receive 23 s. 4 d. of every Clerk instituted for the Bishop's Fee,
it was no more than the Table allowed. 5. That the Fees questioned were
received by my four immediate Predecessors, Bishops Mountain, Neale, Barlow,
Chaderton, Which four Bishops take up a space of time, which extends beyond the
Table of Fees. And the L. Wentworth said, he believed as much, and promised to
report it. 6. My L. of Winchester is able to assure as much, that these are the
ancient Fees of the Diocese; and that I believe my ^^ of London, who was
beneficed and dignified in this Diocese, and has twice or thrice paid the said
Fees in his own person, can, and I doubt not, will be ready to testify as
much. 7. That for mine own part, and mine own time, I was ready to lay all my
Fees (being, God wot, a most contemptible Sum) at your Majesty's Feet, to be
disposed of as your Majesty pleased. Nor had I ever in my Life touched one Penny
of the same, but given it away from time to time to mend my Servants
Entertainment. 8. That the 135 th Canon mentioned by the Commissioners, refers
the examination of all Fees in question, not settled by Acts of Parliament, to
the Archbishop only, and the Cognizance ecclesiastical, who is the only proper
Judge of these Questions: Therefore I humbly beseech your Majesty, that I may
not be drawn to contest with my Sovereign, in a Suit of Law of so mean and
miserable a Charge as this is, but rather, if those two reverend Prelates shall
not be able to satisfy your Majesty, you will be pleased to hear me your self,
or transmit the Cause to the Lords of the Council, or where it is only proper
to be heard, to the Archbishop of the Province, and that Mr. Attorny-General
may stay the Prosecution elsewhere; which I shall embrace with all humble Duty
and Thankfulness, etc.


Which reference to the Archbishop was granted, who did authorize the receiving
of those Fees for the present De been esse only. And after Sir H. Martin and
others had examined the Tables, Registries, and Witnesses of Credit and
Experience, for the Antiquity of the same, upon their Report the several Fees
were ascertained by his Grace's Subscription, for the time to come. So true is
that of Euripides, in Supplic. (...). He that was low in Favor got the better
of him that was great in Power, in a good Cause.

93. Remember that in this petitionary Letter the Bishop calls himself the
King's Chaplain, but not his Counselor; for about a year bygone the King had
commanded that his Name should be expunged, and not remain in the Catalogue of
those honorable persons: And who is so faithful among all thy servants as
David? 1 Samuel 22.24. Yet so it was decreed, he must not challenge the
Privilege, nor keep the Ceremony of the Name; and more he had not in four years
before. No worse an Author than Sir E. Coke tells us, in Jurisd. of Courts, p.
54. By force of his Oath, and Custom of the Realm, he that is a Privy
Councillor is still so, without any Patent or Grant, during the life of the
King that made choice of him. But before whom can this be tried? And, who shall
decide it? It will scarce come within the Law; and when a King will hold the
Conclusion, he will be too hard for any man in Logic. Let the Masters of the
Republic contend about it, whose Counselors have changed as fast as the
quarters of the year. Surely His Majesty showed himself much offended in this
action, yet it is better for a King not to give, than to take away; which
Xenophon put into Cyrus's Mouth, lib. 7. C. Paid. (...) (...). It imprints more
Offense in a man's Mind, to be deprived of that he had, than to be pretermitted
in some Kindness which he never had. Since it was no better, the Bishop thought
he might ask a noble Friend in Good-manners (it was the Earl of Holland) what
had kindled the King's Anger, that he would not allow him the empty Title of a
Counselor? The Earl answered him home and ingenuously, That he must expect
worse than this, because he was such a Champion for the Petition of Right; and,
that there was no room at the Table for those that would abide it. Which was
like the Fortune o^ Poplicola, Honoris sui culmen insregit, ut libertatem
civitatis crigeret, Symma. p. 3. He forfeited his Honor to maintain the Laws,
which being not maintained, the People are not only Losers, but a Kingdom will
look like a Tabernacle taken down, whose Pins are unfastened, and the Cords of
it broken. To gall our Bishop with assiduous recurrent Umbrages (for Pismires
wear out Flints with passing to and fro upon them) the Christening of Prince
Charles being celebrated in the Chapel of St. James's House, Jun. 27. 1630.
and all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal about London being invited thither, to
make the Splendor eminent, the Bishop of Lincoln only was left out, and not
admitted to join in Prayer and Joy with that Noble Congregation. The more sharp
Diseases suffer not the lesser to be perceived; yet this Omission, light as it
might seem, did twinge him, even to outward demonstrance of Dejectedness, that
in so good a day, wherein the Clemency of the King should have run at waste to
all men, that then he should be separated from his Countenance and this
Solemnity. But, says he, in one respect it was well, for I would not have said
Amen to Bishop Laud 's Prayer (which he conceived for the Royal Infant, and was
commended to all Parish-Churches) in that passage, Double his Father's Graces,
O Lord, upon him, if it be possible. No Supplication could be better, than to
crave increase of Grace for that Noble Branch; for when a Prince is very good,
God is a Guest in a human Body: But to put in a Supposal, whether the Holy
Ghost could double those Gifts to the Child, which he had given to his Father,
and to confine the Goodness and Almightiness of the Lord, it was three-piled
Flattery, and loathsome Divinity. Let Cartwright and all his Part show such an
Exception against any line in our Common Prayer, and I will confess they have
some Excuse for their Non-subscription. To carry on mine own Work: When it was
known what small esteem His Majesty had of this Bishop, it raised him up the
more Adversaries, who caught at every thing that was next, and turned it to a
Weapon to strike him; of which Sir Robert Osborn High Sheriff of
Huntingtonshire was aware. It was upon a nice point, the Levy of Ship Money,
wherein the L. of Lincoln was very provident, to do nothing to displease; for
the Adagy could tell him, Verendum est dormienti in ripa ne cadat; He that sits
upon the Cliff of the Sea, had best take heed he do not nodd and tumble down.
The King's Streights did compel him to levy this Impost of Ship Money, for the
defense of the narrow Seas, being startled with a Motto newly devised by
Cardinal Richilieu, Florebunt lilia ponto. The Exchequer would not supply the
rigging of a Navy, though never better husbanded than at that time, by Dr.
Juxon Bishop of London, held by all to be a good man; wherefore I cannot pass
him by without a word out of Sidon. Apol. lib. 4. ep. 4. Cum vir bonus ab
omnibus censeatur, non est homo pejor si non sit optimus. The French Hangers on
in the Court devoured so much, that all his Thrift, which ammassed much, was
gulp'd down by those insatiable Sharks: None but they made K. Charles a poor
King: These are the Gallants that disdain every thing that is English, but our
Gold and Silver. Alexander, Ad Alex. lib. 3. c. 23. tells us a Wonder, (But
shall we believe him?) That from P. Aemylius's Triumph to the Consulship of
Hirtius and Pansa, a full 130 years, the People of Rome paid no Tribute. What a
Revenue Parsimony can both preserve and gather! But if that frugal Senate had
maintained a French Court, the Quaestors would soon have found a vacuum in
their Coffers. Now see what Sir R. O. did hammer out, to despite his Bishop
upon this Impost: He laid a very unequal Levy upon the Hundred wherein Bugden
stood; the Bishop wrote courteously to him to review and rectify the Levy, and
he and his Neighbors were ready to see it collected and paid. Sir Robert rides
up to the Court, and complains bitterly, that the Bishop had utterly refused
the Payment of Shipmoney, and animated the Hundred to follow him. Being easily
convinced before the Lords of the Council, that the Bishop had carried himself
dutifully and discreetly in the matter, yet Sir R. O. had no Check, the Bishop
no Reparation, the Levy no Reformation. Why, the worst Men the worst of
Infidels, the worst of our Enemies, have a Communion of Natural Right with
others, to receive no Injury, to be satisfied upon them that do them wrong and
damage. What a pickle was a poor Prelate in that was not so considered, that
was laid naked to every Slander and Oppression! still he looked for better, and
would never lay aside his Privy-Coat of Trust and Confidence in God. He that
will learn that sanctified Art from an Emblem, which is a Riddle in a Picture,
let him take it out of Pliny, lib. II. Not. Hist. c. 24. Incremento omnium
futuro telas suas araneae altius tollunt. The Spiders, that have made their
Webs in Trees, upon a Bank side, remove them higher when the Spring-Tydes come
in: That is, lift up the Soul, and advance it higher to God and his Protection,
when the Floods of Oppression rage, and threaten to overwhelm us.

94. One Quarrel, commenced upon no ground, continued to this day, by the
Animadverter on the Church History of Britain, and elder than the Troubles with
Sir R. O. was thus: Anno 1632. in the declining of November, Dr. Theodore
Price, Sub-dean of Westminster College, was cut to be cured of the Torment of
the Stone; his Wound growing dry, his Present-death was presaged: Mr. James
Molins, his Chyrurgion, gave intelligence, that his Patient did discover to
some Visitants of the Romish Faction, when he thought Mr. Molins did not hear
him, his Affection and Devotion to their Church: That a Table was prepared,
covered, Plate set on, with a Wax Light, and a piece of Gold laid by it, (this
is his punctual Relation) all being dismissed, and none remaining in the Room but
Dr. Floyd, a very skilful Physician and a Papist, who is yet living) and a
little old man, seen there but once before, who continued together about an
hour. The Bishop being at Bugden, informed of all this, came in the depth of
Winter in all haste to Town, and when he had lighted, before he would go to his
own Lodgings, he went to the Sub-dean, whom he found in sad plight, not like to
continue; so without more ado he offered to pray with him at the Bed's-side,
and was spoken to by the Doctor to forbear. Says the Bishop, Cousin, you have
need of holy Assistance, will you entertain any of the Prebendaries, or some
other Churchman, to do this Godly Office for you belonging to the Sick? He
stiffly refused them all. The Bishop propounded, that his weak state might be
remembered to God at the Evening Prayers in the Abbey. No, says the other, I do
not desire them. Will you have no communion with us of the Church of England,
says the Bishop? Not any, says the Sub-dean. God give you a better mind, says
the Bishop. But, Cousin, will you have any thing with me before we part? Only,
my Lord, says he, that you will be no more a Trouble to me; and that you will
take my poor Servant, being unprovided, into your Care and Family. Which was
not forgot, for the Bish. received his Servant, whom afterward he preferred in
Means and Marriage in the City of Lincoln; for he was more careful of the
Children, Alliances, and Relations of his Friends, when they were dead, than of
themselves when they were living. The E. of Pembrook, L. Chamb. to the King,
being Steward of the College and City of Westminster. the Bishop made him acquainted
with every word that had passed between him and Dr. Price, how at his last gasp
he had disclaimed the Church of England; and the L. Steward related it to the
King; which was then interpreted, and the Scandal is lately renewed, as if the
Bishop had feigned all this (yet it passed before Witnesses) to wound Bishop
Laud, who endeavored to make the Revolter Bishop of Asaph. There had been
little Salt in that Stratagem, for Lincoln himself had sent this Price,
Commissioner for the King into Ireland, moved to obtain for him the same
Dignity of Asaph in the former vacancy, when Dr. Hanmer stepped in before him,
sticked passionately to advance him before renowned Usher, to the Primacy of
Armagh, upon the death of Dr. Hampton. Reader, you will say the Bishop was much
deceived in his Cousin; neither do I defend him; he did more than once miss in
his Judgment in some whom he preferred, Humanum est. And it was a ranting
Speech which Salmasius ascribes to Asclepiades, in his Preface to Solinus, That
he would not be held a Physician if he were ever sick. To deliver thus much in
the behalf of both the Bishops, Dr. Price's Patrons that would have been, the
man was of untainted Life, learned in Scholastical Controversies, of a reverend
Presence, liberal, courteous, and prudent above many, and seemed very fit to
make a Governor. But as our Cambridge term is, he was staid with Nescio's: He
was not known in Court nor City, for he had not shown himself in a Pulpit in 20
years. He that says no credit is to be given to the Information that he died a
Papist, I would he had proved it; for, as Cortesius writes to Politian, p. 242.
Plus de invento vero gaudeo, quam de victoria; I had rather it were true, than
get the Victory: But Wishes will not bring it about. Nemo facit optando ut
verum sit quod verum non est, says St. Austin, Ep. 28. By what color or
appearance can he be vindicated to dye a Protestant? May we not as soon light a
Candle by a Glowworm? In what did he seem to be a Son of our Reformed Church?
I do not mean as an Ape is like to a Man, but as a Child is like to his Mother.
Hypocrisy dwells next door to Orthodox Doctrine, but it never comes in to her
Neighbor. So the Upshot will bear it, that the Bishop of Lincoln did justly
discover his Kinsinan and Friend's Apostasy, though his own blame did depend
upon it: Which will leave him the Praise that Erasmus gives to a L. Montjoy,
Ep. p. 162. Haec est tua n obilit as ut mentiri nescias si velis, nec velis si
scias.

95. There would be no end to repeat with how many Quarrels this unfortunate
Bishop was provoked, yet his Adversaries did but dry-ditch their matters, and
dug in vain, though they still cast up Earth, who were no better than the
Arrians, of whom Athanasius writes, Lib. ad Sol. Vit. Again. (...). They fretted
if they had spent a day wherein they could not do a Mischief. And it will do
the Sufferer no right, to tell how he threw all day, and cast not one good
Chance, but was worsted in all his just Appeals: Quis enim sua praelia victus
-- Commemorare velit? Metam. l. 9. Yet I will insist in that noble Contest he
had with the Archbishop of Canterbury, about his metropolitical Visitation,
that hereafter, when God shall send the like occasion, (as I trust he will) the
Diocesans of Lincoln may know what their stout Predecessor did allege for
their exemption. This may come to pass. But as the unknown Orator said to
Constantine in his Panegyric, p. 246. Ista felicitas viderit utrum adhuc meae
aetati debeatur. Archbishop Land enterprizing to visit his whole Province,
found opposition only from the Universities, from Cambridge I am sure, and from
the Bishop of Lincoln, whom, next to the substance of the Cause, one
circumstance displeased, that Sir John Lamb was commissioned to be the
metropolitan Vicar, to visit his Diocese: Sir John had been very officious
about him for many years: I let it go with that of Tully to Atticus, Pompeius
Scauro studet, sed utrum front an mente dubitatur. And the Bishop had done as
much for Sir John as he could have done for the Worthiest of all his
Profession. It Is amplified enough before, and makes another instance, That so
wise a man was not always circumspect in his Patronage. Lamb was crafty, and of
much experience, but in the running of some years, he was hated of all men, and
much complained of, that he was ravenous in taking Fees: Like as one says of
the Pope's drawing in Moneys from all Parties, That he was a Participle that
took from Clergy and Laity. When he perceived these things distasted Bishop
Williams, and that he had not Encouragement from him as before, and dreaming of
Golden Mountains from another hand, he turned the falsest man, and the greatest
Enemy to him in the World: Archbishop Laud he would worm him quite from adhering to
Lincoln; and much good do him with him. Whereupon I remember what Plutarch
tells merrily, of a goutish man that had his Slippers stolen from him; says the
man full of Pain, I wish the Thief no more harm, but that my Slippers were fit
for him. Well, the Visitation being designed, and to be carried on by
Lieutenant Lamb, our Bishop wrote to my Lord of Canterbury, as follows.

96. Most Reverend, etc.
UPon the Message which I received from Mr. Sherman, of your Graces intention
to visit my Diocese this year, being the year of mine own Triennial Visitation;
and the certain News I heard of Sir J. Lamb's collecting of Presidents, to
induce your Officers to stir up your Grace thereunto, I have, both by my self
and others, made some enquiry into the Records, and several Registries of the
Diocese, and do find clearly, that in Grosthead's time, anno 1235. this Diocese
had never been metropolitically visited, and that ever since that time, until
now, no Archbishop of Canterbury did visit this Diocese (otherwise than in
vacancy of the Sea) but by the virtue and power of some particular Bull
procured from the Pope, or Letter of Assistance from the King's Majesty, since
the Supremacy was reassumed in this Realm. And I find the several Bishops in
these several Ages to have assented to these Visitations, as they were Papal
and Regal only, not forbearing notwithstanding to exercise all manner of Act or
Acts belonging to their Jurisdiction Episcopal, not only in the times, but in
and on the very days of these Archiepiscopal Visitations, and refusing to pay
any Procurations or other Fees, by virtue of a special exemption granted unto
this See, and some others, by Pope Innocent the Fourth, by the procurement of
Bishop Grosthead, deposited in this Registry, and never waved by the Bishops of
this See, however, some other of your Graces Suffragans have omitted
peradventure (as having not the custody thereof) to implead the same: Yet do I
differ (may it please your Grace) in this particular from all my Predecessors
in this See, that I do believe your Grace may visit, even by your own
metropolitical Power, all this Diocese, (unless this great Prescription of an
hundred years may debarr the same) but truly I do, under Favor, conceive, that
your Grace ought not to inhibit my ordinary Jurisdiction, nor do any acts to
impeach the same. Nor can I find any word sounding that way, in any one of all
the Visitations kept, as before is rehearsed, by your Grace's Predecessors,
excepting only in Archbishop Cranmer's, the last Archbishop, who above one
hundred years since visited this Diocese; and yet Longland, then Bishop of
Lincoln, did not only execute all parts of his Jurisdiction, pendente
visitatione metropolitica, but the Dean of the Arches, Archbishop Cranmers, and
the King's chief Commissioner for that Service, did freely and voluntarily of
himself set all the Bishop's Officers at full liberty, to exercise all their
Jurisdictions, after the first day of his Visitation, reserving his Detections
only to his own cognizance. Now, since this Visitation of Archbishop Cranmer,
(which was more Regal than Metropolitical, as appears by the Instructions given
to the Commissioners at that time) no Archbishop of Canterbury has ever
offered to visit this Diocese, as well for the Reasons premised, as because all
the means of Livelihood belonging to this See, being taken away by the Duke of
Somerset, 2 Ed. 61. and a new, airy, and fantastical Corpse being framed for
the miserable Bishopric, consisting in great part of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, if your Grace should inhibit the exercise thereof, and divert the
Profits assigned therefrom for the Bishop's Maintenance, he should not be able
to eat or drink, much less to pay unto his Majesty First Fruits, Tenths, and
Subsidies, charged upon this Bishopric, with relation to this last Endowment:
In the which last Difference this Bishopric is, for ought I know, miserably
distinguished from all others. Thus I conceive the case to stand, my gracious
Lord; and I hope, (unless your Grace will be pleased to permit me to go on with
my Visitation for this year, and take further time to consider thereof) by our
Lady-Eve, to procure all those several pieces, which confirm these Premises,
to be transcribed out of our Records and Registries, and sent by my Officers to
attend your Grace's further Good Will and Pleasure, etc.




How reasonable the Propositions of this Letter are I know not; I know they did
not prevail: Sed ne querelae tum quidem gratae fuere, cum forsitan erant
necessariae, says Livy in his Preface. His Complaints were not well taken,
though they were necessary, and good to stand upon Record, to show what was
alleged for the benefit of his own See, and the emolument of smaller
Bishoprics. In the end our Bishop let it go on the Archbishop's side, without
more contradiction, having not forgotten that Philosophy in Seneca,
Acerbissimam partem servitutis effugit, qui imperium libens excipit.

97. All this, and so many Quarrels piled one upon another, were too little to
bow the straightness of his Spirit, yet there was enough to make his Foes
audacious, because a heavy Charge in Star chamber depended Seven years against
him, prosecuted for the King by the Attorny-General, concurrent all along with
the rehearsed Troubles; Omne tulit secum Caesaris ira malum, Ov. 3. Trist. el.
12. God complains of the Rigor of the Heathen against Jerusalem, I was but a
little displeased, and they helped forward the affliction, Zech. 1.15. Beware
to help Affliction forward, Revenge is fierce when Misery cannot mitigate it:
It may be a Court-lesson, it is not a Christian, to thrust him down that is a
falling: Mark Reader, that the Actors herein came into the hands of a Power, or
rather of a Tyranny, that had no compassion of any. Optima vindex insolentiae
variet as humanae conditionis, Valor. lib. 4. c. 7. The Wheel of Vicissitude
turning many Sticklers that were at the top to the bottom, is the Act and
Motion of Providence, to be the Scourge of Insolency. Among all Devices to
thrust him under Water, that was sinking already, none was hatched of more
Despite and Indignity, than a Book published by a Bluster-master, ann. 1636.
called, A Coal from the Altar, to defame a Letter sent nine years before by the
Bishop, to some Divines of the Neighborhood of Grantham in Lincolnshire, to
resolve a Doubt upon the Site of the Communion Table, or Altar, as the Vicar of
Grantham called it, from whose Indiscretion the Contention began. If ever any
had a Wolf by the Ear, the Bishop was in that quandary upon this provocation.
Gladly he would have made his Peace with the King, to which he came near twice
or thrice, but at last utterly lost the sight of it: It behoved him, for his
Safety, not to make them his Enemies, who were like to be his Judges; chiefly
not to trespass against the Likings of Archbishop Laud, who could draw the King
with one Hand farther than all the Lords in the Court with their whole Arm.
From anno 1627, when the Letter was written in the Case of the Vicar of
Grantham, to anno 1636, there had been much done in Preaching and Practice, to
introduce some comelinesses in the Worship of God, as they were styled, which
had not been before. The Archbishop set his Mind upon it, which a late Writer
calls his Pregnancy to revive ancient Ceremonies; and another Book, Antid.
Lincol. p. 85. No Metropolitan of this Church, that more seriously endeavored
to promote the Uniformity of Public Order, than his Grace now being: -- The
Clamours raised upon him are an Evidence of it. The Compliance; of many to
curry Favor, did outrun the Archbishop's Intentions, if my Opinion deceive me
not, and made the Clamor the greater; which meeting with other Discontents,
might have warned Wisdom to stop, or go on slowly. So well it is known to be
dangerous to run against the Stream, and Unwillingness of the People; and no
good Physician will try Experiments upon an accrased Pody. An honest Mind is
not enough to patronize that which is much condem^^^. I would have none to
suspect the Archbishop, that he meant any Change in the Doctrine of our Church;
I would have none to tax his Reformation for Superstition; but I will say as
Polybius did, in defense of the nice Observations of the old Roman Religion,
that it was (...), an Excess of Piety: Yet be not too bold against causeless
Jealousies. Grant it, (but I do not give it) that the Clamours did rise from
weak Judgments; and pass over that Rule, That the strong ought to bear the
infirmities of the weak, and not to please our solves, Romans 15.1. Policy ought
to listen abroad to the Talk of the Streets, and the Marketplaces, (for secular
Policy is no profane thing, well used in the Service of God) and not to
despise Rumors, when they are sharpened against the innovating of any
Discipline. These things appeared but Straws to stumble at to a resolved
Stomach; and a Champion comes out in print, to gagg all popular murmuring
against the placing of the Holy Table Altar-wise; Ambustum Torr^m Corinaeus ab
ara corripit, Aen. 12. one that would vent more, I believe, than the Masters of
the Game would have done, that put him into the Lists. Athlet^e suts
ineitatoribus fortiores sunt, says St. Hicrom, in an Epistle to Julianus. Yet
the common Vogue was, that this Author, though learned, was not the fittest to
defend the Cause, being not fortunate in the good opinion of the Times. It was
remembered, that the Spartans would not pass that into a Decree, which was good
in it self, which a scandalous Fellow oster'd to their Council, but turned him
by, and set up a plain honest man to prefer it: Sic bona sententia mansit,
turpis author mutatus est, Gel. lib. 18. c. 3. But if the Press must be set
awork, as the Pulpits, Schools, and Consistories had been, to maintain this
matter, of no great moment, God wot, why must this Bishop and his Letter be the
Block to fashion their Wit upon? He was one that would carry no Coals, they
knew it: A judicious Reply from him would make the Shadow return ten degrees
backward upon their Dyal, they knew it: That Abner gave good Counsel to Asahel,
not to pursue a valianter man than himself, and a Captain of the Host, but lay
hold on one of the young men, and take his Armor, 2 Samuel 2.21. they knew it:
Yet they had shuffled the Cards, that they knew they should win somewhat by the
Hand; for, if the Bishop gave no Answer to this Challenger, he was baffled, and
posted upon every Gate about London for a Dastard. If he returned them their
own again, then pull him to the Stake, and worry him in the Star Chamber, where
he was struggling for Life at this time; in which fatal juncture the King must
be told, that he was an Enemy to the Piety of the Times, and the Good Work in
hand: So that this Spaniel was to put up the Fowl, that the Eagle might fall
upon the Quarry. But it was soon decided; for rather than forsake a good Cause,
and a good Name, Lincoln chose to use his Pen to maintain his innocent Letter,
though malicious Subtlety had made it manifest, that nothing could fall so
moderately from him in that cause, which would not be subject to perverse
exposition. The Athenians had deserted their old Philosophy, Cum imminente
periculo major salutis quam dignitatis cura fuit, Justin. lib. 5. Therefore a
Mind that was not degenerous, had rather provide for Dignity than Safety. None
writes better than Budaeus upon such a case, de Ass, lib. 1. fol. 10. Tanta
fuit vis numinis ad stylum manum urgentis, ut periclitari malis, quam rumpi
degeneri patientia. Some divine Spirit did so strongly stir him up to write,
that he had rather run any hazard, than smother such an Injury with cowardly
Patience.

98. I have cleared the rise of the Controversy which follows, That a Letter
of the Bishop's was sent to some few persons, nine years before, to stop a
Debate in a private Parish, and to make Peace in the place. This was published
by Dr. Heylin, with a Confutation, and censured for Popular Affectation,
Disaffection to the Church, Sedition, and for no better than No Learning: And
the Plot was, as Concurrencies will not let it be denied, to pop out this
Pamphlet, when the Bishop's Cause in Star Chamber was now ripe for hearing: And
this was the Pack-needle to draw the Whip-cord of the Censure after it. But
what was this about? Take the Substance, or rather the Shadow, that was
contended for, out of the Letter, in an Abstract: The Vicar of Grantham, P. T.
of his own Head, and never consulting the Ordinary, had removed the
Communion Table to that upper part of the Chancel, which he called the
Altar-place, where he would officiate when there was a Communion, and read that
part of Service belonging to the Communion, when there was none. And when the
People showed much dislike at it, because it was impossible, as they alleged,
that the 24th part of the Parish should see or hear him, if he officiated in
that place, he persisted in his way, and told them he would build an Altar of
Stone upon his own cost at the upper end of the Quire, and set it with the ends
North and South, Altar-wise, and six it there, that it might not be removed
upon any occasion. A Complaint being made against this, by the Alderman, and a
multitude of the Town, the Bishop contented himself at first to send a Message
to the Magistrate, and the Vicar, that they should not presume either the one
or the other of them, to move or remove that Table any more, otherwise than by
special direction of him and his Chancellor; that in his Journey that way he
would view the place, and accommodate the matter according to the Rubric and
Canons. There being no certain day set when the Bishop would come, the
Inhabitants of Grantham prevented him, and came with open cry to Bugden against
the Vicar, who was among them at the Hearing. Some Heat, and sharp Impeachments
against each other being over, the Bishop did his best to make them Friends,
and supped them together in his great Hall, while himself retired to his Study,
and bade them expect that he would frame somewhat, in a thing so indifferent to
him, to give them content against the Morning. So he bestowed that night in
writing, and made his Papers ready by day: As the Panegyrist said to
Constantine of such Celerity, Quorum igneae and immortales mentes, mint^^e
sentiunt corporis moras, p. 303. The Secretary gave a short Letter to the
Alderman, in which that which concerns the case in hand, is this little: That
his Lordship conceived that the Communion Table, when it is not used, should
stand in the upper end of the Chancel, not Altar-wise, but Table-wise: But when
it is used, either in or out of the time of Communion, it should continue in
the place it took up before, or be carried to any other place of Church or
Chancel, where the Minister might be most audibly heard of the whole
Congregation. What can a Critic in Ceremonies carp at herein? What else, but
that the end, and not the side of the Table should stand toward the Minister
when he performed his Liturgy? Is this all? And must a Controversy as big as a
Camel be drawn through the Eye of this Needle? But more of the same comes after
in a larger Script, which the Bishop at the same time willed to be delivered to
the Divines of the Lecture of Grantham, to be examined by them upon their next
meeting-day, that their Vicar being one of their company, might read the
Contents, and take a Copy for his own use, if he would, but to divulge it no
further. Herein the Bishop derives his Conceptions from the Injunctions,
Articles, and Orders of the Queen, from the Homilies and Canons, from Reports
out of the Book of Acts and Monuments, and from the Rubricks of the Liturgy;
and shows out of these, that the Utensil on which the Holy Communion is
celebrated, ought not to be an Altar, but a joined Table; that the Name of
Table is retained by the Church of England, and the other of Altar laid aside;
that the Table (without some new Canon) is not to stand Altar-wise in
Parish-Churches, and the Minister be at the North end thereof, but Table-wise,
and he must officiate at the North side of the same; that this Table, when holy
Duties are not in performing at it, must be laid up in the Chancel, but in the
time of Service, to be removed to such a place of Church or Chancel, the
oversight of Authority appointing it, wherein he that officiates may be most
conveniently seen and heard of all. They that would peruse the whole Letter are
referred to it in Print, but the sum of it is already laid before them. And the
Author was so little overweening, though in a frivolous case, that he prays the
Divines to whom he sent it, that if they found mistakings in his Quotations, or
had met with any Canons or Constitutions differing from the alleged, or did
vary in their Judgment, that they would send their Reasons, and they should be
kindly and thankfully accepted. How could a Prelate carry himself with more
Moderation? or a Scholar write with more Modesty? or a Variance be more
suddenly composed (as it was) with more Indifferency? Did this Letter deserve
to be ripped up nine years after, and torn into Rags by an angry Censure? (...).
Odyss. w. It will be a dishonor to the Times, that Posterity should hear of
it. I see, if the Dr. had been in the place of the Bishop, he would have led
the Parish of Grantham another Dance, to their cost and vexation. Many that are
in low condition, are best where they are: As Livy says, lib. 1. dec. 5.
Quidnam illi Consules, Dictatoresve facturi erant, qui proconsularem imaginem
tam trucem saevimque fecerint? If such had been the Consuls and Dictators of
the Church, what would they have done, who flew so high when they had no
Authority?

99. Scan this now, both for the Form and Matter, before equal Judges in some
Moral and Prudential Rules: The Letter or private Monition, as he calls it that
drew it up, Hol. Tab. p. 82. was written nine years before, and in all that
time had gained this Praise, that it savored of Fatherly Sweetness, to
satisfy the Scrupulous by Learning in matter of Ceremony, rather than to
strike the case dead with Will and Command. The Contents of it had been quoted
in a Parliament, with well done good and faithful Servant, thou have been
faithful in a little. A Divinity-Professor in his Chair, Dr. Pr. had spoken
reverendly of it by the relation of many; it was punctually read, or opened
fully to the King at the hearing of the Cause of St. Gregory's Church, Ho. Tab.
p. 58. and no Counselor did inform that it was disparaged. A Litter of blind
Whelps will see by that time they are nine days old; and was the Answerer
blind, that could not see the reputation this Paper had got, by that time it
was nine years old? Let a Presbyter, for me, dispute the truth with him that is
of the greatest Order in the Church, yet what Canons will suffer him to taunt
and revile a Bishop, whose whole Book was but a Libel against a Diocesan, p.
58. (...). Clem. Constable. lib. 2. c. 31. Which Canon will not allow a Clerk of a
lower degree to raise an evil Murmur against a Bishop. Much of the like is an
Antiquity from Ignatius downward. Their supereminent Order is not to be exposed
to petulant Scoffings by their own Tribe; Sed servanda est uniuscujusque
Episcopi reverentia, says Gregory, Ep. 65. Ind. 2. since the Age grew learned,
and Knowledge puffed men up, Ministers are more malapart among us, and in every
state with the Fathers of the Church; but from the beginning it was not so. If
the like to this had been done upon the Person of another Bishop, he would have
been taught better Manners that had presumed it. The Example is the same
wheresoever it lighted, and might have taught them, that where Reverence is
forgotten to any of the chief Order, that he that abuses one, does threaten
many. It is a sad Presage to my Heart, to apply that of Baronius to them that
did not maintain the Honor of their Brother, Quod Praesides ecclesiarum alter
alterius vires infringebant, Deus tranquilla tempora in persecutiones
convertebat, an. 312. p. 6. These Annals prevent me not to forget, that for a
better color to make licentious Invectives, the Respondent takes no notice
that a Bishop wrote the Letter: For, why not rather some Minorite among the
Clergy? Indeed it had not the Name, but the Style tells him all the way, that
it could come from none but the Diocesan of Grantham: Therefore I will give him
his Match out of Baronius, anno 520. p. 22. Maxentius contra epistolam
Hormisdae scripsit: sed ut liberam sibi dicendi compararet facultatem,
Hormisdae esse negavit, sed ab adversariis ejus nomine scriptam esse affirmans.
This is a stale Trick to bait a Pope or a Prelate, in the name of one that was
much beneath them; Sternitur infoelix alieno vulnere, Aen. lib. 10. but he that
wilfully makes these mistakes, I take him for what he is. I pass to the main
Question, What did this Letter prescribe, that it should be torn with the
Thorns of the Wilderness? It pared away no Ceremony enjoined; O none further
from it; but it moderated a doubtful case, upon the Mode and Practice of a
Ceremony, how the Communion-Board should stand, and how the Vicar in that
Church should pray and read at it for best edification of his Flock. He must
give me time to study upon it, that would demand me to start him a Question
belonging to God's Service of less moment: Had the Gensdarmery of our great
Writers no other Enemy to fight with? Nothing to grind in their Brain-mill but
Orts? This the Colleges of Rome would have, to see us warm in petty Wranglings,
and remiss in great Causes; as Laertius says of one Xenophon, of the
Privy-Purse to Alexander the Great, (...), p. 632 He would quiver for cold in
the hot Sun, and sweat in the Shade. It was a Task most laudably performed by
Whitgift, Bridges, Hooker, Morton, Burgess, to maintain the use of innocent
Ceremonies, with whom Bishop Williams did ever jump; and, as Fulgentius says in
P. Paulo's Life, would defend and observe all Ordinances, the least
considerable, and no whit essential. But this was a great deal below it, to
litigate not about the continuance, but about the placing of a Ceremony; an
evil beginning, to distract Conformists, who were at unity before, and to make
them sight like Cocks, which are all of a Feather, and yet never at peace with
themselves. Woe be to the Authors of such Cadmaean Wars, Quibus semper praelia
clade pari. Propertius. A most unnecessary Gap made in the Vine. yard, through
which both the wild Boar, our foreign Enemy, and the little Foxes at home may
enter in to spoil the Grapes. Plutarch, lib. de Is. and Osyr. tells me of a
Contention between the Oxyndrites and Cynopolites, who went to War for the
killing of a Fish, which one of the Factions accounted to be a sacred Creature;
and when they were weakened with slaughter on both sides, (...), in sine, the
Romans overrun them, and made them their Slaves. Let the Story be to them that
hates us, and the Interpretation fall upon our Enemies.

100. Yet will some of the stiffer Faction say, it was time to clip the Wings
of this Letter, or if it could be done, to make it odious abroad; for the
Mctropolitan intending one common decency in all Churches of his Province,
about the Table of Christ's Holy Supper, this Paper (six years older than his
translation to the Sea of Canterbury) where it was spread, made it difficult to
be obeyed. One about that time would have replied thus: Hold your Hands for all
that, is ye be Good-fellows, for your hour is not yet come: The Stream is
against you: Both they that have read this Letter, and they that never heard of
it, wonder why you are so double-diligent about Accessories, more than about
the Work it self. (...). says Aristoph. in Acharn. and are not pliable for this
Alteration. He that seeks a thing in the wrong way, goes so far backward. The
sage Prelates that ruled for 80 years before, did overlook this matter; and
they neither wanted Will nor Care to advance Decency with God's Glory. If you
think that he has more Power that now sits in chief, than the best of his
Order before him, that is true: Yet let him rein in a galloping Fortune, and he
will sit the surer: Beside, he must have more than Power, he must have the
Hearts of Men, that will form them to a new Model; this the Metropolitan wants;
if he had that, he might easily command them; if he have not, he must slatter
them, or he will do worse: And it is well known, how he that will bring a
People from a Custom in God's Worship, with which they have been inured, to a
Change, must be more than wise; that is, he must be thought to be wise: Look
you to that. Can you say there is any harm in that which you are so busy to
correct? Then what good can you hope to bring in, which is more valuable than
Constancy? I think Plato was a prudent Moralist, from whom this came, 7. de
Leg. (...). It Is hazardous to tamper with that, which has continued long, to
mend it, unless it be evil: But list Sirs, and tell me what Bell it is that
rouls in your Ears; Do you not hear that Great and Small are not only froward,
but sull of Threatening against the Grandeur of the Church? As yet we have lost
nothing, all our care should be to keep that which we have; else, as good
Bishop Hall wrote, while we plead for a higher strain of Prosperity, we bring
our selves into a necessity of Ruin. Archbishop Abbot said often, Parta tueri;
Play for no more, lest you lose your Stake. It is an Epitaph for the
Gravestone of a Fool, I was well, and would be better; I took Physic, and
dyed. Can you be insensible of this impendent Ruin? Are you so intent upon your
Altars, that you know not how the Nation bears a grudge at you? Are you only
Strangers in Jerusalem? As Budaeus said of the Troubles that broke in while he
lived, de Ass l. 4. p. 110. France wanted Eyes and Ears, and which is strange,
it wanted a Nose. Qui tantam cladem odorari ante non potuimus, quam ab ea
oppressi. You do not smell the Vultures, but while you are chopping and
changing, the Vultures smell after you, to prey upon the Carcass of your
Patrimony. You cannot say that there is any thing in it of Conscience to God,
why you should not forbear to provoke the Discontents of the Kingdom any
further: Lege fidei manente coetera jam disciplinae and conversationis
admittunt novitatem correctionis, Tertul. de Vel. Virg. c. 1. Keep the Old
Faith, God is the Judge of that; Order and Discipline may vary, according to
the liking of the Times, Discretion is the Judge of that. In a word, we do not
see but the Swarms of God's Servants work well in all Parishes, if you will let
them alone; if you remove their Hives, or stir them, take heed they do not
sting you. It may be a Coal-kindler would think such Counsel as this not worth
the hearing, Forecast and Fear with him are phlegmatic things; the Piety of
the Times, and a rigid prosecution of a comely Uniformity, must not stoop unto
them. Then do I say no more, but that I do not altogether dislike what a wise
man has taught me, That warm Devotion quiet and innocent, is less hurtful than
ardent Zeal which is turbulent and misdirected.

101. So much advisedly thought of might have conduced not to meddle in that
Cause at this time; but this Bishop and his Estimation was shot at, and he must
be tempted what he would do by a Provocation in Print. They were none of the
Bishop's worst Friends, that wished him, when he read the Coal, to look no more
after it. It is a small thing, but a pretty, which Camerarius tells of
Melancthon, p. 79. His Daughter had gadded from home till it was late, What
will you say to your Mother, if she chide you, says he? Nothing, says the Girl.
It Is well resolved, says her Father. The Bishop had more reason to take that
course, because the Rulers of the time frowned on him; and he that Answers a
Calumny keeps it alive, he that will not, starves it: A Reproach is warm when
it is fresh, but no longer: As Astronomers say of the Dog Star, Cunicula calore
oritur, frigore occidit; It rises in a hot Month, it sets in a cold. It Is much
he did not listen to this, and if it were but for another reason, that he
thought Learning did surfeit of too many Books, and that the most of our late
Authors were more troublesome than profitable: To which Sir H. Wootton's Motto
comes near, That the Itch of Writing makes a Scabby Church. And what else made
so great a Wit as Friar Paul profess, (it is in his Life) That he would never
write any thing with intention to print it, unless Necessity constrained him?
It may be the Bishop fancied somewhat like Necessity in this case; or it was
because every one has not both the Qualities of the brave General Decebalus in
Dion, (...); He knew how to charge on, and how to retreat upon occasion:
Therefore he published a little Tractate, called, The Holy Table, under the
name of a Lincolnshire Minister. The Analyze of it may be spared, since it is
in many hands; it insists chiefly upon two Heads, the Name Altar, and the
Posture of Christ's Table Altar-wise; a mean Subject for the Pen of so good a
Scholar, but Art is confined to small things sometimes, as well as Nature: And
Pliny teaches us, lib. 29. c. 1. Non puduit naturam gignere muscam, cum gignat
hominem. Nature is not ashamed to be the Parent of a Fly, as well as to be the
Parent of a Man. That the name of Altar might pass with more allowance, the
Vicar of Grantham declared, that he would set up a Fabric of Stone, to support
the Elements of the Holy Sacrament: Quite cross to the Advertisements 17 of Q.
Eliz. That the Parish provide a decent Table standing on a frame for the
Communion; and cross to the Canons Anno 1571. Title Churchwardens, They shall
see there be a joined handsome Table, which may serve for the administration of
the Holy Communion; in the Latin, Curabunt mensam ex asseribus composite
junctam. This is irrefragable, unless one be refractory, that he will not
learn; as Erasmus says of Poggius in his Epistles, p. 262. Poggius hoc erat
animo, ut doctissimus haberi mallet, quam reddi doctior: For if these were only
Orders of Sufferance, they were nothing, but Canons are Church-Laws:
Convocations meet not to make Permissions, but binding Canons to be obeyed by
the Subjects, and by all the Ordinaries of the Kingdom, Hol. Tab. p. 205. Yet
it was so forgotten by some, that while this Bishop was in the Tower, one of
his own Clergy in Bedford-shire, Dr. Jas. Fisher, a fair Marble Stone being
dug up in his Chancel, he set Workmen to smooth it, and to erect it for an
Altar, till Troubles marred the Work, and Impeachments of Articles broke the
Heart of a modest able man: He and the Vicar, that would be Altar-builders,
might have spared their Stone, for the Altar of Incense was made of
Shittim-wood, Exodus 30.1. or of Cedar, 1 Kin. 6.20. and over-laid with Gold,
that the Wood might not catch Fire. Or, what if a Stone were set up? It were
not the further for that from being a Table. H. T. p. 115. cites out of learned
Gerard, Cessante sacrificio altaria illa nihil sunt aliud quam mensae lapideae.
Allowing no Sacrifice, those Altars are nothing but Stone Tables. Of Judea I
can say nothing, but in Rome, about Christ's days on Earth, the People did eat
upon Tables, not only of Limon and Maple wood, but of Stone. We have added, and
Decency commends it, a fair white Linen Cloth, to cover God's Board, and our
own at Meal-times, which was not in use when our Savior instituted the
Sacrament, as far as I can see into the convival Customs of those days; for
since the Waiters did wipe away, at the end of Supper, the Liquors which were
spilt from Cups or Dishes with Sponges, it will not hold, that they had a Cloth
spread upon the Table. What will Novelists say to this, that think we break the
Second Command, if we vary from Christ in any circumstance in the ordaining of
the Holy Supper? Some of them may, perhaps, be ready hereupon to take away the
Linen Cloth: Why not? since one Faction of them has taken away the Table:
For, says Bailey in his Disswasive of Errors, p. 121. The Brownists at this day,
at Amsterdam, have no Table at all, but send the Elements from the Pulpit,
where the Minister preaches, and celebrateth the Sacrament, by the Hands of
the Deacon; and adds, that some Independents at London affect the like. (...).
Nothing so dangerous to do all kind of Evil as an ignorant Rabble. They that
will not grant a Table to Christ's Servants, to come to his Feast, will not, if
they can prevail, grant a Church or Chancel to place it in. From which Madness
and Sacrilege God deliver us. Manil. lib. 5. Si forte accesser it impetus
ausis, -- Improbitas fiet virtus.

102. From the matter of Stone, the Dispute leads us into a Strise about the
Name. In the first Liturgy of Edw. 6. Altar is most in use: In the second, and
from that day forward, the word Table is altogether read. In a year or two
after the first of King Charles, the word Altar, per postliminium, was much in
the mouth of many Divines, when it had been laid aside. Observe Peace and
Truth, and call it either, or both, and it is all one: But charge them before
the Lord, that they strive not about words to no profit, says St. Paul, 2 Timothy
2.4. For vanity, and things wherein there is no profit, are all one, Jer. 2.23.
Scholars will understand me by this Instance; Altar for Table, or Table put for
Altar, make no change in the sense with knowing men; the Council at Syrmium
turned (...) in the Nicene Creed into (...), with no small Injury to our Lord
Christ: But a Bishop in Nicephorus, instead of (...), a Couch, as it is Jo. c.
4. read (...), which is a Synonymum; yet Spiridion, a morose man, rose up, and
spoke against the Novelty. Vitiosum est propter nominum mutationem contentionem
intendere, says the Author to Herennius. They are as near as can be to be
Friends, that have nothing but two words of the same signification to part
them. Yet two things were to be cleared to stop mistakings; First, It must be
yielded, that our Mother-language, our Church-canonical word is Table, Altar is
arbitrary at large. Secondly, for the right insight into the nature of the
Sacrament, Table is the proper word, and Altar metaphorical. The Bishop
comprehends them both very well in these words. H. T. p. 75 He does not deny
but the name Altar has been long in the Church in a metaphorical usurpation;
nor would he have blamed the Vicar, if he had, in a Quotation from the Fathers,
or a Discourse in the Pulpit, named it an Altar in this borrowed sense; but to
give the usual call of an Altar (he says usual) unto the Utensil, which the
Law, that always speaks properly, never calls otherwise than by the name of a
Table, is justly by him disliked. (...). And again in that Page; Where we have
a Law and Canon to direct us how to call a thing, we ought not to hunt after
Reasons and Conceits, to give it another Appellation. It is apparent how the
Liturgy confirmed Anno 1549. chooses the word Altar, which Liturgy is
agreeable to God's Word, and the Primitive Church; yet since the alteration
came in by the next Liturgy three years after, the first Book does not allow
you to call it an Altar for the present; your Tongue ought to speak as the
present Book and Law speaks it to you; and when men in their nomination of
things do vary from the Law, which is the quintessence of Reason, they do it in
a Humor, which is the quintessence of Fancy. Thus far he again, p. 142. And it
is truly said in Antid. Lin. p. 96. Another Liturgy confirmed by Act of
Parliament, made void the old: Neither is it pretended out of any Law or Canon
to be called Altar more than once. Statute 1 Ed. 6. c. 1. The most comfortable
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, commonly called
the Sacrament of the Altar, and in Scripture the Supper and Table of the Lord,
the Communion and Partaking of the Body and Blood of Christ. Says the Bishop to
this, H. T. p. 94. The holy Scripture should carry it quite away for the Name
-- and Sacrament of the Altar is not the Name, but the Nickname, -- and a
Penal Statute, as this is, was to take notice of every Appellation it was at
that time known by, and discerned. The last Reformation, which is orderly, as
ours was, is the best: As St. Ambrose writing how Christianity came in after
other Religions, discourses thus, Ep. 32. Quis reprehendit vindemiam, quia in
occasu anni est? Aut ^livam quia postremus est fructus? Suppose some Antiquity
be alleged from the Fathers, it shall have its due reverence, and will help a
little, and but little in this matter: For, says Bishop Montague, Orig. Eccles.
Tom. 1. P. 2. page 314. Aram habemus, seu potius altar, quibus nominibus
vetusti proceres locum illum, in quo erant (...) vocabant, sed mensam saepius.
The Bishop quotes the words of C. Bellarm. lib. 1. de missa, c. 27. That the
New Testament, by the special instinct of the Holy Ghost, did purposely forbear
to insert into their Writings the name of an Altar. This is p. 116. Join to
this what you find p. 147. That in the Romish Reformation of the Canon of the
Mass, they never use in Rubric or Prayer, literally, nor so much as by
allusion, the name of Table. And is it not time to keep the proper, and
Scripture Word, in authority, when the Papalines, with an ill mind, had quite
shouldered it out? If there were any reasons, as I know none, to think the name
Altar as pertinent as Table, yet our Rubric and Canons will be above them; for
it is a prudent Maxim in Baron. anno 542. p. 205. Deseratur reverentiae
Synodorum, ut in his, quae minus intelliguntur, earum cedatur authoritati.

103. Which Rubric and Canons have rejected the name Altar, and substituted
the other of Table, as being conjunct with the Sacrament, ordained for eating
and drinking from the Table. So out of Bishop Morton, p. 130. H. T. Tell us,
where was it ever known, that any Altar was ordained for eating and drinking?
Out of C. Peron. p. 102. It is ever called a Table when it points to a
Communion Supper, and an Altar when it points to the Sacrifice. Out of Bishop
Andrews Strictures, p. 131. Christ was given to us per modum victimae on the
Cross, per modum epuli in the Sacrament. Out of the Act of K. Edward's Privy
Council, p. 132. If we come to feed on Christ spiritually, and spiritually to
drink his Blood, which is the use of the Lord's Supper, then no man can deny,
but the form of a Table is more meet for the Lord's Board, than the form of an
Altar. The alteration of Words came in then (as, who does not see it?) partly
because we would be beholden to the Scripture for our terms, rather than to the
wisest men in the World; partly to give in this Evidence among others, that we
had renounced the Sacrifice of the Mass, the very offering up our Savior in an
unbloody Oblation, not again, but by one and the same Act with which he offered
up himself on the Cross; a Chymaera which is not intelligible to any mortal
man. This was never dreamt of by those holy men, who freely called this
Sacrament a Sacrifice and Oblation. Honesta quidem, sed ex quibus deterrima
orirentur, Tac. An. lib. 1. They are excellent Notes which our Bishop quotes
out of Bishop Bilson, p. 116. Christ and his Apostles did forbear the term of
Sacrifice, therefore our Faith may stand without it. The Speeches of the
Fathers in this kind are dark and obscure, and consequently unuseful for the
edifying of the People. Lastly, We find by experience, that the very Expression
has been a great fomenter of Superstition and Popery: Therefore this is an
Exception at the word Altar, that it is a Relative to a Sacrifice. Dr. Heylin,
Antid. p. 79. pleads for the Vicar, that in that name he aimed at no
propitiatory Sacrifice. I believe him: And the like for many other of the noble
Army of our Hierarchical Church; for when that Sacrifice was exploded, yet for
a while Christ's Board was called an Altar. This was our Bishop's mind; and, I
take it, the same was and is in all our learned men, That in that Holy
Sacrament there is a Spectacle of the Sacrifice of Christ's Body, as it
suffered on the Cross, represented by breaking the Bread, and pouring out the
Wine, by eating the one and drinking the other; that there is a commemoration
of that Sacrifice in the repetition of the words of Institution; that there is
an application of that Sacrifice to their Souls, that partake by Faith; and
that all this makes properly a Sacrament, improperly and figuratively a
Sacrifice. Hereupon, lest the notion of a Sacrifice, in this improper and
secondary acception, should be forgotten, some are willing blamelesly to
refresh it in their Memory, by calling the place of the representation of it an
Altar. Nec cuiquam sunt injucunda quae cantant sibi, says Quintil. lib. II. But
stay there, and step no further, because Lauds and Thanksgivings, the sweet
odor of the Oblation of Alms, the Calves of our Lips, a broken and contrite
Heart, a mortified Body, are spiritual Victims before and after the Sacrament,
as well as in it. Sed non ibi consistunt exempla ubi caeperunt, Pater. lib. 2.
It is good Counsel to be sparing in the use of those words, whose elegancy and
innocence cannot countervail the Errors that have encroached from them. There
are some, I have heard it from their own Lips, who say, that they call this
Utensil an Altar, without any reference to a Sacrifice: Thus they explain
themselves; That what is set apart to God should be differenced in its Name
from common things, that Religion might have a Dialect proper to it self, as
Paten, Chalice, Corporal, Albe, Paraphront, Suffront, for the Hangings above
and beneath the Table: Instances are innumerous, and Churchmen were ever
pleased with Terms of Art peculiar to their own Mysteries, which are not common
and familiar with secular occasions. But if this Project breed confusion, it is
against edifying; if it give Offense, it is against Charity. And if I may not
offend my Brother with my Meat, when I am free, that is, when my Superiors have
made no Ordinance upon it; then, if I walk conscionably, I must not offend him
in usurpation of words, when I am free, and shall not break the Commandment of
Authority. I see not then but the word Table was to prevail, for the Gospel
brought it forch, the Church among us did more generally like it, the Canons
and Rubric score it to be used; and if you will ascend as high as to the
Figures of the Old Testament, says the Bishop, p. 126. not the great Altar for
Sacrifice, but the Table of the Inner Temple, on which the Shewbread was set,
was the true Type and Presiguration of the Communion Table, as diverse Jesuits
yield it. Now, in the end of this (...), or Word-strife, I profess it had never
been inserted into this Memorial of the Bishop of Lincoln, if the Doctor had
not revived it in some late pieces, which he has printed: For who has leisure
to cast his Thoughts upon such small Contentions, when we are overwhelmed with
Heresies and Schisms that pluck up our Foundations? Praesentia hobetantur
incommoda, si cui dolor major accesserit, as Sidonius setcheth it out of
Hippocrates, p. 163. When such Wounds are made in our Body, little Scratches
should be insensible.

104. The same Author has listed up the Quarrel again, which was fallen, about
the Place of the Holy Table: I would it stood in any place of the House of God,
so it might be used, but it is extremely disused. Was there ever such a
negligence among Christians before? Sometimes the Pope has interdicted the
Churches of a Nation for a year or more; the greater was his Sin: But I will
make Affidavit, that some Parishes among us have been interdicted from the
Lord's Supper, by the Hirelings that teach them, from anno 1642. to anno 1659.
and this Famine of the holy Bread is like to continue among them. Is this a
Season to renew what past anno 1637. between the Bishop and him, how the Table
should stand? Deficilis est exitus veterum jurgiorum, Sym. Ep. p. 17. I speak,
as well assured, that the Dr. has been often since that time prostrate at that
sacred Banquet; why then does he break out into old Grudges for their
Quidlibets? First, the Bishop did desire to satisfy his Reader where the holy
Table should stand, when the Communion Service was celebrated. Secondly, where
it should continue when that pious work was over. For the first, he durst not
decide it, but as the Liturgy has it, To stand in the body of the Church or
Chancel, in the Communion-time, where Morning and Evening-Prayer be appointed
to be said. And as the Advertisements state it, That Common Prayer (the
Communion being the supereminent part) be said or sung decently and distinctly
in such place as the Ordinary shall think meet, for the largeness and
straightness of the Church and Quire, so that the People may be most edisied.
And as Canon 82 does enjoin, When the Holy Communion is to be administered, it
shall be placed in so good sort within the Church or Chancel, as thereby the
Minister may be more conveniently heard of the Communicants, in his Prayer and
Ministration, and that they may conveniently, and in more number, communicate
with the Minister. And therefore the Bishop sums it up, Ep. p. 59. That this
Liberty for a convenient place of Church or Chancel, is left to the Judgment of
the Ordinary, and that the King, in his Princely Order about St. Gregory's
Church, did leave it to the Law, to the Communion book, to the Canon and
Diocesan. The Law refers to Salus populi, to the edifying of the People; which
was never respected under Popery, for their Mass was muttered at high Altars,
far remote from the Auditory: Which Harding maintains, H. T. p. 204. That they
never meant the People should understand any more than what they could guess by
dumb Shows, and outward Ceremonies. In old Liturgies it appears, that not only
the Clerks, but where a Church had no more than one Clerk to officiate, the
People made answer in Versicles and Suffrages; an excellent way to keep them in
godly action; of which Privilege and Comfort they have been robbed in corrupt
times, Erasmus says, p. 216. of his Ep. That King Harry 8. defended, that no
Prayer was to be expected from the People; Praeteream quae meant is cogitatione
Deum alloquitur. And that is it which is intended in Cardinal Pool's Articles
of his Visitation, anno 1556. Whether the People be contemplative in holy
Prayer? But we have not so learned Christ, whose Communion is so ordered, that
all that are present may hear and be edisied, every one say the Confession of
Sins after him that pronounces it, every one professes, as he is invited, to
lift up his Heart unto the Lord. Let the Table stand so commodiously for the
benesit of Receivers, when it is employed, and it is not here or there, whether
the Minister stand at the North side, as the Church in terminis directs it, or
at the North end, as Altar-contrivers contend for it. So we are told that the
Table stands, and unremovably under the East Window in the King's Chapel. And
says the Doctor, Antid. p. 41. That which is wisely and religiously done in the
Chappel-Royal, why should it not give Law to Parish-Churches? The King's
Chapel (I should say was, but my Heart will not let me) is a sacred Oratory of
great regard, and ancient mention. Constantine the Great had one portable with
him in his Camp. In Charles the Great's time the Chapel of his Palace is
samous. Luitprandus King of the Lombards had one in his Palace; Baron. anno
744. p. 23. And in the Reign of our William Conquestor, we read out of his
Mouth, Mea Dominica Capella, Seldom. Eadm. p. 165. Such Chapels, if like to our
King's in all his Courts, were of no great dimension; the holy Board could not
stand no where inconveniently in them, but that all might hear; therefore one
constant site was most decent for it, where it deserved the highest Room, it
being the Fabric on which the principal Service Evangelical is solemnized. The
Bishop, p. 182. remembers out of Suarez, that Altars in Oratories and Chapels,
among them who are the Mint-masters of Ceremonies, are not agreeable in
situation to the Altars in Churches: Therefore private Chapels, nay, even the
Kings, cannot be the Directories for all places, because very often Parish
Chancels being but a few strides broad and long, cannot contain the multitude
of all the People that come to take the Holy Mysteries. And when the Belfrey is
between the Chancel and the Nave of the Church, as at Carshalton in Surrey, the
Minister can neither be heard, nor seen, unless he officiate in the Church,
where all may enjoy the Exhortations, behold the Consecration, and join in
Prayer. Therefore the Bishop answers prudently, H. T. p. 34. It is not His
Majesty's Chapel, but his Laws, Rubricks, Canons, Proclamations, which we are
to follow in outward Ceremonies.

105. Neither can the Opponent appeal to Rubric and Canons, but he betakes him
to an Order, wherein the King's Majesty was present at the Council Table, Nov.
3. 1633. This is quoted at length, Antid. p. 62. and in some of his latter
Works, for approving the Table to be removed from the middle of the Chancel to
the upper end, and there to be placed Altar-wise. If the King had intended that
the like should be observed in all Parochial Churches, the Question had been
decided against the Bishop's Letter. Nec turpe est ab eo vinci, quem vincere
esset nefas, as Tigranes says of Pompey, Velle. lib. 1. The Bishop subscribes,
p. 163. That the addition of any more Ceremonies than are prescribed in our
Book, is referred to the person of the King by Act of Parliament. The
Contention remains, whether that Order of His Majesty with his Council has
influence upon other places, beside the particular of St. Gregory, which
occasioned it. The Dr. himself says no such matter directly, but, Antid. p. 36.
The King did not command, but has given encouragement to the Metropolitan, and
Bishops, and other Ordinaries, to require the like in all Churches committed to
them. The Bishop says, He has left all to the Law, to the Communion-book, to
the Canons and Diocesan, p. 59. And which is much they two should agree, the
Doctor says so too, Ant. p. 64. That it is left to the Judgment of the
Ordinary, for the thing, for the time (N. B.) when, and how long he may find
cause. The Bishop says more, That after this Order he had heard of no Bishop
that had exacted of his Diocese the placing of the Holy Table Altar-wise, p.
69. And in the year following, 1634. the Archbishop holding a Metropolitical
Visitation, keeps him to the ancient form in this Interrogatory, Does the Table
stand in a convenient place of Chancel or Church? If one Prelate was singular
in his Visitation of Norwich Diocese, which the Dr. would seem not to speak
out, but to intimate, our Bishop has a Passage to meet it, p. 85. out of
Archbishop Whitgift; There is no manner of reason, that the Orders of the
Church should depend upon one or two men's liking or disliking, Where now
appears, I say not the Command, but the Encouragement, that the Order made for
St. Gregory's Church should be observed in all Parishes? It will conduce to
this Cause, to borrow one Quotation out of the Bishop, and two out of the
Doctor; the Bishop's is taken from an Act of Council made for reformation, 1
Edw. 6. That the form of a Table shall never move the simple from the
superstitious Opinions of the Popish Mass; and that this superstitious Opinion
is more held in the minds of the simple and ignorant, by the form of an Altar,
than of a Table. The Dr. p. 105. out of a Sermon of Bishop Hooper's, preached
before K. Edward, It were well it might please the Magistrates to turn the
Altars into Tables, according to the first Institution of Christ, to take away
the false Persuasion of the People, which they have of Sacrifices to be done
upon the Altars; for as long as the Altars remain, both the ignorant People,
and the ignorant evil-perswaded Priest will dream always of Sacrifice. Then p.
129. Bishop Ridley took down Altars, and appointed the form of a right Table to
be used in all his Diocese, Duo Scipiadae. These two Bishops were very learned,
and very Martyrs. A little remains to shut up this Controversy, or rather to
shut it out: For to set the Table under the East Window of the Chancel, the
ends running North and South, is this to set it Altar-wise? Verily it is a mere
English Phrase, or rather an English Error, because Altars beyond the Seas are
placed promiscuously, either at the top, or in the midst of the Chancel; as the
Bishop notes p. 218. and commonly so far from the Wall, that the Priests and
Deacons might stand round about them: As in Cardinal Borromaeo's Reformation, a
space of eight cubits was to be left between the Altar and the Wall. Altar in
medio Ecclesiae situm, says Baron. anno 451. p. 62. Josephus Vicecomes, a
skilful man in these punctilio's, Altaria in medio Ecclesiae allocata fuisse.
But to fasten it sure, I refer it to Marcellus Corcyrensis, lib. 3. Sacr.
Cerem. p. 215. he says, The Pope never preaches, but when he celebrates the
Mass himself; he goes not up into a Pulpit, but sits in his Chair. Sedet ante
altar super faldistorium, si altar est apud Parietem. -- Si autem seeds Papae
non infra, sed supra altar est, ut in Ecclesia S. Petri, and similibus, tune
Papa vertit faciem ad chorum sedens in praedicta sede. Here Is the Altar, in the
chief Mother Church of Rome, in the midst of the Quire; which falls into this
conclusion, that these local Differences among us, about the Holy Table, are
not in imitation of any Church, but forms taken up at home; so that upon the
final Sentence, Maxima de nihilo nascitur historia, as Propertius says fitly.

106. Here you have the Book of the Holy Table epitomized, and you see the
Bishop broke not the Peace of the Church, but was upon the defense. His
Adversary tells us lately, that it was a Book cried up every where with great
applause, when it came first to light. What would it have been if it had been
studied any long time, and licked over with a second or third examination? But
one month in the Autumn began it, and ended it, as not only the Author, but the
Amanuensis testified. (...), says; (...); that is, when one is swift in doing a
good thing, God and he were joined together. But this Praise belongs to the Dr.
as well as to him who is a swift Dromedary traversing her ways, Jer. 2.23.
There are Passages between them with some bitterness on both sides; I like it
in neither; they that spit upon one another are both defiled: I cite nothing
fallen in that kind, for every Dunghill smells ill, but not till you stir it. To
excuse such things, Non contumelias, sed argutias vocamus, says Seneca; It may
be sharpness of Wit, but it is bluntness of Wisdom. One thing the Critics
noted beside, That in some Passages the Holy Table is too light and merry; and
no Merriment is worse than the Laughter of Anger; Subridens mista Mezentius
ira. Virg. It was not published in the person of a Bishop. And to me it seems
that a joculary Style was not amiss for a frivolous Cause: Nor would the Author
seem to be damped or troubled, but full of sanguine Alacrity for all the
Provocation. And if Mirth keep decorum, it is a good Rule of Theages the
Pythagorean, Laert. p. 847. (...): It is the office of Virtue to act with
pleasure, and not with sadness: Or as Solomon much better, A merry heart does
good like a medicine, Prove. 17.22. But if any the least thing were amiss, he
heard of it on both Ears, in the Antidotum Lincolniense, which I pass over,
because no Reply was made unto it: Not that the Author had won the Field, but
as Livy said, Dec. 1. lib. 3. when the People of Rome retired to the Aventine
Mountain, for the Injury done to Virginia, and the Senators asked them what
they would have, Non defuit quid responderetur, defuit qui responsum daret. The
Bishop, I know, was making his Notes ready to vindicate his Book, and was
resolved, as the Italian Proverb runs, to give his Adversary Cake for Bread;
for he was like to Bishop Fisher in Erasmus's Character of him, Ep. p. 396.
Roffensis vir pius cum primis, ac eruditus: sed eo ingenio, ut non facile
desinat, ubi semel incaluit in certamine. He was prevented by his Cause in
Star Chamber, which was brought to hearing in the same month that the Antidotum
came abroad; a Censure passed upon him, which was executed with that rigor,
that all that he had, even his Books, were seized, and he deprived of his
Library: He could not fight without his Arms; or how could the Bell ring out,
when they had stolen away the Clapper? Baronius pitties Photius, whom he could
not abide, for sustaining that hard usage, an. 871. p. 14. and brings him in
complaining to his unkind Lord Basilius, of whom he had deserved better, Libris
privati sumus, nova in nos excogitata poena, -- librorum amissio non est poena
in corpus sed in animam. But hear himself speak, Epist. 97. of Bishop
Montague's Edition, that Constantine had censured some Bishops, (...). Yet he
spoiled them not of their Goods, nor deprived them of their Books. But the
Bishop of Lincoln found not that mercy, because he might be indefensible, and
bear the Reproaches that fell thick upon him: Even sorry Clerks came into the
Lists, when they knew they should not meet the Champion. Children talk most
when they can speak least sense. Among these was a Doctor, like Theophrastus's
(...), or Ardelio, (...), that will be a Guide to Travelers, when he knew not
a foot of the way. He thrust out his Altar Christianum, to revile his Master,
and his Patron; for the Bishop in his great Office had protected him against a
Justice of Peace, who had served this Doctor with a Warrant for some
Misdemeanors; the then L. Keeper put the Justice out of Commission for it, and
made this Doctor a Justice in his place, took him to be his Chaplain, kept him
often by some months together in his House, bestowed on him a Prebend in
Lincoln Church, commended him to the L. Chamberlain, to swear him the King's
Chaplain in ordinary, and prevailed. Indeed the Dr. lost some favor with the
Bishop at last, because he was a Tell-tale, and made needless Complaints
against his Brethren. In those black days, when the Bishop was over-clouded,
this man strikes at him with all the force of his no-great Learning: Want makes
men busy and industrious; the man wanted Preferment, for he would not have
been so fierce if he had been full. The Puritans might sit still, and look on,
when the King's Chaplains were allowed and preferred for their forwardness to
do disgrace against a Bishop. There was a time when those factious Romans were
most extolled, that cried down their honorable Patricians, Quae res and Marii
potentiam peperit, and reip. ruinam, Match. Resp. lib. 1. c. 5. Now if these
two Doctors think they got the Garland, because no Answer was made to their
Books, let them wear it; if they desired work to write more, and to get Money by
the Press, like the diurnal Scribler, they were disappointed. And well did
Camerarius content himself, not to defend Melancthon against the Flaccians,
because it was in vain to meddle with them; they had no Forehead to be ashamed,
if they were convicted; Et ad unum probrum statim erant quae adjicerentur
december. So far, if not too far, upon the Bishop's Letter, and his Book The Holy
Table, to set some Ceremonies in order in the Church of Grantham; and I will
listen to Sidonius, lib. 8. c. 1. Post mortem non opuscula, sed opeea pensanda.
We are to consider, after a good man's Death, his Works of Bounty and Mercy,
rather than his Books of Controversy.

107. It was not Art, but Power; it was not a Book, but a Bill, that crushed
our stout Prelate: All other Billows, even to the Rage of his Enemies, lifted
him up, but this sunk him. Now I must bring his Boat to the Tower-wharf, the
worst landing-place in all the River: (...). Court and Court-luck, for Company,
from that day forward farewell, he never more looked for good from you. Here Is as
much occasion to open a wide Gate to let in Complaint and Sorrow, as any case
will afford, upon the oppression and downfall of the most complete Bishop that
the Age afforded, take him in the latitude of all his Abilities: Yet
Thankfulness was not sensible of the Good-turns he had done, nor Honor of his
Affronts, nor Justice of his Wrongs, nor Wrath of his Sufferings, nor Charity
of his Undoing. If the Prosecution against him were fair, and the Sentence
righteous, let him not be pitied, nor the Blot wiped out from his Memory: Se
quisque ut vivit and effert; As he lived, so let him hear well or ill, being
dead. But he was so secure, so ready to represent his Cause to the Judgment of
the whole Kingdom, that against a Parliament was called in April 1640. he drew
up the whole matter of his Suits and Troubles, in twenty sheets of Paper, to
offer it to that Honorable House, for their severest Review: And if his
Remonstrance were a Clamor, and not a just Complaint, he invited his Judges to
lay a new and a severer Censure upon him. And it is fit that every Complainant
should be devoved to that Court of Justice wherein he begins a Quarrel, to
suffer as much Penalty, if he make not good his Bill, as he would have those to
undergo, whom he challenged for his pretended Injuries: Which was Roman Law in
Symmachus's days, Ep. p. 67. Provisum est ne quis temere in alieni capitis
crimen irrueret, nisi se idem prius poenae sponsione vinciret. But it came not
to that dint, for this Parliament was bespoken four months before, and was
dissolved when it had met but three weeks: A Duck could not hatch an Egg, if
she had sat no longer. The opportunity therefore was prevented for the
Plaintiff to make use of his Papers, which were prepared for this Parliament:
Fortune had mocked him, if he had tried her Courtesy at that time, who is a
true Handmaid to no Mistress but Good-occasion: Yet this Memorial of his Case,
which came not to their Hands, but to mine, so large, so exact, so fairly
copied, without expunction of a word, without interlining, or the least
correction in the Margin, is fortunately kept till now, (when so many noble
Registries have been torn, and embezzled in these consuming times) to content
both itching Curiosities and staid Judgments, that would know the Truth; out of
which I will glean up faithfully a few handfuls, and no more, for these
reasons: First, For the length it may pass for a Book, and I affect not to make
this Book swell with the incorporation of another. Secondly, The Press at
London, by hook or crook, lights upon every man's Papers, and does license it
self to publish them; the more shame for them that are in power, and do not
mend it: And to save me the pains, Lincoln's Star-chamber-Trial will come ere
long into the Fingers of some sharking Broker of Stationers' Hall, and be entered
in there for his own Chattel, as well as the Author's Prayers and Meditations,
made Anno 1621. for the use of L. M. B. which I glanced at in their due place,
which a bold fellow has filed up in his Hall, to be printed, to which he has
no more Right than Sir To. H -- had to Charing Cross. Thirdly, My Breviate
shall only tell you, and no more, who they were in great Place, that trod this
man down by oppression and false ways, whose Pictures are drawn out at length
in the larger Frame. It Is too much the Recreation of the common man, to stick
longest in that Page wherein he reads Invectives. (...). Demosth. (...). So
engrafted it is in us to listen unto Contumelies, as unto Music. But I will
not feed my Guests with such Acorns: It is enough for a Warning to others, that
God did quickly bring the day which he had called, and they were made like him,
Lam. 1.21. Or worse, that oppressed the Bishop, for the abuse of Fiduciary Power
will never pass long unpunished.

108. Every Effect is best known in its Cause, that is the best ground for a
beginning. It is apparent, that much Anger was seeded, and thrust out of one
bitter Root. The chief Counselors of K. James, and of his Cabinet, that
devised with their Master how to compass the Spanish Match, and took no joy in
the Failing, pleased their old Master, but lost the Prince his Son, alienated
from them by Buckingham, after he had returned home. Richmond, Hamilton,
Belfast lived not long after: Middlesex and Bristol, the first blown down, the
other shaken by Impeachments in Parliament, and both laid aside: Arundel sent
to the Tower, and there had continued, but for the clamor of the Peers in the
Upper House, for nothing but for marrying his eldest Son to a Daughter of the
House of Lenox: How then could Lincoln escape, who was K. James's right hand in
all Dispatches about that Treaty? Nothing was unassay'd to scourge him, because
he knew more Secrets than any man, and showed most Stomach to defend himself.
Sir A. Well. beyond his wont, tells Truth in this, p. 174. That his Ruin was
determined, not upon any known Crime, but upon Circumstances, and upon
Examinations, to pick out Faults committed in his whole lifetime. And the blow
was given, after nine years had been spent upon one matter, to frame a Censure
out of it. Majora animalia diutius visceribus parentum continentur, Quint. lib.
II. The Whelps and Cubbs of great Beasts are long in the Womb before they be
brought forth. It came about anno 1628. that the Bishop had suspended Burden
and Allen, the one a Surrogate to Sir J. Lamb, the other a Proctor in his
Court, both of Leicestershire, for doing Injustice, and being vexatious both to
Clergy and Laity. Ut non -- Compositus melius cum Bytho Baccius. They
petitioned and clamoured to be restored, but as Budaeus says proverbially of a
Land-leaper, that makes himself a Cripple, and cries out for help, Tolleeum qui
non novit, De Ass p. 104. Let him pity him that does not know him. So Burden
and Allen were too well known to get any Favor. At last Sir J. Lamb, a
Creature of dark Practices, and Dr. Sibthorp, undertook for them, and
propounded it to the Bishop at his Table, when their Hand was with him in the
Dish. But when they would ingratiate them for their good Parts, as Mr. Hooker
said of Ithacius, that there was nothing commendable in him, but his Zeal
against the Priscillianists; so these had nothing to brag of in their Brace of
Greyhounds, but that they were the swiftest of their kind to chase the
Puritans. The Bishop told them, (Dr. Morrison and Mr. Pregian Register of
Lincoln and Leicester, being present) That men of erroneous, but tender
Consciences, would never be reduced by such as were scandalous for Bribes and
Taverns, and other bad haunts; how that Severity against that Party was not
seasonable at that time, for he had lately conferred with the King, and that
His Majesty had condescended to give them some forbearance, though not openly
professed, to get his ends out of some Members of Parliament, who were leading
men, and more easy to be brought about, by holding a gentle hand over the
Ministers of their Faction. Here Is the sum of all: This was the King's mind;
And how could it be followed, but by being revealed to some that were in
Office? If there be any blame in this, let him that said it cry out as Philotas
did, Curt. lib. 6. Fides very consilii, periculosa libertas, vos me decepistis,
vos quae sentiebam ne reticerem impulistis. Patt to the Bishop's case to a
word. This was carried to Bissham in the Progress, where Bishop Laud attended,
and by him exaggerated to the King, that his secret Counsels were abused. The
Historian Sanderson taking it out of another, I suppose, who wrote the Reign of
K. Charles, has fancied an Accusation that was never dreamt of, p. 220. That
the Bishop's Wit and Will tempted him to talk disloyally of the King, and a
Bill put in against him for it. A Woodcock's Bill; but no such Bill was put in
Star Chamber. Nullum decuit haec scribere, nisi quem constat optasse, Sym. Ep.
p. 129. He that wrote so would have had it so. Piety forbid that a Bishop
should violate the sacred Honor of his Prince with a disloyal word. Yet how
moderately did Q. Elizabeth speak of Sir J. Perrott's Offense in that kind (
Camden, anno 1592.) quoting the Saying of Theodosius, Si quis Imperatori
maledixerit, si ex levitate contemnendum, si ex insania miserandum, si ab
injuria remittendum. But Aurelian went further, that he might not hear of such
Complaints. (...) sanxit ne audirentur, qui deferebant male locutos de
principibus, Carrion. l. 3. c. 61. It was a generosity in those heroical men,
which Shimei and Railers at Kings did not deserve; but Lincoln was not touched
with the lightest suspicion of this Fault. O but His Majesty's Counsels were
revealed, and expiable Crime in the adverse Bishop's Construction! Kings
Counsels may be of that reach and choice, that to blab them abroad may touch
his Life that did it. Upon such great points of State Bodin moves a Question,
De Repub. p. 386. An poena capitis statuenda sit iis, qui principis arcana
divulgant? Augustus told a Secret to one of the ^abii, that he would bring
Agrippa home again from Mitylene: Fabius told this to his Wife, and she to
Livia, who disaffected Agrippa, and it cost Fabius his Life; as Salmasius
enlarges it in his Preface to Solinus. Plutarch has wrote more upon it, Lib.
de Cur. And. how dangerous it is to know the Privacies of Potentates, lest they
should be vented in rashness: So that Philippides asking Lysimachus what he
should give him; says Lysimachus, any thing but a Secret. But the thing
communicated to our Bishop was but petty in comparison, and no Secret neither,
not imparted at the Council Table, but in Conference, in the time of
Parliament, as to a Peer of the House, locked up with no Seal of Silence, but
to be opened to such persons as might make use of it in their Notice. He could
not say less than he did to express the King's sense, nor at a better time for
advantage: It can be called by no ill Name; but if you will call it Rashness,
weigh it how light the matter was, and I will not refer it to Honor and Mercy,
but to Justice to pass it by: Quae minora and vulgaria sunt delicta oportet
dissimulari, non vindicari. Which is Grotius Maxim. de Ju. B. and P. p. 311.
Petty Faults should be overseen with Magnanimity, and not revenged.

109. And that prevailed to the expiration of about three years, as in the next
place will be cleared, when a few lines are first spent, what the Censure of
understanding men was upon this Treachery of the two Delators. Lamb was the
most hated of all that trod on the Earth in the County of Northampton, where he
dwelt; yet as Tally said of Asinius Pollio, lib. 3. ep. 31. Quem nequaquam,
perinde ut dignus est, oderunt homines. He was branded with the charge of many
Crimes, under the Hands of all the Justices and Gentry, in a manner, in the
Shire, and in two several Bills to be presented to the Parliaments, anno 1621.
anno 1624. This Person, whose Throat he went about to cut, brought him off from
his Troubles, dubbed him a Doctor and a Knight, settled him in his former
Offices, and got him more; for which, I confess, he got no good name to
himself. Lamb marked the Revolution of the Times, saw the Bishop discarded, and
observed, that he might pluck himself into a better Fortune, sooner by being
his Enemy than his Friend: Then what ensues, but as a shifter says in Plautus,
Ut sursum in alto ventus est, exin velum vortitur; Veer the Sail as the Wind
blows? So he watches a day to cast off his Patron, and, to make it more
meritorious, to cast him down. Cum secum servilis animus praemia perfidiae
reputaret, cessit fas, and salus patroni: As if we had found this Wretch
foretold by Tacitus, lib. 15. Annal. An ungrateful Creature in the old times
was held a Monster, now adays none shall be sooner taken into play, to be a
State-Minister. Like Tobacco, every man stopped his Nose at it, when Sir W.
Raleigh brought it first into England; now the Pipe is in every man's Mouth.
But how easy was it for the Bishop to trust this fellow with as much as he
durst utter to any man? He had redeemed him, he had bought him for his own, and
every false Knave does not smell like a Pole-Cat. They are subtler in their
Generation than the Children of Light. The best skilled in the Greek Tongue
say, that the Devout in the New Testament are called (...), quia facile possunt
capi; because they are charitable, and less suspicious of others, so they are
easily taken: Aditum nocendi perfido praest at fides, Sen. Oed. The Credit that
is given to a perfidious man furnishes him with advantage to do a Mischief. He
can hurt none but such as he is beholden to for their good Opinion. Et
perditissimi est hominis fallere eum, qui non laesus esset, nisi credidisset,
Cic. lib. 2. off. And of all Hypocrites, take heed of him that gropes into a
man's Heart, to pluck out his Secrets. Which is well set forth in a Proverbial
Similitude, Venti sunt molestissimi qui abstrahunt nobis pallia. It Is ill
traveling when the Wind blows a man's Cloak abroad, and will not let him keep
it close about him. Meaning, that it is ill conversing with an Ensnarer,
delving into the bottom of your Mind, to know what is hid in it. I would ask a
Casuist, if it were not lawful for me not only to hide my Mind, but to cast
somewhat which is not true before such a Pocher? I mean it tentative, not with
intention to deceive him, but to try if he would deceive me; and I mean it of
no other, but of such a one as Ben Syrach sets out, and this Bishop found to
his cost: Ecclus. 13. v. 11, 12. With much communication will he tempt thee,
and smiling upon thee will he get out thy secrets, but cruelly he will lay up
thy words, and will not spare to do thee hurt, and to put thee in prison.
Ingratitude is Sir J. Lamb's Badge, Perfidiousness both his and Sibthorp's: And
that is not all. Quisquam hominum est quem tu contentum videris uno -- Flagitio?
Juven. These were such as durst do more than one Unseemliness, and deserved to
be baffled for breaking the Laws of Hospitality. They did eat at the Bishop's
Board, gathered that Discourse, which they carried away to kindle Coals of Fire
to consume him, and deposed what they heard, and more than they heard; Unde
illud apud Graecos, da mihi testimonium. Cicero pro Flacco. Fair Conversation
should keep up Table-talk: As Plutarch says of the Spartans in his Licurgus,
That being frollick at Meat, they were wont to say, Not a word goes out of
doors. They that brake that Order, should dine alone, like the Hangmen of
Germany. But seriously the ancient Tragedy-Writers, in their Buskin Scenes,
exclaim mightily against those who betrayed them that had feasted them; as
Hecuba inveighs against Polymestor, that murdered her Son Polydor, (...): What
a Fiend was Polymestor, to do such an Act, that had been her Guest so often?
The very Emblem of the Wolf, that had eaten the Sheep, and would eat the
Shepherd, if he could get him. Thus far of the Crime, and the Criminators, or
rather the Tale and the Tale-bearers, that so little, they so bad: Qui ad
notitiam posterorum per odia virtutum decurrerunt. Sidon. lib. 8. c. 1.

110. I have dealt with the Pick-thanks as they deserved, who traveling from
Bugden to Higham-Ferrers, conferred their Notes, as they deposed, and lost not
a day, but sent Burden and Allen to the Court, as soon as they could be found,
with an Accusation against the Bishop. As Fr. Junius gives his reason in cap.
3. Genesis why he thought the Devil tempted Eve not long after she was made:
Maleficus non potest feriari, ex quo est maleficus: So in this Instance we see,
that Malice is Lead in weight, and Fire in swiftness. The King is moved to
acquaint the Lords of the Council with it, where it gasp'd in the first
Hearing, and dyed. Allen the Proctor Petitions for it again, for B. L. upheld
his Spirit in his Wickedness: The examining is referred to the L. Treasurer
Weston, the Earl of Penbrock, the Earl of Montgomery, the Earl of Holland, who
with one consent cast it away, as not worthy a Debate, that no Blame could
stick upon Lincoln, that Allen was as good as frentick, for he had drawn up one
Petition in Rhyme. This the Bishop alleges in his Address prepared for the
Parliament, while the third and fourth of the Lords-Referrees were living: But
though they are all under Earth, Faith forbid that their Names should be abused
to a wrong Report. To keep History incorrupt from such baseness, it is daintily
observed out of the Poets by Salmasius Clymac. p. 819. Apud orcum defunctae
animae jurare dicuntur, ne quid suos, quos in vita reliquerint, contra fas
adjuvent. The Souls departed take an Oath, not to help their surviving Friends
against Justice: But no such Protestation needs in this Cause. There is a
Petition to be produced, written with the Hand of Dr. Walker, a Gentleman
living, and well known, wherein His Majesty is minded, that he had cancelled
this Complaint, and had given his Royal Hand to confirm it. What could be more
sure? Yet it turned to nothing; the Wound was never suffered to heal by the
daily Whispering of Bishop Laud, diligent in the King's Ear. You may read of
one in Suetonius's Caligula, Cui ad insaniam Caius favebat: So the King
suffered this Prelate, in excess of Power, to turn and return Causes as he
would, and was obnoxious, by the bewitching of his Tongue, to facility of
Persuasions, to grant and retract as he possessed him: Which was seen too late in
this excellent Passage of His Majesty, in (...), I wish I had not suffered mine
own Judgment to be overborn in some things, more by others Importunities than
their Arguments. As Erasmus wrote honestly to a mighty Monarch Harry the
Eighth, Ep. p. 74. Eximia quaedam inter mortales res est Monarcha, sed homo
tamen. And with much liberty our Poet Johnson, in his Forest, p. 815.

-- I am at feud
With that is ill, though with a Throne endu'd.
The Faults of the Blessed Charles were small, yet some he had; who having
assured Lincoln he should never be questioned again about the matter brought
against him by Lamb and Sibthorp, yet remitted it to the Star Chamber: The
Defendant conceived it would spend like a Snail, or the untimely Fruit of a
Woman, but when he found himself deceived, and that the Cause was glowing hot
in Prosecution, he sought the King's Clemency, Quaedam enim melius fugiuntur
quam superantur; it is in Erasm. Ep. p. 18. He thought it better to fly the
Trial, than to get the Cause, and he put up this which follows into the Hands
of His Majesty.

The Humble Petition and Submission of John Bishop of Lincoln, etc.
THAT although he is innocent from any Crime committed against your Majesty, in
thought, word, or deed, yet abhorring (as he finds by Presidents, all other
Bishops of this Realm have done) Placitare cum Domino rege, to have any Suit
with his Sovereign Lord, Master, and Patron; he casts himself in all humility
at Your Majesty's Feet, and implores your Royal Mercy and Clemency, Non intrare
in judicium cum servo tuo, coveting to ascribe his Deliverance to Your
Majesty's Clemency: And whereas your most Excellent Majesty having, in the
fourth year of your happy Reign, received the Opinion of the four Lords
Committees, concerning these very self-same Charges, did in your Majesty's
Gallery at Whitehall admit this Defendant, brought in by the Right Honorable
the Lord Treasurer, one of the said Committees, to kiss your Majesty's Hand,
and did use unto him this Defendant, in the presence and hearing of the said
Right Honorable Lord, these gracious words: That your Majesty was pleased to
forgive all that was past, and would esteem of this Defendant according as he
should deserve by his Service for the time to come. He most humbly beseeches
your most Excellent Majesty, that according to that so gracious Remission and
Absolution, no further Prosecution at your Majesty's Suit may be used against
him, concerning the said Charges; all which he does the rather hope for from
your Majesty, because he is a Bishop that has endeavored not to live
scandalously in his Calling, and has formerly had the Favor from Almighty
God, with his own Hands, to close your Majesty's Father's Eyes, and to have
written and drawn up that Commission and Contract for your Majesty's Marriage,
whereupon ensued to this Kingdom a most unvaluable Blessing; and heartily
prays, that God, who has delivered your Majesty from your late Sickness, may
bless you in all Health, Happiness, and Prosperity.

So far the Petition: I will not teach the Reader what Sallads to pick out of
it, but only the Herb of Grace, that the Bishop kissed the King's Hand upon the
assurance of his Peace; that the Offense which was taken was buried, and should
never rise up in Judgment more: Nihil periculi Soloni a Pisistrato, Diog.
Laert. Now, who ever liked Julian the Cardinal, that made Ladislaus K. of
Polonia break his League with the Turk? And who will defend B. L. that made his
Sovereign break his word with his Subject? It was he, and none else, that put
in an unseasonable Bar to hinder Lincoln the fullness of the Benefit. I know
none that had the nearest part in B. L's Favor, that can deny it: And let them
turn it about as they will, is it possible they should excuse it? (...). It is
Theodoret's Ep. 2. Children see no uncomeliness in their Parents. But although
they will see no ill in the Person, they must in the Fact: For, what a Trespass
is this in Justice, to punish that which was forgiven? Let the King do
Righteous Judgment like God, in whose Throne he sits; before whom this holds
inviolable, Peccata dimissa nunquam redeunt: No, not original Sin, when
remitted in Baptism, it shall not be imputed to them any more, that are damned
for actual Crimes, whereof they did not repent. So Grotius cites it out of
Prosper in Matthew. c. 18. v. 34. Extinctam semel obligationem non reviviscere,
sed propter postrema crimina affici. The most that seems to be against this
Rule, but falls in with it, is this; That when former Sins are forgiven, and
new ones are superadded, the latter shall be punished the more for the
ungratefulness of the Sinner. Non quod jam remissa puniantur, sed quod sequens
peccatum minus graviter pun^retur, si priora remissa non fuissent; says
Maldonat. My Sentence is at the last of all with Syracides, c. 29.3. Keep thy
word, and deal faithfully; revoke not your Kindness; pluck not up the Seeds of
a Benefit, which you had sown with your own Hand: It is worse to turn Mercy
than Justice into Wormwood.

111. Destiny is unavoidable. A Bill is filed in the Star Chamber, and
prosecuted for the King, for Revealing his Councils. The Defendant made him
ready for his Answer, and plied the King with Petitions together; in Parody
like Virgil's Aeneas, Et se collegit in arma -- Poplite subsidens. At first he
tried Bishop Laud, if he would be so generous as to heal the Wound that he had
made, and anointed him with the Weapon-Salve of remembrance of Friendship past,
and protestation of the like for ever; he courted him to mediate for him. And
was it not likely he would think, who had procured him his first Rochet, well
fringed with good Commendums? But what Suspicion, to find a thankful Man did
bring Lincoln into this Error? (...), says Pindar; Old kindness is fast asleep,
and Men are forgetful. This Hand returned him nothing from his Majesty but
Denials and Despairs; as if he had lighted upon one of the Genethliaci, or
Figure-Casters, that never portend a good Horoscope to any; or as I may better
set it down in Gassendus's Complaint, De Pareliis p. 309. Ita praeposteri
sumus, ut nunquam captemus bona omina. A good word from so gracious an Agent
would have cleared any man, who made Lincoln's Fidelity more suspected to his
Royal Master. Bishop Laud knew him, how strong he was in his Intellectuals, how
fit to manage Civil and Church Affairs, (...), as Tully translates it out of
Aratus, Huic non una modo caput ornans stella relucet. He thought it a
disparagement to have a Parage with any of his Rank; and out of Emulation did
dry his Substance, that it might not flow so fast into Charitable Works.
Therefore as the Orator wrote to Atticus, Qui mihi pennas inciderunt, nolunt
easdem renasci, so he kept the Feathers of the other short, that they might not
grow again, to fly before him. Lincoln took it not a whit to heart, because he
foresaw it. I have heard him say, Though I did as much for him as I could, when
he wanted me; yet I knew he would fail, if ever I wanted him. What remedy but
the Cause, which had rotted three years in the Dung, must now be made ripe? a
Mischief which had lain like a Match kindled to give fire to a Train of Powder
long after. So it came to be sifted by the great Abilities of Mr. William Noy
Attorney General, a Man of Cynical behavior, but of an honest heart to his
Friends and Clients, and both together did become him. This famous Lawyer
professed a great averseness from dealing in this Cause: for he wanted a Ground
to plead upon. The Defendant maintains that he had opened no Counsels of the
Kings; but what he spoke to Lamb and Sibthorp was Parliamentary Communication.
Let the Peers and Commons look to it; it concerns them all that their
Privileges be maintained, to be unquestionable for those things which past
from one to another at that season; who, by the Writ that Summons them, do meet
as Counselors for great Affairs concerning the Church and Commonwealth. And by
this very Demurrer Mr. Seldom, about two years before, had quash't a Bill which
was preferred in the Star Chamber against him in a like Accusation. Neither
contemn the Inconvenience, because the storm fell upon one Bishop, and no more.
The whole Tree was as good as unfastned, when one Bough was shaken. It is a
good Caution in Arist. 5. Polit. (...), It is all assumed to say, The Danger is
not great that lights upon one or two Particulars, when by that Entrance it
will break in upon the whole Kind. Be it known therefore, that this Bill was
kept under Hatches, and never came to hearing: For which way could the Council
stir to plead upon it? As great a Pleader as ever lived, Demosthenes, gives us
this Rule, Olynth.. (...). As the Foundation of an House, and the Keel of a
Ship must be laid strong and firm, so should the Foundations of all Actions.
But in this charge let Wit and Learning turn it self every way, there was no
Bottom to build upon. Therefore Mr. Noy, after two years, grew weary of it, and
slackned the Prosecution. He died untimely for our Bishop's good, who
acknowledges it under his Hand, That he dealt fairly with him: not reckoning
by his Maundings and rough Language, which came from him to please the
supervising Prelate. But Lincoln never felt harm from him, whose Finger he cut
but with the back of his Knife. Therefore I pronounce him innocent of this
Man's ruin, upon the reason that Ulysses spared Terpiades, Odyss. (...), He
sung such Songs, as the riotous Suitors of Penelope would have him, by
constraint and necessity.

112. Who have we next to play this Game but notorious Kilvert? and for the
same reason that God gave, why Phocas was made Emperor of the World, because
there was not a worse. Hem! Si quid recte curatum velis, huic mandes oportet. A
Man branded long before in a Parliament for Perjury; a Knight of the Post, as
we call it. A Name which some learned Scholar gave at first to such Catives:
For Casaubon in his Theophrastus shows out of Pausanias in his Atticks, that
perjured Men were called (...), that usually stood about the Panathenaick
Race-posts, called Adrettum, to be hired to give a Testimony, whether it were
right or wrong. Here Is one that wore that Badge: and our Bishop writes more,
and Truth in all, That in scorn of Justice, for many years, he lived from his
own Wife, a virtuous and well-born Gentlewoman, whom he had stolen away from
her Parents, and lived in open Adultery with another Man's Wife, one Mr. Bines,
hard by White Hall, and begot diverse Bastards upon her Body, besides his other
Debaucheries and Infamies of all kinds. This Man, as himself avouched, was
found out, and employed by Archbishop Laud (by this time he is in that Throne)
by Secretary Windebank and Sir J. Lamb, to prosecute the Cause against the
Bishop, without entering him as a Prosecutor upon Record, as he ought to have
done; and was assured he should advance his Fortunes thereby; which was truly
performed. This Fellow interloping into the Prosecution of the Cause, disturbed
it in every point of the due Proceeding, left not one Rule or Practice of the
Court unbroken, menacing, and intimidating Witnesses, Clerks, Registers,
Examiners, Judges, and the Lord keeper himself. One that would undertake any
Office to serve Greatness, and would preserve their Favor that kept him upon
any Conditions: who lack't not such Wisdom as St. James abhors, c. 3. v. 15.
which is earthly, sensual, devilish; whose Description I cut off with that
which Cutzen the Jesuit said of Illyricus, from his own Opinion about Original
Sin, Cujus vel substantia peccatum est, a vitiated Leper in his whole
Substance. O evil World! that the Vices of such a Creature should make free way
for him to be gracious, instead of Virtues! how much do Powers and Dominions
dishonor themselves, when it is not close, but openly seen, that such
Instruments have their Countenance, nay their Recompense. Budaeus lib. 1. de
As. f. 15. spared not a great one in France for that Error; Immemor personae
quam gerebat, quod virtuti debebatur, illiberali obsequio dandum esse censuit.
While Kilvert ranted it, and bore down all Justice before him, there was not an
honest Man, either that acted in this matter, or only looked on, whose silent
consent the Bishop had not to awaken the King, that he would look upon these
Courses, that cried abroad to the amazement of his Subjects. All wish it done,
and the Bishop did not fear to do it. (...). It is Theodorets stout Divinity,
Ep. 21. Under the hand of God there is no remedy but patience; suffering under
the hand of Man the best Remedy is Courage. So he stepped forward to his Majesty,
with the confidence of this Petition.

To the King's most Excellent Majesty, etc.
THat if your Majesty be not pleased to accept as yet of his humble Submission
for his Peace, your Majesty would graciously vouchsafe not to interrupt, but to
permit the Petitioner to proceed, according to the ordinary Rules and Course of
the Court of Star Chamber, against Kilvert the Solicitor, for his manifold
Falsehoods and Injuries in the Prosecution of this Cause; particularly first,
for menacing and frighting your Petitioners Witnesses. 2. For publicly
defaming this Petitioner to be your Enemy; averring that neither he, nor any of
his, did know what the name of a King meant. 3. For offering to sell the
Prosecution of your Majesty's Cause against this Petitioner for Money: and
because this Petitioner refused to tamper with him in that kind, for procuring
base People to make false and aspersing Affidavits, to incense your Majesty,
and that Court against your Petitioner. 4. For menacing the Judges that should
report and certify any thing for your Petitioner. 5. For not sparing to tax
most falsely your most Sacred Majesty, with pressing upon the Lords the
Sentencing of your Petitioner: All which the Petitioner will clearly prove, and
pray to God, etc.

So strong an Accusation, upon such foul Heads, was fit to be sifted,
especially upon the last Branch: For grant it was a lie; here is a false Report
raised against the King's Honor. If it were true, what more criminal than to
impart such Secrets of his Majesty's to his Gossips at a Tavern, where they
flew abroad? But some may more safely steal a Horse, than others look over the
Hedge. The Bishop could get no leave to call this shameless Mate to an answer.
From that day Kilvert was free from Righteousness, and might do any thing. Ipse
sibi Lex est, and qua fert cunque voluntas -- Praecipitat vires, Manil. lib. 5.
He that has no Conscience, and need to fear nothing, will turn a Monster. So
true is that of Livy, Dec. 1. lib. 4. Hominem improbum non accusari tutius est
quam absolvi: It Is safer to have a nocent Person never accused, than to have
him discharged for an Innocent.

113. For all this the Defendant thought he had said so much against the
Prosecutor, that he should never appear in Court again: But as Calvin said of
Bucer, Ep. 30. Qui sibi est optime conscius, securior est quam utile sit. Yet
he proved against him as foul a prank as ever was committed; That he got Warren
the Examiner to the Fountain Tavern near to Shoe-Lane ( Kilvert's daily
Rendezvous, from whence the Bishop got continual and sure intelligence) and
fetched out of him, contrary to his express Oath, the Depositions which the
Defendants Witnesses had made; an heinous wrong to be done before Publication:
which coming to light, Warren fled away from his Office, and never appeared
more. But whether could he run from God's Vengeance? Omnia quidem Deo plena
sunt, nec ullus perfidis tutus est locus, Sym. p. 54. Kilvert stood to it, as
if the sin were not his, that drew the Examiner to Perjury; and no notice was
taken of that constant Rule, which the Casuists took from Tertullian de Bapt.
c. 11. Semper is dicitur facere, cui praemmistratur; The Sin was Ahab's that
purchased a Field of Blood by the Oath of the Sons of Belial. Let Religion look
to this, for that Court would not; nothing would lace it in, it was so wide in
the waste. From this exorbitancy, from this, and nothing else, sprung the Iliad
of wrongs which the Bishop endured: for Kilvert finding, by Warren's
disclosures, that the Depositions for the Defendant were material, and some of
the Witnesses to be Learned men, that had deposed upon Notes and Remembrances,
he turned himself into all shapes to crack their Credit. At first he made an
Affidavit of slight pretended Abuses, which were overruled against him.
Whereupon he vapour'd in the hearing of the Register, and diverse others, That
he cared not what Orders the Lords made in Court, for he would go to Greenwich,
and cause them all to be changed. It was the most scornful Defiance that ever
was given to the Honor and Justice of the Star Chamber, as the Bishop's
Counsel pressed it home. Every one expected the Ruin of the Prosecutor: yet the
Lords perceiving, upupon the Archbishop's Motion, that it was not safe to
punish him, it past over with a slight Submission. One presaged the Ruin of the
Athenian State, because Rats had eaten up the Books of Plato's Commonwealth.
And might not a man that had no more Prophecy than Prudence, foresee the Ruin
of this Court, when such a Rat-catcher did despise their Authority, telling
them he could fetch Orders to sweep away theirs from such Powers: Quae nec tuto
narrantur, nec tuto audiuntur, Seneca de Tranquil. Sir Robert Heath, Lord Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, was but one of the Lords Assessors, yet as just
and sufficient as any of his order; and the Indignity done to him, was as if
done to all: Who made his own Complaint, That Kilvert threatened to procure him
to be turned out of his place for his forwardness. Yet this also was slubber'd
over with a little acknowledgment of Rashness. So much were those honorable
Persons now no longer themselves, fearing that Severity which they perceived
impending upon them. As Pliny bewails the Roman Senate in his Panegyric,
Vidimus curiam, sed curiam trepidam, and elinguem: cum dicere quid velles
periculosum, quod nolles miserum esset. It was become like Ezekiel's Vine-tree,
c. 15. v. 3. you could not make a Pin out of it to hang a good Order upon it,
that was equal and generous. Beshrew the Varlet, that kept his word (which he
was not wont to do) for Sir Robert Heath was displaced, and for no Misdemeanour
proved. But it was to bring in a Successor, who was more forward to undo
Lincoln, than ever the Lord Heath was to preserve him. A man of choice parts,
which yet he showed not in this Cause, which cannot be smothered without
defacing the truth, which Posterity must not want; Desipiunt qui faeces ob v^ni
nobilitatem absorbent. The Dregs of the best Wine are but Dregs, and must be
spit out as distastful; his Lordship's part cannot be spared in this Tragedy;
yet it shall be short, because I will leave him to those Figures that live in
the House of Memory.

114. The main Bill against the Defendant being not like to hold, the quarrel
broke out into a collateral Point, the weighing of the Credit of Jo. Pregion, a
man that had enjoyed two O^lices of great account for diverse years, and was
never questioned before this time in his Reputation. So the Siege of Troy was
forgot, and the Battle was drawn out on both sides, to get, or to recover the
Body of Patroclus, (...), Il. r. The Bishop could not defend his first Cause
without the Testimony of Pregion, which made him diligent to keep his good Name
from being stained; and the Adversaries were as resolute to Impeach him,
looking to spring up a new Information from the Defense of the old Matter. This
tugg held eighteen Months, to the Bishop's Vexation and Cost, having spent as
much upon it, as would have founded an Hospital to keep twenty poor People. The
Archbishop took occasion, upon the spinning out of so much time, to blame the
Defendant for Traverses and Delays: (a Course which the wisdom of Treasurer
Weston had put into him) and if it were bad to fly, with his Grace's leave, was
it not worse to Persecute? Baronius justifies the Christians that made escape
from Heathen Tyrants with a good reason, An. 205. p. 12. Qui non fugit, cum
potest, adjuvat ejus iniquitatem qui persequitur. The Exceptions against
Pregion were referred to the Lord Chief Justice Richardson, and Lord Chief
Baron Damport, which charged Pregion that he endeavored to lay a Bastard-Child
of his own begetting upon another. The two Judge, having heard all that could
be alleged pro and con, disallowed the Exception; and an order being drawn up
for it, when the Lord Richardson was about to sign it, Kilvert most imperiously
charged him not to do it, till he had heard from the King. The Judge, whose
Coat had been singed at the Court before, stopped his Hand, but delivered a Copy
of the Certificate to the Bishop's Solicitor, and avowing he would maintain
it, that is to say, if he durst: but fear shook his Conscience out of him. The
Lord Damport would not vary from himself, and charged his Brother Richardson
freely with Inconstancy. Of which Disagreement the Star Chamber having notice,
added to these three more, the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Judge
Jones, and Judge Vernon. These sitting together in the Lord Richardson's
Lodgings, Kilvert brought in Secretary Windebank among them, (though neither
Referree, nor Witness, nor Party in the Cause) who argued the Business an hour
and half against the Bishop's Witness, and performed it weakly; for all men are
not called to knowledge with their places; as Is^crates would have us believe
in his Areopag. Oration, that the Office of an Areopagite transformed a man, Ut
tanquam loci genio afflatus, ex ingenio suo migraret. Budaeus in 1. lib. Pand.
p. 283. The Secretary having done his part, and shown what was expected from
White Hall, departed. The five Judges drew up a Certificate, signed it, and
assured the Bishop all in general, and one by one, it should not be changed. So
said the L. F. among the rest; but he sup't a Promise into his mouth, and spit
it out again. This predominant Judge, like a Falcon upon her stretches, took
home the Certificate with him, and the Bishop with him, who staid at his House
till almost midnight, because the Lord F. would not give him the Order, till
Kilvert had carried it to the Court to show it to some body. This was not fair;
for to be just and honest is so forcible, that it should be done extempore; not
an hour should be borrowed to advise upon it. Yet the Judge solemnly protested,
That he would dye rather than recede from it, it being the sense, and under the
Hand of all his Brethren. The Bishop being in a withdrawing Chamber, read over
the Order so often, that by the benefit of a good memory he got it by heart
verbatim, and so departed to Bugden against Christmas Day. About the midst of
the Holy Days, he heard by a good Hand that the Certificate was altered, and
all that Matter inserted which had been rejected by the Judges. He came up in
all haste to London, and finding Judge Jones, ask't him if these things were
so. Yes, says he, it is true, all is changed from white to black, and your
Friend the L. F. has done all this. A Friend he might call him, if merit might
have purchased him, for whom the Bishop had done more than for any pleader in
England, when he was in great place; Quae potest esse jucunditas sublatis
amicitiis! quae porro amicitia potest esse inter ingratos? The Bishop charging
this Alteration upon the Judge to his Face, he replied, Quod scripsi, scripsi,
and would not hear Mr. Herbert, the Defendant's Counsel, who told the Judge
with some passion, That there was more matter for Examination of Witnesses
couched in the new Certificate, than was in all the Cause. But the Bishop
demanded calmly of that Lord that had altered all, What he meant to use an old
Acquaintance in that unheard of manner? He answered, (and said the same to
others) He had been soundly chidden by his Majesty, and would not destroy
himself for any man's sake. This Judge was worthy of greater Honors, and did
affect them. Haud sane aequo animo in secundo se sustinens gradu, Curt. lib. 4.
and not long after he got the Garland, by being the most active of all his Rank
to bring about the King's Undertakings, chiefly against this forlorn Defendant;
but held not the place one full year. From whence a Scholar may Contemplate
upon those two Verses of Homer, Il. r.

(...)
(...)
Whom God does honor, if with him you war,
The quarrel's Gods, your ruin is not far.
115. By this time, Kilvert put in Courage with these Stratagems, is ready to
proceed to examination -- of Witnesses. Let me show how he is armed, like
Pliny's Ichneumon, lib. 8. Not. Hist. Mergit se limo saepius, siccatque sole,
mox ubi plurimis eodem modo se coriis loricavit, in dimicationem pergit. He
dips himself often in Mudd, and every time crusts it hard in the Sun, and being
covered with this dirty Harnass, he falls to fight with his Enemy. All will run
even in the application. The Bishop is forced, at an intolerable expense, to
tumble in person with his Lawyers and Sollicitors from place to place, over six
or seven Counties of the Kingdom. The first Abuse done unto him in this course,
was to deny him several Commissions to dispatch his Troubles about the
Witnesses, which was never denied to any Subject before, and to force him to
take an Examiner of the Court whether he would or no. 2ly, Every Defendant
being allowed to choose which Examiner he likes best, by the practice of that
Court, the Bishop pitched upon an ancient and experienced Clerk, yet could not
enjoy him; for in conference with Kilvert he had said, That in this Service he
must be an indifferent man: Whereupon Secretary Windebank commands the Clerk of
the Court, by a Letter under the Signet, to stay the Commission so ordered, and
to appoint another Examiner whom Kilvert did nominate. Thirdly, The same
Secretary directed one Peachy, a Messenger of the Chamber, (start not at it
Reader, for it is true) to attend Kilvert in his Coat of Arms, all along with
the Commission, to apprehend and close imprison such as Kilvert should appoint,
pretending Matters of State, and of deep consequence against them. And Peachy
did apprehend and close imprison, in the face of the Commission, Philip
Pregion, George Walker, and Thomas Lund, Witnesses for the Bishop, and chased
away most of the rest, that durst not be seen for fear. Those three Prisoners
were brought to London, to the Secretary, who told them he had nothing against
them, but bade them give Satisfaction to Kilvert; who could get no Liberty by
his Masterships Leave, till they had confessed Crimes against the Bishop and
themselves, which afterward they revoked upon Oath. Nor would he permit George
Walker's Wife to see her Husband, close kept by the Messenger, but for a base
Courtesy, not to be named. Is not the Wand of Mercury like to charm Witnesses
to say and swear what they would have them, when such Snakes as Kilvert and
Peachy are twined about it? If all this be not true, though incomparably vile,
Aut Thetidi, aut Veneris largire marito, either wash the Book away, or throw it
into the Fire. I meet with a mighty Concussion of Justice in Sidon. Apol. lib.
5. c. 7. yet nothing so bad as this; yet take it, because it is the nearest to
it upon Record: Deputant arbitros, judicanda dictant, dictata convellunt,
attrahunt litigaturos, protrahunt audiendos. The French Mercury has related
strange Presidents from the Parliament of Grenoble, let him match this if he
can. But the Bishop coming home from his Progress with Kilvert, and the
Examiner having sped his Commission, in all haste Publication must be granted,
and the Bishop is served for a Hearing; so he came prepared with excellent
Counsel to defend a Cause which he feared the more, because neither he nor his
Counsel could see, in a matter so violently pursued, any thing to be feared.
But the King's Counsel having perused the Books, spied more than Kilvert could
see, and found that the imaginary false News, and blazing the King's Counsels,
were the damnable Invention and Conspiracy of Lamb, Sibthorp, All^n, and
Burden. Much was urged to expunge all on the Bishop's part, that laid a
Combination of Villainy to their charge, because it did impeach the Credit of
the King's Witnesses. The L. F. pressed it over and over, which was but once, and
that fairly and modestly offered by the King's Counsel. After a long Argument
of five hours at the least, the Court did all vote, (except the Archbishop, and
the L. F.) that the Defense should remain undispunged, for else an unavoidable
Mischief would follow to all the King's Subjects, that being accused by two
desperate Witnesses, they were remediless in that high Court, if they may not
be called in question by the Defendant for their Acts and Honesties. The L.
Coventry having gathered the Votes of the Court, and being ready to pronounce
the Order, so much conducing to the good of all men, the L. Finch desired their
Lordships to take notice, that his Opinion continued contrary to them all.
Quibusdam evenit ut quaedam scire se nesciant, Sen. Ep. 7. Nay, such Spleen was
conceived at this just Order, that though the L. Keeper had pronounced it, the
Register had drawn it up, a Copy of it given to the Defendant, yet so precious
a Rule for the common Safety of all honest men, durst never be entered into the
Book to this day. Yet this Order, though smothered and buried, made an end of
this first Cause; for the Combination of the four Contrivers was not held meet
to come abroad into pleading, who would have fallen to pieces with a little
shaking, that thought to lay the dead Child in the Bishop's Bosom, while he
slept; but their Patron had a care to keep them from Scandal, and that they
knew. As Hegesippus says of Mariamne the Wife of Herod the Great, Secura quod
nihil ab eo exitii perpeti possit, qui supra modum dilexit. So these were the
bolder to come off untouched, under the shelter of that Favor that did never
forsake them.

116. Of a sudden, by the persuasion of some noble Lords, the King began to
grow milder to the Bishop. Et reserata viget vegetabilis aura Favoni. Lucret.
His Majesty hearkened to some Conditions, to have all Bills against the Bishop
cast out, and to let him purchase his Peace with his Purse. Some would dissuade
Lincoln from it, because to buy a Pardon was to confess a Guiltiness: A Nicety,
says Xenophon, that cost Socrates his Life, Apol. pro. Socr. who would pay no
Fine to the Court of Athens, nor suffer any to be paid in his Name. (...). He
said, To be acquit with a Ransom, was to confess a Crime. The like was told me
by the Lady Eliz. Hotton, That the Lord Cook was offered his Place in the
King's Bench, from which he had been removed, if he would bind himself in again
with a Golden Chain: But he stood upon a Rule made by his own Wisdom, That a
Judge must not take a Bribe, nor pay a Bribe. Our Bishop's Resolution stuck not
in those Briers, who saw that this Offer proceeded out of the streights of his
Occasions: Though no Evil were found in him, yet if the King's Power contest,
who can stand upright? And if Malice will take no satisfaction but Ruin, the
most innocent must fall: The L. Keeper, a good man, was over-balanc'd; the
Star Chamber was become like the Tribunal of L. Cassius, Scopulus reorum,
Tacit. Annal. l. 13. a Rock that split all Causes, that lately came into it, in
pieces. The Archbishop thought not himself absolute, till this man was
unprelated, and cared not what he cast at him, so he might hit him home: As
Grotius accuses the Spaniards, that they are so set upon Revenge, Ut in hostem
nihil turpe sit, nihil illicitum, An. Belg. p. 5. He feared the L. F. as much
as any, who in his private Chambers slasht and cut out from his Defenses that
which was most material to his Safety. Et stylus non minus agit cum delet, says
Quintilian. He that puts out the Marrow of Defense, is worse than he that puts
in the Venom of an Accusation. The Secretary was prepared for any Execution,
yet the Bishop gives him this Praise in his Notes, That he was a modest and a
virtuous Gentleman, but in this Cause set on by his Maker. Therefore the Bishop
is content to satisfy the King's Demands, that is, to pitch and pay. The first
Condition brought to him by the L. Cottington, was to part with 4000 l. with
his Deanery, and two inconsiderable Commenda's. For the Money, says the Bishop,
I am low in Cash, but will make a shift to pay it: To part with the Deanery will
make an open Scar, and no fair one: Beside, the Money is useful for the King's
Revenue, the Deanery is no Profit to His Majesty, to take it from my hand, and
to put it into another; and what the World has given me, I am willing to give
it back again; but what His Majesty's Father did give me, and by the Mediation
of His Majesty, being Prince, I can take no comfort in my Life, if I be stripped
of it. That Lord returned again with a Message to leave him his Deanery and
Commenda's, but to raise up the Sum of Composition to 8000 l. The Bishop held
up his Hands to Heaven in amazement at it: But you will lift your Hands at a
greater Wonder, says L. Cottington, if you do not pay it. Well, I will satisfy
the King, says Lincoln, and I will sell some Land for it. The Match is struck,
done it is, and the Bishop as good as undone by it. He delighted to do
charitable Works, but this would sear the Vein, that it could run no more. It
was a sweet Apophthegm, which I heard come from him when all was exhausted: I
care not for Poverty, but I shall not be able to requite a Benefit; God grant
every good King a better way than this was, to enrich him. Fiscus bonorum
Principum non sacerdotum damnis, sed hostium spoliis angeatur I commend thee
Symmachus for it, p. 56. But on goes the Game; the Bishop is dealing in London
to take up a Cart-load of Money, and that right worthy Attorney Sir J. Blanks
was sedulous to draw up a full Pardon, so absolute, that it included more than
the Bishop desired; as this Letter to the L. Keeper will declare.

My very good Lord,
MR. Attorney has once or twice sent unto me, by my Man, some imperfect
Propositions, about the manner of a Pardon, which His Most Excellent Majesty
should grant unto me, which Propositions (not speaking with Mr. Attorney
himself) I do not well understand; for as it is delivered to me, His Majesty's
Offer's more than ever I desired, by naming a general Pardon, to wit, to pardon
all Offenses contained in the two Informations, and any other Offense or
Misdemeanor I should desire particularly to be freedfrom; which, if it be so,
is as gracious a Favor from His Majesty as any reasonable man can expect. But,
my good Lord, I know nothing by my self that should of necessity be so solemnly
pardoned: Yet hearing His Majesty's Inclinations to grant unto others in the
condition that I stand, general Abolitions, and being not so wise as the last
Parliament, to refuse the benefit of a general Pardon, I confess I fell, in my
Parley with your Lordship, upon that way propounded unto me by my Counsel
Learned: But hearing of late it is construed by others as a kind of
Capitulation with my Sovereign, I beseech your Lordship I may wave it
altogether; and that your Lordship would represent me kneeling at His Majesty's
Feet, craving that his Goodness and Mercy only (without any thing in Writing)
together with my Industry in his Service for the time to come, may be the
substance and extent of all my Pardon; and this but for such things, as by
Informations or Petitions I have been (though undeservedly) presented as an
Offender against His Most Excellent Majesty, and desired to be proceeded
against by His Majesty's immediate Directions. If any other private Subject
has ought to say against me, for any Trespass or Misdemeanour committed
against himself, (and not His Majesty) I desire no Protection, but those of His
Majesty's Courts of Justice, against any such person whosoever, etc.

December 11th 1635.

From December it hung as it were between Heaven and Earth, it will, and it
will not be done, till the King had occasion to go to Windsor, and the Bishop
had order to lie at Eaton, expecting to be sent for to kiss the King's Hand;
But who comes thither that was not looked for, it being the middle of the week,
but the Archbishop, who malleated the King's Gentleness into stronger Metal?
When Lincoln had labored for Peace, from thenceforth it was as far set back,
as if it had never been in Treaty. How was his good Soul tossed about between
Friends and Foes, between Mercy and Frowns, and now in the last Attempt put to
Job's note, c. 16. v. 11. God has delivered me to the ungodly, and turned me
over to the hands of the wicked: I was at ease, but he has broken me asunder,
and shaken me to pieces, and set me up for a mark! Intempestiva benevolentia
nihil a simultate differt, Polit. Ep. p. 26. A constant Enmity is more generous
than to interrupt it with Offers of never-intended, or never-composed
Agreements. Now the Archbishop looked for the day when he should trample upon
this Bishop, in a Censure: Azorius the Jesuit shall apply it for me, Moral.
tom. 1. lib. 13. c. 6. When the Order of the Knights Templars was plotted to be
overthrown in a Council at Vienna in Dauphine, says Pope Clement V. Etsi non
per viam justitiae potest destrui, destruatur per viam expedientiae, ne
scandalizetur filius noster rex Franciae. If they cannot fall by Justice, they
must fall for convenience sake: But here is the difference in the Story; There a
Bishop did gratify the King, here the King did gratify a Bishop.

117. Proceed then to another Information, since it must be so. The first Cause
being mortified, a new one took life from it; as Gorgias Leontinus his Mother
was delivered of him when she was dead. Viva fuit sterilis, mortua facta
parens, as Dr. Alabaster writes in his Epigram upon it. They are but ill
Examples in the New Testament, when an Accusation is turned into a new Species.
The Jews impleaded our Savior at first, that he said he would destroy the
Temple, etc. and changed it before Pilate into another Charge, that he made
himself a King. Paul was Indicted by the same Nation, that he brought a Greek
into the Temple to pollute it; but it was turned into another matter, Revilest
thou God's High Priest? They that will not stand to their own Bill, are more
set upon Destruction than Justice. Kilvert onerated the Bishop with Ten Charges
together; the use of the Court being, as Judge Popham had regulated it, to
admit but Four at once. But chiefly he was active to grime the Defendant with
one foul fault, Subornation of Witness, that is, to foment Perjury. But the
King's Counsel perusing the Depositions, waved it, and gave it another form,
Seducing of Witnesses, a manifest injury to the attestation of Truth, and for
contraction in a new phrase, Tampering with Witnesses, as my Lord of Canterbury
called it in his Sentence, Perhaps it is not Subornation of Perjury, but it is
Tampering. The Defendant thought to help himself with a Demur upon four Heads:
First, That it was utterly against the Practice of the Court, from the
Foundation of it, to fall upon a new Charge, started out of a former, before
the first had been heard. 2. That advantage was taken to undo any man living,
to gather new Impeachments out of the Books, after the publication of the
precedent Cause. 3. That for all that was offered to the Court, complaint had
been openly made by Counsel, and not disproved, That it rose from the
Prosecutors mis-leading and menacing of Witnesses, whom Terror and
Imprisonment would not suffer to be constant to themselves. Like as Eusebius
reports, lib. 6. Praepar. Ervang. c. 1. that when one importuned the Oracle for
an Answer, and threatened if he staid any longer; the Oracle told him, Retine
vim istam, falsa enim dicam si coges; Use no violence, for I must tell a lie,
if you do. Lastly, The Bishop pleaded with Animosity ( quid enim loqueretur
Achilles? Ovid. Met. 13.) that their Lordships ought to take such a Charge into
Cognizance, for Tampering had never been noted for Criminal Action before any
Judgment in the Land; which is not a Color, but a Maxim of Law, which appears
by that which is since published by the Lord Cook in Jurisdiction of Courts, c.
5. How that Court deals not with any offense, which is not Malum in se,
against the Common Law; or Malum prohibitum, against some Statute. And that
Novelties without warrant of Praesidents, are not to be allowed. Assume now out
of the Premises, that no Example could be found, that the censorious
magnificence of the Star Chamber had ever tampered with such a peccatulum as
tampering. Alteration in the forms of a Court beget the Corruption of the
Substance. Who ever read, that a Bench of Honorable Judges came into hatred,
so long as it kept close to the ways of their wise and venerable Predecessors?
But says Symmachus in Ep. p. 14. Si adjiciantur insolita, forsan consueta
cessabunt. When the People are over-lay'd with new Discipline, perhaps the old
Seats of Justice may crack in pieces. The Lord Keeper knew Justice, and loved
it; and did not obscurely signify, that he thought the Demur was reasonable:
which had almost removed him. And he found by one occurrence, that the Bishop's
Case was to be severed from other men's: For whereas a Proclamation came forth
in October 1636. that because a Plague was begun in London and Westminster,
therefore all Pleas and Suits in Law should be suspended till Hillary Term was
opened, and the Bishop claimed the Privilege, that all things might be
respited about his Cause, branched out into ten Heads, till that season. The
Proclamation indeed is full and clear on your side, says the Lord Keeper, but I
have special directions, that you shall have no benefit thereof. And I tell you
as a Friend, if you rely upon the Proclamation, your imprisonment is aimed at.
As if there were one Rule of Justice for all the Subjects in the Land, and
another for this Bishop; who took his qu. from this Caveat to attend his
Business; and he did it with the more confidence, that in seven years his
Adversaries had got no ground of him; as Grotius writes of the Spaniards siege
at Ha^rlem, being seven months about it; Annal. Belg. p. 42. Visi sunt vinci
posse, qui tam lent vicerant.

118. Of which none that looked into the Cause despaired, till the Scale was
overturned by the weight of a most rigorous Censure. The Charge in debate,
without any favor to the Defendant, is thus comprised: Anno 1634. when Kilvert
wanted Water to turn his Mill, Sir John Mounson, and Dr. Farmery, Chancellor
of Lincoln, offered themselves to debauch the Credit of Pregion, the Bishop's
Witness; who both expected to have gained, and did gain almost as much as
Kilvert by the Avenues of the Cause. To bring their Contrivance about, a
Bastard is laid to Pregion, to be begotten of the Body of Elizabeth Hodgson,
and that he bribed her to lay it upon another Father. The Bishop was to defend
the Credit of his Witness, and had to do with Matters and Persons in this
Point, wherein himself was altogether a Stranger. He suspected ill dealing from
Sir J. Mounson, the great Stickler, because he knew he hated Pregion, for
casting a Scandal upon his Lady, as virtuous a Gentlewoman as the Country had;
in which Cause the Bishop had caused Pregion to give Satisfaction long before.
Then he had more assurance of Pregions Innocence, because he was cleared of
this Bastard in a Sessions held at Lincoln in May, Car. 9. and whereas it came
again into debate at the Sessions 3 October. following, and it was given out that
an Order was past to find Pregion guilty, the Bishop was certified that the
Order was not drawn up in open Court, and that it was inserted in many places
with Farmeries hand. And Thomas Lund being present at the Sessions, asserted,
That it was not consented to by the Justices, but drawn out of Sir J. Mounson's
pocket. He had Letters from Knights of far greater Estates than Sir John, who
likewise testified the same; and from Mr. Richardson the Clerk of the Peace,
who refused to enter that Order; and that it was excepted against in open
Sessions by Mr. Sanderson, a Counselor of the Laws, and by the greater part of
the Bench, as utterly illegal. So that afterward being tried at the King's
Bench for the illegality of it, it was damned by all the four Judges. Yet more
to detect the Corruption of that Order, at the next Sessions held in May, the
Justices discharged Pregion, and laid the base Child upon one Booth a Recusant,
a Kinsman of Sir J. Mounson's; which Judgment was so inerrable, that it was
proved by three Witnesses, That upon the very day that the Bishop was
sentenced, Booth himself confessed, in the hearing of those Witnesses, that
Pregion had nothing to do with that baggage Woman, but that he, the said Booth,
at such a time and place, did get her with Child, and that Kilvert, whom he
cursed bitterly, had promised him half the Fine to charge the Child upon
Pregion, and had not performed it; and did vainly brag, that Kilvert had
brought him to kiss the King's hand. This was detected when the sad day was
over. Et instaurant dolorem sera solatia, Sym. p. 86. But the Objection lay not
only upon the getting of the Child, but how that Pregion, or rather the Bishop,
had carried themselves, to entangle the Witnesses that had sworn against
Pregion, which was the main Charge of the Information, and the color for the
heavy Sentence. The Bishop being authorized from the Star Chamber to uphold the
Credit of his Witness, he found the Depositions of Lund, Wetheral, Alice Smith,
and Anne Tubb to press upon Pregion. Grande doloris -- Ingenium est, miserisque
venit solertia rebus. Metam. lib. 6. So he did light upon a course which was
inoffensive, to extricate Pregion for his own safety. (...), Xeno. Ath. Resp.
It Is pardonable for every man to help himself. Nor was it an indirect way, no
not a jot; for there was neither Perjury nor Contradiction found between the
first and second Depositions of the Parties: And what the Bishop did was by the
advice of the best Counsel in England, to draw up some few Interrogatories to
be put to the four Witnesses, only to interpret, and not to vary from, or to
substract, or contradict what they had deposed before: For the words being
ambiguous in themselves, might be taken in one sense to Defame, in another
fence not at all to touch upon the credit of Pregion. It was agreed that
Pregion offered money to A. Tubb, and Alice Smith to procure Eliz. Hodgson to
lay the base Child upon another man; this they had sworn: this the Bishop never
endeavored to impeach. But an interrogatory is drawn up, and offered to them,
whether El. Hodgson was dealt with to lay it upon the right Father, (which was
a just and lawful motion) or upon some other, whether he had been the Father or
no. They both answer, That Pregion solicited her to lay it upon another, that
was the true Father. And this variation is all the Offense, that is, none at
all, in that particular. And in that right meaning Sir J. Wray, Sir J. Bolls,
and Richardson the Clerk of the Peace, did receive it in the Sessions. This
Practice, so little as it is, is the grand Objection, all beside comes not to
so much as a filip on the Forehead: For instance, one Ward swears, that he
heard a Servant of the Bishop, C. Powel, offer Alice Smith Moneys to take an
Oath of his framing; but Alice swears directly it was not so. Powel swears he
offered and paid her Money to bear her Charges, as a Witness, which is fit and
lawful. Nec is it a benignitas adimenda est, quae liberalitatem magis significat,
quam largitionem, Cic. pro Murena. T. Lund takes his Oath, That Pregion told
him, that he never had touched El Hodgson but twice: Being demanded hereof more
strictly in his examination in the Star Chamber, he swears, That Pregion did
not say to him, that he touched her carnally, nor did he know what he meant by
touching. Is there either substraction or contradiction in this? or any more
than a plain interpretation? Lastly, Wetheral had deposed, That he was
entreated by Pregion not to be at the Sessions: He stands to it, but adds, that
he was not bound to be there, nor summoned: He had deposed, That Pregion spoke
to him to swear to no more, than the Court should ask him. What harm was there
in that Caution? Being examined in Star Chamber, he swears, That Pregion
tempted him to nothing by Bribes or Reward, but that he told him, if he were
sworn to tell the whole Truth, he would not conceal it. Only one Witness,
George Walker, lays it on the Bishop, how Powel and Richard Owen entreated
him in the Bishop's Name to speak with Witheral upon these matters; which
though it include no ill, yet Owen and Powel depose, They were never employed
by the Bishop to deal with G. Walker upon such an Errand. So the Bishop is
cleared in every Information by sufficient Oaths of such, against whose Faith
there was no exception. How easy a Province had the Defendant's Counsel to
crumble these Impeachments into Dust, and to blow them into the Eyes of the
Impeachers? Verba innocenti reperire facile est, Curt. lib. 6. Yet the Oratory
of the Court, by pre-instructions, did turn them into filthy Crimes. As
Irenaeus says in the beginning of his Work, That out of the same Jewels, which
being handsomely put together make the Image of a Prince, being taken asunder,
you may contrive them into the Shape of a Monster.

119. Could it be expected that such Driblets, or rather Phantoms of
Under-dealing with Witnesses, should hold the Court ten days hearing, in the
long Vacation after Trinity-Term? What leisure was taken to bolt out, to
exaggerate, to wrack, to distort, to make an Elephant of a Fly! which I may
justly pour forth in the words of Tully for his Client, Quintius de fortunis
omnibus deturbandus est. Potentes, diserti, nobiles, omnes advocandi. Adhibenda
vis est veritati, minae intentantur, pericula intenduntur, formidines
opponuntur. But here were worse things, which the Orator had never cause to
complain of under the Roman Laws. All the Depositions of the main Witnesses for
the Bishop were deleted, not fairly by a Hearing in open Court, where their
Lordships might every one have considered of it, but were spunged out by that
Judge in his private Chamber, who was the bane of the Cause from the beginning
to the end; and forsooth, because they were impertinent Scandals against
Kilvert, and others that had deposed for the King: Only the Bishop was allowed
to put in a cross Bill when it was too late, after he was first ruined in his
Honor, Fortunes, and Liberty, and then lest to seek a Remedy against a
Companion not worth a Groat. And who was ever used like this Defendant since
the Star Chamber sat? that when his Cause was so far proceeded, as to be heard
in three sittings, that two new Affidavits should be brought in by Kilvert,
which struck to the very substance of the Cause, to which no Answer could be
given, because they were new matters, quite out of the Books, obtruded long
after publication, yet from thenceforth produced every day, which seduced
diverse of the noble Lords, and no doubt many of the Hearers, as though they had
been Depositions in that Cause, which were not so, but Materials of another
information, and in their due time were fully cleared and disproved. When was
it known before, that in every of the ten days that the Cause was in debate, a
Closet-meeting was held at Greenwich, the Lords sent for to it one by one, the
Proofs there repeated to them, and their Votes bespoken? Which was no better
than when Junius Marius, in Tacitus, bespake the Emperor Claudius to impart his
private Commentaries unto him, Per quos nosceret quisque quem accusandum
poposcisset. And between the full hearing and sentencing the Cause, the Lords
were well told a Passage, That a noble Personage had offered Ten thousand
pounds to compound for the Bishop's Peace, (which is true, that the Duke of
Richmond did it, when he saw how the Game went in the Cabinet.) Which was the
very reason that induced their Lordships to lay such an immense Fine upon a
Fault conceived, that was never sentenced in any Kingdom or State before. Yet
all this did not suffice, but in that morning of the day, when the Cause was
sentenced, it was first debated in an inner Chamber, so long till many hundreds
waited for their coming forth till high noon, wherein Agreement was concluded
by all Parties before they sat. There, and then it was, that the Archbishop
pressed for the degradation of his Brother Bishop, and his deportation, God
knows whither. Now, to decline that Extremity, the most of the Lords, who
endeavored to do all the Favor that they durst show, concluded upon a Fine of
10000 l. Imprisonment in the Tower during Pleasure, (which had been but short,
as they were assured before, if the King had been but left to his own gracious
Gentleness) and to be suspended during Pleasure, in the High-Commission-Court,
from all his Jurisdiction: Which Suspension passed in that Commission July 23.
And it would not be passed over, that Sir Ed. Littleton, then L. Chief Justice
of the Common Pleas, Anno 1640. in the Month of July, brought Lincoln to
Lambeth face to face, with the L. of Canterbury, when Lincoln told his Grace,
That the Commission under the Great Seal had not a word in it to enable him to
suspend either Bishop or Priest by direction from a Sentence of Star Chamber,
but only for Offenses specified in the Commission; and that the Fact which His
Grace had done, had brought him and the Commissioners into a Praemunire. To
which the Archbishop answered, That he had never read the Commission. A learned
Satisfaction; Was it not? when he had censured so many by the Power of that
Commission, which he confessed he had never read. But consider now, as Isocrates
pleaded it well, ad Plat. p. 456. (...). Whether it be right to inflict such
unjust and grievous Penalties upon such petty pretended Misdemeanors. Or did
not the Latin Orator provide better against it? Cic. 1. de Off. Cavendum ne
major poena, quam culpa sit; and ne iisdem de causis alii plectantur, alii ne
appellentur quidem. And let those who meet with this Narration be acquainted,
that albeit the Compact was in the Inner Chamber, that the Lords should speak
all the same in their Judgment, yet a little Vanity slipped from some few to ease
their Stomach: The L. Finch said, That if it had liked others, he would have
laid some Ignominy on the Bishop's person. Promptum ad asperura ingenium, Tac.
An. lib. 1. So this Lord looked on the Bishop's Cause not only with a blear'd
but with a blood-shotten Eye; for it was conceived he meant the cutting off his
Ears, who had never sat a Judge, in all likelihood, if this Bishop, being then
L. Keeper, had not prevented him from leaving his Calling, and traveling
beyond Seas; from which courses he kept him, by fair Promises to provide for
him, and he made them good: I will name the time and place, Aug. 1621, and the
Earl of Exeter's House in St. John's Close. Mr. Secretary Winnebanke said, It
was his desire, if it might have seemed good to others, to have the Bishop
degraded. Hold, Sir Francis, and learn the Canons of the Church; it is not in
the Power of Laymen to degrade Bishops at their discretion; and as little can a
Knight depose a Peer of the upper House of Parliament; for he that can thrust a
Bishop out of that House, why not as well an Earl or a Duke? But Sir Francis
showed his Good will, as the Athenians did to Philip the Son of Demetrius, in
Livy: Additum est decreto ut si quid postea, quod ad noxam ignominiamque
Philippi pertineret, adderetur, id omne populum Atheniensium jussurum, Dec. 4.
lib. 1. Then comes in the Archbishop with a Trick, to hoise up the Bishop with
some Praise, that it might push him in pieces with a greater Censure, That when
he thought upon this Delinquent's Learning, Wisdom, Agility in Dispatch,
Memory, and Experience, that accompanied him with all these Endowments, he
wondered at his Follies and Sins in this Cause. O Sins by all means! for by
dioptrical Glasses some find Blemishes in the Sun: Telescopia fabri facimus ut
in sole maculas quaeramus, says Alex. More, in his Preface to Strangius's
learned Book. So upon this matter his Grace took up no less than a full Hour to
declaim against the horrid Sin of Perjury; and in this Cause he might as well
have spoken against the horrid Sin of Piracy: So he lays all his Censure upon
that Charge. Spirat inexhaustum flagranti pectore sulphur, as Claudian of
Enceladus. The Auditors thought he would never have made an end, till at last
he pleaded for more Right to be done Sir J. Mounson. The Lords (let me say it
freely and truly) had overshot themselves to fine the Bishop to pay Sir John a
Thousand Marks, for saying that his Charge against Pregion was a Pocket-Order.
It is confessed the Bishop said so, and said the Truth. But beside, the Bishop
pleaded, that he heard it of T. Lund; Lund stands to it, that he told it the
Bishop, yet the Bishop is censured, and Lund, that took it upon himself, is not
questioned. But the L. of Canterbury, who did ever mount highest in all
Censures, said, He was sorry the Fine was not a Thousand pounds.

120. This is the shutting up of the Censure, grievous to the Bishop's Purse
and Liberty, but not a whit to his Honor and Good Name; which was so esteemed
by almost all that heard the actings of that day, and shook their Heads at
them. As Cicero says in pro Plancio, Opimii calamitas turpitudo Po. To. non
judicium putandum est. I that write this was chosen to bring the relation of
this Censure to the Bishop, then hard at his Study; which he received with no
change at all of his Countenance or Voice, but only said, Now the Work is over
my Heart is at rest, so is not many of theirs that have censured me. And here
began the way to Episcopal Disgrace and Declension. It was his turn now, it was
Canterbury's not long after. Howl Fir Tree, for the Cedar is fallen, Zech.
11.3. (...); as Salmasius of the Elephant and Dragon in Solinum, p. 307. The
Vanquished was cast down, and the Conqueror fell likewise. When such a Pillar
of the Church was demolished with Prosecutions, so uncovered to every Eye, so
transparent, that you might see the Blush of Injustice quite through them, how
ominous was it to the higher and lower Dignities of the Clergy! As Mr. Morice
says in his Coena (...), p. 354. Perhaps it may be with them as with Staddels
in a Wood, which scarce ever prosper when their fellows are cut down, and
themselves left naked. And what became in three years, or little more, of that
Honorable Court of Star Chamber? of which the L. Coke says, That in the right
institution, and the ancient Orders of it being observed, it keeps all England
in quiet. But in some late Causes it grew distasteful even to wonder; as in
that of the Soap-boilers, and that of London Derry, that of Mr. Osbolston, nay,
in that of Prynn, Bastwick, and Burton, men not to be favored in the matter of
their seditious Writings, but for their Qualities and Places sake, to be pitied
for the Indignity done to their Persons; which I receive from a wise Hand,
Bodin de Rep. l. 6. c. 6. Legibus Francorum ac Saliorum quamplurimae pro
cujusque statu ac condition poenae infliguntur -- Quin and barbarissimi Indi,
qui ad occasum positi sunt, cum de sceleribus conviclum nobilem ac plebeium
tenerent, nobili capillos aut brachialia truncabant, plebeio nares and
auriculas praecidebant. But I said, that after the Censure of the forenamed
Causes, and that of this Bishop, all much against the popular Judgment, many
great men did presage, and the Commonalty did wish the extinction of that noble
Court; and it was overthrown by Vote in the first five months of the Long
Parliament, before the King had carried away his most considerable Friends to
York. This is the condition of mortal things, says Pliny, Ut a necessariis
primum cuncta venerint ad nimium, Not. Hist. l. 26. Many Tribunals were of
necessary institution at first, and of necessary destruction when they run into
Excess. Indeed it is not the primitive Court that is pulled down, but another,
when it waxes quite unlike it self. Non est eadem harmonia, ubi e Phrygio in
Doricum transit, says Aristotle, 5 Pol. The Music is not the same, which is
altered from a shrill to a grave Note. Yet better terms, I hope, may set it up
in a better Constitution. A Pot that boils over may be taken from the Fire, and
set on again: Howsoever, I am not so bold with holy Providence, to determine
why God caused or permitted this great Court to be shut up like an unclean
place; or why Divine Judgment was so severe against their persons especially,
that inflamed the Censure against our Bishop. But I will cover his Case with
St. Austin's Eloquence, touching the Doom passed upon St. Cyprian, Alia est
Sella terrena (aut Stella terrena) aliud tribunal coelorum, ab inferiore
accepit sententiam, a superiore coronam, Ps. 36. Conc. 3. And certainly Christ
does feel the Injuries done to an Innocent, who was sentenced by unrighteous
Judgment.

121. My Pen must not now go with the Bishop, my good Master, to his Lodgings
in the Tower, whither in my Person I resorted to him weekly, and if I said
daily, a lesser Figure than an Hyperbole would salve it; excepting when he was
confined to close Imprisonment, which was not wont, but upon the Discoveries or
Jealousies of dangerous Treasons. The Christians that were committed by
idolatrous Emperors, were in libera custodia, their Deacons and Relievers of
their Wants might resort unto them. I have the Authority of Photius for it, Ep.
97. (...). They that put the Martyrs to death hindered not their Friends to
come and administer unto them: But Christian Magistrates should be more
observant of that Clemency, else the Praise which our Savior gives to the
Charitable would be prevented; I was in prison, and ye came unto me, Mat.
25.36. He that has no more than the freedom of a Prison, much more he that
has not so much, is in a strait Captivity. The Rabbis have a Saying, That if
Sea were Ink, and the World Parchment, it would never serve enough to contain
the praises of Liberty. But so good a Disciple as I write of did not believe
the Jews, that there was so much sweetness as they dreamt of, in any temporal
Prosperity. And finding that the People on this side Tweed, and beyond, were
provoked to Discontents, and more discontented than they were provoked; and
hearing Presages of ill to come, both from the Judicious, and from every
Mechanick's Mouth, things were so bad without-doors, that he saw no reason, but
to think, that Malice had withered him away into no unhappy Retirement. Upon
which subject he made some Latin Poems, especially when he took no good Rest. I
am of opinion it was so with Job, c 35.10. God my maker gives Songs in the
night; and after the vulgar Latin, Qui dedit carmina in nocte. To which Moral
Gregory says, Carmen in nocte est felicitas in tribulatione. With such
Diversions our Job compounded with his Sorrows, to pay them not the half he
owed them: And whatsoever Face thy Fate puts on, shrink not, nor start not, but
be always one; as Laureat Johnson sings it in his Underwoods. Briefly,
Imprisonment to him was no worse than it is to a Flower put into an Earthen
Pot, straightened for spreading, but every whit as sweet as in the open Beds of
the Garden. Yet he wanted not Tentatious to break his Heart, if God had not
kept it. He looked for Mercy from His Majesty, now he had plucked him down, after
a long chase, with a Censure: Neque Caesari quicquam ex victoriis ejus laetius
fuit, quam servasse Corvinum, as Vellicus has immortalized the memory of
Caesar. Whereas three new Bills were allowed to be entered against this Bishop,
as I shall relate, when I come again into that rugged way; which was (...), as
Photius calls Basilius's Usage, an unspeakable pickling a man in the Brine of
Misery. He looked for some of the Nobles to mediate for his Enlargement, (as
there were not a few that did lend him help before, while there was Hope that
he might recover) but Kings like not that any should pity them whom they have
undone. So there was not one Ebedmelech in the Court, that would tie a few Rags
together, to draw Jeremiah out of Prison. How few there be that will co-part
with any in their ruined Fortunes! Miserorum non secus ac desunctorum
obliviscuntur, Plin. Ep. lib. 9. which we may translate into English out of the
Psalm. 31.12. I am a fear to mine acquaintance, I am forgotten, as a dead man
out of mind. The same measure that David found in Jury, Thuanus confesses, was
to be seen in France, Hist. lib. 23. That among all that Diana Valentina had
preferred, when she was their King's Mistress, Nemo unus repertus, qui fortunam
jacentis, and a suis relictae sublevaret. With the same Neglect Velleius
charge the Egyptians, when Pompey their great Benefactor fled unto them, and
was deserted, Quis in adversis beneficiorum servat memoriam? Aut quis ullam
calamitosis deberi putat gratiam? Even they, whose Spiritual Father Paul was,
whom he had begotten at Rome, in Christ's Gospel, they all forsook him, and
none stood to him when he was convented, 2 Timothy 4.16. Some few also of this
bountiful Lord's Servants stood afar off now, and came not near him: They were
so well provided under him, that they did not need him; and they were so
heartless and timorous, that he did not need them. Hirundines Thebas, quod
i.lius moenia saepius capta sint, negantur subire, Plin. N. H. lib. 10. c. 24.
Thebes was so often sacked and taken, that no Swallows would nest within it; a
Summer-bird, and a subtle, that will endure Winter and hard Seasons with no
body. Yet, to give his honest Followers their due, the greatest part of them
shrunk not, but did their best Service that they could afford to their forlorn
Master; like Sear Leaves, that hang upon an Oak in January; though the Tree can
give them no Sap, they are loath to leave it.

122. Another thing came so cross to the Bishop, as nothing could be worse to a
magnificent sumptuous mind; and if he had been covetous, it had done the Work
which his Enemy looked for, it had killed him. All that ever he had was seized,
nay rifled, stormed, plundered; and what Enemy was ever so mad, to batter a
Town when they had taken it? It was time for him to save somewhat, if he could,
to keep him in a competency of Livelihood. He was in Debt some Thousand pounds
deep, and he heard that the King was resolved not to abate a Denier of his
Fine. No man was more willing to unlatch the Door, and to let out Wealth and
Fortune if it would not stay. Si celeres quatit pennas, resigno quae dedit, and
mea virtute me involvo, Hor. Od. lib. 3. penult. Yet that he might not be stuck
on Ground, he petitioned, that His Majesty would stall his Fine, and take it up
as his Estate would bear it, by a Thousand Pounds a year; which was never
denied to any Subject, and was granted, till the Archbishop overcame to have it
revoked. (...), Hom. Odyss. How much better had it been to do a good turn than
a bad? But an Order is dispatched, to gather up all that could be found, and to
import it into the Exchequer, without any respite of Time. Kilvert is
commissioned to be the Publican, to go down to Bugden and Lincoln, with an
Extent: And the Devil could do no worse to Job, when he was put into his Hands;
he seizes upon all the Books he found, Movables, Goods, Plate, Furniture, to
the value of Ten thousand pounds, of which he never made account but of Eight
hundred pounds, for the Thousand Marks allowed to Sir J. Mounson, which
Kilvert's Man told the Bishop, that Sir John and his Master shared it between
them. He felled the Timber, which our new Purchasers of Bishops Lands learned
of that honest man: He killed up the Deer of the Park; settles in Bugden-House
for three Summers, with a Seraglia of Quaedam; fells an Organ that cost 120 l.
at 10 l. Pictures that cost 400 l. at 5 l. Books he filcht what he would; and
for four Cellars of Wine, Syder, Ale, Beer, with Wood, Hay, Corn, and the like,
stored up for a year or two, he gave not account of Sixpence, but spent it
upon Baggage, and loose Franions, as prodigally as if he had kept a Shrievalty.
Thus a brave Personal Estate flew away into Atoms, and not a Tally struck to
pay His Majesty, though enough to have paid all, if it had been justly
husbanded. The worst is behind. The Bishop's Benefices, Lands, and Leases are
offered to be rented at 4500 l. per annum, with sufficient Security to pay the
King: This had satisfied the Fine in two years, within a little. But Kilvert
brings a Letter with him from Secretary Windebank, to direct, or rather force,
the Juries to receive no Evidence against the King's Profit, but to find the
Particulars at half the rate, and less; which the Varlet enjoyed at those
Penniworths, and made Benefit of the Overplus, to waste it in Luxury. Well
might they allow the Bishop, at this rate, 500 l. per annum, out of his own,
for his subsistence; and yet of that the Fees of the Prison sucked up a
considerable proportion: But Kilvert was a long-tongu'd fellow, and if he were
alive, he would speak out, and tell us, That there were Sharers with him in
these Prizes, he had not all. He and Powel were Sequestrators indeed, to
collect the Rents of Huntington shire, but Farmery had those of Lincoln, Sir J.
Lamb the Parsonage of Walgrave, the first Dog that lodged the Deer; the
Prebendaries of Westminster had his Deanery, that breathed him so well in the
Royal Visitation; the Archbishop had the Jurisdiction of the Bishopric,
against the Canon Law, which in vacancy or suspention was to be executed by a
Custos Spiritualitatis, who was to be one of the Residentiaries of the Minster.
But thus he was given up to be devoured, as a Carrion, by his Promoters and
Accusers. And what Conscience was there in the nomination of such partial
Sequestrators? Nor were they ashamed that the Eyes of the whole Land were open,
to see their Extortions: Tanta dulcedo est ex alienis fortunis praedandi, Live.
l. 1. dec. 6. Neither did they consider, that if they shall be cast upon God's
left hand, that did not give charitably of their own, that their Condemnation
shall be far greater, that did rob from others: Multi in hac vita manducant,
quod apud inferos digerunt, Aug. in Ps. 49. But to return to the much injured
Prisoner, his Bark was pilled round about, the Stock then must needs die: Yet
he kept honorable Hospitality in the Tower, and maintained a Table furnished
for the Noon Meal (no Cloth was spread again that day) with as much Plenty and
Decorum as any of the Prelates kept, that had all their Rents and Incomes to
themselves; and yet this little Solace, to draw Friends about him, was repined
at by the Archbishop; for Sir Richard Winn, the Bishop's Kinsman, knowing that
he did sensibly decay by the Sums of Moneys which he had lent him, spoke to
Archbishop Laud, That some Order might be taken for a better administration of
his Estate, that he might be fed and maintained like a Gentleman out of his
own. His Grace gave him this snappish Answer, That he did not hear that his
Kinsman lived like one that wanted. That Is it then he would have heard. There
were very good things to be found in the L. Archbishop, but his implacable
spite against a Bishop, his Raiser, and now become a Spectacle of Pity, was
unpardonable. Let him that weaves the Webb of his Life and Actions, untangle
this Knot in the silken Skeen of his Memory, if he can. But I think, as
Zenobius makes it an Adagy, Cent. 4. Prove. 28. (...), That to draw the Picture
of Butas truly, the best way was not to paint him from Head to Foot.

123. Malevolence did impotently break forth, and had no Vizard to hide its
Face, that the Archbishop was not satisfied to have his Fellow Bishop suspended
in the High Commission Court, but he advanced to deprive him for the Book
called The Holy Table. Gregory the Ninth in his Epistles blames the English
Clergy above any, that they studied to undo one another: O Angli! hominum estis
miserrimi: quilibet vestrum alium corrodit, ac studet depauperare. He saw too
much into the nature of our insulary Severity, and not holding close together.
Uniti muniti. They of the same Tribe, if they be wise, should not make a rent
in their own piece, (...), says the Emperor Antoninus, because they are woven
into the same Loom, and are supporters of the same Building. Where should we
look for kindness, but in the Rulers of the Church, the noblest part of
Christ's Family? And kindness is nobleness, says St. Chrysostom; and mercy is a
generous thing. The Beraeans were more noble than the Thessalonians, Acts 17.
(...), says he. It does not signify nobleness of blood, but gentleness of
pity. Now for the Book, the Stone of Scandal, at which his Grace stumbled so
much, it was known unto him, that some things got into practice in the Church
under his Government, and by his Authority, were disrelisht by a considerable
part in his Province, and they of the best conformity; whose averseness he
thought would be the stiffer, by the contents of that Book. His remedy was to
bring the Author into question, and to crush all that sided with him in his
Person; as the State Maxim goes, Compendium est victoriae devincendorum hostium
duces sustulisse, Paneg. to Constantine p. 339. But which way shall the Book be
brought into Disgrace? with bad Interpretations? It will do no good. Forced
Earth in time will fall to its own level. First then (besides some Answers
published to decry it) he incensed his Majesty with a relation of it; in whose
Ecclesiastical Rights it was mainly written: for what he had collected, and
offered in a Paper to his Majesty, Lincoln got a sight of it by the Duke of
Lennox, and proved that all the Matters of Fact set down against him were
false, and not to be found in the Book, but that it strongly maintained the
contrary Positions: which when his Majesty saw, he seemed to take it ill from
the Informer. So these flitting Clouds were blown over, before they could pour
down the Storm they were big with. His Grace sent the Book to the Attorney
Gener^, to thrust it into an Information, who returned it back, that it would
not bear it. Here again was Tencer's luck in Homer. Il. (...), He had a good
will to hit Hector with an Arrow, but he mist him. Then in his Speech made
against Burton, Prin, and Bastwick, which he printed with a Dedication to the
King, he fell upon this Book, reading out of his Notes, that he that gave
allowance to thrust it at that time into the Press, did countenance thoseth^ee
Libellers, and did as much as in him lay to fire the Church and State. Now
under color to Censure others, to fall upon a man that was neither Plaintiff,
Defendant, nor Witness in their Cause, would amount to a Libel in another
mouth, against whom Justice had been open. But as Demosthenes says against
Aristogiton, (...), a Sword is useless, if it have not an edg to cut; so this
bitter flam was but a leaden Dagger, and did not wound. What remained next but,
take him Bull-begger, fetch him into the High Commission Court, where his Grace
was President Judge, and might be Advocate, Proctor, Promotor, or what he
would. And he was so hot upon it, that three Letters were written by Secretary
Windebank, in his Majesty's Name, to hasten the Cause. Whereas honest and
learned Dr. Rive, the King's Advocate, knew not where to act his part upon it.
Lincoln is now in his Coup in the Tower; whither four Bishops, and three
Doctors of the Civil Laws came to take his Answer to a Book of Articles of four
and twenty sheets of Paper on both sides. The Defendant refuses to take an
Oath on the Bible, claiming the Privilege of a Peer; but his Exception was not
admitted. He stood upon it, that himself was a Commissioner, that they had no
power over him, more than he had over them; which did not suffice him. Then
they come to the Articles; whose Proem in usual form was, That he must
acknowledge, and submit to the power of that high Court; which he did grant no
otherwise, than in such things, and over such persons, as were specified in
their Commission. The second Article contained, That all Books licensed by his
Grace's Chaplains, are presumed to be Orthodox, and agreeable to sound and true
Religion; which he denied, and wondered at the Impudency that had put such an
Article upon him. The third, That he had licensed a Book, when none but the
Archbishops, and Bishop of London had such power. Nay, says Lincoln, my self,
and all Bishops as learned as they, have as much power as they; not only by the
Council of Lateran under Leo the Tenth, and the Reformatio Cleri under Cardinal
Pool, but by Queen Elizabeth' s Injunctions, and a Decree in Star Chamber. The
fourth, That he named a Book, called A Coal from the Altar, a Pamphlet. The
fifth, That he said all Flesh in England had corrupted their ways. The sixth,
That in a jear he said he had heard of a Mother Church, but never of a Mother
Chapel. The seventh, That again in a scoff he derived the word Chapel from
St. Martin 's Hood. The eighth, That he said the people were not to be lasht by
every man's whip. The ninth, That he maintained the people were God's people,
and the King's people, but not the Priest's People. The tenth, That be flouted
at the pretty of the Times, and the good work in hand. The rest of the Cluster
were like these, and these as sharp as any of the seven and twenty Articles,
and one and thirty Additionals. This was the untemper'd Mortar that crumbled
away; or as the Vulgar Latin reads it, Ezech. 13.10. Liniebant parietem luto
absque paleis. So here was dirt enough; but not so much as a little straw, or
chaff, to make it stick together: But such as they were, the Bishop had the
favor to read them all over once before he was examined; a favor indeed, not
shown to every body. After the Examination past over, he required a Copy of
it, which the three Civilians voted to be granted: but his Grace, and Sir J.
Lamb would first have him re-examined again upon the same Interrogatories, to
try the steadiness of his memory, and to catch him in a Snare, if he did vary.
An Error that may easily be slipped into, by the tediousness of the Matter, and
the intricate Forms of the Clerk's Pen, wherein an aged or illiterate man will
scarce avoid the danger of Perjury. But the Bishop, being of a prodigious
memory, had every word by heart which he had deposed before against two
subsequent Examinations; which laid this Cause asleep, till God shall awaken
it, and hear it on both sides at the last day.

124. No worse could be looked for, than that their frivolous Articles should go
out, as they did, in a Cracker. And less was expected from that which followed,
whose steam, when it came abroad, was laughed at in good Company; but it cost
the unfortunate Bishop some thousands in good earnest, for Ciphers, for
Riddles, for Quibbles, for Nothing: It made a third Information in
Star Chamber; for like Herulus in Virgil, Aen. 8. Ter letho sternendus erat.
The driver on, and the dealer in it was the Archbishop; and if all that read
it, do not condemn it, I am not in my Senses. For I will Appeal in those words
of Job, c. 17. v. 8. Upright men shall be astonished at this, and the innocent
shall stir up himself against the hypocrite. Mark how the Game was played by a
black Bishop and two Rooks, and how the white Bishop was taken by discovery.
Dr. Walker, our Bishop's Secretary, hardly escaped in the second Bill, and
Kilvert's anger did still hang over him. Cadwallader Powel his Steward was then
fined at 300 l. and Imprisonment, yet was never touched in his person, nor a
penny of the Fine exacted of him. For which Favors he is dealt with to espy
what he could, to crush his Lord with some fresh Oppression. Who raking in
every Corner to find out somewhat that might answer his Undertaking, he
produces two Letters of Mr. Osbolstons, the head Schoolmaster of the King's
School at Westminster. The Bishop, to whom they are written, will not own them,
that he did ever receive them. Powel says he found them in his Chamber. And it
is possible there was such heedlessness; for I knew the House well, and have
seen some careless oversights in that kind. A fault incident to Melanctthon,
says Camerarius in vit. p. 37. Litterae quae afferebantur, quotidie omnium
oculis and manibus expositae, ex quibus subtractum plurimum esse constat. A
negligence not to be covered with the excuse of the greatest and gravest
studies. But it was made highly probable, that these Letters were neither
found, scattered at random, nor picked out of a Desk or Hamper of Papers, (both
which for certain Powel broke open) but Powel received them immediately from
the Carrier, and never delivered them to his Lord and Master. So it was
confirmed by many Oaths in Court; nay, confessed by Powel, That when his Lord was
in remoter parts, he had order to open all Letters directed to his Lordship, to
look into them if they had any matter concerning the Suits so hotly prosecuted
against him, and to send them, as he thought fit, to the Secretary to London.
The Contents of these two Letters being glost upon by Powel to be dangerous to
the Archbishop, and lap'd up in dark folds to give a greater affright, it
founds likely that he reserved them to himself, and kept them in lavender for
such a day wherein they might stand him in stead. For more confirmation, the
Bishop takes his Oath, He did not remember that ever he received such Letters:
and Osbolston swears point blank, He never had an answer to them; which makes a
strong presumption, that this trusty Steward did pocket them up. Of whom
Kilvert received them; which is not denied. And he presents them to his Grace:
and if his Grace had been the Master of a brave Spirit, we would have thrown
them into the sire. That had been generous to abhor a Servant that betrayed his
Master, and to borrow no Office of Villainy from him. That had been noble, not
to rake for Secrets and Advantages in the Letters of his Adversary. So did
Caesar when Scipio's Cabinet was brought to him, found at Thapsus; so he did
with Pompey's Papers seized on at Pharsalia, which he would not look into, but
burnt them. Illa suit vera and incomparabilis animi sublimitas, captis apud
Pharsaliam Pompeii magni sertniis Epistolarum, concremasse eas optima (...),
a^que non legisse. Plin. lib. 7. Not. Hist. c. 15. Such Gallantry had better
become a Primate of all England, than the Dictator of Rome, and all the World.
This had been: way to have got him a great Name, to give Lincoln such an Eslay
of his Civility. Nihil laudabilius, nihil magno and praeclaro viro dignius
(...) and clem^ntia, Tul. 2. l. Of. But to look for such things from a
revengful mind, is as unlikely as to make the bris^ly skin of a Hedghog smooth.
And when all the Stuff in the Letters are scanned, what Fadoodles are brought
to light? First, Osbolston is charged to write libellous matter against his
Grace, in That he called him Vermin, little Urchin, meddling Hocas Pocas; and
the Lord Treasurer deceased, Great Leviathan. 2. To contain false News and
tales in this passage, That the little Urchin, and great Leviathan, are become
at great distance in earnest. 3. To contain a Conspiracy to destroy his Grace,
because one Letter enquires, when Lincoln would come to Westminster to look
after this Gear. On the Bishop's part, a Note scribled hastily, but no Letter,
is produced, sent to Walker in these Words: MR. Osbolston importunes me, to
contribute to my Lord Treasurer some Charges upon the little Great man, and
assures me they are mortally out: I have utterly refused to meddle in this
Business. And I pray you learn from Mr. Seldom and Mr. Herbert, if any such
falling out be. And keep it to your self, what I write unto you. If my Lord
Treasurer would be served by me, he must use a more solid and sufficient
Messenger, and free me from the Bonds of the Star Chamber? Else let them fight
it out for me.

What a Spider's Thread is here to pull a Man into the Star Chamber by it^ So
Fulgentius tells us of Padre Paulo, that he wrote a Letter in Cipher to Gabriel
Collison, touching at the Court of Rome, as if some came to Dignities by evil
Services; which Collison revealed to St. Severmo, Cardinal, and Head of the
Office of Inquisition, for which Paul was trounced with continual disturbance.
And our Inquisitor St. Severo, did now make use of the like, or rather less
opportunity.

125. To slide this Cause with the most sly advantage into a hearing, Lincoln
is kept in close Imprisonment from All-hollantide till the end of Christmas
(for what Cause will appear in order) that he might be surprised, and neither
trouble the King with Petitions, nor the Court of Star Chamber with motions. He
chaft at it extremely, and could do no less. (...), says Aristotle Eth. 4. c.
5. They that are not angry upon meet occasion, are Foo's. But the day is set,
and come, without any respect had to his due preparation, according to Rules
and Customs. At the hearing Mr. Osbolston pleads, That the great Prelate had no
reason to take those nicknames to himself; that he neither named him nor
thought of him. He swears it, and proves it strongly, That the Hocas Pocas was
one Dr. Spicer, who was vulgarly abused with that byword, and that Judge
Richardson was the great Leviathan, who had committed Spicer at that time, no
less than five years before, to Newgate. What reason was there but he should
expound his own Riddle? Now here is a forked Dilemma, let the Bishop, or any man
living, escape one horn of it, if it be possible. For if he receive such
Letters, and not complain of them, if it come to light, distortions of Phrases
shall endanger him to be guilty of smothering a Libel. If he take the other
course, and reveal them to a Justice of Peace, and say he takes the Archbishop
to be meant by Vermin, Urchin, Hocas Pocas, since the Writer did swear the
contrary, he had evidently made himself the Author of a libellous Exposition.
But the Bishop pleads he never received such Letters to his remembrance; and to
make it likely, Osbolston swears he never had an Answer of them. Powel will not
swear, but says he found them in a Band-box in the Bishop's Chamber. They were
like the Cup in Benjamin's Sack, no body but Joseph and the Steward that
plotted it, could tell how it came there. Dr. Walker believes, but dares not
swear, that his Lordship received them; yet adds, he could not be assured that
he understood them: for upon his knowledge the Bishop was often to seek to
understand Mr. Osbalston 's gibrish, and was fain to send to him for his
Cipher, which in this matter he did not. That which the King's Counsel urged
was from the Papers that Dr. Walker brought in under his Lords hand, which
tuned somewhat like to a Replication to the two Letters. The Secretary was
pelted with many hard words that day from diverse Lords, for doing that ill
O^lice to his Master. I have heard Dr. Walker protest deeply, so have many
besides, That he would not have done it for all the world, but that he knew it
was a main witness of his Lord's Innocence, and enough to clear him, howsoever
the Court did strangely misunderstand it. I am bountiful to him, if I think he
did it for that good end; and I will think so, because I never saw any
immorality or vice in the course of his life. And he was right, that the Paper
is very candid, and did deserve from the Archbishop that he should have cast
away at least some unprofitable courtesies upon the Bishop for it. And the
proof was clear, even ex part Reg is in the Court, that he refused to consent
or agree to make one in a quarrel against the Archbishop: but he holds close to
his main Plea, That the Letters excepted at did never come to his hands. If the
matter of them be worthy of a censure, let it light upon his Steward, and his
Secretary, who confess to have seen those Papers some years before, and to know
the ironical meaning, and did conceal them. He appeals also to the Laws of the
Land, that if such Letters had come to him, like Merlin's Rhimes, and
Rosicrusian bumbast, that no Law or Practice directs the Subject to bring such
Gryphes and Oracles, but plain, litteral, grammatical Notions of Libels to a
Justice of Peace, against a known and clearly deciphered Magistrate. That
nothing were more ridiculous, than to prefer a Complaint for canting, and
unintelligible Expressions. It cannot be but so many wise Lords, as sat in
Judgment, understood this. Well might the Bishop say, that all flesh had
corrupted their way. The Court in those days was rolled about with fear, and
were steered by imperious directions. As Syncsius said of Athens in his days,
Ep. 235. (...), There was nothing but the Hide left, to show what a fair
Creature it was in times of Yore. Let it not be thought rash to write thus of
so noble a Senate How did a Commission of Lords use Queen Ann of Bullen? and a
greater Commission than that use Mary Queen of Scotland? But Mr. Osbalston is
sentenced out of all his Freehold, was doomed to an opprobrious branding, who
escaped it by concealing himself from the cruelty of the Tiger; only the Earl
of Holland voted, that he saw no proof to bear a Sentence; but cleared both
Osbolston and the Bishop; so did not the Lord Finch, and Sir Fr. Windebank, who
listed up the Bishop's Fine to Ten thousand pounds: Such as these made that
Honorable Court insupportable to the Subject, odious to the Parliament: For
whose sake I will change a word in a passage of Tullies Philip. 13. Is It is
locus si in hac Curia fuerit, ipsi Curiae non erit locus. Sir J. Brampston,
Lord Chief Justice, led the most Voices for 8000 l. Fine and Damages, for
receiving Libellous Letters. Yet was so judicious not to call the Script, sent
privately to Dr. Walker, a divulging of them, as some others did; nor did he
tax him for not blaming the Indiscretions of Osbolston: yet those were the
Heads to which the most did refer the Contents of their dislike. For all this
the Bishop rested in peace of mind, and piously wished his Judges Mercy from
God; which Prayer I hope was heard for their persons; but God was offended at
the Court, which over-drip't so many with its too far spreading Branches of
Arbitrary and Irregular Power. If the Excrescencies had been pruned away, the
rest might have served for wholesome use. When the Romans found the Carriage of
their Censors to be insolent, Mucronem sensorium mustis remediis retuderant,
Alex^ab Alex. lib. 3. c. 23. They blunted the Edge, but still kept the Sword in
the Magistrates hand. But God spared not to dig up this burdensome Tree by the
root; as Auson. in Paneg. Quae mala adimis, prospicis ne esse possint rediviva;
yet it may be the Stump is in the Earth, though fettered to be kept under with
a band of Iron and Brass, Dan. 4.15. and may spring again in due season. But
this guilt, among a hundred more upon it, is, that this Bishop being mulcted in
eight thousand pounds, for a pretense thinner than a Vapor, a Trespass to mean
for one Christian to ask forgiveness of it from another, and never clap't upon
him by the Evidence of any Proof, yet not a doit was remitted of that vast Sum.
And yet I look upon our Bishop as one that had a better hold in present
comfort, hope hereafter, and glory for ever. For it is better by far to suffer,
than to do an Injury. Miserior est qui suscepit in se scelus, quam qui alterius
facinus subire cogitur. Cic. Philip. 11.

126. Lucilius a Centurion in Tacitus Annal. lib. 1. had a scornful name given
him by the Military Dicacity of his own Company, Cedo alteram. Quta fracta vite
in terga militis alteram, and rursus alteram poscebat; when he had broken a
Bastonada of a tough Vine upon a Soldiers shouldiers, he called for another,
and another after that. Such an inde^inent Cruelty was exercised upon the
person of this suffering Bishop: when one Bill was heard and censured, Cedo
alteram, and rursus alteram, was all the pity that he sound. (...) Hesiod. lib.
5. Fortune is not content with some men's miseries, unless they be all over
miserable. A new Information is brought on with as much fury, as if Jehu had
marched with it; and that the Desendant might be utterly ignorant of a
Conspiracy that was hatching abroad, he was shut up close, upon color that he
was obstinate, and had not answered to some Interrogatories as was expected.
They were Eighty in all. To which the Bishop does thus remonstrate for himself.
That when a Defendant is examined upon Interrogatories in the Court, and
certified by a Judge to have answered insufficiently, he is to pay twenty
shillings costs the first time, and to be re-examin'd. If he be reported to
fail the second time, to pay forty shillings Costs. The third time to be
imprisoned; but never in close Imprisonment. These were ever the constant Rules
of the ancient Lords that sat upon those Causes. The Bishop being called to
answer to these Eighty Interrogatories, his Answers are certified to be
imperfect to forty of them. But the Judges did not point out wherein the
Imperfection lay, as it ought to be done. But the Defendant is left in a mist,
and knows not how to direct his course to please them Yet goes them over again,
and answers so fully the second time, that the Examiner thought his part was
done; and himself protests, if he failed in any thing, it was for want of
direction from the Judges. All that he had done, and he had done to his best,
is not allowed; his Answers are again returned to be insufficient, yet not
challenged in a word for such and such Omissions, or Tergiversations: for which
an Amercement of 40 s. was the most that could be exacted by Rule. That Is all
one; he is committed close Prisoner to his Chamber, with order that neither
Counselor or Solicitor should come near him, or send to him. The first night
of his close restraint he perfected his Answer the third time, to his best
Abilities. The Judges, Jones and Berkeley are so awed, that they refuse to
certify the sufficiency of this Answer, till Kilvert will acknowledge it to be
complete. So he continued in a melancholy Retirement from Allhollantide till
the end of Christmas; and then he finds a new Charge, or rather no new one, but
the Afterbirth of the second Cause, heard and censured before about Tampering:
A Course against the Fundamentals of Justice, as Budaeus Tom. 2. in Pandec.
fol. 17. Senatus censuit ne quis ob idem crimen pluribus legibus reus fieret.
But in this latter Bill the Mystery of Mischief broke out by God's wondrous
work, and the detection of some Friends, whom the Bishop had never solicited
to look after it. Thus it runs; Cad. Powel, George Walker, T. Lund, W.
Wetherall in this new Charge are made Co-defendants with the Bishop: these all
were partly sentenced, partly in durance before, and must do some Service for
their Freedom and Indemnity, also with expectation of Reward: that is, they
must courageously accuse themselves in their Examination, that they may be more
forcible Witnesses against the Bishop; but shall be as so many Coy-duks, to cry
a little in the ears of the World, until the great Mallard be caught in the
Coy; themselves then to be set free, and to be fed with good Corn. The
particulars of this Bill are branch't into Ten Heads: For the greatest part,
they consisted of old matter, That he had dictated Answers to Witnesses, taught
them cunning Evasions, sent some Witnesses out of the way; with addition, that
he had made Conveyances of his Lands and Leases, to prevent the levying of the
King's Fine. Nay lastly, to sill it up, that he did not allow competent Means
to a Vicar, from the Prebend of Asgaby. I would their Lordships had sat upon
such Reformations for seven years together, if it did belong to their
cognizance. What a Task had the poor Bishop to fence with his Adversaries at
all these Weapons? As Isocrates extolls Evagoras, (...), He was Master but of
one City, and no more, when he waged War with all Asia: But our forlorn
Defendant had no shelter left under Heaven but a Prison, wherein he was mured,
to encounter Perjuries, Conspiracies, Malice, Kilvert, with all his Party, and
all the Rulers in high places that backed him: only that promise of Christ
remained good, Matthew. 10.19. Dabitur in illa hora: It shall be given you in
that same hour what to speak. And it did not fail him.

127. First he demurs, and pleads, That five Charges chained together in this
Information had been heard before, and censured in the Charge upon Tampering
with Witnesses. To bring the same Fault again to trial, that had been once
punished, is contrary to the Justice of God, and exceeds the cruelty of the
worst men. The Lord Popham' s Rules were famous, and registered in the Court,
That bounds should be set to the process of Causes, that they might not be
infinite. If a fourth Bill be admitted to survey the management of a former
Defense, then a fifth may start up in the management of the fourth, a sixth
upon the fifth, and prosecutions will be endless. Then he produces his main
defense, That he could prove that T. Lund and W. Wetherall were drawn by
Kilvert, with diverse indirect means of Terrors and Promises, to accuse
themselves, to have had under hand dealings with the Defendant, to teach them
to shift direct Answers, and to evade Interrogatories with Collusions: That
they had assurance given them, when the Bishop was wounded through their sides,
their wounds should be healed, their fines remited, and their good service
gratified. The Bishop had this Confession of Lund and Wetherall, under the
hands of credible Gentlemen, who smelling that Villainy, had conferred with
them, and galled them with suspicions, that they might thrust themselves into
the Briars, and be forsaken by Kilvert, who was very false. And what if he
should drop away? which might be looked for from a man of his daily Surfeits.
And let him do his best, when they had confessed Perjury against themselves with
their own mouth, he could never soder up their cracked Credit, but the disgrace
would cleave to them, and render them despicable as long as they lived. Which
Terrors being spread before these Men, they exclaim that they were
circumvented, and undone for ever. This being inferred into the Bishop's
Defense, his Counsel came twice to the Bar to move for a Hearing, and were put
off. His well willers, which droopt before, had a strong opinion of a good
Issue. So often we see, there is life in an Apoplectick, though he seem to be
dead. Kilvert curses his Fortune, that his Spells are disinchanted: Et fragil^
quaer^ns illidere dentem -- Insreg^ solido. Horace. The Bishop's Innocence was
not so brittle, as he thought to be torn in sunder: but the Solidity of it did
break his Teeth. Howsoever Kilvert is grown gracious, for his good parts I
wiss, and must not be forsaken in this plung^. But upon a reference, all this
matter about Lund and Witherall is expunged, as scandalous to Kilvert's good
name. Scandalous to his good name! Non entis nulla sunt attributa. Nay, but
give us andience, says the Bishop's Counsel; Is not all this necessary to our
Clients Defense? That cannot be denied, say the Judges Brampston and Berkeley;
it is the very body of his defense; but reproachful to the Man that prosecutes
for the King: and so it was appointed to be taken out. When this expunging was
confirmed, and the Attorney General had made his Replication upon the Demur,
the Bishop knowing not how to wear the Yoke of a base Spirit any longer, and
full of the Courage that God had inspired into him, Appeals from these
intolerable Grievances to the High Court of Parliament in this Rejoinder: That
the Defendant does and will (...), maintain, and justify his Answers, and all
the matters and things therein contained to be true, and certain, and
sufficient in the Law. And that nothing thereof ought to be expunged, which is
necessary and pertinent to his Defense. And in case any part so pertinent and
necessary for his Defense, under color of scandal to a third person (who may
clear his Credit if he be innocent, and be repaired with Costs) be expunged,
and he and all others in the like case be left remediless in the Law; The
Defendant having no other Remedy left in a Defense against a Suit commenced
against him in the King's Name, does humbly Appeal unto the High Court of
Parliament, when it shall be next Assembled, humbly protesting against any
Sentence, as void and null, which shall pass against him in the mean time, for
and because of the want of his just and necessary defense so taken away and
expunged. Much was added in this Appeal to defy Kilvert, who had boasted to
prosecute the Bishop to his degradation; and the Bishop in the said Appeal
disavows, that the Court of Star Chamber had ever degraded, or appointed to be
degraded, or ever will degrade, or appoint to be degraded, any Bishop, or other
Lord and Peer of the Parliament, or take away their Freehold in point of Means,
Profit, or Honor, etc. This Appeal was filed in the Office, entered in the
Clerks Books, and Copies thereof were signed by the usual Officer; although Sir
William Pennyman, Clerk of the Star Chamber, took it off the File, and blotted
it out of the Books. Sir William was ever of a laudable behavior, but durst
not say them nay that thrust him upon this Rashness. Who did not gaze at this
Appeal, as if it had been a Blazing-star? Who did not discourse of it? How did
they, who club together for News and trial of their Wits, spend their Judgments
upon it? Some thought, that excess of Wrongs done to the Bishop had distempered
him, to fall upon a course of Confusion to himself. In plain words, being
bitten by so many mad Dogs, they thought he bit again, as if he had been mad:
Whereas he never did any thing with a more sober mind. Insanire me ^iunt, ultro
cum ipsi insaniant, Plaut. in Menaech. Some replied, Let the danger be what it
will, the President tended to a Public Good: Audendum est aliquid singulis,
aut pereundum universis: For are we not all Passengers, as well as he, in the
same bottom? And may we not be swallowed up in the same Shipwreck, if our
Pilots look no better to their Duty? They that were acquainted with the best
Pleaders, thought to have most Light from them, and asked if the Act did not
exceed the Duty of a Subject. And would it not leave the Author to the fury of
the Court, to be torn in pieces with a Censure? Nay surely, said the Gown-men,
there is no violation of Duty to His Majesty, in appealing to his Parliament,
for he submits to the King, who is the Head of the Body. Or, at the most, it is
Provocatio a Philippo dormiente ad Philippum vigilantem, from K. Charles,
misinformed in Star Chamber, to K. Charles, among his best Assistants, the
three States of the Nation: And for the minacy of a Censure, do if they dare. A
Parliament will repair him, when it sits, and canonize their own Martyr. Both
they that liked and disliked the Appeal, confessed, that the corruption of his
Judges compelled him to it. Should Kilvert, notoriously detected, be suffered
to escape, by cancelling all that brought his Conspiracies to light? Infixo
aculeo fugere, in the Adagy? Strike in his Sting, and fly away like a Wasp!
Suffer this, and at this one dealing of the Game the Bishop's whole state had
been lost, of Fortunes, Liberty, and Honor: Neque enim levia aut ludicra
petuntur -- Praemia, sed Turni de vita and sanguine certant. Discretion was to
give place to Courage in this case: Baronius tells us of Theodoret. ann. 446.
n. 27. That being incensed at the Tyranny of a Shark in Office, that had seized
upon all he had, Uranius Bishop of Emesa, advised him to make no words of it,
but to sit still by the loss: Theodoret answers him bravely, Non solum
prudentia, sed and fortitudo virtus est; Fortitude is a Virtue as well as
Prudence, and is as laudable in her own turn and occasion. Put the case to a
Physician, when he thinks there is no hope of a Patient, what will he do? The
ancient Rule was, Nescio an in extremis aliquid tentare medicina sit: certe
nihil tentare perditio est. To give the sick man Physic is against Art, but to
give him nothing is to cast him away wilfully. Here is Lincoln's condition, who
being denied the Justice of that Court, had nothing to fly to in that
Extremity, but this Appeal, with which he did so hough the Sinews of the Bill,
that from that day forward it never hopt after him.

128. Because some did not stick to say, that the Bishop might thank himself
for his incessant Troubles, that he did not take Conditions of Peace, that were
offered to him, it must be presented here, that Conditions indeed were
tendered, such as Naash offered the Israelites, to thrust out their right Eyes,
1 Samuel 11.2. or as the Samnites released Sp. Posthumious, and a Roman Legion
overthrown at Caudis. with slavish Ignominy. But these were worse: Ultra
Caudinas speravit vulnera furcas, Luca. lib. 2. The Bishop lying in Prison, and
sustaining the heavy weight of the first Censure, July 11. 1637. he pressed the
L. Coventry to move His Majesty for some mitigation of the Fine, and to stop
the violent levying of it, since it stood in no proportion with the Charges of
the Bill, or the Presidents of the Court. Hereupon His Majesty tells the L.
Keeper, he would admit of no such motion, but by the Mediation of the Queen.
The Bishop is glad of the News, and could call to mind, that in greater matters
than this, Princely Ladies had the Honor to make the Accord, which the
greatest Statesmen had attempted in vain; as Madam Lovise, Mother of K. Francis
the First, and Madam Margaret, Aunt to Charles the Fifth, Regent of the Low
Countries, made up that Peace between the Emperor and the King, which other
Mediators had given over for desperate. Our Queen endeavored a Message of
Clemency, but that Honor was denied her. The Earl of Dorset writes in her Name
to the Bishop, That all she could obtain of the King, was, that if he would be
bandied no more in Star Chamber, 1. He must leave his Bishopric and Deanery,
and all his Commendams, and take a Bishopric in Ireland or Wales, as His
Majesty pleased. 2. He must recant his Book. 3. Secure all his Fine. 4. Never
question any that had been employed by His Majesty against him. Strange Physic
as ever was prescribed, for it was a Pill as big as a Pumpion; and whose Throat
could swallow it down? Non est pax, sed servitutis pactio, Tul. Philip. 12. The
worst that all the Courts in England could do, could not impose such Terms upon
him: Beside, to yield thus far were to fly the Field, and to receive an
inglorious wound in his Back. Then he falls upon other Thoughts, that he would
please the King, by making an unparalled Submission to him: And were it not
best to be content with half a Ruin, to prevent a whole? He must be a loser;
yet a man spends nothing, that buys that he has need of. So he wrote back to
the same Earl, that he would lay his Bishopric and Deanery at His Majesty's
Feet, but excused his going into Ireland. To the second, That he could not
recant his Book, which contained no Doctrine that he was not ready to justify.
To the third, He would pay his Fine as he was able. To the fourth he submitted.
Not this, not all this was accepted: The very L. Drusus, in Paterculus, Meliore
in omnia ingenio animoque quam fortuna usus; His noble Wit, and good Parts were
still destituted by Fortune. He received this Return from the Earl; That His
Majesty was not contented to receive his Bishopric and Deanery from him, his
Residency in Lincoln, and Rectory of Walgrave, are required to be voided, and
to Ireland, or no Peace. To the second, No Doctrine should be recanted, but
Matters of Fact, etc. The Bishop wonders at this, who looked for Praise, that
he had stooped so low; yet rather than contest with his Sovereign, he resolves
with David, Adhuc ero vilior: And the common Rule of Polybius was observed by
all men, lib. 5. (...). Of two good things, choose the greatest; of two Evils,
choose the least. He offers to resign all he has in the Church of England, but
still will live in England; for the Book he pleaded so well for it, that the
King was satisfied with a conditional submission, as, If any thing contained in
it offended His Majesty, he was sorry. But to the third, about the Fine, he
found very imperfect and unsolid Proposals, and No Ground that is good is
hollow. Since he must be stripped of all that he had in the Church, he would know
how much should be left him of his Lands and Leases to live upon, that the
King's Fine-gatherers might not snatch up all: And he craves an Answer, whether
that Pension of 2000 Marks per ann. bought of the E. of Banbury, by His
Majesty's Direction, and for his Service and Profit, being then Prince of
Wales, and 24000 l. in Ar^ears for the same, should be considered toward the
King's Payment. The Rejoinder began at the latter Clause, That Pensions are not
paid to men in disfavour, the E. of Bristol being the Example for it. For the
Proportion what he should have to live upon rising out of his own Estate, he
must know nothing, till he had wholly submitted. From that hour the false
Glass, wherein the Bishop saw a shadow of Peace, was broken: And he writes to
the Earl in the Style of a man, That it were a tempting of God to part with all
he had willingly, and leave himself no assurance of a Livelihood: That his
Debts, if he came out of the Prison of the Tower, would cast him into another
Prison, no better provision being made for them, than he saw appearance for:
That he would never hazard himself into a condition to beg his Bread. Truly he
had cause to look for better Offers, and since they came not, he would lay his
Head upon the Pillow of Hope, till he had slept his last: He had not suffered
as an Evil man, his Conscience bore him witness, whereby he was not obnoxious
to Infamy: Majore poena affectus quam legibus statutum est, non est infamis; a
Maxim of Reason and of Law in our Kingdom. To surrender up all he had, were to
suffer as a Fool. Plato is made the Author of the Saying, That he had rather
leave somewhat to his Enemies when he died, than stand in need of his Friends,
who might prove no Friends while he lived. But this is surely Plato's in Apol.
pro Socr. That when Socrates was asked, how he felt himself affected, when he
was wrongfully condemned, he said, he could give no Answer till he met with
Palamedes and Ajax; (...): till he had asked them how they took the Sentence of
unrighteous Judges, he was not fully provided to satisfy them. Our bishop
consulted day and night at his Study with Histories of Saints in bypast Ages,
and knew they had suffered more than he had done, and was sorry for his human
frailty, if they could bear it better. Now, I am confident that the Prudent
will collect, that this Bishop was never deaf to Conditions of Agreement, and
that no man living could offer a greater Sacrifice than he did for a
Peace Offering, unless he would have stripped himself of all, and not have left
off his own two Mites, in all the World, to cast into the Corban.

129. But if the Parley for Peace were nothing but Thunder and Thunderbolt, how
will the Bishop endure it, when it comes to strokes? God be praised, his
Warfare in these Causes was at an end: Flebile principium melior fortuna secuta
est, Metam. lib. 7. The Chamber of Horror, and its Star, did not shine
malignantly upon him again; A time, and times, and half a time, had passed
over, and these things were finished, Dan. 12.7. For three year and half he
continued in the Tower, and in that space lived as if he had drank of Homer's
Cup, Odyss. (...); as if he had represented and not felt the part he acted: For
except that so many Suits interrupted his Studies, he lacked nothing that could
be perceived, of Health, Solace, and Alacrity: Been dormit qui non sentit quam
male dormiat, a Fragment of Publius Mimus. He wanted not good Society, for I
must ever praise his constant Friend Dr. Alabaster, who took up a Lodging in
one of the Mint-master's Houses, to be with him continually. While he was so
many months shut up from the action of the World, he began to hear of some
Occurrences abroad, which made him not dread his chief Enemy at Lambeth at all.
The Archbishop had entangled himself in his own Webb, nay, the King, and all
England and Scotland with him. In illa liturgia infelicissime ad Scotos missa,
says wise Mr. Seldom, de Syn. Jud. par. 2. His Majesty's Expedition into the
North gave our Bishop a breathing time from his Troubles: And when the Articles
of Pacification, made at Berwick, were burnt in London, (true or uncorrupted, I
dispute not) I that report this, was the first that carried the Tidings to the
Tower, and I call God to witness, the Bishop presently broke out into these
words: I am right sorry for the King, who is like to be forsaken by his
Subjects at home, but far more by all Kings and Princes abroad, who do not love
him: But for the Archbishop, says he, he had best not meddle with me, for all
the Friends he can make, will be too few to save himself. A fatal foresight of
all impending and ensuing Mischiefs! But do you not hope, Sir, said I, that
such Concussions as you fear to come to pass will give you your Peace and
Liberty? Possibly they will, says he. But no honest man shall be the better for
a Scotch Reformation, wherein the Hare-brains among us are engaged with them.
Which is like that of Rutilius deported in Banishment to Mytelene; one
comforted him with hope of Civil Wars, and then all that were banished should
return to Rome; says Rutilius, Quid tibi mali feci, ut mibi pejorem reditum
quam exitum sperares? That which did precipitate the common Fortune, and made
all things worse and worse, was the King's very sudden dissolving the
Parliament met in Apr. 1640. His Majesty had been forewarned by a worthy
Counselor, and a dying man, against that Error in the Christmas before, Cujus
mortem, dolor omnium celebrem fecit, Sym. Ep. p. 11. It was L. Keeper Coventry,
who made but one Request with his last Breath to the King, and sent it by Mr.
James Maxwel, of the Bedchamber, That His Majesty would take all Distasts from
the Parliament summoned against April, with patience, and suffer it to sit
without an unkind dissolution. But the Barking of the living Dogs was sooner
heard than the Groaning of a dying Lion; for that Parliament ended in a few
days, in its Infancy, and in its Innocence, but the Grief for it will never
end. The next came on November. 3. with all Animosities that could be infused out
of Scotch and English Distempers. The Bishop of Lincoln Petitions the King, by
the Queens Mediation, that he might be set at liberty, and have his Writ, as a
Peer, to sit in Parliament; which was opposed by the L. Finch, then Custos
sigilli magni, and Archbishop Laud, as appears by a Letter written to Sir
Richard Winn, October. 3. in these words.

130. Good Cousin,
WITH my hearty Thanks remembered for all your great, however unfortunate, care
of me, and my Affairs: Though you would not let me know any thing that might be
any Grief or Discomfort to me yet I hear it of other Hands; That I am eternally
bound to the Queens Majesty, and bound to remain her Vassal as long as I live;
And that I owe much to some other great Lords of His Maj^^ty's Council; And
that his Grace, by my Lord Keeper's bold and much-mistaken Information to His
Majesty, that the Parliament cannot examine Errors and Oppressions in such an
arbitrary Court as the Star Chamber is, does keep off His Majesty from using
his Clemency toward me, or permitting me to employ my best Endeavors to serve
him. My Lords, Grace and Secretary Windebank, have good reason to wish me out
of the Parliament, and out of the World too, if they conceive I have no other
business there, than to complain against them: And so has the Lord Keeper, and
Sir J. Lamb. If her gracious Majesty (whom than willingly offend I will rather
dye) will be pleased to set aside the Relations those two Personages have
toward Her Majesty, and set her poor Servant at liberty, to take his course
for Redress for those intolerable Concussions they have used against him. And
that I do not speak herein beside my Books, I pray you and your Friends to
peruse the bundle of Papers I send you, which I desire you to return to me, etc.




Through the Persuasion of those about the King, whom the Letter discovers,
Lincoln was like to lie by it, and to be shut out of Mercy by an irreversible
Decree. But the Lords of the Upper House, after they had looked about them a
while, on Nov. 16. sent to the Lieutenant of the Tower, to deliver him to then
Officer of the Black Rod, who conducted him to the Parliament, and their
Lordships gave him his Place among his Brethren in the Bishops-Bench. The King
did soon hear of his Carriage, that he neither complained, nor so much as
glanced at his Persecutors: As a true Lover of his Country said, Cic. Ep. Fam.
lib. 10. Non me impedient privatae offensiones, quo minus pro Reip salute etiam
cura inimicis consentiam. His Majesty heard more, That he was his faithful
Minister, and Stable to stand for him in all motions, and did not refrain to
fall sharply upon those Lords, to whom he owed his Releasement, for not
speaking dutifully of His Majesty, and of his Actions, with Reverence. Upon it
the King sent for him, and had conference with him alone till after midnight,
and made him some amends for the Evils past, by commanding all Orders filed,
and kept in any Court or Registry, upon the former Hearings and Dependencies
against him, to be slighted, cancelled crazed, that no Monument or Memorial of
them might remain. So A^m. Probus tells us what Reparation was made to
Alcibiades, after he was brought home to Athens from his Exile, Pilae, in
quibus devotio scripta fuit contra Alcibiadem, in mare praecipitatae, post quam
a Sparta revocatus est? To quote a nearer Example; When Constantine let
Athanasius return again to his See at Alexandria, (...). Athan. ad Solit. Vit.
p. 823. All that was engrossed against Athanasius, he commanded the Memory of
it to be rid out of the way, and all of it to be blotted out. Look for such
another Instance in Symmachus Ep. p. 127. of him that was thrice honored, in
being reinvested in those Honors, from which he was degraded, Majus quiddam
est honorem restituere, quam dedisse, etc. For, Fortune may confer, but only
Judgment restores to Honor. I am come to the end of those Suits with which our
Bishop was overwhelmed, and still made Defendant against the King: Let
Posterity observe how he was censured, and grievously, but for two things,
tampering with Witnesses, (never known before to be a fault in the Realm of
England) and for being suspected to have received two Letters in Ciphers, of a
mystical sense, and as slight regard. Being accused for divulging the King's
Counsels, and for Subornation of Witnesses, he broke the neck of those Bills:
Being questioned for his Book, in the High Commission Court, he wound himself
out of the Labyrinth of all their Articles: From an Hodg-potch of new
Informations in Star Chamber he delivered himself, by adventuring to appeal
from that Court to the Parliament; and in that Parliament to which he appealed,
he sits a Member and Peer, and sees all Papers of Record against him torn, and
burnt to Ashes. Ut advertas feliciter faclum reum, quem sic videas absolutum,
Sym. Ep. 87. Be the Conclusion those words of Ezekiel. c. 17. v. 24. All the trees
of the field shall know, that I the Lord have brought down the high tree, have
exalted the low true: have dried up the green tree, and have made the dry tree
to flourish. Which the great Poet had rather ascribe to a blind Goddess, in his
Poetical License, Aen. 12. Multos alterna revisens -- Lusit, and in solidum
rursus fortuna locavit.

131. A Prisoner, whose Liberty I much longed for, is released, but out of
Limbo into Hell. Can the worst word be had enough for those fatal days? Now
being come with him as far as the Door of the Parliament, into which he entered
upon the Call of the Lords, I turned away for no little time, and interrupted
my self for above two years from writing any more, not out of Sloth, but
Disdain. To part with him till his last day, was against my purpose; and to
keep him company in those boisterous times, wherein a Senate of rigid men was
dangerous. I was at such a stay as Alexander in the dry Country of the
Susitans, Pigebat and consistere and progredi, Curt. lib. 7. It was contrary to
the Project of my Work to stop, and as contrary to my Mind to go forward in the
Hurricane of an intemperate Rebellion: But it is resolved to look over somewhat
of one of the most bloody Tragedies that ever was performed on the Earth,
rather than omit his part, who was so loyal in his Actings, and so magnanimous
in his Sufferings: And this may be done with the less unwillingness, from one
Passage that will recreate the Writer, and the Reader, that the chief
Engineers, that wrought the Thunderbolts at the Forge, and laid the foundation
of all ensuing Mischief, lived to see themselves thrust out of their Den by a
Brewers Drayman, with his tattered Regiment; a Passage to be kept for ever upon
the Engravings of Memory, and would not be pleasant, but burdensome to know it
and not to publish it: As Archytas of Tarentum said, If a man were lifted up
among the Stars, to know their order and motion, the knowledge of it, so
admirable, would be ingrate unto him, unless he met with some, to whom he might
relate it. So I am full of this, to tell it to Posterity, That the pitiful
handful of Lords Temporal (and now Temporary) that adhered not to the King, and
cashiered the Lords Spiritual out of their Society, for their immovable
Fidelity, were dismounted for ever from their own Privilege and Honor, and
might pawn their Parliament-Robes if they pleased. And the remainder of the
Commons, after Pride's Purge, was so despicable, that every Tongue was so
audacious to give them the nickname of the Posteriors of a Beast; and they put
it up, lest angry Wits should paste a greater Scorn upon them. As Cas. Severus
satisfied himself with the Downfall of his Adversary, Vivo, and quo vivere
libeat Asprenatem reum video, Quintil. lib. II. So this one Scene has a good
Catastrophe in the cruel Interlude, That the small, but most spightful part of
this continuing Parliament, held up their Tail, though not their Hand, at the
Bar, and went out it self in such a stink in the Snuff, that all cry sie at it,
that have their Nostrils opened. So my Mind is collected again, and my Heart at
some Peace in it self, to see the Honor of Heavenly Justice settled so far.

132. And to Preface no more, and no less could be said; A Parliament was
sitting when our Bishop had his Liberty, which held in its Fragments twelve
years and six months: Nay, when the stub of the Members were baffled, and
spurned out of the House by the Russian Cromwell, these Bankrupts opened their
Shop once again, and by a post limintum recovered their places; so that we
reckon nineteen years from their first Call to their last Suppression. Umbra
serotina; A shadow is longest at Evening, when the Sun is ready to set. And our
Sun went down quickly, when this shadow was so far extended. But there is a
better similitude for it in Pliny Not. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 14. A Serpent was
taken at the River Bagrada of 120 foot long, and the skin, says he, was hung up
in the Capitol, as long as such stuff could endure. Mark this; a Serpent, the
longest that ever was heard of, the skin kept when it was mortified, and
preserved in the Senate House. Who can miss to apply it? A Serpentine brood of
Men; none ever lasting so long in that High Court: withered away to a skin, or
Skeleton: all were right, if they had been hung up in the Capitol. This Serpent
was young and the worst it could do was to hiss, when Lincoln was brought in to
sit with his fellow Bishops. He had not been many hours there, when he was
amazed to see diverse composed of new and strong Passions; instigated to
boldness by Scotch Confederacy; heightened up by the Petitions and Mutinies of
City and Country; and preached into disorder by Presbyterian Divines: For a
muffled Zeal for Religion has a finger in all Combustions. And as one says,
Multitudo vana superstitione capta melius vatibus, quam ducibus suis paret,
Curt. lib. 3. Churchmen are the most dangerous Instruments to turn
Malcontents into Swordmen, who being prepossest with an ill opinion of the
Times, will quickly humble their Judgment under the Conscience of their
Ministers. But what Credit can it be to our Bishop, for such Peers to take him
into their number by their peremptory Vote? None, if he had answered their
expectation. Yet his chief Friends were as faithful and noble-hearted as ever
sat upon the Benches of the House. And it is no good thrist to cast out
Gold-filings with the dust, as if all were dust. These must be severed from the
rest, to their immortal praise. It is as true, that he was sought for by some
of the rest, who had only an eye to the North-Star of their own
Anti-monarchical Interest: For he that was ordinarily read in man might know,
this able Prelate was to be left out, that had so general an insight into all
Affairs and Motions of State. As Zeno praised Ismenias his Music, (...), that
he could play well upon all Instruments. But when the disloyal Part hoped, that
a Man of a great Spirit, and so much injured, would revenge himself upon the
Causes of his Troubles, and Pipe after their Tune, they were overshot to
imagine it. Though he is bound to be most true that is most trusted, yet no man
was bound to be true to them, whom his Majesty, as appears by his Writ, trusted
with his most concerning and weighty Counsels, and were false to him that gave
them Capacity to treat upon them. They that did intend to employ him in their
Faction, did repent in one day, that ever he came among them. For it was in so
little time that one of them said aloud, We have conjured up a Spirit, I would
we could lay him down again. No harm will come to his Honor, that some in
printed Books have lifted at him, as A. Will. p. 197. gibe, him for closing
again with the King, and shuggling, when he saw the Ax laid to the Root of
Episcopacy. For he staid not to long to declare himself, till the Hare was
started out of the Bush. But S. A. W. goes further, p. 175. for thus he
Censures: We may observe the Judgment of God on him, for flying from the
Parliament his Protector, to give wicked Counsel to to the King his former
Prosecutor. Those Temporary Judgments and Ruins were probably foreseen; but woe
be to him that looks not further to the Judgment of the great Day. Those that
troubled the Land like him not, as he was truly himself, but in such a
Character as they had framed of him to themselves. Thou thoughtest that I was
altogether such an one as they self, Psalm. 50.21. It was St. Austine's Fortune
to be so misconstrued, and he defends himself wittily, Ep. 7. ad Marcel. Non me
diligunt, si non quod sum, sed quod non sum diligunt. They love not me, but
another for me that mistake me. It is not strange if those Members of
Parliament were weary of him, I am sure he was more out of taste with them. As
who could choose, when he met with all fort of Brainsick Factions combined in
one Couplement? It was better for him after thirteen months to be cast out, and
locked up again in Imprisonment, than to continue in the gathering together of
the Froward, and insurrection of wicked Doers. In hoc res devoluta erat, ut
nisi quis malus fuerit, salvus esse non possit, Salvi. l. 5. No Safety for any
within those Walls, nor scarce without, but to run Horse and Man to Hell, with
Decius, not to save their Country, but to ruin it.

133. What a giddy Pin man's life is turned upon? Here Is a Prisoner and a
Freeman; in the Peoples favor, and out with them: repulsed from the Court, and
brought to the King's Presence, and to kiss his Hand; and all this variety in
two days. (...), Diod. Sic. lib. 18. The rowlings and reciprocations of Fortune
were strong on both sides. Though his Restraint was over, his Liberty was still
dangerous, as Salmasius says of Ambustius Valerius p. 840. in Solm. Quem
condemnatio non perdidit, nec absolutio liberavit. Misfortune exercised him as
Original Sin does the Just: The Condemnation of it was taken away, but not the
Malignity. The outcry was among the revolted Lords, That he was good for
nothing. Not for the Commonwealth; for he did maintain what the King had done
for our Liberties. Not for Religion; for he was rivetted fast to the Hierarchy
of the Church. Not for himself; for they expected he should have been a strong
Accuser of diverse whom they hated, and knew he had matter enough for a heavy
Information: but they saw he was like a man dumb, and in whose mouth were no
reproofs, Psalm. 38.14. Not a word came from him, that he had been Prosecuted,
Censured, Imprisoned, Sequestered, Riffled: but he stood like one in the same
point, that had enjoyed quiet and honor fifteen years before. Hereupon both
Houses despised him, as one that would contribute nothing to their ends: and
what should they do with this Gamaliel in their Council? for when they had
plotted to slay some principal Counselors and Servants of the King, and this
Bishop would bring no Proofs to make them guilty men, his Sentence was in
effect, Refrain from these men, and let them alone, Acts 5.38. Himself being
now safe, and by God's Mercy free from Impeachments; it was a comfort to him to
see, nay to procure the Safety of his Enemies. Sunt haec quidem magna, sed in
alio: in hoc vero minima, si caeteris virtutibus comparentur, Plin. Ep. l. 3.
How fain would some say the like for those, whom they adorn with their praise?
But to revenge no wrongs; to requite them with no retaliation, that had
bitterly provoked him, it was so ordinary with him, that in such a man it
rises to no remarkable Observation. And truly it was no time to punish for a
particular quarrel, but to look to the security of a tottering Kingdom. Prudence
might Challenge somewhat to make him remiss, as well as Charity. Yet the
Injuries done him, with their mischief in one aggregate, deserved a Trial, that
would have made as loud a noise as ever came to a Bar. For the Practisers, as
the Fox said of his Cubs, If there be one good in the litter, there was never a
bad For the practices they were such as could not have seen the light, but
would have brought pal^ness on the Actors. And, which was worst of all, the
Bishop could see no Appearance, which might efface his Apprehension, but that
if his Adversaries were in power again, they would show no penitency for the
evil they had done him. Yet when their Agents came to him to feel his Pulse,
they sound it beat so calm and even, that he sent them Messages to enhearten
them, That if they had no w^rse Foes then (...), they might fear no harm, and
that he saluted them with the Charity of a B^^^ p. This was home, and as far as
moral sweetness could go. It a (...), at non ignoscere videaris, sed absolvere,
says Sencca: So his bencht was so complete, that he did rather seem to absolve
those Nocents as a Judge, then to pa^^ion them as a private Man. So confident
were his Malevolents to play with his Gentleness, that Kilvert durst come to
him without a Medi^o^, to crave Pardon and Indemnity for all wrongs he had
done. Says the Bishop, I assure you pardon for that you have done before, but
this is a new fault, that you take me to be of so b^ s^ a Spirit, as to file my
self with tredding upon so mean a Creature: Live still by Petty-fogging and
Imp^^ching, and think that I have forgotten you. Yet he kept Kilvert two hours
in private with him, before he let him go; and then he sent him to his Cellar
with his Servants, but with this Censure upon the Discourse which had past
between them, That his Enemies could not be so bad, as that Fellow made them;
but for Kilvert 's part he was worse in treachery, and readiness to do all
devilish Offices, then he could have imagined. Thus far to the demonstration
of his Christian Mind, and his Continency that he would not render evil for
evil, that he would not gratify the Parliament with Complaints against his
Persecutors. The not doing, or suspension of such an act, is as much, or more
praiseworthy than the doing of diverse things that are very plausible, and may
run well with the close of Beza's Epigram in Parodie, Quod tu fecisti, sit
licet ingens: At quod non saceres ho^ ego miror opus.

134. But the Injuries done to private Man, were Trif^les to the great Affairs
that were in hand. His Majesty's Affairs, which were in great decadence, took
him up wholly; and how could he be safe? A good Subject cannot make any
difference between the King's Fortunes and his own. A full Declaration of the
Storms that were raised concerns not this piece. It was apparent that the
Scotch were at one end of the Fray in the North, and the Presbyterians about
London at the other end in the South: both confederate to root up, cast down,
syndicate, control, and do what they lust; and let them have their own will,
it would scarce content them. Our wise Churchman knew, that he that fears the
worst prevents it soonest: Therefore he did not lose a minute to try all his
Arts, if he could quench the flame amongst the heady Scots, whose common sort
were like their Preachers, Tumidi magis animi quam magni, as Casaubon notes it
in the Atherians, Lib. 1. Athen. cap. 20. rather of a swelling, than a noble
Spirit. Their own polite Historian says more, Dromond Jam. 5. p. 161. That
Hepburn Prior of St. Andrews, the Oracle of the Duke of Albany, told him, That
he must remember that the People whom he did command (for he was Regent) were
ever fierce, mutinously proud, and know not how to obey, unless the Sword were
drawn. What hope then of their Submission, when they had framed Covenants,
Articles, gathered a Convention no less in Power, no less in Name than a
Parliament, without their Prince's leave, and became Assailants to maintain
that, and what they would have more, with the Sword. Let all Ages remember,
that this sprung from no other occasion, but that the King invited them to
prayer in public, in such a Form of Liturgy as himself used, putting no
greater burden upon their Conscience than upon his own. The Peccatulum was,
that there wanted a little in mode and usual way to commend the Book unto them.
Perhaps the Error went a little further, that King James his Promise was not
observed, as the Reverend Spotswood does not conceal it, p. 542. That the Lord
Hamilton, King James his Commissioner, having ratified the Articles of Perth by
Act of Parliament, assured the People, that his Majesly, in his days, should
never press any more change and alteration, in matters of that kind, without
their consent. Admit this Promise, calculated for the days of King James, was
obliging as far as the Meridian of King Charles, yet nothing was presented to
them against true Doctrine, or Divine Worship: for all the Learning of their
Universities could never make the matter of the Liturgy odious. And let it be
disputed, That the Book was not authoritative without the public Vote, and
Consent of the Nation in some Representative. Yet if a Prince so pious, so
admirable in his Ethics, did tread one inch awry in his Politics, must the
Cannon be brought into the Field, and be planted against him, to subvert his
Power at Home, and to dishonor him abroad! was it ever heard, that upon so
little a Storm Seamen would cut Cabble and Mast, and throw their Cargo
overboard, when there was no fear to shipwreck any thing, but Fidelity and
Allegiance? God was pleased to deprive us of Contentment and Peace for our own
wickedness; or Civil Discords, that lasted near as long as the Peloponnesian
War, had never risen from so slender an occasion. The merciful and soft-hearted
King could have set his Horse-feet upon their Necks, in his first Expedition,
which stopped at Barwick, if he had not been more desirous of Quietness than
Honor and Victory. I guess whom Dromond means in the Character of Jam. 3. p.
118. That it is allowable in men that have not much to do, to be taken with
admiration of Watches, Clocks, Dials, Automates, Pictures, Statues: But the Art
of Princes is to give Laws, and govern their People with wisdom in Peace, and
glory in War: to spare the humble, and prostrate the proud. Happy had it been
if his Majesty had followed valiant Counsel, to have made himself complete
Conqueror of those Malapert Rebels, when they first saw his face in the North.
But the Terms of Pacification which they got in one year, served them to gather
an Army, and to come with Colors displayed into England the next year, which
was the periodical year of the King's Glory, the Churches Prosperity, the
Common Laws Authority, and the Subjects Liberty. Threescore and eighteen years
before, when England and Scotland were never at better League, Abr. Hartwell
passes this Vote in his Regina literata, more like a Prophet than a Poet,
Nostraque non iterum Saxo se vertat in arva:
Non Gallus, sed nec prior utroque Scotus.


135. And what could Lesly have done then with a few untrain'd, unarmed
Jockeys, if we had been true among our selves? The Earl of Southampton spoke
heroically, like a Peer of an ancient Honor, That the Bishop of Durham with
his Servants, a few Millers and Plowmen, were wont to beat those Rovers over
the Tweed again, without raising an Army. If the People had not imprudently
chosen such into our Parliament, as were fittest to gratify the Scots, day had
soon cleared up, and Northern Mists dispersed. But our foolish heart was
darkened; and any Scourge was welcome that would chastise the present
Government: we thought we could not be worse, when we could scarce be better.
We greedily took this Scotch Physic, when we were not sick, but knew not what
it was to be in health. An Ounce of common Sense might have warned us, That a
Kingdom may consist with private men's Calamities, but private men's Fortunes
cannot consist with the ruin of a Kingdom. The Love of Money is the Root of all
Evil. Many in England thought they sat at a hard Rent, because of Ship Money;
and would fire the House wherein their own Wealth was laid up, rather than pay
their Landlord such a petty Tribute, as was not mist in times of Plenty: but in
short time their Corn and Plate went away at one swoop, when their stock was
low. The exacting of Ship Money, all thought it not illegal, but so many did,
as made it a number equivalent to all. And a Camel will bear no more weight
than was first laid upon him. Nec plus instituto onere recipit, Plin. lib. 8.
cap. 18. This disordered the Beast; and being backed with some thousands of
Rebels, marched on as far as Durham, made him ready to cast his Rider. The
Royal part was at a stand, and could go no further than this Question, What
shall we do? As Livy says of the Romans, caught in an Ambush at Caudis,
Intuentes alii alios, cum alterum quisque compotem magis mentis ac consilii
ducerent. In such a Perplexity every man asks his Fellow, What Is best to be
done? and being dozzled with fear, thinks every man wiser than himself. Lincoln
spoke what was fit for Comfort, and did what he was able for Redress. He looked
like the Lanthorn in the Admiral, by which the rest of the Fleet did steer
their Course. And as Synesius gives a Precept to a Bishop, Ep. 105. (...), To
do as much work as all his Clergy beside: So this Man bestirred himself, and
ran before the most diligent in this Chase. When he was a Courtier he had ever
declined Acquaintance with James Marquess of Hamilton, now he made him his most
Intimate, waited on him at his Lodgings, went in hand with him to the King,
tried him every way, what Counsel he had in his Breast, to breed Loyalty in the
Scottish Army, that the Contagion might not breed the same Rudeness in the
English, and would give an even poise to such uneven Humors. The Bishop knew
not what to make of this Marquess, Incertum Lar sit, an larva; whether he were
a good, or a bad Genius. Only he said he found every thing in him contrary to
the Vulgar Opinion, which esteemed him cunning and false. For he took him to be
no false one, had will enough to help the King: neither did he find any great
Cunning in him, but rather that he wanted a Headpiece. So he laid him and
aside, but used him sparingly, because he could not frame things of any great
concernment from him. Then he gets acquaintance with Mr Alexander Henderson,
and some of his Disciples in Commission with him: presents them, feasts them,
offered good pay to them, and the Heads of their Faction, as much as the King
could spare, which was the only Bait to catch his Countrymen, who were needy,
and ravenous for Prey. Which is well set out in Salust. p. 187. Feras omnis
generis, quo magis sunt attenuatae penuria, co magis praecipites and
^ffraenatas ruere in perniciem videmus. All Beasts will venture their Lives to
devour what they can get, when they are hungry. The Bishop was sure he dealt
with such as were bare and necessitous, from the Orcades to Berwick, and that
it was part of their Errand into England to carry away Gold, and to get
Pensions. But the House of Commons, that knew their half famisht Fortunes, as
well as the Bishop, voted such a Mass of Money to them, by a word, which co^t
England dear, called Brotherly Assistance, that the King with all his Exchequer
and perhaps his Credit, was not able to raise it, far less to out-bid it. Yet
Lincoln gave not over to persuade their headstrong Party to have no quarrel
with the Church of England; to draw no hatred upon themselves, by reaching at
the Subversion of the Episcopal Dignity, which was never wanting here, since
the Nation received the Gospel of Christ: Bade them remember what Vows their
Kirk had made, and printed them in their Common Prayers, never to unquiet the
Peace of this Land, since Queen Elizabeth, Anno 3. of her Reign, did beat the
French out of Leith, and compelled their Forces to return home, conducted under
the best Soldiers of France, whose purpose it was to drown the Protestant
Religion in the Blood of their Lords of the Congregation. Hereupon some of
Henderson's Assistants staggered, and bade leave our Church to its own staple
Order; when at the same time, in their private meetings, they began to forsake
this moderation: They saw how their Debt of Brotherly Assistance would be paid
the better, if the Revenues of the Prelates were confiscated. They looked upon
their own Work, that they had dethroned Bishops in Scotland, and so long as
England kept up that Dignity, it cried Shame upon their Confusion: And if
Bishops lived at Durham and Carliste, so near to their Borders, they suspected
the like would creep in again at Glascow and Edenburg. And their intention was,
to shape our Church as ill as their own, to make us as odious to the King as
themselves, that both our Offenses might grow higher than the hope of a Pardon
could fly unto. So, in fine, our Bishop perceived that he dealt with men that
made no scruple to shift from Promise, and to break Faith. Diodorus, lib. 3.
tells of strange men in the Island of Taproban, Divisam linguam habentes, and
eodem tempore duobus hominibus perfecre loquntur. I would such double Tongue,
had lived as far off as Taproban, that we had never known them. The end of this
Conflict was, when Entellus could not overcome, Vastos quatit aeger anhelitus
artus, Aen. lib. 5.

136. No sooner had the Northern Carles begun their Hunts-up, but the
Presbyterians flocked to London, from all quarters, and were like Hounds ready
to be entered: They had struggled in the days of Q. Elizabeth and K. James, to
set up their Discipline, (Patriae communis Erynnis) but in vain. After twenty
Repulses they began afresh; Tantus novelli dogmatis regnat furor, Prud. de
Coron. and though their Liquor was stale, and sour as dead Wine, they broached
it now again, to set out Teeth on edge. The Stings of Wasps once lost, are
never repaired; but these were like Staggs, that had cast their Horns often,
but new ones sprouted up. The Independants (the same Creature with the
Brownists, but had shed their upper Coats, and looked smoother) these had not
yet a Name. And as Alexander spoke neglectfully of the Cadusians, Quod ignoti
sunt, ignobiles sunt, nunquam ignorari viros fortes, Curt. lib. 4. so these
were of no reckoning in the first sally of the tumultuous times, and such
Ignotes were not courted, but passed over as a Pawn at Chess, that stood out
all of Play. The wise Bishop turned his Skill upon the Presbyterians, being
less distastful to them in his Person, than any that wore a Rochet. He laid
down his Reasons to them in many Conferences, with such prudence, such softness
and lenity, that they confessed, for his part, he deserved a great Place of
Pre-eminence: And some of the chief Lords of that Knot made him such Offers of
Honor and Wealth for his share, if he would give way to their Alterations,
that they would buy him, if his Faith had been salaeble, with any Price. The
worst Requital that could be propounded to an honest man, and of the narrowest,
to scantle their Blessing to him alone, that labored for a Public Good: As
Ben. Johnson has put it finely into his Underwoods, p. 117. -- I wish the Sun
should shine
On all men's Fruits and Flowers, as well as mine.
When they saw he was not Selfish (it is a word of their own new Mint) some of
their Ministers, that were softened with the dewy drops of his Tongue, eased
their Stomachs with Complaints against the Courts Ecclesiastical, and the
rugged Carriage of certain Prelates. Lincoln knew their Censures had somewhat
of Truth, and much of Malice, but seemed to give them great attention in all;
for he had rather bring them over to the King, than the Scottish Army. Hami
angulares quam directi mucrones tenacius infiguntur, Macrob. lib. 7. c. 3. A
Sword cuts deep, but a Hook sticks in the Flesh when it has made a Wound. He
replies, That any Government undisturbed, and enjoying Eighty years of Peace,
cannot but contract accidental Abuses remaining sound in its Essentials. The
Sun does win certain Minutes and Seconds in the year, which in long tract of
time breed great Alterations. The longer the Body has been in Health, the
harder to be cured, when a Disease overtakes it. But whether they were
Insolences or Grievances that did distaste them, they should be remedied. The
King was ready to lance every Sore, and to let out the Corruption, only keep up
the Places of the Bishops, Deans, and other Dignitaries, among which
themselves, men of great Godliness and Learning, did deserve a share, and
should be remembered: They need not be taught, that the Church, the Building of
Christ, must not be built like a Barn, all upon one Floor, but must be framed
with gradual Subordinations: There is a Babel in plucking down, as well as in
raising up. And for the Revenues bestowed upon our Maintenance, painful
Preachers deserved them, as well as the best Practisers in other Professions,
and knew how to use them. There were plenty of such. Blame not all for the
Sloth or Errors of a few: Cur omnium fit culpa paucorum scelus, Sen. Hippol.
This part brought on a Proposition for a regulated Episcopacy: I cannot vaunt,
that the Bishop made his Party good with them in that; for the meaning of the
Proponent spread out at the breadth, was to join the Presbytery with the Bishop
in all acts of Ordination and Jurisdiction, to give him the first Room, and the
first Voice, but no more; his Suffragans and Coadjutors in the Consistory being
more in number, and every of them equal in Power, should leave him for a
Cipher: Then regulate Episcopacy is the same with demolish it; for turn a Light
downward, and it will extinguish it self: Take such a Bishop, and measure him,
not with an Ell, but a Span, and he is Paterculus non Pater, a titular
Chairman, Beza's Moderator for life, Cartwright's President. How often has
this Mockery of Government been obtruded and rejected? But the Mortar will
still favor of the Garlic that was stamped in it before.

137. The power of the Presbyterians was so great in Tumults and concourse of
base People, that their Conclusions were strong, though their Premises were
weak, to blunt the power of ancient Episcopacy. Nam quae est ista nova and
stulta sapientia, novitatem quaerere in visceribus antiquitatis? Optat. lib. 6.
Yet in all this Lincoln was their Days-man, and gave them considerate Answers;
but he did wind them off, and would spin the Webb no further with them, when he
perceived they aimed more at a regulated Crown, than a regulated Mitre. Just as
Pausanius says of the Messenians, (...). That they would change their Kings
into Regents of a new name, subject to the People, and answerable for their
Faults. So these would make our King as subject to their Elderships, as a
Stadt-holder in the Netherlands; as to have no Government in Church Affairs as
their King, (I mean their Christian King) to be liable to their Censures, to
execute their Verdicts, without disputing the Justice of them. Their politic
Aphorisms are far more dangerous, That His Majesty is not the highest Power in
his Realms; That he has not absolute Sovereignty; That a Parliament sitting is
coordinate with him in it: He may have the Title of only Supreme, yet a Senate
have an essential part without the Name. The Sovereignty was mixed, and
distributed into the Hands of King, Lords, and Commons. Though a Nation war
against a King, and they on the Merit of the Cause have the worser side, yet
may he not war against the Public Good on that account, nor any help him in
such a War. When a man's Possession of the Crown does cease to be the means of
the Public Good, it is then his Duty to resign, and no Injury to be deprived
of it. Though the Power of the Militia be expressly given to the King, it shall
not be his alone, unless it be expressed it shall not be in others. Do not these
Aphorisms suit horribly well with the 13th to the Romans? How could God have
sealed the King's Safety and Commission with a plainer Text, and a stronger
Warrant? Shall these crooked Rules obliquate those loyal Maxims, which are so
strait in St. Paul? These are Junius Brutus's Theorems, or worse, which are
top-heavy, and will fall with their own weight into Hell. Worthy Lincoln heard
the Presbyterian Encroachments upon all other points with a civil welcome; but
when such Divinity, not fit for English Subjects, was pieced unto them, he
would brook no more Addresses. The Cony-skin is easily plucked off from the
Body, but it slicks at the Head. O what a Flood-gate have they drawn up with
these disloyal Tenants, through which a Deluge of War and Mischief has burst
out! Should I tell them, that they have boasted, that their Discipline did
never prevail in a State, but in spite of the Princes of the place? They know
it is true, and that Parsons, Fisher, and other Jesuits have told them of it.
Saepius olim religio peperit scelerosa atque impia facta, quoth Lucretius. This
was Olim, a good while since. But Grotius says of the modern sort of these
Ministers, and some Popish Priests, Per quos communis hujus seculi pest is in
utrasque parts vulgata est, Hist. p. 57. Which made a Marshal of France,
desirous of his Countries Peace, wish, That every Minister had a Priests Head in
his Belly, that they might be rid of them both. The Devil wanted not the
cunning to jostle Heathen Princes out of their Rights, by Stratagems of
Religion: Cleomenes taught the Delphick Oracle how to cast Demaratus out of his
Kingdom: So Pausan. in Lacon. It was an easier thing than for Savanarola, a
Preacher of Christ, to preach the Florentines out of an Optimacy into a Popular
Government. The Citizens burnt him afterward at a Stake in their Streets; they
should have fired him in his Pulpit. I must charge it on our Presbyterians,
that their Thunder-clapps of Rebellious Doctrine hurried our three Kingdoms
into a most bloody War; (...). Demosth. (...). The Plant comes from him that
sowed the Seed. With which Similitude Cicero arrests M. Anton. Ut in seminibus
causa est stirpium and arborum, sic hujus luctuosissimi belli causa Tu
Fuisti,Phil. 2. But what care these men to plead guilty to this Bill? For a
Bell-weather of their Flock writes, I dare not repent of it, nor forbear the
same, if it were to do again, in the same state of things, Holy Commonw. p.
486. What hope have we of Good from such Zealots? What Comfort ever to have
Peace, when the greatest Incendiaries do promise us, that they will never be
better?

138. Sir Fr. Walsingham, an honorable Counselor, did not mistake them; but
he was mistaken that says ever he was a Puritan, as this Letter will testify,
written to Mons. Crittoy, Secretary of France, and to be read in the Supplement
of the Cabala of Letters, p. 40. For those which named themselves Reformers,
and we commonly call Puritans, this has been the Proceeding toward them a
great while; when they inveighed against such Abuses in the Church, as
Pluralities, Non-residence, and the like, their Zeal was not condemned, only
their Violence was sometimes censured: When they refused the use of some
Ceremonies and Rites as superstitious, they were tolerated with much connivence
and gentleness: Yea, when they called in question the superiority of Bishops,
and pretended to bring in a Democracy into the Church, yet their Propositions
were heard, considered, and by contrary Writings debated and discussed: Yet all
this while it was perceived, that their course was dangerous and popular; as,
because Papistry was odious, it was ever in their Mouths, That they sought to
purge the Church from the Relics of Popery, a thing acceptable to the People,
who love ever to run from one Extreme to another. Because multitude of Rogues
and Poverty were an Eyesore and Dislike to every man, therefore they put it
into the Peoples Head^ That if Discipline were planted, there should be no
Beggars nor Vagabond^* A thing v^ry plausible. And in like manner they promise
the People many other impossible Wonders of their Discipline: Beside, they
opened the People a way to Government by their Consistory and Presbytery, a
thing in consequence no less prejudicial to the Liberties of private men, than
to the Sovereignty of Princes, yet in the first show very popular. Nevertheless
this (except it were in some few that entered into extreme contempt) was born
withal, because they pretended but in dutiful manner to make Propositions, and
to leave it to the Providence of God, and to the Authority of the Magistrate:
But now of late years, when there issued from them a Colony of those, that
affirmed the Consent of the Magistrate was not to be attended; when under
pretense of a Confession to avoid Slanders and Imputations, they combined
themselves by Classes and Subscriptions; when they descended into that vile and
base means of defacing the Government of the Church by ridiculous Pasquils;
when they began to make many Subjects in doubt to take an Oath which is one of
the fundamental points of Justice in this Land, and in all places; when they
began both to vaunt of their Strength and Number of their Partisans and
Followers, and to use Comminations, that their Cause would prevail, though with
Uproar and Violence, then it appeared to be no more Zeal* no more Conscience,
but mere Faction and Division. And therefore though the State were compelled to
hold somewhat a harder hand to restrain them than before* yet it was with as
great moderation as the Peace of the State and Church cou^^ permit. Thus far
Walsingham the Wise, one of the Pillars of (...) ^is Generation. It is not such
Fire-Drakes as he writes of could not (...) to threaten the Nation, that they
would prevail, though with Uproar and Violence: No worse man than Cartwright,
their Master, is the Author of those Minaces, as Dr. Bancroft quotes him, and
Scutliff against the Petition, p. 72. The Author of the Demonstration says,
That great Troubles were coming, if they might not have their Will; and, That
the Discipline should come by a way that would make all our Hearts ache. And how
right Sir Francis hits them! That Presbytery was popular in the first Show, but
odious in the Say: As Solinus says of the River Hypanis, c. 14. Qui in
Principiis eum norunt praedicant: qui in fine experti sunt non injuria
execrantur. They that welcome it in, would be glad to open a Postern to let it
out. If it consisted in no more than contemplative Doctrine, the trouble of it
had chiefly fallen upon the Universities: But it is as practick as the Wind, of
which we say, Usque adeo agit, ut nisi agat not sit; It is a meddling
bysie-body, that will let nothing be quiet. In short, it is bred in the Brain,
but like a Catarrh, it falls upon the Heart.

139. Had Secretary Walsingham tasted what Lincoln did from undermining
Presbyterians, Mons. Crittoy had heard more and worse from him than he did, in
that honest Letter: You shall have the Case as it follows. No sooner did this
Parliament open, but Disquietness and Uproars began with it, in many Churches,
to disturb the Holy Service: The House of Commons were their Countenance,
therefore provided no Remedy to control them: That Impiety, which was wont to
be abhorred, was brooded and cherished: Yet the House of Lords appointed a
Committee of their own Members, to give Glory to God, by driving Profaners out
of his Temple; and at the same time selected a Sub-Committee out of Divines of
very contrary Opinions, for Indifferency sake, to propose unto them matters fit
for their cognizance, Bishop of Lincoln. Primate of Armagh. Bishop of Du^ham.
Bishop of Norwich. Dr. Ward, D. Prideaux D. Sanderson Dr. Featly, Dr.
Brounrigg, Dr. Holdsworth, Dr. Hacket. Dr. Twiss, Dr. Burgess, Mr. White, Mr.
Marshal, Mr. Calamy, Mr. H^.
to prevent these Clamours odious in our Land, and scandalous to other Nations.
The Bishop of Lincoln had the Chair both in the Committee and Sub-committee,
with Authority given him to call together those Assistants, whom the Lords had
named to consult for Peace, and to stop the Breaches which Sedition had caused.
Those which were named for the Sub-committee, were some few more than did meet,
but such as did constantly appear to lay their Heads together, are recited in
the Margin, who were called by Lincoln's Letter to attend, in these words.

-- I am commanded by the Lords of the Committee for Innovations in matters of
Religion, that you know, that their said Lordships have assigned and appointed
you to attend them as Assist ants in that Committee; and to let you know in
general, that their Lordships do intend to examine all Innovations in Doctrine
or Discipline, introduced into the Church without Law, since the Reformation.
And if their Lordships shall find it behoveful, for the good of the Church and
State, to examine after that the Degrees and Perfection of the Reformation it
self, which I am directed to intimate unto you, that you may prepare your
Thoughts, Studies and Meditations, accordingly, expecting their Lordships
Pleasure for the particular points, as they shall arise.

Dated Martis 12. 1640.

The Bishop, and as many as were of his Judgment, found no way but to let them,
that seemed to be distasted with the Church for certain things, have somewhat
granted that they asked for, to let Suspicions pass for Proofs, and any Point
of a dubious sense for a kind of Error: As they that raise a Blister where
there was none before, to prepare a Cure for preventing an Apoplexy. Necessity
has no Law, but it shows a great deal of Reason, to unsettle some few things
by Condescension, for the settlement of a general Peace. Sometimes a little
Loss is a great Gain: Those words of Tully will make it good, in his Oration
for Plancius, Haec de sapientissim is and clarissimis viris, etc. non semper
easdem sententias ab iisdem, sed quascunque Reip. status, inclinatio temporum,
ratio concordiae post ularet, esse defendendas. Now this Theological Junto had
six meetings in West. College, in all which time all Passages of Discourse were
very friendly between part and part. The Complainants noted the Passages of
some Books that suited not, in their judgment, with the Doctrine of our Church;
they were condemned. Somewhat in Ceremony and outward form was presented, as
beside Canon, and supernumerary; they had their asking to bid it be restrained.
Their Exceptions against our Liturgy were petty and stale, older than the Old
Exchange; yet, for their contentment, the Vote of the Meeting did bend one way
to castigate some Phrases, to publish the next printed Books, in all Passages
from the beginning to the end, with the Translation of K. James's Bible, and to
furnish the Calendar altogether with Lessons of Canonical Scripture, dispunging
the Apocryphal. The Bishop had undertaken a Draught for regulating the
Government Ecclesiastical, but had not finished it. The sudden and quiet
dispatch of all that was done already was attributed to the Chairman's
Dexterity, who could play his Prize at all Weapons, dally with crooked Humors,
and pluck them straight; bring all Stragglers into his own Pound, and never
drive them in; foresee a Tempest of Contradiction the best that ever I knew,
and scatter it before it could rise; and won all his Adversaries insensibly,
into a compliance, before they were aware. To this day they of the
Nonconformists that survive, and were present, will tell you that they admired
two things in him, in their Phrase, his Courtesy, and his Cunning.

140. When Peace came so near to the Birth, how it abortived, and by whose
fault, comes now to be remembered. The Presbyterians knew not what to ask more
than was yielded to them, before the face of such Scholars, with whom they were
matched: But when they were among themselves, in their own Body, they would
stand to nothing. Itdem eadem possunt horam durare probantes? Hor. Ep. 1. They
did never abide long by their own Reformings; for they walk by no Church-Rule
of any Age. How soon would they be weary of other men's Concessions? A few weak
Brethren might take these Alterations in good part, which were like to be
obtained; but the noted men of the Faction could not bring themselves into Fame
and Name, and somewhat else, but in a greater confusion: The old Waters must be
troubled more, before they could catch the great Fish in their Flue: As one
says of the Jesuits, that profess Poverty, and yet build stately Colleges,
richly endowed, that they are not Mendicants for small Moneys, but Beggars by
wholesale: So these could make no Trade out of such small Bargains, as mend
this, and mend that, but it would be worth an Alderman's Wealth to a lucky
Stickler, to be a Reformer by wholesale: Then, as Aristophanes jeers in his
Equit. (...); He that is low to day, may be aloft to morrow. Therefore they make
Clamor against the Bishops; for, split that holy Order, and they knew all
would sink with it. No Revilings were thought ill enough to make them odious;
as Theophylact complains of his Bulgarians, Episcoporum accusationibus tanquam
suorum defensionibus ninituntur, Baron. ann. 1073. par. 88. So our disobedient
Children, by blotting the good Name of their Reverend Fathers, supposed
themselves would look as white as a new-plaister'd Wall. It was their Eye,
which was evil, that could not see the Good of our Apostolical Government: Like
Luther's Fool, in his Comment on Genesis 13, who standing in the Sun, and looking
downward, complained his Shadow was crooked. The Presbyterians understood, that
they should expose themselves and their Cause to the Censure of wise men, if
they did adventure no further in conference at the Sub-committee. Therefore to
cut off that Meeting in the heat and great hopes of it, they had a Champion
that brought a Bill into the House of Commons, to take away for ever
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, Chancellors, etc. called, The Bill of
Root and Branch. This man was Sir Ed. Deering, a Knight of strong Abilities.
Qui omnes virtutes unus, facti temeritate abstulit; as Paterculus said of
Brutus, lib. 1. What must not this poor Church suffer, when her Principalities
were deslin'd to be funder'd, before new could be provided, to which all might
be firmly fastened? What could a single person do worse, than abrogate all our
Laws and Constitutions? Which is the same with that of Demosthenes, ad Timocr.
(...). What Device was there left to make Sorrow eat further into our Hearts,
than to obtrude the new Gewgaw of the Geneva Platform upon us, instead of the
Chair which St. Peter, St. John, St. Mark had erected in Europe, Asia, and
Africa, from the Primitive Times? Rerum novitate extrusa vetustas, Luc. lib. 3.
When the Athenians compelled the Spartans to renounce their own Laws, and to
accept those of Athens, Livy pitied them, Dec. 4. lib. 6. Nulla res tanto erat
damno, quam disciplina Lycurgi sublata, cui per annos 800 assueverant. This was
worse, compare continuance of time, but much more for Conscience. But did these
Innovators sile another Bill then, or ever after, what form of Government
should succeed in the place of Episcopacy? No, they could never hammer out such
an Engine upon their Anvil; for which Dr. Owen girds them, being then in a good
vein, Vind. Evan. p. 216. Wise Builders are they, pull down they will, although
they have nothing in the room of what they endeavored to destroy Was there
never a wise man among them, that had learnt the Polity of the Venetians, no
ordinary Statesmen? Where no Officer must depart out of his Government, foreign
or domestic, Priusquam novus in ipsius locum substitueretur, Match. Resp. lib.
1. c. 50. Ours were not such Senators, but like Schoolboys, that make a Blot
greater with wiping it out. It is not an Artist's Work, but a Hangman's, says
Tully, to cut off the Limbs of a sound Body, Orat. pro Sestio. Non est ea
medicina, cumsanae parti corporis scalpellum adhibetur, atque integrae:
Carnificina est ista, and crudelitas. But this was their hour, and the power of
Darkness. All was in Tumult. The King's Arm was too weak to hold the Balance of
Justice: As Plutarch, in Dion, makes or tells a Story, That Pigs were sarrowed
in Syracusa, another London, without Ears: And the Soothsayers told Dionysius
the younger, upon it, That the People would be contumacious, and give ear to
nothing. So you have the first and the last part of the Presbyterians Actings,
with the other Divines, whom the Lords appointed for a Sub-committee. There may
well be a Suspicion, when their Deeds do make a Confession, that they would
prevail by Force, when they could not by Argument. And thus began the downfall
of Episcopacy, which was never heard, never suffered to plead at the Bar of the
Parliament in its own Cause, but, as one says pertinently, It was smothered in
a Crowd.

141. Anatomists observe, that the thinnest Membrane is that which covers the
Brain, that no weight might stop it from production of Notions and Phancies.
Certainly it was so in our Bishop's Headpiece, who was consulted every day in
weighty Affairs, and had a Task at this time, concurrent with all that went
before, to look to the Case of the noble, but unfortunate Earl of Strafford: A
Charge of great Crimes was hastily drawn up against him, that he had been a
Tyrant in Ireland, and stirred up His Majesty to raise an Army to oppress his
Subjects in England and Scotland; Haec passim Dea soeda virum diffudit in ora,
AEn. 4. These were the Fictions of Fame, and no more, but made the People cast
about distrustful and disloyal Doubts. The Earl, a man of great Wit and
Courage, knew not whether the King and all his Friends could save him: In a
rebellious nation wrath is set on fire, Ecclus 16.6. And to the shame of
Subjects, bewitched with the new Spirit of that Bedlam rage, neither the King
nor his Justice could protect any man. Too well do I remember that of Justin,
lib. 30. Nec quisquam in regno suo minus quam rex ipse poterat. Some say of the
French, lukewarm in Religion, that they kneel but with one Knee at Mass; a
great number in our rigid Parliament would not do so much, the locking Joint of
their Knee was too stiff to bend at all: Rebellion is a foul word, yet they
blushed not at the deed, who were ashamed of the Title. Then the Scots were
resolved not to disband till this brave Lord was headless. Who has seen a
Hedge hog rouled up into a Ball? The whole lump is Prickles, do but touch it,
and you hurt your Hand. Convolvuntur in modum pilae, ne quid possit comprehendt
praeter aculeos, Plin l. 8. c. 37. So Lessly and his Tykes were bloody and
imperious, fastened with much confidence in one body: Who could remove them?
Nay, who could touch them, or go about to mollitie them, and get no harm? Then
the Tumults of Sectaries, Corner-creepers, and debauched Hang-by's, that beset
the dutiful Lord, and Commons with Poniards and Clubbs, were worse than an Army
far off. These called for Justice, that is, for the Life of the Earl. What had
they to do with Justice? which if it might have fate upon the Bench, and tried
them, every Mothers Son of them had been condemned to the Gallows: But it was
safer to sit still with Prudence, than to rush on with Courage. Plus animi est
inferenti periculum, quam propulsanti, Live. lib. 38. The Affailant, that comes
to do a Mischief, puts on desperately, and is fiercer than the Defendant: And
there is no equal temperature, or counterpoise of Power against the strong
Ingredient of a Multitude. I will not say, but many of this Scum invited
themselves unbidden to do a Mischief; but there was a Leader, a Presbyter
Pulpiteer, that bespoke them into the Uproar from Shop to Shop. Lucius Sergius
signifer seditionis, concitator tabernariorum, Cic. pro dom. ad Pont. I need
not a Lime-hound to draw after him that was the chief Burgess of the Borough,
who gathered this vain People to a head, that had no Head: Silly Mechanics!
Horum simplicitas miserabilis: his furor ipse -- Dat veniam, Juven. Sat. 2. But
what will he answer, that knew his Master's Will, and ran headlong against it?
Now here is the Straight of the Earl of Strafford, exposed to the greatest
popular Rage that ever was known: All that his good Angel could whisper into
him in Prison, was, to trust to God and a righteous Defense: But whereon should
he bottom his Defense? He could not upon the known Law, which is the Merastone
to limit and define all Causes for Life, Limb, Liberty, or Living. He must
stand to a Trial, whether parcels of petty Offenses will make an accumulative
Felony; and be arraigned upon a notion of Treason, which could be wrested out
of no Statute, nor be paralleled with any President: The Treason was rather in
them that called such things Treason, to which no English Subject was liable by
his Birthright. In populo scelus est, and abundant cuncta furore, Man. lib. 2.
The Law was too much his Friend, to bring him before the face of it. Anocent
man fears the Law; an innocent man fears Malice and Envy. O vitae tuta facultas
-- Pauperis, angustique laris! O munera nondum -- Intellecla, Luc. lib. 5. O
the security and sound sleeps of a private Life! If this Earl had not climbed
as high as the Weathercock of Honors Spire, he had not known the Horror of a
Precipice. Isocrates would never meddle with a public Office, says the Author
of his Life. (...); the Athenians were so spightful at their Magistrates, that
he would not trust them. Demasthenes was employed in great Places, and died
untimely by a Poison which he had confected for an evil time. Says Pausan. upon
it in Atti. (...). He that is entrusted to govern the people, when he has
served their turn, seldom dies fortunately. But this is the man, whose Troubles
gave the Bishop occasion to show his Abilities in two points: First, About the
circumstance of the examination of the Cause. Secondly, About the Judges of the
Cause, that is, Whether Bishops might be such in causa sanguinis. There is much
of it, I confess, but the Learning will recompense the length. And I shall not
blemish his Reputation, to say of him what the Orator said of L. Aquilius,
Orat. pro Caecinna, Cujus tantum est ingenium, ita prompta fides, ut quicquid
haurias, purum liquidumque haurire censeas.

142. Before I draw up to the Bishop's Reports, there is more to be premised;
as. That there was much ado to score out the Hearing of Strafford with a
straight Line, and a Form to give some satisfaction; as a Child is often set
upon its Legs before it can go. His Adversaries tossed it about many ways, and
managed it chiefly by two persons, Mr. St. John, the King's Solicitor, one
that did very bad Service to the King his Master, and the Church his Mother,
yet of able parts; therefore I will write the Inscription of his Tombstone on
the wrong side, and turn it downward to the Earth. The other was John Pym; Homo
ex argilla, and luto factus Epicuraeo; as Tully said of Piso, that is, in
Christian English, a painted Sepulcher, a Belly-god. From the first breaking
out of the Plot against the Earl, they committed him as a Traitor to the Black
Rod; who for any thing of Treason, or like to Treason, might go barefaced
through the World, and never be ashamed: For, in the end of all, long after his
Commitment, they had no proof toward that Crime, but a Paper brought out of
old Sir H. Vane's Cabinet, by his naughty Son, Crudelis pater est magis an puer
improbus ille? What were other Misdemeanors to Treason? Sift any man that has
been long in a great Office, and if his Enemies may be permitted to accuse him,
see if he can escape a black Bill, which will found to his peril and disgrace,
amplified with the Rhetoric of Malice. So Plutarch defends the gallant Roman
Fabius, To(...) Not to offend at all in great matters, is more than a man can
do. Let me speak of his Judges with reverence: It was a Parliament which is
more able to prepare Laws to pass where all are concerned, than to sit upon a
Trial where one Subject is concerned: Wise and Weak have the same Right to
Judge; therefore Pliny the younger spared not to censure the Conscript-Fathers
of the Roman Senate, lib. 2. Ep. In publico concilio nihil est tam inaequale
quam aequalitas: quia cum sit impar prudentia, par omnium jus est. Those that
are no Body when they are singled and stand alone, must pass for Oracles when
they vote with others in the House: Like the Vanity of Astrologers, as
Salmasius taxes them, Chym. p. 795. Singula sidera vix pro numinibus habent:
Composita and offigiata potentum numinum instar habere voluerunt. The virtue of
such and such a Star is not reckoned in their Art, but put it into a
Constellation, that Figure cast into a Globe of Stars, they hold to be
propitions, in-flowing into the Life and Death of Men. There were some in this
Parliament that out of their Birth and Education were carried to noble
Attempts, who would not concur to the Ruin of great Wentworth; but their Names
were posted for it by Ruffians, as Enemies to the State: And this was never
looked into for a breach of Privilege. An Indignity will never be forgotten,
till Truth has left to breathe. And it was to no purpose to reason it soberly
with so violent Opposites: Decernente ferocissimo quoque non sententiis, sed
clamore, and strepitu, Live. lib. 20. Their Blood was warmed with the greatness
of their number, and confidence in the People: Beside, says the rare Author, in
his Essay of Faction, it is often seen, that a few that are stiff will tire out
a greater number that are more moderate. What odds then was on their side, that
exceeded in quantity and stiffness? Yet every thing that is stiff is not
straight. But here the bloody part were the Godly in their own Language, they,
and no others. All that came from them, was pretended to be for Reformation and
common Safety, but as different in event as Numbers that are even and odd.
Hypocrisy dwells next door to Virtue, but never comes into its Neighbor's
House. What Justice was that which was thrown by for ever, which played its part
so ill, that the very Actors hissed it off the Stage, and provided by their own
Vote, that it should be seen no more? Quintil. lib. 7. has this upon the
Pleadings of his time, Tot saeculis nullam repertam esse causam, quae sit tota
alterisimilis. No Cause was ever pleaded, that was the same with any that went
before, in all points and circumstances. But how say you to this Cause, when it
was enacted by Statute, That no Cause should be like it for the time to come?
Sir Rob. Dallington notes the Subtlety of the Pope in these words: That he
never challenges a Power. till he be able to maintain it, (no more did this
High Court) and then, that he never approves a Mischief till it be done. So did
not this Court, that would not approve their own Mischief when it was done:
They were not ashamed before, and when they shed innocent Blood, but after:
Quos cum nihil refert pudet: ubi pudendum est deserit illos pudor, Plaut. in
Bacch. Finally, no Evidence can have more light than this, That they knew not
how to make their Justice passable, because, before they began, they found so
many Knots and Scruples how to enter into a Trial. When they had resolved on a
way, the King would have crossed them: Discreet men were afraid, lest Opposition
should make them worse: Lincoln is consulted, approves the King's Zeal to use
all expedient means to rescue his faithful Servant, but thought it would do
hurt, to check what the Parliament had devised for a legal procedure. He that
seeks a thing the wrong way, goes so far backward. In all Contests of Power the
King is ever thought to do wrong: The King's Greatness, made too much
contemptible already, must beware to take a foyl at this time: Mary Queen of
Scotland, Mother to James the third (who was deemed worthy the Character of
Livia the Empress, Ulysses stolata, Ulysses in a Petticoat, Calig. in Sueton.)
gave this Counfel to her Son on her Deathbed, Suffer not your Prerogative to
come in question; but foreseeing the danger, rather give way to all that in
reason is demanded of you, Drum. p. 79. With these Considerations the Bishop
proceeds to deliver his Opinion, as follows, to the Lords.

143. The first Question which your Lordships have called upon me to resolve
is, Whether the House of Commons may examine some of the Members of their House
before a Committee of your Lordships? There is no question of the thing, but of
the time. Regularly they ought not to do it yet: but ought first to put in a
Specifial Charge, and the Reus, or Defendant first be called to his Answer.
Then, and not before, Witnesses ought to be produced. This is the regular
Course. If the Charge be not Specifial, it may be demurred unto, and need not
be answered at all. We have all this in the Acts of the Apostles, cap. 25.
Festus brought brought forth Paul to be examined before Agrippa, that he might
have (...), v. 27. some certain matter to lay to his charge, so as he might not
slip away from it. Therefore a general and uncertain matter will not serve the
turn. For otherwise (...), v. 28. it seemed to Festus void of all reason, to
send a Prisoner to Rome, and no Charge go along with him. They are called there
(...), particular Criminations. This is the regular way before your Witnesses
are used. The Star Chamber goes a little further beside the Rule: For in the
King's Cause, upon Affidavit of Sickness, to prevent Mortality, and as it were
de been esse, some Witnesses have been admitted to Examination before any
Answer put in, or Issue joined. Though these Witnesses were to be re-examin'd
after Issue joined, in case they recovered. A particular Charge being laid
before you, when the House of Commons is a Party, and the Charge of so high a
nature as Treason, I shall not advise this Honorable House to use any
Chiquancery, or Pettisoggery with this great Representation of the Kingdom; but
admit them forthwith to examine their own Members; yet with this Caution, To
hew the Names two days before they be produced, to the Solicitor of the
Defendant, that he may have notice of the persons. But the House press for
Secrecy in the Examination. Well, they are safe enough while they are in the
Lord's hands; who have Urim and Thummim, perfect Knowledge, and perfect
Integrity: and therefore nothing can be suspected. Are not they surer than
other Officers? In ordinary Commissions out of Star Chamber, my Lord Ellsmore
would not allow that any Clerks should be used, to prevent Futility and
Evaporation, saying, That the best Commissioner in England was not too good to
be the King's Clerk. Secondly, I am as'kt about the Examination of the Peers,
and the Assistants of this House upon Oath. There is no question to be made
about the Assistants, they are no Peers of this Kingdom; but whether Peers may
be produced as Witnesses, and testify upon Oath? A question not sit to be now
handled, and impossible to be resolved out of the Rolls of the Parliament;
because the Peers give their Testimony both in this Court, and others, either
way. And I am confident a Peers Averment against his Fellow Peer cannot be
refused either way; especially in case of Treason: For a Peer judges his Peer
worthy of Death upon his Honor, and therefore may witness against him upon his
Honor. In this Court, and almost in this Case, in Alze Pierce her Case, 1
Rich. 2. Number. 21. Lord Roger Beauchamp swears upon the Holy Evangelists: The
Lord of Lancaster, King of Castile and Leon, is examined, but not sworn. Nay,
both ways have been declared in this House to be all one. Your Lordships
declaring that you did not bound, limit, or terminate your Assertion with your
Honor, but mount it, and relate it up unto God, that gave you your Honor; and
yielded your selves perjured, if you falsisied in swearing upon Honor; which
is just the very same, as if you swear upon the Holy Evangelists. To swear upon
Honor, and rest there, were Idolatry. But to swear upon Honor with a Report
and Relation to God, who bestowed it upon your Lordships, as a special Favor
and Grace, is as Christian an Oath as any in the World: For new Scruples in the
manner, as to touch the Book, to look on the Book, to hold up a Finger or Hand
to Heaven, are Ceremonies which the House of Commons little regards, but leaves
them to us: And the Lord of Strafford is so wise, that he will never question
the Honor of his Peers. And why should we trouble our selves about the
circumstance, but leave each Lord called to testisie, to call God as a Witness
to his Assertion, in which of these two manners it shall please his Lordship:
Not the Book, not the Honor, but the Invocation of God to bear witness to the
Assertion, makes the Oath.

144. I am put to it by your Lordships, to speak, in the third place, about the
examination of Privy Councillors: Here needs no distinction between Peers and
Assistants: This is part of a Privy Councillor's Oath, That he shall keep
secret all matters committed and revealed to him, or that shall be treated of
in Council. 2. If any Treaty touch his fellow-Councillor, he shall not reveal
it unto him, till the King or Council shall require it. I collect now, that
matters of Fact he may reveal without violation of his Oath; and that he may be
examined of matters revealed unto him, that were treated of in Council, if they
were not treated of in Council when he was present: That a Privy-Councillor,
for all his Oath, may be examined concerning Words, Advices, or Opinions of
another Privy-Councillor, otherwise given than in Council: That Bedchamber and
Gallery Discourse is nothing to the Council Table: Private Entertainers of the
King, when the Counselors attend at the Door, are not to pass for Counselors:
Ear-wiggs and Whisperers are no Counselors, but detracters from Counselors:
If they advise the Destruction of the King, the State, or the Laws of the Realm
there is nothing in the Oath to protect such an Ear-worm, but he may be
appeached: For matters which touch another fellow-Councillor, or matters
committed otherwise to him, or which shall be treated of in Council, these are
not to be concealed from all forts of men, but from private men only; not from
the King, not from the Council, (both those are in the Oath) nor from the
Parliament: That Privy-Councillots may be examined by Command of the
Parliament, for things treated in Council; 2. for things revealed unto them
secretly, from the King in his Bedchamber; 3. and especially, for ear-wigging
and treating with the King in private, after things already settled in Council.
The Case of Alze Pierce, 1 Rich. II. number. 41. clears all these Doubts: And it
is the Case also of a Deputy of Ireland. William of Windsor, Lord-Deputy,
misbehaved himself in Ireland; the Council directs Sir Nicholas Dagworth to go
thither, and to enquire into his Actions; Windsor makes means to Alze Pierce to
keep off this man, under pretense of Enmity betwixt them: This Shunamite, that
lay in David's Bosom, prevails with the King to stay Sir N. Dagworth, the
Council-Order notwithstanding: The Lords in Parliament question her for this
act, as having drawn with it the Ruin of the State in Ireland: She pleads not
guilty, Issue is joined: The Lords produce inter alios, John Duke of Lancaster,
upon his Honor, and Roger Beauchamp Lord Chamberlain, upon the Evangelists:
Alze produces of her part the Steward and Comptroller of the Household: All
these four were Privy-Counsellors; they depose all of them nothing else but
matters treated of in Council, and opposed by Alze Pierce, treating with the
King out of Council. So that, if this Record be true, this Case is cleared,
Privy-Councillors may not be forced by ordinary Courts of Justice, to reveal
things treated of in Council, but may be produced, upon Oath and Honor, to
reveal such Secrets by the King, the Council, or the Parliament, especially in
detestation of Statewhisperers and Ear-wiggs; yea, though they had taken no
Oath at all. Yet God forbid a Privy-Counsellor should witness against his
Fellow, for publicly venting the freedom of his Judgment at the Board, who is
bound to advise faithfully, not wisely; as I do here this day. Should any man
be accused for an Error of Judgment? O God defend! peradventure my Error has
set all the rest of the Council straight: Errores antiquorum venerari oportet:
si illi non errassent, minus ipse providissem: otherwise you would take away
all Freedom of Debates, nay, almost of very Thoughts. If I knew any man would
witness against me for my Council Table Opinion, I would say to him as Gallus
did to Tyberius Caesar, Good Sir, speak you first, for I may mistake, and you
may witness against me for it in the next Parliament. Some did make Laws with
Ropes about their Necks: What? Must men give their Counsel as it were with
Ropes about their Necks? Solomon says, When thou come to a rich man's table,
put a knife to thy Throat. But what is here? When we give Judgment, as we are
able, among the Lords of the Council, must we put an Ax to our Necks? Beware of
such Traps, pitying the case of human Weakness.

145. The fourth Question is thus comprised; Whether some Members of the House
of Commons may be present at the Examination. Judicially they cannot, the
Judicature is in your Lordships; but whether organically and ministerially, is
the Scruple to be satisfied. I will be brief in my Conceptions, what is against
the claim of the House of Commons, and what is for them. This is not for them,
That 50 Edw. 3. one Love was a Witness in Lord John Nevile's Case; Love denied
what he had confessed before two Knights, Members of the Lower House: The House
of Commons send them to the Lords to confront Love; which they did, and Love
was thereupon committed. Now, their being here was only to confront, not to
assist the Lords, either judicially or ministerially. Many things make for
them, why they may be there, ministerially at least: First, Originally both
Houses were together, and so the Commons heard all Examinations; Considerent
inter se. Modus ten. Pl. and sat so till Anno 6 Edw. 3. by Mr. Elsing's
Collections, which are not over-authentick. Secondly, After that time, they
have, all the House of Commons, been present, when Witnesses were sworn here --
Anno 5 Hen. IV. Rot. 11. swears his Fealty before the Lords and Commons; and
two or three days after, by the same Oath, and before the same persons, clears
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Duke of York, from a Suspicion of Treason
laid to their charge. The Commons were by, and heard all this. The third Reason
is, Mr. Attorny-General, if this Lord were arraigned of Treason (as I pray God
bless him from deserving it) would be by, and observe his Defense, and such
Witnesses as he should produce for himself, and would, no doubt, bring Counter
proofs Sur le Champ, and upon the sudden against the same, if he were able. The
House of Commons is in this case the King's Attorney, who make and maintain the
charge. So far, out of brief Notes (for take them to be no other) you have a
strong Judgment passed upon four Questions. Says Tully in his Brutus, of
Caesar's Eloquence, Tabulam been pictam collocat in bono lumine; He draws his
Picture well, and hangs it out to be well seen: So here is a Piece well drawn,
and placed in the light of Perspicuity. His next Argument is very long, but of
that use to the Reader, that he shall not sind so much Learning in any Author
on that Theme, that I know a Scholar would not want it. They that fostered
deadly Enmities against E. Strafford, labored to remove the Bishops from the
hearing of his Cause. This Bishop and his Brethren minding to him all the Pity
and Help they could show him, the Opposites began to vote them out of Doors,
and would not admit them in the Right of Peers in this Cause, because it was
upon Life and Blood, Lincoln maintains, that the Lords did them Injury, and
that Bishops in England may, and ought to vote in causa sanguinis, That they
were never inhibited by the Law of this Land, never by the Peers of the Land
before this time; That their voluntary forbearance in some Centuries of the
Ages before, proceeded from their Fears of the Canons of the Court of Rome, and
by the special Leave of the King and both Houses, who were graciously pleased
to allow of their Protestations for their Indemnity, as Churchmen, when the
King and Parliament might have rejected their Protestations, if they had
pleased. And much he insisted upon it, that the opponent Lords grounded their
Judgment upon the corrupt Canons of the Church of Rome. Indeed, I find in my
own Papers, that the Monks of Canterbury complained against Hubert their
Archbishop, to the Pope, for sitting upon Trials of Life and Blood: They could
not complain, that he went against the Laws and Customs of England, but their
Appeal was to the Pope's Justice; and it was more tolerable for Monks to rake
in the Rubbish of the Roman Courts, than for English Barons. And say, in sooth,
must not Divines of the Reformed Church meddle in Cause of Blood? (...), Amph.
Would they be laughed at for this Hypocrisy, or abhorred? For, who more
forward to thrust into the Troops of the late War, than the Ministers, whom
they countenanced? Have I not seen them prance about the Streets in London,
with Pistols in their Holsters, and Swords by their sides? And so for Edg-hill
and Newberry, etc. Could they rush into so many Fights, and be clear from cause
of Blood? Nay, the Pontisical part make but a Mockery of this Canon; for anno
1633, a Book was printed in Paris, sill'd with a Catalogue of Cardinals,
Bishops, and Priests, who had been brave Warriors, most of them Leaders in the
Field; the Author, a Sycophant, aimed to please Cardinal Richlieu, and a Fig
for the Canons: Reason, Canons, Parliamentary Privileges, nay Religion, are to
corrupt men, as they like them for their own ends. Now hear how this Bishop did
wage his Arguments for the affirmative.

146. It is to be held for a good Cause, against which nothing of moment can be
alleged; such is this concerning the Right of Bishops to vote in causa
sanguinis. First, It is not prohibitum quia malum, not any way evil in it self,
no more than it is an evil thing in it self to do Justice. Secondly, It was in
use from the Law of Nature, when the eldest of the Family was King, Priest, and
Prophet. Thirdly, It was in use under Moses's Law, and so continued in the
Priests and Levites, down to Annas and Caiaphas, and after Christ's death, till
the Temple was destroyed; as appears by the scourging of the Apostles, by the
stoning of Stephen, and commanding St. Paul to be smitten on the Mouth.
Fourthly, It was in use in the persons of the Apostles themselves, as in that
Judgment given upon Ananias and Saphira; in the delivery up to Satan, as most
of the ancient Fathers expound that Censure, to be a corporal Vexation: And
generally, in all the Word of God, there is no one Text that literally inhibits
Churchmen more than Laymen, to use this kind of Judicature: For that Precept,
to be no striker, 1 Timothy 3.3. is no more to be appropriated to a Bishop,
distinct from the rest of Christian men, than that which is added, not to be
given to Wine, that is, immoderately taken. Proceed we to Practice and Use in
our own Country. Why, it was in use in this Island before the Romans entered the
same, when the Druids gave all the Sentences in Causes of Blood, Si coedes
fac^e p^as constituunt, Caesar Bell. Gai. li. 6. And see Mr. Selden's Epinomis,
c. 2. Nor is it like that the Romans, when they were our Masters, should forbid
it in Priests, whose Pontifical College, after they had entertained the twelve
Tables, meddled in all matters of this kind, Strabo Geogr. lib. 4. And it is as
unlike, that the Christian Religion excluded Bishops in this Island from
Secular Judicatures, since King Lucius is directed to take out his Laws, for
the regulating of his Kingdom, by the Advice of his Council, ex utraque pagina,
the Old and New Testament, which could not be done in that Age without the help
of his Bishops. See Sir H. Spelman's Councils, p. 34. Ann. Dom. 185. And how
the great Prelates, among the ancient Britains, were wholly employed in these
kind of secular agitations, you may see in the Ecclesiastical Laws of Howel
Dha, set forth by Sir H. Spelman, page 408. anno 940. And a little before this
Howel Dha, lived K. Aetheljtan, in the second Chapter of whose Ecclesiastical
Laws we have it peremptorily set down, Hinc debent Episcopi cum Saeculi
Judicibus interesse judiciis; and particularly in all Judgments of the Ordeals,
which no man that understands the word can make any doubt to have been extended
to Mutilation and Death, Sir H. S. Counc. p. 405. ann. 928. And that the
Bishops joined always with the secular Lords in all Judicatory Laws and Acts,
under the whole reign of the Saxons and Danes in this Island, we may see by
those Saxon-Danish Laws (or rather Capitularies, which among the French and
Germans do signify a mixture of Laws, made by the Prince, the Bishops, and the
Barons, to rule both Church and Commonwealth) set forth by Mr. Lambert, anno
1568. See particularly the ninth Chapter of St. Edward's Laws, De his qui ad
judicium sorri vel aquae judicati sunt; fol. 128. And thus it continued in this
Kingdom long after the Conquest, to wit, in Henry Beu-clerk's time, after whose
Reign it began to be a little limited and restrained; for at Clarendon, anno
1164, 8 Calend. Febr. 11 Henr. 21, a general Record is agreed upon by that
King's Special Command, of all the Customs and Liberties of this Kingdom, ever
since Hen. the First, the King's Grandfather; as you may see in Matthew. Paris,
p. 96, of the first Edition; where, among other Customs agreed upon, this is
one: Archbishops and Bishops, and all other persons of this Kingdom, which hold
of the King in capite, are to enjoy their Possessions of the King as a Barony,
and by reason thereof, are to answer before the Judges and Officers of the
King, and to observe and perform all the King's Customs: And just as the rest
of the Barons ought (for it was a Duty required of them, as the King now by his
Summons does from us) to be present in the Judgments of the King's Courts,
together with the rest of the Barons, until such time as they shall there
proceed to the mangling of Members, or Sentence of Death.

147. Observe, that there is a diversity of reading in the last words; for
Matthew. Paris, a young Monk, that lived long after, reads this Custom thus;
Quousque perveniatur ad diminutionem membrorum, vel ad mortem. Which may be
wrested to the first agitation of any Charge tending that way; but Quadrilogus,
a Book written in that very Age, and the original Copy of the Articles of
Clarendon, which Becket sent to Rome, extant at this day in the Vatican
Library, and out of which Baronius, in his Annals, anno 1164, transcribes it,
reads the Custom thus, Usque perveniatur in judicio ad diminutionem membrorum,
etc. which leaves the Bishops to sit there, until the Judgment come to be
pronounced, amounting to Death, or Mutilation of Members. And as this was
agreed to be the Custom, so was it the Practice also, after that 11th year, to
wit, in the 15th year of Henry the Second, at what time the Lay-Peers are so
far from requiring the Bishops to withdraw, that they endeavor to force them
alone to hear and determine a matter of Treason in the person of Becket.
Stephanides is my Author for this, who was a Chaplain and Follower of that
Archbishop, The Barons say, says that Author, You Bishops ought to pronounce
Sentence upon your selves; we are Laics, you are Churchmen, as Becket is; you
are his fellow-Priests, and fellow-Bishops. To whom some one of the Bishops
replied, This belongs to you, my Lords, rather than to us, for this is no
ecclesiastical, but a secular Judicature: We sit not here as Bishops, but as
Barons. Nos Barons, and vos Barons, hic Pares sumus. And in vain it is that
you should labor to find any difference at all in our Order or Calling. See
this Manuscript cited by Mr. Seldom, Titles of Honor, 2 Edit. p. 705. And thus
the Custom continued till the 21st year of the same King Henry II. at what time
that Provincial Synod was kept at Westminster, by the Archbishop of Canterbury,
and some few of his Suffragans, which Roger Hoveden mentions in his History, p.
543. And it seems Gervasius Dorobernensis, which is a Manuscript I have not
seen. The quoting of this Monk in the Margin of that Collection of Privileges,
which Mr. Seldom, by command, had made for the Upper House of Parliament, is
the only ground of stirring up this Question against the Bishops at this
present, intended by Mr. Seldom for a Privilege to the Bishops, not for a
Privilege to the Lay Peers, to be pressed against the Bishops. The Canon runs
thus: It is not lawful for such as are constituted in Holy Orders, Judicium
sanguinis agitare, to put in execution Judgment of Blood; and therefore we
forbid, that they shall either in their own persons execute any such mutilation
of Members, or sentence them to be so acted by others: And if any such person
shall do any such thing, he shall be deprived of the Office and Place of his
Order and Function. We do likewise sorbid, under the peril of Excommunication,
that no Priest be a secular Sheriff or Provost. Now this is no Canon made in
England, much less confirmed by Common Law, or assented to by all the Bishops
of the Province of Canterbury, or by any one of the Province of York, but
transcribed (as appears by Hovenden's Margin) out of a Council of Toledo; which
in the time that Council is supposed to be held, was the least Kingdom in
Spain, and not so big as Yorkshire, and consequently improper to regulate all
the World, and especially this remote Kingdom of England. Beside, as this poor
Monk sets it down, it does inhibit Churchmen from being Hang-men, rather than
from being Judges, to condemn men to be thus mutilated and mangled in their
Members, an ordinary Punishment of the Goths and Vandals, who then lived in
Spain, but never heard of here with us of many years before the Reign of Hen.
II, and therefore not sitly pressed to drive Bishops from sitting as Peers in
the case of the Earl of Strafford, who is not to be sentenced to any mutilation
of Members. True it is, that in the Council it self, being the Eleventh Council
of Toledo, Can. 6. they are forbidden, Quod morte plectendum sit sententia
propria judicare, to sentence in any Cause that is to be punished with Death:
Whereas, in the Fourth Council of Toledo, Can. 31, under Sisinandus, not long
before, held anno 633, it is said, That the Kings do oftentimes commit to
Priests and Bishops their Judicature, Contra quoscunque Majestatis obnoxios,
against all Treasons; howbeit they are directed not to obey their King in this
particular, unless they have him bound by Oath to pardon the Party, in case
they shall find reason to mediate for him. And thus the Canon Law went in
Spain, but no where else in Christendom in that Age.

148. But these Bishops at Westminster. traveled not so far as Toledo, to fetch in
this Canon into their Synod, but took it out of Gratian, then in vogue, (for he
lived in the time of Hen. Beu-clerk, Grandfather to this Hen. II.) who in the
second part of his Decrees, Cap. de Clericis, says thus, Clericis in sacris
ordinibus constitutis ex council. Tolet. Judicium sanguinis agitaro non licet.
And so this Canon was fetched from Spain into these other parts of Europe,
above four hundred years after the first making thereof, upon this occasion.
Pope Gregory the Seventh, otherwise called Hildebrand, who lived in the time of
William the Conqueror, having so many deadly Quarrels against Hen. IV. Emperor
of Germany, to make his part good and strong, laid the first ground (which his
Successors in their Canons closely pursued) to draw the Bishops, and other
great Prelates of Germany, France, England, and Spain from their Lay-Soveraigns
and Leige-Lords, to depend wholly upon him, and so by color and pretense of
Ecclesiastical Immunities, withdrew them from the Services of their Princes, in
War and in Peace, and particularly from exercising all Places of Judicature in
the Civil Courts of Princes, to the which Offices they were by their Breeding
and Education more enabled, than the martial Lay-Lords of that rough Age, and
by their Fiefs and Baronies, which they held from Kings and Emperors,
particularly bound and obliged. And therefore you shall find, that whereas the
Bishops of this Island before the Conquest, did still join with the Thanes,
Aldermen, and Lay-Lords, in the making and executing of all Laws whatsoever,
touching deprivation of Life, and mutilation of Members: Yet soon after, when
the Norman and English Prelates, Lanfrank, Anselm, Becket, and the rest, began
to trade with Rome, and as Legati nati, to wed the Laws and Canons cried up in
Rome, and to plant them here in England, they withdrew by little and little our
Prelates from these Employments, and Dependencies upon the Kings of England;
and, under the color of Exemptions and Church-Immunities, erected in this Land
an Ecclesiastical Estate and Monarchy, depending wholly upon the Pope,
inhibiting them to exercise secular Employments, or to sit with the rest of the
Peers in Judicatures of Life and Members, otherwise than as they list
themselves; and hence principally did arise those great heats between our Rufus
and Anselm, which Eadmer speaks of, and those ancient Customs of this Kingdom,
which Hen. II. pressed upon Becket, in the Articles of Clarendon, that the
Prelates ought to be present in the King's Courts, etc. Which Pope Alexander, a
notable Boutefeu of those times in the Church of God, did tolerate, though not
approve of; as he apostyles that Article with his own Hand, to be shown to this
day in the M. S. extant in the Vatican Library. And although I shall not deny,
but the Popes did plead Scripture for this Inhibition (as they did for all
things else) and allude unto that place, 2 Timothy 3.4. which they backed with one
of the Canons of the Apostles, as they call them, the seventh in number. Yet it
is clear, their main Authority is fetched from this obscure Synod of Toledo,
where eighteen Bishops only were convened, under Bamba the Goth, who of a
Plowman was made a King, and of a King a Cloistered Monk; as you may see in the
History of Rodericus Santius, par. 2. c. 32. This is all the goodly Ground that
either Gratian in his Decrees, or Innocent III, in the Decretals, or Roger
Hoveden in his History, alleges against the Ecclesiastical Peers, their
sitting as Judges in Causes of Blood, to wit, this famous Gothish Council of
Toledo. The first that planted this Canon here in England was Stephen Langton a
Cardinal, the Pope's Creature, (as his Holiness was pleased to style him in his
Bull) and thrust upon the Sea of Canterbury by a Papal Provision, where he
continued in Rebellion against his Sovereign, as long as King John lived. This
Archbishop, under color of Ecclesiastical Immunity (for so this Canon is
marshalled by Linwood) at Osney near Oxford, did ordain; Ne quis Clericus
beneficiatus, vol in sacris Ordinibus constitutus praesumat interesse, ubi
judicium sanguinis tractatur, vel exerceatur. And this is the first Canon
broached in this Kingdom to this effect; that of Othobone being subsequent in
time, and a mere Foreign or Legantine Constitution: See it at large in Linwood,
Constit. lib. 3. ad sinem. And by virtue of a Branch of this very Constitution,
the now Archbishop, two years since, sined the Bishop of Gloucester in the
High Commission, because he had given way, in time of Pestilence only, that a
Sessions, a Judgment of Blood, might be kept in a sacred place, which was
likewise inhibited in this Canon. But this admits of a multitude of Answers.
First,

149. Quod haec dictio Clericus ex vi verbi non comprehendit Episcopum, Linwood
lib. 3. de locat is and conductis. Secondly the irregularity, incurred by
Judicature in Causes of Blood, is only Jure positivo, and therefore dispensable
by the Pope, says Covarruvias in Clemen. si furiosus, p. 2. com. 5. n. 1. and
here in England is dispensed with in Bishops by the King, who in his Writs or
Summons to the Parliament, commands the Lords Spiritual, without any exception
of Causes of Blood, to join in all Matters and Consultations whatsoever, with
the Temporal Peers of the Kingdom, their Summons being unto them a sufficient
Dispensation so to do. And Othobon himself, inhibiting other Clerks to use
these Secular Judicatures, has a Salvo to preserve the Privileges of our Lord
the King, whereby he may use any of their Services in that kind, when he shall
see cause, Tit. ne Clerici Juris. saec. exerceant. And Linwood upon that Text,
does instance in the Clerks of the Chancery, and others. Nor are these Writs,
that summon the Bishops, Dispensations only, but Mandates also: And those
Bishops have been fined at the Kings Bench, and elsewhere, that absented
themselves from Councils in Parliament without the King's special leave and
license first obtained. Thirdly, When they are forbidden, interesse, to be
present, the meaning is not (in the very Canons themselves, that they should go
out of the room; but only that they should not be present to add Authority,
Help, and Advice to any Sentence pronounced against a particular or individual
Person in cause of Blood, or mutilation. If he be present auctorizando,
consilium, opem, vel operam dando, then he contracts an irregularity, and no
otherwise, says our Linwood out of Innocentius. And the Canon reaches no
further than to him that shall pronounce Sentence of Death, or Mutilation upon
a particular Person: For Prelates that are of Counsel with the King in
Parliament, or otherwise, being demanded the Law in such, and such a Case
(without naming any individuum) may answer, generaliter loquendo, That Treason
is to be punished with Death, and a Counterseiter of the King's Coin. Hostien.
lib. 2. eap. de falls. monet. allowed by John Montague de Collatione
Parliamentorum, In Tracta. Doctor. Vol. 10. p. 121. Fourthly, These Canons are
not in force in England, to bind the King's Subjects, for several Reasons:
First, Because they are against his Majesty's Prerogative, as you may see it
clearly in the Articles of Clarendon, and the Writ of Summons, and therefore
abolished 25 H. 8. c. 8. It is his Majesty's Prerogative, declared at
Clarendon, that all such Ecclesiastical Peers, as hold of him by Barony, should
assist in the King's Judicatures, until the very actual pronouncing of a
Sentence of Blood. And this holds from Henry the First down to the latter end
of Queen Elizabeth, who employed Archbishop Whitgist as a Commissioner upon the
Life of the Earl of Essex, to keep him in Custody, and to examine him after
that Commotion in London. And to say that this Canon is confirmed by Common
Law, is a merry Tale; there being nothing in the Common Law that tends that
way. Secondly, It has been voted in the House of Commons, in this very Session
of Parliament, That no Canons since the Conquest, either introduced from Rome
by Legatine Power, or made in our Synods, had in any Age, nor yet have at this
present, any power to bind the Subjects of this Realm, unless they be confirmed
by Act of Parliament. Now these Canons, which inhibit the Presence of
Churchmen in Cause that concerns Life and Member, were never confirmed by any,
but seem to be impeach't by diverse and sundry Acts of Parliament. Thirdly, The
whole House of Peers have this very Session despised and set aside this Canon
Law, which some of the young Lords cry up again in the same Session, and in the
very same Cause, to take away the Votes of the Bishops, in the Case of the Earl
of Strafford. For by the same Canon Law that forbids Clergymen to Sentence,
they of that Coat are more strictly inhibited to give no Testimony in Causes of
Blood. Nee ettam potest esse test is vel tabellio in causa Sanguinis. Linw.
part 2. sol. 146. For no Man co-operates more in a Sentence of Death than the
Witnesses, upon whose Attestation the Sentence is chiefly past. Lopez pract.
crim. c. 98. distl. 21. and yet have the Lords admitted as Witnesses, produced
by the House of Commons against the Earl of Strafford, the Archbishops of
Canterbury and Armagh, with the Bishop of London: which Lords command now all
Bishops to withdraw in the agitation of the self same Case. Bishops, it seems,
may be Witnesses, to kill ont-right; but may not sit in the Discussion of the
Cause, to help, in case of Innocence, a distressed Nobleman. Whereas the very
Gothish Bishops, who first invented this Exclusion of Prelates from such
Judicatures, allow them to Vote, as long as there is any hope left of clearing
the Party, or gaining of Pardon. 4. Conc. Tol. Can. 31. And by the beginning of
that Canon, observe the use in Spain in that Age, Anno 633. as touching this
Doctrine, Saepe principes contra quoslibet majestatis obnoxios Sacerdotibus
negotia sua committunt; Binnius 4. Tom. Can. Edit. ult. p. 592. Lastly, In the
Case of Archbishop Abbot, all the great Civilians and Judges of the Land, as
Dr. Steward, Sir H. Martin, the Lord Chief Justice Hobart, and Judge Doderidge
(which two last were very well versed in the Canon Law) delivered positively
(when my self at first opposed them) That all Irregularities introduced by
Canons upon Ecclesiastical Persons, concerning matters of Blood, were taken
away by the Reformation of the Church of England, and were repugnant to the
Statute 25 II. 8. as restraining the King's most just Prerogative, to employ
his own Subjects in such Functions and Offices, as his Predecessors had done,
and to allow them those Privileges and Recreations, as by the Laws and Customs
of this Realm, they had formerly enjoyed; notwithstanding the Decree de Clerico
venatore, or the Constitution, nae Clerici Saeculare, etc. or any other in that
kind.

150. The only Objection which appears upon any Learning or Record, against the
Clergies Voting in this Kingdom in Causes of Blood, are two or three
Protestations, entered by the Bishops among the Records of the upper House of
Parliament, and some few Passages in the Law Books relating thereunto. The
Protestation the Lords now principally stand upon, is that of William Courtney
Archbishop of Canterbury, 11 Rich. 2. inserted in the Book of Privileges,
which Mr. Seldom collected for the Lords of the upper House. In the Margin
whereof that passage out of R. Hovenden, about which we spoke before about
Clergy-mens agitation of Judgments of Blood, is unluckily inserted, and for
want of due consideration, and some suspicion of partial carriage in the
Bishops, in the case of the Earl of Strafford, has been eagerly pressed upon
the Bishops by some of the Lords, in such an unusual and unaccustomed manner,
that if I my self, offering to speak to this Objection, had not voluntarily
withdrawn, the rest of the Bishops and I had been, without hearing, voted out
of the House, in the agitation of a Splinter of that Cause of the Earl of
Strafford's, which came not near any matter of Blood. An act never done before
in that honorable House, and ready to be executed suddenly, without the least
consideration of the merit of the Cause. The only words insisted upon in the
Protestation of Courtney's, are these; Because in this present Parliament
certain matters are agitated, whereat it is not lawsul for us, according to the
Prescript of holy Canons, to be present. -- And by and by after they say --
These matters are such, in the which, Nec possumus, nec debemus interesse --
This is the Protestation most stood upon. That of Archbishop Arundel 21 Rich.
2. is not so full and ample as this of Courtney's: For the Bishops going forth
left their Proxies with the Lay-Lords, and consequently continued present in
Judicature in the eye and construction of the Law. Therefore I apply my Answers
to Courtney's Protestation principally; which are diverse, and fit to be weighed
and pondered. First, I do observe that Bishops did never protest or withdraw in
Causes of Blood, but only under the unsteddy Reign of Richard the Second. Never
before, nor after the time of that unfortunate King, to this present
Parliament, for ought appears in Record or History. And that one Swallow should
make us such a Spring, and one Omission should create a Law or Custom against
so many Actions of the English Prelates, under so many Kings before, so many
Kings and Queens after that young Prince, seems to me a strange Doctrine;
especially when I consider, that by the Rules of the Civil and Common Law, a
Protestation dies with the death of him that makes it, or is regularly vacated
and disannulled, Per contrarium actum subsequentem protestationem, by any one
subsequent act varying from the tenor of the said Protestation. Regul. Juris.
Bap. Nicol. part. 2. Now that you may know how the Prelates carried themselves
in this point, and actually voted in Causes of Treason, and sometimes to Blood,
before Richard the Second, I refer me to what I cited before out of Mr. Seldom,
and he out of Stephanides, concerning Becket condemned by his Peers
Ecclesiastical and Temporal, 15 H. 2. Archbishop Stratford acquitted of High
Treason in Parliament by four Prelates, four Earls, and four Barons under
Edward the Third. Antiq. Britan. p. 223. There was 4 Ed. 3. Roger de Mortimer.
Berisford, Travers, and others adjudged Traitors by Bishops as well as other
Peers. 16 Ed. 3. Thomas de Berkely was acquitted of Treason in pleno
Parliamento. And especially I refer my self to Roll 21 Rich. 2. Number. 10. which
averrs, That Judgments and Ordinances, in the time of that King's Progenitors,
had been avoided by the absence of the Clergy; which makes the Commons there to
pray, that the Prelates would make a Procurator, by whom they might in all
Judgments of Blood, be at the least legally, if they durst not be bodily
present in such Judicatures. And for the practice since the Reign of Rich. II.
be it observed, that in the fifth of Hen IV. the Commons thank the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, for their good and rightful Judgment in freeing the
Earl of Northumberland from Treason. 3 Hen. 5. The Commons pray a Confirmation
of the Judgment given upon the E. of Cambridge, by the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal. 5 H. 5. Sir J. Oldcastle is attainted of Treason and Heresy by the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal. 28 H. 6. The Duke of Suffolk is charged with
Treason before the Lords Spiritual and Temporal. 31 H. 6. The Earl of Devon in
like sort: and so down to the Earl of Bristol's Case 22 Maii 1626. ten Bishops
are joined with ten Earls, and ten Barons, in the disquisition and agitation of
that supposed Treason. I leave it therefore to any indifferent Judgment,
Whether these Protestations made all under one Kings Reign, dying with the
Parties that made them, can void a Right and Custom, grounded on a continual
Practice to the contrary, in all other Trials that have been since the
Conquest, to this present Parliament.

151. Secondly, It is fitting we know the nature of a Protestation, which some
may mistake: Protestatio est animi nostri declaratio, juris acquirendi, vel
conservandi, vel damnum depellendi causa facta, says Spiegle, Calvin, and all
the Civilians. No Protestation is made by any man in his Wits, to destroy his
own Right, and much less another man's, but to acquire, or preserve some Right,
or to avoid and put off some Wrong, that was like to happen to the Party or
Parties that make the Protestation: As here in Courtney's Protestation, the
Prelates in the first place conceive a Right and Power they had voluntarily to
absent themselves, while some matters were treated of at that time in the House
of Lords, which by the Canon Law (the Breach whereof the Popes of Rome did
vindicate in those times, with far more Severity than they did the
Transgressions of the Law of God) they were not suffered to be present at, not
for want of Right to be there in all Causes, but for fear of Papal Censures. In
the next place, they did preserve their former Right as Peers, which they still
had, (though voluntarily absenting themselves) More solito interessendi,
considerandi, tyactandi, ordinandi, and definiendi, all things without
exception acted and executed in that Parliament. And, in the last place, they
protest against any loss of right of being or voting in Parliament, that could
befall them, for this voluntary absenting of themselves at this time. And where
in all this Protestation is there one word to prejudice their Successors, or to
authorize any Peer to command his fellow-Peer, called thither by the same Writ
of Summons that himself is, and by more ancient Prescription, to withdraw and
go out from this Common Council of the Kingdom? Thirdly, We do not certainly
know what these matters were whereat Archbishop Courtney conceived the Prelates
neither could nor ought to be present: These matters are left in loose and
general words in that Protestation. Some conceive indeed it was at the
Condemnation of Tressilian, Brambre, L. Beauchamp, and others, Ant. Brit. p.
286. But the Notes of Privileges belonging to the Lords, collected by Mr.
Seldom, do, with more reason a great deal, assign this going forth of the
Prelates, to be occasioned by certain Appeals of Treason, preferred in that
Parliament by the Duke of Gloucester, against Alexander Archbishop of York,
whom the Popish Canons of those Times (as you know) exempted, as a sacred
person, from the cognizance of King or Parliament; and therefore the rest of
the Bishops, as the Squares went then, neither could nor ought to be present,
and Parties, to break the Exemptions, Immunities, and Privileges of that great
Prelate. But the Earl of Strafford is not the Archbishop, but the President of
York; and to challenge any such Exemptions and Immunities at this time, from
the cognizance of King and Parliament, amounts to little less than Treason:
Therefore this Protestation is very unseasonably urged, to thrust out any
Protestant Prelate from voting in Parliament. Lastly, In the Civil and
Canon Law, (for the Law of this Land knows it not) a Protestation is but a
Testation or witnessing beforehand of a man's own Mind or Opinion, whereby
they that protest, provide to save and presorve their own Right, for the time
to come. It concludes no more bend themselves, no Stranger to the Act, no
Successor; but, if it be admitted, sticks as inherent in the singular and
individual person, until either the Party dies or the Protestation be drawn and
revoked. Therefore, what is a Protestation made by Will. Courtney to Will.
Laud? Or by Tho. Arundel to bind Tho. Morton? And, what one Rule in the
Common Law of the Land, in the Journa^-Books, or in the Records of the Tower,
can be produced to exclude the Lords Spiritual from sitting and voting in
Causes of Blood? Sometimes by the great Favor of the King, Lords, and Commons,
(not otherwise) they were permitted to absent themselves, never before now
commanded by the Lay-Lords to forbear their Votes in any Cause that was
agitated in Parliament: So our Law Books say, That the Prelates, by the
Canon Law, may make a Procurator in Parliament, when a Peer is to be tried:
Which is enough to show their Right thereunto. This is to be seen 10 Edw. IV.
f. 6. placit. 17. And, That it is only the Canon Law that inhibits them to vote
in Sanguinary Causes. Stamford, Pleas of the Crown. f. 59. And, says Stamford,
the Canon Law is a distinct and separated notion, and not grown in his Age to
any such Usance or Custom, as made it Common Law or the Law of the Land.

152. Coming now to an end, it moves me little what some object, That many
worthy Fathers of this Church-reformed, and Bishop Andrews among the rest, did
forbear to vote in Causes of Blood, and voluntarily retired out of the House,
if such things came in question; nor did offer to enter any Protestation. I do
not doubt, but they had pious Affections in it, though they did not fully
ponder what they did: I have heard, that a main Reason was that of the Record
and Statute of 11 Rich. II. That it is the honesty of that Calling not to
intermeddle in matters of Blood. Now the French word Honesty signifies Decency
and Comeliness: As though it were a butcherly and a loathsome matter to be a
Judge, or to do Right upon a Malefactor, to Death, or loss of Members: But this
is an imaginary Decency, never known in Nature or Scripture, (as I said before)
but begotten by Tradition in the dark Foggs and Mists of Popery: Such an
Honesty of the Clergy it was to have a shaven Crown, to depend on the Pope, to
plead Exemptions, and to resuse to answer for Felonies in the King's Courts.
All these were esteemed in those days the Honesty of the Clergy: And such an
Honesty it was in the Prelates of England, in the loose Reign of Rich. II, to
absent themselves when they listed from the Aslembly of the Estate, contrary to
the King's Command in the Writ of Summons, and to the Duties of their places as
Peers of Parliament: Yet they had more insight into what they did, than some of
our Bishops; for they never offered to retire themselves in those days, before
their Protestation was benignly received, and suffered to be entered upon the
Parliament-Roll, by the King, the Lords, and the House of Commons. I know those
excellent men, that are with God, proposed other Scruples to themselves; they
doubted not of the Legality or Comeliness, for an Ecclesiastical Peer of the
Kingdom of England to vote in a Judgment of Blood; they did it continually in
passing all Appeals and Attainders in Parliament; but it startled them, because
it is not the practice of Prelates in other parts of the Christian Church so to
do, and thought it better to avoid Scandal, and the Talk of other Nations. That
there being in the High Court of Parliament, and Star Chamber, Judges enough
beside them, they might, without any prejudice to their King and Country,
forbear voting in those Judicatures; somewhat the rather, because all our
Bishops in England are Divines, and Preachers of the Gospel, and consequently
to be employed in Mercy, rather than in Judgment; who never touch upon the
sharpness of the Law, unless it be to prepare men's Hearts to relish and receive
the comfort of the Gospel. Let the Piety then, and the Good-meaning of those
grave Fathers be praised; but I say, they forgot their Duty to the Writ of the
King's Summons, and the use and weight of their Place. And now, to close. I
protest, without vaunting, I cannot perceive how this can be answered, which I
have digested together: And if so many Bishops cannot obtain their Right, which
is so clear on their side, God send the Earl of Strafford better Justice, who
is but a single Peer.

153. Blame not my Book, that there is so much of this Argument; I hope the
Ignorant will not read it at all, but let a knowing man read it again, and when
he has better observed it, he will think it short. Some History-spoilers have
detracted from our Bishop, that though he pleaded much in Parliament, to his
own Peril, in the behalf of E. Strafford, yet he wrought upon the King to
consent to give way to his beheading. Says our Arch-Poet Spencer, lib. 3. Can.
1. st. 10. -- Great hazard were it, and Adventure fond,
To lose long-gotten Honor with one evil Hand.
But he shall lose no Honor in this; for first, as Nazian. Or. 27, rejects
them that had raised an ill Report of him, whom he praised, (...) can you
prove, that they were sound in their mind that said so? if any will believe it
from such authors, a good man has lost his thanks: Ego quod been fec^ male
feci, quia amor mutavit locum: Plautus. That which was well done is ill done,
because it is not lovingly requited. Hear all, and judge equally. Both the
Houses of Lords and Commons, by most Voices, found the Earl guilty of Treason;
they made the greater Quire, but those few that absolved him sung better. The
King interceded by himself, by the Prince his Son, to save him, craved it with
Cap in Hand: -- Being foundered in his Power, he could go no further; the
Subjects denied their Sovereign the Life of one Man, so Strafford must be cast
away, Opimii calamitas turpitudo Po. Romans non judicium fuit, Cic. pro Plancio,
Whose Calamity is the shame of English Justice. His Majesty, for diverse days,
could not find in his Heart to set his Hand to the Warrant for Execution, for
Conscience dresseth it self by its own light. And I would he had been as
constant to his own Judgment in other things, that we might remember it to his
Honor; as Capitolinus testifies for Maximus, Non aliis potius quam sibi
credidit. The fate of it was, that the Parliament would not grant Mercy to the
Earl, and would have Justice from the King, according to their Sentence,
whether he would or no: They threaten (and were as good as their Word) to sit
idle, and do nothing for public Safety and Settlement, the whole Realm being
in distraction till the Stroke was struck: All the Palace-Yard and Hall were
daily full of Mutineers and Outcries; His Majesty's Person was in danger; the
roguy Off-scum in the Streets of Westminster talked so loud, that there was
cause to dread it: Though there is nothing more formidable, than to fear any
thing more than God, yet the most eminent Lords of the Council persuaded His
Majesty to make no longer resistance, Placeat quodcunque necesse est, Lucan
lib. 4. Not he, but Necessity should be guilty of it. If he did refuse to
concur with the Parliament, nay, if he took more time to deliberate upon it,
it would be worse for the Earl, and he would come to a more unhappy Death; for
an Hellish Contrivance was resolved upon, just as in St. Paul's case, Acts
23.15. the Zealots, that had vowed Paul's death, laid the Plot with the Priests
and Elders, to signisie to the Captain to bring him down, to enquire somewhat
more perfectly concerning him, and ere ever he came near, they would fall upon
him. The condemned Earl, when he heard of this, was no longer fond of Lise, but
sent word to the King, that he was well prepared for his End, and would not his
gracious Majest y should disquiet himself to save a ruined Vessel that must
sink. A valiant Message, and sit for so great a Spirit. Loginus notes acutely,
that when Ajax was to combat with Hector, he begged some things of such Gods as
he called upon, but to escape with life was not in his Prayer; (...). It was
beneath a Grecian Hero to desire Life. It being therefore to no purpose to
dispute what was the best Remedy to save this Lord, when there was none at all,
the House of Lords nominate four Prelates to go to His Majesty, to propound how
the Tenderness of his Conscience might safely wade through this insuperable
dissiculty; these were L. Primate Usher, with the Bishops Morton, Williams,
Potter. There was none of those four, but would have gone through Fire and
Water, as we say, to save the Party; which being now a thing beyond Wit and
Power, they state the Question thus to the King, (sure I am of the Truth,
because I had it from the three former) Whether, as His Majesty refers his own
Judgment to his Judges, (in whose Person they act) in Court of Oyer,
King's Bench, Assize, and in Cause of Life and Death, and it lies on them if an
innocent man suffer; so why may not His Majesty satisfy his Conscience in the
present matter, that since competent Judges in Law had awarded, that they found
Guilt of Treason in the Earl, that he may susser that Judgment to stand, though
in his private mind he was not satisfied that the Lord Strafford was criminous,
for that juggling and corrupt dealing which he suspected in the Proofs at the
Trial, and let the Blame lie upon them who sat upon the Tribunal of Life and
Death? The four Bishops were all for the ashrmative, and the Earl took it so
little in ill part, that Reverend Armagh prayed with him, preached to him, gave
him his last Viaticum, and was with him on the Scassoid, as a Ghostly Father,
till his Head was severed from his Body.

154. Indeed His Majesty, in his (...), does seem to represent it as if he did
not approve what he received from the four Bishops at that Consultation. And I
will leave such good men to his Censure, rather than contradict any thing in
that most pious, most ravishing Book, which deserves as much as Tully said of
Crassus in his Brutus, Ipsum melius potuisse scribere, alium, ut arbitror,
neminem. Perhaps the King could have wrote better, but I think no man else in
the three Kingdoms. What a venomous Spirit is in that Serpent Milton, that
blackmouth'd Zoilus, that blows his Vipers Breath upon those immortal
Devotions, from the beginning to the end! This is he that wrote with all
Irreverence against the Fathers of our Church, and showed as little Duty to his
Father that begat him: The same that wrote for the Pharisees, That it was
lawful for a man to put away his Wife for every cause; and against Christ, for
not allowing Divorces: The same, O horrid! that desended the lawfulness of the
greatest Crime that ever was committed, to put our thrice-excellent King to
death: A petty Schoolboy Scribler, that durst graple in such a Cause with the
Prince of the learned men of his Age, Salmasius. (...) as Eunapius says of
Ammonius, Plutarch's Scholar in Egypt, the Delight, the Music of all
Knowledge, who would have scorned to drop a Pen-full of Ink against so base an
Adversary, but to maintain the Honor of so good a King, whose Merit he adorns
with this Praise, p. 237. Con. Milt. De quo si quis dixerit omnia bona, vix pro
suis meritis satis illum ornaret. Get thee behind me Milton, thou savourest not
the things that be of Truth and Loyalty, but of Pride, Bitterness, and
Falsehood. There will be a time, though such a Shimei, a dead Dog in Abishai's
Phrase, escape for a while, yet he, and the Enemies of my Lord the King, will
fall into the Hands of the Avenger of Blood: And that Book, the Picture of King
Charles's innocent Soul, which he has blemished with vile Reproaches, will be
the Vade Mecum of godly persons, and be always about them like a Guardian
Angel. It is no marvel if this Canker-worm Milton is more lavish in his
Writings than any man, to justify the beheading of Strafford, whom good men
prayed for alive, and pitied him dead: So did the four Bishops, that I may
digress no longer, who poured the best Oil they could into the King's
Conscience, to give him Peace within himself when the main Cause was desperate,
and common Fury would compel him in the end to sacrifice this Earl to the
Parliament. Things will give better Counsel to men than men to things. But a
Collector of Notes, W. Sa. has a sling at the Bishop of Lincoln, his quill
hits him, but hurts him no more, than if it were a Shuttle-cock with four
Feathers. Forsooth, when those four Bishops were parting from the King, he put
a Paper into His Majesty's Hand, and that could be nothing else, but an
Inflammatory of Reasons, more than were heard in public, left the King should
cool, and not set his Hand to the fatal Warrant. This Author was once in the
right, p. 154. of his own Book, That it becomes an Historian, in dubious
Relations, to admit the most Christian and Charitable. Pessume it is, optime
hercle dicitis, Plaut. in Pen. But this Case needs no Favor: The Paper which
that Bishop put into the King's Hands (as he told me the next morning) was an
humble Advice to His Majesty, why he should not give the Parliament an
indesinite time to sit, till both Houses consented to their own dissolution.
Was not this faithful Counsel? For what could the King see in them, who had
been so outrageous already, to stand out the trial of their wavering Faith?
Trust should make men true. Says Livy, lib. 22. Vult sibi quisque credi, and
habita fides ipsam plerumque fidem obligat. But a number of these men cared not
for moral Principles, they were all for the Scriptures, and they read them by
new Lights: The King had too much Faith, and they had no Good Works. What
magnanimous Prince would bow so low, to give the Keys of Government to so many
Malcontents, and to stand to their Courtesy, when they would resign them
again? Nec missura cutem nisi plena cruoris hirudo, Hor. Art. Poet. It could be
for no small time that they itch'd to hold the Reins, and having governed so
long, they would never be brought to obey. The Fox in the Fable crept into a
Granary of Corn, and staid till his Belly was so full, that he could not get
out. It is a wise Note of Spartianus upon Did. Julianus, Reprchensus in eo
praecipue, quod ques rogere auctoritate sua debuit, praesules sibi ipse fecit.
When the prudent Augustus saw he could not shake off a standing Senate, he saw
no way, but to divide the Provinces of the Empire between him and them, and to
take the worst half, the remotest to himself: But did the King think to escape
so well with an indissoluble Parliament? Balsack writes profanely, That the
World ought not to end, until the French King's Race should fail. And it proved
by this concession, to continue the two Houses to sit as long as they would,
that the Glory of the Crown should fail, before they would endure their old
Stump to be rooted up. When a Swarm of luxurious men, that made love to
Penelope, wasted Ulysses's Substance in his absence, Homer breaks out, Odyss
(...) Let no King henceforth be gracious and kind, for he shall fare as ill as
the worst. So let no King suppose to oblige his Subjects with the greatest
Trust that was ever committed to men, for he shall speed the worse for his
considence in them. The Bishop of Lincoln, but two days before, asked the King,
If his wise Father would have suffered such a thing to be demanded, much left
have granted it? And, Whether it would be possible for his truest Lieges to do
him Service any more? So bold he was, and plied his good Master to the last
with new Motives to dehort him from it. I know not what ill Star scouled upon
so good a King, to listen to no good Counsel in that point. There was one that
thrust him on, whose Advices were more loving than lucky. And on a Sunday, May
9. he signed the indefinite continuance of the Parliament, (as it is commonly
voiced) and Strafford's Execution, with the same drop of Ink. A sad Subject!
and as I found it, so I leave it.

155. Wisdom and Reason were not wanting in that noble King; Fortune was.
Darius, called Codomann, was the best of all the Kings of the Porsian Race,
from Cyrus downward to himself, yet under him the Persian Monarchy was ruined,
and fell to the Macedonians; Destinatus sorti suae, and jam nullius salubris
consilii patiens, says the Historian, Curt. lib. 5. It cuts my Heart, to say
that this agrees to a far better Monarch than himself. King Charles makes ready
in the Summer for a Journey into Scotland, hoping to bring over the Seditious
there to love him, with Sweetness and Caresses, by Bounties, as he was able, by
Honors bestowed on some, by Promises, and by the gracious Interview of his
presence; for we owe Affection naturally to them that offer us Love. Or, if all
this wrought not, he was so oversway'd with Disdain to be near to Westminster,
where his Person, his Justice, his Court, or his Clergy were slandered every
hour, that he would ride far enough from the strife of Tongues, and not be near
the Furnace, where the steam was so hot. I heard one of his Bedchamber say,
That nothing made him remove so far from his Court and Council, as the
tediousness of Intelligence brought to him every minute, with variety of
Glosses and Opinions upon it. As Adrian the Emperor said in his last Sickness,
that he had too many Physicians about him to be cured; so our King thought he
had too many Counselors at London to take distinct Advice. Walk in the
Spring-Garden in May, and what Bird can you listen to particularly, when there
is not a Bough but has a Bird upon it, that warbles his own Note? There is
pleasure in that: But those that pressed so thick upon the King, came with some
ill Augury: Seraque fatidici cecinerunt omnia vates, AEn. lib. 5. Howsoever,
Home is homely, says the Country Adagy; and this Journey to Scotland was not
begun in a good day. There was never any Parliament like it which now fate,
that bewrayed openly so many foolish Fears, raked up in the cold Embers of
Distrust and Guiltiness; Quae pueri in tenebris pavitant, sing untque futura:
Therefore a Jealousy was straightway in their Heads, that this Journey could
not be good for them. Why? What can a King do, to be good for himself, and
pernicious to his People? Well said the Persians, Xen. lib. 8. Cyr. paed. (...)
cyrus can undertake nothing, and make it good for himself alone, and not for
us. But upon their Jealousy they resolve to give the King such a Welcome home,
as should offend him. O Hypocrites! that seem to be afraid of the King, when
none had more cause than he to be afraid of them. Watchful Lincoln had dived
into the Secrets of the Masters of the private Assembly: Hannibali omnia
hostium non secus ac sua nota sunt, Live. lib. 22. Every man knows his own mind;
a wise man, like Hannibal, will know his Enemies if he can. The Bishop coming
to the King, besought His Majesty, that for his sake he would put off his
Scotch Journey to another season: His written Notes, in my keeping, are long
and impersect; the sum is thus: He besought His Majesty to consider, that the
Scotts were Sear-boughs, not to be bent; whatsoever he said to them, they would
reveal it to their Cronies at Westminster, for there was a Trade and Exchange
that ran currently among them: Some of them, and not the meanest, make it a
slight thing to be persidious, and will laugh at it, when they are derected:
They have distinctions for it from their Kirk, which straddle so wide, that
flat Contraries, Yea and Nay, Truth and Lies, may run between them. K. James
the Fourth had the knack of such Devices, who having made a strong League of
Peace with Harry VIII. and yet invaded England with an Army (remember it was at
Flodden-Field, Drummond. p 142.) said, He did not break his League with
England, but departed from it. The Bishop prayed the King to remember, that
those Lowns had been in Hubbubs, and Covenants, and Arms two years together;
could they be converted of a sudden without a Miracle? Integrum non est ad
virtutem semel reliclam remigrare, Cic. Lelius. It will be a long time before
Rebels find their Fidelity again, when they have lost it. They have showed
their Despite so lately, that it is too soon to offer them Courtesy; they
know in what condition your Majesty is, and they will not take it for Kindness,
but Fear. Keep near to the Parliament, all the Work is within those Walls; win
them man by man, inch by inch, somewhat may be gotten out of small pieces of
business, nothing out of supervacaneous. And, Sir, says he, I would it were not
true that I shall tell you, Some of the Commons are preparing a Declaration to
make the Actions of your Government odious: if you gallop to Scotland, they
will post as fast, to draw up this biting Remonstrance: Stir not till you have
mitigated the grand Contrivers with some Preferments But is this credible, says
the King? Judge you of that Sir, says the Bishop, when a Servant of Pymm 's (in
whose Master's House all this is molded) came to me, to know of me in what
terms I was contented to have mine own Case in Star Chamber exhibited among
other Irregularities? And I had much ado to keep my Name, and what concerns me,
out of these Quotations; but I obtained that of the fellow, and a Promise to do
me more Service, to know all they have in contrivance, with a few Sweetbreads
that I gave him out of my Purse. What is there in all that the Bishop said,
especially in the last touch, that looked not like sober Warning? Yet nothing
was heeded: The King saw Scotland, and I know not what he brought thence,
unless it were matter to charge the five Members of Treason, who were
priviledg'd from it with a Mischief. His Majesty being returned to London, Nov.
26. That which the Commons called The Remonstrance of the state of the Kingdom,
came forth by their Vote, December. 15. to besoil His Majesly's Reign with
studied bitterness: And this was a Night-work, and held the Members Debate all
Wednesday night, and till three of the Clock in the Thursday morning. Synesius
spoke his worst of Trypho's Tribunal, Lib. de Prove. (...) he did not administer
justice in the daytime, but in the night; a time more proper for thieves to go
to work, and for the beasts of the forest to come out of their dens, and get
their prey. if the loyal part had staid it out (who appeared the greater number
in the beginning of the question) they had cast it out for a vile desamation;
but the one half of that part had slunk away, and were gone to bed. as st.
Peter stood to his Master stoutly till midnight, but railed him by the second
crowing of the Cock. If these had kept the wise Rules of the Roman Senate, the
one part had been frustrate in all they obtained in the dead of the night, and
long after. Says Budaeus, Senatus consultum ante exortum, and post occasum
solis nullum fait, lib. 1. in Pand. p. 231. And the other part had been fined
for departing away: Senatori qui non aderit, aut causa, aut culpa esto, Cic. de
Leg. But their Apology is, That those were no Juridical hours, either for a
Roman or an English Senate; Birds of Day keep not time with Screetch-owls. But
these Libertines had leave to sit as long as they would by night or day. Magna
sumendo majora praesumimus, Sym. Ep. p. 9. Great Concessions are the cause of
greater Presumptions.

156. During some part of the time that the King was in the North, Miseries
came trooping all at once upon the Church: The Reverend Fathers every day
libelled and defamed in the Press, durst not come in to help: The Times did
make it appear what Blood was about men's Hearts: They that feared to diversifie
from the received Doctrine and Discipline of the Church before, dreading
Ecclesiastical Consistories, and the High Commission Court, increased into so
many Sects almost as there were Parishes in England. And as Aventine said, lib.
8. Annal. of the Schoolmen newly sprung up in his days, Singulae sectae judicio
multarum sectarum stultitiae cowvincuntur. But what were we the better, when
every Spark kindled another, to make a general Combustion? Our Case in God's
House was as bad as that of the Gauls in Caesar's time, lib. 6. Bell. Gal. Non
solum in omnibus civitatibus, atque in omnibus page is partibusque sed in
singulis domibus factiones sunt. The Parliament, which saw the Body of Christ
wounded, looked on, and passed by on the other side, Luke 10.32. as if they did
but smile at the variety of Throngs and Dispositions. I think they durst net
pour in Wine or Oil to heal the Wounds of Religion, for that reason which Dr.
Owen gives, Praef. to Vind. p. 36. For by adhering to one Sect professedly,
they should engage all the rest against them. Only Lincoln, for all this
universal Contempt of Episcopacy, visited his great Diocese in October, not by
his Chancellor, but in his own person; Naequid expectes amicos, quod tute agere
possies, so cited out of Ennius, Trust not to your Friends when you can do your
Work your self. A Bishop is lazy that does his Duty by a Proxy. Pontificium
significat and potestatem and officium, says a Critic, Heral. in Arnob. p.
115. The Etymology of a Pontificate imports Power and Office. They are both
Yoke-fellows. Says another Critic, and a good Judge indeed, Salmas. in Solin.
(...), in the Age of Christian Emperors, were Visitors, that went from Church
to Church, like Paul and Barnabas, to set things in order, who long before that
were Physicians, that were sent from Village to Village, to cure the Sick. This
Labor our Bishop undertook personally, to heal the Maladies of Brainsick
Distempers at Boston, Lester, Huntington, Bedford, Hitchin, the last Visitation
that was held in either Province to this day: And God grant he might not say as
Synesius did of his Diocese of Ptolomais, when he and all the Bishops of Egypt
were ejected by a conquering Party, (...) in (...). O my Ptolomais! am I the
last Bishop that ever thou shall have? But I hope better things: Hope is the
common Revenue of the Distressed, they have much of that, who have nothing
else. I go on with our Bishop, who so long as he was in Place, and for a while
that his Words were remembered, brought those Counties to a handsome state of
quietness: Cocus magnum abenum, quando fervet, paula confutat trua. When a
Cauldron of hot Liquor boils, and is ready to run over, a Cook stays it, by
casting in a Ladle of cold Water. No man could comprize his Exhortations in
better Harmony than this Orator, and set several Instruments in tune one to
another, and the Voice to them all: Eloquium tot lumina clausit, Meta. l. -- as
Mercury lulled Argos asleep with all his Eyes; for, says he, much to this
meaning, Countrymen and Neighbors, whither do you wander? Here are your lawful
Ministers present, to whom of late you do not refort, I hear, but to
Tub-preachers in Conventicles. There is a Penalty for this, and no Power can
protect you against the Statutes in force, which are not yet repealed, but you
are bound in Conscience to keep those Laws, which are not Fetters upon your
Hands, but Bracelets; they are the Vote of all the People in the
Representatives of your Forefathers; and you are obliged, as good and honest
men, to maintain what your selves have done. It is not possible that all your
Disagreements blown abroad should incorporate: then either you will devour your
selves with Despite at last, or Strangers will de^ us all: Dumque esse
putamus, -- Nos facimus miseros, Grot. Poem. Lock back from the beginning of Q:
Elizabeth's Reign to this day; Can you wish the Gespel to frand better against
the Church of Rome than it has done so long under the Bishop., (...), and
Canons? That flattering word Liberty puts our whole frame out of joyur: Non
dominari instar servitutis est; Many of the lowest fortune are so proud, that
they complain of Servitude, if they may not govern, nay, if they may not
domineer. Out of this Idol of imaginary Liberty, which you worship, you will
make so many Masters to your selves, that we shall be all Slaves. It is a
popular word, but in the abusive sonce of it like Homer 's Moly, black in the
Root, though white in the Flower. They that live in the lower Orb of Obedience,
please God as much as their Rulers, and shall be blessed alike, if they quietly
follow the motion of the higher Sphere of Authority. Our Doctrine is consonant
to the Consessions of all Reformed Churches, and every Nation enjoy their own
Ceremonies without opposition, only we excepted They are wiser than we, who
consider duly, that they are the greater things of Faith and a Holy Life, for
which we shall be tried before the Judgment of Christ, and not for a sew
unvaluable Rites of Circumstance and Comeliness, which yet cannot well be
spared. My Brethren I here can tell you, out of Naz. Orat. 23. that Hero, a
peaceable Bishop, said often, (...) that piety consisted not in small things.
If you require more Justice from Christian Counts, or that scandalous and dumb
Ministers should be displaced, it may be done without Sedition: But because you
think you do not find so much Good as you looked for in the old way, you would
set up a new one, not foreseeing how much evil you shall find in that: Non quod
habet numerat, tantum quod non habet optat, Manil. lib. 4. But let me tell you,
you will quickly love the Winding Sheet of the old Wedlock, better than the
Marriage-sheets of the new. Enjoy that real Blessing which you possess, rather
than an Utopia, found no where but in the Distempers of the Brain. A little
small Meney in the Purse is better than a dream of Gold; and a Cottage to live
in, is better than a Castle in the Air. First seek for Piety to God, Loyalty to
the King, and Peace with all men, and all things else will be added unto you.
These were the Lenitives with which the Bishop prevailed more than could have
been done with Censures and Menaces. As in the Old Testament a Cake of
unleavened Bread was better made ready with Ashes than with Fire. Beside, the
more hurt they could do, the less to be forced to Extremity. And marvel not, if
a man of so losty a Spirit could humble himself so far, as to speak so
correctedly in such Auditories, full of ignoble Sectaries and high-shone
Clowns: For, even Alexander taking the Kingdom upon him after the murder of
his Father Philip, Diodor. lib. 17. p. 487. (...), was fain to collogue with
the People, to get their Benevolence with fair words: And he that gets a good
Bargain with Courtly Language, buys it with Money which is soon paid, and
quickly told.

157. No sooner had our Bishop dispatched his Visitation, and was come again to
sit in the face of the Parliament, but he heard of a muttering against him from
the Lower House, not only for visiting his Diocese in such a time of
unsettlement, but because he had said in diverse places, That no Power could
protect them against Statutes still in force, that sell into Disorders and
Deviations against them. So he took his opportunity, at a Conserence that was
between the two Houses in the Painted Chamber, as well to justify the labor
he had undergone to uphold the Rights of holy Government, as to silence them
that were unlicens'd Preachers, and presumed to say and do what they would, as
if all Government were dissolved: Non minus turpe est sua relinquere, quam in
aliena invadere injust um and ambitiosum, Salust. Bell. Jug. He maintained he
had done God good Service to unmask them to their shame, that were ignorant
Laics, yet preached privately and publicly, to the corruption and dishonor
of the Gospel. Nay, all would be Teachers in the gatherings of the Sectaries,
scarce a Mute in the Alphabet of these new Christians, but all Vowels. Every
one puts Hand to Christ's Plough, that neither know Seed, Soil, nor Season.
Soldiers, as the Heathen feign, may come up like Cadmus Teeth, Seed in the
Morning, and grow Men by Noon: (...), Synes. Dio. Sativos Theologos nulla
hactenus fabula prodigiose finxit. Nay, these Praedicants were never so much as
potentially Seed, but Mushrooms. Christ is brought in, Luke 2.46. being but
Twelve years old, sitting in the midst of the Doctors, hearing and asking
Questions, Ne infirmus quis docere audeat, si ille puer doceri interrogando
voluit, Montag. Orig. par. 2. p. 299. Christ could learn nothing of them, but
we learn of him, that ignorant men must not presume to teach, since he that
knew all things conformed himself to our Weakness, as if being young, he would
be taught by Questions. It is a lame Excuse to say in the behalf of some of
these Upstarts, that they are gifted men: Who reports this, but such as are as
blind as themselves? They have bold Foreheads, strong Lungs, and talk loud:
(...), Plut. 8. Sympos. An empty Cask will make a great sound if you knock upon
it: They have sounded it sweetly, when their Disciples are Anabaptists,
Familists, Brownists, Antinomians, Socinians, Adamites, any thing but Orthodox
Christians; yet a world of these unstable People flock after these
Coachmen-preachers, Watchmaking-preachers, Barber-preachers, and such addle
headed Companions. Pliny says of Dates, taken just at their ripeness, lib. 13.
c. 4. Tanta est musteis suavitas, ut fims mandendi non nisi periculo fiat: So
^entices and Country-folk hunt after these Teachers, and are ready to burst
their Bellies with new Dates. But worst of all, these silly Bawle^s qualifying
themselves for the Peoples Favor, vent such Politics, as are by odds the most
dangerous part of their Discourses, encroaching so far upon Allegiance, that
they cut off all Duty which St. Paul would have given to the higher Powers.
But, what if they were guilty of such Gists as some would seem to observe in
them? Is there nothing else that goes to the making of a Minister of God's
Word? The Woman that reckoned the Charge of her Brewing, forgot the Malt, that
cost most; so you reckon their fitness to preach upon the score of their Gifts;
but, Where is their Calling? Where is their Ordination? Cooks or Butchers have
a Gift to dress a Beast, yet God would admit none but Priests to make ready his
Sacrifice. And if you mean by Gifts Learning and Knowledge, I am persuaded if
these your Chaplains had them, they would give them away again if they could:
Learning is that which they decry, as a mark of the Beast; Qui omnes sui
similes esse cupiunt, ut privata e^runt inscitia sub c^mmuni delitescat, says
Erasmus. I spend too much time to pull down a Sconce of Sand: I have no more to
answer to, but to them that bid me speak well of these and pity them, because
they are ignorant, and mean well. I report that of Bernard to it, Ut liberius
peccent, libenter ignorant; They are willingly ignorant, that they may be
wilfully factious. And through what Loop-hole does their Good-meaning appear?
In Railings or Blasphemies? I will never impute a Good meaning unto them, so
long as I see no such thing in their Fruits, unless God shall say so at the
last day. God grant to this Parliament a Good-meaning, to reform these Abuses,
and to act it with their Wisdom and Power; for I have heard some say, that Hell
is full of them that had nothing but good purposes. This which the Bishop did
then deliver, I may call his visiting of the Parliament; and you have both what
he acted in his Diocese, and what he spoke at a Conference of both Houfes.
(...); as I may borrow it out of Nazian. upon another Athanasius, He exceeded
the most eloquent in Eloquence, and the most active in Practice. For all this
good Warning, our great Commanders in the Belly of the Trojan Horse mended
nothing: Nay, in about a year and half after this, they sequestered the choicest
Divines of the Kingdom from their Livings, and many of these Mechanics
supplied their places. At Wimbleton, not far from me, a Warrener propounded to
Thomas Earl of Exeter, That he should have a Borough of Rabbets of what color
he pleased. Let them be all white skinned, says that good Earl. The Undertaker
killed up all the rest, and fold them away, but the white lair, and left not
enough to serve the Earl's Table. The application runs full upon a worthy
Clergy, who were destroyed, to make room for white-skinn'd Pole-cats, that came
in with a strike, and so will go out

158. But the King is come home again, who could not work the Scots to his own
plight, or obtain any thing from that ungoverned Nation: Here he found his
Bishops designed to Undoing, and the Parliament would sit his Patience out till
it was effected. An unlimited Concession ( Utinam promissa liceret non dare,
Metam. lib. 2.) forfeits the Giver himself to those that have received the
Privilege from him. The Houses stand not upon Reasons, but Legislative Votes.
Reasons! no, God wot: As Camerar. says of sorry Writers, in vt. Melan. Miseri
homines mendicant argumenta: nam si mercarentur profecto meliora afferrent;
They beg the Cause; for if they purchased it with Arguments, they would bring
better. If they have no other Proofs, there were many in the Pack that could
fetch them from Inspiration: Or obtrude a Point of Conscience, and then there
is no disputing; for it cannot live, no more than a longing Woman, if it have
not all it gapes for. They ask it for a great-bellied Conscience, to which, in
Humanity, you must deny nothing. His Majesty was mainly afflicted, both that an
unseasonable Bar was devising against all the Clergy, to intermeddle in any
secular Affairs; especially, that the Bishops Places, of which they were so
anciently possessed in Parliament, were heaved at, which came near to the
lessening, or worse, of his own Royalty: He knew they were joined in such a
couplement, as the removing of the one endangered the other. Grotius says it
was the Judgment of a wife and mighty Prince, Charles the Fifth, Caesari
persuasum, conculcata sacerdotum reverentia, ne ipsi quidem mansurum obsequium,
Annal. p. 11. What did persuade the Emperor to think so? Not because his
Clergies Revenues are at his devotion, to help him more than other men's; or
that they were learned, and able to dispute his Right and Title with his
Enemies; or that their Interest did legally keep his Throne from tottering; but
because commonly the King and the Prelates have the same Enemies; and the
Constitution of them both is much at one; for he that thinks a Bishop is too
much a Potentate over the Ministry, is yellow with Disdain against Superiority,
and is prepared to conceive, that a free Monarch is too glorious a Creature
over the People. The King therefore expressed his Patronage, as much as he could,
to that Holy Order, and exalted some worthy men to Bishoprics in vacant
Places; and among others, translated the Bishop of Lincoln to be Archbishop of
the Province of York. This is that man, whose Life was so full of Variety; Quod
consul toties exulque ex exule consul, says Manilius of Marius. He was advanced
to great Honors very young; half of his Pomps cut off within five years; lay
four years current in the Tower, sequestered of all, and very near to be
deprived of all, and of a sudden recovers his Liberty, and a higher Place than
ever. That of Patercu. upon the City of Capua is very like, or the same; Mirum
est tam mature tantam urbem crevisse, floruisse, ^ccidisse, resurrexisse. His
Sufferings, his great Name and Worth, his Service done daily at that time for
the King and Church, did deservedly prefer him, before diverse that were of
great merit. So Synesius said of Antonius, Ep. 68. that was chosen when many
were in nomination, for a Bishopric, and all worthy of it, (...); It gave him
great Reputation to be accounted better than them that were very good. And for
a Surplusage, the King granted him to hold the Deanery of Westminster in
Commendam for three years, that he might not be displaced out of his House,
while he attended at that great Meeting, His Majesty expecting it would not
live above three years, but it had as many Lives as a Cat, and lasted longer:
And York, after twice three months, never saw his Deanery more. This Parliament
meaning to sit till the Day of Doom, wanted, to their full Power and Pleasure,
to be rid of their Company, whom they liked not; which the Commons could not
effect for their part, till they held out the Gorgon's Head of the Covenant.
The Lords would not stay so long, but prepared a Bill, and read it, to reject
the Bishops from being Spiritual Peers of the Upper House: But what Pincers
will they pluck them out withal? First, with the Resorts, Petitions, and
Ragings of the People. What, the People, that seditious Beast! Cupidum novarum
rerum, ctio and quieti adversum, Salust. p. 109. Sic est vulgus, ex veritate
pauca, ex opinione multa judicat, Cic. pro Dom. And Grotius proves out of the
Caesarean Law in Matt. 27.23. That when Pilate inclined to hear the People, who
would have Christ condemned, he acted contrary to Caesar's Law, Vanas populi
veces non audiendar Imperatores pronunciarunt. O those of the right Heroical
Race were dead and gone, who would not have endured to be directed by the
Off-scourings of their greatest Enemies: Nec bellua tetrior ulla est -- Quam
vulgi rabies in libera colla frement is, Claud. in Eutrop. The other catch of
the Pincers was, their Lordships Legislative Vote, and their odds in number
above the Bishops, if you counted men by Noses. Power should be a divine thing,
this was only Strength; as Aristotle says 2 Rhet. c. 2. (...): which Tully has
put in good sense and good words, pro Quinc. Arbitrantur sine injuria potentiam
levem, atque inopem esse. Some think it is not Power, unless they make us feel
that it can do an Injury. Now methinks their Lordships should have marked, that
their House was altered in its Visage very much, when the Bishops sat no
longer with them. And Hippocrates says, That sick man will not recover, whose
Face is so much changed, that it is drawn into another fashion. (...). And did
the Lay-Peers look to last long, when the Aspect of their House was so
metamorphos'd? It is a vulgar Error, If you pluck up a Mandrake, you will dye
at the Groan of it: Though it be but a Fable, let them remember it that are for
Extirpation; and ware them whose turn is next. Take away one Leg from a Trevit,
it may make a scurvy Stool to sit on, but it is no longer a Trevit. And take
away the third Estate of Bishops, be it nominal or real, a Convention it may
be, but I doubt whether it be a Parliament. And as a bungling Painter said of a
Beast he had not drawn well, It would not make a good Lion, but he could turn
it into a good Calf. There was a time when the whole Academy of Philosophers
was banished out of Athens, but they were soon missed, and he was well fined
that was their Enemy. Sequenti anno revocati, and multa 5 talentorum Sophocli
Archonti indita, Moeur. fort. At. p. 65. But for them that thrust the Bishops
out of their ancient Right, the Injury avenged it self upon them; for it was
not long when the Commons served the Temporal Lords in the same kind: Nec
longum, laetabere, te quoque fata prospectant paria, AEn. lib. 10. They were
not only thrust out, but an Engagement, like a Padlock, clapped upon the Door, to
keep them out for ever; and to their great dishonor, the other House made to
resemble the Peers of the Land. Duxit Sacerdotes inglorios, and Optimates
supplantat: Mark their Sympathy in the words of the vulgar Latin, Job 12.19.
Which retribution, measure for measure, the Bishops did neither wish nor
rejoice in, but committed their Innocence to be justified by the Holy God. Seek
no other reason why they had so many Enemies, but because Christianity was
mightily fallen among us, both as to the credenda and the agenda. A mighty part
had a Religion (I mean equivocally called so) that was a Picture looking
equally upon all Sects that passed by it; and as indifferent as Gusman^s
Father, that being taken by the Pirates of Argiers, for quietness sake, and as
one that had not the Spirit of Contradiction, renounced Christ, and turned
Turk. But when the Cause of the Bishops, for other Immunities, and to keep
their undoubted Right and Place in the Lords House, was in the hottest dispute
Sentence ready to be called for, and like the last bidding, for a thing at the
Port-sale, York, at a Committee of the Lords, stands up for his Brethren,
Murique urbis sunt pectore in uno, Sil. lib. 7, and delivers him in the long
Harangue that follows.

159. I shall desire as much Water, or Time of your H. Lordships, as your
Lordships can well afford in a Committee, because all I intend to speak in this
business, must be to your Lordships only, as resolved, for mine own part, to
make hereafter no Remonstrance at all to His most excellent Majesty, for these
several Reasons: First, That I have had occasion of late to know, that our
Sovereign (whom God bless and preserve) is, I will not say above other Princes,
but above all Christian men that ever I knew or heard of; a man of a most
upright, dainty, and scrupulous Conscience, and afraid to look upon some
Actions which other Princes abroad do usually swallow up and devour. I know
(for I have the Monuments in my own custody) what Oath, or rather Oaths, His
Majesty has taken at his Coronation, to preserve all the Rights and Liberties
of the Church of England; and you know very well, that Churchmen are never
sparing in their Rituals and Ceremonials, to amplisie and swell out the Oaths
of Princes in that kind. Your Lordships then know right well, that he is sworn
at that time to observe punctually the Laws of King Edward; the first Law
whereof, as you may see in Lambert's Saxon Laws, is to preserve entirely the
Peace, the Possessions, and the Rights and Privileges of the Church. And truly,
I shall never put my Master's Conscience, that I find resenting and
punctilious, when it is bound up with Oaths and Protestations, to swallow such
Gudgeons, as to sill it self with these Doubts and Scruples. My second Reason
is, That if His Majesty were free from all these Oaths and Protestations, I
du^t not, without some fair Invitation from himself, advise His Majesty to run
Shocks and Oppositions against the Votes of both these great Houses of
Parliament. Lastly, If I were secretly invited to move His Majesty to advise
upon the passing of this Bill, yet speaking mine own Heart and Sense, and not
binding any of my Brethren in this Opinion, if I found the major part of this
House to pass this Bill, without much qualification, I should never have the
boldness, nor desire to sit any more in any judicial place in this most
honorable House. And therefore, my H. Lordships, here I have sixth my
Areopagus, and dernier Resort, being not like to make any further Appeal; which
makes me humbly desire your Patience, to speak for some longer time than I have
accustomed in a Committee; in which length, notwithstanding, I hope to use a
great deal of brevity, some length in the whole, and much shortness in every
particular Head, which I mean so to distinguish, and beat out, that not only
your Lordships, but the Lords my Brethren may enlarge themselves upon all the
particulars, which neither my Abilities of Body can perform, nor does my
Intention nor Purpose aim at, at this time: I will therefore cast this whole
Bill into six several Heads, wherein I hope to comprehend all that I shall say,
or any man else can materially touch upon in this Bill. The first is, the Rise
or Motive of this Bill, which is the Duty of men in Holy Orders, for the words
are, Persons in Holy Orders ought not to intermeddle, etc. And this Duty of
Ministers may be taken in this place two several ways; either for their Duty in
point of Divinity, or for their Duty in point of Convenience, which we commonly
call Policy. In regard of either of these Duties it may be conceived, that men
in Holy Orders ought not to intermeddle in Sacred Affairs, etc. and this is the
Motive, Rise, and Ground of this Bill. The second point are the persons
concerned in the Bill, which are Archbishops, Bishops, Parsons, Vicars, and all
other in Holy Orders. The third point contains the things inhibited from this
time forward, to such persons by this Bill, and they are of several sorts and
natures: First, Freeholds and Rights of such persons, as their Suffrages,
Votes, and Legislative Power in Parliament: Secondly, Matters of Princely
Favors; as to sit in Star Chamber, to be called to the Council Board, to be
Justices of the Peace, etc. Thirdly, Matters of a mixed and concrete nature,
that seem to be both Freeholds and Favors of former Princes; as, the Charters
of some of the Bishops, and some of the ancient Cathedrals, are conceived to
be: And these are all the matters or things inhibited from those persons in
Holy Orders, by this present Bill. The fourth point is the manner of this
Inhibition, which is of a double nature; first, of a severe Penalty; and
secondly, under Cain's Mark, an eternalkind of Disability and Incapacity laid
upon them, from enjoying hereafter any of those Freeholds, Rights, Favors, or
Charters of former Princes; and that which is the heaviest point of all,
without killing of Abel, or any Crime laid to their Charge, more than that in
the beginning of the Bill it is said roundly, and in the style of Lacedaemon,
That they ought not to intermeddle in Secular Affairs. The fifth point is a
Salvo for the two Universities, but none for the Bishop of Durham, nor for the
Bishop of Ely, not for the Dean of Westminster, their next Neighbor, who is
established in his Government by an especial Act of Parliament, that of the 27
of Queen Elizabeth. The sixth and last point is a Salvo for Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls, Viscounts, Barons, or Peers of this Kingdom, that either may be, or are
such by Descent: Which Clause, I hope in God, will prove not only a Salvo to
those honorable persons (whereof, if we of the Clergy were but so happy as to
have any competent number of our Coat, Quot Thebarum portae, vel divit is ostia
Nili, this Bill surely had perished in the Womb, and never come to the Birth)
but I hope that this Clause will prove this Bill a felo de se, and a Murderer
of it self; and intended for a Salvo to noble Ministers only, prove a Salvo for
all other Ministers, that be not so happy as to be nobly born; because the very
poor Minister, for ought we find in Scripture, or common Reason, is no more
tied to serve God in his Vocation^ than these (...), and nobly-born Ministers
are. And therefore I hope those noble Ministers will deal so nobly, as to pull
their Brethren the poor Ministers out of the Thorns and Briars of this Bill.
And these are all the true Heads and Contents of this Bill: And among these six
Heads your Lordships shall be sure to find me; and I shall expect to sind your
Lordships in the whole Tract of this Committee. And now, with your Lordships
honorable Leave and Patience, I will run them over, almost as briefly as I
have pointed and pricked them down.

160. For the first, the Rise and Motive of this Bill, which is the Duty of Men
in Holy Orders not to intermeddle with Secular Affairs, must either rise from a
point of Divinity, or from a point of Convenience or Policy: And I hope in God
it will not appear to your Lordships, that there is any Ground either of
Divinity or Policy to inhibit men in Orders, so modestly to intermeddle with
Secular Affairs, as that the measure of intermeddling in such Affairs shall not
hinder nor obstruct the Duties of their Calling: They ought not so to
intermeddle in Secular Affairs, as to neglect their Ministry; no more ought
Laymen neither; for they have a Calling and Vocation, wherein they are to
walk, as Ministers have; they have Wife, and Children, and Families to care
for, and they are not to neglect these to live upon Warrants and Recognizances,
to become a kind of Sir Francis Michel, or a Justus nimis, as Solomon calls it,
Eccles. 7.16. That place, 2 Timothy 2.4. No man that wars entangles himself with
the affairs of this life, will be found to be applied by all good Interpreters
to Laymen, as well as Churchmen, and, under favor, nothing at all to this
purpose. Besides that, the word ((...)) does point at a man that is so wholly
taken up with the Affairs of this Life, that he utterly neglects the Offices
and Duties of a Christian man: And so I leave that place as incapable of any
other Exposition, nor ever otherwise interpreted, but by Popes Legates and
Canonists, that make a Nose or Wax of every place of Scripture they touch upon.
But that men in Holy Orders ought not, in a moderate manner, together with the
Duties of their Calling, to help and assist in the Government of the
Commonwealth, if they be thereunto lawfully called by the Sovereign Prince,
can never be proved by any good Divinity; for in the Law of Nat^e before the
Deluge, and a long time after, it is a point that no man will deny me, That the
Eldest of the Family was both the Priest and the Magistrate: Then the People
were taken out of Egypt by Moses and Aaron, Moses and Aaron among his Priests,
as it is in the Psalm. Then there was a Form of a Commonwealth setch'd from
Heaven indeed, and planted upon the Earth, and judiciary Laws dictated for the
regulating of the same. Nor do I much care, though some men shall say, That
persons in Holy Orders ought not to intermeddle in Secular Affairs, when that
Great God of Heaven and Earth does appoint them to intermeddle with all the
principal Affairs of that estate: witness the exorbitant Power of the
High Priest in Secular Matters, the Sanhedrim, the 23, the Judges of the Gate,
which were most of them Priests and Levites. And the Churchmen of that Estate
were not all Butchers and Slaughter-men, for they had their Tabernacle, their
Synagogues, their Prayers, Preaching, and other Exercises of Piety. In a word,
we have Divinius, but they had operosius ministerium, as St Austin speaks.
Our Ministry takes up more of our Thoughts, but theirs took up more of their
Labor and Industry. Nor is it any matter that this Commonwealth is no more in
being: it suffices it has been once, and that planted by God himself, who
would never have appointed persons in Holy Orders to intermeddle with things
they ought not to intermeddle withal. I will go on with my Chronology of
persons in Holy Orders, and only put you in mind of Ely, and Samuel among the
Judges, of Sadock's Employment under K. David, of Jehojada's under his Nephew
King Joash, and would sain know what Hurt these men in Holy Orders did, by
intermedling in Secular Affairs of that time. Now we are returned from the
Captivity of Babylon, I desire you to look upon the whole Race of the Maccab^s,
eve^ to Antigonus, the last of them all, taken Prisoner by Pompey, and (...)
afterward by M Antony; and show me any of those Princes (a Woman or two
excepted) that was not a Priest and a Magistrate.

161. We are now come to Christ's time, when methinks I hear St. Paul, 23. of
the Acts, excuse himself for reviling of the High Priest: I wist not, Brethren,
that he was the High-^iest, for it is written, Thoushalt not speak evil of the
Ruler of thy People: Where observe, that the word Ruler in the Greek is (...),
the very same word that is used by St. Paul, Romans 13.3. where this word (...)
is translated by Beza, Magistrates. Then you must be pleased to imagine the
Church asleep, or almost dead under Persecution, for almost 300 years, until
the happy days of the Emperor Constantine, and not expect to find many
Magistrates among the Christians: Yet you shall find St. Paul, 1 Cor. 6.5.
offend against this Bill, and intermeddle Knuckle-deep with Secular Affairs, by
inhibiting the Corinthians very sharply for their Chicanery, their Pettisoggery
and common Barretry, in going to Law one with another: Besides, that as all
learned men agree, both the Apostles and Apostolical men that lived presently
after them, had a miraculous power of punishing exorbitant Crimes, which
supplied the power of the ordinary Magistrate; as appears in Ananias and
Sapphira, the incestuous Corinthian, and many others: But then, from
Constantine's Age till the Reformation, began by Luther, Churchmen were so
usually employed in managing of Secular Affairs, that I shall confess
ingenuously it was too much; there lying an Appeal from the Courts of the
Empire to the Bishops Judicatory; as you shall find it every where in the Code
of Justinian. So it was under Carolus Magnus, and all the Carolovingian Line of
our neighbor Kingdom of France. So, and somewhat more, it was with us in the
Saxon Heptarchy, the Bishop and the Sheriff sitting together check by jowl in
their Turns and Courts. But these exorbitant and vast Employment, in Secular
Affairs I stand not up to desend, and therefore I will hasten to the
Reformation. Where Mr. Calvin, in the fourth Book of his Institutions, and
eleventh Distinction, does confess, that the holy men heretofore did refer
their Controversies to the Bishop, to avoid Troubles in Law. You shall find
that from Luther to this present day, in all the flux of Time, in all Nations,
in all manner of Reformations, persons in Holy Orders were thought fit to
intermeddle in Secular Affairs: Brentius was a Privy-Councillor to his Duke and
Prince; Functius was a Privy-Councillor to the great Duke of Boruss^a, as it is
but too notoriously known to those that are versed in Histories; Calvin and
Beza, while they lived, carried all the Council of the State of Geneva under
their own Gowns. Bancroft in his Survey, c. 26. observes, that they were of
the Council of State there, which consists of Threescore: And I have my self
known Abraham Scultetus a Privy-Councillor to the Prince Palatine; Reverend
Monsieur Du Moulin, for many years together, a Councillor to the Princess of
Sedan; his Brother-in-law Monsieur Rivet, a great learned Personage now in
England, of the Privy Council of the Prince of Orange. You all hear, and I know
much good by his former Writings, of a learned man called Mr. Henderson, and
most of your Lordships understand better than I, what Employment he has at
this time in this Kingdom: And truly, I do believe that there is no Reformed
Church in the World, settled and constituted by the State, wherein it is held
for a point in Divinity, that persons in Holy Orders ought not to intermeddle
with Secular Affairs: Which is all I shall say of this Duty of Ministers in
point of Divinity.

162. Now I come to the second Duty of men in Holy Orders, in point of
Convenience or Policy, and am clearly of opinion, that even in this Regard and
Re^ection they ought not to be debarred from modestly intermeddling in Secular
Affairs; for i^ there be any such Inconvenience, it must needs arise from this,
That to exercise some Secular Jurisdiction must be evil in it self, or evil to
a person in Holy Orders. Which is neither so nor so, for the whole Office of a
subordinate civil Magistrate is most exactly described in Romans 13. v. 3, 4. and
no man can add or detract from the same. The Civil Power is a Divine Ordinance,
set up to be a Terror to the Evil, and an Encouragement to Good Works. This is
the whole compass of the Civil Power: And theresore I do here demand, with the
most learned Bishop Davenant, that within a few days did sit by my side, in the
Eleventh Question of his Determinations, What is there of Impiety, what of
Unlawfulness, what unbecoming either the Holiness or Calling of a Priest, in
terrifying the bad, or comforting the good Subject, in repressing of Sin, or
punishing of Sinners? For this is the whole and entire act of Civil
Jurisdiction. It is in its own nature repugnant to no Person, to no Function,
to no fort or condition of Men, let them hold themselves never so holy, never
so seraphical, it becomes them very well to repress Sin and punish Sinners;
that is to say, to exercise in a moderate manner Civil Jurisdiction, if the
Sovereign shall require it: And you shall find that this Doctrine of debarring
persons in Holy Orders from Secular Employments, is no Doctrine of the
Reformed, but the Popish Church, and first brought into this Kingdom by the
Popes of Rome, and Lambeth, Lanfrank, Anselm, Stephen Langton, and the rest,
together with Otho and Ottobon, and to this only end, that the man of Rome
might withdraw all the Clergy of this Kingdom from their obligation to the King
and Nobility, who were most of them great Princes in those times, and thereby
might establish and create (as in great part he did) Regnum in Regno, a Kingdom
of Shavelings in the midst of this Kingdom of England. And hence came those
Canons of mighty consequence, able to shoot up a Priest at one shot into
Heaven, as, that he must not meddle with matters of Blood; that he must not
exercise Civil Jurisdiction; that he must not be a Steward to a Nobleman in
his House; and all the rest of this Palea and Garbage. That is in plain
English, the Priest must no longer receive Obligations from either King or
Lords, but wholly depend upon his Holy Fathers, the Pope of Rome, and the Pope
of Lambeth; or at least wise, pay him soundly for their Dispensations and
Absolutions, when they presume to do the contrary. In the mean time here is not
one word or show of Reason, to inform an understanding man, that persons in
Holy Orders ought not to terrisie the Bad and comfort the Good, to repress Sin,
and chastise Sinners; which is the summa totalis of the Civil Magistracy, and
consequently so far forth, at the least, to intermeddle with Secular Affairs.
And this is all that I shall say touching the Motive and Ground of this Bill,
and that persons in Holy Orders ought not to be inhibited from intermeddling in
Secular Astairs, either in point of Divinity, or in point of Convenience and
Policy.

163. The second Point consists of the Persons reflected upon in this Bill,
which are Archbishops, Bishops, Parsons, Vicars, and all others in Holy Orders;
of which point I shall say little, only finding these Names huddled up in an
Heap, made me conceive at first, that it might have some relation to Mr. (...)
Reading in the Middle Temple, which I ever esteemed to have been very
inoffentively delivered by that learned Gentleman, and with little discretion
questioned by a great Ecclesiastic then in Place; for all that he said was
this, That when the Temporal ^ords are more in Voices than the Spiritual, they
may pass a Bill without consent of the Bishops: Which is an Assertion so clear
in Reason, and so often practiced upon the Records and Rolls of Parliament,
that no man any way versed in either of these, can make any doubt of it, nor do
I; though I humbly conceive no Pre^ident will be ever sound, that the Prelates
were ever excluded, otherwise than by their own Folly, Fear, or Headiness. For
the point of being Justices of Peace, the Gentleman confesses, he never
meddled with Archbishops, nor Bishops, nor with any Clergyman made a Justice by
His Majesty's Commission. In the Statute made 34 Edw. 3. c. 1. he finds
Assignees for the keeping of the Peace, one Lord, three or four of the most
valiant men of the County; the troublesome times did then so require it: And if
God do not bless us with the riddance of these two Armies, the like Provision
will be now as necessary. He finds these men included, but he does not find
Churchmen excluded; no, not in the Statute 13 Rich. II. c. 7. that requires
Justices of Peace to be made of Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen of the Law, of
the most sufficient of each County. In which words the Gentleman thinks Clerks
were not included; and I clearly say, by his favor, they are not excluded; nor
do the learned Sages of the Law conceive them to be excluded by that Statute.
If the King shall command the Lord Keeper to fill up the Commissions of each
County, with the most sufficient Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen of the Law,
shall the Lord Keeper thereupon exclude the Noblemen and the Prelates? I have
often in my days received this Command, but never heard of this Interpretation
before this time: So that I cannot conceive from what ground this general
Sweepstake of Archbishops, Bithops, Parsons, Vicars, and all others in Holy
Orders should proceed. I have heard, since the beginning of my Sickness, that
it has been alleged in this House, that the Clergy, in the Sixth of Edw. 3.
did disavow that the Custody of the Peace did belong to them at all, and I
believe that such a thing is to be sound among the Notes of the Privileges of
this House; but first, you must remember, that it was in a great Storm, and
when the Waters were much troubled, and the wild People unapt to be kept in
order by Miters, and Crosier-staves: But yet if that noble Lord shall be
pleased to cast his Eye upon the Roll it self, he shall find that this poor
Excuse did not serve the Prelates turns; for they were compelled with a witness
to defend the preservation of the Peace of the Kingdom for their parts, as well
as the Noblemen and Gentry. And you shall find the Ordinance to this effect set
down upon that Roll. I conclude therefore, with that noble Lord's favor, that
the sweeping of all the Clergy out of temporal Offices, is a motion of the
first impression, and was never heard in the English Commonwealth before this
Bill.

164. I come, in the third place, to the main part of this Cause, the things to
be severed from all men in Holy Orders, which are, as I told you of three
kinds: 1. Matters of Freehold, as the Bishops Votes in Parliament, and
Legislative Power. 2. Matters of Favor, to be a Judge in Star Chamber; to be a
a Privy-Councillor, to be a Justice of Peace, or a Commissioner in any Temporal
Affairs. 3. Mixed Matters of Freehold and Favor too, as the Charters of some
Bishops, and many of the ancient Cathedrals of this Kingdom, who allow them a
Justice or two within themselves, or their Close, as they call it, and exempt
those grave and learned men from the Rudeness and Insolency of Tapsters,
Brewers, Innkeepers, Tailors, and Shoe-makers, which do integrate and make up
the Bodies of our Country-Cities and Incorporations. And now is the Ax laid to
the very Root of the Ecclesiastical Tree, and without your Lordships Justice
and Favor, all the Branches are to be lopt off quite with those latter
Clauses, and the Stock and Root it self to be quite grubb'd and dug up, by
that first point of abolishing all Vote and Legislative Power in all Clergymen,
leaving them to be no longer any part of the People of Rome, but mere Slaves
and Bondmen to all intents and purposes; and the Priests of England, one
degree interior to the Priests of Jer^boam, being to be accounted worse than
the Tail of the People. Now I hope no Englishman will doubt, but this Vote and
Representation in Parliament is not only a Freehold, but the greatest Freehold
that any Subject in England, or in all the Christian World, can brag of at this
day, that we live under a King, and are to be governed by his Laws, that is,
not by his arbitrary Edicts or Rescripts, but by such Laws confirmed by him,
and assented to by us, either in our proper Persons, or in our Assignees and
Representations. This is the very Soul and Genius of our Magna Charta, and
without this one Spirit that great Statute is little less than litera occidens,
a dead and useless piece of Paper: You heard it most truly opened unto you by a
wise and judicious Peer of this House, that Legem patere quam ipse tuleris, was
a Motto, wherein Alexander Severus had not more interest than every true-born
Englishman. No Forty-shillings-man in England, but does in person or
representation enjoy his Freedom and Liberty: The Prelates of this Kingdom, as
a Looking-glass and Representation of the Clergy, a third estate, if we may
speak either with Sir Edw. Coke, or the ancient Acts of Parliament, have been
in possession hereof these Thousand years and upward. The Princes of the Norman
Race, indeed, for their own ends, and to strengthen themselves with Men and
Money, erected the Bishoprics soon after the Conquest into Baronies, and left
them to sit in the House, with their double Capacities about them; the latter
invented for the profit of the Prince, not excluding the former, remaining
always from the beginning, for the profit and concernment of the poor Clergy,
and the State Ecclesiastical: which appears not only by the Saxon Laws set
forth by Mr. Lambert and Sir H. Spelman, but also by the Bishops Writs and
Summons to Parliament, in use to this very day. We have many President, upon
the Rolls, that in vacancy of Episcopal Sees, the Guardian of the Spirituals,
though but a simple Priest, has been called to fit in this Honorable House,
by reason of the former Representation: and such an Officer I was my self over
that See whereof I am Bishop, some 25 years ago, and might then have been
summoned by Writ to this Honorable House, at that very time, by reason of
keeping the Spirituality of that Diocese, which then, as a simple Priest, I
did, by virtue of the aforesaid Office represent. And therefore, most noble
Lords, look upon the Ark of God's Representative, that at this time floats in
great danger in this Deluge of Waters: If there be any Cham or unclean Creature
therein, out with him, and let every man bear his own Burden, but save the Ark
for God and Christ Jesus sake, who has built it in this Kingdom for saving of
People. And your Lordships are too wise to conceive that the Word and
Sacraments, the means of our Salvation, will be ever effectually received from
those Ministers, whose Persons shall be so vilified and dejected, as to be made
no Parcels or Fragments of this Commonwealth. No, faith Gregory, the last
Trick the Devil had in this World was this, that when he could not bring the
Word and Sacraments into disgrace by Errors and Heretical Opintens, he invented
this Project, (and much applauded his Wit therein) to cast Slight and Contempt
upon the Preachers and Ministers. And my noble Lords, you are too wise to
believe what the common people talk, that we have a Vote in the election of
Knights and Burgesses, and consequently some Figure and Representation in the
noble House of Commons They of the Ministry have no Vote in these Elections,
they have no Representation in that Honorable House, and the contrary
Assertions are so slight and groundless, as I will not offer to give them any
answer. And therefore, R. Hon. Lords, have a special care of the Church of
England your Mother in this point. And as God has made you the most noble of
all the Peers of the Christian World, so do not you give way that our Nobility
shall be taught henceforth, as the Romans were in the time of the first and
second Punick Wars, by their Slaves and Bondmen only: and that the Church of
God in this Island may come to be served by the most ignoble Ministers, that
have ever been seen in the Christian Church, since the Passion of our Savior.
And so much for the first thing, which this Bill intends of sever from Persons
in Holy Orders, viz. Votes and Representations in Parliament. The next thing to
be severed from them by this Bill is of a meaner Metal and Alloy, sittings in
Star Chamber, sittings at Council Table, sitting in the Commissions of Peace,
and other Commissions of Secular Affairs, which are such Favors and Graces of
Christian Princes, as the Church may have a being, and subsistence without
them. The Fartunes of our Greece do not depend upon these Spangles: and the
Sovereign Prince has imparted and withdrawn these kind of Favors without the
envy or regret of any wise Ecclesia^ical Persons. But, my noble Lords, this is
the Case; our King has by the Statute restored unto him the Headship of the
Church of England, and by the Word of God, he is Custos utriusque tabulae. And
will your Lordships allow this Ecclesiastical Head no Ecclesiastical Senses at
all? No Ecclesiastical Person to be consulted withal, not in any circumstance
of Time and Place? If Cranmer had been thus dealt withal in the minority of our
young King Josias, King Edward the Sixth of pious memory, what had become of
the great Work of our Reformation in this flourishing Church of England? But I
know before whom I speak. I do not mean to Dine your Lordships with Coleworts:
the harsh Consequents of this Point your Lordships do understand as well as I.
The last Robe that some Persons in Holy Orders are to be stripped of, has a kind
of Mixture of Freehold and Favor, of the proper Right and Graces of the King,
which are certain old Charters, that some few Bishops, and many Ancient and
Cathedral Churches have purchased and procured from the ancient Kings, before
and since the Conquest, to enable them to live quiet in their own Precincts,
and close (as they call it) under a Justice or two of their own Body, without
being abandoned, upon every slight occasion, to the Injuries and Vexations of
Mechanical Tradesmen, of which your Lordships best know those Country
Incorporations do most consist. Now whether these sew Charters have their
Foundation by Favor or by Right, I should conceive, under your Lordships
savor, it is neither Favor nor Right to take them away, without some just
Crime objected and proved. For if they be abused in any particular, Mr.
Attorney General can find an ordinary Remedy to repair the same by a Writ of Ad
quod damnum, without troubling the two Houses of Parliament. And this is all I
shall speak to this Point.

165. And now I am come to the fourth part of this Bill, which is the manner of
Inhibition, heavy every way: heavy in the Penalty, heavier a great deal in the
Incapacity. For the weighing of the Penalty will you consider, I beseech you,
the small Wyres, that is, poor Causes, that are to induce the same: and then
the heavy Lead that hangs upon those Wyres. It is thus: If a natural Subject of
England, interessed in the Magna Charta, and Petition of Right, as well as any
other, yet being a Person in Holy Orders, shall happen unfortunately to Vote in
Parliament, to obey his Prince by way of Counsel, or by way of a Commissioner
be required thereunto, then he is presently to lose and forfeit for his first
offense all his means and livelihood for one year and for the second to forfeit
his Freehold in that kind for ever and ever. And I do not believe that your
Lordships ever saw such an heavy weight of Censure hang upon such thin Wyres of
Reason in an Act of Parliament made heretofore. This peradventure may move
others most, but it does not me. It is not the Penalty, but the Incapacity, and
as the Philosopher would call it, the Natural Impotency imposed by this Bill on
Men in Holy Orders to serve the King, or the State in this kind, be they never
so able, never so willing, never so virtuous. Which makes me draw a kind of
Timanthes vail over this Point, and leave it, without any amplification at all,
unto your Lordships wise and inward thoughts and considerations. -- The fifth
Point is the Salvo made for the two Universities, to have Justices of Peace
among them of their own Heads of Houses, which I confess to be done upon mature
and just consideration: For otherwise the Scholars must have gone for Justice
to those Parties to whom they send for Mustard and Vinegar. But yet, under
favor, the Reasons and Inducements cannot be stronger than may be found out
for other Ecclesiastical Persons; as the Bishop of Durham, who was ever, since
the days of K. John, suffered by the Princes and Parliaments of England to
exercise Justice upon the Parties in those Parts, as being in truth the King's
Subjects, but the Bishops Tenants, and therefore not likely to have their
Causes more duly weighed, than when the Balance is left in the hand of their
own proper Landlord. The Case of the Bishop of Ely, for some parts of that Isle
is not much different. But if a little Partiality does not herein cast some
little Mist before mine eyes, the Case of the Dean and City of Westminster,
wherein this Parliament is now sitting, is far more considerable, both in the
Antiquity, extent of Jurisdiction, and the Warrants whereupon it is grounded,
than any one of those places before mentioned. For there is a clear Statute
made 27 Eliz. for the drawing all Westminster, St. Clement, and St. Martins le
Grand, London, into a Corporation to be reigled by a Dean, a Steward, twelve
Burgesses, and twelve Assistants: And if some Salve or Plaster shall not be
applied to Westminster in this Point, all that Government and Corporation is at
an end. But this I perceive since is taken into consideration by the Honorable
House of Commons themselves. -- I come now to the last Point, and the second
Salvo of this Bill, which is for Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Barons or
Peers of this Kingdom; which is a Clause that looks with a kind of contrary
glance upon Persons in Holy Orders: it seems to favor some, but so that
thereby, and in that very act, it casts an aspersion of baseness and ignobility
upon all the rest of that Holy Profession. For if no Persons in Holy Orders
ought to intermeddle in Secular Affairs, how come those Nobles to be excepted
out of the Universal Negative? Is it because they are nobly born? Then surely
it must be granted that the rest must be excluded, as being made of a worser
and rougher piece of Clay. For the second part of this Reason in the beginning
of the Bill can never bear out this Salvo, That the Office of the Ministry is
of so great importance, that it will take up the whole Man, and all his best
Endeavors. Surely the Office of the Ministry is of no greater importance in a
poor man than in a noble man; nor does it take up the whole Man in the one, and
but a piece of him in the other. I cannot give you many Instances herein out of
Scripture, because you know that in those days, Not many mighty, not many noble
were called, 1 Cor. 1.26. But when any Noble were called, I do not find but
that they did put more of the whole Man, and their best Endeavors upon the
Ministry than other Men in Holy Orders are, at the least in Holy Scripture,
noted to have done. I pu^ your Lordships in mind of those Noble men of Beraea,
compared with th^se of Thessalonica, Acts 17.11. So that this Salvo for the
Nobility must needs be (under your Lordships favor) a secret wound unto the
rest of the Ministry, unless your Lordships by your great Wisdom, will be
willing to change it into a Panacaea, or common Plaster both to the one and to
the other. And, under your Lordships Favor, I conceive it may be done under a
very fo^ing Argument. The Office of the Ministry is of equal importance, and
takes up the wh^ Man, and all his best Endeavors, in the Noble born, as well
as in the mean born Bishop. But it is lawful, all this notwithstanding, for the
noble born Minister to intermeddle in Secular Affairs, and therefore it is
likewise lawful for the mean born so to do. And so in may Conscience (I speak
it in the presence of God, and great Noblemen) it is most lawful for them to
intermeddle with Secular Affairs, so as they be not entangled (as the Apostle
calls it) with this intermedling, as to slight and neglect the Office of their
Calling; which no Minister, noble or ignoble, can do without grievously sinning
against God and his own conscience. It is lawful for Persons in Holy Orders to
intermeddle; it is without question: or else they could not make provision of
Meat and Drink, as Beza interprets the place. It is not lawful for them to be
thus entangled and bound up with Secular Affairs; which I humbly beseech your
Lordships to consider, not as a Distinction invented by me, but clearly
expressed by the Apostle himself.

166. And thus, my noble Lords, I shall, without any further molestation, and
with humble thanks for this great patience, leave this great Cause of the
Church to your Lordships wise and gracious consideration. Here is my Marshill,
and further I shall never appeal for Justice. Some assurance I have from the
late solemn Vow and Protestation of both Houses, for the maintaining and
defending the Power and Privileges of Parliament, that if this Bill were now
to be framed in the one House, it would never be offered, without much
qualification, and I persuade my self it will not be approved in the other.
Parliaments are indeed Omnipotent; but no more Omnipotent than God himself;
who, for all that, cannot do every thing. God cannot but perform what he has
promised: A Parliament, under favor, cannot un-swear what it has already
vowed. This is an old Maxim, which I have learned of the Sages of the Law, A
Parliament cannot be Felo de se, it cannot destroy or undo it self. An Act of
Parliament, (as that in the eleventh, and another in the one and twentieth of
Richard the Second) made to be unrepealable in any subsequent Parliament, was
ipso facto void in the constitution. Why? because it took away the Power and
Privileges, that is, not the Plumes and Feathers, the remote Accidents, but
the very specisial Form, Essence, and Being of a Parliament: So if an Act
should be made to take away the Votes of all the Commons, or all the Lords, it
were absolutely a void Act. I will conclude with the first Ep. to the
Corinthians, c. 12. v. 15. If the soot shall say, because I am not the hand I
am not of the body, is it therefore not of the body? v. 20. but now are they
many Members, yet but one Body. v. 21. And the eye cannot say unto the hand, I
have no need of thee: nor again the head unto the feet, I have no need of you.
So far our brave Speaker: and all this is exscribed faithfully out of his own
Copy. Let another take his room; and let him that is wisest perform it better.
The Success was, that he laid the Bill asleep for five months (for I confess
that by oversight I have not kept the just order of time; for it should have
been referred to the middle of May, before the King went into Scotland) and was
in a trance by the charm of this Eloquence till November after: which shows how
like he was to Athanasius (Nazian. in Orat. pro codem) (...). Athanasius was an
Adamant, not to be broken with violent blows: and a Lodestone to draw them to
him that were of a contrary Opinion. Now mark the Partiality upon which the
Speaker much insisted, That the Lords would grant Interest to noble Persons in
Holy Orders to act in Secular Affairs; but to none beside. As Grotius fits it
with a passage Annal. p. 5. Castellani quantumcunque usurpent ipsi libertatem,
in aliis non serunt. The Castilians are great encroachers upon liberty for
themselves; but will not tolerate it in any beside. To the main Cause I yield
that that was easy to be defended on the Clergies part; as learned Saravia
shows de Christian. Obed. p. 169. not only from Moses's Law, but from the
Custom general of the most orderly among the Heathen, Gaulish, Druids, Persian
Magi, Egyptian Heirophants, and so forth by induction from all places, to make
it amount even to a natural Law, that Priests were no where excluded from
honorable Employments in Secular Affairs. I will appose two Quotations for it,
and very remarkable. The first from the Judgment of the Scottish Presbytery. R.
Spotswood Hist. p. 299. and 449. That they contended for that Privilege, that
some Ministers should give Voice in Parliament in the behalf of the Church --
And some to assist the King in Parliament, in Council, and out of Council. Does
the Wind blow so from the North? The other taken from Ludo. Molin. Paraen. c 4.
And he no well-willer to our Hierarchy in that Book, least of all to their
Consistories -- Deus Pastori Evangelico non detrahit jus and potestatem
Magistraturae: nec magistratum prohibet ministerio, si ad utrumque factus and
comparatus est. But this Bill that went no further, when it was first set on
foot in May, began to enlarge its strides, and mend its Pace in the end of
Autumn. Either because this fiery Parliament saw that Confusion begun must be
carried on with acting greater: or because the King was suspected that he
tampered with the Scots, and they framed an Injury from his Neglect to leave
them so long: or how it was that their thoughts were whi^'d about with the
Wheel of swift Persuasions, themselves knew best: but their Spleen began to
show it self with stronger fits than ever against the Clergy, who were never
safe so long as the Bill we have heard of was not cancelled. For the Spanish
Proverb tells us, That Apple is in great danger that sticks upon the prickles
of an Hedge-hogg. But if the Sum of the Bill had been right cast, the now most
noble Marquess of Dorchester, and more noble because most learned, told his
Peers May 21. Which of your Lordships can say he shall continue a Member of
this House, when at one blow six and twenty are cut off. This was sooth, nay
Sooth-saying and Prophesying: but it was not attended.

167. When all ways had been tried to pass this Bill of Dishonor upon the
Clergy, chiefly the Bishops, and it hung in the House of the Lords: the event,
methinks, is like that which we read I Kings 22. v. 21. There came forth a
Spirit; and stood before the Lord, and said, I will persuade them. And the Lord
said, Wherewith? And he said, I will go forth, and I will be a Spirit of
clamor and tumult in the mouth of all the People. And the Lord said, Thou
shall persuade them, and prevail also. Go forth, and do so. There had been an
unruly and obsteperous concourse of the People in the Earl of Strafford's Case:
But a Sedition broke forth about Christmas, that was ten times more mad: Ludum
jocumque dices fuisse illum alterum, prout hujus rabies quae dabit, Terent.
Eunuch. which took heat upon this occasion. The King came to the House of
Commons, to demand five of their Members to Justice, upon impeachment of
Treason. His Majesty, it seems, was too forward to threaten such persons with
the Sword of Justice, when he wanted the Buckler of Safety: How far those five
were guilty, I have nothing to say, because plain Force would not let them come
to a Trial. But if they were innocent, why did they not suffer their Practices
to see the Light? It had been more to their Honor to be cleared by the Law,
than to be protected against the Law: And that Cause must needs be suspected,
which could not put on a good outside. I am sure the King suffered extremely
for their sakes: All Sectaries and desperate Varlets in City and Suburbs,
flocked by thousands to the Parliament. Diogenes was asked, What was to be seen
at the Olympic Sports, where he had been? Says he, (...), Laert. in Vit. Much
People, but few Men. But here were no Men, but all Beasts, who promised one
another Impunity by their full body of Rebels; and where there is no fear of
Revenge, there is little Conscience of Offense: Quicquid multis peccatur
inultum est, Lucan. The Rakehells were chaffed to so high a degree of Acrimony,
that they pressed through the Court-gates; and their Tongues were so lavish,
that they talked Treason so loud, that the King and Queen did hear them. Let
the five Members be as honest as they would make them. I am certain these were
Traitors, that begirt the King's House, where his Person was, with Hostility by
Land and Water: He that speaks of them without detestation, allows them, and
makes way for the like. Sometimes they called out for Religion, sometimes for
Justice: Ex isto ore religionis verbum excidere aut clabi potest? as Tully of
Clodius, pro Dom. Was the sacred term of Religion sit to come out of their
Mouths? Did it become them to speak of Justice? Sarah cried out to Abraham, The
Lord judge between me and thee, when her self was in the fault, Genesis 16.5.
Every Tinker and Tapster called for Justice, and would let the King have none,
who is the Fountain of it. What did the great Parliament in the mean while?
Give Freedom to their Rage. (...). Odyss. (...). Their Friends in their ragged
rows were too many to be childden; they were more afraid of them than of the
Ruin of a Kingdom; as little Children are more afraid of a Vizard than of the
Fire; therefore they stroke them with fair words when they meet them. O
Indignity! An quae -- Turpia cerdoni Volesos Brutumque decebunt? Juven. Sat. 8.
That which was base in Cobblers, was it not worse in Lords, and Knights, and
Squires, and such as assumed to be the Princes of the Land? No Senators that
intended to rule a People did ever endure the like. Let M. AEmilius the Consul
speak for the State of Rome, Livy lib. 39. Majores nostri ne vos quidem, nisi
cum aut vexillo in arce posito, comitiorum causa, exercitus positus esset, aut
plebi Concilium tribuni edixissent, aut aliqui ex magistratibus and concionem
vocassent, temere coire voluerint, ubi legitimum rectorem multitudini censerent
esse debere. They that boulster up such Insurrections as these, their own
Guards, upon a new Quarrel, may knock them on the Head: Cum tot populis
stipatus eas, in tot populis vix una fides, Sen Hercul furens. But these Wat
Tylers and Round-Robins, being driven or persuaded out of White Hall, there was
a buzz among them to take their way to Westminster-Abby; some said, Let us
pluck down the Organs: Some cried, Let us deface the Monuments; that is,
profane the Tombs and Burying-places of Kings and Queens. This was carried
with all speed to the Archbishop; the Dean, who made fast the Doors, whi^ they
found shut against them, and when they would have forced them, they were beaten
off with Stones from the top of the Leads; the Archbishop all this while
maintaining the Abbey in his own person, with a few more, for fear they should
seize upon the Regalia, which were in that place under his Custody. The Spite
of the Mutineers was most against him, yet his Followers could not entreat him
to go aside, as the Disciples restrained Paul from rushing into an Uproar, Act.
19.30. but he stood to it, as Cesius Quintius in Livy, lib. 3. Unus impetus
tribunitios popularesque procellas sustinebat. After an hours dispute, when the
Multitude had been well pelted from aloft, a few of the Archbishops Train
opened a Door and rushed out with Swords drawn, and drove them before them,
like fearful Hares. They were already past their Duty, but short of their
Malice, and every day made Battery on all the Bishops, as they came to
Parliament, forcing their Coaches back, tearing their Garments, menacing if
they came any more. What Times could be worse? None, says Tully upon M.
Antony's Violence upon the Senate, Phil. Or. 13. Caesare dominante venicbamus
in Senatum, si non libere tamen tuto. What Aid did the Lords afford to quell
these Affronts? Why, let Softhenes be beaten before the Judgmentseat, Gallio
cares for none of these things, Act. 18.17. The Bishops were God's Ministers,
and let him defend them; as Tyberius to that way in Tacitus, Deorum injuriae
Diis curae sunt. The remissness of our Parliament Lords ( Optimates non Optimi)
showed the same Indifferency: O ye religious Kings, that would govern with
Peace, how are ye able? These foul and unremediable Uproars tell you, that the
only Imperatorian Art is to be furnished with a good Army, and to know how to
order it.

168. So great a Hurry continuing, wherein all things were turned the wrong
side upward, there was such an apparent Mischief co-incident, that whatsoever
did pass in the Lords House, during their constrained absence, was null and
invalid; for if any one person in either House, be repelled by force, and be
denied Freedom to give his Vote, that Nicety is a Bar to the whole Proceeding
of the Parliament; as some write, that comment subtly upon Parliamentary
Privileges: Not as if the Speaker did ever sit in his Chair, when none were
absent; or that one Vote is like to sway a Cause, (yet sometimes it comes to so
near a scrutiny) but this Judgment is made of it, That it may so fall out, and
does often, that one Member (put the case the person forced out) may propose
such Reasons to the House, as that all resolve into his Opinion. This great
Prejudice concurring, by repelling the Bishops tumultuously from taking their
Places in the Lords House, York called his Brethren together, to set their
Hands to a Petition and Protestation made to His Majesty, and the Lords
Temporal, and put it into the L. Keeper Littleton's Hand, yet not to be read,
till His Majesty, by the Bishop's Invitation, should fit with the Peers in the
House, and then to read it in the King and the Lords audience, and not before.
The L. Keeper unadvisedly (I hope it was no worse) produces the Petition, etc.
before the King was made acquainted with it; which made a Project, well
contrived, break out into a Thunderclap of Mischief; which rash or bad dealing
in the Lord Keeper, York could not suspect: And he that drives much business
shall be crossed in some, for want of Luck, though he be never so prudent:
Nulli fortuna tam dedita est, ut multa tentanti ubique respondeat, Sen. lib. 1.
de ira, c. 3. That Protestation follows here, whose like, and almost same, York
had found in the Records of the Tower, which he studied there, till his
Eyesight was much the worse for it.

To the KING's Most Excellent Majesty, and the Lords and Peers now assembled in
Parliament,

The humble Petition and Protestation of all the Bishops and Prelates now
called by His Majesty's Writs to attend the Parliament, and now present about
London and Westminster, for that Service.

THat whereas the Petitioners are called up by several and respective Writs,
and under great Penalties to attend in Parliament, and have a clear and
indubitate Right to vote in Bills, and other matters whatsoever debateable in
Parliament, by the ancient Customs, Laws, and Statutes of this Realm, and ought
to be protected by Your Majesty, quietly to attend and prosecute that great
Service. They humbly remonstrate, and protest before God, Your Majesty, and the
noble Lords and Peers now assembled in Parliament, that as they have an
indubitate Right to Sit and Vote in the House of the Lords, so are they (if
they may be protected from Force and Violence) most ready and willing to
perform their Duties accordingly: And that they do abominate all Actions or
Opinions tending to Popery, and the maintenance thereof; as also all Propension
and Inclination to any malignant Party, or any other Side or Party whatsoever,
to the which their own Reasons and Consciences shall not move them to adhere.
But whereas they have been at several times violently menaced, affronted, and
assaulted by multitudes of People, in their coming to perform their Services in
that Honorable House, and lately chased away, and put in danger of their
Lives, and can find no Redress or Protection, upon sundry Complaints made to
both Houses in these particulars; They likewise humbly protest before your
Majesty, and the noble House of Peers, that saving unto themselves all their
Rights and Interests of Sitting and Voting in the House at other times, they
dare not Sit or Vote in the House of Peers, until your Majesty shall further
secure them from all Affronts, Indignities, and Dangers in the Premises.
Lastly, Whereas their Fears are not built upon Fantasies and Conceits, but
upon such Grounds and Objects, as may well terrify men of good Resolutions,
and much Constancy. They do in all duty and humility protest before your
Majesty, and the Peers of the most Honorable House of Parliament, against all
Laws, Orders, Votes, Resolutions, and Determinations, as in themselves null,
and of none effect, which in their absence, since the 27th of this
Instant-month of December. 1641, have already passed: As likewise against all
such, as shall hereafter pass in that most Honorable House, during the time of
their forced and violent absence from the said most Honorable House; Not
denying, but if their absenting of themselves were wilful, and voluntary, that
most Honorable House might proceed in all the Premises, their Absence, or
this Protestation notwithstanding. And humbly beseeching your most Excellent
Majesty to command the Clerk of that House of Peers to enter this Petition and
Protestation amongst his Records; They will ever pray to God to bless and
preserve, etc.

Subscribed by Joh. Eborac. Tho. Dunelm. To. Cov. and Lich. Jos. Norwicen. Joh.
Asaphensis. Gul. Bath and Wellen. Geo. Hereford. Rob. Oxen. Matthew. Elien.
Godfr. Glocestr. Job. Petroburg. Maur. Landoven.

169. Hear and admire, ye Ages to come, what became of this Protestation, drawn
up by as many Bishops as have often made a whole Provincial Council. They were
all called by the Temporal Lords to the Bar, and from the Bar sent away to the
Tower: Nonne fuit satius tristes formidinis iras, Atque superba pati fastidia?
A rude World, when it was safer to do a Wrong than to complain of it: The
People commit the Trespass, and the Sufferers are punished for their Fault.
(...), Athen. lib. 9. A Proverb agreeing to the drunken Feasts of the Greeks,
If the Cook dress the Meat ill, the Minstrils are beaten. That day it broke
forth, that the largest part of the Lords were fermentated with an
Anti-episcopal Sourness. If they had loved that Order, they would never have
doomed them to a Prison, and late at night, in bitter Frost and Snow, upon no
other Charge, but that they presented their Mind in a most humble Paper, to go
abroad in safety. Ubi amor condimentum inerit quidvis placiturum spero, Plaut.
in Casin. Love has a most gentle hand, when it comes to touch where it loves.
Here was no sign of any silial respect to their Spiritual Fathers. Nothing was
offered to the Peers, but the Substance was Reason, the Style lowly, the
Practice ancient; yet upon their pleasure, without debate of the Cause, the
Bishops are packed away the same night to keep their Christmas in Durance and
Sorrow: And when this was blown abroad, O how the Trunch-men of the Uproar did
fleer, and make merry with it! But the Disciples of the Church of England took
it very heavily; not for any thing the good Bishops had done, but for that they
suffered; for a Prisoner is not a Name of Infamy, but Calamity. Poena damnati,
non peccati, Cic. pro Dom. Estque pati poenam, quam meruisse minus, Ovid. lib.
1. de Pont. Nothing can be more equal, than to lay the Objections the Lords
made, and York's Answers for the Protestation together, as they go from Hand to
Hand to this day, in Town and City: And let the Children judge what their
Fathers did, if they read this hereafter.

Obj. 1. That the Petition is false; the Lords did not sit in Fear, as my Lord
of Worcester, Winchester, London: Nor was it the Petition of all the Bishops
about London and Westminster; not of Winchester, London, Rochester, Worcester.

(...) If this were true, yet were it not Treason against any Canon or
Statute Law; but the Fact is otherwise: First, the Fear complained against is
not for the time of their Sitting in the House, but for the time of their
coming unto and going from the said House; and it is easy to prove they were
then in Fear. Secondly, They know best, whether they were in Fear or no, who
subscribed or agreed to the Petition. And my Lord of Winchester agreed in it as
much as the rest, and instanced in the cause of his Fear, his chasing to
Lambeth. Thirdly, For the other part of the Objection, the Bishop of London was
then at Fulham, Rochester in Kent, Worcester at Oxford; nor does the Title of
the Petition comprehend them, as not being about London and Westminster.
Winchester did agree thereunto, and came thither to subscribe; and it was
resolved his Name should have been called for, ere ever it was to be solemnly
preferred to the King; which was never intended to be, but when the King sat
in the Upper House of the Lords, which the Bishops intended to pray His Majesty
to do: And this appears by the Superscription of the Petition.

Obj. 2. The nulling of all Laws to be made at this time, that the Kingdom of
Ireland was in jeopardy, was a conspiring with the Rebels to destroy that
Kingdom, and so amounted to Treason, or a high Misdemeanour.

(...) 1. A Protestation annulleth no Law, but so far as the Law shall extend
to the Parties protesting: Nor so far, but in case that the Parties protesting
shall afterward judicially prove their right to annull that Law: So that it was
impossible any Protestation of the Bishops should actually intend to hinder the
Relief of Ireland. 2 The Relief of Ireland by 10000 Scots and 10000 English,
was voted and concluded long before this Protestation, and all the Particulars
of that great business referred to a Committee of both Houses and the Bishops
unanimously assented thereto: So that the Relief of Ireland comes not within
the Date and Circumscription of this Protestation. And the Bishops call God to
witness, they never conceived one Thought that way. 3. The Bishops protested
against no Laws or Orders at all to be annulled absolutely, and for all the
time of this Session of Parliament simply, but for that space of time only,
wherein they should be forcibly and violently kept from the said Parliament, by
those rude and unruly People. So that as soon as the King and the Lords did
quiet their passage unto Parliament, (which the Lords did do before this
Petition was read in Parliament) and that any of the Bishops were present
there, the Protestation was directly null, and of none effect; so as indeed the
Protestation was void and dead in Law, before the L. Keeper brought the
Petition in question into the House; because the Bishop of Winchester, and some
others, had even then quiet access unto that Honorable House. And the Bishops
conceived the Protestation void in such a case, and do most humbly wave and
revoke the same, and humbly desire both Houses to accept thereof.

Obj. 3. They desire the King to command the Clerk of the House of Peers, to
enter this their Petition and Protestation among his Records; which derogates
from the Rights of Parliament: As though the King could be his Command make a
Record of Parliament.

(...) It is to be conceived, that the Bishops never intended that this
Petition (as may appear by the Directory thereof) should be preferred to the
King in any other place, but in the Upper House of Parliament. And it will
appear among the Records of that most Honorable House (11 Rich. II. number. 9.)
that the King in that House has commanded the like Protestation of the Bishops
to be enrolled, which made the Bishops use that Phrase. Howbeit, beside the
King's Command, the Assent of the Peers and Commons have still concurred, and
the Bishops never conceived it otherwise; which made them presume, that no
matter of their Protestation could possibly amount to any higher Crime than
that of Error or Mistake, considering that it was still to be admitted or
rejected by the King, with the Assent of the Peers and Commons.

Here the Answer ends, in this brief compass: Let all the Council in the Land
plead against it, and show where it is not sound and satisfactory. Yet the
Bishops desire no other reparation for their false Imprisonment, but Liberty,
and Safety to Vote in that House, to which they were called by the King's Writ.
Sidonius speaks in pity of Eutropia, lib. 6. ep. 2. Victoriam computat, si post
dammum non litiget. And these innocent men would not hold it for Justice done
unto them, if after so much Wrong sustained, the Contention might be ended.

170. Every subsequent Action of that Parliament did castrate their Hope, Day
uttered unto Day how they meant to dissolve that Primitive and Apostolic Order
piece by piece: And what shall we have next? The very Kingdom of Christ set up
in the Church, if you will believe them: As Pisistratus would persuade the
Athenians, that he changed not their Laws, but reduced them to those that were
in Solon's time, by which Trick he made them his Slaves, Laert. in Vit. Sol. Is
it possible that men could have the face to pretend more ancient Rulers in
Christ's Church than Bishops? The method of Sacrilege was, first to pluck the
Spiritual Lords out of the House, and to disable all the Clergy from
intermedling in Secular Affairs. The Bill is read, and easily passed, now the
Bishops were not in place to hear it, and dispute it. The Plaintiff pleads the
Cause at Westminster, what can the Defendant say to it in the Tower? Proceed,
my good Lords, he that runs alone by himself must needs be foremost. This was
worse than if a young Heir were sent to travel by his Guardian, and the
Guardian pulls down his House, fells his Woods, leaseth out his Lands, when he
is not in the way to look to it. But where were those Earls and Barons that
sided with the Bishops before? Shrunk, absent, or silent. -- They that are wise,
Leave falling Buildings, fly to them that rise.
Or as Plautus in Stych. as neat in his Comic Phrase as Johnson, Si labant res
lassae, itidem amici collabascunt. But the King's part is yet to come: The
Parliament makes ready a Bill, the King only makes it a Law: So he did this,
and it was the last, I think, that ever he signed: Why he did it, is a thing
not well known, and wants more manifestation: Necessity was in it, say they
that would look no further; Nulla necessitas excusat, quae potest non esse
necessitas, Tertul. Exh. ad Cast. c. 7. The most said, That nothing was more
plausible than this, to get the Peoples Favor: Or, that the Houses had sat
long, like to continue longer, and must have Wages for their Work; because they
are no Hirelings, they will choose and take, and this Boon they will have, or
the King shall have no Help from them. It would ill become a Royal Spirit, to
plead he was compelled by Fear, else His Majesty might have revoked this Act
upon that Challenge. As Sir Nic. Throgmorton, surpassing most of his Age for
Wit and Experience, assured Mary Queen of Scots, shut up in the hold of
Loquelevin, Cessionem in carcere extortam, qui justus est metus, plane irritam
esse, Cambd. Eliz. ann. 1569. Yet Fear had not so much stroke in this, as the
Persuasions of one whom His Majesty loved above all the World. The King foresaw
he was not like to get any thing from this Parliament but a Civil War, he would
not begin it, but on their part he heard their Hammers already at the Forge; Et
clandestinis turgentia fraudibus arma, Manil. lib. 1. He being most tender to
provide for the Safety of his Queen, went with her to Dover, to convey her into
France; not that she desired to turn her Back to Danger, or refused to partake
of all Hazards with her Lord and Husband, for she was resolute in that, as
Theogena the Wife of Agathocles, Justin. lib. 20. Nubendo ei, non prosperae
tantum, fed omnis fortunae iniisse societatem. But because His Majesty knew
himself, that he should be more courageous if his dear Consort were out of the
reach of his Enemies. Being at Dover, the Queen would not part with the King to
Shipboard, till he signed this Bill, being brought to believe by all
protestation of Faith from Sir John Culpepper, who attended there for that
Dispatch, that the Lords and Commons would press His Majesty to no more Bills
of that unpleasing nature: So the King snatched greedily at a Flower of a fair
Offer; and though he trusted few of the men at Westminster, yet in outward show
he would seem to trust them all, the more, because the Queen had such
Confidence in them. How Culpepper instilled this into the Queen, and how she
prevailed, York is my Author, and could not deceive me, for he told me in the
Tower, That the King had sacrificed the Clergy to this Parliament, by the
Artifices contrived at Dover, a day before the News were brought to London.
Then they fell to Bells and Bonfires, and profaned the Name of God, that He
had heard them, whose Glory was not in their Thoughts from the beginning to the
end. A Day-labourer lifts up his Ax toward Heaven, but strikes his Mattock
into the Earth. And all the Evil that the Earth breeds was in their Mind, when
they seemed to look up to God. That which is of God, must have its Foundation
in Humility, its binding fast in Obedience, its rising in Justice, and its
continuance in Peace. So begins the Misery and Fall of the Bishops. Synesius
has lent us words fit to express, jump in the same Case, Ep. 70. (...). That
is, the Bishops were expulsed merely by Slander, nothing being demonstrated to
lay any Crimes against them: And verily, God was gracious to them. What should
they have done as it turned to be in five months after? Better be alone than
ill accompanied. And if that World last still, they will never wear out the
Disgrace by Repealing that infamous Bill. I were wicked if I wished it not
otherwise, but foolish if I did hope it. I bewail not York more than I do the
rest. Nihil est praecipue cuiquam dolendum, in eo quod accidit universis. Cic.
lib. 6. Ep. ad Torquatum. Now when the worst was done, the merciful Judges in
Parliament gave the Bishops their Liberty. And most of those Grey-heads sled
from London, or were imprisoned, in no long distance of time upon it. In May
after York went away privily to seek the King, and never returned again. (...),
Diodor. Sic. lib. 13. Few men ever lived whose lives had more Paradoxes in
them. But from that day his Afflictions were constant to him, and never lent
him pause or intermission of Peace. Qui per virtutem peritat pol non interit.
The Gail of Anguish is the Cup of Salvation, to him that gives thanks unto the
Name of the Lord.

171. London was no place to contain the Lords and Gentry, that remembered they
were sworn to be faithful to the Crown, when it was known that the King had sat
down in the City of York. Many came seasonably thither; many made ready for it,
and were stopped: abundance sent their Purse: the Poor and wellmeaning sent their
hearts, who would have failed beyond the Cape of Neutrality, and cast Anchor on
the King's shore, if their Company could have brought profit or service. Our
Archbishop of that Province came with the first, being as restless as Tully was
to leave Rome in the stirs of Pompey, Hinc ipse evolare cupio, ut aliquo
perveniam, ubi nec Pelopidarum nomen, nec facta audiam, Lib. ep. fam. He had
been translated from Lincoln to this Dignity seven months before; He that gives
a Promotion to a worthy man obliges all men: and this was marvellously well
taken by all the Clergy of the Diocese. Until that day he had not seen the
place, from which he was entitled; which he had proposed to be the Scene
wherein he would do the part of an Archbishop in great splendour. His Means were
sufficient; his Inclinations very hospital; Provisions abundant in that
Country: the Gentry addicted to Liberality, or rather Profuseness: no man was
ever so cut out to please them, since Alex. Nevil's days for magnificence. But
God prevented it, that he could never settle his Household in Yorkshire, as he
desired. He found every thing looking with a face of Confusion, the gallantry
of the South poured into the North, not to begin a War, but ready for the
defensive part, as was expected. There are Mischiefs approaching when common
bodings misgive them: which were not discerned soon enough, through fatal
Security, before they were ripened. As Budaeus writes of France upon the first
breaking out of Wars at home, That France wanted eyes, and ears, and, which is
strange, they wanted a Nose; Qui cladem adventantem odorari ante non potuimus,
quam ab ea oppressi, Lib. 4. de Ass, fol. 110. The Presbyterians, those
Scalda-banco's, or hot Declamers, had wrought a great distaste in the Commons at
the King, and at all that had his ear and favor. The Age growing Learned, and
Knowledge puffing up, Scholars grew more impudent and malapert with us, and in
every state, than did become their Function. Our much Peace, which had lasted
almost two Jubilees, was seeded with great Vice in our manners. Young men lived
idly, which made them want, and therefore were ready for Bustles and Commotions
to boot-hale and consume: they that proposed to themselves no laborious kind of
Life, expected Alterations, and then to have enough to lavish. And not a few of
these were of good Houses decayed, that, as one says, Had ancient Coats of all
colors, but lack't Argent and Ore. Tempestuous weather was sit for their
Harvest. And when Wars broke out, they crept out of their Cranies, like the
Cimici in the Houses of Italy, not of rotten Bedsteds. But the Parliament, our
continual Hectic, did lend their Arm to all Mischief, to usher it in. They
could not bow the King to all their Votes, and abase him to be contented with a
shadow of Sovereignty, therefore they ranged every thing to a War, as palpably,
as if their Drums and Colors had been in the Fields. Bacchae Bacchanti si
velis adversarier, Insanam insaniorem facies: feriet saepius. Plauti Frag.
Their Motions now were not Mutinies a mutiendo, but Vociferations, as loud as
an Herald could proclaim them. But God will never suffer the abuse of fiduciary
Power (which a good, but an improvident King had past away) to go unpunisht in
themselves, or in their Children. Perditissimi est hominis fallere eum, qui
laesus non esset, nisi credidisset. Cic. Off. l. 2. The King deserved the
better from them, that reposed upon their duty both his own honor, and the
weal of all his Subjects. The more public the Person is, the more he must
betake him to trust many. Nay, none so private, no Action that comes abroad so
mean, but you must believe in the fidelity of some. As Russinus very well upon
the Creed, Nihil est quod in vita geri possit, si non credulitas ante
praecesserit. The City of London came in for a great share, to encourage the
drawing of the Sword; provided that the War came not near their Lines of
Communication. This City, the Epitome of England, marred all England: as S.
Hierom plays upon the River Pactolus, that it has golden Sands, but unwholesom
water, Ditior caeno quam fluento, that the Mud was the best part of their
River, Ep. ad Mar. and Alex. So muddy Wealth was the best thing that the Chuffs
of the City had: much else was but Dish-water: except some few of the old
store, Sir H. Garrway, Sir Ri. Gurney, and their like, who were poured into the
Kennel for their fidelity. But the worst of them all durst never have been so
stout, if the Parliament had not held up their Spirit in their wickedness. And
there was a Nation, that shall not escape me, that whistled to the Jades that
plowed up the Furrows of our Land, and gave them Provendore, I mean the French:
to whom yet I will ascribe what Magius the Patavine does, Gens bellicosissima,
honorisque appetontissima. It has a stock of very noble Gentry, but sick of
two faults, they abhor the Spaniards, hate the English, and wish the Confusion
of both: which may turn upon themselves. They object how we assaulted them at
Rhee: but forget what we did for them at Amiens, and Calis. They remember King
Charles his Navy at Rochel: but take no notice of Queen Elizabeth, who advanced
Harry the Fourth to the Crown, in spite of the Leaguers. These kindled the
Brands that set their Neighbors House on fire: which lies sleeping under the
Ashes of our memory; and they may repent it when they want us. Now what banding
here was on every side, to ruin the greatest Saint that ever ruled our Nation?
God was in them that came about him with their homage in such a time of hazard.
Magna negotia magnis adjutoribus egent. Paterc. And I am sure the Metropolitan
of York was none of the meanest of David's Worthies for Plot and Direction. He
was fit for the Service, and obliged to assist it. For as Scipio Nasica very
well, No good man is a private man; most of all, if the weal public needs him.

172. But the King's Condition at York was not in such strength and readiness
as it deserved: though the brave and resolute Spirits about him thought not so.
They persuaded themselves that the very Name of a King would supply the want of
Power: and that they were on the right side, as sure as God's Word could
warrant them. Causaque valent, causamque tuentibus armis
Ut puto vincemus.
Luca. l. 8. For all that, the Parliament had made better preparation for a
War. First, A most deluded People, made to believe that his Majesty had
gathered a Popish Army to change Religion. Quod sibi probare non possunt, id
persuadere aliis conantur. Cic. pro Rose. Com. But upon this false Fame their
great Preacher St. Marshall tells them, page 6. of his Letter, That they may
secure their Religion against their King with a good Conscience. Next they had
the Nerves of War, all the Money of London at their command: and, which was the
worst of all Infelicities, they had cheated his Majesty of his Navy, and seized
on his Magazines. It was not sit that the King should stay out their
Provocations, and when they had soaled, then see what was in their Belly. Dubia
pro veris solent
Timere Reges.
Sen. Oedi. And it was not reasonable to abide their Courtesy, who had voted
for Delinquents all that did Service to their Lord and Master. They did all
they could to disturb the tranquillity of a Soul most excellently composed, and
to tire him out of his Principles. He held out the first Olive Branch, and
sought Peace from them by a most gracious Message; who in right should have
begun. But as Lasicius notes of the sullen-proud Russians, Ni prior ipse
salutaveris, non salutaberis, Theol. Mosc. p. 64. They salute none that do not
first uncover, and salute them. It was not once or twice that his Majesty sent,
but he persisted, yet all in vain, to draw a dutiful Answer from them. And
what is more tedious than to cast all day, and not to throw a good Chance? Since
nothing would serve them but to rally the Sons of the Earth, the Titans of
their Tumults, and to fill up an Army with them, the King retired into his deep
Thoughts, what was best to be done. Hic magnus sedet AEneas, secumque volutat
-- Eventus belli varios.
Aen. l. 10. A Prince of so much Religion and Mercy was not to learn, That it
was sit to be slow in an Enterprise of so high a nature; For Kingdoms in their
Channels safely run,
But rudely overflowing are undone;
says our English Horace. It is Marcianus his Maxim in Zonaras, (...), A King
must never fly to Arms, if a noble, nay if a tolerable Peace may be had. Yet
again, he did not forget that a prosperous Wind might blow away a Storm that
was gathering, before the Shower fell upon him. Fest inandum antequam cresceret
invalida conjuratio paucorum. Tacit. Hist. l. 1. Be sudden before a Conjuration
strengthen it self, and give it no day. And Pliny brings it for the Advice of
Apollo's Oracle, Biduo citius messem potius facere, quam biduo serius, Lib. 18.
c. 3. Begin Harvest two days too soon, rather than two days too late. Alluding
not to the Rural, but the Politic Harvest. Another, and a good Genius too,
would say to the contrary: What! will you embroil the Land in a Civil War?
Every Life that is slain in it, on either side, is the King's damage. And the
blood of Christians shed in rebellion, is poured on the Devil's Altar. Every
Field, and Town, and Castle that is spoiled is the Kings loss; who has the
dominion of all the Earth that serves him, though not the Property. His Majesty
knew the worth and good Governance of many in his List, Pacisque boni, bellique
ministri.
Aen. l. 11.

But who could promise for so many hot Bloods, as were upon the place, that
they would not rob and ransack the Innocent, and make the Army odious by too
much Cruelty upon the Nocent? All are not a King's Friends that follow him: so
do Flies the smell of strong Drink: but they that will maintain his Honor with
Obedience, as well as his Quarrel with Manhood. If the Headstronger should be
more in number -- Such an If is enough to discourage any one to be the Captain
of a Civil War. Nam in civilibus bellis plus militibus quam Duci licet. Tacit.
Hist. lib. 2. Their Commander dare not displease them; so much he fears Revolt,
or Treachery. And his Majesty's great Wildom could not like it, that his
Cavaliers were too consident and Secure. Contemnendis quam cavendis hostibus
aptiores. Idem Hist. l. 4. No man could persuade them that there was either
number, wit, skill, or valor among the Rebels. But says a Master of Military
Art, Veget. l. 3. Ille difficile vincitur, qui de suis and adversarii copiis
recte potest judicare. It was safer for the Royal Battalion to know that the
Enemy multiplied fast, and pleased diverse, by laying themselves forth abroad to
to all show of Sobriety and Holiness, though sincere Honesty had no Charge of
them. And Despair will make Chicken-hearted Soldiers courageous. They that had
drawn their Sword against their Sovereign, must throw away the Scabbard. They
must purple their hands with slaughter in the Field, or be hanged in Ignominy.
What would they do to break all the Bands of the Law in sunder, the King's Name
and Authority, which would not allow them their Book to save them? These things
might be so deliberated in the King's Camp, or Cabinet; I cannot definitely say
it. For after the Archbishop departed from Westminster to the North, I never
saw him more to confer with him; from whom before I learnt all things in effect
that I knew. But as Tully writes L. de Senec. of L. Maximus, Illud divinavi,
quod jam evenit, illo extincto fore unde discerem neminem. After I mist him,
who was wont to tell me, not barely what was done, but the reasons, the
fitness, or incommodities of it, I have heard somewhat, but I understand
little. And I make as much moan for the want of him, as St. Basil did for
Martinlan, Ep. 379. (...). What skills it to hear many Discourse one after
another, when this one had gathered as much Experience and Wisdom as them all?
But the tidings came from the most interested in both Armies, That none was
more active than this great Prelate, to keep Yorkshire in obedience to the
King, to reduce them that were perverted: none more assiduous in the
Consultations of War with the Gentry to raise Money, Men, and Horse for the
Army. This was hung up in Picture in the Hall and Change. And let them do their
worst in those penny Tables, Sint modo carminibus non onerata malis, as
Passeratius deprecates all bad Epitaphs, let them make good Verses to their
Pictures, or let their Poets hang up for Company. But let this go together with
his Loyalty, that there was not one man that served him as Lord Keeper or
Bishop, but either served or suffered in the King's Cause, except a brace whom
Kilvert had long before perverted. They that were affected to the sin of the
Parliament, saw so much opposition in him, and fierceness to bring them on
their knees, that the same unhappy ones vowed his death, and were near to
execution, who first refisted his Majesty at Hull.

-- quae prima malorum
Causa fuit, belloque animos incendit agrestes.
Aen. l. 7. Which is worth a story to observe, that these Professors of the new
Discipline, made no scruple to break down God's double Defense, Touch not mine
anointed, and do my Prophets no harm.

173. King Charles his coming to York was not a Progress of Delight, but an
Escape from his Palace of West minster, for the Alarums of continual Mutinies,
which he could not stand out with safety. As great a blemish to the Parliament
that provided no better for him, as the flight of Harry the Third of France was
to the Guisians on the Sunday, which is still called by them Dominica dolearis,
when they would have block't him up with Piles of Wine-Casks in the Louver, to
keep him fast for stirring. His Majesty's first care was, and ought to be, to
have some Hold of good Defense for Retreat, if Bloodhounds sought him. And
happy was that Fortress, of which he should make Election for so good a
Service. All places are patent to a Monarch that are under his Laws and
Scepter, though he were a Tyrant. Then what inferior Officer would not be glad
to give the Keys of his Government upon his Knees to as great a Saint as
Josiah? Tribonius writes well to that matter in an Epistle to Tully of Caesar,
Lib. 12. Ep. Fam. Eum, quem necesse erat diligere, qualiscunque esset, talem
habemus, ut libenter quoque diligamus. And certainly he that should repulse the
King in his first design, must both be his first and his greatest Enemy. Initia
fere dare formam negotiis, Thuan. An. 1558. The first Success gives Spirit to
an Army, and Honor to their Chief. Which the solid man Tacitus teaches, Hist.
lib. 2. Ut initia belli provenissent, famam in caetero fore. And if the first
Expedition be unfortunate, it is as ominous, as a sinister hour at the birth of
a Child, when an Astrologer Calculates a Nativity. So unauspicious it was that
his Majesty did stumble, I may say, at the Threshold, when he came out of
Doors. He goes to Hull, where he had stowed up Shot, Powder, Arms in his
Magazine. The Gates are kept shut, the Walls manned, Sir John Hotham and his
Son capitulate that they keep it for the Parliament. Dirarum nidis domus
opportuna volucrum. Aen. 8. A strong Cage it was to keep these unclean Birds
from the Royal Eagle. Great Ordnance, great Provision, great Wealth were
within. No man would have sealed up a Box so fast, if it had been empty. Yet
the Hothams were so kind, that they offered Entrance to his Majesty's Person,
with a few of his unarmed Servants: which was no better than to receive him to
be their Prisoner. Intempestiva benevolentia mhil a simultate differt, says
Politian. Ep. p. 26. Nothing is more hateful than a malicious Courtesy. But
they looked to be born out in all they did by the strength of their great
Masters; and had cast it up, that when Crimes are carried in a happy strain of
Luck, they lose their Infamy; that shame seldom or never follows victory. The
Names of Delinquent or Traitor never scared them. Haec acies victum factura
nocentem est. Silius. He must be the Delinquent that is at the Conquerour's
Mercy. Unlucky Town of Hull for thy Commanders sakes! Perhaps some other
Garrisons would have been as bad as it, if they had been tried. Perhaps so. But
no Dunghill smells ill till you stir it. Hull had the opportunity to be
renowned, if it had yielded to be the King's Harbor. Now her Infamy is like
that of the Village of the Samaritans, which would not receive the Lord Christ,
Luke 9.52. I do not condemn all that were within her Walls, who could not help
this Insolency, but with groans and tears, if they durst do that. I will plead
for such (as I know there were such) as Isocrates did for the Plata^ks, forced
by the Thebans to do unkindness to their Friends the Athentans, (...), The
Theban, constrained their Bodies, but their Hearts were with you. Their
Lecturers were the Corrupters of that Corporation, who had preached the People
from Charitable to Censorious, from neighbourly Love to Faction, from Subjects
to Rebels, from Sheep to Swine. Qua magis via irrepunt vitia quam publica?
Prin. l. 36. c. 2. If you would have some great harm done, employ those, who
are heard so often in public, and they shall do a mischief sooner than all the
Brotherhood of the Guild beside. Absalom sent Spies throughout all the Tribes
of Ifrael, saying, as soon as ye hear the sound of the Trumpet, ye shall say
Absalom reigns in Hebron, 1 Samuel 15.10. Spies, says Grotius upon the place, and
in all the Tribes. Some of these must be Levites, for none but they dwelt among
all the Tribes. Genus hominum ad turbandas res maxim idoneum, ubi suis
indulgent affectibus. These are they, that will sooner rail against me for this
observation, then leave off their girdings at the Civil State, and keep close
to that matter only which Christ has taught them in his Gospel. Their bald
Rhetoric, sit for great Ears, and gross Brain^, made the King wait attendance
two hours at their Gate, and had his Commands, nay his Prayers despised. O that
a King should give the stoop to such as these? -- Meumque
Objeci caput, and supplex ad limina veni.
Aen. 8. So great a heart in another Prince would not have turned away, without
Choler and Fire flashing upon them. But he was a Sovereign over all his
Passions, and opened not his mouth. Nullius hominis quam sui simillimus, as was
said of Picus Mirandula; He had no pattern of a mere Man before him, and none
that saw him for a Pattern was ever like him for Patience. So let Cerberus that
kept the Gates of Hull. keep them still. It is a greater honor to come off
with Judgment, than to go on with Courage in a desperate Service. So the King
retired from them, who were worthy to be torn up from the Society of Men. But
the Hothams came forth of their Dens to raven for a Prey: they had the forehead
to appear and not blush, unless blood did rise in their Face, when they did
mind to shed it. And the Archbishop escaped them as narrowly, as David did
Saul, when Michol let him down throw a Window, and put an Image in his Bed to
cousin her Fathers Messengers, 1 Samuel 19.13. My Relation I deliver out of the
mouth of Mr. Roger Nightingale, a Gentleman of the King's Chapel, who was in
Cawood-Castle with the Archbishop, When the pious and learned Dr. Fern,
requiting his Patron for the Archdeaconry of Leicester, came to him late at
night with a solicitous counrenance, and warned him to change that Lodging, and
that Country, as he tendered his Life, for the younger Hotham was making ready
to come with force enough by five of the Clock the next Morning to take the
Castle, and had drawn his Sword before some Gallants, with a Vow to cut off the
Archbishop's head. The Family was much amazed; for Cawood was unprovided,
ruinous, undefensible: Young Hotham was a rough piece, provoked by the
Archbishop's language among all his Alliances for the disloyalty ut Hull; and
above all, as Vellicius says of Clodius, Malorum propositorum executor
acerrimus, One that never promised an ill turn, but he paid it. So after
midnight the Person whose Life alone was threatened, made haste out of the
House, with some few Horse in his Company, conveyed away such of his Goods, as
could be saved in so short a time, left the Charge of the Place with Mr.
Nightingale, who stoutly undertook it, and was Summoned with a Trumpet at the
hour expected, and having no Colors, hung out a Sheet for a Parley with the
Assailants. Whose Leader fell into a rage, when he heard from the Window, that
the man lay not there that night, whom he called out to speak with; but upon
condition to save the Lives of all the persons in the Castle, (which was
faithfully kept) and to allow them Carts to carry away all their Furniture but
Arms, the place was surrendered up. The last Article was broken, and nothing
was saved from the top to the bottom from the plunder of the Soldiers: But God
provided that his Person was saved, whom the Lions Whelp would have murdered in
cold Blood: Quam pome furvae regna Proserpinae, etc. Horat. Od. lib. 2. How
near was the Sword to the Thread of his Life, to cut it off? Venerable Bede
relates a strange Passage, That Felix (well might he be named so) a Presbyter
of Nola, ran under a Staircase, from one that followed him with a naked
Weapon, and no sooner was Felix got in, but a Spider spun a Webb before the
entrance of that dark place, which made him lurk there unsuspected. But
Solinus, page 11. would make us believe, that Castor and Pollux called Pindar
the Poet out of his House, to speak with him, which fell down, by a fault in
the Foundation, as soon as he was come out of doors. I am sure it was worthy
Dr. Fern who called the Archbishop out of Cawood, else he had been sacrificed
to the Fury of a wicked Doeg; and I am as sure that the Doctor thinks himself
happy, that he saved so precious a Life. Now, what became of Hothams, Father
and Son, whom their Patrons brought out of Hull to the Scaffold on Tower Hill,
is known to all; for there is none for whose sake you do a wicked thing, but
they despise you in their Heart, and when their turn is served, they will cast
you off, as one that deserves no better than Scorn: As David served himself a
while of Joab, and left order at last to cut him off.

174. In a midnight Affrightment the Archbishop left his House and Diocese, as
he thought for a while, but it was for ever. He went away without a Sumpter,
nay, not with so much as change of Apparel; and for Coin, it was so near to
Cantabit vacuus, etc. he was sure that no Highway-men would stop him for a
Booty. All that he could gather while he was among his Tenants in Yorkshire,
was little enough to furnish the King: But his good luck was in his passage, to
find His Majesty gathering a rolling Army, the Drums beating for Volunteers, in
which Service he left some of his stoutest Followers behind him, and kept a
slender Attendance, to carry him to the furthest parts of North Wales. At his
parting, upon his bended Knee, with Tears running down his Cheeks, and hearty
Prayers for His Majesty, he received his Gracious Hand and Manual Seal for his
safe Passage and Convoy, which brought him to his native Soil, beyond
Pen-man-maur; where let him keep for a while, till I have shown the great Sin
of our Land, the Troubles of a Civil War, wherein the King was involved without
any Fault of his. Every Digression is not a Transgression. When His Majesty saw
he had no Power to stop the daily Uproars about his Palace of Whitehall, which
did emperil and threaten his Life, because the Commons gave them Thanks, upon
all occasions, for their readiness to assist them; the Lords of the
Privy Council, and his trusty Servants, could see no other in it than a Spark
of Rebellion, and a Seed of War. Neither did they cast about mistrustful and
unfaithful Doubts, for he that had his Senses could not err in that
apprehension: Potest est bellum sine tumultu, tumultus sine bello esse non
potest. It is the Judgment of the Senator Cicero Philip. 8. A War may be
prosecuted without a Tumult; a Tumult cannot continue without a War. But the
King minded not so much that his Life, as that his Honor was at the Stake; for
he hated Rebellion more for the Indignity, than the Danger: Yet it becomes a
Prince, more for our Good than his, to preserve both his Person and his
Dignity. Upon mature Judgment, he travels by easy Journeys, with his Household,
into the North, where he finds the Parliament professing Hostility against him
by their Command and Overt Act, denying him way into the Town of Hull, and the
use of his Magazine; a Confront no less outrageous than if they had given him
Battle. Is not every foot of Ground in the Land, upon which Man and Beast
treads, subject to the King's Dominion? Is not his Crown reached at, when any
part of it is held against him? This is Gospel, and it will be Law, if ever
this Case come to a sober reckoning. Subjection being quite disclaimed, and
that with a Martial Defiance, it was in vain to dispute what Redress there was
for it, when there was none, but to look to the Array, and to muster stout and
loyal Soldiers: Yet with what unwillingness did his Wise and Pious Heart go
about it? How many Offers of Accordance did he make in that very Instant? How
many Messengers were posted to London? which was no better than to dry-ditch
the business; for every Offer of Grace made his Enemies haughty, the King's
Reputation less, his Friends suspicious, that he could sooner entreat for, than
defend his Cause. Paper Mercuries, well worded, are fine things, but not
forcible: (...) -- (...). for Ulysses sake, so much abused, says Homer; For K.
Charles so much rejected, say I, let no Prince hope to bend the stubborn and
revolted Subject with Goodness and Mildness; break them to pieces, and quell
them with Power; there is no other Art to work upon such churlish Metal.
Forasmuch then as the King saw that he but abused advantage of time to knock at
a Door, that would never be opened, he opened the Temple of Janus, that was
close shut before, and let out War, if it might be called so, who brought
scarce 600 into the Field; but had his Array been forty times more, he would
not have looked how strong he was, but how innocent, and the more innocent,
because most unwilling. Well did the Orator state it, lib. 4. ep. 7. Sapientem
and bonum virum initia belli civilis invitum suscipere, (...) non libenter
persequi. Which was consonant to the Hearts-affection of our King, as he took
it upon his Death. And to speak to common Reason and Charity a man whose Paths
were Piety, his Governance Mercy, his Bed Chastity, his Repast Sobriety, his
Addresses Humility, how could he set a Ditty to any other Pricked Song, but the
Tune of Peace?

175. What Pardon can we expect from the Censure of a better Age, that we did
not stop the Fury of Malcontents, before any drop of Blood was shed? I appeal
to Fidelity, Homage, Duty, why did we no instantly raise an Host of Horse and
Foot, which Rebels would not dare to encounter? And because Help from remoter
Countries would be too flow for sudden action, why did not the adjacent
Counties come in all as one man, where the Royal Standard was pitched? Water
which is to be setch'd far will not quench a Fire. There are some Virtues which
lose their Name, unless they operate as soon as their fit Object is before
them. To be loyal, to be thankful, to be just, to be remorseful, should be done
ex tempore. And I appeal to Prudence, who does not know, that if you endure the
Fever of a Civil War to have one Fit, it will have more, and consume the
Body-politick before it be cured? Semper erit paribus bellum, quia viribus
aequant, Manil. lib. 1. Which Sir Walter Ral^igh well translates, Hist. p. 179.
Equals from Equals will receive equal harms. When a domestic War seizes on a
Country rich in Plenty, and full of Surfeits with continual Ease, it never
leaves purging those Superfluities till all be wast d. It was an Imposture
which many were willing to put upon their own Cenference by this Excuse, that
they did nothing against Allegiance, because they took not the contrary part.
First, None can sin against themselves, but that they incurr a great Guilt; and
those betrayed their Liberties and Livelihoods to the Rage of Tyrants, for not
defending themselves; themselves, I say, for while they fight for their King,
they fight for themselves; if he fall, they are ruined, in whose Weal their own
is comprehended. And their not listing themselves in the King's Battalion, was
a Trespass: It is called (...) by one word in Greek, when the Subjects make not
ready to follow their Sovereign in Arms: And note the Punishment of it, 1 Samuel
11.7. Saul hewed a yoke of oxen, and sent them throughout all the coasts of
Israel, by the hands of his messengers, saying, Whosoever comes not forth
after Saul and Samuel, so shall it be done to his oxen: and the fear of the
Lord fell on the people, and they came out with one consent. Not the care of
Wife and Children in a Family, not a weak Body, not a gray Head should free a
Subject from such a Service. To the latter, which may look more excusable than
the rest, Symmachus gives an Instance, p. 10. Epis. Nullam Nestor tertio
aetatis curriculo militiae vacationem poposcit. Where was the English Piety, or
where was their Bravery at this season, that so few adventured themselves to
draw their Swords for the Lord's Anointed, when so many invited themselves
unbidden to do a Mischief? I go further: They were basely backward to come
forth into the Field, when they should have stood manfully to their own Cause;
for it was not the King's Cause alone, it was the Kingdoms Cause, and the King
was in the Cause: Non magni parts, sed magnum in partibus esse, Lucan. lib. 5.
Put King Charles into the Verse for Pompey, and the sense is the same. I have
no Name scurvy enough for it, that without some special feelings and ends of
their own, few lead on to remove an Evil for the common Relief, but would
thrust every man before them into the danger of an Action; if they can share in
the Profit of an Event, they mind not the Glory: And that which in Reason
should have drawn the Peasants on, held them back, the small Band of Soldiers
that marched after His Majesty. This Objection was every man's Fault, that did
not make the thin Files more by one. And it was every ones Infidelity, that
would not trust in the Lord of Hosts to maintain the Right. He gives power to
the faint, and to them that have no might he increases strength, Isa. 40.29.
What Cowardice was it to think all was lost, before they struck a stroke?
Turpiter desperatur quicquid fieri potest, Live. lib. 10. If God had given the
Multitude Faith to remove this Despair, and to have obeyed the King in the
first Onset, Rebellion had sunk into the Ground like Snow, and nothing could
have been added to our Prosperity with wishing.

176. And yet I will not say that the Sin of Omission was bad in all alike;
some did not discharge Allegiance out of Imprudence and Frailty, but take them
by the Poll, and more offended out of Design and Subtilty; such as turned their
Sails to the changableness of the Wind: Utcunque in alto ventus est velum
vortitur. So Plautus, of such crafty Time-servers. That (...) I condemned, when
subjects did not give up their names to the king's militia, was worse in them
by far, that kept at home, till they saw how fortune went abroad, who would be
of no side in the open dispute, that in the end they might be of the victor's
side: they would wear the king's colors in the pale purple, if the day were
his; or Essex's Badge in Orange-tawny, if Treason proved prosperous. These
Neutralists are of a Spaniel Brood, that will fawn as much upon a Stranger as
upon their Master, and are welcome to none, because they undertake
Impossibilities, to be gracious with all. As Curtius does instance in Amyntas,
lib. 4. Semper (...) ancipiti rerum mutatione pendens; he would please the
Macedonians, and not displease the Persians, and was distrusted by both. And
Livy gives us an Example in Servilius, lib. 19. He was forward to plead for the
Authority of the Senate, and not backward to justify the opposite Liberty of
the People: Ita medium se gerendo, nec plebis odium vitavit, nec apud patres
iniit gratiam. I would not have my L. Bacon ill interpreted in his Essay of
Faction, whose words appear more crafty than honest: Let a man be true to
himself, with an end to make use of both Factions. He speaks not of two Camps
in the Field, one headed by the King, another by Cade, or Watt Tyler, but of
two great parts in the Court, that have Clients adhering to them, and
should'ring one-another out of Favor, if they can; for he expounds it thus
upon that very Contrast: Mean men, in their risings, must adhere to one side,
but great men, that have Strength in themselves, were better to maintain
themselves neutral and indifferent. But he that comes not to quench the Flame
when the King's House is set on Fire, watching what will be the Fate of the
Incendiaries, he deserves to undergo a Saxon Ordeal, to pass through hot
Plow-shares to reveal his Double-deasing. Solon's Law in Plutarch has escaped
no man, I think, that has written Politics, (...): In a public Seditum, be
that looks on, and will be of no side, till the Fray be done, is to be branded
with Infamy. I will degree this noxious Neutrality one Peg higher, when a
cunning Fox, that would save all, curried Favor both with King and Rebels,
lent his Sword to him, and his Pistols to them: Dubiis Mars errat in armis,
Georg. 2. Like the god of War, that fights on both sides. What say you to two
Kinsmen, what say you to two Brothers showing their Prowess one against
another, he for Caesar, and he for the Republicans; this a Gibelline, and that
a Guelph? that upon the last Revolution of the Quarrel, the faithful Brother
may merit to compound for the Peace of the false; or, if God would have it so,
the false for the faithful. This was the Mystery of Iniquity, when the same
Family had such a reciprocal Interest in our public Miseries, that their Cards
were so well packt, that they could not be Losers. An Example which Sir Robert
Dallington has given for such juggling, is worthy to be remembered, Aphor. lib.
2. c. 2. The Duke of Ferrara would not enter into League with Charles the Third
of France; but suffered his Son Alsonso to sight under the Duke of Millain, as
his Lieutenant General, that the Son might make the Father's Peace if the
Leagues prevailed, and that he might free his Son if the French had the better.
What Reward should these have? But as the Scripture speaks properly, Let them
be divided in twain, and (...) their portion with Hypocrites. A Siren, half
Flesh and half Fish, is painted with its Eyes always cast upon its
Looking-glass, because such amphibious and all-part-pleasing Creatures have
their Eyes upon nothing but their own Preservation. And Theophrastus, in his
Character of a glavering Sycophant, pinns this Knave upon his Back; (...)
(...). He will please his Client, and strike in with his Client's Adversary,
because he would be of that gender, which is the common of two, and so become
unprofitable to both in proper construction. I need not be long in this, for an
ingenuous Pagan, how much more a Christian, will easily learn this Lesson, to
be hot or cold; the lukewarm Quality, that partakes of both, is fit to make a
Vomit. Salmasius writes upon Solinus, That Tityrus was a Mungril Beast,
begotten between a Goat and an Ew: But there is no Creature of that composition
to be presented at the last day, before the Judgment of God: They that are at
the right Hand must be pure Sheep, harmless, gentle, without any Goatishness in
them; and surely those Tityri will be found among the worst of the Goats, that
are rejected to the left Hand.

177. After Caterpillars, the Locusts succeeded; such as you may find Rev. c.
9. v. 2, 7. The bottomless Pit (that is, the endless Parliament) was opened;
and a smoke went out of the pit, (a Cloud of Ordinances to make War with the
King) And there came locusts out of the smoke, no ordinary ones, but such as
had stings like scorpions, who were like borses prepared to battle, and they
had as it were crowns like gold (for they took the Sovereignty of Kingly Power
upon them). I do not interpret, but allude unto the place; They that commanded
in the bottomless Pit, had Wealth enough to maintain an Army, all that London
and the Land was worth. But to maintain their Cause, that is, to sight against
their Lawful King, all their Money could not purchase them so much Scripture,
Law, or Reason, as would justify them with one Argument. Their Preachers
over-stretch'd their Sinews to defend them, and could not, but left it to the
Swordmen, to hold it out at the Arms end: Yet they abused so much Divinity, as
would serve to cover some of the deformity of the Sin, with a few torn pieces
of Jeroboam's Garment; for I am persuaded of some of them, that if they had
looked upon their Impious Act, without a Disguise, they would have run mad at
the astonishment of their Guiltiness. All this Mischief was their
Pulpit-ranters Work. The great Sedition raised against Moses and Aaron, Numb.
16. is called the Gainsaying of Core. Wherefore should Core carry the Name,
since Dathan and Abiram, great Princes, had their Hands in it? Because that
mucinous (...) did more harm by his prating, than all the Factious in the
Conspitacy beside. The (...) of this Design gave great Wages to their
Chaplains, but the Work which they performed was not worth the half of it,
between Knave and Knave: The Crime was so black, that they could not lay any
white upon it, to make it color like Justice and Innocence. They dodg'd St.
Paul, Romans c. 13. and St. Peter's Text, 1 Ep. c. 2. v. 11. with as many
turnings as ever old Hare gave to a brace of Greyhounds, but they could find
nothing out of the Scriptures to make them look like theirs; nor any Quotation
out of pure Antiquity in the best Ages of the Church, to adjust their execrable
Action: And must not that Cause be very bad, which could not put on a good
outside, either from the Authority of God or Man? Only as they enforced
accumulative Misdemeanors against the Earl of Strassord, to indict him of
Treason, so they raked up accumulative Misgovernments in Charge against the
King, to allow themselves the committing of Treason. All their Shifts and
Shufflings shall be cursorily examined; though their Persons are in a
Sanctuary, so are not their Opinions: There is a Writer, Gisbert Voetius of
Utrecht, learned indeed, but bitter minded against our King, and the old
Settlement of our Church; this man the Assembly of Divines did easily gain unto
them, and for their Interest he states a Question, Disput. tom. 2. p. 852. How
Subjects may quell their King, and pull him down by force of A^: Which is
intended for our English Case, cut out into as many Exceptions almost as there
he words in the Thesis, and all the Particulars wrongly applied to our ungodly
Distempers. His Hammer strikes thus upon the Forge: Primo quaestio est an a
Proceribus, Statibus, Ordinibus, Magistratibus Superioribus Infericribus, qui
pro ratione regiminis publica auctoritate instructi sunt? (palea.) 2. Regi and
Principi limitato and conditionato? (palea.) 3. In extremo necessitatis casu?
(palea.) 4. Post omnia frustra tentata? (palea.) 5. Secundum leges, and pacta
fundamentalia principatus? (palea.) 6. Defensive armis resisti? (palea.) 7. Ut
respub. ab interitu conservari possit? (palea.) First When had our Peers, our
Magistrates, superior and inferior Power to bring His Majesty by Fear or
Force into Order? Never. 2. When was his Empire limited or made conditional,
otherwise than to charge his Conscience before God to keep his Laws? Never. 3.
Were we brought by ill administration to the brink of extreme Necessity? No
such thing. 4. Or, were all dutiful means tried to obtain the King's Consent to
honest Demands? Widest of all from Truth. 5. Or, have we Pactions sundamental
between the King and People, to constrain him to concur with their Proposals?
It Is a mere Chimera. 6. Did the Parliament wage the defensive part of the War?
Quite mistaken. 7. Was there no other way, but by such a rout of Russians to
keep our native Country from Ruin? Nay, was it in the least danger of Ruin? Not
at all: not till these (...), these Club-Lawyers, silled the whole Land with
Blood and Burning. What cutting and carving has this Dutch Workman made, to
bring us to worship the Idol of Rebellion! And when all is said, we know that
an Idol is nothing in the World. 1 Cor. 3.4. and as it follows, there is no
other God but one, and none but that one God above the King, against whose
punitive Justice, and none beside, K. David offended.

178. Many things were alleged to commence and continue this fatal War: Quae
prima querar? Quae summa gemam? Pariter cuncta deslere juvat, Sen. Her. Fur.
One thing made a loud cry, far and wide, That His Majesty had left his
Parliament, and that the Members fate in great danger. This was a Scandal
taken, which did raise such Enemies, whom nothing else could have tempted from
their Loyalty. He lest his Parliament; yes, but consider it intelligently, not
till he had granted as much as was abundant for our Liberty, Peace, and
Welfare; not till he had yielded up more Branches of his Sovereignty and
Revenue, than all his Predecessors had granted in 300 years before; not till he
had trusted them to spend out that Parliament at their own leisure, and yet
they would trust him with nothing: An Affront of deep Indignity! Dare they not
trust him that never broke with them? And I have heard his nearest Servants
say, That no man could ever challenge him of the least Lie? But as Probus said
of Epaminondas, Adeo veritatis diligens, ut ne joco quidem mentiretur. Was it
square dealing to protest against him, that would pay them all due Debt, if
they would let him? I am sure, when he left them, he left a great many traces
of Fame, and Glory, a great many Benefits of Obligation, behind him. And this
Case will prove the same, or much like to the Objection of the Pontificians.
They say we made a Schism in departing from the Church of Rome. We say, that
the Schism was on their part; for they that give the Cause, for which it is
necessary to abandon Communion, they are the Authors of the Schism: We
continued in the Fellowship of Christ's Church, and retreated from the Errors
of an incorrigible corrupted part, and from the Affrightments and Censures of
them, that were turned our open Enemies. Say over the same to this Parliament,
and it will be the King's Apology. They made the Schism that offered him Bills,
unfit to be passed, with Clamoring, Menacing, and undutiful Violence, which he
must sign, or fly far enough: Sed qui mali sensu, aut metu extorquere assensum
velit, eo ipso ostendit se argument is diffidere, Grot. lib. 6. de Christi
Relig. They made the Schism that used his Royal Name with Irreverence (a King
must not be contented with mediocrity of Respect) but their Manners were gross
and Plebeian. They made the Schism, that heard the highest Indignities against
his Crown with Patience, when Sir Harry Ludlow spoke Treason, and was not
questioned. To cut off a great deal, they received his ample Concessions with
no Thanks, and degreed to further Demands, and more unreasonable, that filled
the Palace, the Hall, their Stairs, their Doors, with such as forbore not to
bring in doubt the Safety of his Sacred Person. When so many were chased to
such a barbarous Boldness, what wise man would stand it out, and not prevent
it? What security has the Earthen Pitcher against an Iron Pot? He that fears
the worst, prevents it soonest.

179. The High Court of Parliament, one House or both, under the Saxon
Monarchs, or in a few Descents after, was created to assist the King to be his
great Council. When he pleased he called it, when he pleased he dismissed it.
In succession of days, none fate there before he had taken an Oath to bear true
Ligance to him and his Heirs, and to defend His Majesty against all Perils and
Assaults. Never was it intended to obtrude upon him with force, to compel him
to take out his Lesson which they taught him, as in a Pedagogy, but to propound
and advise with due distance and humility. Introducta in alicujus utilitatem in
ejus laesionem verti non debent, if I may believe the Civil Law. That which was
instituted for the Sovereigns benefit in common sense must not be elevated
above him to unthrone him. A right Parl. is the Mind of many gathered into one
Wisdom; this looked rather like the petulancy of many breaking out into one
frowardness. The form, that gives essence to every thing, was gone, when they
that silled the places of Counselors, would transcend, and give Law to
Majesty. If yet they dare criminate him upon Schism, tell them that Christ came
to the lost Sheep of the House of Israel, yet when they took up stones to stone
him, he went away through the midst of them. There is King Charles his Pattern.
Wherefore then did they hunt after him in warlike Terror, as if they would
fetch him in by Proclamation of Rebellion? Had he seen the Tide ebb but an
inch, I should guess by the sweetness of his Patience, that he would have
tarried with them, and hoped for better. But moderate men did see no
likelihood. And why should a gracious Prince imbrier himself any longer in
Thorns, and do no good, but leave his Wool behind him? There are a sort of
People in Gusman's Hospital, that when a Friend stays long, whom they had
waited for, look often out of the Window to spy him, as if he would come the
sooner for that impertinency. Plautus has drawn it up elegantly in his
Stychus: Si quem hominem expectant, eum solent provisere: Qui hercle illa causa
nihilo citius veniet. Would you have a wife King one of this ridiculous
Hospitals? And it was not wisdom only, but heroic Magnanimity, that he would
not seem to deserve any thing by those Favors, in passing their ill-fram'd
Bills, which he verily thought would be plucked up by the Roots, when the Day
of the Lord should come to redeem us. Matter so corrupt, and the manner so
compulsory, must needs fall to the ground, upon review in sober Times. Quae in
pace latae sunt leges bellum abrogat, quae in Bello pax. It is Livies. Else
cast it into this Answer: His Majesty discerned that he, himself had marred
both Houses, and he would do them no more harm to concur with them in their
Excess of Disobedience and Profaneness. For what made them stretch themselves
beyond their Power, but the King's Act, which gave them liberty to sit beyond
lawful measure. A Session sitting long grows sour and stale, and is like to
Theophrastus's Date-tree, (...). When it is young the Fruit it bears is without
a stone in it: but if it grow long, a Date-stone is so hard, that it will break
good Teeth to crack it. So this Convention, being durable against Dissolution,
wax't very corrupt, surly, and tyrannical. There were worthy Men among them,
some very learned in the Laws, other Gentlemen well experienced in the Nature
of the People; of whom some were tired out, and gone: and much that remained
was Lumber and Luggage, tumbled together in a waste Room: which brought up at
last their final farewell and expulsion, so generally applauded, as Ballads and
Pasquils did testify. Behold Sidonius his Judgment Lib. 1. Ep. 7. upon
Arvandus, a great Officer in his days, Non eum aliquando cecidisse, sed tamdiu
stetisse plus miror, qui primam praefecturam gubernavit cum maxima
popularitate, sequentem cum maxima populatione. So our imperious Masters were
flattered at first for Popularity, and hated in the end for Depopulation. And
to put a signal Remark of Disgrace upon them (it is not forgotten before) they
were carried out of their House like empty Casks with a Brewers sling.

180. Some Pieces of Apology are patch't into this old Garment, which in my
Judgment make the Rent worse. When things were gone so far out of Order, it was
a hard thing for a man to speak truth to himself. Hear them howsoever: for
sometimes there is likelihood in that which is a lie; and sometimes Truth in
that which is unlikely. It is not amiss to allege, that the Authority of
Parliaments has been venerable from times of old; but it is most certain that
the Majesty Royal was evermore venerable. For the King is God's Representative,
and the most part of their Patriots but the Representatives of the People: But
they would teach us, That the Judgment of the whole Land speaks in the mouth of
their Parliament. I cannot be their Disciple in that; I am sure their sense was
not the sense of thousand thousands abroad: and the Parliament indeed supplies
our Political Capacity, but they do not carry with them our Personal Wisdoms.
Says another, Were we not frank of our Loyalty, when we promised we would make
his Majesty a great King? This Spot at first made a show of a good Card: but to
their shame I rejoyn, there was a great disparity between the Promises and the
Sequels. Antisthenes (so Laertius) came to see Plato being sick, just after his
Physic had wrought: Says Antisthenes, I see your Choler in the Basin, but not
your Pride: so every plain man might read the slattery of the Promise, but not
find the fraud. They make him a great King? It was God that made him a King,
and in that Title made him great. Inde potestas illi unde and spiritus. Tertul.
Apol. And by what sign did it appear they would make him great? or what did
they not do, to make him a great Underling? To give him Law, to subject him to
their Votes, is the greatness of a Tympany, which swells and kills: The
Sophistry in which they gloried most was extracted out of the Jesuits Learning,
That they were faithful to the Regal Office (which remained in the two Houses
albeit his departure) but contrary to this man in his personal Errors: and if
they obey in his Kingly Capacity, and Legal Commands against his Person, they
obey himself. All this, beside words, is a subtle nothing. For what is himself,
but his Person? Shall we against all Logic make Authority the Subject, and the
Person enforcing it a have Accident? It sounds very like the Parodox of
Transubstantiation, where^ (...) qualit, ^ of Bread and Wine are feigned to
subsist without the Inherence of a substance. With these Metaphysics and
Abstractions they were not Legal, but Personal Traitors. If an Undersheriff had
arrested Harry Martin for Debt, and pleaded that he did not imprison his
Membership, but his Martin ship, would the Committee for Privileges be sob'd
off with that distinction? Learnedly ^aravia de ob. Christ. p. 51. Eundem
hominem partiri Jurisconsulti nesciunt, ut idem homo sibi imperet and par^at.
Whatsoever a man's relations be, they are so conjoined to the Suppositum, that
you cannot treat with him, partly in honor, partly in dishonor, as in terms
of opposition. And sometime there is not so much as a notional Difference
between Imperial and Personal Respect. St. Paul instructs the Christians at
Rome, That every Soul should be subject to the higher Powers. The higher Power
under which they lived, was the mere Power and Will of Caesar, bridled in by no
Law. Pliny in his Pan^g. speaks it openly to Trajan: Ipse te legibus subjecisri
Caesar, quas nemo Principi scripsit. This was too much. For Kings, should not
Rule without limitation of Laws; as Claudian to Honortus, Primus jussa capi,
tune observantior aequi
Fit populus.
But if they fail, who shall judge them but God? To obey the King is God's Law,
to obey our Laws is the Ordinance of Man: therefore the Bodies and Estates of
the Subjects are obnoxious to the Common Laws, and the King to nothing but his
Conscience. It is God only that avengeth the violation of Conscience; it is
above the Judgment of Men. But I return to St. Paul. There was no distinction
then in the Roman Empire between a Legal and Personal Capacity, yet Let every
Soul be subject to the higher Powers. Put them together, for you cannot put
them asunder, (...), let it be the Power in the abstract; the word (...) (for
st. Peter was not mistaken) puts it into the concrete: and the Duty required
is, That every Power be subject to that Power which is higher than it self.
This distinction, which I have erased, being too learned for every Shopkeeper
and Headborough to understand, they fell to this plain Expression That they
were in danger of the King's Forces, and gathered such Soldiers, as they'
could make ready, to defend themselves. And they that suffer more than Nature
can bear, will be compelled to do more, than Duty can justify. It is the word
of the Hellenists, Ecclus. 4.35. (...), when a capricious man thinks all his
Imaginations to be Certainties. These that fly to the excuse of a Defensive War
are such. For can this be persuaded to any man, when all England did see so
many Brigades, provided for the Service of the Earl of Essex, when the King had
not Two hundred about him, and those disposed in no Military Titles or Orders?
And says his Majesty at the hour of his Death, Read the dates of their
Proclamations and mine. they are in print, and let every eye be judge from whom
the first Alarm unto War proceeded. A Defense is to avoid Blows, not to give
them: and is it a Defense to parsue another from place to place? Then a Falcon
is upon the Defense that (...) after a Pheasant. But they never spoke truer
than when this Conse^^ came out, That they made themselves strong, to bring the
King under their power, for they were bea^y afraid, and durst not trust him.
They were safe for the present: not secure for the future: having a Conscience
of Guilt, which trembled in them, knowing that their Manners were the just
occasion of all the Evil that could be done unto them. Yet who brought them
into this strait? Says Porc. Latro in Salust. Serae sunt hominum lamentationes,
quae suo vitio desidiaque contigerunt. The style of good Christians was wont to
be, Let them that have failed in the first duty of Innocence, lay hold of the
next duty of Repentance. If they have offended, let them crave Mercy through
Christ, and not command it with the violence of the Devil. If they will not
trust the King's Mercy, because they have provoked him so far, whose Fault is
it but their own, if they become Rebels? He that dares not trust the Sea, and
will not traffic, whose fault is it but his own, if he prove a Beggar? O, they
dealt with a King, that knew it was no time for Vengeance, but for Pardon.
Howsoever, the gate of his heart was wide open for Penitents at all times. If
Cicero had said more to Caesar, it would not have transcended King Charles his
Clemency, Nemo nunquam te placavit inimicus, qui ullas residisse in te
simultatis reliquias senserit. Pro Deiot. I have sifted the dreadful War
advanced by this Parliament, with truth impartial: there needs no falsehood to
make their Practices seem worse than they were. The Van of their Army was
Treason, their Main Body Rebellion, their Rear Murder. So I found them, and so
I leave them.

181. Sufficient is delivered to silence the Excuse of the Parliament, that a
just Fear put Swords into their hands to defend themselves. An Ethnic must
submit to this Rule, which I will quote the second time, Nulla necessitas
excusat, quae potest non esse necessit as, Tertul. exhort. ad castitatem, c.
24. and a Christian has learnt this Rule, That nothing is more formidable,
than to fear any thing more than God. They provoked a King to his face in a
Civil War, than whom no Prince did better deserve the Purse, the Prowess, the
Persons of his Subjects to help him on, both to Safeguard and Victory. He
failed in both, through that which Budaeus in one word calls (...), cum populus
Imperatori infensus vincere nolit, Lib. 2. Pand. fol. 10. The common Peoples
love to him, I conses, was cold and lazy. They had not studied him, and the
great Graces of his unspotted Life. Qui exemplo potuit esse his, quos nos
habemus in exemplo. I borrow it for him out of Sidonius. He might have been an
Example to those, who were held the best Examples of the Times he lived in. But
they fretted at some improsperous Expeditions, which his Ministers had made
into Spain, France, and Germany, and looked downward upon those dishonorable
Actions, not upward upon his Virtues. So he lost them. For evil Successes are
not ordinarily forgotten, though prosperous ones vanish in the warmth of their
fruition. No doubt but he had framed his Imagination to things of great
entertainment, for the good of his Nephew in the Palatinate, and the
Protestants at Rochel. But who can foresee what Chance the Dye of War will
cast? Centum doctum hominum consilia sola baec devincit Dea Fortuna, Plaut in
Pseud. An Heathen could go no further, but we understand more. And though
foreign Enterprises miscarried, there was great Prosperity at home, Wealth,
Trade, Peace, Plenty, all Professions floarithing. But did he follow Polybius
his Counsel to Scipio AEmilianus, never to go abroad but to oblige some before
he returned, it being the chief happiness, of a Prince to get Frineds. Truly he
did many Acts of Liberality, with a look that did not take much, and with a
blind hand. He was not made to set his Face cheerfully, nor to attract with
delightful Expressions. Whereas Heyward nicks it right in his Hen. 4. That the
Multitude are more strongly drawn by unprositable Courtesies, than by churlish
Benefits. But our King's Motto might have been drawn from Illustrius the
Pythagoraean in Laertius, (...). Act great things, but promise little: which
was the right temper of this dispassionate Philosophical Man, who cared not for
Opinion, but would please himself in that which was just, though it were
displeasing to others: and delighted to live much to himself, and his own
thoughts: As if, says a late Pen, he had rather been guest at, than known. You
shall read nothing more apt to excuse him, than that of Cicero to Cato. Ep. l.
15. Ea studiose secutus sum, ete quibus vera gloria nasci possit, ipsam quidem
gloriam per se nunquam putavi expetendam.

182. The same Parliament did for a while so much acknowledge his Virtues, that
they would have praised him into a Fool. For these were their words: That they
know him to be good of himself; and therefore did strive per force to fetch him
from a debauched Army and evil Counselors. Woe be to him whose Head is bucketed
with Waters of a scalding Bath. These Flowers of Flattery, that would wither
before to morrow, were they worth the prince of a Crown? The King's Army
consisted of as valiant and brave Men, as ever marched upon English Ground. If
there were somewhat of the Libertine among them, there was nothing but the
Hypocrite among the Enemy; whose Sacriledges, Robberies, and Spoils I defer
alittle to spread open, and the Foxes skin shall never be able to cover all the
Lion. Few Soldiers in the heat of their Blood, in their Hunger and Watchings,
in their Necessities, and revengeful Executions make perfect Saints. To have
castra simillima regi, as Statius has it, was to be wished, more than hoped
for. As for the Nobles, Commanders, Knights and Gentry, and many Scholars that
jeoparded their Lives in that Service, I wish their due Honor may be set forth
in a long-lived History, to which I will lend that of Curtius lib. 4. Fatebimur
and regem talibus ministris, and illos tanto rege fuisse dignissimos, His
Majesty's Council, the best Peerage of three Nations, that could never leave
him, had more true Piety in their hearts, than their Pharisees would dissemble.
To continue their Allegiance to death, had more of Heaven in it, than was in
all their simpering Preciseness. For Religion and Loyalty are like the Wax and
Wiek, making one Taper between them to shine before God and Man: but for all
that, they would bring the King away from his evil Council, and take him to
themselves, the very Pink of the faithful. I must not say but it it is a
mannerly Expression, if any thing be wrong, to remove it from the Sovereign,
and to charge them with it, who did execute the Order. David, though he knew
Readiness bitterness, yet is willing to impute his Persecutions to Readiness
Servants, 1 Samuel 26.19. If they be the children of men that have stirred thee
up against me, cursed be they of the Lord. There will ever be such Sycophants
in a Court, that will whisper corrupt talk, endeavoring that none should get
the start of them in the Royal Favor: but must all prudent Senators be cast
off and suppressed, if some Ear-wiggs peradventure had got into credit? Let the
Shepherd put away his Dogs, and the Wolf will ask no more. Let the King once
forfeit his Friends to an ignoble Trial, and he shall never see days of Comfort
and Security again. Did he ever protect any Servant from the Trial of the Law?
That would not suffice our Judges in Parliament; but he must leave them to the
Votes of an Arbitrary Censure. Then a wife man had better pay half his Estate
for a Fine, than be a Privadoe to the King in his nearest Employments. And most
miserable is he, that must not choose those whom he will trust, but have his
Officers of greatest Dispatches thrust upon him by Compulsion. King Richard the
Second had Counselors and Guardians empowered to retrench him in his
Government, whose Arrogance when his great Spirit shook off, it is known what
it cost him. Never think to see a King's House so purged of undeserving
persons, that none of them will creep into that trust they deserve not. Budaeus
gave over that hope, Lib. 5. de Ass, p. 110. Ita est reip. nostrae status, ut
clitella generosis equis, instrataque speciosa imponantur asinis. The best
Steeds sometimes shall carry the Panniers, and Jades and Asses be covered with
the Footcloth. There was never man so wise, that did not love some Simpletons,
whom you may call Fools: Nor never Prince so absolute, but did stamp some
Honors upon base Metal. Non est nostrum aestimare quem supra caeteros, and
quibus causis extollas, says a good Statesman in Tacitus. And our excellent
Camden shifts in this answer for Queen Elizabeth's sake, whose Affections were
so strong to Robert Earl of Leicester, that he knew not whether it were a
Synastria, a Star which reigned at both their Births, that made him a Gratioso
to so brave a Lady. Make any unlikely answer, rather than defy a King with an
Army, to pluck his best betrusted from him. Thuamus is an Author to be
delighted in, whose observation it is, Lib. 11. That Maurice of Saxony made his
Apology for raising War against Charles the Fifth, that he intended no offense
to Caesar, but to divorce him from Alva, and Granval, his evil Counselors. A
Stale and thread-bear Cheat, and yet the Devil to this day cannot find out a
better. Take away those, whom they call Evil Counselors, place as good, or
better in their room, (it is not impossible) it were a marvel if they did eat a
bushel of Salt in Court, and not be scowled upon with Envy, as much as they
that did forego them. Let any Tree grow tall in favor, and the Shrubs will
complain, that it drops upon the underwood. A great disheartning it is to our
Grandees, to see so many of worth and clear integrity ruined by a public
hatred; which made Pausanias pity Demosthenes, and the chief Burgesses of
Athens, in At. (...). A great Actor in the Affairs of the Commonwealth feldom
goes to his Grave with Honor and Peace. I am not of their Spirit then, that
would remove the King's Counsel from him: but some are of my mind, that in many
great Dispatches, they did heartily wish that the King himself had been removed
from his Council. For he was more happy, when he took the way which he spun out
of his own Brain, than when he altered his Opinion to follow the Judgment of
his Counselors. But it was his humble temper, to like that wisdom in others,
which was greater in himself.

183. It is not too late to unblind some of the People, provided they beware of
them that spit Holy Water, as other Jugglers have a slight to spit fire. The
Pope's Cruciada drew thousands of Soldiers to adventure into the Holy War; and
our cunning Popelings made their Muster exceed, by carrying the Figure of
Religion in their Colors. Therefore it is good to take off this great Charm,
that bewitched the heedless into Rebellion. Which Enchantment was a common cry,
That Religion lay a bleeding: reform the Church either now or never. This is
the time to pull up Popery and Prelacy: and Fortune is an Handmaid to no
Mistress but Occasion. Therefore let the faithful live and die together for
God's Cause and Christ's Kingdom. Pack away Bishops, Liturgy, Courts
Ecclesiastical, Canons, Crosses, Organ Music, Ceremonies: Change for every
thing, for any thing. Seraque terrisici cecinerunt omnia vates. Aen. 5. Survey
all this calmly. They that undertake to alter so much at once, is it likely
they will mend it all at once for the better? A better Headpiece than theirs
gives them a wiser Principle, Synes. de provid. (...). Things may admit a
general change of a sudden for the worst, but not for the better. Then to clap
Religion into a quarrel is a formal foolery, that every Child can look through
it. Ex cupiditate quisque suorum religionem velut pedissequam habet. Leo. Ep.
23. Now look back into King Edward the Sixth's days, who those Bishops and
Divines were, whom God stirred up to frame our happy Reformation. Their
Sanctity, Learning, Humility, Martyrdom, compel us to believe that they sought
the Truth: and the hand of God upon their works: that none did ever prosper in
this Land, with their new frame of Worship to deface their Foundation, will
persuade us that they found the Truth. Let these words of the Orator be
dedicated to their blessed memory, De arusp. resp. Sat is superque prudentes
sunt, qui illorum prudentiam, non dicam asscqui, sed, quanta suerit, perspicere
possint. We know who jear at this, and think they are far before all our
Predecessors, to chalk out the right Line of Gospel Purity, the Presbyter
Divines and their Elderships. As Cato the Censor strived to keep the Athenian
Philosophy and Learning out of Rome; for, says he, Quandocunque ista gens
literas suas dabit, omnia corrumpet. Plin. l. 29. c. 1. So we have had Cato's
and prudent Senators, who have spared for no pains to crush the turbulent
Presbyterians, yet they have continued to surprise the Judgments of unquiet
Opiniators, and they flowed in by shoals in our Civil Wars. Schismatica
pravitas semper bello ardente maxim luxuriat, says Camden Eliz. Anno 1588. and
he speaks it of these men. These are they that are striving to wind up higher
in Reformation; which makes me insert what I read since I wrote this, As if
Religion were intended for nothing else but to be mended: Sirs, shall we change
and change till all be satisfied? that is to put us off for Peace to the Greek
Calends. When you tell us which in your Brains is the best and final
Reformation, we will tell you another thing as impossible, which is the
greatest number. They troubled Queen Elizabeth and King James with their
Platforms of Christ's Kingdom, and were repulsed: for who could give an eaven
poise to such uneaven Humors? chiefly perceiving that a Monarchy would not
consist with their Consistories, their Pretenses running one way, and their
Practices another: and indeed their Encroachments are not only upon Royal
Authority, but upon the Civil Magistrate, whosoever he be. Now they would
enforce their Scottish or Geneva Changeling upon King Charles, who was swift to
run to any good; and when he stopped, it was because Religion and Reason could go
no further. This stinking Elder, lately shot up, he could not Authorize. Who
can forget Pisistratus, how he tossed and turned the Athenian Commonwealth over
and over, and yet would persuade them, that he changed not their Native Laws,
but reduced them to those that Solon was the Author of; which none could
disprove, so much they were forgotten. So they that put on this Change, were
impatient to hear that it was a Mushroom of late growth: but boasted it was the
constitution of the Apostles, but lasted so short a Time, that History cannot
make it out to justify it. The discreet King was sure that the Gospel was
planted over much of the Heathenish World by Bishops; that they rooted up
Idolatry, suppressed Herefies, edified all places with the glorious Virtues of
Faith and Charity, and that God would not go along with a corrupt Hierarchy, in
such manifold and great Mercies: And should he set up another Government, from
whose alteration he knew not what would proceed? was it not Prudence to owe
unto Ignorance still, rather than to try it? Nihil in specie fallacius quam
prava religio, says Posthumous, in Live. lib. 9. Religion, though the best
thing, yet the name of it is the greatest Cheat, if you take not heed of
Hypocrisy.

184. But who can dispute with them that will fly to Inspiration, and when they
have no other Argument, will boast, that they have talked with GOD? (...),
Wisd. 7.14. which is in our Margin, They have entered friendship with God. Then
all that Reason shall say to the contrary is profane, and underneath them.
There is an Objection to be answered with Grief, That some learned and painful
men did promote this Discipline. I will say to their Praise and Pity, as much
as Tully did of the Gracchi, Orat. de acus. resp. Quod dolerent boni omnes,
illa tanta ornamenta, and meliorem mentem voluntatemque non esse conversa.
Their Pains in some were very laudable, in some little more than Lungs and
Language. A little Gold comes to more in payment than a great deal of Copper
Money. Pliny, lib. 16. c. 27. speaks of some Vines that bore thrice a year, yet
the Vineyard-dresser lost by it: Insana vitis trifero proventu, sed evanida
luxurians. There were Auditors that extolled such Preachers, and would say,
They could profit by no other. So Amnon pretended he could eat no Meat, unless
his Sister Tamar dressed it. The Plot came to light in our days, that these
were they that rung the Pan in the Pulpit, and then the Bees swarmed to
Rebellion. But that which is of God, must have its Foundation in Humility, its
Rising in Obedience, and its Continuance in Peace. View the Success of
Presbyterism, where it takes a little root here and there, what Shoots do grow
by it, or out of it! Anabaptists, Antinomians, Familists, all Mr. Edwards's
Gangreen, beside Quacks and Quakers, Mahumetan Dervises, of a raging, not a
ravishing Spirit; among all these the Independents, their young Brothers, by
Burrough-Tenure, have got the Estate from them. I will borrow a strain of his
Wit, that said there went but a pair of Sheers between them, That the
Independents would not have a King, so much as in name; the Presbyters would
have no more than the mere Name of a King. But, O how these blasphemed the
Name, and slandered the Footsteps of God's Anointed! who laid our good King
forth as a Papist to their Rabble, since he would neither be for the
Consistorians nor Congregationers: Nihil est audere relictum, Manil. lib. 5.
Blessed Saint! how firm was he to the Antipapal Doctrine of this Church, which
he maintained against the Marquess of Worcester in the greatest agony of his
Troubles, and trusted his Soul upon it at the agony of Death. Most of all that
Calumny came from Hell, that he gave privy leave to the Irish Hell Hounds, to
commit that horrid Massacre upon so many Innocents, Men, Women and Babes: Did
not Muscerry and Philem O Neal tell the contrary at their Execution, and pawned
their Salvation upon it, when it was no time to dissemble? They, the
Parliament, contributed much to that Assassinate, who cut off Strafford for an
evil Counselor, the only man of Courage and Counsel, to have prevented the
Troubles of Ireland. A Passage shall decide it clearly, that came to my own
knowledge; I was so scrupulous to forget nothing of it, that before I stirred I
wrote down the Speaker, the Words, the Place, the Year, the Day.

On July 24. ann. 1654. at Rygate in Surrey, I had Conference about this
Defamation, with that excellent Primate of Armagh, Dr. Usher; says he, Stop
their Mouths with this that I shall faithfully tell you. Sir William Parsons,
our Chief Justice, was much trusted with the King's Affairs in Ireland; he
deceasing, his Friends and Executors sent his Papers to me, to look them over:
In his Cabinet I found a Letter written by the King, to warn him to look well
to the Meetings of the Popish Irish, for he had received certain Intelligence
out of Spain, that they were upon some great Design of Blood and Confusion. And
did His Majesty hold any Intelligence with those Miscreants, who fetched his
Intelligence as far as from Spain to prevent them? Nulla sunt certiora quam
quae ex dubiis fact a sunt certa, Quintil. lib. 5. The reliquation of that
which preceded is, it looks not all like Popery that Presbyterism was disdained
by the King; his Father had taught him, that it was a Sect so perfidious, that
he found more Faith among the Highlanders. Experience taught, that it was not
suitable to the Eternal Gospel, for the Fautors of it did scarce Summer and
Winter the same form of Discipline. His hatred of Sacrilege taught him, that
upon the abdication of Episcopacy, there was no likelihood, but the Patrimony
of the Church, which is the Patrimony of Christ, would be distributed by the
Lords and Commons, to their own, but certainly to profane uses.

185. At the same time that a murmuring was raised for preserving or advancing
Religion, as much was pretended upon another score, to recover Liberty; Populo
supervacanea est calliditas, Saluf. p. 75. The dull-headed People knew not all
what this meant, but rushed on toward it; and when the Beast did imagine it was
loose from the Chain of Monarchy and Laws, who could tie it up again? They that
say, the whole Earth turns about, will allow us to sit still; but let these
earthy Clodds follow their own motion, Rest and Safety are out of hope to every
man. St. Paul says, that a Liberty to sin is the greatest Captivity; so a
Liberty to be lawless is the greatest Bondage. The Hedge of common Sasety is
Law; the Hedge of the Law are Penalties; the infliction of Penalties is the
power of the Supreme Governor. Can the Subjects be at more Freedom, if this
Authority be taken away from one supereminent person? Whereunto that ingenuous
Gentleman Mr. Wrenn says very well, Monarchy Asserted, p. 79. It can be nothing
but Madness, voluntarily to expose ones self to Misery, for the taking away of
a Power, in the room of which another equal Power, must necessarily be
substituted. Yet it may be that Monarchy is excellens sensibile, the Splendour
of it is an Eyesore, and one would better endure the faint Beams of lesser and
lower Planets. To this I will reply with Capito Cossutius, when the Roman
Senate deprived Nero Caesar, To overthrow Sovereignty Liberty was cried up, but
if Sovereignty be overthrown, Liberty will be set upon, Bolton, p. 258. Let
Judgment be passed upon the state of our own Monarchy; the worst Enemy to it
has given this Testimony upon it, Oceana, p. 97. It was a Throne the most
indulgent to, and least injurious for so many Ages upon the Liberty of the
People, that the World has known. And indeed how could it be otherwise? For
the People preside in the House of Commons, to debate the Grievances of all
Counties, Cities, and Buroughs, and to raise Levies of Moneys with
Indifferency, which is Democratical. The Lords Spiritual and Temporal join
their Wisdoms to debate the Proceedings of the Commons, and are engaged in
Honor to settle all things in Honor and Safety: which is Aristocratical. And
His Majesty gathering up the results of their Prudence, governs upon no other
grounds, and can neither abrogate the Laws already enacted, nor enforce a new
Law, which is not passed, and preserred unto him by both Houses; which is the
most inoffensive Regulation of Monarchy to please GOD and Man. The most ancient
Observator of the Temper of these three Governments, made up into one with such
Concinnity, is Polybius, lib. 6. thus he; Some people are under a pure
Monarchy, some under an Optimacy, some like a Democracy; (...). The best
Government, without compare, must be that which has collected the Properties
of all the three into its Platform: This is that equal Hand (and it is our
case) that sets the Instruments in Tune one to another, and the Voices to them
all. But it was exclaimed, that our Monarchy kept not the bounds of Law,
untuned the Harmony, as the Remonstrance, December. 15. expresses it in a raging
style, Injustice, Oppression, Violence broke in upon us without any restraint
or moderation. And wherefore so much Outcry for Peccadilloes, and verily
occasioned by the Undutifulness of former Parliaments, and subsequent
Necessities? In some remediless Occurrences, the wisest that sat in the House
thought it would be more profitable to be insensible of them, rather than too
sharp, because His Majesty had rectified the principal Grievances, and was
prepared to go on in the same Compliance and Serenity. Now when the Pox was
coming out, Violence was the way to drive it in again: And let the Censurers of
Evils foregone look with Charity upon them, and with Concessions of Humanity,
and they will find some slight Taxes levied, which impoverisht no man, the
course of the Law still open to all; it may be, and will ever be, in the
winnowing the Chaff from the Corn, there would be a little loss of Wheat. Then
all they that have howled against the Oppressions of the Sovereign, if the Door
of your Conscience be not too narrow to let out so great a Sin, open the
Wicket, that this Slander may fly away into the Deserts of Forgetfulness, yet
rather of Repentance. But if you could make your Proofs true, That you wanted
your native Rights and Liberties, this will not justify a rebellious War. The
Principle of the ancient Church is strong, If the Magistrate command things
contrary to God's Law, suffer, and resist not. Much less do not resist, though
he command things contrary to his own Laws; for, to break his Scepter, you
wring the Scepter out of the Hand of God; He alone is above him, you are under
him. Men that have Leisure and Learning, may read Chrysantus's Oration in
Xenoph. Cyr. Pa. lib. 7. I will spend but one Passage of it here: Fellow
Soldiers, says he, we have obtained many Victories under our Lord Cyrus, and
are become the Conquerors of great Kingdoms, and which way got we all we have?
(...)? That is, by our Governor: There can be no greater Good, than to
preserve our selves in that Obedience. Audi'n' haec Amphiarae sub terram
abdite? Can the Ghost of John Pymm hear this, whom no good man's Patience can
forgive, for making that dirty Remonstrance?

186. Begin once again to detect this popular Cheat. The Ringleaders of the
Impious War caress the People, That if they will stick to them against the
King, and leave the Power in their Hands, they would possess them in the best
Liberty that they could imagine to enjoy. These petty Tyrants grew very kind of
a sudden, but to be suspected, as Appius Claudius the Decemvir was, when he
courted the Citizens, Nunquam gratuita in tanta superbia comitas esse solet,
Livy. So our King-quellers did not sell their Complement for nothing; they had
got a Forest of Fools in an Army after them; instantly all Laws were dead that
kept men living, Liberty quite defunct, and will never have a resurrection, but
under a Monarchy in the true and lawful Successor; the Laws, the sworn Judges,
the Verdicts of Jurors, the maintenance of all these under the Care and Justice
of the King, these are the Preventions, that the Freemen of this Nation are not
in the least fear of Slavery: Be thankful for this Liberty, and ask for no
better, for the Restraint which a man has by coming under a Law, comes home to
him again by the Benefit and Protection of the Law. Tully says more, and yet no
more than Truth, Orat. pro Caecinna. Mihi credit, major haereditas venit
unicuique nostrum a jure, and legibus, quam ab iis, a quibus ipsa bona relicta
sunt. Every man is more beholden to the Laws for his Lands and Chattels, than
to his Parents that did bequeath them, for the Law gave the Parent Power to
make his Will and Testament, that his Estate might be settled upon his
Children, and the Law allows the right Heir to enjoy it: As a Vineyard yields
us Wine, but unless that Wine be laid up in found Vessels, and those Vessels
hoop'd, that it leak not out, that which we got in the Wine press will be lost
in the Cellar. Therefore we did but put a Knife to our own Throats when we
advanced an Army, which our soft Laws (merely made for Peace) were not able to
regulate, and were sad Lookerson, when we saw our Martial Grandees cut and
carve what they pleased to themselves, for every one had an Eye to the
Pole Star of their present Interest. And lo, into what we are fallen: Pro
communi imperio privatam sibi quisque servitutem peperit, Salus. p. 174. When
the overflowing Romans meant to make a Prey of a Nation not yet vanquished,
their Phrase was, That they would go and civilize them, reduce the Gauls or
Britains from Barbarism. (...), says Plutarch, When they coveted a Nations
Wealth, they did polish them into Bondage. So the Parliament-Militia robbed us
of all we had, upon Promise to call us to the Cap or Coxcomb of Liberty. Look
into two or three Particulars, and see what these Hucksters sold to a besotted
Nation, in exchange for the great Charter of our ancient Freedom: First, They
asked at once, and had it, the fifth part of all Land-Rents, and the twentieth
part of all Goods and Movables, and gave us a Ticket of public Faith, that is,
of punick Faith, to repay it. Euclio in Plautus deserved to be sequestered, for
speaking so plainly to this Cousonage, Fidei censcham maximam vulgo fidem, ca
mihi sublevit os poenissime. They that brought not this Sum into the mass of
the common Treasure, were plundered of all they had. Woe be to the wealthy.
(...), as Plutarch speaks of the Rapin which the thirty Tyrants made in Athens,
It was more dangerous to be Rich, than to be the worst of evildoers. At the
same time a Payment was laid upon our Necks, a Pick-purse Trick, which they had
learnt of the Provinces that revolted from the King of Spain, it is but one
word, and much in little, Excise upon all Merchantable Wares, beside Coals,
Beer, and other things of Trade and Use at home. A word so odious to our
Country, that if our Kings had put it in use, their Ministers had been served
like Adoram, Grand-customer to Rehoboam, whom the Israelites stoned with
Stones, that he died. Yet, after all these exactions, they will tell you with
Pseudolus, Ratio constat, argentum (...), Take out your Tables, and write down
Liberty.

187. Moreover, to make us swear our selves for ever into Profaneness, Sin,
and Baseness, the solemn League and Covenant passed by the Votes of both
Houses, and by the great approvement of their Journeymen the Assembly; and this
Flag of six colors was hung up in all the Houses of God in the Land; where the
two Tables of the Law were put before, to hold out our Duty to God, and Love to
our Neighbor, a new piece of Christianity is clapped upon the Wall, to renounce
the King, and to ruin the Church. Tertullian liked not this Alteration, lib.
de Cor. Mil. Credimus ne humanum testamentum divino superinduci deberi? And the
Caesarean Law gives a mortal Sentence upon it, as Elminshorstius quotes it, p.
148. upon Arnobius, Qui factionis susceperit sacramentum, vel dederit, gladio
feriatur. O very wise Parliament. can you teach one how to piece Liberty and
this Covenant together? for all that refuse it must be sequestered, imprisoned,
disossiced; the Clergy that will not submit, lose their Benesices, and the Law
cannot keep them in their Freehold: Their Case is alike, as it was with the
Orthodox under the Tyranny of the Arrians, as it is in Athanasius Apol. p. 329.
(...); Either subscribe, or relinquish your Churches. I read in Cembd. Eliz. p.
71. That the Queen called them to an account, Qui pensiones religiosis, e
monasteriis ejectis, assignatas subtraxerant? It hat Provision did our
Potentates make for Protestant sequestered Ministers? What? why Freedom and
Choice, to beg or starve; but not a Denier allowed to a single man. They talked
of a fifth part to maintain the Wife and Children of a married one, with so
many Clauses of Exception, Thirteen at least, says Dr. Thomas Fuller, that the
allocation came to nothing but Charge and Trouble. Liberal -- Thieves! the
Earth is the Lord's in all its fullness, and you shall know the Church will be
Christ's in all its emptiness: You all altered the Texts to good purpose, Act.
4, and 5. cap. there the Disciples did, and Ananias said he would, bring all he
had, and lay it at the Apostles Feet, but now the Disciples of the Apostles
must lay all they have at Ananias Feet: Yet since you say all this is done to
deliver us from the Bondage of the King's Power, take out the Tables again, and
write down Liberty. To abbreviate the mention of a thousand Wrongs and Evils,
had we been a conquered People, trodden under the Feet of Turks, what could the
Conqueror have done worse, to transform us into Slaves, than to set up that
Tribunal of Blood, the High Court of Justice? The Privilege of the Free People
of England is their Trial per Pares, as well in Criminalas in other Causes.
Some smack of it is so ancient, that I find in Grotius de Jure bell. and pacis,
p. 248. That Cato the elder would never punish a Slave, till the Slaves of the
Family, who did wear the same Chain, did cast him by their Verdict. Now the
case is altered at Westminster Hall, a Prisoner is tried at the Bar, neither by
the Law for Reason, nor by Jury upon Matter of Fact, but by the Conscience of
some that are commissioned to judge upon Law, Reason, Right, and Fact. Suppose
that the Conscience of Sultan Cromwell, and his Vizier Bashaw, alias Bradshaw,
sit among them, that Court must prove a Rock, against which an Innocent cannot
choose but split, and these high Justitiaries Gentlemen of the first Edition.
Quid facturi sunt illi, si consules, si Dictatores fuissent, qui proconsulorem
imaginem tam trucem saevamque fecissent? Live. Dec. 1. lib. 5. They that raised
such Storms among us, being Vapors in the lower Air, would have lightened and
thundered, if they had been Exhalations in the middle Region; but that the
Authors of the forenamed Miseries and Depressions durst say, that they took up
Arms against the King for Liberty, take out the Tables, and write down Villainy.

188. Our Observation must not launch now into the Whirl-pool, or rather
plounce into the Mudd and Quagmire of the Peoples Power and Right pretended,
That the Sovereignty is theirs, and originally in them; That they of mere
Choice and Election cast themselves into such and such forms of Government at
first, and may dissolve them by Force and Constraint, when they will, and do no
man Injury, for they recall their own, which they did but lend during pleasure,
upon a natural Paction. Some things, discovered before, were very ill, which
did disorder us to Rebellion, saying that this Invention does disembogue it
self into the roughest and blackest Sea of Treason: Like to Verres's stripping
the Sicilians, his last Oppression was a more grievous Pillage than all the
former. Secum ipse certat, and id agit, ut semper superius suum sacinus novo
scelere vincat, Act. 7. The Axiom, which has gone from hand to hand, in some
dangerous Books, is, Rex singulis major est, Universis minor. Grotius said so,
but it was Grotius the Advocate of Rotterdam, a Minister to a popular State,
and Barnevale's Creature; but Grotius, the Ambassador to the French King, from
the Swedish Crown, would be ashamed of such Politics. So says as spightful an
Author to the Honor and Safety of Princes as ever writ, Stephanus Junius
Brutus, that is the Title of his disguise, whom learned K. James suspected to be
a Papist, dissembling the person of an Hugonote, to make them all odious. But
we are beholden to Gisb. Vootius, who has pulled off his Mask, Tom. 2. Disp.
p. 852. he says, that Tronchinus making an Oration in Geneva, at the Funerals
of Simon Goulartius, made it known to his Auditors, that Simon Goulartius had
assured him, that Hubertus Languettus, a Gentleman of Burgundy, and of good
same till this Mischief came to light, did hatch the Monster, and send it
forth. To spare the rest, all but one, the same is the Doctrine of Parsons the
Jesuit in his Dolman, who follows it all the way, That Civil Government is
radically in the People; that they may set up and pull down their Rulers for
the public good as they will. Let the Index of Expurgation look to it, whether
the Temporal Sovereignty of the Pope come not under the Whip of this Doctrine.

(...). Odyss. (...). The People of Romania, Bononia, Ancona, Ferrara will be
very insolent, if you buz such a Be into their Brain; every light Offense
taken will make them threaten. But whence do these People-pleasers draw this
Maxim, That a King is greater than every Subject apart, but less than their
Body taken altogether? Not from Scripture, for the Kings of Israel and Judah,
in that Book, were above all the Tribes in their Aggregation. Hiram writes to
Solomon, Blessed be the Lord, who has given to David a wise Son over this
great people, 1 Kin. 5.7. Hear the Queen of Sheba likewise, That Solomon was
Minister Dei, non populi; God delighted in thee, to set thee in his Throne, to
be a King for the Lord thy God, and made thee over them, to do judgment and
justice to all, 1 Chronicles. 9.8. Shall I leave my fatness, says the Olive in the
Parable, to be promoted over the Trees? That is, over every Tree in the
Forest: But these Dogmatists dare not recourse to Scripture, they must be
traced in prudential ways. Proteus, the man of all shapes, says Synesius, Ep.
136. (...), acted always among Men, not in Heavenly, but in Earthly Wisdom. Let
it be Reason, and not Fallacy, wise men will be ready to hear it. One Argument
of the Adversaries is, That once upon a time, they know not when, Men were
gathered out of Deserts and Savageness into a body, to live sociably, and it
was their Courtesy then to set up such a King as did please them: He is but
the Peoples Creature, therefore in his first making, and always, at their
mercy. This is a Tale put together of a thing out of the Memory of all Writers;
which were it true, as it is unlikely, it will come to nothing. If the People
did part with their Right to a King, to be governed and defended in Wealth and
Peace, their Act is irrevocable, the Bond indissoluble. Though Democritus
thought his Atoms might concur to make a World, yet the World being made,
those Atoms could not fall asunder again to dissolve the World. Conceive we
were in Polonia at this day, the Eligents, who make the King by their Vote, are
tied fast by their Oaths and Faith, to their own Act. Nor do they give the King
his Power, but design his Person, because Election is not an Act of Power, but
of Privilege. That a Monarch is not greater than the Universe of his People,
whether it look like somewhat to the weakness of Sense, I know not, but it is
nothing to Reason; for Comparisons are to be made between things of the same
kind. Mark then. A part of the Body is less than the whole Body in magnitude,
but the Soul, though one part of Man, and no more, is greater in Virtue than
all the Body. The intellectual Faculty is but one Faculty, yet greater in
Dignity and Regency than all the Faculties of the Soul beside. The Sorbonists
adhering to the Council of Constance, tell us, That a Pope is less than a whole
general Council; they give him Honor and Place before any single Prelate,
Metropolitan, or Patriarch, by Ecclesiastical Constitution, yet he is inferior
to an Oecumenial Synod in tota, because he comprehends not in his Office the
Virtue of the Catholic Church, for that is an Usurpation: But the Vertual Power
of the Kingdom is in the King, which discovers the odds of the Comparison. Our
Politico's also object, that the People were before the King. Not before him,
if Soveraignity grew first out of Paternal Right, (and so it did for certain in
Adam, the first Father, and first King.) Yet grant them their asking, here is
an Instance to silence them: All the Creatures were made before Man, yet God
gave him the Dominion to govern them that were created before and after him. It
is to no more purpose to cavil, That the King is made for the good of the
People. Is that which is appointed for the good of another the less for that
Cause? Quite contrary, it is therefore the greater. So is a Preceptor and
Shepherd, the one above the Scholars, the other above the Flock. Saravia
distinguishes skilfully, de Obed. p. 228. Quod est propter aliud, si
benesicium ab co accipit, minus esl, si dat majus est. They stretch their Wit
further, and say, That the King gives his Oath to his Subjects, to mamtam them
in their known Laws. It well befits him. So God gave an Oath to Abraham and
David, Quare juramentum, praes itum Inseriori, non ei subjicn Superiorem, says
the same Author. As for the matter of the Oath, to keep the Laws, it puts him
not under the Wrath of Men, if he do not keep them, but under the Wrath of God.
A King is to keep the Laws of Nations with other Princes, yet is not subject to
them. God defend us from making Experiments, what would come to pass if the
choice of a Governor or Governors were referred to the thousands and millions
of England. Beware a Heptarchy again, beware an Hecatontarchy. Things give
better Counsel to men, than men to things. Look behind, enquire into Histories,
what bloody meetings the World has known upon such ambitious bandings between
Gogs and Magog's Parties. An quae per totam res atrocissima Lesbon,
-- Non audita tibi est?
Metam. l. 2. Is it forgotten how they have lifted up their Friends in a Fit,
and straightway plucked them down in a Fury? As the Greek Emperor said to a
Bishop, Ego te Furne condidi, ego te destruam. For as Painters delight in
Pieces not being made, but in their making, so the Hare-brain'd Multitude run
on to a Choice with Greediness, and when it is passed, they loath it with
Fickleness. The Conclusion shall be, That this Stratagem to unthrone a King by
the pretended inherent Right of the People, can come to no conclusion: For if
there were occasion for all Cities, Counties, Buroughs, Hamblets, to come to
try that Right, who shall warn them, that the opportunity is ripe to require
their concurrence? Who shall summon them? Why A. rather than B? Who shall
propound? Upon what place shall they meet? Who shall preserve Order and Peace?
For every Hog, when you drive them, must have a String about his own Leg. Who
shall umpire and stop Outrages? Such there will be, Saevitque animis ignobile
vulgus. An hundred impossible Dissiculties may be added to these, and he that
can roll them up all into Sense, deserves the Philosopher's Stone for his
Labor. To divert the vulgar fort from meddling with things improper to, and so
much above them, Budaeus remembers me how to call them to such a Choice, as is
fitter for them, lib. 1. de As. In Pervigilio Epiphamae regnum ad sesquiboram
lusu sabae sortiuntur. Let them choose the King of the Bean on Twelsth-night,
and be merry with the Cake-bread.

189. The best of Kings had some that fell off from him, after the fust and
second year of the War, when they saw his Enemies had got ground in some
Skirmishes and Sieges, and were possessed of the best part of his Navies,
surrendered to them by a false Faitour. This was a color for their Rhetoricians
to impute Righteousness to the fortunate Part. And their Orders for
Thanksgivings boast of it, that God did own their Cause, because of the
Victories which had besall'n them. But Wisdom dresseth her self by her own
Light, and minds not the shadow of Success: for after the first dark Cloud that
comes, it can be seen no more. It is not strange that Self-lovers are so wary,
and rash Springolds so sond, to like that which is most lucky. Thucyd. l. 1.
notes it upon the variable turnings of the Peloponnesian Wars, (...), Men
cannot leave, but they will bend their Fancies to the Casualties of Events.
Nay, says Matthew. de Prin. c. 25. There is no living for us without that
Tropical Humor: Si tempora mutant ur, statim perit, qui in agendo rationem non
mutat. But all such Errors shall be reversed, and the mistakes consuted,
before a Tribunal Eternal, Impartial, which will deceive none. Go not about
then to try right and wrong, as they are bandied among us. No man knows either
Love or Hatred by all that is before them. All things come alike to all. There
is one event to the righteous and to the wicked, Eccles. 9.2. If you Judge the
merit of a Cause, or the integrity of a Man by prosperous Chance, Epicurus will
have a strong tentation to say, Is there a God, whose wisdom sees and governs
all things? Dionysius, when he had robbed a Temple, and failed away merrily with
his Booties scost at it, Videt is amici quam bona a Diis immortalibus navigatio
sacrilegis datur. Cic. de Not. Deor. l. 3. Such a Scandal another of the
voluptuary Sect took at a Courtezan, that had forsworn her self, and looked
more amiably after it. -- Obligasti
Perfidum diris caput, enitescis
Pulchrior multo, juvenumque prodis
Publica cura.
Horat. Od. l. 4. We, that are bred under holy Discipline, know that it will be
the worse for thee hereafter; for their Torments will appear more bitter in the
next World, because they felt nothing but pleasure in this. The ways of God are
past finding out; He permits that Evil which he hates, and he Corrects that
Good which he loves. This is the Trial of Faith; Quicquid imponitur molit. All
that is brought to her Mill, she will grind it into fine slour of Thanksgiving
and Patience: and is afsured, That as a Ball mounts higher, when it is thrown
to the ground, so a good Cause when it is beaten will rebound higher to Heaven.
Otherwise, says Manilius l. 5. Si sort accesserit impetus ausis, Improbitas
fiet virtus. If Sin get the better at hand-blows, Virtue shall hold up its hand
at the Bar, and be condemned for Vice Joshuah's discomfit at Ai, Josiah's at
Megiddo, the hundred Victories that the Saracens have had against the
Christians tell us, how they that sight the Lord's Battles, are not privileged
from turning their Backs to their Enemies. It is an acute passage of S. Ambrose
in an Epistle to Valentinian, That the Heathen had no reason to beast that the
Idols, whom they worshipped, were true Gods, and gave them ^icleries: for if the
Romans prevailed, where were the Carthaginian Gods to help them? if the
Carthaginians triumphed, where were the Roman Gods, when they were beaten?
Success will neither serve Christians nor Heathen to make a competent Judge for
the lawfulness of their War: For is it not most impious to prove a Cause, not
till after the Victory? and to have no Inducement that they sought for the
right, till all was done? Experience is stronger than twenty Reasons against
it. As Paterculus said of one good man, Lusius Drusus, Meliore in omma ingenio,
quam fortuna usus; so let there be thousands of such in a body, their Innocence
may be greater than their Fortune. The fallacy of Success is to be exploded out
of the Morals of Justice: neither can such a contingent Medium produce a
demonstrative Conclusion. It was bravely pleaded by the Rhodians in an Oration
before the Roman Senate, Live. lib. 35. You Romans were wont to account your
Wars prosperous, Non tam exitu eorum quod vincat is, quam principiis, quod non
sine causa suscipiat is. I may say, hic rhodus, hic saltas. And this is
sapience, to list them, who admire Success, among those whom Fortune favors.

190. Neither were the vainglorious content to pride it upon Success, and to
stamp it upon their Money, God with us, but sharpened their presumption against
the King's Friends with Insultations and Revilings, that they were
unregenerate, such as walked after the flesh, forsaken of God, and appointed to
slaughter. Bitter, untrue, uncharitable. Such as knew not his Majesty's
faithful Soldiers, thought vilely of them: such as faw their daily diligence at
Common Prayer, their sidelity for their Lord and King, their preparation for
death, their adventuring their Estates and Bodies in all hard Service without
pay, nay without necessary Subsistence, did deservedly magnisie the Grace of
God that was in them. Yet we do not justify all. Some scores of them might
have been spared, who were driven into the King's Quarters, by the Oppression
of the Parliament, and came to save themselves, more than to defend the King:
and it was a common observation at Oxford, that, excepting the great
Counselors and the Clergy, they that sought least lived worst. Yet the loosest
of these kept their Oath of Allegiance, which comes nearer to a Saint, than any
Rebel of a good outside, -- Qui nesciret in armis
Quam magnum crimen virtus civilibus esset.
Luc. l. 6. But did they never read of an holy Commander, forced to take Arms
in a good Cause, and guarded from his Enemies by Persons of an homely
Character? David is the Captain, the Heir to the Crown of Israel and Judah by
God's Election; his Cause, to escape the Tyranny of Saul, not to bid him War.
And what were his Soldiers? 1 Samuel 22.2. Every one that was in distress,
discontented, in debt, of a bitter soul, gathered themselves to David, and he
became a Captain over them. There were sins very reproveable in either of our
adverse Armies: put them thus into a comparison. Which did most offend God,
Noah's planting a Vine, and being drunk, or the building of the Tower of Babel?
The Casuists have an Answer at their fingers ends, That drunkenness corrupted
the world, but ambition confounded it. And is not confusion of a whole Realm
more pernicious than corruption in a part? But how willingly did the sober Army
allow, cherish and make wealthy their Chaplain Peter's? Is there such another
spotted Leopard in all the King's Quarters? as Catulus said of Nonius, What a
deal of dung does that Cart carry? Have they no better excuse for themselves,
than a pandanni Plauti trinum: Scelest us est, at mihi infidelis non est? or
than Xenoph. makes for the Athenians in his Oration upon their Republic,
(...). The Athenians (a baseness in them) loved those that were fit and useful
for them, though they were wicked men. Yet it was not the Riot of the King's
Army that caused it to be improsperous: that was reported, where nothing was
examined and weighed, but out of spite believed as it was rumor'd. It was
partly neglect of Duties for want of pay. But chiefly Presumption, that their
cause was clearly loyal and lawful; that the name of the King was more than
thirty thousand: that the Subjects of England did never suffer the Crown in
fine to be oppressed: that they would fight for it, though it hung upon an
Heythorn-Hedge. They forgot that the English were new cast, and turned into
another People, by scottish sawciness and contempt of Sovereignty. This
Presumption kept the King's Forces sleeping, when their Enemies were waking:
and what is Presumption but Hope run out of its Wits? The Rebels were well
paid, well provided of all Ammunition, mightily courted by their Chiestains, as
Tertullian could say, de Praes. c. 41. Nunquam (...) proficitur quam in castris
rebellium, ubi ipsum esse illic promereri est. Again, none are so adventurous,
as they that dare not be Cowards for fear of hanging. The Law was behind the
Parliamentarians; sight, or hang. Despair will inspire a faint heart, as a
skilful Author notes it, Vegetius l. 3. Clausis in desperatione crescit
audacia: and cum spei nihil est sumit arma formido. These are the Difficulties
through which the King was to pass, and could not; which is no dishonor to his
Goodness or Wisdom. (...). Plut. No man need to be ashamed that he cannot do
all things. And never wonder if the Counsels of men, well contrived, be
frustrated by the secret Counsels of God, which an Ethnic expresses in the
style of his Religion, Destinata salubriter omni ratione potentior fortuna
discussit, Curt. l. 3. To clear up this more: would they, that so much adore
their Idol Success, would they have confessed from their heart their own Cause to
be wrong, if the King had beaten them? I believe the God of this World has
darkened them so much, that such a Confession cannot be gotten out of them. The
Weavers of Kidderminster must not be brought to such a sight of their sin, that
is, they must never repent, if they be true Disciples of Mr. Baxter's Doctrine.
The best of Orators was the greatest of Dissemblers, in his Plea for Ligarius
before Caesar. Tully had been a violent Pompeian, but the whole Empire, after
the Pharsalian Field, being turned Caesarean, says the fine-spoken man, Nunc
certe melior ea causa judicanda est, quam etiam Dii adjuverunt. Yet so much
dissonancy there was between his Tongue and his Heart, that he triumphed in the
murder of Caesar, the only Roman that exceeded all their Race in nobleness, and
was next to Tully in eloquence. Boast not therefore in Success, which is an
advantage to make Insidels proud: but the abstruse ways of God's Providence,
which sets up one, and pulls down another, as he pleases, should make us
Christians humble.

191. For all this, if the wise men of Goat-ham will appeal to Success, to
Success let the matter be referred, and then every eye may see what was the
Summum bonum, the chief aim and drift of the rebellious Enterprise, Wealth and
Spoil. So general is S. Paul's Rule, That covetousness is the root of all evil.
England was never more wealthy than when this War broke out. In fourteen years,
now spent, the great ebb of Coin, and decay of Trade is a deep wound in the
State. There was Employment to get a living for all that were industrious:
Cup-boards were full of massy Plate: all Pay was in Gold, if it were to buy the
Ware but of a Pedlar. All this is sunk, vanished, consumed. Sanctarum digestas
opum, partaeque per omnes
Divitiae populos, magnique impendia mundi.
Statius. Armies maintained east, west, north, and south have wasted it, which
do not shear, but slay the miserable People. Our Shields of Gold are converted
into Brass, as when Shisack robbed Jerusalem and the Temple, 1 Kings 14.27.
Brigades, and Garrisons of Beggars, are become the sufficient Men, that can
lend hundreds and thousands. Here Is right Quin. Varus in Paterc. Syriam pauper
ingressus, invenit divitem; dives pauperem reliquit. Treasurers of the Army,
Excise-men, Collectors of Taxes, Victuallers of the Navy, Committee Men, with
their Scribes, Officers of all forts, abundance of decayed Fortunes, nay
Scoundrels, not worth a Groat before, are swelled into vast Estates, progging
and prowling every way in purveyance for themselves. Will not these choose War
rather than Peace against Foe or Friend? For the Wheel will run easily into any
mischief, when it is well greased. Who are they, says Polybius, that prefer a
Soldiers life before any? Lib. 6. (...). They that loved to eat upon other men's
cost, and to live upon their Countrymen. So sensible are all men of this fatal
and general empoverishing, because we are so far from having the wound healed,
that the Arrow is not plucked out, but sticks still in our side. To bring but
part of their Rapines to an audit, the Members of Parliament voted all rich
Offices to themselves, which the Licinian and Aebutian Law among the old Romans
would not have suffered, Ne quis Senator commodum sibi and suis acquireret ex
lege quam ferendam rogaret. But these Members gave vast Sums, Offices,
Forfeitures of Delinquents Lands and Goods one to another: like Brutus and
Cassius, that committed an horrid act to make their Republic free, and then
invaded Provinces to themselves, without the privity of the Government, and
took up all Moneys by their own power, which the Questors had gathered for the
aerarium. And it will never be better, when freedom is driven on in a popular
uproar. Now lest themselves in the House, the Red-coats in the Field, or their
Intelligencers abroad, should want pay, they voted fifty Subsidies at one chop
upon the City of London; imposed a fifth and twentieth part upon all Lands and
Movables: gathered ninety thousand pounds a month upon the Substance of all
the Subjects: then, beside Customs, superinducted Excise upon diverse Wares,
which has raised the prices of all things, never to be brought down: alas
these are but flea-bits to the exaction of anipmoney. Intestine War is a Market
that will grow dearer and dearer, as I will transcribe an Example for it out of
Meursius, Fortu. Atti. p. 55. Bellum Peloponnesiacum quo diutius duravit, eo
majora vectigalia imposita sunt bello, sub Aristide moderata: magna sub
Pericle: majora sub Alcibiade: aucta sunt sub Lycurgo: sub Demetrio admodum
crevere. Yet for every Penny of theirs, our Tyrants imposed a pound; it is
beyond the reckoning of Sums and Ciphers: for these godly Patriots, upon a
mistake of Conscience at the worst, must have all the Cavaliers Estates, all
the Kings and Churches Revenues, pay no Debts, no Tithes, no Lords Rents, no
Copy-holds: War was their gains, and the Box swept in all. Every one that would
be innocent, and live by the known Laws, was devoured. In the sad words of
Salvian, Eo res devoluta est, ut, nisi quis malus sit, salvus esse non possit.
Many that loathed the Rebellion in their hearts, listed themselves into it,
being before reduced to beggary. (...), Diodor. l. 18. p. 594. who adventured
to die every day, that they might live. They were lost, unless they could save
themselves in the public Ruin. Sed it a se res habet, ut publica quisque ruina
malit occidere, quam sua proteri, Paterc. lib. 2. Desperate men had rather be
undone in the Kingdoms ruin, than in their private Fortune. Some Noddies
thought that a general Innovation would set them higher than they were. Very
sententiously the great Livy, lib. Omni praesenti statu spes cuique res suas
novandi est blandior. Collect all into this misery; when every man may reap the
Field that will, though he never sowed, what will become of the Harvest?

192. No wonder now if a right noble and harmless King was beaten, with all his
Part, out of his strong holds; for his Enemies were hired unto it with as much
pay and spoil, being well husbanded, as would have beaten the Turk out of
Europe. The plunder and pillage that was made of private persons, would have
paid twenty thousand men for five years. In conjunction with them, or out of
conjunction; round or rattle, if he were rich he must be a booty, or a
compounder. There was but one thing that escaped their Claws, which Plutarch
has exempted in the Life of Demetrius, (...), War will plunder no man of his
Virtue, it is a Commodity (now grown an Incommodity) not regarded. Every thing
else must pay tribute to the Sword. Videbitis oppida in quibus nibil aliud est,
quam cadavera quae lacerantur, and corvi qui lacerant, as Petromus of the like
times, every one was a Raven, or a Carcass. Or much like the riffling of
Ptolemais in Egypt, by the woeful experience of Synesius, (...) it was a night
scuffle, no distinction could be made between friends and foes: which made some
of the faction attrite, if not contrite, and sing their sorrows to a pitiful
tune, that they did ever concur to give the power to such perfidious usurpers.
o planetblasted wits, to think their cargo could be preserved in the shipwreck
of the whole kingdom! In vastitate omnium tuas possessiones sacrosanctas
futuras putas? as Tully told Catiline to his face. In this havoc and torrent
of Spoil, none smarted more than the Clergy, and their Patrimony. Their persons
were laid fast in Prison: their Churches were unroost and desaced. An
abomination which the Switzers will not commit in their Wars. You may believe
their Historian, Semler lib. 2. Perpetua lex est, jam olim a nostris sancita,
ut in omni bello nulla vis and injurta sacris locis inferatur. But what do we
talk of Law? Vis colitur, jurisque locum sioi vendicat cnsis, Sil. l. 2. What
Law is there to recover the Plate and Ornaments torn away from the Cathedrals?
No Law can restore the Bishops Palaces crazed, to turn all the Fabrics into
Coin. Four hundred years will not restore their Woods and Timber Trees so well
preserved, now not the Prelates, but the Kingdoms damage. What haste they made
to rid these things out of the way, and to purse up all, and to barter
presently with their Customers the Jews? for fear was upon them, lest what
remained should return to the right Owners. For no time, not an Age can cross
us in our just Claim hereafter. Praescribere volentibus mala fides in aeternum
obstat: a Maxim of Law in Dr. Duck's Book, p. 21. Long before him, and in
plainer words, the Orator in his best piece Phil. 2. speaking of, and praising
King Deiotarus, Scivit homo sapiens jus semper hoc fuisse, ut, quae tyranni
eripuissent, tyrannis sublatis, ii, quibus ea erepta essent recuperarent. God
has a Cyrus in store, we hope, to pluck away again, that which was dedicated
to him, from profane Belshazzars. When the Phocians had spoiled the Temple of
Delos, the Grecks were so offended at that Sacrilege, that they all resolved
in their Pan-hellenium, Quod totius orbis viribus expiari debet, Lib. 8.
Justin. And when those Phocians were routed in a bloody Battle, and ask't leave
to bury their dead, the Locrians answered them, (...), Diod. lib. 16. p. 427.
That it was the Common Law of Greece, to cast away the Carcasses of the
Sacrilegious, and not to allow them Burial. Some of our Thieves, who robbed God,
are interred in Peace, some of them among Princes and Nobles: yet they and
theirs cannot escape the Curse of an hundred Anathema's darted against them.
Now it is discernable that the Parliament, and such as they raised to maintain
their Cause, got an East and West Indies out of the Clergy and Laiety, pulling
a few Locks away at first, at last the Fleece of all the Flock: like Grecian
Toss-pots, that begin with small Cups, and quaff off great ones when they are
drunk. Some little remains, to be put to this, nay no little, but more than a
thousand and a thousand drams of Gold, to be cast into the Heap of their Gains,
wherein they sucked the Blood of the Rich, and quite starved them, who were
poor already, I mean they and their Horses lying upon the Charge of the
Country; Vetelliani per omnia Italiae municipia desides, and tantum hospitibus
met uendi, Tacit. lib. hist. 3. like to like, as the Devil to the Collier: they
were our (...), as Casaubon puts it into one word upon Theophrastus; we call it
Free Quarter. What a grief to be made servile to provide for such Guests, when
the Family knew it was Judas that dip't his hand with them in the Dish? What an
Expense it was to bring out all their Stores laid up for a year, and to waste
it in a week sometimes, upon an hundred of their Orgoglioes? It is an Arabian
Proverb, If thy Friend be Honey, eat him not up all: But these Horse-leaches
seldom, lest an House, till they had thresht the Barn Empty, and drunk the
Cellar dry; And had their mouth been a little widder,
They would have devoured bidder and shidder;
says Spencer in his Calendar. There are greater wrongs to be complained of
than this, yet none more vexatious: and he that is unlucky to be made an Host
to lodge such Guests at Free Quarter, let him set up a Cross for his Sign-post.
Now if the Reader carry in memory, that Parliament Privileges, Religion,
Liberty, the Peoples innate Power, and the like, were the Color and Pretense
to take up Arms against the King, but the thing intended was Sacrilege, goodly
Lands, Spoils of all forts, a Mass of Riches; will he not excuse an honest
Vicar of Hampshire, who changed one word in the last Verse of the Song, Te
Deum, O Lord, in thee have I trusted, let me never be a Roundhead.

193. The Condemnation of an impious, disloyal, and sacrilegious Rebellion has
filled up many Pages of this Book. Loqui multum non est nimium, si tamen est
necessarium; which is St. Austin's byword. As for the Dependence, it is not
unartificial which the Subject designed in these Papers; for that barbarous War
running on through many years of the Archbishop of York's life, and it being
the saddest, and most remarkable Passage of the Age, it could not be lest out
from the remembrance of any Occurrences made and traversed upon those infamous
Times. The Hatred and Horror of it struck as deep into this Prelate's Heart, as
into any man's. I do not believe that of Cicero to Torquatus, lib. 6. ep. Nihil
praecipue cuiquam est dolendum in eo quod accidit universis. A wise man, full
of Observation, apt to make likely Presages from present Actions upon future
Miseries, could not pass them by with Slights and Carelessness, as some others
did. Of two things for certain he was disappointed: Three years at the most
never passed over his Head, since he had a good Purse, but he expended a
valuable Sum upon some Monumental Work of Charity. His Mind was still the same,
for all Ground is not barren that lies sallow. But being stripped of those
Revenues which suppeditated Oil to the Lamp, the Light of his Spirit was
eclipsed in this obscurity to be unprofitable. Another, and no less Calamity
was, that his Papers of long study, and much commentation, with his choice
Books, were either rifled, or, it may be, burnt with Cawood Castle, and being
eager, if not ambitious, to restore his Notes again by diligence, and a mighty
memory, yet in the noise of Wars, beating up of Quarters, and shifting of
Lodging to sly from Danger, it was impossible to contrive it. Arts did never
profit in the distractions of Wars. Surgery may get experience by daily
searching into wounds. Geometry may enhaunce its skill, by crecting Bulwarks
and drawing Lines for new forts of Fortifications. But all Sciences beside will
wither in the midst of Arms, and Barbarism will overspread, till Learning
recover Maintenance, Rest, and Peace. Aptly to this Isocra. (...). In the
concord and good management of things in Greece, the Philosophers and their
Studies would fare much the better. Yet a man need not say his Life is under
great Adversity for want of such Accessions; which are but Notes of good
direction in the Margent of the Book, but belong not to the Text, which the
Reader cannot span: whose Contents are the Church of Christ in its Doctrine,
Piety, Regulation of Order kept inviolate; the King's Crown and Honor
supported; the Laws maintained to us, as our Ancestors enjoyed them; Liberty
and Property defended from wrong and violence: these are the Contents of the
great Charter, so precious to the pious and political man. And all these
Pillars, which held up our Subsistence, were battered by the Sons of Anak, and
ready to fall. In this disasterous season, who would not pity a great and aged
Prelate, driven into the remotest corner of the Land, and least desensible:
whither he carried the Prayer of Synesius with him, (...), I would presently
lay down my life, and very contentedly, if I might see my Country the beautiful
Shape of former Peace and Happiness.

194. Physicians use to prescribe to their Patients, when a tedious Languor
hangs upon them, to remove their dwelling, and change the Air. But Pliny says,
Longissima locorum mutatio est utilissima, the further removing from the Soil,
where they did not mend, the more wholesome and healing. I would it proved so to
this Archbishop, who lest Cawood-Castle in the North, to come to Aber-Conway in
Wales. It was the magnetic attraction of the Town, wherein he was born, that
drew him thither. Summas in affectu parts jure sibi usurpat terra quae genuit.
Sidon. lib. 3. ep. 8. And a greater than he, King James called it a Salmon-like
instinct to see the place of his Breeding. Spotsw. Hist. p. 257. He had been
near fifty years from the County of Carnarvan, and the Town of Conway, unless
by incidentary Visits, where his Mother brought him forth. Now, by the
circulation of a strange Destiny, he is carried thither, in a Rapture, or a
Whirlwind, to spend a few years, and to end his last days. An ulla est patria
tam digna quae hanc reciperet virtutem, quam quae peperit? as Tully pleads for
An. Milo. Even now it was, that every Hundred, almost every Tything of this
Kingdom did need some wise and courageous Man to defend it. And who could
better settle the distracted People of Wales than this person? and who did
better deserve his help, than his own Flesh and Blood? He came not so much for
Refuge, as to be a Refuge to those true-hearted Mountaineers, his Kindred and
Allies. He is well, who is the better for others: but he is happy, for whom
others are the better. And they might give God thanks, that their Chief was
come among them. Their Fault is, that there are many emulations (another would
call them Factions) between the tops of their Families, who would never have
been brought into one Body, to do the King Service, unless such a Man had
interposed, who could wind in some with Patience and Bounty, and scatter others
with Authority. Nothing liker to him than Pompo. Atticus in AEmilius Probus,
Ita Athenis se gerebat, ut communis insimis, par principibus haberetur. Though
indeed it was not common Love, but common Fear, that drew those Counties into
Confederation: so true it is, what Philostratus has in Protesilao, The
communion of good things, as Plenty and Peace, often breed heart-burnings and
envy: but when men share in Miseries, they begin to love one another,
recompensing Compassion for Compassion. It behoved him that was a wise Man, and
potent in those remote places to watch two Evils, among them that cried up the
King's Cause, Treachery among false Friends, and Disagreement among true ones,
but such as had rather perish than be ruled. The Archbishop had as good a scent
as any Vulture, to smell them out, who held Intelligence with the Enemy, of
whom he secured a few, and the rest fled far enough out of guiltiness. To stop
the other Inconvenience, besides the general Love born to him, and his great
Alliances, he found it best to appear in the strength of a strong hold, with
such Men and Arms, as might incline the whole Body to obey his Counsels. For
they that are beset with danger, had better go one way in concord, then ran
many ways, though they were better, with crossness and discord. Which they
might learn from those that were disciplined by the Parliament, nay from the
Devils. Est quaedam concordia inter daemones, non ex amicitia, sed ex nequitia
proveniens, as the Schoolmen distinguish it. Moreover, this Prelate, well seen
in all good things, inured all North Wales round about to Piety, to brotherly
Love, to Temperance, as well as to be fit to use their Arms. He bid that
frequent Prayers should be had in all Churches, with Fasting. Put the Ministers
to preach weekly, and none more often in the Pulpit than himself: invited
well-prepared Christians many times to partake of the Lord's Supper, the best
Ordinance of the Gospel, and little used there by most culpable negligence.
This was the course he rook: (...). Aeschyl. in Persis. Wisdom did turn the
Rudder of his Projects. And this was the way to bring down God among them. Si
vis tuto vivere, been vive: nihil virtute securius; it is in a Dialogue of
Petrarchs. And none could be more active in any place, that owned the King's
Authority, than he was there, in providing Powder and Ammunition, in sorting
good Commanders, in fortifying Conway Castle, and such like, to his Majesty's
high content, and his deserved praise, as will come on in the sequel. So much
did Wales gain by that which Yorkshire lost. As Tully solaced himself in his
banishment, Lib. 3. Ep. Duas res quibus me sustineam habeo, optimarum rerum
scientiam, and maximarum rerum gloriam: so he that was driven by the evil
Spirit of the Hothams into this Wilderness, had these Companions to travel with
him, great Piety, great Learning, and great Glory.

195. Being entered into the care of so great a Province he wearied himself, and
all that assisted in the Service with indefatigable diligence. His own share in
collecting Moneys, gathering Forces, repairing the Castle, casting up Works,
writing, sending, consulting, woing, and entreating, was his as much as the
burden of all the Agitants besides. In which assiduity of watching, and an
hundred vexations, his strength and healthful vigor, well maintained to that
time, began to fail, and from that year came forward no more. (...), Chrysostom.
lib. 2. de Sacerd. Continual cares, says he, will pull down the spirit; the
body much more. The malcontents at London heard of it quickly, how busy he
was in arraying the Welsh Militia, although no Bishop belide would run such
hazard, but all fell quietly to their Prayers. Hereupon they that acted for the
Parliament did him the worst despite they could, libelling, be riming him,
setting him in out in Picture covered with a Helmet, Musket on his Shoulder,
Sword and Bandaliers about him. A trick which they had learnt of their Gossips
the Low Dutch, who traduce the greatest Kings in Europe in such paltry Tables,
with their Mechanic Scurrility: (...): Baubles to be laughed at for the folly,
and to be lamented for the bitterness. The worst was, that there were many
clashes at Conway, and in the contines of it among themselves. The raw Soldiers
now come into muster and pay, were malapart, and crowed over their own Friends,
that had not the honor, as they called it, to serve on Horse, or to trail a
Pike. They had not gotten John Baptist's Lesson by heart, Luke 3.14. To do no
violence, to put no man in fear, to be content with their allowance. In some
things the World is more civil than in Ages past: but the longer it lasts, our
Wars are more licentious and barbarous. Livy says Fabritius was as innocent in
War, as in Peace. Just in boasts of greater things, lib. 25. Multa tune honest
ius bella gerebantur, quam nunc amicitiae coluntur. Formerly they found
honester Foes in the Field, than we find Friends in the City. When the rudeness
of the common Soldier abated by courteous treatment, the greater disliculty was
to thrust back the Ambition of diverse, more than enough, that would be
Commanders. Words of high Language past between him, and some Gallants, before
they would sit down. Ambrosius vir optimae meant is, sed elatae, says Lud.
Molin. Paren. p. 539. So this Ambrose was not to be out-braved with a
Buff-Jerkin and a Feather. And though some of the Cava^iers love not his memory
for it to this time, yet I shall give no scratch to Truth or Reputation, to
declare my self in his Defense, that it was to be praised in him, that he
repuised the English from being chief O^icers over the old Britains in their
own Soil. And it was prudence to preserve the Bulkly's, that great Family of
Anglesey, in the Vice-Admiralty of those Seas, rather than a valiant Gentleman
born in Cambridgeshire: for they will venture further with their own
Deputy Lieutenants, Gentry, and Landlord, than with a Stranger. The Western-men
were never so well in heart, as with their own Bevile, Greenvile, Ralph Hopton,
Killigrew, Godolphin, etc. when they changed these for other Generals and
Colonels, their Purses were shut, their Courage fell, and their Duties were
slackned. In all these Contrasts the Archbishop prevailed, and broke through
Mutinies and high Threats; which had been impossible, but that he was ever most
obliging and merciful in his greatest Fortune. Bona sibi comparat praesidia
misericordia: He that would never hurt any, when he might, was most like, if
any, to be shot free.

196. Let it stick upon his good Name as a mark of Heroic Loyalty, that he
fell to these works, upon his own cost and peril, before the King was aware,
nor had yet required it of him; which will bring in that of Xenophon l. 3.
Hist. Hystaspas and Chrysantus were Cyrus his most faithful Ministers:
Hystaspas would do all that Cyrus bad him: Chrysantus would do that, which he
thought was pleasing to Cyrus's Service, before he bad him. But when his
Majesty heard of this Prelates Actions, he posted Letters often to him, and
those so sweet and affecting, that they did recoct his drooping Age into Youth,
and cozened him, that he saw no danger in the Camp, and selt no envy from the
Parliament. Of those Letters there are many reserved, yet no more shall be
produced than concerns the keeping of Conway-Castle, because it turned to a
sharp quarrel, and procured him obloquy.

From Oxford, Aug. 1. 1643.
CHARLES R.
MOst Reverend Father in God, etc.
We are informed by our Servant Orlando Bridgman, not only of the good
Encouragement and Assistance you have given him in our Service, but also of
your own personal and earnest endeavors to promote it. And though we have had
long experience of your fidelity, readiness and zeal in what concerns us; yet
it cannot but be most acceptable unto us, that you still give unto us fresh
occasions to remember it. And we pray you to continue to give all possible
assistance to our said Servant. And whereas you are new resident at our Town of
Aber-Conway, where there is a Castle, heretofore belonging to our Crown, and
now to the Lord Conway,which with some charge is easily made defensible: but
the Lord Conwaybeing imprisoned by some of our rebellious Subjects, and not
able to furnish it, as is requisite for our Service, and the defense of those
parts: You having begun at your own charge to put the same into repair, We do
heart^y desire you to go on in that Work, assuring you that whatsoever Moneys
you shall lay out upon the Fortification of the said Castle, shall be repayed
unto you, before the Cusiody thereof shall be put into any other hand, than
your own, as such as you shall recommend.




Upon the backside of this gracious Letter, this the Archbishop has written
with his own Hand: I Jo. Archbishop of York have assigned my Nephew Mr. Will.
Hooks Esquire Alderman of Conway, to have the Custody of this Castle, mentioned in
his Majesty's Letter under his Signet, until I shall be repaid the Moneys, and
Money-worth disbursed by me in the repair thereof, by virtue of this Warrant.
And in case of Mortality, I do assign my Nephew Gryffith Williams to the same
effect.

Jan. 2. 1643.


197. New Motions, and sudden started Counsels were no new thing at the Court
in Oxford. Now the illustrious Prince Rupert is made the Generalissimo, and the
Powers of the War are given to him. The Lord John Byron is entrusted and
furnished with a part to secure North Wales. Neither of them had success
according to his Cause, or according to his Courage. What Charge his Majesty
gave to them both to listen to the Archbishops Counsels, appears in the
following Letters. From the King to Prince Rupert, Apr. 17. 1646
Right dear, and right entirely beloved Nephew, etc.
WHereas our most Reverend Father in God, our right trusty and entirely beloved
John Archbishop of York, makes his abode in the remotest parts of North Wales,
and has been heretofore, by reason of his great and long experience, very
useful to us in the advising and directing of the Commissioners of the Peace
and Array, in the several Counties of Carnarvan, Anglesey, and Merioneth, in
all things nearly concerning our Service, Supplies, and Assistance: and that we
have required the said Commissioners from time to time to listen to all his
reasonable Counsels and Advice to that effect: We thought it sit to let you
understand, that we have laid our Commands upon the said most Reverend Father
in God, to do you (upon whom we have placed the care and government of those
parts) the like Service in this kind, if you shall hold it fit to require it:
the said Archbishop humbly desiring us it might be no otherwise imposed upon
him, which we thought fit to signify unto you. As also that esteem we have of
his Abilities, and entire Affections in our Service, which we desire you to
encourage by all fair respects. So we bid you heartily farewell.


Another of his Majesty's follows to the Archbishop, Febr. 25. 1645.
WHereas we have appointed the Lord Byron to Command in chief over all our
Garrisons and Forces in North Wales, and hope that by his good Conduct in those
parts, our Service and the Countries Security will be furthered with all
diligence: Nevertheless, for his better and more effectual proceeding therein,
we have thought to fit desire the ready concurrence with him of your self, and
all our Friends: knowing well how considerable advantage yours and their hearty
and unanimous endeavors with him there, will bring to our Service and Affairs.
And in that respect, as well as your common interest and duty, we command your
suitable compliance; which we assure you shall be looked upon by us, as a fresh
acceptable Testimony of your Affections to Us, and our Cause, and preserved in
our Royal remembrance, with the rest of your Merits, against the time, when it
may please God to enable Us to reflect thereon for your good.


Thus far his Majesty, to make way for the Lord Byron, a gallant Person, a
great Wit, a Scholar, very Stout, full of Honor and Courtesy, yet favored
the English Interest above the Welsh in those Counties, which did not take. And
the Dye of War run so false, that he lost the Cast to one, who had not the
Ames-Ace of Valor in him. Neither did the scattered Forces of those distressed
Parts ever set them another Stake. Prince Rupert, observing the Royal
Directions, wrote largely, as follows, May 16. 1644. To all Governors, and
Officers, to all Sheriffs, Commissioners of the Array, or Peace, all
Vice-Admirals, or Captains of Ships in the three Counties.
WHereas I understand by his Majesty's Letters unto me lately directed, that
the most Reverend Father in God, John Lord Archbishop of York, by reason of his
great Experience and Employments in the Affairs of this Kingdom, as well under
my Grandfather of famous memory, as under his Majesty that now is, has been
entrusted in the three Counties, etc. from the first beginning of these
Troubles, and gives his best Advice in Matters of Importance, which have
relation to the King's Service, and the Peace, and safe keeping of those
Counties from all Invasions by Sea or Land: And that he has discharged that
Trust reposed in him, faithfully and successfully during the time of his abode
in those parts; My will and pleasure is, That according to his Majesty's
intimation to me, you, and every one of you, in all matters of importance and
moment, touching or concerning his Majesty's, or my Service under his Majesty,
in those Counties, as also in all Matters of Questions, Doubts, and Variances,
which may fall out either among your selves, or between your selves and the
several Counties wherein you govern, or command, shall from time to come
consult and advise with the said most Reverend Father in God, and follow such
his Advices and Counsels in the Premises, which shall be grounded upon the
Laws of the Land, or the pressing Necessities of these times, and agreeing with
our Directions and future Instructions from time to time.

RUPERT.


Nothing was wanting of Royal and Princely care to preserve the Archbishop in
Conway-Castle; yet all would not serve. There was none whom Envy did more
strive to hold down upon all occasions, which his great Deservings brought upon
him. So true is that of Synesius de provid. (...): Virtue does not quench Envy,
but rather kindle it. One violent Person unframed all good Order, who would
submit to no Authority: a hot Man, for he was ever dry: and he did not conceal
it, for he was always drinking.

198. That Affront waited more leisure to break forth, and suffered him to take
a long and a tedious Journey in Winter to Oxford, in obedience to these Lines,
which he received from his Majesty December. 16. 1644. CHARLES R.

WE having had frequent experience of your good Affection and Ability to serve
us, and having occasion at this time to make use of them here, We have thought
fit, and do by these Presents require you to repair hither to Us to Oxon, with
all convenient expedition. Desiring you to come as thoroughly informed, as you
can, of the true condition of Our Affairs, etc.


Presently he set forward, (though the ways were much beset) and came in
January with the first to the King, for he had many things to represent, and
was not in his Element when he was consined in private Walls. He took up his
Lodging with the Provost of Queens-Colledge Dr. Christopher Potter, a Master in
Divinity, and a Doctor of Piety. He was received in the Court with much Grace,
where he saw his stay must be short. For that City could not long receive so
many Nobles and Gentry, as came to make a Session of Parliament: neither could
so many of the King's principal Friends be spared from their Countries. Being
then a good Husband of his time, and having private Audience with his Majesty,
he gave him that Counsel to which Wisdom and Allegiance led him; as Thraseas
Paetus, the famous Senator said, Suum esse non aliam quam optimam sententiam
dicere. One passage is fit to see the light, which had much of prudence in it,
and too much of prophecy. He desired his Majesty to be informed by him, and to
keep it among Advices of weight, That Cromwell, taken into the Rebels Army by
his Cousin Hambden, was the most dangerous Enemy that his Majesty had. For
though he were at that time of mean rank and use among them, yet he would climb
higher. I knew him, says he, at Bugden, but never knew his Religion. He was a
common Spokes-man for Sectaries, and maintained their part with stubbornness:
He never discoursed as if he were pleased with your Majesty, and your great
Officers: indeed he loves none that are more than his Equals. Your Majesty did
him but Justice in repulsing a Petition put up by him against Sir Thomas
Steward of the Isle of Ely; but he takes them all for his Enemies, that would
not let him undo his best Friend: and above all that live, I think he is
Injuriarum persequentissimus, as Porcius Latro said of Catiline. He talks
openly that it is sit some should act more vigorously against your Forces, and
bring your Person into the power of the Parliament. He cannot give a good word
of his General the Earl of Essex, because he says the Earl is but half an Enemy
to your Majesty, and has done you more favor than harm. His Fortunes are
broken, that it is impossible for him to subsist, much less to be what be
aspires to, but by your Majesty's Bounty, or by the Ruin of us all, and a
common Confusion, as one said, Lentulus salva Repub. salvus esse non potuit,
Paterc. In short, every Beast has some evil properties; but Cromwell has the
properties of all evil Beasts. My humble motion is, that either you would win
him to you by the Promises of fair Treatment, or catch him by some stratagem,
and cut him short. Now if it shall be objected, Who reports this saving the
Archbishop himself, to magnify his own parts, that he was so excellent in
foresight, and as Ajax slighted his Rival, -- Sua narret Ulysses
-- Quae sine test gerit,
I satisfy it thus: His Servants, and they that daily listened to his
Discourses, have heard it come from him, long before the accident of saddest
experience, how some of them would live to see, when Cromwell would bear down
all other Powers before him, and set up himself. The King received it with a
smile; and said nothing. Darius destinatus sorti suae, etiam nullius salubris
consilii patiens. Yet that Darius was the best of all the Persian Kings from
Cyrus, and for want of heed to the best Counsels lost all. Our King was wise
among wise men of the first magnitude: full of constant and great Virtues, all
of them Pearls of a clear water, but had not the luck to hit the right, when he
came to particulars. Yet I have heard some that were about him at Oxford
protest, that he has said in their hearing, I would some would do me the good
Service to bring Cromwell to me alive or dead. All good Subjects were bigg with
that wish, when it was too late. Curt. lib. 8. Male humanis ingeniis natura
consuluit, quod plerunque non futura, sed transact a perpendimus: It is a sore
Punishment upon Man's Understanding, that the Fillar of Fire is behind it, and
the cloudy Pillar before it. The Fire lets it see the Harm that is done, that
we may repent and bewail it; but the Cloud does darken it before, that
oft-times it has no forecast to prevent it. Which is all one, as if a Knife
should cut better with the Back than with the Edge.

199. Much Prayer and Fasting were indicted and observed at this time in
Oxford: A mighty Expectation was raised, what the Parliament would bring forth,
which opened there. But what Parliament shall we call it? The same that was
summoned to meet at Westminster, Nov. 3. 1640? The same: For they were the
Members of them two Houses neither called by new Writs, or new chosen, but the
best of the old Stock, summoned hither by the King, to take to themselves their
Right to be the High Court of Parliament: But the Parliament continued still at
Westminster, and can one Body be in two places? Habent hoc publicae
necessitates, ut impossibilia plerumque persuadeant, Quintil. lib. 6. c. 3.
This was a Knot not easily to be untied, but a Scruple to distract the best
Gown-men that had the soundest Judgment in the Laws: Nothing but high Necessity
could resolve the Riddle, such a Necessity as could find no other way to save
the King and his Kingdoms: That Necessity compelled to stride over the seeming
Absurdity, to have one politic Body (not one natural) in two places. They that
sat at Westminster were a Parliament by the force of an unhappy Statute passed
to them two years before: They that sat at Oxford were the same Parliament
removed thither, because they could not discharge their Trust with their
Fellow Members, nor abide in Conscience to hear the King's Honor traduced
daily; therefore the Common Safety, which they had undertaken as Members of
Parliament, compelled them to such a way as was without President, because no
Subjects had ever so much endangered the Crown of the King, and the
Wealpublick. New Injuries require new Remedies. And we may learn much from a
Passage in Quintilian, lib. 7. Tot saeculis nullam repertam esse causam, quae
sit tota alteri similis. The Members therefore of these two Houses took their
places in the fair Schools of the University: Sir Richard Lain, Lord Keeper of
the Great-Seal, being Speaker in the House of the Lords, and Sergeant Sampson
Evers in the House of Commons. An appearance there was beyond imagination, of
the Peers and best Gentry: The words of the Orator will set it out gracefully,
Philip. 3. Talis Senatorum and dignitas, and multitudo fuit, ut magna
excusatione iis opus sit, qui talie in castra non venerunt. The King was
marvelously pleased with the frequency of so many courageous persons, whom he
knew not well how to protect, least of all to reward them: As the same Author
writes it of Tarquin driven out of Rome, lib. de amicit. Se intellexisse quos
fidos amicos habuisset, quosque insidos, cum jam neutris gratiam refer
possit. So the good King knew not Sheep from Goats, Loyal from rebellious, till
he was neither in condition to chastise the one, or advance the other. After
great Consult in Parliament, when the best Orators had been fully heard, it
was unanimously resolved, that this Share of Parliament should send a Message
to the other Share, (with Leave obtained from their General the Earl of Essex)
for His Majesty's Safety, to come to London, for suspension of Arms, to fill up
the House at Westminster, with one Body, all Affronts on both sides to be
obliterated, and Conditions for Amity for the future, and the Public Good to
be propounded. All which was uncivilly rejected, and nothing granted, but to
stand to the mercy of an insolent Clutter. Of the King's Parliament (which had
agreed in a most reasonable Message, though proudly scorned) some voted, in the
warmth of their Courage, that the Part at Westminster was an illegal and
traiterous Convention. Some slaked the Flame with cool Arguments, That they
were very bad Members, and greatly abused their Trust, yet they kept their
Places by the consent of both Houses, and the Royal Consent had passed it into
an Act: That this course would emperil the validity of all Parliaments past and
to come: That the Blame would fall upon the King principally, whose
confirmation of their continuance to hold out this Session was not revocable;
Princeps ad contractum tenetur ut privatus, cum maxim in eo requiritur bona
sides, Duckius de Jure, p. 44. That the King's Forces were thin, ill armed, ill
paid, and it behoved not them that were low to use high words: (...), AEschyl.
They that are declined, must incline to Moderation. The resolute Members
answered, It was true, an Act of Parliament cannot be revoked, but by a
Parliament. What did they make of this Body of Lords and Commons met at Oxford?
They would draw a Bill, and offer it to the King, to repeal that stale
Association. The King had ratified their Bill for continuation of a Session;
but a Promise holds not, if such a Mischief break out upon it, as the Promiser
cannot with Conscience and Safety hold Faith with them. It is a Maxim in the
most ancient Laws of the World, Omnia debent idem esse quae suerant cum
promitterem, ut promittentis fidem teneas, Senec. de ben. lib. 4. c. 35. The
Success of the Enemy was not so prosperous as it was given out and seared, but
were they ten times stronger, they would not abate them a jot of the
Impeachment of Traitors. The more Violence they did use to shake off that name,
the more it would cleave to them. But let the times grow worse, -- Sors ubi
pessima rerum,
Sub pedibus timor est.
Metamor. lib. 15. And our last Breath shall be in Cicero's words, Phil. 7.
Dicam quod dignum est Senatore and homine Romano, moriamur. Death is not so
formidable as to submit to Rebels. Which of these two Opposites did argue best,
let Solomon judge, if he were alive, in which mind I dismiss it; for that which
outgoes my Knowledge shall never undergo my Censure. As our English People say,
Much Cry and little Wool; these two Houses produced small things in the close:
Nothing more uncertain than what a Parliament will bring forth in the end. At
the Colloquy at Ratisbon, Tanner granted, that the Pope might err in a Council,
unless he used all due and ordinary means: But the Jesuit in effect granted
nothing; For, says he, without all doubt and question he does ever use those
means. But if a Parliament were all Popes, and made out their Consults with the
Line and Plumbet of the best Diligence, Obliquity would fall out, because all
human Light burns dim in the Lanthorn of thick misty Passions. It is observed,
that His Majesty removed one Parliament to Oxon in the first of his Reign, this
other in the nineteenth, both rose up abruptly, and gave him small content. How
is it that public Councils were improsperous in those delicate Seats of Arts
and Sciences? The Genius of the place is not pleased with those Areopagites,
for they are not proper Visitors of its learned Foundations. Themistius has
these words in an Oration upon the Muses, (...), They all agree very well
together, but the Muses like no other company.

200. Oxford wanted not Bishops at this time, many lodged in it; but they were
excluded to sit and vote as Peers in Parliament, yet their presence served for
very good use. His Majesty had preferred Dr. Frewin, the President of
Magdalen-College, to the Bishopric of Lichfield and Coventry, whom none of his
Predecessors did exceed in Prudence, Bounty, and Advancement of learned
Scholars, who was consecrated by the Archbishop of York in the Chapel of his
own College, and feasted the Nobles and Clergy in a fair Room built at his own
Cost. It is not to be passed over, that he left the Presidentship of that
College, a place of Security and Plenty, to take a Bishopric, when those
Dignities were voted out of the Church by the Disciplinarians, and their
Revenues offered to sale to pay the Charges of their Army. Which was an act of
as much Hope and Courage, as that Roman's in Livy, That when Rome was besieged
by Hannibal, bargained for, and bought that piece of Land, upon which the
Carthaginians had pitched their Camp. To return from this little Diversion into
the great Road, When the Parliament had made a recess, His Majesty called a few
able Statesmen to him in private, among whom our Archbishop was one, and being
the first in precedence, was called upon to begin, and to say freely what might
best be done, to bring His Majesty, and his faithful part, out of those
Troubles, which the Lords and Gentlemen, that lately undertook it, had left no
better than they found them. The Archbishop was very backward, and made many
Excuses, desiring to hear others, that had been more assiduous in those great
Affairs, which being not granted, he was honester than the Oracle of Apollo, as
Eusebius objects it to the Pagans, lib. 6. Praep. Evan. c. 1. That the Oracle,
much importuned in a certain case, and loath to give an Answer, burst out into
this passion, Retine vim istam: falsa enim dicam si coges: An Evasion sit for
the Couesels of the Devil. But the Archbishop took his mark from St. Ambrose,
Ep. 29. to Theodosius, Neque est imperiale libertatem dicendi negare, neque
Sacerdotale quod sentias non dicere. So he broke into the matter.

Sir, says he to the King, my Opinion will be strange, and I fear, unwelcome:
If it please not, yet do not impute it to Falsehood or Fear, but to Error and
Mistaking. Your Militia is courageous, but small, not like to increase, and
then not to hold out. Your Enemies multiply, and by this time your Army has
taught them to fight: They are in Treaty with the Scots, to make a Recruit; and
the Princes and States beyond Seas, to their shame, give them countenance.
Their Treasurers at Westminster boast, that it costs them large Moneys every
month to keep Correspondence with their Intelligencers and Spies about you.
Your Soldiers in their March and Quarters are very unruly, and lose the
Peoples Affections every where, by the Oppressions they sustain. Out of these
Premises I infer, and I engage my Life to your Majesty's Justice, and my Soul
to God's Tribunal, that I know no better course than to struggle no further,
since so it is the Will of God, and to refer all to the pleasure and discretion
of that unkind and insolent Parliament at Westminster, but with the
preservation of your Majesty's Crown and Person, to which they have all taken
an Oath to offer no Hurt or Violence, and have renewed it in many
Protestations: As likewise with the Indemnity of your Adherents; for we save a
Ship with the loss of the Goods, not of the Passengers. If any thing will
soften them, it will be this most pacifick and gracious Condescension. The
Heathens speak rudely, that Constancy in Suffering will tire out the Cruelty of
the Gods; but certainly such a Sufferance and Self-denial as resigns up your
Majesty's Cause and Trust quite unto them, will make the worst of them ashamed
of their pertinacy, and mel^^^ the best into a shower of Repentance: But if
your Majesty disdains to go so low, and will not put the good of the Church and
Kingdom upon their Faith, to which Misery, I fear our Sins have brought us, I
am ready to run on in the common Hazard with your Majesty, and to live and dye
in your Service.


There was danger in so much Plain-lealing; for Xenophon, lib. 2. Hist.
relates, that in a Case to this as near as can be, Archestratus was cast in
Prison, for advising the Athenians to take such Conditions of Peace, as the
Lacedaemonians would give them, after their great Overthrow at Aegos-potamos.
Yet some noble persons, at the prosecution of this Consultation, struck in with
the Archbishop's Judgment, the most dissented, the King was not pleased in it,
and the Burden lay upon the Foreman that began it. Says the Son of Syrach, c.
7, 5. Boast not of thy Wisdom before the King. The Note of Grotius is extant
upon it, Qui excellunt sapientia suspecti ferme regibus. But the Gallantry of
the Array were quite out of patience to hear of it, their Heaven upon Earth was
to see the day that they might subdue and be revenged of the Roundheads. The
common Soldier, that subsisted upon Pay and Plunder, had as lieve dye as lose
his Trade: Tanta dulcedo est ex alienis fortunis praedandi, Live. lib. 6. Now,
because this was called the Archbishop's Judgment, though others consented, and
suffered hard words, it will be to some purpose to unfold it a little, and to
defend the Innocent: For he that lives may out-wear a Disgrace, not he that is
dead: Therefore Arist. maintains it in his ninth Problem, that it is more just
to do right to the Dead, than to the Living.

201. First, let the magnanimous Junto be heard, who would try the hazard of
War to the last, and had rather lose their Heads, than put them under the
Girdle of a Presbyterian Conventicle: It is enough (quoth they) to lend our
Ears to a dishonorable Advice; but shall we buy Peace with Dishonor? We will
never rent it for so much: He that fears Death, does not enjoy his Life. It was
an Ignominy in the Athenians, which they will never blow off, Just. lib. 5.
Imminente periculo belli major salut is quam dignitatis cura fuit. Faint
Hearts, that in a sore War had more respect to their Safety than their Dignity.
We are not of Athens, but of England; and what are they under whose Authority
we should truckle? Heady, arrogant, implacable, that look upon their Speaker's
Mace, as if it were the Scepter that swayed the whole World. Adeo est natura
multitudinis, aut servit humiliter, aut impotenter dominatur, Live. lib. 23. One
of the three things that disquiet the Earth, says Solomon, is an Handmaid that
is Heir to her Mistress, Prove. 30.23. But it will disquiet the Earth a great
deal more, to have such Vassals exalted to be Kings, and while His Majesty
lives, to become Heirs to their Master. We'll not cap and kneel to them, we'll
meet them on Hounslow-health. Totidem nobis animaeque manusque, Aen. 10. We
cannot believe that God will suffer such Foes and Furies to prosper any longer;
Fortune has served them, and will soon be weary of that Service. Nulli fortuna
tam dedita est, ut multa tentanti ubique respondeat, Senec. lib. 1. de ira, c.
3. We are great Sinners we confess, yet we are obedient to the Church, loyal to
the King, faithful to our Laws and Country. Non potest baerere in tam bona
causa and tam bonis civibus tam acerba injuria, Cic. Orat. pro Caecinna. Our
Fellow Subjects in London, and most about in all places, have been entranced or
bewitched; Neighbour-Princes are drowsy and supine, not aware that their turn
will come shortly, if they endure a Rebellion so near them, and not advance to
correct it. The Crown of England has never wanted Aid in the most desperate
plunges. Regum afflictae fortunae multorum opem alliciunt ad misericordiam,
quod regale nomen magnum, and Sanctum esse videtur, Orat. pro le. Manil. But
whatsoever becomes of us, God forbid the King should leave himself to the will
of the Kirk, and John Knoxe's Scholars. The Indignities they showed to his
Grandmother will never be forgotten. Trust these broken Reeds? Parthis fides
dictis faclisque nulla, nisi ubi expedit, Just. lib. 21. They are lovers of
their own Faction, fal^e to all the World beside. In fine, this is a Knot not
to be unloosened with our Tongue, as if we were Boys at Blow point, but we will
cut it asunder with our Swords. This was strong and rough. But to this one of
the Lords of the Moderation would be like to reply, That it were pity such
redoubted Valor should not be reserved for Service of more likely Success.

-- Quantum ipse feroci
Virtute exuperas, tanto me impensius aequum est
Consulere, atque omnes m^tuentem expendere casus.
Aen. 11. Our Sins have brought us to this dejection, to ask Quarter of them,
when it was our Right to have given Mercy and Life to them, when they had begged
it. I expect these will show no Generosity to their Betters upon the close.
Omne ^l justum censent, quicquid superior contra inferiorem decerneret; as
Augustus said of the Pannenians, Dion. lib. 44. The baser their Carriage shall
be to His Majesty and his Friends, the worse it will be for themselves, for it
will make their Tyranny more odious. Do you imagine, when we yield so far, but
that we foresee their own Pride and Demerits will in a little time cast them
out of possession, and we are confident, ere long, all will revert into its
former Channel. God se^^geth us by them, to let the People feel the difference
between the Reign of a sweet King, and the Violence of a sort of Mahumetan
Bashaws. As in the like case God says, 2 Chronicles. 12.8. Nevertheless they shall
be Shisach' s servants, that they may know my service, and the service of the
Kingdoms of the Countries. Gentlemen, you see much Hope to raise up the King,
but where? in that Courage that is within your selves. I cannot see it abroad.
Trust not in Princes, nor in any Child of Man. The next-neighbour King, the
French I mean, might and ought to assist His Majesty by alliance of Blood; and
I think I say not amiss, that he is his greatest Enemy. I remember the words of
a Stranger, that writes our History, Polyd. Virg. lib. 23. Hine colligere licet
Aethiopem posse prius mutare pellem, quam qui terram incolunt Gallicam valde
multum diligere Anglos. At home in our own Country the silly People every day
fall away apace. Si labant res lassae itidem amici collabaseunt, Plaut. in
Styc. And we our selves are in part guilty of it. Most look to govern
Garrisons, and to take Contributions of the Villages to the quick, and to spend
them lavishly; as Diodor says, lib. 5. That the Dogs at Cuma leave the scent of
the Beasts they hunt, and stoop to smell at the Flowers of the Meadows:
Therefore I say, before we be quite abandoned, and our Fortunes stoop lower,
give this Sop to Cerberus, give them a Blank, and we shall bleed fewer ounce;
of Wealth and Honor. I would I knew once the worst that shall be imposed on
us: It is better to grieve for what we bear, than to fear at Uncertainty what
we may bear. Doleas quantum scias accidisse, timeas quantum potest accidere,
Plin. lib. 8. Grief is finite, but Fear is infinite. That Parliament dare not
but receive the King with all outward Gratulations, they have made so much
protestation to it already, and the Law of God and Nations extort it: For if
the People rebel, and be tired out to submit, the King is still bound to keep
his Oath, and to govern them by his known Laws. And if the King be wearied out
in a Civil War, and let the People win the Day, the People must still perform
their sworn Allegiance to the King. You hear my Judgment different from worthy
persons in a great case, (...): It is an honorable Error to be mistaken in so
great a matter. Marvel not that my words appear the fruits of a low Spirit;
marvel that the Anger of God has compelled us to it. I reckon not my self in
the motion, but the King, his Posterity, and his Kingdoms. Wisdom is not the
same thing at all times; neither is Truth always of the same stature. Hear
Tully, because he never spoke better, Orat. pro Planc. Hoc de sapientibus, and
clarissimis viris accepi, non semper easdem sententias ab ^^^dem, sed
quascunque reip. status, inclinatio temporum, and ratio concordiae postulant
esse deferendas. And it is noted in as great a Christian, as he was a Heathen,
That exactness of Honor, Justice, and Decorum cannot be kept even at all
times, (...), Synes. ep. 67. So that the Counsels of the great Athanasius did
give place to the variation of Times. The Leaders of both sides have spoken;
but the negative did carry it. Perhaps I may say with the old Proverb, Chorus
ejus major est, meus melius eccinit: yet I would rebuke him that should think
the worse of those heroically resolved men from the fatal Accidents of
succeeding Times. Doubtless we had compounded for less blood, less loss of
Honor, less confusion with the Presbyters then, than with the Independent or
Congregational Tyranny after. The first pinnion'd our Arms, the latter cut them
off. The first were like the Philistines, which made the Children of Israel
their Slaves; the other were the Chaldaeans that murdered our King, pulled down
every great Man's House, and the House of the Lord. The one gave us Vinegar to
drink, and the other Gall. The one made us a miserable nation, the other have
made us execrable Parricides to God and Man.

202. All being run over, and disputed in this Argument, the Archbishop
controuled not the greater number, and therein the better, because the King was
better satisfied to try his right by his Sword. It is fit to serve Kings in
things lawful with undiscoursed Obedience, which Climachus calls Sepulchrum
voluntatis: -- For we deny
When Kings do ask, if we ask why,
says our Master Poet Johnson. So the Archbishop took the Ball fairly, not at
the ^^oly, but at the first rebound. It is a Motto of great sense and use,
which Mr. Gataker cites Lib. ^. Anton. (...), a good man is either right or
rectified: as some Plants grow straight, some are helped by adminiculation to
be straight: and some are wise at the first sight, some not until the second
inspection into a Cause. Now our Prelate leaves Oxford at the opening of the
Spring, with a Charge from his Majesty to look to North Wales, chiefly
Conway-Castle; with easy Journeys, and the safeguard of some Forces, that
marched the most of the way that he road, he came to Conway, and that was his
last Journey in this World, where some few years after, like old Jacob, Genesis
49.33. He gathered up his feet into his bed, where he first set his feet upon
the Ground.

Felix qui prepriis aevum transegit in arvis:
Ipsa domus pucrum quem videt, ipsa senem.
Claudias. One year, and a tedious one, run out, in listening to things abroad,
how the King's Forces and his Garrisons did speed. The bold Britains would
believe them that reported the best, and the best was that they were Cadmaean
Wars, Et semper praelia clade pari, Propert. It molested them not alittle, that
they were jealous among themselves, how to keep their own. For we that live in
the South slander them, if their common men be not Filchers and Thieves. And
though it were piped by a Mouse,
It must needs come to Fame's House;
says noble Chaucer. As many in those Counties, as had Plate, Coin, Jewels,
Movables that were precious, besides their Writings and Evidences, got favor
of the Archbishop to slow them up in the Castle, each Person having an
Inventory of his own share. And some suspected to be corrupt-hearted to the
Royal Cause, obtained that favor; the ground of much ensuing mischief. But it
was the forecast of the wise Prelate to take Hostages, as it were, from such,
and to be secured against their Revolt, being in possession of the best of
their Substance. A Twelvemonth after Sir Jo. Owen, a Colonel for the King,
that had gone out with a Regiment of Foot, and returned after a year with a few
of the shattered Remnant, though he had been unfortunate against his Enemies,
would try his Valor upon his Friends, and contrived how to recover his Debts
and Damages with the Spoil of Conway-Castle: slighting with the clack of his
singers all sober Counsel, That all North Wales was concerned to have their
Wealth in the custody of so trusty a person as his Grace of York, that their
hearts were with their bag and baggage; if he made a prey of it, their whole
Body would turn against him; that nothing would prosper after it in the King's
behalf, that their Atlas in those parts, the Archbishop, had the custody under
the Signet to remain quiet in it, till his cost bestowed on it should be
refunded to him, which was not hitherto treated upon or offered, that the
Prince, the General, had corroborated his Majesty's pleasure therein, and had
commanded all Officers by Sea and Land to assist him in it. What Conditions
could be assured to any man by Royal Faith, if these were broken? A violent
Man, and a Furioso was deaf to all this, and purchased the favor of Prince
Rupert to be made under his Hand (not equal to the King's Signet) to be
Commander of the Castle, and by force he surprised it, and entered it: which in
somewhat more than one year was taken from him by Colonel Milton, who relieved
the Archbishop, and such as had Interest in it, to carry away their Goods which
remained. All this fell into a hard Construction, derogating much to the
Archbishops credit; and the infamy was not only hot, when it was fresh, but it
cools not much to this time. Though Love has a soft hand to touch where it
loves, I will not so far defend the whole Process, but I confess he was more
earnest than advised in this unlucky action. Camerarius penning the Life of
Melanchthon, casts in a few sweet words thus, Out of my great opinion of him,
Quaedam forte carius existimem quam mereantur: But I disdain to call bad good,
and darkness light. Yet in justice I must patronize the noble Williams against
Mr. Sanders. Hist. p. 889. in these Lines, That he fortified his Garrison
against the King, and dissuaded the Country from contribution to the King.
Those were Times, when he wrote, to outface Truth, and willing to listen to
Slanders: no wonder if many took the liberty, and had the confidence to broach
Fictions. And it is a great advantage against the Truth, when Lies and false
Rumors have got the start to speak first, chiefly when they have spread long,
Mensuraque ficti
Crescit, and auditis semper novus addidit author.
Ovid. Thus much I will undertake, to inform all Readers with truth in the
matter, and satisfy the greatest part of many men with a clear Apology.

203. He builds ill that lays not a sure Foundation, therefore my Entrance
shall be from the very words, not a syllable varied, wherein the Archbishop
laid forth to his Majesty, how he had suffered from Sir Jo. Owen, which he sent
to Oxford by Captain James Martin, a faithful and undaunted Soldier; and by his
diligence it was registered among other Complaints, when he could get no more.
The Instructions follow: 1. Upon the Ninth of May 1645. Sir J. Owen Governor
of Conway, about Seven of the Clock in the Evening, before the Night-guard was
sent unto the Castle, the possession whereof was placed by the King in the
Archbishop of York, and his Assigns, upon great and valuable considerations by
his gracious Letters, and under his Majesty's Hand and Signet, bearing date at
Oxford August. 1. 1643. did with bars of iron and armed men, break the Locks
and Doors, and enter into the said Castle, and seize upon the Place, the
Victuals, Powder, Arms, and Ammunition, laid in by the said Archbishop at his
own charge, without the least contribution from the King or the Country, for
the defense of the place, and the Service of the King and the said Country.

2. That being demanded by the said Archbishop to suffer two of the said
Archbishop's men to be there with his rabble of Grooms and beggarly People, to
see the Goods of the Country preserved from filching, and the Victuals and
Ammunition from wasting and purloyning, Sir John in a furious manner utterly
refused it, though all the Company cried upon him to do so for his own
discharge, yet would he not listen to any reason, but promised the next day to
suffer all things to be inventoried, and the Lord Archbishop to take away what
the would, Sir John acknowledging all the Goods and Ammunition to be his.

3. The next day he receded again from all this, would not permit at the
entreaty of the Bishop of St. Asaph, his own Cousin-German, any of the
Archbishop's men to go and look to the Goods, nor suffer his servants to fetch
forth for his Grace's use (who has lingered long under a great sickness and
weakness) either a little Wine to make him some Cawdles, or so much as a little
of his own stale Beer to make him Possets, which all the Country conceive to be
very barbarous.

4. The said Sir John continues rambling from place to place, and detaineth
still all the Goods of the Country, laid up in this Castle, as conceived to be
owned by the Archbishop, who was like to be responsal for them; and had duly
returned them in other years: and threatens to seize upon the Plate, and all
things else of Value to his own use. Than which no Rebel or Enemy could deal
more outragiously.

5. The Archbishop desires his Majesty would repossess him of the right of this
Castle, according to his Majesty's Grant made upon valuable consideration. And
that if his Majesty's pleasure be, that Sir Jo. Owen (or any other Man of more
moderation and less precipitancy) should be there, he come under the Archbishop
his Assignment, as right requires, and as Colonel Ellis and Mr. Chichely were
content to do, and did. To the which the Archbishop (as Colonel Ellis and Sir
Will. Leg can witness) was ever willing to give way.

6. That howsoever, the Archbishop may have all his Goods and Chattels all his
Cannon, Arms, Ammunition, Powder, Provision in Beef, Beer, Wine, Cheese,
Butter, Oatmeal and Corn presently restored to him. And what is wasted and made
away, may be answered to him by Sir John: As also that all the Inhabitants of
this and the Neighbor Countries, may have their Goods presently out of the
Castle, before they be pilfered and imbezeled.

7. Or otherwise, that his Majesty, and Prince Rupert his Lieutenant, will
graciously permit and suffer, with their gracious favor, the said Archbishop
and Inhabitants of the Country, to repair with their Complaints to the Assembly
at Oxford, and the Committee there, against these, and many other Outrages and
Concussions of the said Sir Jo. Owen, under color of being Governor and
Sheriff of this Town, not warranted by any of his Commissions.

Every Line of this Remonstrance is just, humble, pathetical, yet came to
nothing. The time was protracted from week to week, and at last an Answer, like
to a Denial, is given to Capt. Martin, That it should be considered at more
leisure. One Hector, a phrase at that time for a daring Russian, had the ear of
great ones sooner than five strict men, that served the King unblameably before
God and all his People. But when the Messenger returned to Wales, and brought
not the least satisfaction, not a complemental Excuse to pacify the
Archbishop, he said nothing, lest he should have said too much: But as Livy
notes upon Fabius the Consul, when Papirius Cursor was made Dictator over his
head, Apparuit insignem dolorem ingenti animo comprimi: A great Spirit was
chased with a great Indignity.

204. Fifteen Months were run out after the Archbishop received this baffle to
be postponed to Sir J. Owen (the time is truly digited) and a year of darkness
and gloominess came upon this miserable Land. Nasby Fight was struck, the Lord
Jacob Astly defeated, the Western strong Holds reduced to Fairfax, Chester
surrendered, Oxford it self begirt; as Mindarus wrote to Sparta in his short
Country Language, (...), all that was good was undone. Chester being possessed by
Col. Milton, the Door into North Wales, he, full of Animosity against the Royal
Cause, marches over Dee, through Flint and Denbyshires, unto the Town of
Conway, where the Conawians would as soon fight for a May-poll, as for Sir J.
Owen. The amazed People turn to the Archbishop, look upon his strong wisdom and
gray hairs to stop the cruelty of the Conqueror, and to lighten the yoke of
their Misery. And an aged Counselor is a Sovereign help at such a pinch.
(...), Plut. (...). Long time of Life, which robs us of all things else, pays
us the Principal again with Use in Knowledge and Wisdom. The Archbishop's Grace
calls some few to Counsel with him, who agree to parley with Milton (one that
understood his own strength, and their weakness). The Welsh made some high
Demands, which were not heard patiently. They perceived Milton's mind was at
the Castle, where the Archbishop's Wealth, and of diverse far and near was
deposited, which was ready to come every jot into the Colonels power; whom they
perceived to be rather haughty than covetous, and they closed by insinuations
with him, relating how Sir J. Owen had surprised the Castle, detained their
Goods, and insulted over them, who had born Arms in the same Cause, therefore
they offered to join with him to put him into the Castle, with condition that
every Proprietary might obtain what he could prove by the Archbishops Inventory
to belong to him, and for the Overplus, let it fall to the Colonels Mercy;
whose Consent the Archbishop's Art and fair Language drew on. And not the least
time being spent in delay, the Soldiers entered the Castle both by Scalada, and
by forcing the Gates, assisted by the Archbishop's Kindred, and other Welsh;
and Milton kept the Castle, and kept his Word, to let the Owners divide the
Goods among themselves, to which they laid Title, and could prove it. Let
another take the Archbishop's room, and discharge it better. That which was
lost, the Castle, could not be kept; that which was saved helped the King's
Friends to subsist, which his gracious goodness would allow. Yes, but Milton
was a Rebel. And may not a Rebel be used to do acts of Justice or Charity?
Licet uti alieno peccato, is often allowed in most conscionable Divinity. Make
the case that one of the King's Ships at Sea piratically board a London
Merchant, and spoil him; shall the Merchant be debarred from imploring an
Algiers Captain to get him his own again, if he could find that favor? Here Is
the case, and all the case, upon whose mis-report the Archbishop's good Name
did suffer deeply. For whose justification more may be said, than they that
love detraction are willing to hear. Says Sanderson, He fortified his Garrison
against the King: No such matter. Mliton took the Garrison, and kept it: but
his Grace retired to his dear Kinswoman's House, the Lady Mostyn. Yet says
another, He was forward in the action in his own person, which was to fall away
from the King. It is replied, He was ever slow to revenge an unjust wrong, but
earnest to recover a just right: which Salust commends in Jugurtha's Wars, Non
minus est turpe sua relinquere, quam aliena invadere injustum. This made him
thrust himself in among the Assailants, which in my censure of his Carriage did
not become him. Else what harm was it to save his own stake and his Friends,
without prejudice to the King's interest, whose Part could no longer hold any
Garrison in England: Non vires alias, conversaque numinasentis!
Cede Deo --
Aen. 11. From his Fidelity to his Majesty he never went back an inch. He
suffered in the imputation to the contrary as innocently, as the Prophet Jeremy
did, c. 37.13. who when he had separated himself from the People, Irijah laid
hold of him, and said, Thou fallest away to the Chaldaeans. So Athanasius was
banished by the good Emperor Constantine, being impeacht that he hindered the
victualling of Alexandria, which might have endangered the ruin of the City.
What did our Archbishop in this otherwise than his Excellency the noble
Marquess of Ormond, whom Sanderson justly praises, That he thought it more
honorable to surrender to the Parliament Forces, what the King held in
Ireland, than to suffer the interest of the English Protestants, to fall under
the power of the Irish Papists. Actions are not rigidly to be perpended, into
which one is thrust by necessity. A mild man, Nazianzen, pleaded pardon for
them, who, being showed the wrack, set their hands to Athanasius's banishment;
(...), Orat. de laud. Athanasii. Their Mind was true, their Pen was forced.
Integrity must be more precious to a Man than his Life: but in some things to
be reduced to obey Rebels is no departure from Integrity. He was a Lord
Chancellor of France, whose Decipher agrees exactly with this great Prelate,
sometimes Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, Guido Rupifalcaudius citra ignaviam
circumspectus, and generose cautus: and tempori ita cedens, ut consertis
manibus integritatem fervaret, Budaeus de As. fol. 36.

205. The Historian Sanderson's Ink drops another Blot upon the Archbishop's
Honor, That he dissuaded the Country from Contribution to the King. I must
exclaim as Demosthenes did, when Aeschines run into a great Absurdity, (...);
why do you not take Hellebore, or Bears-foot, as we call it in English, to
purge Melancholy? So quite is every thing mistaken. For the Welsh in those
Parts had now laid down their Arms, the Enemy being six to one that was broke
in upon them. Omnes, quorum in alterius manu vita posita est, saepius cogitant,
quid potest is, cujus in ditione, and potestate sunt, quam quid ipsi debent
facere, Cic. pro Quinctio. It was no time for the Subdued to show their Teeth,
when they could not bite. Besides, they paid no Contribution before, but for
their own defense, neither carried Moneys out of their own Country: The
scarcity of Coin is well known in that remote corner of the Kingdom; they have
Meat and Drink good store for their Bellies, and homespun Frieze for their
backs, as the Modern Greeks have a Proverb in barbarous words, (...), God
provides thick Mantles for clothing, where there are hard Frosts. But the
Silver of the Welsh, which they talk of is in the Mines of the Mountains, not
in their Purses: or you may say their Sacks are full of Corn, but they are not
so lucky as Joseph's Brethren were, to have money likewise in their Sacks
mouths, Genesis 42.27. Yet suppose they had been able now to make a bountiful
Levy, would Milton have suffered them to send it to the King? Or might it be,
they could have done it by stealth, their Friends at Oxford were block't up,
and could not come by it. Collect then, what unlikelyhood, nay, what
impossibility there was to dissuade those Counties from Contribution to the
King. It Is far better yet on the Archbishops side, he might go barefaced
through the World, and not be ashamed, but rather admired for the good Service
he did to his depressed Countrymen in their greatest necessity. Livy says of
the Corinthians, when they looked for hard bondage from the Romans, and quite
above their expectation, a Praeco standing by the Commander of the Legions
proclaimed Liberty to them, and to all the vanquished Graecians, Mirabundi
velut somni speciem arbitrabantur: So after the Archbishop had turned Milton up
and down with fine Discourses, and wrought him like Wax, the People thought
they were in a Dream, when their League was made upon these Conditions, That
none of those Counties should compound for Delinquency, nor be burdened with
Free Quarter, nor have the Covenant offered to them, nor be charged with Taxes,
but only in Victual for Men and Horse in the Garrisons. As Valerius says Lib.
7. of Anaximenes saving Lampsacum, by turning Alexander's vow to destroy it, to
be the obligation to save it, Salus urbis vasramenti beneficio constitit: So
these Cambro-Britains were conserved by the cunning and dexterity of a
Master-wit, and let Col. Milton come in for his share of easiness and lenity.
Oxford had tolerable Articles of Immunity upon the Surrender: Exeter had better
than it: but North Wales had the best of all; and was never much oppressed after,
but by Vavasor Powel: he and his fellow Praedicants ransack't all that the poor
Church had, (...), Soph. Antig. Those New-light-men, that thought they were
near to be Prophets, were very rapacious and covetous. Let the Archbishop's
carriage super totam materiam now be brought to the Touchstone: except some
unadvisedness to venture personally upon the Castle (and it was no worse) had
been, I see nothing could make any noise, which made the entrance to a wrong,
but a great suspicion. Dr. Harmer has flourish't it over with fine Latin to
bring off the Archbishop from obloquy: but I am better acquainted from sure
Hands and Papers about every occurrence, and leave him to his own elegancies.
This was the Judgment of Col. Samuel Sands of Ambersly near to Worcester, which
he gave to Mr. John Griffith, and the resolution of Col. Samuel Sands of Ewel
in Surrey delivered to my self, That this matter was discoursed by many as good
as themselves, and that all concluded, it was an Action very excusable, and
full of prudence, and that the most of them were acquainted with the Apology
which his Grace made to his Majesty. How unlike is it that this Man should be
unfaithful to the King at this blunt only, and make his Life so unlike to it
self in all his proceedings and studies before and after? It is a motion which
Tully makes, Orat. pro Sulla, and a just Judge cannot deny it: Neque potest
quisquam nostrum subito fingi, neque cujusquam vita repent mutari, aut natura
converti. Vita torqueatur, ex illa quaeratur. An excellent Rule of Reason and
Charity to silence many Defamations. Take another Maxim, which is good in all
Courts in and out of England. Qui in reatu decedit integro statu decedit, Bad.
l. 2. in Pand. f. 3. The Archbishop was never brought to Answer for this
imputed Misdemeanour; yet that will not drive the Nail home: but he that is
impleaded, and yet no Judgment awarded, dies an Innocent. Few consider how
odious the voice of Slander is before the God of Truth. In the two and
twentieth Chapter of Deuteronomy, compare the 19th and 29th Verses, and you
shall find, how he that defames a Virgin to be a Whore, is amerced in twice as
many Shekels, as he that defloured a Maid, and made her a Whore. If the
Slanderer have recourse for his own Apology to common Report and Fame, his
Judgment marches after the Devil's Drum. Our time honored Chaucer, in his
pretty Fiction of the House of Fame, condemns the Giddiness of common Talk, in
a very pleasant Art: That Aeolus brought two Trumpets to Fames House, one of
Laud, another of Slander; That Fame would not suffer Aeolus to wind out the
Praise of some, though most deserving; bad him cry up others of no merit;
authorized him to disgrace diverse, that had done things worthy of Renown.

Speak of them Harm and Shrewdness,
Instead of Good and Worthiness:
For thou shall Trumpet all contrair,
If that they have done well and fair:
Some new thing, I wot not what,
Tidings, either this or that.
When Aeolus's foul Blasts are over, which will not continue long, the Glory of
this Archbishop, and his Innocence, will mount above the Envy and Credulity of
his Foes; wherewith his Memory must be content, as Socrates was Cum ab
hominibus sui temporis parum intelligebatur, posterorum judiciis se reservavit,
Quintil. lib. 11.

206. What a long range of Displacings, Disfavours, Censures, Sequestrings,
Imprisonments, Hurries to and fro, and Revilings has this famous Prelate met
with in his troublesome Life, and rather passed by them than through them? No
Cross could come so heavy to him, but he could cut it into small shivers, and
play with them in his Hand, but never take the whole weight upon his Shoulder:
As the Gloss says on Exodus 4. v. 4. when Moses put forth his Hand, and took the
Serpent by the Tail, and it became a Rod in his Hand, Ut serpens, ad laedendum
sit baculus ad sustentandum: So the Oppressures that in Three and twenty years,
without intermission, exercised the Defense and Patience of one man, made him
stand the stronger. Not a Stoic, but a Christian, may say, Though Miseries
have a real Evil in them not to be denied, yet there is much of mere Opinion in
their nature. That Industry which is the daily Vocation of a diligent man,
would crack the Sinews of a Sluggard. That Solitariness which is one man's
Comfort, is another Captivity. That Abstinence, which is Health to a sober
man, would put a Glutton in fear of starving. And those Troubles which are
Potions to a weak Constitution, are Wine and Myrrh to the found and lusty. I
reach not too high when I set forth this Archbishop to be an undaunted
Sufferer, like Paul rather than Job, one that could wipe off Afflictions as
easily as he could dry his Hands when he had washed them: Yet in the end one
eminent Sorrow cut his Heart, Exemploque carens, and nulli cognitus aevo
Luctus. --
Lucan. and no Comfort could ever cure it, but Death. Our excellent, but most
unfortunate King, took a strange farewell of Oxford: Ferme fugiendo in media
fata ruitur, says Livy; What God wills shall be done; he that shuns his Destiny
meets it by flying from it. His Majesty, unwilling to stay to the last in a
City begirt, (for it would be inglorious to fall into the Hands of his
Subjects, like a Prisoner) by the persuasion of Monsieur Mountrevile, went
privily out of Oxford, and put himself into the Hands of his Native Countrymen
and Subjects at New Castle. What! says our Archbishop, when he heard of it, be
advised by a Stranger, and trust the Scots! then all is lost. It was a Journey
not imparted to above ten persons to know it, begun upon sudden Resolution,
against that Rule of Tacitus, Bona consilia mora valescere. When Pope John
XXIII. was told by his Friends, that many things would be charged upon him at
the Council of Constance, says the Pope, There is a fault worse than them all,
that I am come over the Alps, and have put my self upon this Council. Such was
the Mishap of a brave Prince, that to avoid some approaching Harms, threw
himself into their custody, that cried, Hail Master, and took Money for him.
The Scots, to choose, prefer a Monarchy before any other Government, so they may
govern their Monarch: But they are as stiff for a King as the Cappadocians in
Livy, that refused the Offer of the Roman Senate to be made a free State,
Negant vivere sine rege se posse. And they count it no small Honor, that no
Nation at this day can reckon so many Kings, as they have had, One hundred and
ten; but no five Nations have murdered so many Kings. To which Impeachment Dr.
Rivet, the Professor of Divinity at Leyden, gives this dogrel Answer, Sic sunt
Scotorum praefervida ingenia, who were not Blood-hot, but Hell-hot with his
Favor. The Scotch at Newcastle to whom the King retired for Safeguard, had a
brave occasion to show Faith and Loyalty, but they kept their wont, and sold
their Master, as Judas did his to the Jews, to the Race of New England, the
Independent Salvages: O barbarous! persidious! mammonish! sacrilegious! to make
Bargain and Sale of him that sat in God's stead over them! Nomen erit pardus,
tigris, leo, quicquid adhuc est
Quod fremat in terris violentius. --
Juven. Sat. 8. I roar it out to all People and Languages, are you not
astonished at it? Which you will not believe, though it be told you, Habbak.
1.5. Crediderim tunc ipsam fidem, humana negotia spectantem, moestum vultum
gessisse, Valor. lib. 6. whom Cromwell their Paymaster used as they deserved,
and after that day would never believe the false Lesly, that made the Market,
nor the turbulent Kirk, in any thing. Cromwell was cunning in that Art, and
could see through Lesly, and his treacherous Nature, that if Lesly had
advantage to betray him, he would take ready Money for him. Like Ptolemy, that
betrayed Pompey to Caesar's Executioners; Qui Pompeii caedem partium fato, non
Caesari dederat: Haud dubie idem in ipsum ausurus, si expediret. He would have
served Caesar so, if Caesar had been the Blot to hit, and by that to win the
Game he played for, Florus, lib. 4. c. 8. There were Thousands and Millions of
the Scots innocent of this Crime, Onus invidiae non exuperabile terris, Manil.
lib. 2. which struck Grief to the bottom of their Souls to hear it, that washed
their Hands from the foulness of it, and cursed the Traitors to Damnation, who
had left such an indelible Stain upon their Kingdom. But what an iniquous thing
it is, that the Contagion of a part should infect the Honor of all the good
People of a Country?

207. England deserved worse, and heard worse than these Jocky-Pedlars that
chaffer'd away their King, and our Countrymen are received abroad in some
places, to this day, as the Offscouring of Europe. Our Gentlemen that travel
know it, how the Spaniards shrugg'd and stopped their Noses at them, when they
met them in Madrid. There is a Reason why the French give them no less Civility
than they were wont; their Heads were in the Plot of our Civil Wars; they
looked on as unconcerned Spectators, till our King was taken out of the way,
and instantly confederated with our new States the Traitors, and consented to
all their Articles and base Demands: So much are they fallen from that Honor,
which their own Thuanus gives them, an. 1559. p. 616. Afflict is Principibus
fidum, ac tutissimum semper fuit apud Gallos persugium. This perhaps was true,
when such sage Senators as Thuanus swayed the Court: But how much of late is
the case altered? But I hasten to the beginning and end of the saddest Tragedy
that ever was acted since that of our Blessed Savior. Our Innocent King, a
Lamb dumb before the Shearer, being cheated out of the Presbyterian Guards
which kept him, Cromwell and his Maniple of Miscreants seized on him: Cromwell,
that Imp of Satan, compounded of all Vice and Violence, and Titan-like Courage,
devoid of all Pity and Conscience, the greatest of the Soldiery, and by his
Arts greater than them all, waxen to be a Colossus, between whose strides the
Seas flowed, his Countenance confessed him a Tyrant, such as Domitian was;
Saevus ille vultus and rubor, a quo se contra ruborem muniebat, Tacit. Vit.
Jul. Agr. But he that blusheth always, can give no Testimony of Shame in his
Face: He regarded not Parliament, Courts of Law, Patents, Charters, much less
any Canons which Holy Church had ever appointed, no, nor the Scriptures of God,
in comparison of some new Light shining in the Lanthorn of his own Head: But
his way was to govern three Kingdoms by his Armies, the Armies by the
Agitators, and the Agitators by himself, whom he shot dead upon the place, if
they crossed his Will; Superbus, and sanguinarius, and volens militariter
imperare: It is as true Cromwell, as it was Macinus in Capitol's History. But
that which sped him in all his Villainies was Perjury, like Ferdinand the
Castilian, Ferdinandus grande perfidiae lucrum tulit, Thuan. anno 1502. a very
Lysander in Plutarch, that couzened men with Oaths, as Nurses do Children with
Plums and Cake-bread: He took as many Oaths (they were the Full-Moons of his
Protestations) and kept as few as any that was ever baptized in the Name of
Christ, unless Pope Alexander the Sixth did match him, Quo nemo speciosius
juramentum juravit, qui minus praestitit nemo unquam fuit, Match. Resp. p. 76.
He was so accustomed to forswear himself, that he could not leave it in Toys
and Driblets; yet would sooner keep Faith with Fernando the Portugal Jew, to
provide him the best Sacks and Tobacco, than with his Cabinet, and all the
fawning Folk that were about him. If I had ever met with a more odious Passage
than that in St. Basil, ep. 246. I would afford it him, (...), a Morsel fit for
the Devil's Stomach. This arch-juggler, to feel the Pulse of the People,
suffered His Majesty's Servants to have better access to him, than was under
the Presbyterian Restraint; and he set out Declarations in print, That no sure
Peace could be made, without due care taken for His Majesty, and his Posterity.
You would think he had been as penitent, and as much changed as Apuleius was,
lib. 4. Statis ja^, dolis abjectis, asinum me bonae frugi Dominis exhibere;
that he was grown weary of all his Roguerie^ in his transformed shape. Yet
these were but Tricks, to rock all those asleep, who he knew would oppose him,
if they were prepared: Sonmo occupari ut possint lenes audiendae sunt naeniae,
Arnob. lib. 7. But as soon as he had disposed his Forces to bridle all
popitious and strong places of the Land, and to control the Assurance that the
City of London might make to save the King's Life, he sell to compass that
which Plutarch in Solon's Life calls the most hated thing among men, (...), A
Perpetuity or Eternity of falling out; and to implicate the soldiers in such a
Crime as could not be pardoned, to make Rebellion immortal. So Tolumnius put
the Fidenates on such an Action, as they must fight with Rome to the last man,
and never hope for Peace, Live. lib. 5. Fidennates cruento se^lere interficiendi
legatos implicuit, ne spem ullam a Romany possint recipere. And together he
found a means to forgive himself all the Mischief he had done, by getting
himself above all Law and Power, that might question him. Matchiavel could find
no fault in Cromwell, as he did in Pagalous, because he killed not Pope Julius
the Second, when he had him in Perusium. Sic rei magnitudo omnia priora secler^
obtegere potuit, and a periculo conservare, De Rep. l. 1. c. (...). So he calls
his Familiar Ireton to him, the common Sewer of Malice, Sator, sartorque
scelerum, and messor maximus, Plaut. and these complot to draw in above an
hundred more, to sit in an High Court of Justice, (give them their Phrase) to
bring the King in person to be tried before them, the Indictment is studied and
made ready, but St. John and Dorilaus: The great Bellows that blew out the
fatal Sentence, was that Son of Perdition Bradshaw, the Rider upon the red
Horse (for he sat in Scarlet) and had power to take peace from the earth, that
men should kill one another: and there was given to him a great sword, (to cut
off the Lord's Anointed, his dear Servant) Rev. 6.4.

208. These, with the Cubbs of the same Litter, shed the Royal Blood upon a
Scaffold openly, for no Fault, God knows, but as Beda reports of K. Sigebert,
slain by two Ruffians, who rendered this Cause for it, That his Meekness had
made many Malefactors, and his Goodness had undone the Kingdom. O unheard of
Immanity, above Mariana, and all Jesuitical Positions. -- Quorum sceleri non
invenit ipsa
Nomen, and a nullo posuit natura metallo.
Juven. Sat. 13. O Sons and Daughters of Jerusalem, droul out an Elegy for good
King Josias, Tristius lacrymis Simonidaeis, Catullus. O most facinorous Fact,
next above that of the Priests, that to poison the Emperor Henry the Seventh,
forbore not to poison their own God in the Sacrament. O ruthless Monsters, that
could stop their Ears at the Prayers of so many Nobles male and female, that
kneeled unto them to spare their Sovereign, who would never have been moved, if
the People had wept Blood! O day of wailment to all that are yet unborn! (...),
Synes. Ep. 58. As apt as ever words did light in my way. It was the day that
they crucified Christ upon the Cross again. O ye Kings of the Earth, wherefore
do ye not revenge it? When Bessus killed Darius, Justin puts you in mind,
Communis Regum omnium est causa, lib. 13. every Monarch in Europe was wounded
with that stroke: If those Royal persons will not regard it, to whom should the
Crown of England make its moan? Let the words of Tully be marked, Act. 7. in
Verrem: Si in aliqua desertissima solitudine ad saxa and scopulos haec conqueri
vellem, tamen omnia muta and inanima tanta ac tam indigna rerum atrocitate
commoverentur. But wherefore do we quarrel the remissness of Princes abroad?
Since there is not among our selves that has the Courage of a gallant man, to
meet with Cromwell, who jetts up and down, and strike him to the Heart, and
expire upon the Murderer; since the Law cannot punish him for so confessed a
Treason, is not the Equity and Vigor of the Law in every one that can attach
him? Si quis eum qui plebiscito sacer sit occiderit homicida non est. That Is
Law with Budaeus, lib. 2. Pand. fol. 28. Private Revenge is infamous and
unlawful; but he is actually condemned that has killed the supreme Magistrate,
and every man is a Magistrate to cut off that Malefactor, when there is no
Magistrate or Bench of Justice sitting, to try the Traitor. But it is our
Shame, that every one wishes that were done by another's Hand, which he dare
not for fear do himself. Metellus Macedonicus was dragged to Prison by Catinius
Labeo, Tribune of the People: Says Pliny, lib. 7. c. 44. Indignationis dolori
accedit, inter tot Metellos tam sceleratam Catinii audaciam semper fuisse
inultam. The Cattive Cannibal Cromwell lives, and is mighty, cockers his Genius,
and abounds in Luxury: (...). Odyss. 1. Here Cyclops, drink Wine, says Ulysses,
since you have eaten so much Man's-flesh. Says the learned Dr. Duport, Ironice
and moraliter dictum, ut somno vinoque conscientiam sopiat, qui homicidium
commisit. But our Cyclops will never be able to cast his Conscience into a
sound Sleep; the Furies of Hell will often lash him and awake him. Nero was the
Murderer of his Mother Agrippina, and though afterward he drowned himself in
all sort of Pleasure, he could not avoid the Torment of heavy Remembrance. So
Sueton. par. 24. Neque tamen sceleris conscientiam (quanquam and militum, and
senatus, and populi acclamationibus confirmaretur) aut statim, aut unquam
postea serre potuit. Had Zimri Peace that slew his Master? Richard the Third
seemed to see many Devils haling him, and tormenting him, the night before he
was slain in Bosworth Field, Pol. Virg. Hist. p. 25. The same continual
Excruciation must be in the Breast of brazen-faced Bradshaw; God will run him
into Phrenzy with the sight of his Sins, as our Acts and Monuments record, That
Judge Morgan fell mad, after he had passed Sentence of Death upon Lady Jane,
and cried out, Take away the Lady Jane from me; and died in that Horror. But
whither am I carried? Silence in such a Subject before me would condemn me, and
Writing enrageth me. Our Critics blame Euripides, that he is (...), too long
in his Bewailings. I could not contract Laments into a less compass, upon the
most deplored end of a thrice-honour'd King, a most pious Saint, a patient and
a crowned Martyr; of whom our Prelate Williams preaches in a Fast-Sermon, p.
55. That he was as like Virtue it self as could be pattern'd in Flesh and
Blood. What Velleius writes of Aemilianus is too much for a man, but scarce any
one came nearer it than this man, Qui nihil in vita nisi laud dignum aut
fecit, aut dixit, aut sensit. But I will challenge to King Martyr Charles, what
a Christian Historian writes of a very Christian King of ours, Malmsb. lib. 1.
c. 4. It is King Kenwolf, to whom Beda dedicates his Ecclesiastical History,
Nihil quod livor digne carperet unquam admisit. And let his Death be bewailed
his Memory be resresh'd with glorious Praises, and immortal Fame to the Worlds
end.

209. The Thread of his Life so dismally cut off, who was the Darling of all
that were holy, and feared God, who was the Breath of our Nostrils (as Naz.
writ to Basil, (...), You are more my Breath than the Air I breathe in.) This
the heaviest Judgment of God that could befall us, turned all England into such
a Mourning, as no Relation can describe, or Fancy imagine. Tears burst out,
Groanings bellowed forth, Hearts melted like Wax, few but forgot to eat their
Bread, Melancholy struck abundance dumb; the saddest Event was, that Frenzies
seized on some, and sudden Death on many. It pierced the Archbishop's Heart
with so sharp a point, that Sorrow run him down the Hill with that violence,
that he never stayed till he came to the bottom, and died. As soon as this Blow
was given, many conceived Despairs, and are big with it yet, that the Slavery
under which the three Nations are fallen is irrecoverable, till the last and
terrible day of the Lord. In which doleful Sadness Lord Primate Usher, I am
witness of it, continued to his End. We English are observed to be too
credulous of vain Prophecies, such as are Fathered upon Merlin, and no better
Authors. I remember an old Scotch man called Mony-penny, (if it were his right
Name) taught me this Rhyme, when I was Fourteen years old: After Six is One,
And after One is None;
But Hey-ho and Weal-a-day
To the day of Doomsday.
His Grace of York turned that Prophetic Conceit into a Religious Practice:
Dr. Floyd, a Religious Divine, Preaching a Sermon at his Funeral, extolled the
most Reverend Father's Devotion, That from the heavy time of the King's Death,
he rose every midnight out of his Bed, and having nothing but his Shirt and
Westcoat upon him, kneeled on his bare Knees, and prayed earnestly and strongly
one quarter of an hour, before he went to his Rest again. I will inform Dr.
Floyd in two things, which he knew not: First, He observed the season of
Midnight, because the Scriptures speak of Christ's coming to judge the Quick
and the Dead at Midnight. It is true, according to the motion of the Sun and
Stars, it will be Day as well as Night in some Climate of the World, but very
like to be Night, that is, cloudy Darkness over all the Earth. Secondly, The
matter of his Prayer was principally this; Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, and
put an end to these days of Sin and Misery. So much I learnt from himself, and
so report it. His days were consumed in Heaviness, as his Nights in Mourning:
Facetiousness, in which he was singular, came no more out of his Lips, he
ceased from Discourse, from Company, as he could, and nothing could hale him
out of this Obscurity. Such another Condoler for his King worthy Spottswood
remembers, Hist. p. 106. That Will. Elphelston, Bishop of Aberdeon, hearing of
the unfortunate Death of K. James the Fourth at Floyden, was never afterward
perceived to laugh, nor willingly did he hear any thing that sounded to Mirth
or Gladness. Mourning for the Dead profits not, yet a tender Nature is liberal
of it, and will pay more than it needs. Says Sophocles, If Tears would call the
Dead again, (...), they would be more valuable than Gold. But a Bucket of them
will not empty the dead Sea of Grief. Wise Solon in Laertius taking on heavily
for his Son's Death, says his Companion to him, Grief will do you no good. And
that makes me grieve the more, says Solon, because it will do me no good. It is
a very weak Passion, and yet often too strong for Reason. The Archbishop
remained very silent in his dejected Heaviness, and inquired after no News,
except that sometimes he would lift up his Head, and ask what became of the
King's Tryers, Baanah and Rechab especially, Cromwell and Bradshaw, looking for
some remarkable Judgment of God to come down upon them; which they have
escaped, for the greater trial of good men's Patience: And a Dream of Felicity
is granted to them here, that passing from Extremity to Extremity, their Pain
may be the sharper when they awake to Judgment. Caesar writes like a Dictator
of Reason, de bell. Gal. l. 1. Consnesse Deos immortales, quo gravius homines ex
commutatione rerum doleant, quos pro scelere eorum ulcisci velint, his
secundiores interdum res, and diuturniorem impunitatem concedere. Synesius has
said a little more, Ep. 44. (...). He that holds out long unpunished, after a
foul Fact, is to be esteemed most unhappy, and so base, that neither God nor
Man regards him. Let these Regicides be reprieved, and each live with himself,
he cannot have worse Company than himself, till he descend into Hell.

210. Abite lemures pessimi: I thrust these Infernal Goblins out of my way with
the Censure they deserve; and I resume the mournfful Archbishop, who is now
come to the end of his days, and I of my Copious Labor. Two Years, and almost
Two Months, he consumed in a sequestered and forlorn Condition, scarce any
Witness could tell what he did all the while, but that he prayed, and sat at
his Book all Day, and much of the Night. That little which he spoke at Meals
would afford great Essays of Wisdom, and observable Predictions, if it were
remembered. As Nazian. said of St. Basil's common Talk, Quae ab eo velut obiter
fiebant multo praestantiora sunt, -- Quam ea in quibus alii elaborant. But let
all pass which he concealed to himself in the dark times. I remember my Rule,
though I forget who taught it me, though it be not according to Nature, it is
according to Honesty, Vacuum potius relinquere quam non verum. There was an
Idol in Lacedaemon, (Pausanias knew it well, p. 195.) called (...), which they
worshipped that were young, to delay Old Age: But no Times did precipitate Age
and gray Hairs upon Men more than these wherein we live. Says the Master of the
Sentences among the Heathen, Il. 4. (...). Men grow old apace, that are in
Misery. Assuredly every month spent away the Archbishop's ruined Tabernacle
now, more than a year before: And all Infirmities fly to Old Age, as Offenders
to an Altar. Dr. Flood, the Panegyrist at his Grace's Obsequies, tells us, That
he had some Prognostics of his Death not long before it, and told it to some
persons with Assurance, and much Grief; and sometimes when he had said Grace
after Meal, and was rising from the Table, he would say, I am ready for the
LORD. His Death came from a sudden Catarrh, which caused a Squinancy, by the
inflammation of the interior Muscles, and a shortness of Breath followed,
which dissolved him in the space of twelve hours: In which time the virtuous
Lady Mostyn, where he sojourned, spoke to him of his preparation for Heaven:
Says he, Cousin, I am already prepared, and will be better prepared. So he
called for the Minister that was the nearest, to read the Visitation of the
Sick, and twice over to him, the greatest part whereof, especially the Psalms,
he rehearsed distinctly himself, and received Absolution: When the Pangs of
Death approached, many other Prayers were read, and short Sentences of Devotion
repeated aloud in his Ears; and those words being often said, The Lord be
merciful to thee, the Lord receive thy Soul, at that instant first he closed
his Eyes with one Hand, and then lifting up the other, his Lips moved, and
recommending his Spirit to his Redeemer, he expired. (...). Synes. Ep. 57. He
is gone before me, whom I desired not to outlive: A Squinancy, whereof he dyed,
was the Death of the only Pope that was born in England, Hadrian the Fourth:
But the whole Conflux of the Disease that took him away, was in all
circumstances the same with Padre-Paulo's the Servite, as the Author of his
Life sets it down, that his Feet could receive no warmth, (the same Symptom
that laid hold of this Prelate) and that a Catarrh destroyed him. There are
many Diseases dangerous and mortal; this is often cured by the lance of a
sorry Chyrurgion, of whom there was none in that place. Ego timeam terres
trementes, quem crassior saliva suffocat?

Sen. de Not. l. 6. c. 28. The day of his farewell out of this Life was upon the
Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin, which was his Birthday, the 25th of March,
1650. Dureque ad miseros veniebas exulis annos? says the banished Poet at
Tomes, upon his Nativity-day, lib. 3. de Trist. El. 13. Pompey was slain as
near as could be to his Birthday, Pridie Natalium, in the Observation of
Plutarch. William Earl of Penbrook died suddenly upon his very Birthday,
Sanders. Hist. p. 141. Macrobius tells a Wonder, Saturn. lib. 1. that Antipater
Sidonius had ever a Fever upon his Birthday, and in his Old Age died of a
great Fit the same day. This Holy Father had completed the just number of 68
years: Satietas vitae maturum tempus mortis assert, Cic. de Sen. He was weary
of Life in those hateful Times, therefore Death came welcome to him; and the
more welcome, because he lamented his own Condition, that he could contribute
nothing to raise up the Ruins of the Church and Kingdom. Tum cecidit, cum
lugere rempub. potius possit, quam servare, says the same Eloquent of
Hortensius in his Brutus. When Satiety of Years was come about, a Body wasted,
a Mind oppressed with Desolation of the Publick-weal, it had been a Punishment
not to dye, after that neat Similitude of Epictetus, lib. 2. c. 6. (...). It is
an Injury, or in his word a Curse, upon Corn, when it is Summer-ripe, not to be
cut down with the Sickle. So this worthy Father of the Church died in his
Maturity of Age at Glocketh, in the Parish of Eglowaysrose, in the County of
Carnarvan; his Body was interred, where his House of Pentrin stands, in
Llangeday, the Heriot which every Son of Adam must pay to the Lord of the
Manor of the whole Earth: If you look for more of him, it is in another and a
better World. -- (...),
(...),
Says the Epigram, Anthol. l. 3. If you look for Menender, (it is ^all one if I
said Archbishop Williams) look for him with GOD, and the Saints above. Or, if a
little more will suffice, read this Inscription upon his Tomb, in the Chancel
of Llangeday-Church. Plato, in the Twelfth Book of his Laws, would have no
Epitaph exceed the length of four Verses; this shall not hold you four minutes.

211. HOspes lege, relege. Quod in hoc Sacello, paucis noto, haud expectares,
Hic situs est Johannes Wilhelmus, omnium Praesulum celeberrimus:
A paternis natalibus e familia Wilhelmorum de Coghwhillin ortus,
A maternis e Griffithis de Pentrin.
Cujus summum ingenium, and in omni genere literarum praestantia
Meruit ut, Regis Jacobi gratia ad Decanatum Sarum
Post Westmonasterii eveheretur.
Ut simul, atque uno munere, tanto Regi esset a consiliis secretis, and
deliciis,
Magni Sigilli Custos, and Sedis Lincolniensis Episcopus:
Quem Carolus primus infula Episcop. Eboracen. decoraret.
Omnes scientias valde edoctus: novem linguarum thesaurus:
Theologiae purae and illibatae medulla: prudentiae politicae cortina:
Sacrae, canonicae, civilis, municipalis sapientiae apex, and ornamentum.
Dulciloquii cymbalum, memoriae tenacissimae, plusquam humanae:
Historiarum omnis generis myrothecium.
Magnorum operum, usque ad sumtum viginti mill librarum, structor.
Munificentiae, liberalitatis, hospitalis lautitri,
Misericordiae erga pauperes insigne exemplum.
Postquam inter tempora luctuosissima
Satur esset omnium, quae videret, and audiret:
Nec Regi aut Patriae, per rabiem perduellium, amplius servire potuit,
Anno aetatis 68o, expleto, Martis 25o, qui fuit ei natalis,
Summa fide in Christum, inconcussa erga Regem fidelitate;
Animam, angina extinctus, piissime Deo reddidit.
Nec refert quod tantillum monumentum, in occulto angulo positum.
Tanti viri memoriam servat.
Cujus virtutes omnium aetatum tempora celebrabunt.
Abi viator, sat tuis oculis debes.
212. That which my Prayers and Studies have long endeavored, the dispatch of
this Labor, is come to pass by the good Hand of God this Seventeenth of
February 1657. which is some hearts-ease, but with respect, that I wait the
Consolation of the Lord in better times. Which Benefit, not I perhaps, but such
as are younger may live to see: as the old Father said to his Son in Plaut.
Trin. Mihi quidem aetas acta ferme est: Tua isthuc refert maxim. I need not
admonish my Readers, for they find it all the way, that my Scope is not so much
to insist upon the memorable things of one Man's Life; as to furnish them with
reading out of my small store, that are well-willers to Learning, in
Theological, Political, and Moral Knowledge. Yet in those Observations I have
not set down a Cyrus, a feigned Subject, but wrought them into the true Image
of this Prelate. So Nazianzen informs us, that when Athanasius drew out the
Life of Anthony the Hermit, (...), He drew out the Instructions of a Rural
Hermetical Lise in his Behavior. Some are cheated with Wit nowadays after
the French fashion, and had rather Men should be commended in Romances of
Persons, that were never extant, than in such as lived among us, truly deserved
Glory, and did us good. My Subject is real, and not umbratick; a Man of as deep
and large wisdom as I did ever speak with; and I fear not to say of him, as
Laelius does of Cato major, Aut enim nemo, quod quidem magis credo; aut, si
quis usquam, ille sapiens fuit: He was constant to that Religion wherein he was
catechized, and instructed in it more perfectly in Cambridge. A punctual
observer of the ancient Church Orders, whereof he was a Governor, and a great
decliner of innovations, holding to it, that what was long in use, if it were
not best, it was fittest for the People. He tasted equally of great Prosperity
and Adversity, and was a rare Example in both, like Lollius in Horace, Secundis
rebus dubiisque rectus: not elevated with Honor, nor in the contrary state
cast down. His Enemies liked nothing worse in him than his Courage, and he
pleased himself in nothing more: Of a stately Presence, and a Mind suitable to
it. Some called it Pride and Haughtiness, a Scandal laid upon St. Basil, says
Nazianzen, (...), They twisted him that he was lofty and supercilious.
Underlings will never forbear to object it to Men in places of Pre-eminence,
when there is more of it in themselves. Well said Petrus Blesensis, Melior est
purpurata humilitas, quam pannosa superbia. Yet I concur with others, who knew
this Lord, that Choler and a high Stomach were his Faults, and the only Defects
in him. And it had been better for him, if he had known a meek temper, and how
to be resisted. Otherwise his Virtues were super-excellent. A great Devotee to
public and private Prayer: There did not live that Christian that hated
Revenge more than he, or that would forgive an Injury sooner. Most Munificent,
Liberal, Charitable above his Means, for he died in a Debt of 8000 l. though
his Heir, Sir Griffith Williams, had enough in Manors and Movables to pay it.
He loved to do things Praiseworthy. Nulla est tanta humilitas quae dulcedine
gloriae non capiatur, Valor. lib. 8. cap. 13. Justice, Charity, Temperance,
tender Bowels of Compassion, enchased all his Life and Carriage with wonderful
gracefulness. His Skill in the Tongues, his Skill in the course of all
Academical Arts, in all History, in all the parts of Divinity, must needs be
excellent: for he had a piercing Wit, a sound Judgment, a strong Memory, and
with all these concurred indefatigable Industry. Yet by the employment of a
great Office, but much more by the Iniquity of troublesome Suits,
Imprisonments, fatal Wars, and most of all by the embezelling of his Notes and
Papers, Posterity is little beholding to his Pen; but it owes greatly to his
good Works. Et post mortem non opuscula sed opera pensanda, Sidon. lib. ep. 8.
ep. 1. I will part with him now, as Xenophon did with Socrates in his Apology
for him, (...). That is, to a word, considering the Wisdom and Gallantry of the
Man, I cannot choose but remember him, and when I remember him, I cannot but
praise him. Se quisque ut vivit and effert. Manil. l. 2. But Praise be given to
God for all his good Gists. Amen.

FINIS.
THIS Manuscript was writ by the Reverend Author above. Forty years since, in a
small white Letter; it was printed in haste, to prevent a surreptitious Copy,
and in the Absence of a Friend best acquainted with it; whereby the Greek
Quotations are often false accented, besides other Mistakes in English, which
the Reader is desired to excuse and amend.

Praesul noster quidam laesae Matis. insimulatus, and de quibusdam
interrogatus, noluit tamen scripto Commisis subscribere, quia nescivit quomodo
postea interpungerent.

Gatak. Cinn. Fol. Page 145.
ERRATA.
In the First PART.
PAge 1. Line 34. read grudged. p. 3. l. 1. r. Halicarnaseus. l. 41. r. many.
p. 7. l. 33. r. Manilius. p. 9. l. 15. r. mighty. l. 38. for Arlis, r.
Aristotle. p. 13. l. 24. r. History. l. 62. r. Magdeburge. p. 15. l. 18. r. in
this Charity. p. 16. l. 10. r. contrast. p. 17. l. 30. r. Greek. p. 18. l. 48.
r. when. p. 20. l. 54. r. do right. p. 24. l. 5. r. Humecta. l. 32. r.
Experience. l. 40. r. Palatinate. p. 32. l. 38. r. Assassinates. p. 34. l. 10.
for sear, r. seize. p. 39. l. 56. r. Bugden. p. 40. l. 60. r. to be rich. p.
50. l. 26. r. ply. p. 54. l. 10. dele come. l. 57. r. Burr. p. 56. l. 34. lege
(...). p. 58. l. 12. r. Landscape. l. 62. r. Cato Utica. p. 61. l. 41. r.
actually. p. 65. l. 45. r. Briars. p. 72. l. 35. r. Marry. p. 73. l. 21. r.
those Lords. p. 83. l. 4. for we, r. ye. l. 7. r. Septimius. l. 33. r.
Continementum. p. 86. l. 25. for whom, r. when. p. 87. l. 45. r. Anastasius. p.
94. l. 20. r. unnatural. p. 97. l. 56. r. Patri. p. 102. l. 26. r. ad Iter. p.
103. l. 18. for solus, r. solius. p. 111. l. 61. r. Placita. p. 113. l. 43. r.
Treaty. p. 123. l. 56. r. from the Womb. p. 124. l. 56. r. Verdure. p. 125. l.
26. r. in that order. l. 44. r. Undertakers. p. 126. l. 15. r. are not. p. 128.
l. r. design. p. 132. l. 64. r. but an Eye. p. 151. l. 13. r. onerated. p. 153.
l. 45. for World, r. Work. p. 159. l. 5. r. Majesty. p. 160. l. 19. r. formosa.
l. 20. r. his Son. l. 33. r. Deiposories. p. 161. l. 55. r. thus much. p. 167.
l. 30. r. effected. p. 168. l. 20. for ye, r. yet. p. 171. l. 60. for strong,
r. strange p. 175. l. 13. r. Herbert. l. 47. r. not expected. p. 177. l. 11. r.
Petitio. p. 186. l. 32. for him, r. them. p. 189. l. 7. r. every. p. 191. l.
44. r. Want. p 200. l. 11. for Gods, r. Goods. p. 210. l. 50. r. he had. p.
211. l. 31. r. roosted. p. 212. l. 22. r. Hassia. p. 221. l. 20. r. auferri. p.
224. l. 36. r. froward. p. 226. l. 6. r. detested. l. 31. r. 68.

In the Second PART.
PAge 6. Line 10. read the Stoic, fate. p. 13. l. 44. r. Fathers Heart. p. 14.
l. 41. r. could not. p. 15. l. 53. r. a Admiral. p. 22. l. 9. r. be long. l.
55. r. Lordship. p. 29. l. 50. lege (...). p. 30. l. 24. r. Therefore I return.
p. 42. l. 17. r. he had left to be. l. 62. r. thick a Wall. p. 44. l. 34. r.
Simler. p. 46. l. ult. r. Monstrare. p. 47. l. 47. r. false in much, bitter. p.
61. l. 18. r. Stings of Wit. p. 65. l. 24. r. appearing. p. 68. l. 57. r.
Saunderson. p. 72. l. 7. r. to their. p. 87. l. 25. r. Gharles V. l. 56. r.
advancer. p. 93. l. 20. r. Sub-Dean. p. 107. l. 21. r. hebetantur. l. 33. r.
Deficilis. p. 108. l. 17. dele not. p. 112. l. 32. r. inexpiable. p. 120. l.
52. r. Hatton. p. 142. l. 35. r. pejor. p. 161. l. 17. r. Longinus. p. 162. l.
17. r. Pessimc. p. 169. l. 24. for Sacred, r. Civil. p. 182. l. 10. dele not p.
187. l. 45. for est, r. esse. p. 193. l. 11. r. Paradox. p. 203. l. 38. r.
Saltus. p. 216. l. 4. r. enchanted. p. 219. r. Mitton. p. 224. l. 37. r. by St.
John and Dorislaus. p. 227. l. ult. r. Terras. p. 228. l. 4. r. Tomos. p. 229.
l. 7. r. lautitiri.


