THE CHARACTER OF A REBEL.

A SERMON Preached at Market Harborow, On the 26th of July, 1685.

Being the day of Thanksgiving Appointed for His Majesty's Victory over the
REBELS.

By THOMAS HEYRICKE, Minister of Market Harborow.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Heyricke at Grayes-Inn-gate in Holborne. 1685.

Ex AEdibus Lambeth. Aug. 22. 1685.
Imprimatur.

Jo. Battely R. R. P. Dom. Guil. Archiep. Cantaur. a sacris Domesticis.

To the Right Honorable EDWARD GRIFFIN, Esquire Treasurer of the great Chamber,
and Lieutenant Colonel of his Majesty's first Troop of Guards.
Honorable Sir,
THere is no inducement in the World could have possibly raised my Ambition so
high, as to shelter so mean a Piece under so great a Name, but that I was well
assured, the scope and intent of this Discourse, Honesty and Loyalty, would be
acceptable; those Gems being always justly valued by you, in whatever rugged
Shells they are found. Loyalty is that which you have always kept near your
Heart, the mark not only of your self, but of your Family for many Generations,
that Vestal Fire which has never gone out, but has cherished an
inextinguishable zeal for your King and Country.

Blessed be God for Victory! we live now in a time when Loyalty is in fashion,
it swims quietly down the Stream without any opposition, and every one will
venture out to Sea in Halcyon days. But you showed undeniable proof of yours in
the greatest Storms of Rage and Fury. Loyalty indeed is a Jewel in all times
and persons; it is the spirit and life of all Virtues, without which they become
hurtful to the owners and the Public; but in ill times it is truly valuable,
it is then a Diamond that shines best in the dark.

Such a true ancient uninteressed Loyalty is that which fills your breast, not
grounded upon Design and Advantage, but too generous to be warped to Interest;
such a Loyalty as stuck close to the side of an injured Prince, stem'd the Tide
of popular Fury, scorned the Menaces of the Vulgar, and the feavourish Heat of
a misled Parliament, that was undaunted at the madness of the People, and the
rage of the Sea; and when that merciless Element threatened to devour that
Prince, that had been, and was to be the Darling of Providence, a sacred
blessing for our happy Land, was seen touched with no fear but that of your
Princes safety. Such a Loyalty as in a dangerous Intestine Rebellion spared
not, for your King and Countries good; an only Son, the sole remaining Branch
of a Great and Ancient Family, but exposed his tender years to hardship and
danger, and the fury of the worst of men, even those that were below contempt.
Such a Loyalty as was not lately took up, as that of others, and aukwardly
managed, but was descended from a long series of Ancestors, was elevated and
purified by their successive practices, and in you sublimed to the highest
pitch; so that what in others is Passion or Interest, in you is your very
Essence. And that Loyalty in you might not seem a thing of chance, it is become
the Genius of your house, your honorable Lady and hopeful Son have a
magnificent proportion. The former, though a tender and indulgent Mother, yet,
when the good of her King and Country required it, forgot even Nature, laid
aside Affection, and with a generosity and greatness of mind worthy her
Illustrious Name and Family with a magnanimity beyond her Sex, not only
consented to, but encouraged an only Son to War; a deed beyond the spirit of a
Spartan Matron so much renowned in History.

Nor did the son of two such Parents frustrate the expectation that was justly
had of him, but, preferring the duty he owed his King and Country to all other
considerations, with a willing and cheerful Loyalty, and a Courage superior to
his Age, he took upon him the toil and labor of the Camp, his Countries good
being above all other invitations, more attractive than the splendour and glory
of the Court, even than the charms of a young beautiful and beloved Bride; he
not allowing himself that Privilege which God indulged the Jews, when married,
one Year to abstain from Warfare to live with the Wife of their Youth. Such
great acts in the early Spring of Age give an hopeful prospect of what the
growing Harvest will be. In each there is matter of surprise and wonder,
something above Example that enforces Respect and Honor: so that where such a
Constellation of Loyal Virtues meet, Loyalty cannot fear to obtain a Patron,
which will be looked on as the greatest honor could possibly be conferred on,

Honorable Sir, Your most Humble Faithful and Obliged Servant, THO. HEYRICK.

2 SAMUEL 15. 11. And with Absalom went two hundred men out of Jerusalem that
were called, and they went in their simplicity, and they knew not any thing.
IF we consider the unparalled deeds of Darkness lately committed in this our
Land, we shall have little reason to believe with some of the ancient
Heretics, that Sin is by imitation; or in a strict sense to hold even with
Solomon, that there is nothing new under the Sun. In deeds of Villainy our Age
has scorned to tread in a beaten path; to go by Presidents and Examples, but
can defy the deeds of former Ages, and the invention must be ascribed wholly
to themselves. Yet however we cannot deny but as there is a circulation of
Times and Seasons, Days and Years, and a periodical motion of Heaven and Earth;
so without supposing a Metempsuchosis, there is of humors and tempers of men,
and of actions good or bad flowing from them. And though the Histories of
former times to a prudent man are a good guide to wisdom, though we are learnt
from holy Scripture, 1 Cor. 10. 11. that what things happened to others are for
our ensamples, and are written for our admonition; the good actions and their
Rewards enrolled for our Imitation; the evil and their punishment for our
Terror. Yet have we some in our times that seem to have been conversant with
the Sacred Scripture only to learn how to be conscientiously wicked, and to
sin by Pattern, that weed out the worst deeds of men there mentioned to be a
Scheme for their practice, and considering the ill use they make of it, (to be
exquisitely and exactly wicked) we have reason to believe it had been well for
them had they never seen that holy Book. A pregnant instance of which is the
unnatural Rebellion mentioned in this and the subsequent Chapters, and its
exact agreement with our times, it seeming to be an History of our days under
borrowed names. Yet however I shall not be tempted to draw up the Parallel (it
having been done learnedly and Ingeniously by other hands) but some things
there are of so great note, and passed by by others, that I cannot pass them
without a remark.

First, That it is the deadly policy of Rebels to revile the Government, and
tax the Justice of a Nation. This was Absoloms practice, 2 Samuel 15. 3. to the
people coming for Justice; See thy matters are good and right, but there is no
man deputed of the King to hear thee. And then presently subjoyns what Justice
he would do if he was King. There is nothing more conduces to the grandeur and
honor of a Prince, and the safety and peace of a People: Nothing more ingages
Subjects to Allegiance and love to a Prince than the due execution of Justice,
it being the Basis upon which the happiness of both is founded; and we in this
Land have reason to bless God, that not only from the Constitution of our
Government, but from the Temper of our Prince, (a King of Justice, Integrity,
and Faithfulness) we are almost the only Nation in the world where Justice and
Equity are impartially dispensed, and no man's Right, either by Fear, Flattery,
or Bribes, given away. So that if we be not happy, it is not the fault of the
Government, but of our selves, since there is nothing does make a Land more
fruitful in Blessings, and ought to make a People more pure from Pollution and
Defilement, than when they are watered with the true Dew of Heaven, Justice:
When judgment runs down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream, Amos
5. 24.

Yet have we those in our Israel as well as David had in his, that to carry on
their mischievous practices, vent all the Scandals that it is possible for
venomous Wit and Malice, for men possessed with the Devil (who has his name
((...)) from Defamation) to invent, or Tongues set on fire of Hell to vomit out
against the Government, we for one Shimei in David's time having a thousand.
What viperous Pamphlets have they spread? What poisoned Invectives? things that
seem beyond the invention or malice of men, have much of the Fiend in them, and
can be nothing but the venom of that old Serpent, by their falsehood showing
their Original from him who was a Liar from the beginning. And it is strange to
consider after so many visible Mercies of God to our King and Religion, and so
many Judgments on Rebellion, with what a brazen Forehead they yet continue
their unparalled Forgeries, which yet visibly shows the weakness of their
cause; for as that which is founded on Truth (which is eternal and never
alters) is built on an immovable Rock which nothing can shake: So that which is
grounded upon falsehood which has no real existence but in men's imagination,
and continually changes, must needs of it self come to ruin.

So that though nothing of truth can possibly be gathered from their Reports,
they being all but the effects of Malice, Discontent, and the spirit of Lying;
yet this we may learn, that since the defaming of Government is one chief
Artifice of a Rebel, commonly forerunning Sedition, since those are but the
flying Troops that scowre the way for the gross body of Rebellion that follows,
we ought to be very careful of those that invent or spread, or with delight and
joy listen to those pestilent reports; they are hidden Rebels, and want only
means or opportunity, not will: There is Fire though covered with Ashes, and
how dreadful one spark may prove when it has matter to work upon every one can
judge; and what care those that are in Authority should take to suppress them,
the meanest capacity can understand.

Secondly, Rebellion is usually carried on with a pretense of Religion, it is in
it self ugly and detestable, a fearful, hideous, and deformed Monster, and
therefore clothes it self in the venerable and Sacred garb of Religion. Thus
Absalom, when he had laid the Scheme of his unnatural Rebellion, and every
Agent and Instrument was ready, that he might have a fair pretense to leave the
Court, he speaks to his Father in the 7th verse of this Chapter, I pray thee,
let me go and pay my vow which I vowed to the Lord in Hebron. Surely there is
no evil act the Devil can put a man on more irreligious or unnatural than
Rebellion, more against the Law of Nature, of God, and of Man, and so needs all
possible Artifice.

That it is irreligious we shall easily assent to, if we consider the manifold
dehortations in Scripture from it; the character that gives of it, to be as the
sin of Witchcraft, and by Moses Law a Witch was not suffered to live, Exodus 22.
18. and that sin which is enmity toward God, is called by that odious name. If
we consider the many positive Commands both in the Old and New Testaments, to
Obedience, Subjection, and Loyalty, the Principles and Practices of the
Primitive Christians, and the Doctrine of the Church of England, which allows
of no pretense for Rebellion, and will not that any Interest, Provocation or
Oppression, should cancel that eternal Obligation and Bond of Loyalty.

That Rebellion is no less unnatural than irreligious every one may know, that
considers that the whole Nation in a Politic capacity is but one Body, and
that Rebellion is an unnatural War between the Members and the Head and that it
is the proper action of an Epileptick or raging madman with his own hands to
wound, tear, and beat himself: not to recount that the King is the Father of
the Country, and Rebelling against him is not only casting off our Allegiance,
but of that natural Duty and Affection we owe him. And if, according to the Law
of Moses, a stubborn Son that would not obey the voice of his Father and Mother
was to be stoned by the Congregation, Deuteronomy. 21. 18, 21. what can these
unnatural Rebels deserve. Rebellion therefore being thus justly odious, (to
omit many other aggravating Circumstances) an Enemy to Religion and Reason, to
Piety and Policy, the Laws of God and Men. It is no wonder if the mischievous
policy of Rebels clothe it in a good garb to make it acceptable: to take away
the irreligion they pretend Religion, and upon an odious thing they put a good
name; and the unnaturalness of it they molifie and sweeten with the delightful
sounds of Liberty and Property, and so carry their Proselytes away with noises,
shapes and shadows for realities, shows and Pageants for substantial Blessings;
the reason and consideration of the Rabble being not in their Brain, but in
their Eyes and Ears.

Thirdly, All the Nobility and chief of the Land were with David, v. 18. And
all his servants passed on before him, and all the Cherethites, and the
Pelethites, and the Gittites, all the Nobility and men of Military order. And
to make it the more remarkable, it is said, they were those that came with him
from Gath, the true old Royalists; they were his Companions in banishment, they
were after-sharers of his Prosperity, and now again the faithful Attendants of
his Adversity; which does show that true Loyalty is no sudden fit of Passion,
took up for Interest, Gain, Honor or Glory, but an eternal Principle, an
inherent Virtue, engraven deeply in the Soul, writ like the Laws of the Medes
and Persians; not to be softened or melted by Prosperity, nor broken by
Adversity, yielding to neither extremes, but scorning the flattery of one, and
fury of the other.

As for Absalom, his company consisted of the meanest of the people; those that
he had sordidly cringed and bowed into submission, had kissed out of their
Loyalty, and had breathed into them Rebellion; those whom he had flattered out
of that inestimable Jewel, their Honesty and Conscience, and deluded with warm
hopes of glorious times when he came to reign; men they were of low rank,
little fortune, and less sense, neither capable of the impressions of Honor or
Reason, Religion or Honesty; for among all that disorderly band we read of no
man of note but Amasa a relation of Ioab's, whom Absalom made Captain of the
Host, 2 Samuel 17. 25. This seems so true a draught of our Rebellion, that
nothing can possibly be more like; ours being an Insurrection of the Peasants,
of the Dregs and Lees of the People against the King and Parliament, the
Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy: Not unlike the Bellum Servile among the Ancients,
and it is not improbable it might have been as happily ended as that, had the
same methods been used, to have encountered them not with Swords, but with
Whips.

Fourthly, All the Priests and Levites were with David, v. 24. And lo Zadock
also and all the Levites were with him bearing the Ark of the Covenant of God.
That a rude disorderly multitude should rise against David, the Cherethites,
the Pelethites, and the Gittites, and all the men of might, was a thing that
sufficiently showed their madness and the mist that Ambition casts before men's
eyes; but that they went without God, not one Priest or Levite with them,
without, nay against the Ark of the Covenant of God, evidently shows their
Impiety. To the Priests was entrusted the Oracles of the living God, and the
Priests Lips preserve knowledge; and it was that Religion, of which they were
professors, that taught them, as it does us, Loyalty and Fidelity to our
Prince. From whence we may gather, that the truest and most unalterable Loyalty
is that which flows from Religion, and is grounded on the Commands of God, God
having fixed the Thrones of Princes upon the same Basis that he has his own;
Fear God, and Honor the King going hand in hand. Hence also we learn, that no
Religion, or pretense of it, can patronize Rebellion, since it is absolutely
contrary to it: and that that Religion that upon any pretense whatsoever does
allow Rebellion, is false, and the tenet damnable.

In which we may see the Primitive Piety, and Apostolical Truth of the Church
of England, which has stood unshaken in its Loyalty among all the storms of
Fury, and Paroxisms of Madness which have seized our Nation; for neither the
rage of the Heathen, nor madness of the people that imagined a vain thing; not
the fears and rumors of Innovations in Religion, dressed up with all the amazing
circumstances of horror; not secret underminings and open Batteries; not the
force of threatening, nor power of persuasion; nor all other stratagems of
rebellious Minds could ever draw off one true Son of the Church from his
Allegiance and Loyalty. Loyalty being the badge of the Church and Clergy of
England; and there being no truer Shibboleth to distinguish her true Sons from
those that are spurious and pretended ones; they, obeying not for wrath, but
for Conscience sake. Not for fear of the Laws, but the fear of God. An eternal
Obligation, which will last, when all the low designs of Interest and
advantage, of fear and dread (which vanish with their causes) will perish and
die. And this brings me to consider the particulars in my Text.

And there went with Absalom, etc.

I shall not speak of the ingratitude of Absalom, or tenderness of David; or of
Jerusalem from whence, or Hebron whither Absalom went; or show how near the Two
hundred men that went with Absalom come to the number of those with which our
Absalom invaded this flourishing Kingdom. In the words I shall consider,

1. That Rebels use many ways, insinuations and arts to draw men from their
Allegiance: They were called, enticed.

2. Men may be drawn by insensible degrees into Rebellion, and never perceive
it or intend it; They went in their simplicity.

3. That Rebels never lay open their villainous intents to common view, but with
great care and art hide them, covering them over with pleasing pretenses; They
knew not any thing.

4. Therefore it is every ones duty to be very careful how they are blindly led
into wickedness.

First, Rebels use many ways and allurements to entice men from their Loyalty
to join with them in Rebellion. Divines tell us, there is not one humor in the
body which is predominant, not one faculty of the Soul, or inclination of the
Mind which is strong, or custom that is inveterate; not one part of our Soul
which is weak, or Conscience which is feared, to which the Devil does not lay
continual siege, by temptations made up with exquisite art, adapted and fitted
to betray, and all levelled to the reach and capacity of the sinner. And as
Rebellion had its original from the Devil, so the Rebel has not only his
Ambition, Pride, and Malice from him, but his Diligence too, going about like a
roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour: There being not any corruption in
Manners, or Heresy in Religion; no Disease in State, or Corruption in the
Church; no Interest, Humor, Passion, Discontent, Malice or Rage, which he does
not make, ferment again, and add new Poison to it.

To the fearful he applies rumors, jealousies, Armies in the air, Barrels of
Daggers, and Instruments of cruelty, till he has turned their fear to
desparation: The Conscientious or seemingly so, he buzzes with Visions,
Apparitions, Prophesies, and alteration of Religion: The Covetous he debauches
with promises of Wealth: The ambitious, of Honor; The revengeful, of Blood and
Proscriptions; and considering how many profligate wretches that have no sense
of God, were among them, we have reason to suspect they were drawn in, as the
young Nobility of Rome were by Cataline, by making Stews of his House: The
Moon has not more various faces than a Rebel, nor the first Matter more
capable of receiving any form; he can in one moment be an Angel of Light and of
Darkness; now be in Blood and Slaughter, and soon in Revels and Jollity; true
to nothing but Villainy, attempting every thing but Honesty, and can put on any
thing but Sincerity.

But as to men of various tempers, various temptations must be laid, so the
Rabble, of which most Rebellions consists, lies liable to all, the Rich being
above Bribes, the Wise above Shapes, the Generous above Flattery, the
Courageous above Fear, but the common Rout subject to them all. For, whether it
be their want of Judgment which makes them headlong and furious, or whether
their natural envy to Greatness and Excellency, of which they have no notion;
or their credulity and easiness to believe and spread false Reports, and
smother the true, willingly conducing to betray themselves; or whether it be a
natural desire of Novelty and Change; or that they desire stirs, having nothing
to lose, and hoping to gain, their mean Souls prefering a little private gain
to a Kingdoms safety; or that they are fit to mutiny and rebel, but not to
fight; (and miserable are those that rely on them) which one of these, or
whether all conduce to make them so restless, is not now to be decided: This is
sure, Blow but up a Trumpet, and say, Absalom reigns in Hebron, and all the
Sons of Belial will presently be with him.

Secondly, Men may be drawn insensibly into evil courses, and at last into
Rebellion, if they set not a Guard upon themselves. The progress in sin is
unaccountable, the motion invisible, and the Chains by which habits fasten on
us are never to be explained. The tract and path of Nature in many of its
motions is very hard to follow, but none so mysterious as our course in sin. We
grow up from Infancy to Youth, from Youth to Manhood by insensible degrees, nor
can we by all our watching perceive when any one Limb increases, or any one
Member swells bigger: The Sun keeps his daily and yearly course, yet cannot the
most piercing eye with all possible watchfulness discern any one step that it
takes, or how it steals on its unwearied course from East to West. Yet though
we cannot perceive the manner how we grow, or the Sun does move, yet we
perceive the matter of fact, that we do grow, and that the Sun does move. But
in our course of sin there is even an ignorance of the fact; we not only know
not by what degrees we degenerate, but we are not sensible we do so. Though we
grow from good to bad, and from bad to worse, we perceive not the change, but
think our selves as good as ever; sin having that faculty, that as it conquers
it stupifies, and as it is a contradicton to reason and sense, so it takes them
away; yet if God in his Mercy or Grace makes a man look back in his course in
sin, his going will seem like a man's descending a pleasant Hill, who when he
turns back is amazed to see how low he is got before he perceive it. Many men
are afrighted and tremble at the very thought of those sins which in a little
time become familiar, and lose all their dread; and as the Fox in the Fable is
said at first sight of the Lion to be almost dead, at the next to abate of his
fear, and after to grow so impudent to take him by the Beard; so men by seeing
sin acted often, or often ruminating on it, grow reconciled to it; from a great
sin it becomes a small one, from a small one to be none; and so not only to be
acted, and that with delight, but to be vindicated, nay even gloried in as a
perfection: but above all, very remarkable is the progress of men in Sedition
and Rebellion. How many men (not to name other ways and means) though the name
of it is odious to them, have been drawn into Rebellion by a spice of ill
Nature, or an itching Ear; for most men being naturally more delighted with the
defamation than the praise of another, (Praise being a tacit reprehension of
themselves that merit not so much) and there being too many ready to gratify
them in it, among diversity of discourse the Government cannot escape free, and
those in Authority have their share: So that some things being heard for Mirth
and Laughter, others with cruel delight in hatred to the person, others with
enmity to Dignity and Power, they insensibly are infected, they are poisoned
even with what they hate, staggered even with what they do not believe, till by
continual reiteration, like so many several Batteries, their Principles of
Loyalty at last sink; they begin to suspect and doubt, then to whisper their
fears, and continually pushed on, (man's depraved nature being always ready to
aggravate) they become Mutinous, Seditious, and at last Rebellious.

The best way therefore to prevent this Evil, is to be very cautious what
converse we keep. There will something stick behind according to our society;
for as a man grows insensibly wicked (though naturally inclined to good) that
herds with evil men, so he will suck in principles of Loyalty, Worth, and
Integrity by conversing with Loyal persons: he will rectify his Mistakes,
improve his Judgment, and fortify his good Sentiments and Resolutions by
Example and Encouragement.

Thirdly, Rebels never lay open their villainous intents to common sight, but
carry on their Proselytes with specious pretenses. I am apt to believe no one
takes off the Vizard from Rebellion and shows her naked to open view; it would
be an astonishing spectacle, and few would strive to be in the embraces of the
Monster. Few faithfully tell them the Murders, Robberies, Sacriledges, Rapes,
Proscriptions, and innumerable mischiefs of an unnatural Rebellion: few lay
before their eyes the mangled dismembered Bodies of those Thousands that were
blindly led to death, the Son triumphing in the death of his Father, and the
Father of the Son: few sound in their ears the cries and groans of the
Fatherless and Widow made so by that unnatural War: few draw a Scheme of a
flourishing Kingdom in desolation, of Cities in ashes, and of Religion bleeding
to death wounded by her regardless Children. These things and many more, though
they are the natural effects of an unnatural War, they artificially conceal and
bear up the Spirits and Courages of their followers with dreams of honor,
riches and pleasure, and such aerie notions. The Devil never told Eve if she
eat of the forbidden Tree, she should forfeit Paradise, and intail upon her
self and miserable Offspring misery and death not to be reversed, but pleased
her with ravishing expectations of being as God and knowing good and evil; it
being one of the chief pieces of Policy of the Devil and the Rebel to cover the
danger, to blind men from seeing the Precipice, and strew the Pitfal with
Flowers and Delights. And this brings me to the fourth thing, which is the care
we all of us should take lest we be led in our simplicity to sin and
wickedness: In order to which give me leave to lay down these particulars.

First, Let us beware how we listen to ill counsel, especially such as tends to
Sedition and Rebellion. There is a venomous quality in some men's Discourse, and
some have Adders Poison under their Lips; nor is there any Sense that more or
sooner affects the Brain than Hearing, there being a nearer way of
Communication by that Organ than any other. Objects may much affect our Fancy
or Imagination by the eye, the touch, and other Senses; but there is nothing so
effectual to stir us up to good or bad actions as pointed and stabbing
Sentences that strike deep, and enter even into the inward Soul: the enchanted
Songs of the Sirens being as fatal as the Cups of Circe; the wondrous effects
of Eloquence have been well known to the elder Ages of the world. When an
Orator has stirred up the people to rage, as a Tempest does the Sea, and
presently made them smooth as glass again; the power of it is unaccountable,
and able to shake the foundations of a State. As therefore the power of words
is so great in good things, (for Faith comes by hearing) so it is
proportionably bad in evil things, and most pernicious and fatal in Seditions.
If any ones discourse therefore tends to Sedition or Faction; let us stop our
ears to it, and be as wise as the deaf Adder charm he never so plausibly: If we
would be safe let us fly; that City seldom holds out long that admits of a
Parley; have no communication, there is deadly Poison near, and whatever the
pretense is, there is death in the Pot. The Basilisk kills by the sight, many
Poisons by the taste and touch, but this by the Ear; it is a venomous air, which
when once entered into the Brain, it breeds Serpents and Scorpions, till after
much pain (as Jupiter was) they are delivered of an armed Pallas.

I wish there were not too many in our days that have been industrious to mix
and give this Cup of Enchantment and deadly draught of Sedition. We read that
many of the ancient Heretics were men of deep Learning, and of exemplary Life
and Sobriety, and spoke upon many points well and Orthodoxly, but still they
were infusing their pestilent Opinions when ever the Subject would bear it. I
wish the Nonconformist Preachers of our times were more guilty of their
Learning and Piety, and not so much of venting their pernicious Principles,
dangerous to Church and State; and I hope now their unreasonable cry of
Persecution will cease, (their Conventicles being forbid as Seditious) since
the Egg is visibly broke out into a Scorpion. These give Poison in a draught of
pleasure; they infuse Principles which naturally tend to Sedition yet conceal
the Name; these lay the Train, kindle the Match which they know will take and
blow up the State, and yet all the while plead Ignorance; they wind up the
Spring, set the time when the Alarm of Rebellion shall beat, and yet all the
while cry Innocence. And since there is so much mischief in ill Converse, in
the Name of God I charge all Dissenters from the Church, all deluded and
bewildred Souls, all that have been drawn away, if not to act or abet
Rebellion, yet to wish well to the Cause; if they have any love for their
Native Soil, any value for the Protestant Religion, (so much scandalized by
their evil Practices) or any care of their own Souls, that whenever hereafter
they shall hear any discourse that tends to Sedition, that they would start
back as if they had trod upon a Serpent; for be they well assured, who ever
they be, whatever the pretense is, they are Ioabs, though they proffer to
embrace they will smite under the fifth Rib and kill; they have a real design
against their peace and quiet, their Religion and Honesty. And since in the old
Law, Deuteronomy. 13. whoever enticed to Idolatry though the nearest Relation, though
thy brother the son of thy mother, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend
which is as thy own Soul, entice thee to serve other Gods, thou shall not spare
him, etc. Surely then Rebellion breaks all ties of Nature, Love, and
Friendship; forfeits all Privileges, nor ought we to spare him that would draw
us from our God and King, our Religion and Loyalty.

Secondly, Consider how dangerous it is to follow the unlawful ambition of
Rebellious spirits; a vice not only fatal to all those that are infected with
it, but all those that depend upon them, it being a precipitous slippery path
which few pass safe, the dangers of which would deter any one whose Eyes were
not fixed above, and dazzled with the rays of Honor, and the ruins of those
that have fallen down the Precipice, afright any one that could look so low; but
much more fatal is it to those that are led in that fearful passage by their
inconsiderate guides: Caesar will be great, but it must be at the expense of a
Million of Gauls; and to satisfy the thirst of one restless Alexander, Rivers
of Blood must be shed, and the peace and quiet of the whole world disturbed.

Sure the eyes of common people will at last be open and see that it is not
them, but their Ambition, that rebellious Spirits court; that they scorn and
despise them only for their ends, they being only Tools with which they work:
So that if Absalom kiss them, it is Iudas-like to betray them: if he bow to them
it is on their Necks to tread and ascend; and if he smile, it is for contempt,
not Love. If they could consider they would know it is folly to believe, that
that man that for his Ambition tramples on all the bonds of Nature, the
obligation of Allegiance, and ties of Religion, that throws away all Honor and
Honesty, and comes with cruel Arms to tear open the Bosom of his Mother, and
disturb the settled peace of his native Soil, can ever be true to them or have
any real love for those whom he in his secret thoughts does scorn and despise.
And how miserable are those that for his cause sell their Religion, Allegiance,
and Faith for an inconsiderable reward. And how dreadful must their state be
that die in actual Rebellion against their lawful Prince (a sin of a deep dye)
without possible Repentance. And let us make this use of it, henceforth to shun
the Stratagems of ambitious Rebels, and know when any one courts the Rabble and
bows down to the common people (since there is no worth in them to merit love)
that Interest is intended, and that Snares and Traps, Plots and Treachery is
laid against our Religion or Liberty: When any one visibly designs Popularity
(the worst itch of greatness) beware an Absalom is there. A wise Italian will
draw his Sword at that man that shows him more than ordinary kindness without a
visible cause.

Thirdly, Consider how dangerous it is to go against the Laws of the Land on
what pretense soever. Laws in general are the preservation of the world: the
Laws of God are our guides in Religion, those of the Land in Society; and take
away these, all divine Worship, all Morality, all Civility and Society fall to
the ground, confusion and destruction cover all, and a wide door is open to all
manner of mischief. If once we take the liberty to break the Laws of the Land,
which are the Sinews of a Kingdom, the same pride or obstinacy, conceit or
wilfulness that runs us upon that will not stay there, nor keep us within the
bounds of Religion; let us therefore not allow our selves in the least,
particular to wander from our duty; a little error in our first setting out
proves a great mistake in the end, many mischiefs proceeding from despicable
causes; one little breach in a Sea-bank being enough to drown a Country. It is
scarce credible in two Lines drawn from the same Center, how the distance
between them increases the farther they go, and were they drawn out to infinity
they would still be wider.

Fourthly, Let us take heed how we be induced to sin upon any design or
pretense, or for any reward; the world has been too long imposed upon, and
made to believe that some unlawful things at some times may lawfully be done;
and that even Rebellion in some cases is meritorious; and this men were chiefly
persuaded to by having a good name put upon an odious thing, (evil men being
glad of any pretense to sin) thus fighting against the King was fighting the
Lords Battles. Plundring the Royalists was spoiling the Egyptians: Sequestring
men's Estates, was doing themselves Justice, they being Saints and the Earth
belonging to them, and many other such abominable Tenets. But surely if sin be
of that virulent and poisonous nature that nothing could atone for it but the
Blood of Christ, not Rivers of Oil, or thousands of Bullocks or Rams could
qualify it; surely no design can hallow it, no pretense can take away its
nature: though it may be colored and palliated, the essence of it remains
still; the Poison is Poison though took in a Cordial; and since Kingdoms cannot
buy off Iniquity, nor Empires be a Sacrifice for Transgression; surely the
argument is very strong, that then sin should not be committed for the greatest
gain, for the highest interest: For what does it profit a man to gain the whole
world and lose his own soul? Sure then Rebellion a sin of an high nature should
not be entered into, though the pretense was saving a Kingdom, though our
Property, our Liberty, our Lives, our Religion lay at stake.

Fifthly, If none of the former considerations can avail, I would desire
factious Spirits to consider the end of Rebellion, which as it is founded on
the ruins of Piety and Religion, so it ends in infamy, death, and destruction,
which the late blessings of God to this Land do evidently demonstrate. The
Devil was the first Rebel, and it cost him dear, his Heaven and happiness, and
there is little hope any Rebel should enter that blessed place, when the first
Rebel (after he was so) was not suffered to stay one moment in it: and though
God sometimes for the sins of a Nation does suffer Rebellion a while to
prosper, and makes evil instruments his rod of Correction; as the Jews, Gods
own people, were punished by the Idolatrous Philistines and Chaldeans; yet when
God by them had brought his sacred purposes to pass, he swept even them away
too with the Besom of destruction. So though God for the manifold provocations
of this Land gave up a pious King (the Mirror of Princes) to the fury and
unparalled villainy of Miscreants and Regicides, as he did his beloved Son to
the Jews: yet there seems to be as visible a Curse on those Regicides and their
Posterity, as there was on that cursed Nation that cried, His blood be upon us
and on our children; both of them abhorred of God and men. And as the greatest
of Judgments both seem to be given up to Impenitency and hardness of heart;
for as the Jews that murdered our Savior do yet continue to blaspheme him; so
those that murdered the Father (as if they had no sense of the sin) have since
attempted on one Son by private Conspiracy, and the other by open force, so
that it may appear no needless piece of charity to pray for them in that
Collect of our Church for the conversion of Jews, Turks, and Infidels (to be
read on Good Friday) if yet there be a door open for Repentance.

Having thus considered the branches of my Text, the mercies we have received
at the hand of God cry aloud to us for Thanksgiving, and that we may rise to a
due pitch it would be needful for us to look back upon those dangers we have
escaped. But what mind is there so piercing, or fancy so luxuriant that can
possibly number those Devastations, Ruins, Massacres: the desolations of
Houses, Families, and Cities that would have followed. What pity could have
been expected from that rude Multitude, the worst of men, of whom the Rebels
Army consisted, natural enemies to Nobility and greatness, Eminence and
Excellence too visible enemies to the Church, and mortal foes of Decency and
Order: How would all the true Sons of the Church of England, for their Loyalty
to their Prince, have been branded with the Imputation of Papists, and killed
tumultuously by a Vote of the Commons. And who can sum up those Hydra's heads
of Schism and Faction, those nests of Vermin that would have overspread our
Israel, those innumerable Sects, a worse plague than the Egyptians felt under
their Frogs or Lice; what praise can be enough to God for our deliverance from
all these.

And that the Rebels themselves may not complain that they want their share in
this days Solemnity. I entreat all those that were either publicly or
privately so, to consider that had God given Victory to their unlawful Arms,
they would have missed those advantages they expected, and they have reason to
praise God for their disappointment: For what concord could there have been
among that disorderly Rabble, the sink of so many Sects in Church, and Designs
in State, which no sooner was their common Enemy the Church of England
destroyed, but they would have crumbled into innumerable Sects and Factions,
and been like the armed Brothers sprung of Cadmus Serpents teeth. What
settlement in Church or State, when one party in the West of England was for
Monarchy, those in Scotland for Aristocracy, and no doubt the Rabble for
Democracy? What rule, what safety could there be for the Subject? and how
miserable a life would that Prince have led that was to humor so many
Factions? All must have been confusion, and who knows where the uncertain Ball
of Contention would have rested, tossed from one Sect to another, to the utter
ruin of a flourishing Kingdom.

And let me in the Name of God desire all those whose Hearts were with the
Rebels, and we have too much reason to believe many were by that visible Joy
that was in their faces upon any of their Successes: Let me entreat all such to
bless God that delivered them from their unlawful desires and wishes; let them
bless God who kept them safe against their wills, that gave them not
opportunity, means, or power, when they had given themselves will, to be
Traitors and Rebels. And may the miserable fall of their Brethren be a lasting
Memorial for them; may it learn them more Piety and Wisdom than to meddle with
those that are given to Change. And may they, repenting of their sins, and
acknowledging them to God and man by future Loyalty, agree with us (though they
will else in nothing) in offering up Praise and Thanksgiving to God for
delivering us from them, and them from themselves.

FINIS.

