THE Hackney Coachmens CASE, Humbly offered to the Consideration of the Right
Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in Parliament Assembled.
BY an Act of Parliament made in the Thirteenth and Fourteenth of Charles the
Second, only Four hundred Coaches were Licensed, by which Regulation they were
able to live, maintain their Families, and pay each of them Five Pounds per
Annum, toward Paving, Repairing, and Enlarging the Streets, but that Expired
long since.

Since which time there has been so great an increase of Hackney Coaches,
Gentlemen's Coaches, and Coaches that drive short Stages, and Chairs, about this
Town, that it is impossible for them to live, much less to pay Five Pounds out
of their small Gain, Wear and Tear considered; great numbers of which Hackney
Coaches must in a short time be undone, and rendered incapable to pay the Five
Pound intended to be laid on them, unless reduced to some Regulation, which is
humbly offered as follows. I. That no Person or Persons, Drive, or Let for
Hire, any Coach or Coach Horses (except Stage-Coaches, directly from one Stage
to the other) within the City of London or Westminster, or Parishes within the
Weekly Bills of Mortality, without a License, on pain of forfeiting Five Pounds
for each Offense, being thereof Convict, the one half to the King, the other to
the Informer. II. That the Number of Hackney Coaches to be Licensed, may not
exceed Five hundred; the Four hundred Ancient Licensed Hackney Coaches by
Authority of the said Act to be preferred, each License to be taken out every
Year, but the Power of Licensing to be for Ten or Twenty Years; and all the
Clauses in the said Act, relating to Licensing and Regulating Coaches revived.
III. That every of the said Five hundred Coaches so Licensed, do pay yearly, to
such Person appointed to receive the same, Six Pounds, to be disposed of as
shall be thought convenient.


Obs. There is not now above Seven hundred Hackney Coaches, which at Five
Pounds each, for One Year, amounts but to Three thousand five hundred Pounds.

If Five hundred be Licensed at Six Pounds each Coach, for Ten Years, is Thirty
thousand Pounds; for Twenty, Sixty thousand Pounds, the Town sufficiently
served, and the Streets much less spoiled or torn up; and a present good Fund
to raise Money.


