

A SHORT VIEW OF THE LIFE and REIGN OF King Charles, (The second MONARCH OF
GREAT BRITAIN) From his Birth to his Burial.

Tacit. Hist. Lib. I. Alii diutius imperium tenuerunt, Nemo tam fortiter
reliquit.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston, at the Angel in Ivy-lane. 1658.

A SHORT VIEW OF THE Life and Reign of KING CHARLES. (The second Monarch of
Great BRITAIN) from his Birth to his Burial.
OUr Chronicles tell us of a Man in Queen Elizabeth's time that wrote the Ten
Commandments, the Creed, the Paternoster, the Queens Name, and the year of our
Lord within the compass of a Penny; and gave the Queen a pair of Spectacles of
such an Artificial making, that by the help thereof she did plainly and
distinctly discern every Letter.

The contracting of the Life and Reign of King Charles in so narrow a compass
as I have limited to my self, may seem to be a work of no less difficulty. And
yet I hope to do it in such a plain and perspicuous manner, that every one who
runs may read it without the help of any such Spectacles as our Chronicles
speak of. To Brevity I am enjoined, and it must be my business to avoid all
Obscurity; though I am conscious to my self, that I shall draw this Picture
with too much shadow. But I take the Pencil into my hand, and thus form my
lines.

1600.
CHARLES, the third Son of James the sixth King of the Scots, and of Anne his
Wife, Daughter of Frederick the second, and Sister of Christiern the fourth,
Kings of Denmark, was born at Dunfermeling (one of the principal towns of
Fife) in Scotland, on the nineteenth day of November Anno 1600. derived by a
long descent of Royal Ancestors from Malcolm Conmor King of the Scots, and the
Lady Margaret his Wife, Sister and sole Heir of Edgar Atheling, the last
surviving Prince of the English Saxons. So that his Title had been good to the
Crown of England, though he had borrowed no part of his Claim from the Norman
Conqueror.

Which I observe the better to encounter the extravagant follies of some men in
the book called Antinormanisme, and some other Pamphlets of that time: in which
it is affirmed that this King had no other Right to the Crown, then what he
claimed from that Conquest; and therefore that the English Nation having got
the better of him by the Sword, might lawfully free themselves from that
subjection, which by no other Title then the Sword of the Normans had been laid
upon them.

At his first coming into the world he was so weak and unlike to live, that his
Christening was dispatched in haste, without attending the performance of those
solemnities which are accustomably used at the Baptism of such Princely
infants. And as the name of Henry was given to the Prince, his Elder Brother,
with reference to Henry Lord Darnlie, the Father of King James by Mary Queen of
Scots; so was this younger Son called Charles, in relation to Charles Earl of
Lenox, the younger Brother of that Henry, and by consequence Uncle to King
James.

1602.
Having received some measure of strength, he was at the Age of two years
created Duke of Albany, Marquess of Ormond, Earl of Rosse, and Baron of
Ardmanock; of which four Titles the two first and the last are wholly at the
Kings disposing, to be bestowed on whom he pleases. But the Earldom of Rosse
falling unto the Crown in the time of King James the third, was so settled in
the Crown by Act of Parliament, that it is not lawful for the King to sell,
alienate, or dispose the same unto any other, then to the second Son of
Scotland.

1603.
On the 26. of March next following, Anno 1603. King James had news by Sir
Robert Carry, one of the younger Sons of the Lord Hunsdon (who had stole a
posting journey thither) that Queen Elizabeth was dead, contrary to the opinion
of many of his Scottish Courtiers; who being wearied with the tediousness of
their expectation, did believe at last, that it should never be acknowledged by
the Lords of England that the Queen was dead, as long as there was any old
woman of that Nation left, to wear good Clothes, and take the name of Queen
upon her. For bringing which news the Duke of Albany (as if he were more
concerned in it then all the rest of the Kings Children, as indeed he was) was
afterward committed to the Governance of Sir Roberts Lady, and he himself from
that time forwards of principal esteem and place about him.

This news being seconded by that of the Proclaiming of King James, for her
true and lawful Successor in the Imperial Crown of this Realm, the King
prepared himself for England. At what time (as I have been told by some Persons
of Quality) a certain Lord of the Highlands, though of very great Age, came to
his Court, to take his leave of him, whom he found accompanied with all his
Children, the young Duke being then held in his Nurses Arms.

His Address unto the King consisted of Prayers for his long life and
Prosperity; and those Prayers intermixed with some desires, that in the midst of
the Felicities and Glories of the English Court, he would not be unmindfull of
his Native Country. Which having said, without taking any great notice of the
Prince, he applied himself wholly to the Duke, whose hands he kissed with such an
Ardency of Affection, as if he meant they should grow for ever to his lips. And
when the King told him, that he had mistook himself in his Addresses to the
infant, as not being his eldest Son, and Prince of Scotland; he answered, that
he knew well enough what he did, and that it was this Child in whom his Name
and Memory was to be perpetuated to succeeding Ages, with other Speeches of
like nature. Which being then either unregarded, or imputed unto age and
dotage, were called to mind after the death of Prince Henry, and then believed
to have something in them of a Prophetical spirit.

1603.
But to proceed. On the fifth day of April in the year 1603. King James began
his journey for England, and in the end of May, the Queen accompanied with
Prince Henry, and the Lady Elizabeth, set forwards also; finding at Berwick a
Noble Train of Lords and Ladies sent thither from the Court to attend her
coming, and wait upon her in her journey.

1604.
The next year order was given for bringing the young Duke to the Court of
England. But before such as had the Charge of him could begin their journey,
the young Duke was taken with a fever. Which being signified to the King, he
sent thither Doctor Atkins one of his Physicians, who in six weeks restored him
to such a degree of health as made him fit to be removed to a Warmer Air, and
a more comfortable Climate.

On the sixteenth of July this Remove began, which brought him by short and
easy stages in the first week of October, to Windsor Castle, where the King
then was, by whom he was committed to the Governance of the Lady Carry, as
before is said. And not long after, for his better welcome into England, he was
on the sixth day of January next following (commonly called Twelfth-day)
invested solemnly with the title of Duke of York by cincture of a Sword,
imposition of a Cap and Coronet of Gold upon his Head, and by delivering unto
him a Verge of Gold; himself with ten others of eminent Nobility, having been
made Knights of the Bath (with all the accustomed Ceremonies) the day before.

1606.
In the sixth year of his Age, he was taken from the charge of his Women
(though not from the Motherly superinspection of the Lady Carry) and committed
to the Pedagogy of Master Thomas Murray, a Scot by Nation; sufficiently
qualified for that service, but otherwise ill Principled in the Rites and
Ceremonies in which the Church of England differed from the Kirk of Scotland.

1610.
Under this Tutor the young Duke advanced exceedingly in the way of good
Letters; the weakness of his lower parts, which made him unapt for Exercises
and feats of Activity, rendering him more retired and studious, and more intent
upon his Book then he had been otherwise. Which Prince Henry taking notice of,
as he, the young Duke, Dr. Abbot then newly made Archbishop of Canterbury,
with many of the Nobility, were waiting in the Privie-Chamber for the Kings
coming out; the Prince (to put a jest upon him) took the Archbishops
Square-cap out of his hand, and put it on his Brothers head, telling him that
if he continued a good boy, and followed his Book, he would make him one day
Archbishop of Canterbury. Which the child took in such disdain, that he threw
the Cap upon the ground, and trampled it under his feet, not being without much
difficulty and some force taken off from that eagerness.

This, though at first it was not otherwise beheld then as an Act of Childish
passion, yet when his Brother Prince Henry dyed, and that he was Heir apparent
to the Crown, it was taken up by many zealous Churchmen for some ill Presage
unto the Hierarchy of Bishops, the overthrow whereof by his Act and Power did
seem to be foresignified by it. But in that their fears were groundless, and
their conjectures no better grounded then their fears, there never being a more
gracious Patron to the Church, nor a more resolute Champion in behalf of the
Hierarchy then he proved to be* What is presaged (if there were any presaging
in it) in reference to the Archbishops Person, may be shown hereafter.

1611, 1612.
In the eleventh year of his Age, he was made Knight of the most noble Order of
the Garter, and on the sixth day of November, Anno 1612. he lost his Brother
Prince Henry, whom he immediately succeeded in the Dukedom of Cornwall, with
all the Royalties, Rents, Profits, and Commodities of it; according to the
entail which was made thereof by King Edward the third, when he conferred it
upon Edward the black Prince, his eldest Son.

The first solemn Act which he appeared in after this change of his condition,
was at the Funeral of Prince Henry on the 7. of December. following, at which he
attended as chief Mourner. And on the 14 of February then next ensuing, being
Sunday, and St. Valentines day, he performed the Office of a Brideman (a
Paranymph the Grecians call him) to the Princess Elizabeth his Sister, married
upon that day to Frederick the Fifth, Prince Elector Palatine: A marriage which
drew him afterward into many cares and great expenses, of which more hereafter.

In his Childhood he was noted to be very wilful, somewhat inclining to a
perverseness of disposition, which might proceed from that retiredness which
the imperfection of his Speech, not fitting him for public discourse, and the
weakness of his limbs and joints (as unfit for Action) made him most delight in.

But now being grown both in years, and state, he began to shake off that
retiredness, and betake himself to all manner of man-like exercises; such as
were Vaulting, riding great Horses, running at the ring, shooting in cross
bows, Muskets, and sometimes in great Pieces of Ordnance, in which he became
so perfect, that he was thought to be the best Marks-man, and the most comely
mannager of a great Horse of any one in all three Kingdoms. And as he shaked
off this retiredness, so he corrected in himself the Peccancy of that humor
which had grown up with it; there being no man to be found of an evener temper,
more pliant to good Counsel, or less wedded then he was to his own opinion.

1616.
On the third of November, Anno 1616. He was at White Hall (with all the
accustomed Solemnities) created Prince of Wales, Earl of Chester and Flint, and
put into the actual possession of all the Regalities, Profits, and Commodities
belonging to them; his Household being then formed and constituted, and all the
officers of State, which belong unto him, appointed to their several places.

And now it was expected that he should break out into more glory then he had
done formerly, and take upon him as the Heir of so great an Empire. But
considering very wisely that the forward and enterprizing nature of his Brother
Prince Henry, the popularity which he affected, and the great resort of young
Noblemen continually unto his Court, had been displeasing to his Father;
resolved to keep himself at a close ward, and not to seem so great as he was,
that when time served, he might appear greater then he seemed to be. Old
Princes do not love to have their eldest Sons too active, and to tread too
close upon their heels; and therefore many times do enterpose the power of a
favorite to keep them at the greater distance. A policy much used by King James
in the whole course of his Government, who for that cause in the lifetime of
Prince Henry, took Sir Robert Carr into his most especial favor, whom he
first made Gentleman of his Bedchamber, and on the twenty fifth of March Anno
1611. Created Viscount Rochester, and the same year made Knight of the Garter
also, conferring on him all the power and trust he was capable of; that by the
greatness of the one he might keep down the daring nature and confident Spirit
of the other.

Prince Charles understood this well enough, and carried himself with so much
prudence, that he disputed not the power of his Fathers favorites, suffering
all Honor, Offices, and other matters at the Court to be carried by them as
best pleased the King. Which though it was generally ascribed unto
Pusillanimity, and the defect of Spirit in him, yet was it looked upon as an
Act of the greatest wisdom by more knowing men. For had he any ways crossed the
designs and Councels either of Carr then Earl of Sommerset, or of the Duke of
Buckingham, his Fathers favorites (who at that time did much outshine him) he
had not only incurred the Kings displeasure, but of necessity must have divided
the Court, and by consequence the Kingdom also into several factions, each
laboring to advance their own, though to the Ruin and Destruction of the
public Peace.

Only to take off somewhat of the imputation, he made so much use of his power
and interesse with the King, as to prefer three of his servants unto Titles of
Honor, Anno 1621. viz. Sir Robert Carry Chamberlain of his Household, to the
Title of Lord Carry of Lepington; Sir Thomas Howard, second Son to the Earl of
Suffolk, and Master of his Horse, to the Honor of Viscount Andover, and Lord
Howard of Charlton; and Sir John Vaughan Controller of his Household, to the
Honor of Lord Vaughan of Molingar in the Realm of Ireland.

1618.
On the eighteenth day of November Anno 1618. There appeared a great blazing
Star, the forerunner of many woeful events in these parts of Christendom. But
the first sad effect thereof which we found in England, was the death of Queen
Anne, which happened on Tuesday the second of March next following. A loss which
the Prince bare with great equanimity, or evennesse of Spirit; neither
banishing all shows of grief with a Stoical Apathie, nor spending his time in
too much womanish lamentation. At the Funeral of this great Queen, he was
principal Mourner, and it became him so to be; she having always been to him a
tender and indulgent Mother, expressing more affection to him then to all the
rest of her Children.

1619.
Not long after the death of the Queen, King James fell very sick at Newmarket,
and having a desire to come to London, advanced on his way as far as Royston,
where he was fain to stay till his sickness was over, which at last became so
dangerous, that his death was feared. At what time Dr. Andrews Bishop of
Winchester attending on him, bewailed with great Affliction the sad condition
which the Church was like to fall into, if God should take away his life, the
Prince being in the hands of the Scots, which made up the greatest part of his
Household, and not well principled by those which had the tutelage of him,
either as to the Government or Liturgy of the Church of England. The King
acknowledgeing this sad truth, and condemning his own negligence in it, made a
solemn vow, that if God would be pleased to restore him to his health, he would
take the Prince into his own immediate care, instruct him in the Controversies
of Religion, and set him on so right a bottom, that there should be no fear of
his disaffection either unto the Hierarchy, or the rites and Ceremonies of the
Church; which he did accordingly. And he did it so effectually, that at such
time as the Prince made his journey into Spain, and that some principal persons
in all the Places and Offices belonging to him, were to follow after, Dr. Maw,
and Dr. Wren, two of his Chaplains being appointed for that service, came to
King James to know his pleasure and commands. The King advised them not to put
themselves upon any unnecessary Disputations, but to be only on the defensive
part, if they should be challenged. And when it was answered that there could
be no reason to engage in such Disputations, where there could be no Moderator;
the King replied, that Charles should moderate between them and the opposite
party. At which when one of them seemed to smile on the other, the King
proceeded, and told them, that Charles should manage a point in Controversy
with the best studied Divine of them all; and that he had trained up George so
far as to hold the conclusion, though he had not yet made him able to prove the
Premises.

1619.
On Friday the twenty fourth of March, Anno 1619. The Prince with the Marquess
of Hamilton, Marquess of Buckingham, diverse Earls and others performed great
Justing at White Hall in honor of the day, being the day of King James his
happy coming to the Crown of England.

1620
And on the Sunday after, being Mid-lent Sunday, he attended his Father to S.
Paul's Cross, conducted in a most solemn manner from Temple Bar to that Church
by the Lord Major and Aldermen, and at the entrance into the Church, received
by the Dean and Chapter in their rich Copes, and other Ecclesiastical Habits,
and by them conducted into the Quire; where having heard the Divine service for
that day most solemnly performed with Organs, Cornets, and Sagbots, they went
to a prepared place where they heard the Sermon at the Cross preached by Dr.
King, then Lord Bishop of London; and from thence unto the Bishops Palace,
where they were entertained with a Banquet. Infinite was the concourse of
People at both those Solemnities, and all of them returned with great joy and
comfort to see him so bravely accomplished in the one, so devoutly reverent in
the other.

1622.
On Tuesday the eighteenth of February, Anno 1622. Accompanied with the Duke of
Buckingham, M. Erdimion Porter, and M. Francis Cottington; he took ship at
Dover, arrived at Bulloign in France, and from thence rode Post to the Court of
Spain.

The occasion this; Frederick Prince Elector Palatine had inconsiderately taken
on himself the Crown of Bohemia, An. 1619. and for so doing, was by the Emperor
deprived of his Ancient Patrimony; the Electorall dignity together with the
upper Palatinate being conferred on the Duke of Bavaria, and the lower on the
K. of Spain, who possessed himself of all of it except the towns of Heidelberg,
Frankendale, and Manheim, well manned and Garrisoned by the English. For the
preserving of which places, and the recovery of the whole, when all means else
had proved ineffectuall, it was held most expedient to negotiate a Marriage
betwixt Prince Charles and the Daughter of Spain. Which being first managed by
the Leiger Ambassadors in both Courts, was afterward prosecuted with more
particular instructions by John Lord Digby (well verst and studied in that
Court) whom the King sent as his Ambassador extraordinary to conclude the
match. But Digby being fed with delays from one time to another, it was
resolved by King James, without making any of his Council acquainted with it,
that the Prince himself should go in Person, that he might either speed the
Business, or break off the Treaty.

According to this Resolution he began his journey, no otherwise accompanied or
attended then with those three persons above mentioned, all of them passing in
disguise, to avoid discovery. Being come to Paris, they adventured to see the
Court, where at a Mask, he had a view of that most excellent Princess whom he
after married. But no sooner had he left the City, then the French King had
Advertisement of his being there, who thereupon dispatched away several Posts
to stay him in his journey, and bring him back; but the Prince had past beyond
Bayonne, the last Town in France, without being overtaken by them, and posting
speedily to Madrid, entered the Lord Ambassadors Lodging, without being known to
any but his Confidents only.

News of his safe Arrival there being brought to the King, there was a present
order taken for the sending of some of his Servants of all sorts, to attend
upon him in that Court, that so he might appear amongst them in the greater
Luster. But this lessened not the Cares and Fears of the English Subjects, who
could not be more glad to hear of his safety, then they were afraid of the
danger which he had incurred. For having put himself into the power of the King
of Spain, it was at the Courtesy of that King whether he should ever return or
no: it being a Maxim amongst Princes, That if any one without leave sets foot
on the Ground of another, he makes himself his Prisoner.

Philip the first of Spain and Duke of Burgundy, being cast by Tempest on the
Coast of England, was here detained by King Henry the seventh, till he had
delivered up the Earl of Suffolk, who had fled for Refuge to his Court: and
Mary Queen of the Scots, being forced by her Rebellious Subjects to fly into
this Realm, was presently seized on as a Prisoner, and so continued till her
lamentable and calamitous death. So in like manner Richard the first of
England, passing in disguise through some part of the dominions of the
Archduke of Austria, was by him took Prisoner, and put unto an heavy Ransom;
and not long since Charles Lodowick the now Prince Elector Palatine posting
through France, in hope to get the Command of Duke Bernards Army, was stayed in
the middle of his journey by the Kings command, and kept so long under
Restraint, that he lost the opportunity of effecting his purprose.

This, though it was the general Fear and apprehension of the English
Subjects, yet no body durst acquaint the King with it, but Archee the fool, who
going boldly to the King, as he found him once in a good humor, told him that
he was come to change Caps with him. Why, said the King? Marry, says Archee,
because thou have sent the Prince into Spain, from whence he is never like to
return. But said the King, what will thou say when thou see him come back
again? Marry, says Archee, I will then take off the fools Cap which I put upon
thy head, for sending him thither, and put it on the King of Spains, for
letting him return. At which words, it is reported, that the King became
exceeding pensive, never before so much apprehending the Danger of that
Adventure, as then and afterward he did.

1623.
But the generous Spaniard intended to make no such Market of him, but gave him
all the Royal entertainment which a Princely Suitor might expect. Nor was the
Prince wanting for his part in all fit Compliances by which he might both gain
on them, and preserve himself. For by his Courtly Garb he won so much on the
Affections of the Infanta, and by his grave and circumspect behavior got so
much ground upon the King and his Council, that the match went forward in good
earnest. The Articles of the Marriage with all the Circumstances thereof were
agreed upon, and solemnly sworn to by both Kings. Nor was the Pope wanting in
the grant of a dispensation (without which nothing could be done) writing a
Letter to the Prince, who returned to him a Civil answer, which afterward was
reckoned amongst his Crimes, by such as rather would not then did not know the
necessity which lay upon him, of keeping at that time a plausible
Correspondence with the Catholic party.

But as for his Religion, the change whereof was moved by the Pope, and much
hoped for by the Court of Spain at his first coming thither, he showed so many
strong evidences of his constancy in it, that those hopes soon vanished. And
that it might appear, that he professed no other Religion, then what was
agreeable to the Rules of Antiquity, and not much abhorrent from the forms
then used in the Church of Rome, the English Liturgy was by the care of the
Lord Keeper Williams translated into the Spanish Tongue; and so many Copies of
the Book then printed sent into Spain, as gave great satisfaction in that point
to the Court and Clergy.

And this I must needs say was very seasonably done, the Spaniards being till
then persuaded by their Priests and Jesuits, that when the English had cast off
the Pope, they had cast off also all Religion, and became mere Atheists; the
name of God being never used amongst them, but with a purpose to expose it unto
scorn and profanation. Insomuch that the Constable of Castile, being sent to
swear the Peace concluded with Spain, when he understood the business was to
be performed in the Chapel, where some Anthems were to be sung, desired that
whatsoever was sung, Gods name might not be used in it, and that being forborne,
he was content they should sing what they listed. King James himself so relates
the story in Archbishop Spotswood, fol. 530.

But the Prince had another game to play, namely, the Restitution of the
Palatinate; which the Spaniard would not suffer to be brought under the Treaty,
reserving it (as they pretended to be bestowed by the Infanta after the
Marriage, the better to ingratiate her self with the English Nation. Which
being a point of too great moment to depend upon no other assurance then a
Court-Complement, he concluded with himself that since he could not prevail in
the one, he would not proceed unto the Consummation of the other. And hereupon
he was much edged on by the Duke of Buckingham, who having conceived some deep
displeasure against the Conde de Olivarez, the special Favorite of that King,
desired rather that all Treaties should be broken off, then that any Alliance
should be made in which that Conde had appeared so isntrumental.

But it did concern the Prince so to provide for his own safety, that no
intimation might be made of the intended Rupture, till he had unwinded himself
out of that Labyrinth into which he was cast. For which cause having desired of
his Father that some ships might be sent to bring him home, he showed himself a
more passionate lover then ever formerly, and made a Proxy to the Catholic
King and Don Charles his Brother, in his name to espouse the Lady Infanta;
which Proxy he left with Digby, not long before made Earl of Bristol, by him
to be delivered within some few days after the coming of the expected
dispensation.

But no sooner had he took his leave, and was out of danger, but he dispatched a
Post unto him, commanding him not to deliver up the Proxy until further
order. And having so done, he hois'd Sails, and came for England, arriving at
Portsmouth on Sunday the fifth of October, Anno 1623. From whence by
Posthorses he past to London, the next morning, and so by Coach to the King at
Royston, to the great content of all the Kingdom, declared by Bells, Bonfires,
and all other the accustomed expressions of a public joy.

The King being made acquainted with all particulars, and that no Assurance
could be had of the Restitution of the Palatinate, by the advice of his Privy
Council, dispatched a command to the Earl of Bristol, not to deliver up the
Proxy unless the business of the Palatinate were concluded also* The
expectation whereof not being answered by Success, a Parliament is summoned,
to begin on the sixteenth day of February then next following, to the end that
all things might be governed in this great Affair by the public Counsel of the
Kingdom. Not long after the beginning whereof, the Duke declared before both
Houses (more to the disadvantage of the Spaniard then there was just ground
for) how unhandsomely they had dealt with the Prince, when he was in Spain; how
they had fed him with delays; what indignities they had put upon him, and
finally had sent him back not only without the Palatinate, but without a Wife;
leaving it to their prudent Consideration what course to follow.

It was thereupon voted by both Houses, that his Majesty should be desired to
break off all Treaties with the King of Spain, and to engage himself in a war
against him for the recovery of the Palatinate, not otherwise to be obtained.
And that they might come the better to the end they aimed at, they address
themselves unto the Prince, whom they assured, that they would stand to him in
that War to the very last expense of their lives and fortunes; and he
accordingly being further set on by the Duke, became their instrument to
persuade his Father to hearken to the Common Votes and desires of his Subjects,
which the King, pressed by their continual importunities, did at the last assent
to.

But in the conduct of this Business, the Prince consulted more the Dukes
passion, and the pleasing of the Commons in Parliament, then either his own or
the Regal interesse. For there is nothing more unsafe for a King of England,
then to cast himself upon the necessity of calling Parliaments, and depending
on the purse of the Subject. By means whereof he makes himself obnoxious to the
Humor of any prevailing Member in the House of Commons, and becomes less in
Reputation both at home and abroad. The Commons, since the time of King James,
have seldom parted with a penny* but they have paid themselves well for it out
of the prerogative.

And this appeared by their proceedings in this very Parliament: For though
they had engaged the King in a War with Spain, and granted him three Subsidies
and three Fifteens toward the beginning of that War; yet would they not suffer
that grant to pass into an Act of Parliament, till the King had yielded to
another against Concealments. Insomuch as it was affirmed by Justice
Dodderidge, at the next Public Assizes held in Oxford, that the King by
passing that Act, had bought those Subsidies and Fifteens at ten years
purchase. Nor dealt they otherwise with this Prince then they did with his
Father, those very Commons who had engaged him in the War, and bound
themselves to make good that engagement with their lives and fortunes, most
shamefully deserting him in the first Parliament of his Reign, and after
working more and more upon his necessities, till they had robbed him of the
richest Jewels in the Regal Diadem.

1624.
But to proceed, the Treaty with Spain being like to come to a Rupture, it was
judged necessary to counterballance the Power of that King by negotiating a
Match with the Princess Henrietta Maria, the youngest Daughter of France;
first set on foot by the Mediation of the Earl of Holland, who found that Court
inclinable thereunto, and afterward concluded at the coming over of the Earl
of Carlisle, joined in Commission to that purpose. It was reported, that when
she was told that the Prince of Wales had been at the Court, and was gone for
Spain; she Answered, that if he went to Spain for a Wife, he might have had one
nearer hand, and saved himself a great part of the trouble. And I have read,
that receiving at one time two Letters from England, the one from King James,
and the other from the Prince, she put that from King James into her Cabinet,
and that from Prince Charles into her Bosom. Of which King James being told, he
was exceedingly pleased with it, saying, that he took it for a very good Omen,
that she should preserve his Name in her Memory, and lodge Charles in her heart.

1625.
During these preparations for War and Marriage, King James departed this life
at Theobalds on Sunday the twenty seventh of March, Anno 1625. Immediately upon
whose death Prince Charles was proclaimed at the Court-Gates to be King of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, etc. The like done presently after at
London, and by degrees in all the other Cities and Towns of the Kingdom, with
infinite rejoycings and Acclamations of the People.

The Funerals of the deceased King were celebrated on the seventh of May, his
body being brought from Somerset House with great Magnificence to Saint Peter's
Church in Westminster (where he was interred) the King himself being principal
Mourner. Which though it were contrary to the Custom of his Predecessors, yet
he chose rather to express his Piety in attending the dead body of his Father
to the Funeral Pile, then to stand upon any such old Niceties and points of
State.

The Funeral being past, he thought it was time for him to quicken the coming
over of his dearest Consort, to whom he had been married on the Sunday before
at the Church of Nostre-Dame in Paris; the Duke of Chevereux a Prince of the
House of Guise (from which House King Charles derived himself by the Lady Mary
of Lorain, Wife to James the fifth) espousing the Princess in his Name.

On Trinity Sunday, late at night, she was brought by a Royal Fleet of Ships
from Bulloign to Dover, which being signified to the King who was then at
Canterbury, he went to her betimes the next morning, and received her with
great expressions of Affection, professing that he would be no longer Master of
himself, then whilst he was a Servant to her. The same day He brought her to
Canterbury, where he gave himself up to those Embraces, to which from that time
he confined himself with such a Conjugal Chastity, that on the day before his
death he commanded his Daughter the Princess Elizabeth to tell her Mother,
that his thoughts had never straied from her, and that his love should be the
same to the last.

On the Thursday after, being the sixteenth of June, they came from Gravesend
to White Hall in their Royal Barges, attended with an infinite number of Lords,
Ladies, and other people who could get Boats to wait upon them; the Ordnance
from the Ships which were then preparing for the Wars, those from the Merchants
Ships, and the Tower of London, thundering her Welcome as she past.

But in the heat of these Solemnities and entertainments, the King forgot not
the main Concernments of himself and the Kingdom, and to that end began his
first Parliament on Saturday the eighteenth of June, which fell out not
unseasonably, that the French Lords might see with what Royal Magnificence he
was attended by the Peers, Prelates, and other Officers of State (besides his
own Domestic Servants) to the Parliament House.

At their first meeting, he put them in mind of the War in which they had
engaged his Father, and of the promise they had made to stand to him in it with
their lives and fortunes; that both his Land and Sea-forces were now in
readiness to set forwards, and that there wanted nothing but a present supply
of money to quicken and expedite the Affair. In Answer whereunto, the Commons
past a Bill of two Subsidies only, so short of the excessive Charge which the
maintenance of so great a Fleet and Army required at their hands, that being
distributed amongst the Officers, Soldiers, and Mariners, it would scarce have
served for Advance-money to send them going. Which notwithstanding, the King
very graciously accepted of it, taking it as an Ernest of their good
Affections, in reference to the greater Sums which were to follow.

But the Plague growing hot in London, the Parliament on the eleventh day of
July was adjourned to Oxford, there to be held on the first of August, at what
time the King put them in mind again of the necessity of setting forward his
Fleet, and that the eyes of his Confederates were fixed upon it. But the Commons
had other fish to fry, and began to quarrel at the greatness of the Duke of
Buckingham, whom in the last Parliament of King James they had idolized above
all men living. But he had served their turn already, and now they meant to
serve their own.

This was the first Assault which the Commons made upon this King, though not
directly on his Person, wounding him through the sides of his principal
Minister; they were so well verst in the Arts of a Parliament-war, as to take
in the Outworks first, that so the Fort it self might lie the more open to
continual Batteries. Concerning which, and the sad consequents thereof, take
here the words of a Letter written to the King from an unknown Person.

These men, says he, either cannot or will not remember, that never any Noble
man in favor with his Sovereign, was questioned in Parliament, except by the
King himself in case of Treason, or unless it were in the Nonage and
tumultuous time of Richard the 2. Henry the 6. or Edward the 6. which happened to
the destruction both of the King and Kingdom. And that, not to exceed our own
and Fathers Memories, in King Henry the eight's time, Wolsies exorbitant power
and pride, and Cromwels contempt of the Nobility and the Laws, were not yet
permitted to be discussed in Parliament, though they were most odious and
grievous to all the Kingdom. And that Leicesters undeserved favor and faults;
Hattons insufficiency, and Rawleighs insolence far exceeded what yet has been
(though most falsely) objected against the Duke; yet no Lawyer durst abet, nor
any man else begin any invectives against them in Parliament. And then he adds
(some other passages intervening) that it behooves his Majesty to uphold the
Duke against them, who if he be but decourted, it will be the cornerstone on
which the demolishing of his Monarchy will be builded. For if they prevail
with this, they have hatched a thousand other Demands to pull the feathers of
the Royalty, they will appoint him Counselors, Servants, Alliances, Limits of
his Expenses, Accounts of his Revenue, chiefly if they can (as they mainly
desire) they will now dazzle him in the beginning of his Reign.

How true a Prophet this man proved, the event has shown, and the King saw it
well enough, and therefore since he could not divert them from that pursuit, he
dissolved the Parliament, by whose neglect (I will not call it a perverseness)
the Fleet went out late, and returned unprosperously. In which conjuncture, if
he had clapped up a Peace with Spain, (which the Spaniards had as much reason to
accept as he to offer) he might have prevented the following Rupture betwixt
him and France, and freed himself from the necessity of calling Parliaments,
till he had no necessity for a Parliament to work upon, and then he might have
found them as pliant to him as he could reasonably require.

But he resolves to try his fortune in another as soon as he had performed the
Solemnities of his Coronation, which was celebrated on the second of February,
(commonly called Candlemas Day) then next ensuing. In the external Pomp
whereof, he omitted his triumphant riding through the City from the Tower to
White Hall, the Charge whereof would have stood him in sixty thousand pounds,
as some compute it; and he had then more necessary occasions to expend his
money, then Money to answer those occasions. In the sacred part of it, there
was nothing altered, but the adding of a clause to one of the Prayers which had
been pretermitted since the time of King Henry the sixth, and is this that
follows, viz. Let him obtain favor for the People, like Aaron in the
Tabernacle, Elisha in the Waters, Zacharias in the Temple; give him Peter's key
of Discipline, Paul's Doctrine. Which clause had been omitted in time of Popery,
as intimating more Ecclesiastical jurisdiction to be given to our Kings then
the Popes allowed of; and for the same reason was now quarreled by the Puritan
Faction. As for the Coronation Oath, it was the same which had been taken by
his Predecessors, as appears by the Records of Exchequer; Not made more
advantageous to the King, and less beneficial to the People by the late
Archbishop, though both the long Parliament in the year 1642. and the lewd
Pamphlets of that time did object the contrary.

The Coronation being passed over, he began his second Parliament on the sixth
of the same month, in which he sped no better then he did in his first. The
Commons voted some Subsidies to be granted to him, but they never past them
into Act, that bait being only laid before him, to tempt him to give over the
Duke to their pride and fury, against whom they had framed a large impeachment
ushered in by Sir Dudley Diggs, prosecuted with six bitter invectives, made by
the best Speakers and most learned Lawyers of that House, and finally concluded
by Sir John Eliot, who brought up the Rear.

1626.
But the King easily perceived that his Royal Father and himself were as much
concerned in it as the Duke, their favors being made his crimes, and their
authority in bestowing Offices and Honors on whom they pleased, not obscurely
questioned.

But the storm went higher then the Duke, some part of it falling downright on
the King himself; it being openly affirmed in the House of Commons by one Mr.
Coke (a true chip of the old block) that it was as good to die by a foreign
Enemy as to be destroyed at home. Of this reproach, tending so much to the
dishonor of his Government, he complained in a Speech before both Houses, but
without any remedy. And being further incensed by the noise of a Declaration
which they had then upon the Anvil, he dissolved the Parliament on the
eighteenth day of June then following.

No sooner was he freed from this, but the necessity of his Affairs involved
him in another Embroylment. The French Priests and Domestics of that Nation
which came into England with the Queen, were grown so insolent, and had put so
many affronts upon him, that he was forced to send them home; in which he did
no more then what the French King had done before him, in sending back all the
Spanish Courtiers which his Queen brought with her. But the French King not
looking on his own example, and knowing on what ill terms the King stood both
at home and abroad, first seized on all the Merchants ships which lay on the
River of Bordeaux, and then brake out into open war. So that the King was fain
to make use of those Forces against the French, which were designed to have
been used against the Spaniard, and to comply with the desires of the
Rochelers, who humbly sued for his protection and Defense. But the Fleet not
going out till after Michaelmas, found greater opposition at the Sea then they
feared from the Land; being encountered with strong Tempests, and thereby
necessitated to return without doing any thing, but only showing the Kings
good will and readiness toward their assistance.

1627.
But the next year this design was followed with greater vigor by the Duke of
Buckingham, who hoped thereby to make himself of some consideration in the eyes
of the people. The gaining of the Isle of Re, which lay before the Town of
Rochel, and imbarred their Trade, was the matter aimed at; and he had strength
enough both for Sea and Land to have done the work, if he had not followed it
more like a Courtier then a Soldier; suffering himself to be complemented out
of the taking of their chief Fort, when it was almost at his mercy; and
standing upon points of Honor in facing those Forces which were sent from the
French King to raise the siege, when he might have made a safe retreat unto his
ships without loss or danger.

In the mean time his Majesty neither neglected his Affairs at home nor his
Friends abroad: At home he found the Puritan faction to be much increased by
the remissness of the government of Archbishop Abbot, whom therefore he
suspended from all his Metropoliticall Jurisdiction, and confined him to his
House at Ford in Kent, committing the exercise thereof to the Bishops of
London, Durham, Rochester, Oxford, Bath and Wells, by Letters Patents, bearing
date the 9. day of October, Anno 1627. Abroad he found the Princes of Germany
wormed out of their Estates, one after another, by the Emperors Forces, the
King of Denmark (whom they had made the Head of their League) being driven out
of the Country by Count Tilly, and hardly able to defend his own Dominions. No
Prince so fit for the prosecution of that cause, as Gustavus Adolphus, King of
Sweden, whom therefore he elects into the Noble Order of the Garter, and
solemnly invests him with it in the midst of his Army, then lying at the Siege
of Darsaw, a Town of Pomerella belonging to the Crown of Poland, on Sunday the
twenty third of October, of the same year also. At which time he laid the
grounds of that Confederacy, which being seconded by the French, the States of
the United Provinces, and the distressed Princes of the Empire, brought that
King into Germany; where he gave the first great check to the Emperors
fortunes, and had restored the Prince Elector Palatine to his ancient
Patrimony, if he had not fallen unfortunately at the Battle of Lutzen.

1628.
Being thus engaged and embroiled, he gave a beginning to his third Parliament
on the seventeenth of March, and freely declares to them the necessities under
which he lay; in Answer whereunto the Commons voted five Subsidies, but meant
he should pay dearly for them before he had them. Such grievances as they
thought fit to insist upon, were cast into the mold of a petition, by them
called a Petition of Right; which if the King granted, he must lose his
prerogative; if he denied it, he must lose all hopes of their supply in his
great extremities. The consideration of which last induced him to yield to
their desires, and confirm that petition by Act of Parliament, the Prerogative
never so much descending from Perch to popular Lure, as by that concession. But
though this Act of grace might have given satisfacton even to supererogation
(as one well observes) yet the Commons were not so contented, but were
preparing a Remonstance to take away his Right of Tonnage and Poundage, as
disclaimed by him in that Act; which coming to the Kings knowledge, on the
twenty sixth of June, he adjourns the Parliament till the twentieth day of
October then next ensuing.

In the mean time the Duke prepares for the relief of Rochel, both by Sea and
Land, and being ready to set sail, was suddenly cut off at Ports-muth by the
hand of one John Felton, a discontented Officer of the last years Army,
alleging no other reason for that bloody act, but that the Duke had been
declared an Enemy to the Commonwealth, in a Remonstrance tendered to the King
in the former Session.

But such was the constancy of the Kings temper, and the known evenness of his
spirit, that this sad Accident made little or no stop in the proceedings of the
Fleet, which at the last set forwards under the command of the Earl of
Lindsey,; who found the Haven of Rochel so strongly barred, that it was utterly
impossible for his Ships to force their way (though it was gallantly attempted)
and give relief to the besieged; who thereupon set open their Gates, and
received their King into their Town without more delay.

To smooth his way to the next Session of Parliament, adjourned again till the
twentieth of January, Archbishop Abbot is admitted to kiss his hand, by whom
he is commanded not to fail of his attendance at the Council table; Dr. Barnaby
Potter (a through-paced Calvinian) is made Bishop of Carlisle, and Mr.
Mountagues book called Appello Caesarem (for which he had been questioned and
molested in the beginning of the Kings first Parliament) must be suppressed and
called in by Proclamation.

But this little edified with the faction in the house of Commons, who not
only took upon them the reforming of the Church and State, but called the
Customers in question for levying Tonnage and Poundage, not then granted (nor
ever likely to be granted as it had been formerly) by Act of Parliament, and
distraining such Merchants goods as refused to pay it. And in this point they
went so high, that fearing they should be dissolved before they had vented
their own passions in that particular, upon the second day of March they locked
the Doors of the Parliament House, kept the key thereof in one of their
pockets, and held the Speaker by strong hand in his Chair, till they had
thundered out their Anathemaes not only against such as should dare to levy
it, but those also who should willingly pay it. The news of which riotous
proceeding being brought immediately to the King, he sent his Band of
Pensioners, accompanied by his ordinary Guard, to force open the doors, and
going himself to the House of Peers, he dissolved the Parliament, not having
continued in that Session above forty days.

At the end of the former Session he had admitted Sir John Savill of Yorkshire,
a busy man in the House of Commons, (but otherwise a politic and prudent
person) to be one of his Privy Council, created him Lord Savill of Ponfract,
and made him Comptroller of his Household in the place of Sir John Suckling
deceased. And a little before the beginning of the following Session, he took
into his Council Sir Thomas wentworth of Wentworth Woodhouse in the same
County, whom be created Viscount Wentworth, and made Lord President of the
North, and within two years after Lord Deputy of Ireland also. A man he was of
prodigious Parts, which he made use of at the first in favor of the Popular
Faction: But being gained unto the King by Sir Ri. Weston then Chancellor of
the Exchequer, (afterward Lord Treasurer and Earl of Portland) he became the
most devout friend of the Church, the greatest Zelot for advancing
Monarchichall Interesse, and the ablest Minister of State which our Histories
have afforded to us.

On the judgment of these two his Majesty did much rely in Civil matters, as
he did on the advice of Doctor Neile then Bishop of Durham, and Doctor Laud
then Bishop of Bath and Wells, in matters which concerned the Church. These
last he had called unto his Council in the beginning of April 1627. and finding
them to be of as great abilities to advise, as sincere affections to his
person; he advanced the first to the Sea of Winchester, and afterward to the
Archbishopric of York, Anno 1631. the second to the Sea of London, and from
thence to Canterbury, Anno 1633.

1629.
But whilst it was such hot weather at home, it grew cold abroad, the breach
betwixt him and France being closed up at the same time, by the prudent and
seasonable intervention of the State of Venice. And not long after he concluded
a Peace also with the King of Spain, all things being left on both sides in the
same condition in which they were before the war, but that the Spaniard did
engage that he would make use of all his Interest with the Emperor, for
restoring the Prince Elector Pa^^^ine to his lost Estate.

And now the King having thrown away his Crutches (which had as often deceived
him as he trusted to them) he began to stand on his own legs, and in short time
became more considerable in the eyes of the world then any of his Predecessors.
The Spaniard sent hither yearly in English Bottoms no less then six hundred
thousand Crowns in Bullion, for the use of his Army in the Netherlands,
redounding very much to the Kings benefit in the coinage, and no less to the
profit of the Merchants also, most of the money being returned into Flanders in
Leather, Cloth, Lead, Tin, and other the manufactures and Native Commodities
of this Kingdom. The Dutch and Easterlings look upon London as the safest
Bank, not only to lodge, but increase their Treasure; so that in short time
the greatest part of the Trade of Christendom was driven up the Thames.

1630.
To make him yet more estimable in the sight of his People, God blessed him with
a Son, the presumptive Heir of his Dominions, on the twenty ninth of May, Anno
1630. and seconded that blessing with the birth of a Daughter on the fourth of
November, in the next year after, as afterward with a plentiful issue of both
Sexes.

1633.
Nor did he meet with any check in his Prosperity till the year 1633. at what
time the Coals of Faction and Sedition, which seemed for some years to have
been raked up in the ashes of contentment, kindled the next combustible matter
and brake forth again to the inflaming of both Kingdoms. Scotland burns
first, and takes fire on this occasion.

In the minority of King James, the Lands of all Cathedral Churches and
Religious Houses which had been settled on the Crown by Act of Parliament, were
shared amongst the Lords and great men of that Kingdom, (by the connivence of
the Earl of Murray, and some other of the Regents) to make them sure unto the
side. And they being thus possessed of the said Lands, with the Regalities and
Tithes belonging to those Ecclesiastical Corporations, Lorded it with pride
and insolence enough i^ their several Territories, holding the Clergy to small
stipends, and the poor Paisant under a miserable vassalage, and subjection to
them.

King Charles engaged in War at his first coming to the Crown, and having
little aid from thence for the maintenance of it, by the advice of his Council
of that Kingdom, was put upon a course of resuming those Lands, Tithes and
Regalities into his own hands, to which the present Occupants could pretend no
other Title then the unjust usurpation of their Ancestors. This he endeavored,
first by an Act of Revocation, but that course not being like to speed, he
followed it in the way of a legal process, which drew on the Commission for
surrendering of Superiorities and Tithes, to be retaken from the King on such
conditions, as might bring some profit to the Crown, some Augmentation to the
Clergy, and far more ease and benefit to the common people. But these proud
Scots choose rather to expose their Country to the danger of a public Ruin,
then to part with any of that power (it might be called a Tyranny rather) which
they had exercised on their Vassals, as they commonly called them; and
thereupon conspired together to oppose the King in any thing that should be
offered in the following Parliament, which had relation to the Church or to
Church-affaires.

But because Religion and the care thereof, is commonly the best bait to catch
the vulgar, they must find out some other means to divert the King from the
prosecuting of that Commission; then the consideration of their own personal
and private interesse; and they found means to do it on another occasion, which
was briefly this.

King James from his first coming to this Crown, had a design to bring the Kirk
of Scotland to an uniformity with the Church of England, both in government and
forms of worship. And he proceeded so far as to settle Episcopacy amongst them,
naming thirteen new Bishops for so many Episcopal Sees as had been anciently in
that Church; three of which received Consecration from the Bishops of England,
and conferred it on the rest of their Brethren at their coming home. Which
Bishops he armed also with the power of an High Commission, the better to keep
down the insolent and domineering Spirit of the Presbyterians. In order to the
other, he procured an Act to be passed in the Assembly at Aberdeen, Anno 1616.
for composing a Liturgy, and extracting a new book of Canons out of the
scattered Acts of their old Assemblies. At the Assembly held at Perth, Anno
1618. he obtained an Order for receiving the Communion kneeling, for
administering Baptism and the Lords Supper in private Houses, in cases of
extreme necessity, for Episcopal confirmation; and finally, for the
celebrating the Anniversaries of our Saviors Birth, his Passion, Resurrection
and Ascension, and the coming down of the Holy Ghost. All which he got to be
confirmed in the following Parliament.

So far that wise King had advanced the work of Uniformity, before his engaging
in the Cause of the Palatinate. His Breach with Spain, and the War which did
ensue upon it took off his thoughts from prosecuting that design, which his
son, being more entangled in Wars abroad and Distempers at home, had no time to
finish till he had settled his Affairs, and attained to some measure both of
Power and Glory. But being it was a business which was to be acted leisurely
and by degrees, not all at once, he first resolved upon passing of an Act of
Ratification of all that had been done by his Father, and then to go in hand
with the introducing of a public Liturgy. In the effecting whereof, at such a
time as he went into Scotland to receive that unfortunate Crown, he found a
stronger opposition in the Parliament of that Kingdom also, about the passing
of that Act of Ratification, then he had reason to expect: But carried it at
last by a far major part of that Assembly.

This gave him the fist taste of their disaffection to his Person and
Government; but he went forward notwithstanding in pursuit of those purposes,
which he brought thither with him. For not long after his return into England,
he gave order to the Dean of his Chapel Royal in Edinburgh that Prayers be
read therein according to the English Liturgy; that a Communion be had every
month, and all Communicants to receive the Sacrament on their knees; that he
who officiated, if he be a Bishop, perform it in his Rochet and other
Episcopal Robes; and that he do it in his Surplice, if a common Presbyter; and
finally, that not only the Lords of the Council, but the Lords of the Session,
and as many of the principal Magistrates of that City also as could
conveniently, fail not of their attending the Divine Service there on Sundays
and Holy Days: For by this means he gave himself no improbable hopes, that the
English Liturgy passing a probationership in the Chapel Royal, might find a
plausible entertainment in the Churches of Edinburgh, and be received by
degrees in all the rest of the Kingdom.

But the Presbyterian Scots not ignorant of the Kings intentions, insinuated
into the minds of the common People, that this was a design only to subject
that pure Kirk to the superstitious Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of
England, and therefore that it did behove them to stand together as one man to
oppose their entrance.

The Lords and Gentry of that Realm, who feared nothing so much as the
Commission of Surrendries before mentioned, laid hold on this occasion also:
And they being seconded by some male-contented spirits of that Nation, who had
not found the King to be as prodigal of his favors to them as his Father had
been before, endeavored to possess them with Fears and Jealousies, that
Scotland was to be reduced to the form of a Province, and governed by a Deputy
or Lord Lieutenant, as Ireland was. The like done also by some Lords of Secret
Council, who before had governed as they listed, and thought their power
diminished and their persons under some neglect, by the placing of a Lord
President over them to direct in chief.

So that the people generally being fooled into this opinion, that both their
Christian and Civil Liberty were in no small danger, became capable of any
impression which the Presbyterian Faction could imprint upon them. Which
visibly appeared by a virulent and seditious Libel, published in the year 1634.
wherein the King was not only charged with altering the Government of that
Kingdom, but traduced for very strong inclinations to the Religion of the
Church of Rome. The chief Abettor whereof (for the Author was not to be found)
was the Lord Balmerino, for which he was legally convicted and condemned of
treason but pardoned by the Kings great goodness, and by that pardon kept
alive for the mischiefs following.

The fire thus breaking out in Scotland, it was no marvel if it had laid hold
on England also, the Puritans of both Nations working themselves about this
time into a Body, and from henceforth communicating their Counsels and designs
unto one another.

The King not long after his return thought fit to renew his Fathers
Declaration about lawful sports on the Lords Day, the principal motives
whereunto were, the increase of Popery in some parts of the Kingdom,
occasioned by interdicting all honest Recreations on that day, and the rest of
the Holidays; the tendency of the Sabbatarian Doctrine to downright Judaisme;
some orders made by some public Ministers of Justice, for suppressing the
Annual Feasts of the Dedication of Churches, commonly called Wakes; and
finally, the bringing of Dancing, Running, shooting and other harmless
Recreations, within the compass of the Statute made in the first Parliament of
his Reign against all unlawful exercises and pastimes; in which no such thing
was ever intended. And though the Kings intention in it was only to ease the
people from that yoke of superstition which many of their Preachers had laid
upon them; yet by the practice of those Preachers, it made more noise among the
People, and wakened more to appear in defense of that which they call Religion,
then all the Geese in the Capitol.

Nor did His Majesty speed much better in another of his pious intentions,
concerning the Conformity of Parochial Churches to their Mother Cathedrals.
The Dean and Chapter of S. Paul's (as Ordinaries of the place) had appointed the
Communion Table in St. Gregory's Church to be placed Altar-wise at the end of
the Chancel, where it had stood (and by her injunctions ought to stand) in Q.
Elizabeth's time. Against this some of the parishioners appealed to the Dean of
the Arches, and the Dean and Chapter to the King. The cause being heard before
His Majesty and the Lords of the Council on the third of November, Anno 162^.
it pleased his Majesty, having first showed his dislike of all Innovations, to
declare that he well approved and confirmed the Act of the said Ordinary, and
also gave commandment, that if those few parishioners before mentioned, do
proceed in their said Appeal, then the Dean of the Arches (who was then
attending at the hearing of the Cause) shall confirm the said Order of the
aforesaid Dean and Chapter. On this encouragement the Archbishop of Canterbury
in his Metropoliticall Visitation, beginning in the year next following, and
the Suffragan Bishops in their several and respective Diocesses, did appoint
the like, for the avoiding of those frequent inconveniences and prophanations
which that sacred Table had formerly been exposed unto.

This made the Puritan Faction open wider then before they did, as foolishly
afraid of the breaking in of Superstition, by this last Declaration, as of
Profaneness by the other. And that they might keep peace with the Scots in
all particulars, they dispersed many scandalous and seditious Libels against
the Governors of the Church, and all that acted by and under their Authority,
not sparing the king himself if he came in their way; most certain tokens and
prognostics of those great Combustions which soon after followed in both
Kingdoms.

1634.
Nor were there any less Apprehensions infused into them by some zealous
Patriots, who most ambitiously affected the Title of (...), in the Orators
language, the professed Champions of the Property and Liberty of the English
Nation; the occasion this: The Sovereignty of the narrow Seas, had not only
been invaded by the Hollanders during the late troubles both at home and
abroad; but that invasion had been justified in some public writings. And
thereupon, by the Advice of Mr. Noy his Attorney General, he issued certain
writs in the tenth year of his Reign, Anno 1634. directed to all the Port Towns
of the Kingdom, to set out a certain number of ships furnished with Mariners.
Ammunition, Victuals, and all other necessaries, for defense of the Realm;
which Writs he afterward extended also to the inland Counties, following
therein the examples of his Predecessors, in which none was better able to
instruct him, then he that gave him that Advice. By means whereof he did not
only recover that Dominion, which belonged to him on the Sea, but very much
improved and enricht the Land, as before is said. Which notwithstanding, some
of the discontented members of the former Parliament, and others of the same
party, under color of standing in defense of the Rights and Properties of the
Subject, did stubbornly oppose the payment of that imposition, in which the
Honor, Wealth, and Happiness of this Kingdom was so much concerned. And
though the King had the opinion of all the Judges, under their hands to
justify his proceedings in it; yet chose he rather to proceed against them in
a legal way, then to make use of any arbitrary power, or the opinion of the
Judges, which extra judicially had been given in the case. And so well did he
prosper in it, that when it came to be argued in the Exchequer-Chamber, of the
twelve Judges, ten absolutely declared themselves for the lawfulness of it;
the other two (being Crook and Hutton) dissenting openly from that opinion, to
which they had formerly subscribed* So that here being a mixture also both of
Christian and Civil Liberties, which were given out to be in danger; it is no
marvel if the Faction in both Nations did conspire together, to disturb the
peace and happiness of this flourishing Kingdom.

1637.
The ground thus laid, it was thought fit the first part of the Tragedy should
be played in Scotland. The Bishops of that Church, though they liked well enough
of the English Liturgy, desired a Liturgy of their own, for fear of
acknowledging some dependency of that Church on this; which being composed
amongst themselves, and approved by some of the English Prelates, to whom his
Majesty referred the perusal of it, was recommended to the Scots for the use
of that Church, and the twenty third day of July, Anno 1637. appointed for the
first exercise and reading of it: on this occasion followed the sedition at
Edinburgh, encouraged underhand by the Marquess of Hamilton, the Earls of
Roxborow and Traquair, and many other of the Kings false servants, both in
Court and Council.

This sedition afterward brake out into open Action, the principal Sticklers
against the Book of Common Prayer, and the Kings proceedings in the same,
engaging the whole Nation in a solemn Covenant for the Extirpation of
Episcopacy, and whatsoever they were pleased to comprehend under the general
Names of Heresy and Superstition, in which not only the five Articles of
Perth, but the whole Common Prayer Book was intended by them. And that they
might be sure to keep their party together, they bound themselves in the said
Covenant, to stand to one another in pursuance and defense thereof, against all
manner of persons whatsoever, the King himself not being excepted. And though
the King, by the persuasion of Hamilton here, and his untrusty servants there,
gave order for the suppressing of that Liturgy, the High Commission, the book
of Canons, and even the Articles of Perth, though confirmed in Parliament, yet
nothing could content their pride and insolency, but the utter abolishing of
Episcopal government: which since they found the King resolved not to yield
unto, they were resolved to do it without him; in their Assembly held at
Glasco, abolishing the Episcopal Order, and thundering their Anathema's and
excommunications, not only against the Bishops themselves, but all such as
adhered unto them. And that they might be beforehand with him, they
intercepted his Revenews, surprised all his Forts and Castles, and finally put
themselves into open Arms.

1639.
This forced the King to set forth against them, accompanied with an Army
Royal, and furnished with such a gallant Company of Lords and Gentlemen, as
might assure him of a cheap and easy victory. But he conceiving that the
terror of his coming would reduce the Scots to obedience without blows or
bloodshed, resolved in himself not to out-go Muster and Ostentation; and
thereupon was very easily entreated to refer all differences between them to
certain Commissioners of both Kingdoms.

By their negotiation a general Accord was made at Barwick on the seventeenth
of June Anno 1639. upon which the King presently disbanded his Forces, and
returned toward London, having effected nothing by his chargeable expedition,
but his making the Scots more insolent then before they were, and giving them a
greater Reputation in the eye of the world then before they had; of which he
became assured and sensible when it was too late.

For no sooner had he disbanded his Army, but the Pacification (such as it was)
was openly protested against in the Scots Army; and many false copies of it
were scattered abroad, to make it more dishonorable to the King, and of more
advantage to themselves. The Officers of their Army were retained in pay, the
old form of holding Parliaments in that Kingdom was altered by them, and the
prerogatives of the Crown invaded; their words and actions tending to a more
general Defection then before. So that the King was fain call home his
Sheat-Anchor the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, whom not long after he created
Earl of Strafford, in the County of York. By whose advice, seconded by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, his Majesty about the beginning of December gave a
public intimation of a Parliament, to begin on the thirteenth day of April
then next following.

And it was intimated so long beforehand for these two reasons. First, that the
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland might in the mean time hold a Parliament in that
Kingdom, which he did, and managed so much to the Kings advantage, that an
Army of 8000 Horse and Foot was speedily raised, and money granted by the
Parliament to keep them in pay, and furnish them with Ammunition, Arms, and all
other necessaries. Secondly, that by the Reputation of a following Parliament,
he might be the better enabled to borrow money for the carrying on of the war,
in case the Parliament should fail him, as it after did. For being come
together at the time appointed, instead of Acting any thing in order to his
Majesty's service, they were at the point of passing a Vote for blasting his
war against the Scots To prevent which his Majesty was forced to dissolve them
on the fifth of May, the Convocation still continuing, who granted him a
Benevolence of four shillings in the pound for all their Ecclesiastical
promotions, to be paid six years together then next ensuing.

The Members of the dissolved Parliament inflamed the people in all parts of
the Kingdom with such discontentments, which actually brake out in Southwark
into open sedition, not pacified without much danger, and the executing of the
principal Leader. In the middle of which Distempers his Majesty was blessed with
a third Son, born on the eight of July, Christened by the name of Henry, and by
his Majesty's command called Duke of Gloucester.

1640.
To welcome this young Prince into the world, the Scots put themselves into
Arms again, and backed by a strong faction here, thought that they could not do
enough by standing on their defense at home, unless they entered England also,
as they did accordingly. But they took not his Majesty unprovided, who had
raised another gallant Army under the command of the Earl of Northumberland, as
chief General, and the Earl of Strafford as the chief Commander under him;
himself with all speed posting toward the North, as soon as the News of this
invasion had been brought unto him. But scarce was he well settled in the head
of his Army, but he was followed by a Petition from some Lords of England,
conformable in the main points of it to a Declaration of the Scots, which they
called the Intention of their Army. So that the Cloud which gathered behind him
in the South, threatened more danger to him then the Northern Tempest, which
blew directly in his teeth.

Sailing thus between Scylla and Charybdis, it concerned him to steer as even a
course as he could, and thereupon he summoned the great Council of his Peers to
attend him at York, that doing nothing in this great business without their
advice, he might give himself the better hopes of their assistance, as his
occasions should require. By their advice Commissioners are appointed to treat
with the Scots, to understand their Grievances, the reasonableness or
unreasonablenesse of their Demands, and finally to make up the breach by such
an Accommodation as might conduce to the peace and happiness of both
Kingdoms, and his Majesty's honor.

In the mean time he calls a Parliament, to begin at Westminster the third day
of November then next following, which if it had been held at York, as lying
nearest to the danger and Scene of action, might not have proved so fatal and
destructive to him as it after did.

In the beginning of this Parliament, he cast himself on the love and loyalty
of his English Subjects, in which he found himself deceived of his expectation.
For the first thing they did, was to deprive him of the Counsels of the Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, and the Archbishop of Canterbury, and thereby to
terrify all others from adhering to him in the times of his greatest need.
These they impeacht of High Treason, removed them from the House of Peers, and
committed them to the Tower of London, where the Archbishop staid four years
before any particular charge, or any prosecution upon that charge, was brought
against him. But with the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland they made quicker work,
inviting the People of all the three Kingdoms to bring them in such matter as
they had or could devise against him; and having made all things ready for a
public Trial, they brought him to the Bar before the Peers, sitting in
Westminster Hall on the sixth of April then next following; but he so
rationally pleaded in his own behalf, and so fully satisfied all objections
which were made against him, that the Commons were fain to desist from the
Course which they had begun, and to proceed against him in a Bill of Attainder.

For the better passing whereof the Commons framed a Protestation on the third
of May, in many things not unlike the Scottish Covenant before mentioned, by
which they bound themselves among other things, to maintain and defend the
Power and Privileges of Parliament, the lawful Rights and Liberties of the
Subject, to endeavor to bring to condign punishment all such as shall either
by Force, Practice, Plots, Counsels and Conspiracies, or otherwise, do any
thing to the contrary; (amongst which they reckon the Earl of Strafford to be
one) and finally to stand unto one another, and to every other person
whatsoever in any thing he shall do in pursuance of the said Protestation.
Which Protestation being first taken by themselves, was the next day taken also
by the House of Peers, and not long after obtruded on all the rest of the
Kingdom.

But not finding this sufficient to effect their purpose, they first forced the
Lords by Tumults, and afterward the King by their importunities to pass that
unhappy Bill of Attainder; which having obtained, they brought him to the
Scaffold on Tower Hill on the thirteenth of May, where with as much Christian
confidence and magnanimity as could be expressed by flesh and blood, he delivered
up his neck to the Executioner.

In order to this great work which they knew the Scots much labored for, and
had declared so much in a Pamphlet called The intentions of their Army, at
their first coming into England, the leading men in the house of Commons held a
strict correspondency with the Scots Commissioners then residing in London, and
voted no less then three hundred thousand pounds (by the name of a brotherly
Assistance) to be given to the Scots in general, under color of repairing
such damages as they had sustained in the time of this breach, but in plain
truth to bind them fast unto themselves. And having made sure work with them,
they deprived the King by little and little of almost all the ancient and
undoubted prerogatives which of right belonged unto his Crown.

The power of calling Parliaments, in case of his neglect or refusal, is put
into the hands of Sheriffs and Constables; his right to Tonnage and Poundage
must be disclaimed by Act of Parliament; the Bill of the Attainder of the Earl
of Strafford, and that for the continuance of this Parliament during the
pleasure of the Houses, are extorted by tumults. And by the terror of the
like, the Act for Knighthood is repealed, and the imposition for ship money
condemned as an illegal Tax, and abolished also. The like Acts passed against
the office of the Clerk of the Market, the Court of Stanneries, his propriety
in the making of Gunpowder, the authority of the Council Table, the Courts of
Star Chamber and High Commission, the jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical
Courts, as also the Presidiall Courts held for a long time in York and the
Marches of Wales. And finally, that he might lose both his strength in
Parliament, and his power with the People, they extorted the passing of two
Acts, the one for taking away the Bishops Votes and place in the House of
Peers, the other for disclaiming of his power in pressing Soldiers (enjoyed by
all his Predecessors) for defense of his Person and the Realm.

And that they might the better awe the King to their Concessions, the Army of
the Scots must be maintained with pay and plunder, till there was almost
nothing left for them to crave, or the King to grant. But being at the last
sent home, his Majesty followed not long after to settle his affairs in that
broken kingdom; where to oblige that Nation to him, he confirmed not only all
his former concessions by Act of Parliament, but all such things also as had
been acted by them in their Assembly held at Glasco. And more then so, he
parted with so much of his Eoyall Prerogative (invaded and usurped by them in
the late Confusions) that he had almost nothing left remaining to him, but the
empty title, the having of a Sword carried before him, and some other outward
pomps of Court, which signify just nothing when the power is gone.

This good success of the Scots encouraged the Irish Papists to attempt the
like, and to attempt it in the same way as the Scots had gone; that is to say,
by seizing his Towns, Forts, and Castles, putting themselves into the body of
an Army, banishing or imprisoning all such as oppose their practices, and then
petitioning the King for a public Exercise of their Religion. The 23. of
October Anno 1641. was the day designed for the seizing of the City and Castle
of Dublin, and many places of great importance in the Kingdom. But failing in
the main design which had been discovered the night before by one Ocanelle,
they break out into open arms, dealing no better with the Protestants there
then the Covenanters had done with the Royal party in Scotland,

Of this Rebellion (for it must be called a Rebellion in the Irish, though not
in the Scots) the King gives present notice to his Houses of Parliament,
requiring their counsel and assistance for the extinguishing of that flame
before it had wasted and consumed that Kingdom. But neither the necessity of
the Protestants there, nor the Kings importunity here, could persuade them to
levy one man toward the suppression of those Rebels, till the King had
disclaimed his power of pressing soldiers in an Act of Parliament, and thereby
laid himself open to such acts of violence as were then hammering against him.
Which having done, they put an army of Scots (their most assured Friends) into
the Northern parts of Ireland, delivering up into their hands the strong Town
and Port of Carickfergus, one of the chief keys of that Kingdom; and afterward
sent a small body of English to preserve the South, which English forces having
done notable service there against the Rebels, were kept so short both in
respect of pay and other necessaries by the Houses of Parliament, (who had made
use of the money raised for the relief of Ireland to maintain a War against
their King) that they were forced to come to a Cessation, and cheerfully
returned home again to assist the King in that just War which he had undertaken
for his own defense. The ground and occasion of which War we are next to show.

At such time as he was in Scotland and expostulated with some of the chiefs
among them, touching their coming into England in an hostile manner, he found
that some who were now leading men in the Houses of Parliament had invited them
to it. And having furnished himself with some proofs for it, he commanded his
Attorney General to impeach some of them of high Treason; that is to say, the
L. Kimbolton, a Member of the House of Peers, Mr. Hollis, Sir Arthur Haslerig,
Mr. Hambden, Mr. Pym, and Mr. Strode, of the House of Commons. But sending his
Sergeant at Arms to arrest their persons, there came a countermand from the
House of Commons, by which the Sergeant was deterred from doing his office, and
the Members had the opportunity of putting themselves into the Sanctuary of the
City. The next day, being the 4. of January, his Majesty being no otherwise
attended then with his ordinary Guard, went to the House of Commons to demand
the five Members of that House, that he might proceed against them in a way of
justice; but his intention was discovered, and the birds flown before his
coming.

This was voted by the Commons for such an inexpiable breach of privilege,
that neither the Kings qualifying of that Action, nor his desisting from the
prosecution of that impeachment, nor any thing that he could either say or do,
would give satisfaction. Nothing must satisfy their jealousies and secure
their fears, but the putting of the tower of London into their hands, together
with the command of the Royal Navy, as also all the Forts, Castles, and the
Trainbands of the Kingdom, all comprehended under the name of the Militia;
which if his Majesty would fling after all the rest, they would continue his
most loyal subjects. On this the King demurs a while, but having shipped the
Queen for Holland, and got the Prince into his own power, he becomes more
resolute, and stoutly holds on the denial.

Finding the Members too strong for him, and London, by reason of the
continual Tumults, to be a dangerous neighbor to him, he withdraws to York,
that being in a place of safety, he might the better find a way to compose
those differences which now began to embroil the kingdom. At Hull he had a
Magazine of arms and ammunition provided for the late intended war against the
Scots, and laid up there when the occasion of that War was taken away. Of this
Town he intended to possess himself, and to make use of his own Arms and
Ammunition for his own preservation; but coming before the gates of the Town,
he was denied entrance by Sir John Hotham, who by the appointment of the House
of Commons had took charge of that place.

The Gentry of Yorkshire who had petitioned the King to secure that Magazin,
became hereby more firmly united to him. The like had been done also by the
Yeomandry, and those of the inferior sort, if his proceedings had not been
undermined by the Committee of four Gentlemen, all Members of the House, and
all of them Natives of that Country, sent thither purposely (in a new and
unprecedent, way) to lie as Spies upon his Counsels, and as controllers to his
actions.

Some Messages there were betwixt him and the Houses of Parliament, concerning
the attoning of these differences, whilst he was at York. But the XIX
Propositions sent thither to him, did declare sufficiently that there was no
peace to be expected on his part, unless he had made himself a cipher, a thing
of no signification in the Arithmetic of State.

And now the War begins to open. The Parliament had their Guards already, and
the Affront which Hotham had put upon his Majesty at Hull, prompted the
Gentlemen of Yorkshire to tender themselves for a Guard to his Person. This
presently voted by both Houses to be a leavying of War against the Parliament,
for whose defense, not only the Train-bands of London must be in readiness,
and the good people of the country required to put themselves into a posture
of arms; but Regiments of Horse and Foot are listed, a General appointed,
great sums of Money raised, and all this under pretense of taking the King
out of the hands of his evil Counselors.

The noise of these preparations hastens the King from York to Notingham,
where he sets up his Standard, inviting all his good Subjects to repair unto
him, for defense of their King, the Laws and Religion of their Country. He
increased his Forces as he marched, which could not come unto the reputation of
an Army, till he came into Shropshire, where great bodies of the loyal and
stout-hearted Welsh resorted to him.

Strengthened with these, and furnished sufficiently with Field Pieces, Arms
and Ammunition, which the Queen had sent to him out of Holland, he resolves
upon his march toward London; but on Sunday the twenty third of October was
encountered in the way, at a place called Edgehill, by the Parliament Forces.
The Fight very terrible for the time, no fewer then five thousand men slain
upon the place; the Prologue to a greater slaughter, if the dark night had not
put an end unto that dispute.

Each part pretended to the victory, but it went clearly on the Kings side, who
though he lost his General, yet he kept the Field, and possessed himself of
the dead bodies; and not so only, but he made his way open unto London, and ^n
his way forced Banbury Castle, in the very sight as it were of the Earl of
Essex, who with his flying Army made all the haste he could toward the City
(that ^e might be there before the King) to ^ecure the Parliament. More certain
^gns there could not be of an absolute ^ictory.

In the Battle of Taro, between the Con^derates of Italy and Charles the eight
^f France, it happened so that the Confederates kept the Field, possessed
themselves of the Camp, Baggage and Artillery, which the French in their
breaking through had left behind them. Hereupon a dispute was raised, to whom
the Honor of that day did of right belong; which all knowing and impartial
men gave unto the French For though they lost the Field, their Camp, Artillery
and Baggage, yet they obtained what they fought for, which was the opening of
their way to France, and which the Confederates did intend to deprive them of.
Which resolution in that case may be a ruling case to this; the King having not
only kept the Field, posse^^ himself of the dead bodies, pillaged the car^iages
of the enemy, but forci^^y op^^e^ his way toward London, which the enemy
endeavored to hinder, and finally entered triumphantly into Oxford, with no
fewer then a^ hundred and twenty Colors taken in the Fig^^.

Having assured himself of Oxford for his Winter Quarters, he resolved on hi^
Advance toward London, but had made so many halts in the way, that Essex was
got thither before him; who had disposed of his Forces at Kingston, Brentford,
Acton, and some other places there abouts, not only to stop his march, but to
fall upon him in the Rear, as occasion served. Yet he goes forward
notwithstanding as far as Brentford, out of which he beats two of their best
Regiments, takes five hundred Prisoners, sinks their Ordnance, with an intent
to march forwards on the morrow after being Sunday, and the thirteenth of
November. But understanding that the Earl of Essex had drawn his Forces out of
Kingston, and joining with the London Auxiliaries, lay in the way before him at
a place called Turnham-Green near Cheswick, it was thought safer to retreat
toward Oxford while the way was open, then to venture his Army to the fortune
of a second Battle, which if it were lost ^t would be utterly impossible for
him ^o raise another.

At Oxford he receives Propositions of peace from the Houses of Parliament, but
such as rather did beseem a conquering then a losing side. But being resolved
to treat upon them howsoever, he found the Commissioners so straightened in time,
and so tied to such particular instructions as the Houses had given them, that
nothing could be yielded to which might conduce to the composing of the present
Distempers.

At the opening of the Spring, the Queen came to him, who had landed at a place
in Yorkshire called Burlington-Bay in the end of February, and now brought
with her unto Oxford some supplies of men with a considerable stock of Powder,
Arms, and Ammunition.

1643.
The next Summer makes him master of the North and West, some few places only
being excepted. The Earl of New Castle with his Northern Army had cleared all
parts beyond Trent (but the Town of Hull) of the enemies Forces. And with his
own Army under the command of Prince Rupert, and Prince Maurice (two of the
younger Sons of his Sister Elizabeth Queen of Bohemia) he reduced the Cities of
Bristol, and Exeter, the Port Town of Waymouth, and all the Towns of any
importance in the Western parts, except Pool, Lime and Plymouth. So that he was
in a manner the absolute Commander of the Counties of Wilts, Dorset, Somerset,
Devon, and Cornwall. And though the Towns of Plymouth, Lime, and Pool still
held out against him, yet were they so bridled by his neighboring Garrisons,
that they were not able to create him any great Disturbance.

The noise of these successes was so loud at London, that most of the leading
men in both Houses of Parliament prepared for quitting of the Kingdom, and had
undoubtedly so done, if the King had followed his good fortunes, and advanced
toward London. But unhappily diverting upon Gloucester, he lay so long there,
without doing any thing to the purpose, that the Earl of Essex came time enough
to raise the Siege and relieve the Town, though he made not have enough to
recover London without blows. For besides some skirmishes on the by, which
fell out to his loss, the King with the whole body of his Army overtook him at
Newberry, where after a sharp fight (with the loss of the Earl of Carnarvon,
the Earl of Sunderland, and the Lord Viscount Falkland on his Majesty's side)
he had the worst of the day, and had much ado to save his Canon, and march off
orderly from the place; followed so hotly the next morning* that his own Horse,
which were in the Reere, were fain to make their way over a great part of his
Foot, to preserve themselves.

Being returned to Oxford with Success and Honor, he Summons the Lords and
Commons of Parliament to attend there on the twenty second day of January then
next following; and they came accordingly. And for their better welcome* he
advances Prince Rupert to the Titles of Earl of Holdernes and Duke of
Cumberland, and creates James his second Son (born the Thirteenth day of
October, Anno 1633) Duke of York, by which name he had been appointed to be
called at the time of his Birth, that they might sit and vote amongst them. But
being come, they neither would take upon themselves the name of a Parliament,
nor acted much in order to his Majesty's designs; but stood so much upon their
terms, and made so many unhandsome motions to him upon all occasions, that he
had more reason to call them a Morgrel Parliament in one of his Letters to the
Queen, then they were willing to allow of.

1644.
And now the Summer coming on, and the time fit for Action, he dismisses them
to their several dwellings, and betakes himself unto the Field. The frequent
traverses whereof, the interchangeable taking and losing of Towns by the chance
of war, are too many in number to be comprised in this short Abstract. It must
suffice if I take notice of those only which are most considerable.

His Majesty prevaling in the North and West, 'Twas thought fit by the ruling
party in the Houses of Parliament, to crave aid of the Scots, whom they drew in
the second time, by the temptations of entering into Covenant with them, for
conforming of this Church with that, sharing amongst them all the Lands of the
Bishops, and sacrificing to their malice the Archbishop of Canterbury, as
formerly they had done the Earl of Strafford* But besides these plausible
allurements, the Commissioners of that Kingdom were to have so great a stroke
in the Government of this, that the Houses could act nothing in order to the
present war, no, not so much as to hold a Treaty with the King, without their
consent.

Upon these baits they entered England with a puissant Army consisting of one
and twenty thousand men well armed, and fitted for the service: and having made
themselves Masters of Barwick, Alnwick, and all other places of importance on
the other side of the Tweed, they laid Siege to York, where they were seconded
by the Army of the Earl of Manchester drawn out of the associated Counties, and
the remaining Yorkshire forces under the Command of the Lord Fairfax.

The news whereof being brought to Oxford, Prince Rupert is dispatched with as
much of the Kings forces as could well be spared, with a Commission to ^aise
more out of the Counties of Che^ter, Salop, Stafford, Darby, Leicester, and
Lancaster. So that he came before York with an Army of twelve thousand Men,
relieved the Town with all things necessary, and might have gone away unfought
with, but that such Counsel was too cold for so hot a stomach. Resolved upon
the onset, he encountered with the enemy at a place called Marston-Moor, where
the left Wing of his Hor^e gave such a fierce Charge on the right Wing of the
enemy, consisting of Sir Thomas Fairfax his Horse in the Van, and the Scots
Horse in the Reere, that they fell foul on that part of their own Foot which
was made up of the Lord Fairfax his Regiments, and a reserve of the Scots,
which they brake wholly, and trod most of them under their Horses feet. But the
Princes Horse following the execution too far, and none advancing to make good
the place which they had left, the enemy had the opportunity to rally again,
and got the better of the day; taking some Prisoners of good note, and making
themselves masters of his Canon. So that not being able to do any thing in
order to the regaining of the Field, he marched off ingloriously, squandred
away the greatest part of his Army, and retired to Bristol.

After this blow the Affairs of the North growing more desperate every day then
other, York yielded upon composition on the sixteenth of July (being a just
fortnight after the fight) the Marquess of Newcastle and some principal
Gentlemen past over the Seas, and the strong Town of Newcastle was taken by the
Scots on the nineteenth of October following.

In the mean time, the Queen being with child, began to draw near the time of
her Delivery. And it was generally believed that the Earl of Essex with his
Forces had some aim on Oxford, as the Seat Royal of the King, the Residence of
his Court and Council, and the Sanctuary of a considerable part of the
Nobility, Gentry and Clergy. In which respect it was thought fit that the Queen
should remove to Exceter, as a place more remote from danger, and not far from
the Sea, by which she might take shipping for France as occasion served.

On the sixteenth of April she began her journey, the King bearing her company
as far as Abingdon, where they took leave of one another, neither of them
having any the least presage, that the parting Kiss which they then took was
to be their last. Convoi'd with a sufficient strength of Horse for her security
on the way, she was received there with as much magnificence as that City was
able to express; and on the sixteenth day of June was safely delivered of a
Daughter, whom she Christened by the name of Henrietta.

As Soon as she had well passed over the weaknesses and infirmities incident to
Childbed, she committed the young Princess to the Lady Dalkeith, a Daughter
of Sir Edward Villiers, one of the half Brothers of the Duke of Buckingham, and
wife unto the Lord Dalkeith, the eldest Son of the Earl of Morton. Which having
done (according to some instructions which she had received from the King) she
took shipping at Pendennis Castle on the fifteenth of July, and passed into
France, there to negotiate for some supplies of money, Arms and Ammunition for
the advance of his Majesty's service, and to continue howsoever in the Court of
the King her Brother, till she might return again in Honor and safety.

And to say truth, her Removal from Oxford was not only seasonable, but
exceeding necessary at that time, the Earl of Essex, and Sir William W^ller
with their several Forces not long after her departure drawing near to Oxford;
on whose approach his Majesty leaving the greatest part of his Army for defense
of that place, marched on directly toward Wales. Upon the News whereof, it was
thought fit by the two Generals, to divide their Armies; it being agreed upon
that Sir William Waller should pursue the King, and that the Earl of Essex
should march toward the West, for the regaining of those Countries.

And now the mystery of iniquity appeared in its proper colors: For whereas it
was formerly given out by the Houses of Parliament, that they had undertaken
the war, for no other reason, but to remove the King from his evil
Counselors: those evil Counselors were left at Oxford unmolested, and the
Kings Person only hunted.

But the King understanding of this division, thought himself able enough to
deal with Waller, and giving him the go by, returned toward Oxford, drew
thence the remainder of his Army, and gave him a sharp meeting at a place
called Cropredy bridge, where he obtained a signal victory on the twenty eighth
of June, and entered triumphantly into Oxford. This done he marched after the
Earl of Essex, who had made himself master of some places in the West of good
importance.

During this march, it happened that one of the Carriages brake in a long
narrow lane which they were to pass, and gave His Majesty a stop at a time of
an intolerable shower of rain which fell upon him: Some of his Courtiers, and
others which were near about him, offered to hew him out a way through the
hedges with their swords, that he might get shelter in some of the Villages
adjoining; but he resolved not to forsake his Canon upon any occasion. At which
when some about him seemed to admire, and marvelled at the patience which he
showed in that extremity, His Majesty lifting up his Hat, made answer, That as
God had given him Afflictions to exercise his patience, so he had given him
patience to bear his Afflictions. A speech so heavenly and Divine, that it is
hardly to be paralelled by any of the men of God in all the Scripture.

The carriage being mended, he went forward again, and trod so close upon the
heels of the Earl of Essex, that at last he drove him into Cornwell, and there
reduced him to that point, that he put himself into a Cock-boat with Sir Philip
Stapleton and some others, and left his whole army to his Majesty's mercy. His
Horse taking the advantage of a dark night, made a shift to escape, but the
Commanders of the Foot came to this capitulation with his Majesty, that they
should depart without their Arms, which with their Canon, Baggage and
Ammunition, being of very great consideration, were left wholly to his
disposing.

Immediately after this success, his Majesty dispatched a message from
Tavestock to the two houses of Parliament, in which he laid before them the
miserable condition of the Kingdom; remembering them of those many messages
which he had formerly sent unto them, for an accommondation of the present
Differences; and now desiring them to be think themselves of some expedient by
which this issue of blood might be dried up, the distraction of the Kingdom
settled, and the whole Nation put into an hope of Peace and Happiness.

To which Message, as to many others before, they either gave no answer, or
such an one as rather served to widen, than close the breach, falsely
conceiving that all his Majesty's Offers of Grace and Favor proceeded either
from an inability to hold out the War, or from the weakness and irresolution
of his Counsels. So that the Trage-Comedy of the two Harlots in the first of
Kings, may seem to have been acted over again on the Stage of England. The
King, like the true Mother, compassionately desired that the life of the poor
infant might be preserved; the Houses, like the false Mother, considering that
they could not have the whole, voted that it should be neither mine nor thine,
but divided betwixt them.

But if instead of this Message from Tavestock, his Majesty had gone on his own
errand, and marched with his Army toward London, it was conceived that in all
probability he might have made an end of the War* the Army of Essex being thus
broken, and that of Manchester not returned from the Northern service. But
sitting down before Plymouth, and staying there to perfect an Association of
the Western Counties, he spent so much time, that Essex was again in the head
of his Army; and being seconded by the Earl of Manchester and Sir William
Waller, made a stand at Newbery, where after a very hot fight, with variable
success on both sides, each party drew off by degrees, so that neither of them
could find cause to boast of the victory.

Winter comes on, which though it be not ordinarily a time of Action, will
notwithstanding afford us some variety which will not be unworthy of our
observation. And first, a Garrison is formed at Abington, (a Town within five
miles of Oxford) by order from the two Houses of Parliament, under the command
of Colonel Brown; the King and Council looking on, and suffering the
Intrenchments to be made, the Works to be raised, and the Ordnance to be
planted on the same.

It cannot be denied, but that Sir Henry G^ge, Governor at that time of
Oxford, and many of the chief Commanders which were then in and about that
City, offered their service to the King, and earnestly desired leave to prevent
that mischief which by the Intrenchments of this Town must needs fall upon
them. But the Lord George Digby, not long before made principal Secretary of
Estate, had persuaded the King unto the contrary, upon assurance that he held
intelligence with Brown and that as soon as the Town was fortified and
furnished with Victual, Arms and Ammunition, at the charges of the Houses of
Parliament, it would immediately be delivered into His Majesty's hand. In which
design he was outwitted, and consequently exposed unto some loss of
reputation with all sorts of People. For Brown having brought his project to
the highest round of the ladder (as himself expressed it) thought it high time
to turn it off, and to declare himself for the two Houses against the King;
printing not long after all the Letters which passed between him and the Lord
Digby upon this ocasion.

After this followed the taking of Shrewsbury, a place of very great importance
to the King, as the Gate which opened into Wales, situate on a rising ground,
and almost encompassed round about by the river Severn; that part which is not
environed by water, being wholly taken up and made good by a very strong
Castle. By the loss of which Town the Kings former intercourse with His loyal
Subjects of North Wales was not only hindered, but a present stop was given to
an Association, which was then upon the point of concluding between the
Counties of Salop, Flint, Chester, Worcester, etc. to the great prejudice of
the Kings Affairs in those Parts of the Kingdom.

Then comes the lamentable death of the Archbishop of Canterbury, kept for
four years a prisoner in the Tower of London, as before was said; but reserved
only as a bait to bring in the Scots, whenever the Houses should have
occasion for their second coming; as formerly on the like temptation they had
drawn them in, with reference to the Earl of Strafford. The Scots being come,
and doing good service in the North, it was thought fit they should be
gratified with that blood which they so greedily thirsted after. And thereupon
the Archbishop being voted guilty of High Treason by the House of Commons, was
condemned to die in such a slender House of Lords, that only seven ( viz. the
Earls of Kent, Pembroke, Salisbury, and Bullingbrook, the Lords North, Gray and
Brewes,) were present at the passing of the sentence of his condemnation. Which
being past, he was brought unto the Scaffold on Tower Hill on the tenth of
January, where he ended his life with such a modest confidence, and so much
piety, that his greatest enemies then present, who came to behold the Execution
with hearts full of joy, returned back with eyes as full of tears.

Last of all, comes another Treaty solicited by the King consented to by the
Houses with no small difficulty, and that upon condition to have the Treaty
held at Uxb^idge, a Town about fifteen miles from London, and more then twice
as much from Oxford. According unto which appointment the Commissioners met on
the thirtieth of January accompanied with some Divines, for debating the point
of Church Government, when it came in question. But this Treaty proved as
unsuccessefull as that at Oxford had done before; the Commissioners for the
Houses offering no expedient for an Accommodation, nor hearkening unto such as
were tendered to them in the name of the King. So that there being no hope of
bringing the War unto an end this way, both parties were resolved to proceed
in the other.

The King having wintered his Army at Oxford and the Towns adjoining, it was
thought fit to send the Prince into the West to perfect the Association which
had been begun in the end of the last summer; and in those Countries to advance
such further forces as might not only serve for the defense of themselves, but
give some reasonable increase to His M^jesties Army.

In the beginning of April he set forwards toward Bristol, accompanied with
the Lord Culpeper and Sir Edward Hide, as his principal Counselors, and some
of the chief Gentry of the West, who were of most authority in their several
Countries. But before he had made himself Master of any considerable strength,
news come of the unfortunate success of the Ba^tel of Nasby, which much
retarded his proceedings; and hearing afterward that Sir Thomas Fairfax with
his victorious Army was marching toward him, he quitted Somersetshire, and
drew more Westward into the middle of Devonshire.

Bristol being taken, and his Majesty's affairs growing worse and worse, both
there and elsewhere, he sent a Message unto Fairfax, desiring a safe conduct
for the Lord Hopton, and the Lord Culpeper to go to the King and mediate with
him for a Treaty with the Parliament. To which, after a fortnights
deliberation, he receives an answer the eight of November to this effect, That
if he would disband his Army, and apply himself unto the Parliament, the
General himself in person would conduct him thither.

No hopes of doing good this way, and less the other, Exeter being besieged,
and Barnstable taken by the enemies forces, he leaves his Army to the Lord
Hopton, and withdraws into the Dukedom of Cornwall. But finding that Country
unable to protect him long, he passes into the Isle of Scilly, and from thence
unto the Queen his Mother, whom he found at Paris, not doubting but to receive
such entertainment in that Court, as might be justly looked for by the eldest
Son of a Daughter of France. Which passages I have laid together in this place,
that I might follow his Majesty's affairs elsewhere with the less interruption.

The Prince being gone for Bristoll, as before is said, his Majesty resolved on
the approach of Summer, to relieve such of his Northern Garrisons; as had been
left untaken the year before, and from thence to bestow a visit on the
associated Counties. But being on his march, and having stormed the Town of
Leicester in his way, he returned again so far as Daventry, upon the news that
Sir Thomas Fairfax newly made General in the place of Essex, was sat down
before Oxford.

Concerning which we are to know, that not long after the beginning of this
everlasting Parliament, the Puritan Faction became subdivided into
Presbyterians and Independents; of which the Presbyterians at the first carried
all before them. The Independents growing up by little and little, and being
better studied in the arts of dissimulation, easily undermined the others, and
outed their Lord-Generall, and all that commanded under him, of their several
places, under color of an Ordinance for Self-denial. That done, they
conferred that command on Sir Thomas Fairfax, a man of more Precipitation then
Prudence, not so fit for Counsel as Execution, and better to charge on an
Enemy then command an Army. With him they joined Colonel Oliver Cromwell (whom
they dispensed with in the point of self-denial) by the name of Lieutenant
General; but so that he disposed of all things as Commander in chief, and left
Fairfax to his old trade of Execution, to which he had been accustomed.

The like alteration happened also in the Kings Army; Colonel Sir Patrick
Ruthen, a man of approved valor and Fidelity, being by his Majesty made Earl
of Forth in Scotland, was on the death of the Earl of Lindsey made the Lord
Lieutenant of his Armies; and the next year made Earl of Brentfort, for the
good service he had done in that place. Having both fortunately and faithfully
discharged that office for two years and more, he was outed of his place by a
Court-contrivement made in the favor of Prince Rupert, who a little before
Christmas last was declared Generallissimo of his Majesty's Forces: which he
most ambitiously aspired unto, and at last obtained, notwithstanding his late
defeat at Marston-Moor, his squandring away so brave an army, and his apparent
want of Age, Experience and Moderation for so great a trust.

By these new Generals the fortune of the War, and the whole estate of the
Kingdom, which lay then at stake, came to be decided. For Fairfax hearing that
the King was come back as far as Daventry (which was the matter he desired)
made directly toward him, with an intent to give him battle, and at a place
near Naseby in Northamptonshire, the two Armies met on Saturday the 14. of
June. The King had the better at the first, but Prince Rupert having routed one
wing of the enemies Horse, followed the chase so unadvisedly, that he left the
foot open to the other wing; who pressing hotly on them, put them to an
absolute rout, and made themselves Masters of his Camp, Carriage and Canon, and
amongst other things, of his Majesty's Cabinet, in which they found many of his
Letters, most of them written to the Queen, which were after published with
little honor to them that did it. For whereas the Athenians on the like
success had intercepted a packet of Letters from Philp King of Macedon, their
most bitter enemy, unto several friends, all the rest of those Letters being
broke open before the Common Council of Athens, one of which was subscribed to
the Queen Olympias, was returned untoucht; the whole Senate thinking it a
shameful and dishonest act to discover and betray the Conjugall secrets
betwixt man and wife. A modesty in which those of Athens stand as much
commended by Helladius Bisantinus, an ancient Writer, as the chief leading men
of the Houses of Parliament are like to stand condemned for the want of it in
succeeding Histories.

But we return unto the King; who having saved himself by flight, gathered
together some part of his scattered Forces, but never was able to make head
against the conquerors; losing one place after another, till his whole strength
was almost reduced to Oxford, and some few Garrisons adjoining. I shall take
notice only of some of the principal, viz. Chester, Conway, Hereford, Bristol,
and Exeter, on which so great a part of his affairs did most especially depend.

Chester first comes within the danger, a City of great importance in those
parts of the Kingdom. To the relief of this place then besieged by Sir William
Brereton, Colonel Jones, and others of that party, and at that time brought to
some distress, he made all the convenient speed he could; but was pursued upon
the way, and charged in front by the besiegers, betwixt whom this small Army
was routed at a place called Bauton-Heath, and the Lord Bernard Stuart (newly
created Earl of Lichfield) killed upon the place; the last of three brethren
that had lost their lives in their Princes quarrel.

On this discomfiture, the King draws toward the North-East, and commands the
Lord Digby with the Remainder of his Horse to march for Scotland, and there to
join with the Marquess of Montrosse, who with small strengths had acted
Miracles in that Kingdom. But at a Village in Yorkshire called Sherbourn (a
fatal name, but pointing to another place) where he surprised 700 of the
Parliaments Foot, he he was set upon by Colonel Cotly, his Forces made drunk
with the good fortune of the day very easily mastered, and he himself compelled
to fly into Ireland, never returning since that time to his Native Country.

But notwithstanding the Kings misfortune before mentioned, which happened on
the twenty ninth of September; the Lord Byron, who had the command of the
Garrison in Chester, held it out gallantly till the first of February; and then
perceiving that there was no hopes of any Succor, came to an honorable
composition, and gave up the Town, the greatest part of the Country falling
into the same condition with their mother City.

Before we leave the North-west parts, we must look upon the fortune of the
Town and Castle of Conway, a place of principal Command on that narrow
Channel which runs between the County of Carnarvon and the Isle of
Anglesey. Before this Town, being then besieged by Colonel Mitton came Doctor
John Williams, formerly Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, and at that
time Archbishop of York: Who to ingratiate himself with the Houses of
Parliament, and to save the charges of compounding for Delinquency, came with
some forces to the aid of the Besiegers (some say in Armor) and encamped there
till the place was taken; to the Amazement of the world and the eternal infamy
and Reproach of his Person.

Bristol comes next, a place conveniently seated for the Trade of Spain, the
River capable of great Ships, and the port well guarded. At the taking of this
City by the Kings Forces, to such strengths as before it had, there was added a
Fort Royal (as they called it) then conceived impregnable; into this City
Prince Rupert (who had spent there too much of the year before) had put himself
at the present, and was besieged not long after by Sir Thomas Fairfax, who came
before it on the twenty fourth of August, and had it surrendered to him without
any memorable resistance, together with the old Castle and Royal Fort, on the
thirteenth of September.

The quick surrendry of which place, being so well fortified and furnished with
victual, Arms and Ammunition, and the weak defenses which were made to
preserve the same, created some suspicion of disloyalty in Prince Rupert
toward the King his Uncle. There had before passed some Letters betwixt the
King and him, touching the Kings coming to a speedy agreement with his Houses
of Parliament, in which the King was pressed so far, that he seemed to be
displeased at it. And now this news coming on the neck of those Letters,
startled him into such a distrust of his Nephews Loyalty, that he dispatched a
messenger with all speed to the Lords at Oxford, to displace Collonell William
Leg (one of the Confidents of Prince Rupert) who had succeeded Sir Henry Gage
in the Government of that City, and to put into his place Sir Thomas Glenham, a
Gentleman of known extraction, and more known fidelity.

Nor were the Lords of the Council less amazed at the news then his Majesty
was, who thereupon, when Prince Rupert and his Brother Maurice returned to
Oxford, commanded them to be disarmed, and would not suffer them to walk the
streets with their Swords by their sides, as they had done formerly; though
afterward by the Kings great goodness, they were restored to all apparences
of favor, though not to any special places of Command or Trust.

Hereford follows the same fortune, which having in vain been besieged by the
Scots, from the 13 of July to the first of September, was suddenly surprised by
Colonel Birch and Colonel Morgan (this last then Governor of Glocster) on
the eighteenth of December.

Exceter holds out longest, and was last attempted, such blocks as lay in the
way between Fairfax his Army and that City being first in the course of war to
be removed. Which took up so much time that it was the twenty fifth day of
January before Fairefax could come near enough to give it a Summons, and being
summoned it held out till the thirteenth of April, and then was yielded upon as
honorable Conditions as any other whatsoever; all other Garrisons in the West
being first surrendered, the Princes forces worsted at Torrington, not long
after disbanded upon Composition, and he himself retired into France for his
personal safety.

All these mischances thus happening on the neck of one another, all the Kings
hopes and expectation rested upon the coming of Sir Jacob Astley, created Lord
Astley of Reading two years since; Who having kept together some Remainders of
the Kings Forces since the Fight near Chester, and increasing them with the
Accession of some fresh supplies, marched toward the King, and was to have
been met upon the way by Sir John Campsfield with the Oxford Horse. But either
through the want of intelligence, or the necessity of fate, or some occasional
delays, it was so long before Campsfield was upon his march, that the news
came of the Lord Astleys being vanquished at a place called Donnington near
Stow on the Would, on the 21 of March. In which fight himself was taken
prisoner, and with him all the Kings hopes lost of preserving Oxford, till he
could better his condition.

1646.
In this extremity he left that City in disguise on the 27 day of April, Anno
1646. and on the fourth of May put himself into the hands of the Scots, then
lying at the siege of Newark. After the taking of which Town, they carried him
to Newcastle, and there kept him under a Restraint.

The news hereof being brought to Oxford, and seconded by the coming of the
whole Army of Sir Thomas Fairfax, who laid siege unto it, disposed the Lords of
the Council, and such of the principal Gentry who had the conduct of the
Affair, to come to a speedy Composition. According whereunto, that City was
surrendered on Midsomer day; James Duke of York the Kings second Son, together
with the Great Seal, Privy Seal, and Signet, were delivered up into the hands
of the enemy: by whom the young Duke was sent to Westminster, and kept in the
House of S. James under a Guard with his Brother and Sisters; the Seals being
carried into the House of Peers, and there broke in pieces.

But long these young Princes were not kept together under that restraint, the
Princess Henrietta being in a short time after conveyed into France by the Lady
Dalkieth; and the Duke of York, attired in the habit of a young Lady
transported into Holland by one Captain Bamfield.

The Scots in the mean time being desirous to make even with their Masters, to
receive the wages of their iniquity, and to get home in safety, with that spoil
and plunder which they had gotten in their marching and remarching betwixt
Tweed and Hereford, had not the patience to attend the leisure of any more
voluntary surrendries They therefore pressed the King to give order to the
Marquess of Ormond in Ireland, and to all the Governors of his Garrisons in
England, to give up all the Towns and Castles which remained untaken, to such
as should be appointed to receive them for the Houses of Parliament, assuring
him that otherwise they neither could nor durst continue him in their
protection.

To this necessity he submitted, but found not such a general obedience to his
commands as the Scots expected. For not the Marquess of Ormand only, but many
of the Governors of Towns and Castles in England considered him as being under
a constraint and speaking rather the sense of others then his own; upon which
grounds they continued still upon their guard, in hope of better times or of
better conditions.

But nothing was more hotly pressed by the Scots, then that the Marquess of
Montrosse should lay down his Commission, who with small strength in the
beginning, and inconsiderable forces when they were at the best, had acted
things in Scotland even unto admiration. For besides many victories of less
consequence, he had twice beaten the Marquess of Argile out of the field,
followed him home, and wasted his Country with Fire and Sword. He vanquished
Baily, one of the best Soldiers of the Faction, commanding over a well-formed
Army in a set battle fought between them; followed his blow, and made himself
Master of the City and Castle of Edinburgh, releasing diverse of his Friends who
had been seized and imprisoned there when he first took Arms. Had the Lord
Digby's Horse come to him, he had not only perfected, but assured the conquest
of that Kingdom. But instead of those aids which he expected, he was
unexpectedly set upon, and his whole Army broken by David Lesley, sent from the
Scots Army in England with six thousand Horse to oppose the progress of his
fortune; whose coming being known to the Earl of Roxborow and Traquair, (in
whom the King continued still his wonted confidence) was purposely concealed
from him; to the end that he being once suppressed, and in him the Kings power
destroyed in Scotland, they might be sure from being called to an account of
their former Treasons: however he began to make head again, and was in a way of
well-doing, when he received the Kings command to disband his Forces; to which
he readily conformed, took ship, and put himself into a voluntary exile.

These Obstacles removed, his Majesty conceived some thoughts of finding
Sanctuary in Scotland, the Scots having first assured him, (as he signified by
Letter to the Marquess of Ormond) before he put himself into their hands, that
they would not only take his person, but so many of his party also as repaired
unto him, into their protection, and stand to him with their lives and fortune.
According to which hopes on his part, and those assurances on theirs, he had a
great mind to return to his Native Country, his Ancient and Native Kingdom,
as he used to call it, there to expect the bettering of his condition in the
changes of time.

But the Scots hearing of his purpose, and having long ago cast off the yoke of
Subjection, voted against his coming to them in a full Assembly; so that we may
affirm of him as the Scripture does of Christ our Savior, viz. He came unto
his own, and his own received him not. The like resolution also was entertained
by the Commissioners of that Nation, and the chief Leaders of their Army, who
had contracted with the Houses of Parliament, and for the sum of two hundred
thousand pounds in ready money, sold and betrayed him into the hands of his
Enemies, as certainly they would have done with the Lord Christ himself for
half the money, if he had bowed the Heavens and came down to visit them.

By the Commissioners sent from the Houses to receive him, he was conducted to
Holdenby a fair house of his own, and one of the goodliest Piles in England,
situate not far from Naseby, (to the intent that he might be continually
grieved with the sight of the fatal place of his overthrow) but kept so close
that none of his Domestic servants, no, not so much as any of his own
Chaplains were suffered to have Access unto him.

In the mean time a breach began betwixt the Presbyterian Party in both Houses
and some chief Officers of the Army, which growing every day wider and wider,
one Cornet Joice, with a considerable party of Horse, was sent to seize on his
Majesty's Person, and bring him safe to their head Quarters. There at the first
he was received with all possible demonstrations of Love and Duty, some of his
Chaplains licensed to repair unto him, and read the Book of Common Prayer, as
in former times, and the way open to all those of his party who desired to see
him.

This made the Animosities between those of the two Houses and the Army to be
far greater then before, the City closing with that party of the Houses which
desired the Kings coming to the Parliament, and going down in a tumultuous
manner required the present voting of a Personal Treaty. This made the Speaker
and such of both Houses, as either held for the Army, or had no mind to see the
Kings Return to London, to quit the Parliament, and to betake themselves to
their Protection; encouraged wherewith they resolved upon their march toward
London, to restore those members to their Houses, and those Houses to the Power
and Freedom of Parliaments. Upon the noise of whose Approach, the Citizens who
before spoke big, and had begun to raise an Army, under the Command of the Lord
Willowby of Parham, sent their Petitions for a peace, and gladly opened all
their works between Hide-Park Corner and the Thames, to make an entrance for
the Army; who having placed their Speakers in their several Chaires, and
suppressed those of the opposite party, made a triumphant passage through the
chief Streets of the City, with Trumpets sounding, Drums beating, and Colors
flying.

The King removed from one place to another, was brought in the course of those
Removes to Casam Lodge, an House of the Lord Cravens not far from Reading,
where he obtained the favor of giving a meeting to his Children at Maydenhith,
and there they dined together; the General willingly consenting, and the
Houses then not daring to make any denial.

From thence he was at last brought to his own Palace of Hampton Court, where
being terrified with the Apprehension of some Dangers, which were given out to
be designed against his person by the Agitators, who for a time much governed
the lower part of the Army, he left that place, accompanied only with two or
three of his servants, and put himself unfortunately into the power of Colonel
Hammond in the Isle of Wight, where no relief could come unto him.

Being secured in Carisbrook Castle, Propositions are sent to him from the
Houses of Parliament, as had been done before at Newcastle, and Holdenby-House:
to which he returned the same Answer now as he did before, their Demands being
nothing bettered, and his condition nothing worse then before it was. Provoked
wherewith, the Houses past their Votes of Non-Addresses to his Majesty, and
take the Government upon themselves, as in the times of Vacancy and
Inter-regnum in the State of Rome; wherein they were confirmed by a Declaration
from the Army, binding themselves to stand to them in defense of those Votes.

During the time of these restraints, he betook himself to meditation, and then
composed that most excellent Book entitled (...), or the Pourtraiture of his
sacred Majesty in his Solitudes and Sufferings. The Honor of this work some
mercenary Sticklers for the two Houses of Parliament have labored to deprive
him of, and to transfer it to some other, though they know not whom. But it is
well known to all that knew him, that his Majesty had always a fine stroke
with his pen, which he practiced at all times of leisure and recesse from
business, from before his coming to the Crown, to these last extremities. By
which means he became Master of a pure and elegant Style, as both his
intercepted Letters, and those to Mr. Henderson at New Castle in the point of
Episcopacy (where he could have no other helps but what he found in himself) do
most clearly evidence.

1648.
And now the Subjects of both Kingdoms, which before had joined in Arms against
him, began to look upon his Estate with Commiseration; and seeing they could
obtain no favor, or freedom for him in the way of Petition, they resolved to
try their fortunes in the way of Force.

And first a very considerable part of the Royal Navy, encouraged by Captain
Batten, formerly Vice Admiral to the Earl of Warwick, was put into the power
of the Prince of wales to be made use of for his Majesty's service in that sad
condition; and next the Kentish, who twice or thrice before had showed their
readiness to appear in Arms on his behalf, put themselves into a posture of
War under the conduct of one Master Hales (an Heir of great hope and
expectation) and after under the command of George Lord Goring Earl of Norwich.
The ^arl of Holland, whom he had cherisht in his Bosom, and who unworthily
deserted him in the first beginning of his troubles, repenting when it was too
late, of his great disloyalties, began to raise some small Forces in the County
of Surrey; Langhern, Poyer, and Powel, who before had served under the pay of
the Houses, seized on some strong Towns and Castles in South Wales, and
declared against them; the Castle of Pomfret was surprised by Stratagem, and
kept by them who had surprised it, for his Majesty's service. And finally the
Marquess of Hamilton (not long before created Duke Hamilton of Arran) having
raised a strong Army of Scots, confederated himself with Sir Marmaduke
Langdale, and Sir Thomas Glenham and others of the Kings party in the North,
and having Garrisoned the Towns of Berwick and Carlisle, past into England with
his Forces under color of restoring the King to his Crown and Liberty.

But these eruptions in both Kingdoms, though they might give hi^ Majesty some
hopes of a better condition, yet did they not take him off from looking
seriously into himself, and taking into Consideration those things which had
formerly passed him, and which might seem most to have provoked Gods
displeasure against him.

And what they were which most particularly grated on his Conscience appears
by the Prayer and Confession which he made for the times of his Affliction; and
is this that follows, viz. Almighty and most merciful Father, as it is only
thy goodness that admits of our imperfect Prayers, and the knowledge that thy
mercies are infinite, which can give us any hope of thy accepting or granting
them; so it is our bounden and necessary Duty to confess our Sins freely unto
thee: and of all men living, I have most need, most reason so to do, no man
having been so much obliged by thee, no man more grievously offending thee:
that Degree of knowledge which thou have given me, adding likewise to the guilt
of my Transgressions. For was it through ignorance that I suffered innocent
blood to be shed by a false pretended way of Justice? Or that I permitted a
wrong way of thy worship to be set up in Scotland, and injured the Bishops in
England? O no; but with shame and grief I confess, that I therein followed the
persuasions of worldly wisdom, forsaking the Dictates of a right-informed
Conscience. Wherefore O Lord, I have no excuse to make, no hope left but the
multitude of thy mercies; for I know my repentance weak, and my Prayers faulty.
Grant therefore, merciful Father, so to strengthen my repentance, and amend my
Prayers, that thou may clear the way for Thine own mercies; to which O let
thy Justice at last give place, putting a speedy end to my deserved
Afflictions. In the mean time, give me Patience to endure, Constancy against
temptations, and a Discerning Spirit to choose what is best for thy Church and
People which thou have committed to my charge. Grant this, O most merciful
Father, for thy Son Jesus Christ's sake, our only Savior, Amen.

Now as the King thus armed himself against all future events, in the middle of
these hopes and expectations; so the Houses of Parliament were not wanting to
themselves in their care and diligence to destroy those hopes, and make those
expectations fruitless and of no effect. For the Storm thus breaking out on
all sides, Lieutenant General Cromwell with some part of the Army is ordered to
march into Wales; where he reduced such Towns and Castles under his command as
had before been manned against them, the three chief Captains above named
yielding themselves upon the hopes of that mercy which they never tasted. This
done he hasteneth toward the Scots, whom he found in Lancashire, discomfits
them, takes all their Foot, with their Canon, Arms, and Ammunition. The Duke or
Marquess, with his Horse, which had escaped out of the fight, were so closely
followed by the diligence of the pursuers, that most of his Horse being slain
or taken, himself was sent Prisoner unto London.

Following his blow, Cromwell bestows a visit on Scotland, suppresses all those
in that Kingdom, who stood in any sort suspected of the crime of Loyalty, the
Towns of Berwick and Carlisle being delivered into his hands without blows or
Bloodshed. An expedition which he made good use of in his following Counsels,
discovering by this means the weakness and condition of the Country, the
irreconcilable Factions and part-takings amongst the great ones of that Realm,
on whose divided wills and pleasures all the rest depended; and on what side
they lay most open and assaultable, when any further occasion should be taken
(as there after was) to attempt upon them.

In the mean time some Troops of the other part of the Army scatter the weak
forces of the Earl of Holland, who flying toward the North, is taken at Saint
Neots in the County of Huntingdon, and sent Prisoner unto London also. The
Kentish being either scattered, or forced over the Thames, put themselves into
the Town of Colchester, and are there besieged by Sir Thomas Fairfax himself
with his part of the Army. The issue of which Siege was this, that after some
extremities endured by the besieged, the place was yielded upon composition,
the Townsmen to be safe from plunder, the Soldiers and their Commanders to
yield themselves Prisoners absolutely without any Conditions. The Principal of
these were the Lord Capel, Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle, all of them
of approved valor and fidelity: of which the two last were shot to death upon
the place, the first reserved for the Scaffold; on which he looked death in the
face with as much magnanimity, as Hamilton and Holland (who suffered at the
same time with him) entertained it with a poorness and Dejection of Spirit.

And which was worst (because it lost some Reputation to the Prince in his
first Attempt) the Mariners growing discontented that Prince Rupert was
appointed to be their Admiral, instead of the Lord Willoughby of Parham, by
whom they desired to be commanded, fell off with many of their Ships, and
returned again to their old Admiral the Earl of Warwick. By the withdrawing
of which Ships he was rendered the less able to do any thing considerable on
the Sea, and landing with some Forces near Deal-Castle in Kent, sped not so
fortunately as both his Friends hoped and himself expected.

But notwithstanding these Successes, the Houses seeing how desirous the whole
Nation was of a Personal Treaty, recalled their Votes of No-Address, and
ordered that a Personal Treaty should be held with his Majesty at Newport in
the Isle of VVight, to begin on the eighteenth day of September next following.
But the Commissioners which were sent to manage this Treaty, spent so much
time upon each Nicety and Punctillio of the Propositions, before they drew
toward a Conclusion, that they gave the Officers of the Army too much
opportunity to frame and publish a Remonstrance, bearing date at S. Albans on
the sixteenth of November. In which it was declared that the King was the sole
cause of all that bloodshed which had been made in the Kingdom, that he was
incapable of any further trust in the public government, and that nothing
could be more expedient to the safety of the Commonwealth, then to bring him
to the Bar of Justice. Nor staid they there, but in pursuit of this Design,
some of the Officers were appointed to go into the Isle of Wight, and having
seized upon his Person to bring him over to Hurst Castle in Hampshire, from
whence they brought him by degrees to Windsor, and at last to Westminster.
And on the other side, the Independent Party in the House of Commons (holding
intelligence with the Army) voted his Majesty's Concessions to be so
unsatisfactory, that no well-grounded Peace could be built upon them.

In the next place, a care was taken by the Army to purge the House of all
those members to whom his Majesty's condescensions had given satisfaction.
Which done, a New Court, called the High Court of Justice, is to be set up, a
President of the same appointed, certain Commissioners nominated to Act as
Judges, and a set time designed to call his Majesty to a Trial, in an
unprecedented way, before his Subjects.

It is reported that at his going from the Bar, one of the Soldiers most
barbarously spit in his face, and used very reproachful words against him.
Which though his Majesty suffered with his wonted patience, yet the Divine
vengeance would not suffer it to go unrevenged; that wretch being not long
after condemned in a Court of War, for some endeavors to make a Mutiny in the
Army, and openly sho^ to death in S. Paul's Churchyard.

And now Saturday the 20 of January, the day of his appearing being come, his
Majesty was brought from the Palace of Saint James unto Westminster Hall, to
appear before the new Judges, and answer unto all particulars which are thought
fit to be objected.

His appearance could not be avoided, in regard he was under a constraint; but
no constraint could force his will to make him acknowledge their Authority, or
submit himself unto their judgment. He would not so betray the Liberty of the
English Subject (as he plainly told them) to any arbitrary and lawless Power,
as he must needs do by submitting unto their proceedings; and therefore since
the Laws and Liberties of the Land were now in question, he stood resolved to
die a Martyr for them both. For which contempt (having stood resolutely on the
same term, as often as he was brought before them) he was sentenced on Saturday
the twenty seventh of the same month to lose his life, by the dividing of his
head from his body.

That fatal morning being come, the Bishop of London, who attended on him in
that sad exigent, read the morning Prayers, and for the first Lesson thereof,
the 27 Chapter of S. Matthews Gospel, relating the History of our Saviors
Sufferings under Pontius Pilate, by the practice of the chief Priests, the
Scribes and Pharisees, and others of the Great Council of the Jewish Nation. At
first his Majesty conceived that the Bishop had made choice of that Chapter, as
being very agreeable to his present condition; But when he understood that it
was the Chapter which the Church had appointed for that day in her public
Calendar, he seemed to apprehend it with some signs of rejoicing.

No sooner had he done his Devotions, but he is hurried to White Hall, out of
the Banqueting House, whereof a way was forced to a Seaffold on which he was to
act the last part of his Tragedy in the sight of the people. Having declared
that he died a Martyr for the Laws of this Kingdom, and the Liberties of the
Subjects, he made a Confession of his Faith, insinuating that he died a true
Son of the Church of England, he betook himself to his private Devotions, and
patiently submitted that Royal Head to an Executioner, which had before been
crowned with so much outward Pomp and Splendor.

The Members of both Houses had often promised him in their Petitions, Messages
and Declarations, that they would make him a great and glorious King, and now
they were as good as their words, changing his fading but painful Crown of
Thorns, which they first platted for him, to an immarcessible Crown of Glory.

At his first coming to the Crown, one of his Chaplains in Ordinary, and now a
Bishop in this Church, taking good heed unto the close contrivances of some,
and the seditious actings of others in his two first Parliaments, thought fit
to give him and his Council such an item of it, as might awaken them to prevent
those mischiefs which otherwise might ensue upon it. And thereupon he preached
before them on these words of S. Matthews Gospel, viz, But when the husbandmen
saw the Son, they said among themselves, This is the heir, come let us kill
him, and let us seize on his inheritance, Mat. 21.38. In the dissecting of
which Text, he made such an Anatomy of the Husbandmen, whom he had in hand
(with reference to some Plots and Practices which were then on foot) and his
whole discourse upon the same, that he gave the King and those about him such
Remembrances, as might make them have an eye unto themselves and the public
safety. But then withal (though he carried on the matter with great care and
prudence) he drew so much danger on himself from some leading Members in the
second Parliament, who thought themselves as much concerned in the Sermon as
the chief Priest and Pharisees did in the Parable, that he was upon the point
of leaving the Kingdom, when he had news that his Majesty had dissolved the
second Parliament in no small displeasure.

What he then preached concerning the said Husbandmen, was after practiced, and
that he then fore-signified was accomplished now. Which shows him to have been
both a Priest and a Prophet, if at the least the name of a Prophet may be given
unto any man who foretells not of things to come by Divine Revelation, but
out of a deep insight into business.

But we return unto the King, whom if we look on in his Children (the most
lively Images and Representations of deceased Parents) we shall find him to
have been the Father of four Sons and five Daughters.

1. CHARLES-JAMES born at Greenwich on Wednesday the 13. of May, 1629. but died
almost as soon as born, having been first christened by Dr. Web, one of the
Chaplains in Attendance, and afterward a Bishop in Ireland.

2. CHARLES Duke of Cornwall by Birth, Prince of Wales in Designation, and
Knight of the Garter, born at his Majesty's house of Saint James near
Westminster, May 29. 1630. solemnly crowned King of the Scots at Edinburgh on
the first day of January, Anno 1650. But being invaded by an Army from England,
under the command of General Cromwell, he was forced to quit that Kingdom and
try his fortunes in the other; so closely followed by the Army, which compelled
him to that Expedition, he was fought with near Worcester on the third of
September 1651. before the Earl of Darby and some others of his party here
could come to aid him with their Forces. In which Battle, though he acted
beyond the expectation of his Friends, and to the great applause of his very
Enemies; yet it so pleased the Divine Providence that he lost the day, and
being miraculously preserved (notwithstanding the diligent search which was
made after him) he passed safely over into France to the Queen his Mother.
Finding that Court unsafe for him, he passed into Flanders, accompanied with
his Brother the Duke of York, Anno 1654. where they have continued ever since.

3. JAMES born in the same place on the 13. day of October Anno 1633. entitled
Duke of York by his Majesty's command at the time of his birth; created so by
Letters Patents, bearing date at Oxford, January 27. Anno 1643. and not long
after made Knight of the Garter. Taken prisoner at the surrendry of Oxford,
June 24. 1646. he was carried to his Majesty's house of Saint James, and there
kept under a Guard with his Brother and Sister; but being attired in the habit
of a young Lady, he was conveyed thence about two years after by one Colonel
Bamfield, who brought him safely into Holland, and presented him a most welcome
guest to the Princess of Orange, from whence he past afterward into France to
his Mother and Brother.

4 HENRY born on the eighth of July, designed to the Dukedom of Gloucester, and
so commanded to be called. Left by his Majesty at the House of Saint James (the
place of his birth) at such time as he withdrew toward the North, Anno 1642,
he remained there till the Death of his Father, and some years after, and then
upon the promise of an Annual pension, was permitted to go into France to his
Mother and the rest of the Kings Children. But in the year 1654. almost as soon
as his two elder Brethren had removed themselves into Flanders, he found a
strong practice in some of the Queens Court to seduce him to the Church of
Rome, whose Temptations he resisted beyond his years, and thereupon was sent
for by them into Flanders.

5. MARY born on the fourth of November, 1631. and married to Count William of
Nassau Eldest Son to HENRY Prince of Orange, on Sunday the second of May, Anno
1641. conveyed by the Queen her Mother into Holland in February following,
where she still remains. Her Husband having succeeded his Father in all his
Titles and Estates, died young, and left her the hopeful Mother of a Son, now
Prince of Orange.

6. ELIZABETH born the twenty eighth of January 1635. survived her Father, but
died with hearts grief not long after.

7. ANNE born the seventeenth of March 1637. died before her Father.

8. KATHARINE, who died almost as soon as born.

9. HENRIETTA born at Exceter June the sixteenth 1644. conveyed not long after
into France by the Lady Dalkeith to the Queen her Mother, where she still
remains.

It is observed of the Wolf, that as soon as he is once full he begins to
howl, and such a howling fit fell at this time on the Presbyterians. They had
carried on this Tragedy to the very last Act from the first bringing in of the
Scots to the beginning of the war, and from the beginning of the war till they
had brought him prisoner into Holmby-House, and then quarrelled with the
Independents for taking the work out of their hands, and robbing them of the
long-expected fruits of their Plots and Practices. They cried out against them
in their Pulpits, and clamoured against them in their Pamphlets for this most
execrable fact, of which themselves were parcel-guilty at the least, Et si non
re, at voto pariter Regicidae, etc.

On the other side, the Independents, who had washed their hands in the blood of
the King, seemed as desirous as the Presbyterians to wash their hands of it. By
them it was alleged more calmly, that they had put Charles Stuart to death,
against whom they had proceeded as the sole cause of so much bloodshed; but
that the King had been murdered a long time before by the Presbyterians, when
they deprived him of his Crown, his Sword and his Scepter; of his Crown, by
forcing from him those Prerogatives which placed him in a Throne of Eminence
above his People; of his Sword, by wresting the Militia out of his hands, by
which he was made unable to protect them; and finally, of his Scepter, in
divesting him of the power of calling Parliaments, and of his Negative voice in
making those Laws by which he was to govern all estates of men under his
Dominion. And more then so, that they had deprived him of his natural Liberty,
as he was a Man, of the society of his Wife, as he was a Husband, of
conversation with his Children, as he was a Father, of the attendance of his
Servants, as he was a Master, and in a word, of all those comforts which might
make life valued for a Blessing. So that there was nothing left for the
Independents to do, but to put an end to those Calamities, into which this
miserable man, this vir dolorum (as he might very well be called) had been so
accursedly plunged by the Presbyterians.

Thus did each party seek to shift the guilt of this most execrable Act upon
one another, and thus fell CHARLES the meekest of Men and the best of Princes,
leaving behind him an example of Christian fortitude, in suffering patiently
that blow, which neither the Law of God or man, nor any deservings of his own
could inflict upon him.

His body being removed to Windsor was there interred in the same Vault with
K. Henry the 8. but not interred with that solemnity, nor in that public form
and manner which is appointed in the Liturgy of the Church of England, of which
he had been always a devout Observer, and to the last a resolute Patron and
Defender. His Funeral solemnized and his Death lamented with fewer tears than
can be easily imagined; men bleeding inwardly from their hearts, when their
eyes durst not express outwardly what grief they felt. So dangerous were the
times, Vt suspiria etiam subscriberentur (as Tacitus affirms of the times of
Domitian a most cruel Tyrant) that men's very sighs were registered and kept
upon account toward the undoing of many in the time to come.

But though he died thus in the strength of his years, he still lives in the
memories of all good men, and by that most excellent Portraiture which he has
made of himself, will be preserved alive amongst all Nations, and unto all
succeeding Ages. The Pourtraiture of King Charles in his Solitudes and
Sufferings, will be a Character of his Parts and Piety beyond all expressions
but his own; a Monument of richer metal than all the Tombs of Brass or Marble
erected to the honor of his Predecessors; which no Inscription whatsoever,
though in Letters of Gold, and engraven with a pen of Diamonds, can be able to
parallel.

And so I shut up this short View of the Life and Reign of this glorious King,
as Tacitus does the Life of Julius Agricola, a right noble Roman (the names of
the persons only changed) viz. Quiquid ex Carolo amavimus, quicquid mirati
sumus, manet mansurumque est in animis hominum, in aeternitate temporum, fama
rerum.

Horat. Carm. lib. 1. Ode 24. Multis ille bonis flebilis occidit,
Nulli flebilior quam mihi --

THE END.

