A VINDICATION OF THE REVIEW. OR, The Exceptions formerly made against Mr.
HORN'S Catechism set free from his late allegations, and maintained not to be
MISTAKES. BY J. H. Parson of Massingham p. Norf.

Videamus ne reddamus rationem and pro otioso silentio. Ambros. Offic. l.1. c.
3. CAMBRIDGE: Printed by John Field, Printer to the Universitie. 1662.

DIGNISSIMO VIRO AC DOMINO OMNIGENA VIRTUTE CLARO MULTIS QUE NOMINIBUS
HONORANDO, D. CAROLO MORDAUNT, BARONETTO, Hoc quicquid est conaminis in
receptae Fidei vindiciis Grati animi and Debitae observantiae tesseram L. M. D.
D. C. Q.

JOSEPHUS HACON.

To the Reader.
TO you it is, when all is done, and to you alone, to whom we must make our
applications and addresses, if we desire to obtain an equal hearing. And to
that purpose, though we know not your character and disposition, yet do we
presume that you are good and courteous; likewise that you are sound in the
faith, able and well qualifyed, and not only able, but which is more, willing
also to give righteous judgment. Hence it is that we still appeal to you, and
bring our matters controverted before your bar, and while we differ in other
things, sometimes more perhaps then need is, yet we never fail to agree in
this, to refer all to your final sentence, saying, Let the Reader judge. And
because it must be thus, and cannot possibly be otherwise, I pray you be well
pleased with all if I now briefly put you in mind, and tell you, for your own
sake as well as mine, what that is that you are to judge and pass your censure
upon: It is not whether party of the two goes beyond the other in artifice and
subtilitic, or is of the better parts and abilities, or the more ready and
expert in wielding the brazen shield: if this be it that is contended for, I
yield it now, and give it gone, not having so much art and learning as some men
have, to deliver things manifestly untrue, corrupt and irrational, and when
they are found to be such, presently to cast about for mists and muffles,
wherein to involve my self, and pass away undiscerned; so that my admirers, if
any I had, should nevertheless admire and follow me still. And because I think
I durst not do it, and am sure I ought not, I am very well content that I
cannot do it. But the Question that you are to look after is, on which side the
Truth is, and such truth as much concerns you, for most of those things we
strive about, it is needful for you rightly to understand and know, lest you
be drawn aside into a wrong way, upon pretense of taking a nearer, or a better
way. Yea, the main Controversy is, concerning the meaning of certain clauses
in your Fathers Will and Testament; and these too, touching your heavenly
inheritance, what your claim and title is to life eternal, and how you hold it:
Whether God or man, Grace or Nature, does begin and finish Faith and Salvation.
So that it concerns you, as much as it concerns either of the parties
litigant, that you be wary and judge aright: and I pray you remember, what you
know already, that the best cause does not always fall to the fiercest pleader,
nor to him that uses most words. My Adversary Mr. Horn, seems to be of this
mind, That any argument though never so slender, or answer though never so
sleighty, any evasion, albeit most frivolous, will serve the turn, and do well
enough, so they be well set on, namely with clapping hands and houting. And
many of the weaker sort, when they perceive him not only to be earnest and
importunate, but to wax hot and moody; are resolved to believe there is
something in that which he says, though they know not what it is: And rather
than they will put themselves to the trouble of weighing with due attention
what is said on each side; they choose to think, whatsoever is said by way of
Answer, though it be merely delusory, to be Answer sufficient: and supposing no
good man will complain for naught, they judge it rightful to assist and favor
the wronged party. And because at all times they find it a more easy and
pleasing work, to be moved and warmed in their affections, then to be informed
in understanding and knowledge; you can hardly persuade them to the contrary,
but that faithfulness and the best Religion, are lodged under that which they
call Zeal, though oftentimes it be little else, but noise and clamor.

He that has perused the Answer, that this Reply of mine is directed to,
cannot but observe one custom or manner of the Author, not proper indeed to
him, yet wherein he does exceed and out-go others his like: when he should
answer an objection, and make good his own Doctrine against my Exceptions, he
is wont to omit the chief strength of the proof, reason or authority, and
catching hold of some word or clause, some expression or other, upon that to
spend his time, and sometime his anger, though that word or expression be so
far impertit^nent, as it might have been left out, and the charge or exception
have been valid nevertheless, even as valid without it. This dealing of his so
frequent, has called to mind that which Erasmus somewhere relates of a
certain wealthy citizen, who having promised to a German Doctor a good sum of
money in reward of his diligent attendance and fidelity in the cure of a
contagious disease; being recovered and grown sound again, was nothing so
forward to perform, as he was free to promise; but having passed the danger,
bethought himself how he might mock the Saint. The first time that he saw him,
he put him off with fair words; the next, with foul: for meeting him in the
street, after many words and sharp contest arising about the Non-payment, at
last not knowing how better to come rid of him, he took sore offense at his
putting THOU upon him, which yet sounds not alike in all languages, Vah homo
Germanus, Tuissas me? so shaking his head, and using threatening speeches, away
he flung in a great fume, and thus the matter ended. Though Mr. H. my adversary
does somewhat resemble this wealthy citizen, and be of their number who hold
chiding to be the cheapest satisfaction; I hope, you my Reader, have so much
skill in difference of coin, as to join with me, while I cannot acknowledge
cavilling and exclaiming to be current pay. To accuse in generals, is thought
not to be fairly done, and I must not now make any stay upon instances; yet
this I will say, I was much discouraged, and somewhat provoked with his
trifling allegations, and picking holes in stead of hitting blots, so vainly
and loosely for the most part, that I hope you do not expect I should insist
upon every particular that he has put upon me, because I think there is no
man, yea though he had nothing else in the world to do, but must needs be
unwilling to go through with so tedious an employment: And yet when I pass by
his objections and exceptions, such as they are, taking no notice of them; I am
afraid those Laymen that he speaks of page 102. that cannot read Latin, and
yet could see the faults of my arguings, when they shall come and here epsy
moreover the want of my answerings, will verily believe, that I am quite put to
silence in the respective particulars, and can find cut nothing to say in
behalf of my self, but am at Dulcarnon, right at my wits end; I must therefore
desire you to remember, that if I have omitted any thing, it is not because I
thought it could not answered; but because I thought it needed no answer, or
else deserved none, trusting that you, my Reader, will compare what is said on
each side, and satisfy your self. So will I here take my leave of you, rather
than I will seem either to misdoubt, or any further to prevent your observation.

CHAP. I. Touching the Epistle.
IF beginnings be ominous, as they are held to be, then may I presage at the
very first what I shall find in that which follows; for with these words you
break into your discourse:

Mr. H. observes a wrong method, he condemns me as an Interpolator veritatis
(Title Page) a Huckster of the truth, before he brings in any proof or
evidence.

Sentences prefixed in title-pages are not to be taken with any strict or
rigorous application: your self, Sir, have now set down five several ones,
there; w^h do intimate much worse against me, before you did prove they were
applicable to me; and your very Title proclaims my Notes to be Mistakes, before
you give in any evidence that they were such, at least, in the Readers order,
and the progression that he must make. This is just as if you should blame the
Vintner, for hanging forth his ivy, when as yet you have not tasted his wine;
or before you know whether it comes not so near to vinegar, that after the old
quip of Palladas, a bunch of Lettice, or other Sallet-herbs, may not better
become the sign-post. According to your new method, which your self follow not,
he that writes a book, must place the Title of it there where FINIS is wont to
stand, for when he has concluded, we will suppose that he has made his Title
and his promise good. But Titles, as I take it, are usually impressed last. As
also Prefaces and Epistles, though they be placed first, are yet taken to be
composed then, when the work is done.

Page 1. Articles of Religion, must not be injurious to the Churches growth, or
her members, by tying them to the measure already obtained]

By the growth and measure you speak of, you do not mean more clear
illumination, in respect of the mind, or evident belief, which is called
Gradual Revelation: for that is no way hindered by tying Christian people to
Articles and forms of Confession: But I find where your trouble lies; you are
for Doctrinal Revelations, which are in regard of the object, or things
revealed; as if there were some points of our Confession that had no certainty,
and some others that being not commonly known, are not yet received into it,
which may hereafter be found needful to be believed, as Chiliasme, or Christ's
temporal kingdom, and many other old lights that might again be set up new,
if once the people could be brought to forget those terms of prejudice,
Donatist, Anabaptist, Pelagian.

We had not as yet had our Articles and Catechismes, if Popish Articles had not
been broke through, or gone beyond.

Because Articles and Confessions were once abused, must they not now be made
use of? Simile est matter erroris. The Anabaptists thought they must needs
oppose Luther, as much as Luther opposed the Pope: How shall the people ever
come to be grounded and rooted in the Faith, if they be taught to think that
they are still upon uncertainties, no otherwise than they were before the
Reformation?

I fear the late Synod went more from the English Catechism, than mine has
done by far, especially in the points the Reviewer sticks at.

Here you make diverse Parallels, namely, betwixt the Church-Catechisme, that of
the Synod, and your own. But I have not yet made any collation or comparison,
betwixt the Assemblies Catechism and any other: And I think there is no
comparison to be made, betwixt so great a number of men so well qualifyed
(whatsoever their Authority was) pretending to walk in the beaten path of the
reformed Churches, And your self, being but one singular person, without any
color of Authority, professing to forsake the common road. And he that
reads the Title Page of your Catechism, and observes what points you there
promise to lay open; would think that you ought in fair dealing to have made
the nine and thirty Articles your Standard, and rule of comparison: for They
contain the established Doctrine of the Church of England touching those
controverted points: but in the childrens Catechism, nothing is laid down
purposely concerning them, because it was not thought, although you think so,
that they did suit the capacity of children. Yet because you seem to appeal to
the English Catechism, as making much for you, I am willing to deal with you
there, and thither we will go: Although I expect you should evade and shift off
all that can be brought against you out of it: or else fly off from it, as not
obliging you in all things, but only in some things that you approve: And
these two, I reckon to be much alike. I know little difference in this matter,
betwixt you, who think that Confessions which are to be subscribed unto, be
prejudicial to Christian growth and liberty; and others, whosoever they be,
who make confessions and articles useless, by opposing and eluding their
manifest meaning. Out of the Church-Catechisme I propound to you two arguments
in brief, against your common Doctrine. The first out of these words, The holy
Ghost sanctifyeth all the elect people of God. Where is taught, that Gods
Spirit sanctifyeth those that be elected; elected first, and then sanctified.
You teach quite otherwise, [that God electeth those that are sanctified;
chooses the godly man, (as you wrest the Psalm,) and those that believe, and
that are called, that is, engrafted into Christ's mystical Body, and you cannot
find where the Uncalled are said to be elected.] Secondly, the English
Catechism teaches the scholar thus, That he is not able to serve God without
his special Grace: and he that has learned this lesson well, will never be
brought to answer to the name Universalist, or believe he can do it by
Universal Grace. So here is no accord in the points we stick at.

Sect. 3. His third page utters this uncharitable slander of me, that I dread
and deprecate all national establishment of Religion, as sanguinary
persecution. Reply: It Is false. That God establish his true Religion in this
Nation, I pray for, and neither dread nor deprecate. Is there no way to build
up Sion, but by blood, or to serve Religion, but by sanguinary persecution? for
the Nation to establish Religion is a kind of (...), an improper speaking.]

Here you begin your game, to play on both hands; you say no such matter, and
yet you justify it: you seem to be very angry, and yet you seem not to be in
earnest, when you thus make sport with the word all; which might as well have
been by me left out, and your charge had been as full without it. When I said,
all establishment, I meant not, as you might well think, all both Humane, and
Divine; but my intent was to note, that you mislike the establishment, even of
that Religion, which you do now like well and profess: The Door must be left
open, lest any Truth be in danger to be shut out, though some errors in the
mean time enter, that so the growth of Christians be not hindered, as you said
even now. When the Supreme power of any Nation establishes Religion in that
Nation, this is National establishment; and if it be the true Religion, then
does God nationally estabish it. What you mean by Gods establishment of the
true Religion in a Nation, I know not, unless it be a liberty for every one to
believe and profess as he will, without restraint. But this is an improper
speaking indeed, (1) to call this the true Religion which is schism; and (2)
to call it establishment, which unsettleth all things, and introduces a
licentious wildness.

Endeavoring only by instruction, conference, and other spiritual weapons to
convince and further one another in the truth, and keep out error.

Your counsel comes too late, after that it has for many years been weighed and
tried, and found too light upon the scales, and too pernicious to the Church of
God, and his true Religion nationally established. Experience has taught us,
by what we have seen, how much good is like still to be done by the edge of
spiritual weapons only: there is little hope of silencing such persons as have
a faculty of a malady called (...), Multum loquaces, and dicentes nihil, that
say nothing, and yet cannot hold their peace. The Devils scholars are like
himself, who being twice repulsed by our Savior, set on him the third time,
and would not leave him yet, till he was commanded away, and bid be gone, by
way of Authority. To dispute with an obstinate heretic, keeps him in breath
and exercise, and the falls that he takes upon the ground, do but help to
recover his strength. Think you the German Anabaptists, would have been charmed
with instructions, and conquered with your conferences: it is true some few of
them might, and were so: therefore it is good to use both kind of weapons; not
the spiritual only, as you advise. When the Apostle Paul, gave order to Titus
that the heretics mouths should be stopped, chap. 1. v. 2. he meant not by
conviction of argument only it should be done, and endless discourse; but by
suspension and censure: therefore in the third chapter ver. 10. They must have
but a first and second Admonition, no more, and then be rejected. And in a
Christian State, if the censure spiritual be not backed and seconded by the
temporal arm, the wanton and profane ones of the world, will count it but as
stubble, and the shaking of this spear contemptible. If this be the only way
you can think of, to keep out error, I pray keep this your error to your self.

Under pretense of establishing Religion. to compel all men to believe or
profess and practice the same things, whether God has revealed it to them or
not; and for not doing so, though otherwise sober, pious and peaceable, the
persecuting and punishing them, and pressing and binding burdens of humane
ceremonies and traditions, and so exercising a lordly Domination in the Church
of God, is such beastly doing, under pretense of Church Power, that I pray God
enlighten all men's eyes to see the mistake and mischief of it.

As for the case of compulsion in matters of faith; you know (though you be
content that others should understand it otherwise, before whom you declaim
against settling of Religion) that the Question among us, is not about
compelling strangers, Jews, Turks, or Americans to a new belief; but of
compelling people to conform to their own laws agreed upon: Every man's consent
is involved in every Law that is made; so that a Law being enacted for the
uniformity of Religion, if any man suffers, he suffers not injuriously, but by
his own consent: Clergymen especially, whose consent is more express than any
other men's is. Tertullian is often alleged, as speaking against constraint in
Religion; but it is there where he pleads the Christians case against the
Ethnicks in his Apologetick, and to Scapula: But in the Church no man more
servent for Discipline than he is, and where he deals against heretics, as in
his Scorpiaco, or Antidote against the Gnostics, where his words are these,
cap. 2. Ad officium hereticos compelli, non inlici dignum est, duritia vincenda
est, non suadenda: that is, It is fit that heretics should be compelled, not
allured to do what they should do, and being obstinate, they are not to be
perswaed, but subdued.

Though otherwise sober, pious and peaceable] This is as much as if you should
say, quite contrary to what our Savior says, Matthew. 7.15. Take no heed of
false teachers, let them alone, do not hinder them, nor molest them, though
they be ravening wolves, so they come to you in sheeps clothing. Your qualities
of Sober, Pious, Peaceable, (in outward show, and further we cannot judge) are
the sheeps clothing, under which Sectaries are wont to shroud themselves, that
they may infect others before they be discerned. What Tertullus called Paul,
Act. 24.5. a Pestilence, is true enough in These, though misapplyed to Paul;
every Seducer is a very Pest, and therefore to be looked to that he spreads not
his contagion. And another may come and plead for Homicides, Traitors, false
Coiners of money, that are otherwise pious and peaceable, as well as you plead
for Seducers. But by the providence of God, all men's eyes that will see, are
opened to see the mischief of them.

That passage (of my deprecating all national establishment of Religion)
perhaps was one of those passages, that in a letter to me he cried peccavi in,
and therefore I forgive it, for as Seneca says, Quem poenitet peccasse, pene
est innocens, He that repents that he has done amiss, A faultless man almost
he is.

There was very little likelihood that this should be one of the passages I
meant: and I said no more of you then, than you now say of your self, nor so
much. He is ill advised that chooses you for his Confessor, who are so ready
to cry it out when he cries Peccavi: for me, resolved I am, never to put either
wine or ought else, that is worth ought, into that vessel that I perceive will
hold no water, But I am like to loose the benefit of Seneca's sentence; because
it repents me that I made any such acknowledgment, now that I see what use
you make of it, and what interpretation: and yet I doubt not to salve my
innocence well enough, because what I said was true, yet was spoken out of fair
comport, and not from conscience of any wrong I did you, for I did you none, as
I more perceive now I am more acquainted with you.

Sect. 4. That phrase, as may best serve the capacity of children, was not
joined with the great Mysteries, but with what went before -- But may not
children learn the great Mysteries?

The instructions, by your Title, were in the first place for children, though
not unusefull for men also: if you intended not that the great Mysteries should
be for the capacity of children, why did you direct the children at the end of
your catechism, to get the Answers to all the Questions by heart, some at the
first time, some at the second? your meaning was clear, as if you had said,
Because these instructions for children contain these great mysteries,
therefore they are not unusefull for men also.

Sect. 5. What more rise with them, then the odious names of Pelagian,
Semipelagian, Arminian, the Enemies of Gods Grace, and what not?

These names may be odious to others, but they are not odious to you, or if the
names be, the opinions are not; no, not the Pelagian. One of your party makes
it Pelagianisme, to be offended with the Surplice; another says, that the
error of Pelagius was, that he held perfection in this life. I would gladly
know, how you shift it off from your self; for I know no difference of any
moment betwixt him and you in the main. He was an enemy to Grace no further
than thus, that he held Grace was given to all sufficient to salvation, and
that it was given according to man's works, will, or preparations. And whereas
you join the Semi-pelagian and the Arminian together, I think you do Arminius
no wrong: for every man knows his own mind best, and his mind you may know by
his words, Oper. p. 143. Adjunxi disquiri posse an Semipelagianismus non sit
verus Christianismus. I said indeed (says he)it might be questioned, whether
Semipelagianism were not the true Christianity: because That is as the Mean,
(so he adds) duly receding from each extreme, namely, the Pelagian on the one
hand,, and the Manichean on the other: whereas I suppose Semipelagianism has
been taken hitherto to be a degree of one extreme, and not the golden mean
between the two extreems, any more than the Papist is in the right between the
Jesuit and the Anabaptist.

Sect. 6. He says, Vote, and the Rule of Gods word, may be not contrary but
subordinate: Reply. Be it so; yet would I not walk by vote, but by the word
still, though in walking by the word, I should in that case walk with the vote.
A man that travelleth from Lin to Aylesham, may go much of his way in Norwich
road, yet he goes not in it because it is Norwich road, but because it is the
way to Aylesham.

The wisdom from above is first pure, then peaceable: So may your Religion be,
in the first place, Pure; because it accords with Gods word: and in the next
place, peaceable, because it accords with the Churches Confession: But as you
handle the matter in your similitude of traveling from Lin to Aylesham, you
regard not the Church at all, no, not in the least. But what if it be a matter
of difficulty, that you know not what to think? will you not suffer the
Churches Authority, being put into the scale, to cast it on either side, so as
to make one part more probable than the other? Or if in matter of practice, you
doubt whether you may lawfully do, what you are by the Church enjoined, will
you not think it better to doubt, and obey, than to doubt and disobey? Or if it
be in a matter of small consequence, wherein without all doubt, you think your
self in the right, and others in error; will you not keep it to your self,
rather than so to propound it, as to hazard the continuance of the Churches
peace? If to these you answer, No; then you regard not much the Apostles
charge: To be of one mind, Philip. 2.2. To be perfectly joined in the same
judgment, 1 Cor. 1.10. To give no offense to the Church of God, chap. 10.32.
If all Protestants had been of your mind, the labor might have been spared,
of putting forth the Harmony of Confessions, as being of very little use. When
Abraham commanded his children to keep the way of the Lord; and when Joshua
undertook for himself and his household, that they should serve the Lord; had
they of their several families been of your resolution, they might have
returned this answer: We will serve the Lord, and keep his way, but not because
you command us; for then Gods fear should be taught by man's precept, which must
not be. God Almighty would not have given Ministers and Pastors for teaching
and edifying his Church, if he intended them no more respect and authority,
than you seem willing should be given them.

In the Preface to your Catechism, you would have your people not walk by
Vote, because ths is to be taught by men's precepts] said I again, They that
learn a Catechism framed by a single Pastor, are taught by the precept of
man, as much as they that walk by the vote of an Assembly: To this you answer
now, That you suspend none for not following you, neither do you enjoin your
sayings by compulsive force.] But this alters not the case at all. For that
which is indeed superstition, is so, whether it be imposed by violence, and
enforced, or whether it be voluntarily assumed and put in practice. Their Fear
is taught by the precept of men, whose Religion is Superstition, consisting in
will worship, and in observation of humane traditions and inventions. And what
is this, to a Catechism or Articles of Faith framed by an Afsembly or a
Convocation? You take up a Scripture-saying, before you have learned what it
means, and so the sound of it may serve your present purpose, You little
consider in what principles you breed your scholars, and how you teach them to
contemn all teaching, and the whole ministry of Gods word. And as for
compulsion, for ought I know, you use all the force you can use, (which is not
much.) Those who will not follow your directions, you will not encourage as
your disciples; and this is as great force and violence within your narrow
sphere, as that which is used in a larger compass.

Sect. 7. page 7. While we are instructed all of us not to have our fear toward
God taught by the precepts of men, we are instructed to have all but one Faith,
or Creed, that is, the word of God, and not to have our Faith like that of the
Romanists, depend on other men, to believe only implicitly, as the Church
believes, which is the thing I lead my parishioners from.]

Three Symbols or Creeds were wont to be proof sufficient of a good Christian
and Catholic. You here would have but one: and that one the word of God, as
every man shall differently understand it. And I do not remember that ever I
heard before now, the word of God called a Creed. Because I named Removers of
landmarks that their forefathers had set, you said I condemned you for such:
you seem now to acknowledge your self such: for certainly, no limits there are
of the Christian Churches, if the Creeds be not. The implicit Faith of the
Romanists, is a Resolution and Profession to be of the Churches belief, though
in the mean time it be unknown what that is; An assent in gross to all that the
Church propounds to be believed: and though Faith be in Scripture called
Knowledge; yet, say they, it is better defined by Ignorance than by Knowledge.
This implicit Faith, being upon the matter nothing but a good opinion we have
of our teachers, may be a good disposition or preparation to Faith, but Faith
it self it cannot be. And can your conscience suffer you to make the world
believe, that when a Church shall compose a Confession of Faith, taking care
the people be taught it, and exacting conformity thereto, and imposing
penalties upon such as shall depart therefrom; that this is only the implicit
Faith of the Romanists? Or to tell a good Christian that has been instructed
in the Doctrine of the Church of England, who knows it and believes it to be the
Truth, That it is a point of Popery to believe as the Church believes? I hope
there are but few that will not soon discern the mischief, and the consequence,
and the fallacy of such instruction.

Sect. 9. I told you formerly, that you used this word all, as a helve or
handle, wherewithal to cut down the trees of the forest. To this say you now;
Sect. 9. An acute charge, like helves or handles that use to cut.]

I thought you might be so acute, as to take my meaning without my further
rehearsal of the Fable that is so well known. A man that wanted a helve for his
ax, came and begged one of a certain goodly wood or tuft of trees, promising to
trim and prune them, and having obtained it, did therewithal cut the trees
down to the ground. He could not cut them down without a helve, but with an
helve or handle he did it. For there is no remedy, but you must give us leave
to put this particle[ with] to any thing that is an instrument, whether
conjunct or separate, or that is instrumental. He that felleth an oak, does it
with his arm, and with the strength of his arm, as well as with his ax. You
write with your ink, and with your hand, and with your pen: the ploughman will
tell you that he turns up the soil with his oxen: and will you tell him again,
that oxen do not use to turn up the soil? Thus while you hunt after such
minutes and minims as these are, and miss them too, thinking you have caught a
fly, when it is but the shadow of it; you let pass the substance of the
accusation which I brought against you, and that is this: You come to
Scripture, and thence you take this word all, pretending by the help of that to
preach the Gospel more sincerely, and more profitably than others generally do,
running without their message: But you frame it, and stretch and wrench it in
such a manner, that you corrupt and overturn the chief points of the Covenant
of Grace. Tertull. de Pudic. cap. 16. Est hoc solenne perversis, alicujus
capituli ancipitis occasion, adversus exercilum sententiarum instrumentitotius
armari: that is, With one place, or sentence, or point of belief, that is of
various and doubtful acception, perverse men think themselves sufficiently
armed and furnished, to oppose the greatest part of the Bible.

Sect. 10. I said, that we may not think that Luke meant contrary to Paul's
doctrine: That he fraudulently suppressed]

Your discourse tending to accord the words of Luke with Paul's doctrine,
because it was somewhat tedious and vain, as I thought it, and especially
because it belonged to another place, I did only note by the way in brief. But
that you did in seeming-satisfaction to your self at least, make them agree
well together, I did not omit to give notice in these words [ though he
thinks he can reconcile them.] And when I said thus much, it is most evident,
that I did not fraudulently suppress, what you did; though I did not needlessly
express how you did it. But when you said, It is safer to stick to Paul than to
Luke, it was scandalously spoken of you, and an odious comparison: if you do
indeed believe all holy Scripture to be divinely inspired, why should you
prefer one writer of it before another?

You appeal to me, Whether in case Luke does disagree with Paul [ if it be not
safer to stick to Paul, who says, If we, or an angel from heaven preach any
other Gospel than we have preached, let him be accursed]

But the Apostle does not make comparison betwixt himself and any other Apostle
or penman of holy Scripture, for he joins himself with them [ if we] he sets
not himself above others, but names himself together with others, the better to
establish that Gospel, which he together with others had taught. Here is
nothing of sticking to Paul more than to Luke, but of sticking to the doctrine
once delivered, against any other doctrine that should be taught by any
whosoever, upon what pretense soever imaginable.

Sect. 11. May I not stick to his sayings, and yet say, they be hard to be
understood?

But when you answer the arguments brought against you out of such chapters, by
saying, those chapters are hard to be understood; then you do not stick to his
sayings so, as by them to be concluded, or to suffer an end to be put to the
Controversy. That which is urged out of those places against the
Universalists, is easy and evident: you make use of the difficulty of them,
for an answer to put off and elude that which is plain and not obscure or
difficult. The matters of doctrine delivered by S. Paul, may be hard to be
understood, that is hard to be received, digested, and entertained, by loose
unsettled persons: many difficulties and intricacies there may be, not easily
cleared; shall this render the proof invalid, that such doctrines there are? If
you should out of S. Paul's Epistles defend Justification by Faith against a
Papist, you would not accept it for an answer, if he should say thus, That is
one of those things the Apostle Peter speaks of, hard to be understood, which
some heretics have wrested toward liberty and profaneness, as if therefore
there were no necessity of godliness or good works. The rejection of the Jews
and calling of the Gentiles, The abolition of the Law of Moses, were matters
hard to be understood by the Jews, and in which were many perplexities; yet
were plainly delivered by the Apostle: The impossibility of Apostates
repentance and renovation was plainly taught, yet attended with difficulties,
and wrested by the Novatians: So is the final period of the world foretold in
holy Scripture; yet are there many obscurities about it, and many errors. The
Resurrection of the dead is fully and manifestly declared and confirmed; yet
because it was hard to be understood and believed, it was wrested to this
sense, as if it were already past, whether interpreted of rising from the death
of sin, or any other way. These particular doctrines now by me named, are by
diverse diversely conjectured to be intended by S. Peter, as well as that
doctrine to which you apply his words. Gods gracious and free Election,
likewise final Perseverance, are evidently taught by the Apostle Peter, 1
Epist. chapter 1. ver. 2, and 5. as well as by the Apostle Paul, Romans 8.29, 30. and
in the chief part of the ninth chapter. And because these things are hard to be
yielded to, and hard to be received; and because there be many things belonging
thereto that are secret and unfathomable; let not therefore that which is
plainly taught, be either denied, or in such a manner interpreted and
perverted, that it amounts to a denial. You and yours have so gone to work,
that to an ordinary capacity the chapter spoken of is made scarce
intelligible. You say, God decreed not to choose particular persons, but to
choose all such as believe the promises of the Gospel, and to refuse all such
as seek justification by works; whereas certainly had there ever been any such
decree made, then Paul had never been chosen, who was a law-worker, as you call
it. So were many of the Jews and Pharisees, who yet were brought to life
eternal. And whereas the Apostle teaches Election and Salvation to be, Not of
man that works, wills, er runs, but of God that shows mercy; you have
so wrested it, that now it is, Not of man that wills or works, but of man
that believes, and continues in Faith and Repentance to his lives end. And
indeed, if Election be of such, as such, who persevere in Faith and Repentance,
then is Election of workers, in respect of their works, namely, Believing and
Repenting, and Persevering, which are works, all of them belonging to Gods law.
And thus have you overthrown your own doctrine which you have devised,
wherewith to overthrow the doctrine of S. Paul.

Sect. 12. It is one thing to look boldly, another that it may do so. Humane
frailties hinder not Christian boldness.

But he that says, I may look boldly, does there-withall, and in so saying,
look boldly indeed. Now you made your book look boldly, whether it might do so
or no, when you taught it to say in the Preface, that it might look your worst
Adversaries boldly in the face. And although he that has humane frailties may
look boldly, yet his humane frailties may not; and if he says, they may; he
does then justify his frailties. And thus much for your Preface or first
Chapter.

CHAP. II. The word Creatours.
I Shall put him in mind where he may read it, in Ainsworth upon Psalm. 149.
The Christian Churches never forbad us to read Eccles 12.1. in the Hebrew
tongue, or to turn it into English, according to its proper force or Idiome.

You have helped me where to find the word in our language, but that it is
found in our Church, I cannot admit: for you know that Ainsworth was a
professed Separatist from the Church of England. It was somewhat boldly done of
him to turn it so, who yet in his Title professed to explain the Hebrew words;
but it was far more boldly done of you, to learn the children at the very first
to speak so. As you have helped me to the notice of one, so will I in lieu of
him help you to the notice of another, whom perhaps you have not yet observed;
or if you have, I dare say you never before took notice of one of his places,
which he has added to yours and Ainsworths. It is Th. Br. of N. in a small
tract published last year. His fourth instance is in these words, Ephesians. 2.12.
And ye were without Gods in the world, so it is in the Greek plurally but it is
falsty tran slated God singularly, as if there were but one God in the
Trinity.] I hope there is a mean on this side the Tridentine Restraint, without
such liberty as many men affect, who are afraid that they shall not be known,
but pass in obscurity, and not be counted more learned and judicious than
others are, if they do not mend and alter something or other, though it be
without exception generally received, and of long continuance. AEneas Sylvius
before he was Pope or Cardinal, or Bishop, was Secretary to Frederick the
Emperor, and having indicted some letters, at his first coming to the
employment, he sent the copy to a Bishop then living at the Court, who procured
him that preferment, desiring him to examine it, and alter what he should find
needed alteration; who soon after returned him again his copy, in sundry
places blotted, but no way bettered, having put out diverse words, here one and
there another, placing such in their stead as were no way so fit and proper:
and when the Secretary asked him the reason, and what he misliked in those
words that he thus corrected: Atqui, said the Bishop, non vidisse me scripta
tua suspectare poteras, si nihil immutatum reperisses: you would have thought I
never read or perused your writing, had you received it again just such as you
sent it to me. I could wish that those men who are forward to show their
diligence, and their skill in the learned languages (or perhaps their
ignorance, as it happened in the instance I now gave you) by mending the vulgar
version, would innovate in matters of less moment: for these be indeed above
any profanae vocum novitates. I know it is one thing to teach that such a point
of Faith is employed in such an Hebrew Idiom: another thing to teach children
and common people to use the plural number, upon pretense of drawing the Church
to the Scripture. Christian Churches forbid not to read Eccles 12.1. in Hebrew,
but they are against rendering every word, just as it is in that language, as
their practice does plainly witness. And would you indeed that the English
Bible should begin in the same manner, and with the same pretense that you
began your Catechism withal; The Gods created heaven and earth? I hope you
would not; and yet you are in the way to it. And though you teach your scholars
at your fourth Question, to answer, There is but one God: yet if they be wonted
to read or hear that word in the plural, and be used so to speak, will they not
go near to forget your Answer in your Catechism, and to think that there are
more than one? Bara Elohim is the sacred Text, good Hebrew and sound Doctrine:
But Creavit Dii, is scandalous, no true Latin, nor good Divinity.

And because you think good to join with those that hold it not to be a bare
Hebraism, but an intimation of the Sacred Trinity, I pray you to remember on
the other side, 1. that the plural number implies two or four, as well as
three: so wholly it is but a matter of uncertaintie: 2. because you say here,
it is a scandal for Christians to Judaize, for so you are pleased to
Lutheranize, if indeed you believe that God is called Elohim, because of the
plurality of persons; then wheresoever that word be found, though ascribed to
one several person, it must signify the whole Trinity, and then in stead or
Judaism, you are in peril to fall into Sabellianism, or the error of the
Patropassians. And for the common people, I hope they will be wary how they
walk; and how they speak in such points of Faith, as this is. And because it is
a matter of consequence, and because the ground is slipperie, let them in Gods
name lay fast hold upon the Athanasian Creed, beginning thus, Whosoever will be
saved, for their guide and conduct; let them read it often, and hear it with
their best attention, and prefer it before all Catechismes; much more before
any newfangled one. There shall they soon learn by plain Analogy, according
to the Doctrine of the Scripture, and the Doctrine of the Catholic Church,
That the Father is Creator, The Son Creator, The holy Ghost Creator: yet are
there not three Creatours, but one Creator. And this may suffice for your
second chapter.

CHAP. III. Sinful lusts.
THe Question is, Whether in those words of the English Catechism, [ Sinful
lusts of the Flesh] the word Flesh signifies created nature, as you taught; or
the corruption of nature, as I said; making the epithet sinful, serve only to
amplify, and not as you make it to distinguish. Here you say, Be it so; the
matter is not material, it is to trifle about a toy] Yet I gave some reason why
it was requisite, that Christians young and old should understand the meaning
of that term. Matter of words is so far material, as to preserve what is
material; Verba quasi vasa, as the shell preserves the kernel, and the vessel
keeps what is put into it. But though you say, Be it so; yet presently after,
it must not be so. Sinful may be an epithet to distinguish withal. Why so?
Because we are taught to renounce, not the works of the Devil only, but the
Devil also; why not also the other two enemies, the world and the flesh.]

Those words of the Catechism refer to Baptism. In the form of Baptism these
three enemies are twice named, singly or solely, without any epithet or
addition, namely, Grant they may triumph against the Devil, the World, and the
Flesh: also, To fight under his banner against Sin, the World, and the Devil.]
By which two places compared together, any one that will may plainly see, what
Flesh in the form of Baptism, and in the form of the Catechism does signify,
namely, Sin: for what is called Flesh in one place, is called Sin in the other.
And every one that will, may plainly see also, that you are resolved to uphold
whatsoever you have said, yea, though it be an evident absurdity. This
Question with the answer, you left out wholly in your later Edition: which when
I perceived, I made some doubt whether or no I should take notice of it in my
Review, because I did interpret the omission to be a kind of confession of
your mistake; yet did I note it for the reason given in my Postscript. But here
you declare your self to be for confused signification, rather than a nice
distinction: and what you threw out of your second edition, you call home for
your relief in defense of your first: Neither are you well contented, as it
seems, that every one should interpose or meddle, and mislike that which happily
may deserve to be misliked. Nemo sibi extrane us est; sicut in vulnerum tract
atione,(says Julius Scaliger) Ossa mihi extraxi egomet minimo dolor: No
Surgeon can so inoffensively touch or handle a wound, or sore, or fracture,
as the Patient can. And more than this I shall not say to your third Chapter.

CHAP. IV. The tree of knowledge.
When upon the marginal note of your fourtieth Question and Answer, I
mentioned that horrible error, as you well call it, The Denial of Divine
Prescience, I did it so fairly and softly, that I thought I had not given any
just cause of distaste or anger. I gave you account of my intention, in making
stay at it. It was because the Socinians had gone that way very far, and some
of the Remonstrants were following. I had some other reasons which I then kept
to my self: but now my expectation thus failing me, you shall have them. One
was, because there was a pestilent Sectarie, who to prove that God does not
know free actions before they come to pass, produced those words, Genesis 2.19.
God brought the beasts and fowls to Adam, to see what he would call them: and
because I thought your gloss upon the ninth verse of that chapter might
unhappily help that error forward, namely, that it was called the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, because God would try whether man would do good or
evil; I therefore endeavored to give the true reason why it was called the
Tree of knowledge. And Socinus disproves Divine prescience from those words,
Genesis 22.12. Now I know thou fear God, seeing thou have not withheld thine
only son: and your explication of a place of the same kind with these two,
was likely to promote that pernicious error. Another reason was this; I did
observe of you in your writings, that you do in a manner wholly symbolize with
the Remonstrants, and in some things with the Socinians, as in these for
instance. 1. In neglecting the authority, custom, and manner of the Church,
upon pretense of walking only by the Scripture-rule, witness the very first
Question of your Catechism: and, Open door, Preface, of this. You bid the
people prefer the Apostles expressions before men's glosses: as here page 44.
you contented your self with the Scripture phrase, and used not that of the
Church. 2. In your opinion that Christ's death was only a Preparation to his
Sacrifice. 3. Ut fideles panem frangant, are the words of their Catechism; and
Professors to break bread are the words of yours. 4. You hold with them, that
Faith is wrought by no immediate power, but only the word preached. 5. You
would have the Names written in the book of life, to be Qualities; and Socinus,
Praelect. 13. page 72. Satis est eorum qualitatem quandam certam esse, quae in
hac metaphora proprio nomini plane respondet: It is sufficient that those who
are said to be elected, have some certain quality, which in this Metaphor of
the book of life, plainly is answerable to their proper names. You who have
gone so far with them or after them, are in danger to go further.

"What irreligious principles they that plead for their liberty of will are
forced to maintain, I know not. That you might soon have seen by that which
follows there. By Their liberty, I mean such liberty as they plead for, and
such as cannot stand with certainty of Prescience. Say they, For any one to
exhort another to do that which he knows before hand he will not do, is to
dissemble: such liberty as must be free not only from coaction or compulsion,
but from necessity of infallibility as to the event: which necessity is
incident to things contingent and fortuitous: for events, necessary,
contingent, chanceable are called so, and differenced so, in respect of their
second causes, not in respect of the first or supreme cause: for Quicquid est,
quando est, necessario est: any thing that is, must needs be so, then when it
is so. That Saul, after he was wearied with seeking up and down the country
for his fathers cattle, should on such a day, and such an hour of the day, meet
with the Prophet Samuel, was to Saul then when it came to pass, as certain as
that the sun should set that night, or did rise that day, that is, it was most
certain because it was present. But to God all things are certain and present
that shall be; as certain to him though future, as to us though present.
Socinus therefore was driven (and if he had not been driven and enforced to it,
he would never have done it) to deny and impugn Divine Prescience, and that
in order to denial of Divine Decrees, and to maintain, Quod non est certum, non
est scibile, nec futurum: whatsoever comes to pass, and does not certainly come
to pass, is not capable of being known: no more than factum infectum fieri is
capable to be done. And the Socinians,(in Compendiolo,) Negant admissa
infallabili omnium futurorm Praescientia, refelli posse dogma de
Praedestinatione: and whether they speak reason or no, Ger. Vossius can tell,
whose words are these: Hist. Pelag. c. 6. Th. 15. Nisi negarc volumus Deum
praescire quid homo pro quibusque circumstantiis sit acturus, fateri etiam
COGIMUR Deum certis hominibus Gratiam praeparasse, qua certo and infallibiliter
salventur: aliis vero hujusmodi Gratiam non praeparasse: that is, Unless we
will say that God does not foreknow what man will do, upon such and such
circumstances, we cannot but of necessity confess, that he has for some
certain men prepared such grace, whereby they shall certainly and infallibly be
saved, and not prepared such grace for others. If Faith be Gods gift, and if he
will give it to whom he will give it; this is that predestination which you
endeavor what you can to fright the world withal. That therefore which you
call in this chapter a horrible error, and I called an irreligious principle,
you must fall to and defend by rational consequence, unless you give over your
horrible and irreligious manner of reviling Gods decrees.

I fear this Gentleman is so far from thinking that God did not know before,
that he thinks he decreed and necessitated Adam to sin. Would I follow his
course in fastening upon him the sayings and judgments of other men of his
mind, I might find passages enough to that purpose in many of them, to render
him and his opinions odious: but Mr P. has done it so fully, that I shall but
actum agere, do what is done already; and therefore I shall leave the Reader
for that to him.]

Although I do think that you have more mind to slander than cause to fear,
yet I will now tell you, 1. I do not believe God did decree sin: but I think
you believe that he did decree the permission of sin: 2. In those things which
are decreed to come to pass, Gods decree infers no necessity upon inferior
causes or agents, because he decrees all things to come to pass according to
their kind: natural agents to act naturally, voluntary agents voluntarily: So
of necessary, contingent, and casual agents. I pray suffer your self to be
informed a little better by Dr. P. Baro, page 321. in explication of this
position, Dei Decretum pravae voluntatis libertatem non tollit, Therefore I
shall leave you for that to him. But if you have so much leisure as to trouble
your self about others, and what it is that they think, and that you would not
be afraid there where no fear is; I pray let all your fear in this matter be
for them that call it [ A gross solecism to imagine that there should be one
cause of the act, and another of the obliquitie or sinfulness of the act; and
that think it is as impossible to separate the wickedness of the act, from the
act that is wicked, as it is to distinguish the roundness of the globe, from
the globe that is round; So that he which is the Author of the one, must be
the Author of the other also: yet the Apostle Paul said, Acts 17.28. In him we
live and move: Let it be for them who tell you it must be a Metaphysical head
that can determine how God should work by evil instruments, and not be guilty
of the evil: and yet the Apostle said, Acts 3.18. He has So fulfilled. Let it
be for them that think, he who withholdeth a thing which being present would
hinder an event, is the cause of that event: and in whose power it is that a
thing be not done, to him it is imputed when it is done; and he that
withdraws the light, is the cause of that which follows for want of the
light.] And yet no man that has his reason left entire to him, can imagine
that the sun which is all light, having no darkness in it, can be the cause
when it sets, of the shadow of the night.

It is an easy matter to make any opinions seem odious to those men that are
full gorged with prejudice against them. Every thing feeds according to the
kind and constitution: Torva leaena alupum scquitur. I can tell of some, who
in the doctrines of the Church of England, wherein they have been educated,
have been very much confirmed by the matter and the manner of some men's
writings against them.

And as for those men that take such pains to make the opinions you speak of to
be odious: I do wish, and if it might be, I would advise them, that they would
at last forbear, and not please themselves in so odious a practice: whether
these opinions be true or false, is uncertain; it is at least probable that
they are the Truth, and upon these reasons.

First, it because very many of these men, by their own confession, were of the
very same mind in these points of doctrine, and held that end of the
controversy to be the surest, which now they load with unworthy mockings and
reproaches: And if They were so, then were their Teachers so likewise, because
it was for want of better company that they changed no sooner.

Secondly because a very great proportion of the Churches Christian,
heretofore and lately, has in the main and leading parts of the controversy,
gone that way which these now forsake, and would persuade the world to follow
them. For the days of old let Ger. Vossius speak, never suspected for a
partiarie while he wrote his History, unlelss it were for their side. After
all his search, the brief of all he gives in is this. De Histor. Lat. in
Cassiano: Celeberrimi quique occidentalis Ecclesiae Doctores, sequebantur
Augustinum and Prosperum; Nec enim sudicio meo B. Augustinus prioribus Patribus
repugnat, sed quod de Praedestinatione priores fere Patres praeteribant, hoc
addit: Atque ubi illi de Gratia incautius essent locuti, hoc explicat: that is,
The most famous and most renowned Doctors that were in the Western Churches,
followed Augustine and Prosper; neither in my judgment was S. Augustine
contrary to those Fathers that went before him; but that which they omitted
about Predestination, he added; and that which they uttered somewhat
negligently and unwarily, he explained. It is true that Poelenburgh in
confutation of Hornbeks eighth chapter Sum. Controv. produces Vossius to the
contrary, lib 6. Th. 8. testifying that all the Greek and Latin Fathers
before Augustine, held that those were predestinate who God foresaw would live
well:] but he left out what follows because it made clearly against him: Verum
intellexere praescientiam eorum quae homo esset facturus ex viribus Gratiae,
tum praevenientis tum subsequentis, eoque antiquitatis ille consensus, nihil
vel Pelagianos vel Scmipelagianos juvat:] They understood the foreknowledge of
what they would do by the strength of Grace: their consent therefore nothing
avails either Pelagians or Semipelagians. For late ages, Popish Schoolmen are
generally for the upper way; it is communis sententia against Massa corrupt'a
as the object, so witnesses Estius in Epist. p. 112. Yea, the Remonstrants who
were not of that opinion, do testify, Apol. p. 63. There is no doubt to be
made but the Popish Doctors, and most of the Schoolmen, were Patrons of that
opinion. For which their opinion Calvin wrote against them in diverse places. I
name these, Instit. 3.23.. 2. Neque tamen commentum ingerimus absolutae
potentiae, quod sicuti Profanum cst, it a merito detestabile nobis esse debet.
In Isai. c. 23. v. 9. Commentumillud de absolut a potentia Dei quod Scholastici
invexerunt, execranda blasphemia est. Opusc. p. 1006. Commentum de absoluta Dei
potentia detestabile est, quia ab aeterna Dci supientia and justitia separari
non debeat potestas. I shall thank you therefore if you can help me to
understand the meaning of Hist. Qu. part. 1. page 38. where the doctrine of the
Supralapsarians is said to be first broached by Calvin. Surely those Papists
could not follow him in that for which he reprehended them who were long before
him. And the Council of Trent goes no further than to forbid men to presume
themselves to be of the number of the predestinate, not denying the Decree, but
only affirming it to be secret and hidden, unless by special Revelation. In
Popish countries ea opinio maxim viget, says the Preface to Castellio's
pieces. And if these opinions be so odious and pernicious, what think you might
be the reason why the Pope could be brought no sooner to declare against them?
And if a great party of Papists do still hold them, it is a great probability
they are true; because it concerns their advantage and worldly gain, that they
should not be true: For what freedom of Grace does gain, that merit of works
does loose; and merit it is that brings in their profit.

The learned Dr. J. by his Publisher was entitled, The Divine, with these two
restrictions, of his Rank, and of his Age: I may add a third, of his party,
and then his testimony is without exception, Page 3712. If as good a scholar
as Bellarmine would take the pains to examine his opinion, as strictly as he
has done Calvin's (touching reprobation) it would quickly appear to be for
qualitic the very same, if not worse.] And the Church of England teaches the
Doctrine of Predestination, yet knew it to be A dangerous downfall to carnal
minds, Artic. 17.

I am not speaking now of the Truth, or of the certainty of these matters; nor
at this time persuading any man to be of this judgment touching these
opinions. whether they be certain or no, or whether they be true or no; this is
certain, they are probable to be true: and that may be enougn to persuade men
not to reproach them, though they believe them not. Prudentibus (faith
Sidonius) cordicitus insitum est vitare fortuita: Wisemen use to be deeply
rooted in this principle, not to run a great hazard or capital adventure upon
any thing that is dubious and uncertain. Good men out of a principle of
conscience toward God, will not engage against their Sovereign Prince: and bad
men, if they be not too bad and forsaken of God, dare not partake with them
that are given to change; because of the wrath of man, foreseen as possible,
though against common expectation; and because of that which vicissitude, or
(...), the turn of a present state and and posture may bring upon them.

The opinions furthermore (which your Reader must be directed, where he shall
find them made so odious) besides the Authority of a most considerable part of
Christians, receive some probability from Gods dealing in this present world:
his ways being not like ours, nor his thoughts like our thoughts: therefore are
his works rightly counted wonderful. Was there ever found any man who was well
satisfied and contented with what God has done and does upon earth, unless it
were by laying to heart that it was his doing? I speak not now of Cato or
Socrates, but of David, Solomon, and Jeremy. How many things come to pass
contrary to man's wisdom? yea, which is more to our present purpose, contrary
to man's goodness, that is to say, the goodness that is in man, and the goodness
ness that ought to be in man? And if there be so much left in this world to our
admiration; it is possible, yea it is likely there is much more in the other.
Hic est fidei summus gradus, (says Luther, de servo arbitrio) credere illum
esse clementem, qui tam paucos salvat, tam multos damnat: This is the highest
degree of faith; to believe that God is merciful who yet condemns so many,
and saves so few. And if we give allowance to our reason to come up so far as
to keep even pace with our faith, we may perhaps a little satisfy our reason,
and a while gratify our affections, and likewise retain some kind of
religion. But let us remember that the Christian Religion has always been
accounted by the best Christians, to be as well against our will, as above our
understanding.

In case of vile and scandalous words against some great Prince or Potentate,
it has been sometimes the manner for the Judges, not to hear the words
publicly uttered or rehearsed; but as it were privately and apart to read and
consider them: Even then and there where such words were to beaggravated to the
height, and deeply censured. It were to be wished that the Remonstrants, and
all that join with them, were half so moral and respectfull toward the God of
heaven. For they seem to take delight to heap up terms most horrid, odious, and
detestable, and charge them upon their adversaries how? as spoken by them? no:
disclaimed by them, but following upon their opinions by consequences framed or
forged rather by their own selves, But if you and yours will not be otherwise
minded than you are, nor take heed to your way, lest you offend with your
tongue, in reproaching the living God; but that you will take pleasure to
sharpen and poison the arrows of your reproaches with taunts and mockings,
whereby to render Christianity hateful to the common people, who for the most
part do so far contemn Gods manifest judgments of this life, that they are
little busied with his secret decrees touching the world to come, saving that
you would fain fill their heads with your venomous slanders: Then I will give
this counsel to all Christians whomsoever, who think not much to take good
counsel from whomsoever, that they beware how they give a willing ear to such
offensive and distasteful speeches: and that they take heed of being
conversant, and especially in taking pleasure and disport in such scurrilous
writings, as The Thief Predestinate, and Tilenus Examinate, with the like, lest
they be given over to hardness of heart and a reprobate mind, as a just
recompense of the delight they take in such wickedness. Religion is the most
sacred and the most serious thing in the world: All serious persons think it
so; and all idle ones will find it so, when they shall come sooner or later to
abominate and hold accursed that froth and some of wit, that presumes
profanely and sacril egiously to make any article of Faith, any part of
Christian profession, or the holy Scripture, the subject or matter of mirth and
mockery.

In stead of asking pardon for what I have now said, I will crave leave upon
the same occasion to say a little more, before I pass from your fourth chapter.

To render opinions odious, although it may be bad enough, is yet pertinent.
But it has been always accounted moral, to spare the persons. Now that you may
see how little heed is to be given to your Authors design, while he would
make his Adversaries opinions to be odious, I will here, being so fairly
invited by you, give an instance of his haste and mistake while he endeavored
to make their persons odious. One instance, but a pregnant one, containing no
less than four mistakes of his in less than twice so many lines. So I direct
you to his 120 page of Heautontimorumenos, where thus he asperseth several
persons: and first M. B. as not able to write true English, and who would not
loath to read such an one. [ He prays perfect nonsense, he is skipping for joy
out of sense and syntax, -- his faults being greater than those of Rivet, of
which the grave and wise Grotius took public notice. And in this I have
followed that great example] To this latter part is affixed in the margin out
of Grotius's Votum pro pace, which he wrote against Rivets Examen, [pag. 63.
Moneo ne qui Latin non didicit, Latin scribat] with addition of some
particulars or instances of false Latin, which there may be seen.

The perfect nonsense spoken of, was not written by M. B. but was made by your
Author, taking one mood for another; the sentence is this being contracted [
Now that God would be pleased to make up all our differences] If you take it in
the Subjunctive mood, it is lame and imperfect: but take it in the optative, as
doubtless it was intended, and it is beyond all cavil and exception. The want
of sense and Syntax was the Printers fault, a very common one, in misplacing
the latter semicircle of a Parenthesis, which being set where it ought, and as
it might easily be, by any intelligent Reader, does set all right: concerning
which also M. B. in the very next page did thus give warning, and did thus
presage before the collection of the Errata, [ As to the neglecting signs of
Interrogation and Admiration, and such like small matters, they may be left
alone for some jocular Adversary to make his games of.] So much for M. B. Now
follows next the justification of the practice by the example of Hugo Grotius,
who without any disparagement to his gravitie and wisdom, did find out, and
did publish to the world, some Grammatical oversights (...) in the writings of
Andrew Rivet, with whom he was engaged in controversy. But what if it does now
appear, that Grotius did civilly conceal the true name of the party that was
thus peccant against the rules of Grammar, and your Author did set down a
false one? will you not grant that he has wronged Grotius as well as Rivet,
and has taken a course to render both of them odious or despicable? Had M. P.
ever read the works of that learned and judious man, or but taken notice that
he was Divinitie-Professour in the Universitie of Leyden; and that he was made
choice of, and singled out to be Tutour to the Prince of Orange, two
employments undertaken usually by the most eminent and accomplished men that in
the whole nation respectively are to be found: He would never have been so
precipitate as to fasten upon Rivet the sorry badge of a John lack-Latine,
upon the single testimony of aprovoked Adversary, and that without examining,
not whether he said true, but whether he said so or no. But it is an ordinary
thing for some men, without chewing to swallow the words of those, whose
persons they have in admiration: and on the other side, upon slight or no
grounds to entertain contemptible thoughts of their persons whose cause they
disaffect. It is certain, 1, That Rivet never wrote what is there mentioned:
and 2, That Grotius never charged him with it. And for proof of what I say, a
very persunctory inspection may suffice: for the words quoted are brought in
toward the end of a long digression, written also in a smaller character,
containing a relation of some acts and historical passages at Oxford, Roterdam,
and the Hague; but not one word of Rivet, or any thing concerning him: who
therefore complains in the 66 Section of his Answer, called his Apologetick,
of so large an excursion, and so extraneous: Per sexdecim paginas ex^urrit D.
Grotius in alia, ea excutienda relinquam iis quorum interest: that is, I leave
the matters contained in so many pages to those that are concerned in them. As
for the person understood and concealed although I think he may be better known
by some other tokens there specified, than by [Latine non didicit;] yet my
chief aim being now to demonstrate who it was not, it is reason I should be so
courteous to him, in suppressing his name, as Grotius was, who yet had received
at his hands no small cause of distaste: And in this I have followed that great
example. But he who thought it not impertinent to render odious a person of so
great note, of such merit and praise in the Churches, upon no other ground that
I know, but because he was not of his own opinion, in those things wherein
liberty of dissent was wont to be pleaded for and pressed; must not think me
curious or over-busie, while I have done what I can to wipe off so unworthy a
blur from the names of the illustrious Hugo Grotius and Doctor Rivet.

CHAP. V. The prepared Sacrifice.
Sect. 1, 2, 3. I Said not he offered up himself in heaven, but in his
ascending ihto heaven, Strictly, the offering of the sacrifice was either the
act of the man bringing it to the Priest, bebefore the slaying of it, or the
act of the Priest and that after it was slain, causing the savor of it to go
up by fire toward heaven,

His yielding up himself to obey and suffer, yea humbling himself and obeying
to the death, though acts of sacrificing, and of the sacrifice offering it self
to be sacrificed, were but preparatorie to his Priestly oblation, strictly so
called, in in which the virtues of his blood went up to God, and was in the
eternal Spirit, the altar and fiery love of it, carried up into heaven a
spotless Sacrifice.]



Strictly, the offering of the sacrifice was that which you have omitted,
namely, the killing of it in relation to God. That which you call the oblation
of the sacrifice, was a thing consequent upon the oblation; or at most, the
completing of the oblation, that is, the burning of part of it, and the
ascending of the fire and smoke. For this is the nature of sacrificing, which I
shall now tell you. The The Priest is the officer or Mediator betwixt God and
Man: Man offers his gift to God, when he wholly resigneth up his gift to him:
this is done partly and preparatively by himself in the presentation:
principally and fully by the Priest in the mactation or slaying of it. The
Priest killing the Sacrifice at the foot of the altar, does then man's part, in
offering to God man's gift. Now has man done offering. In the next place God
does by his Priest dispose of the gift being thus made his: How? his altar
devoureth one part, the Priest and the people the other. If therefore you would
rightly know the true nature of sacrifices among the Jews, you must consider
them not only as exercises of obedience and divine worship in the general; or
as acknowledgements that death was the stipend of sin; or as shadows and types
that Christ should die for the sins of the world; though all these they were:
But further they are to be considered as Federal rites or signs of a Covenant,
Friendship, or Agreement betwixt God and man: As always feasting or eating
together was a Symbol of familiarity, amity, and mutual consent. Psalm. 41. My
familiar friend that did eat my bread: and 1 Cor. 5.11. by those words, With
such an one, no not to eat, familiarity is forbidden. 1 Cor. 10. We are one
body, because we are partakers of one bread. Thus the Altar is called Gods
Table, Ezekiel. 41.22. and in the first of Malachi, The Table of the Lord is
contemptible, and the sacrifices are called Bread there, they offered polluted
Bread upon the altar, when they offered the blind and the lame for sacrifice.
Levit. 21.6. The offerings of the Lord made by fire, and the Bread of their God
they do offer. Bread, it is well known in phrase of Scripture, signifies all
that is eaten. Malach. 1.12. His meat is contemptible. Levit. 3.16. The Priest
shall burn them upon the altar, it is the Food of the offering made by fire.
God is brought in, in figure and allusion or analogically, as eating what is
burnt upon the altar. Calvin's words upon the place last named are these;
Notatur familiaris Dei cum populo suo communicatio, ac si communem cum illis
haberet mensam -- se cultoribus suis convivam facere dignatus est; that is,
When the part of the sacrifice which was burnt upon the altar, is said to be
Gods Meat or Food, it notes, that God is pleased familiarly to converse with
his people, and as it were, to feast together on the same feast with them. And
to the same purpose Grotius Annot. in Evag. p. 451. Quasi scilicet amicorum
more communes cum ipsis epulas sumeret. As humane passions are in a borrowed
manner ascribed to God, after the same manner was eating in the burning of the
sacrifices in the time of the Old Testament. In the fiftieth Psalm when it is
said, Think thou that I will eat Bulls flesh? though it be denied of God in
a gross and carnal manner, and as if he needed it or did it out of hunger; yet
is it even there intimated as true in a figurative signification. And it would
never have been denied, had there been no color for it, no likelihood of it,
had there been no likeness of it, more or less. The altar, and the fire of the
altar do take Gods portion; the rest the Priest and people eat, 1 Cor. 9.13.
They which wait on the altar, are Partakers of the altar. The altar takes
part, and they take part: as servants usually wait on their master, make ready
the meat, and serve him til he has eaten, and afterward they eat: Thus did
the Levites make the dinner ready, the Priests attended upon the table, that is
Gods altar, where he is supposed as it were to eat, and afterward they did take
their share, and feed upon the reversion, Praecerptos cibos, as Minucius Felix
calls the meats that were left of the heathen sacrifices. So that the act of
offering was past before the fire came to be kindled, although the gift that
was offered, did remain there ready to be burned. They who rendered Idolothyta,
things offered to idols, did not think that the offering consisted in the
burning; for then the ashes must be eaten, there being nothing else left.
Incense was offered strictly when it was burnt: but strictly, Beasts were
offered when they were slain, though they might be said to be offered too, in
some fort, when they were consumed by fire. And the reason which you seem to
give out of the Texts in Leviticus, chap. 1. and 3. is as weak as water. It is
called a Burnt-offering made by fire: does the offering therefore consist in
the burning? No: but that which was before offered, is now burnt, and there is
the Burnt-offering, or the offering made by fire, or the offering fired. And
you know well enough that other languages give not the least color for this
your new conceit, whatsoever the English with some that are ignorant may do.
And if the whole Burnt-offering, one kind of sacrifice were called so, as you
say, from ascension, it does not follow thence, that the offering consisted in
the ascending.

And whereas you make application of this your fancy, that Christ's Priestly
oblation should strictly be, when he went unto God, and was carried up to
heaven, you do after your wonted manner, confound Christ's oblation with his
Ascension: and his state of Humiliation, with his state of Exaltation. Hebr.
9.25, 26. Nor yet that he should offer himself often, for then must he often
have suffered. Does not the Apostle say plainly here to your understanding,
that Jesus did offer himself then when he suffered, and in his suffering? And
although you say, "It is one thing to offer himself in heaven (which you meant
not) "and another to offer himself in his ascending into heaven (which was your
meaning) yet in your page 22. you declare yourself plainly for the Socinians,
teaching that the purgation was made in heaven: so you contradict one falsehood
with another. Your words are, Yea, how did his sacrifice purge the heavenly
things themselves, but by his entering in once into the heavens, as Hebr. 9.23.
where also in v. 26. his offering himself is made by the Apostle to answer to
the high Priests entering once into the holy place?] In what sense soever it was
that the heavenly things were purged, or purified, or dedicated, it was by that
which was done on earth, and not by that which was done in heaven. Neither does
the Apostle, v. 26. oppose the high Priests entrance into the holy place, to
Christ's entrance into heaven; but the high Priests entrance into the holy place
with the blood of others, to Christ's entrance into heaven with his own blood,
that is, the virtue and merit of his own blood, Still you deceive your self or
your Reader, with the ambiguity of the word offer, as if there were no
difference betwixt presenting himself, and offering sacrifice.

Sect. 4. That the Altar was the Cross, a great mistake, Matthew. 23. Which is
greater, the gift or the altar that sanctifyeth the gift? by which reason they
make the cross greater than Christ as sanctifying him.]

When the Altar is said to be the Cross, the meaning is, that as sacrifices
were offered or slain at the altar (not upon it, but) at the foot of the altar,
or as Revel. 6.9. uuder the altar; so was Jesus Christ offered and slain upon
the cross: neither is there any fear from the words of our Savior, though the
altar be called the cross; because as Christ was, in diverse respects, The
sacrifice which was offered, and the Priest that offered, and the altar that
sanctified the sacrifice: so might the cross in another respect be called the
altar, because there he died: for these two being mutually related, so that
where there is a sacrifice, there is an altar also; whether we make the altar
to be the cross, or the Divine nature, as you call it, the fiery love of it,
or whatsoever it be that bears most proportion to other altars; still we
shall find there will be some dissimilitude betwixt this altar, and that upon
which the sacrifices were wont to be burnt. And whereas you compare the
ascending of the smoke of the sacrifice, which God is said to smell as a sweet
savor, unto Christ's ascending into heaven; It is Christ's Passion, not his
Ascension, in which God was well pleased, as with the smoke of the
burnt-offerings: Ephesians. 5.2. Christ loved and gave himself for us, an offering
and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor. He gave himself for us,
when he was crucified, and then was his love showed to us, when he laid down
his life for us: And accordingly is our justification ascribed to his blood or
death: 1 John 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. Revel.
1.5. He has washed us from our sins in his blood: and chap. 5.9. Thou have
redeemed us unto God by thy blood. Contrary to your doctrine therefore I may
boldly affirm, That Christ's death upon the cross, was that which did answer,
fulfill, effect and accomplish, both the killing of the beasts, and the burning
of them also. The question with you is about this latter. Hebr. 13. V. 11, 12.
The bodies of those beasts whose blood is brought into the Sanctuary by the
high Priest for sin, are burnt without the camp: wherefore Jesus also, that he
might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the gate.]
Hence is proved invincibly, that the crucifying of Jesus Christ was typifyed
and prefigured by the burning of the beast: and that it did perfect and
complete the sacrifice of him, as much as the sacrificing of the beast was
finished and completed, then when it was burnt and consumed to ashes.

His note from Hebr. 9.26, 28. That to suffer, and offer, and die, are made the
very same thing, is a gross mistake: to offer was active, to suffer was
passive.]

These three were in that case the very same thing, howbeit the words differ
in their several significations. If it were true which you now teach in this
matter, That Christ's oblation of himself consisted in his ascension into
heaven; you might very well say, that his oblation and ascension are the very
same thing; yet to offer is one thing, and to ascend is quite another. You have
many a nimium nihil, just like this same in this chapter, which I pass by; but
this I have noted, that our Reader may observe, how little heed is to be taken
to you, when you call aloud, A gross mistake, or use any the like false and
deceitful out-crie. He is too much to blame, that observes your custom, and
will trust you, And thus much for this Socinian chapter.

CHAP. VI. Head of the Church.
FOr your first Section I direct the Reader to the Review: and for your second,
where you would prove the Apostles to be not temporary, but of perpetual
standing, because it is said, Ephesians. 4. Till we all come, etc. I answer, it is
sufficient for verifying these words, that some of the officers, namely,
Pastors and Teachers, continue to the end of the world: And secondly, The
writings of the Apostles do abide still; and the Gospel preached by them at
first, is brought along to our times, and as our blessed Savior says, Joh.
15.16. Their fruit remains: and yet it cannot well be said in common manner
of speech, and you leave us to guess at your meaning, when you say, the
Apostles are of perpetual standing.

Sect. 4. page 33. I did relate what was done in the time of Henry VIII,
without any desire to harm you: as he that should rehearse the severitie
enjoined by the Law of Moses, Deuteronomy. 18.20. cannot be therefore said to wish it
were put in execution now: nor desire any harm to them that have foretold the
day of Judgment to befall in several years now past.

Kings incensurableness smells of flattery: and page 34. It is good for Rulers
to beware of flatterers, who have the poison of asps under their lips, and kill
insensible and unsuspected, and therefore are a more dangerous kind of enemy
than (though not so frightfull as) open Rebels, as Dalilah did Samson, more
hurt then the Philistines without her could have done him. By M. H. principles,
Samuel was too blame to refuse to turn again with Saul, and to go to visit him,
-- and the Priests of the Lord in Uzziah's time; and S. Ambrose in Theodosius
time, were saucy fellows, for dealing as they did with their Sovereigns; not
remembering that they were their Fathers; yet I am neither for the Popes Bulls,
nor the Scotch Presbytery.

To praise, and to flatter; to reprove, and to revile; these do well or ill,
have good or bad effect, according as the party is disposed upon whom they are
bestowed. Rebuke a wise man and he will love you; but if you reprove a scorner,
he will hate you: if you praise a good man more than there is cause, that is,
if you flatter him, he will study to deserve your good word, and will be (as
it were) ashamed to come short of your commendation: and it will in effect
amount to an admonition or reproof. It is a very good caution to Princes and
great persons, to take heed of flatterers, who do in all things seek to sooth
and please them, from whom oftentimes they receive damage, and so they do
sometimes from those that out of quite contrary carriage do contradict, and
cross, and provoke them.

If it be granted that a flatterer is in some fort worse than a rustical
reprover, yet he is not better than a reviler, the excess always having more of
virtue in it, or at least inclining more to it, than the defect; and especially
in our demeanor toward our Superiors. And if a flatterer be the worst of
enemies that deal in words; yet is he not so ill as those that wrong in hostile
attempts: and therefore you kept no decorum, when you made flatterers worse
than open Rebels, yea though growing frightfull. And there is a larger
difference between a flatterer, and a traitor. The example of Dalilah had done
well enough, to prove that a secret traitor is worse than an open Rebel; but
to your present purpose it no way appertains.

For this particular kind of flattery, that consists in ascribing too much
power, greatness, or prerogative to Princes, as it is true, so it is
impertinent to say they may be flattered: for so may the people too, to the
prejudice of them both. Out of doubt, it is ill done to ascribe to either of
them more than belongs to them. But here is the right question, To whom the
supreme power of Religion belongs, whether to the King, to take care what Faith
it is the subjects make profession of; or to the subjects to be of what
profession they will. And I think it is not well done to call that flattery,
when no more is ascribed to any one than is due to him by the law of nature: by
the Law of God, and by the law of the land respectively.

Toward the censurableness of Kings (which was wont to be accounted amongst
dangerous positions) you bring three instances; Saul, Uzziah, and Theodosius.
As for Saul, Samuel refused to turn again with him, and to join with him in
sacrificing what was forbidden to be sacrificed: but he did not refuse to turn
with him, when he was to show him honor before the people, in attending on him
while he worshipped God, And inasmuch as God himself reproved Samuel, for
showing more regard and tenderness to Saul than he ought to have done, being
peremptorily rejected; we may well imagine how Samuel stood affected to Saul:
how respectfull and how steadfast he would have been to him, had the case been
ordinary. And Uzziah was not put out of that place that did belong to him: The
Priests said, You shall not come into our place in the Temple: they said not,
You shall not keep your own. If a Minister should not suffer one of his
Communicants to consecrate and distribute the bread and wine in the Lords
Supper, but forbid him: this would not come near so much as to abstention, and
therefore this example comes not near the purpose. And lastly, as to
Theodosius; I answer, If Constantine the Great be reckoned the first Christian
Emperor; then Theodosius the elder is the first Christian Emperor that is
found among the Penitents, or under Ecclesiastical discipline; and the last
too, for the space of seven hundred years, till the time of Henry the fourth
and Heldebrand, when Hell, that is, Satan broke loose. Next, it is questioned
whether it was well done of these two great persons, what they did. As some
highly commend, so others much mislike the Emperors submission, and the
Bishops austerity, as drawing danger and disgrace upon the Ruler of the people,
whose dignity God provided for, by making a law that forbad all such speeches
as savoured of detraction and contempt of him. Thirdly, I regard not much what
S. Ambrose did. Actions Heroical, and Actions Zelotical recorded in Scripture
or Church-Historie, are not rashly to be imitated, or drawn into example. I
attend rather to his words: Apolog. Dav^ cap. 10. Liberi sunt Reges a vinculis
delictorum, neque enim ullis ad poenam vocantur legibus, tuti imperii
petestate: that is, The power of Empire discharges Kings from the bands or
censures of their transgressions, neither are they obnoxious to the penalties
of laws as others are. The Popish Casuists resolve, That whosoever is
excommunicate must be Subditus, he must have a Superior, some or other:
therefore with them the Pope is free, because there is none on earth above him;
whosover censureth another judges him, and whosoever judges another, is
superior to him: and there cannot be two supremes, and there must be one.

CHAP. VII. The Magistrates power in Religion.
Sect. 1. AT that rate I might conclude that M. H. knows not how, and in what
sort Christ is Head of the visible Church, because he has not told us]

This was not my omission, but your very great negligence: I told you how, in
that place page, 27. In regard of the Graces of edification derived from him,
for the Offices, Ministry, and Government of his Church, and in regard of the
common benefits and common gifts of a spiritual kind.] So now I have told told
you twice.

Sect. 2. I Think they have a mind to settle their Contra-Remonstrant or
Presbyterian Principles by persecution.]

If I should ask you why you make these two terms all one which yet look
several ways, one of belonging to Doctrine, the other to Government, I know
not what you would plead for your self, unless it be Custom, a custom that
you have to confound, and unkindly to mix and make up together things
heterogeneous and quite different. And because you seem to be better acquainted
with the opinions of the Remonstrants, than you are with their persons,
therefore let me tell you, First, that the Remonstrants were Presbyterians, and
lived under that Government, and misliked it not. Only in the doctrine of
these Churches they excepted against four points; and doubted somewhat of the
fifth. And in the year 1622, they put forth their Confession or Declaration of
their opinions, in the chief heads of Religion, and in the 21 chapter their
words are; Cum Episcoporum and Presbytero^um omnium munus sit docere ac regere,
manifestum esse satis videtur, aliis in alios imperium nullo jure divino
competere. To teach and to govern belongs to Bishops and to all Presbyters,
neither have they by divine right any power one over another.

Secondly, Those Divines who went out of great Britain, and were assistant in
the National Synod, where these doctrinal differences were examined, were all
of them Episcopal men, and three of them were Bishops either then or afterward;
and when they were to give approbation to the Belgic confession, they kept
themselves only to points dogmatical, and would not examine those two
articles, the thirtieth and the one and thirtieth, which concerned
Ecclesiastical order; as is inserted in the Acts, Sess. 144. and which is more
than so, and which is not inserted, they did in the very next Session openly
impeach the Presbyterian Government and Paritie of Ministers. So far were they
from being, according to your medley, Contra-Remonstrants and Presbyterians,
Sed cursum mutavit iniquum frugibus amnis Doctus iter melius. So you would have
it at least, that now these terms should turn their wonted course, and carry
quite another meaning than they did heretofore. But because you are ready to
take up any thing, though it be never so nonsensical (to use your own word)
that you imagine any way to make for you; give me leave to tell you further,
First, that there is no great heed to be taken to his complaint, who misliketh
the Presbyterians for that which they are to be commended for, and for that in
which the Episcopal part joins with them: which is this, That they desire and
endeavor that Religion may be nationally established, and some kind of
government and discipline Ecclesiastical settled. And secondly, They who are
not content to commend their form of Government as good, and as the best; but
further set it forth as Christ's throne and spiritual kingdom, are not matched,
but outgone by them, who make it a point of Christian liberty, and a part of
Christ's kingdom, to have no Church Government at all. And as it is no good
Logic, to oppose Presbyterian and Remonstrant; so it is no great honesty to
make the world believe it, if they could, that none but Presbyterians oppose
Remonstrants.

Himself alleges a passage where I commend Authority for securing Religion
against Blasphemy by civil sanction; therefore he might see I am not the man
he represents me. I put a great difference betwixt Blasphemies and differences
in opinion.

Some kind of blasphemy I ever thought you were willing should be suppressed,
though it be contrary to your principles that it should. That which I noted out
of you in the place alleged was this, That you who in one place do call the
establishment of the Contra-Remonstrant, or seeming orthodox opinion, a bloody
sanction, in another place would have the Magistrate make provision against
them, by enacting a law like that which was made against direct blasphemy: and
how do you then put a difference betwixt Blasphemies and Differences in opinion?

Sect. 3. To pleasure him a little with my thoughts about the Magistrates power
in matters of Religion, I shall say briefly; 1. He may not exercise the
authority of the Dragon, spoken of Rev. 13. assume names of Blasphemy, set up
and enforce images of any other Object, Author, or Medium of worship, than God
and Christ, and the mediums, ways, and ordinances of his appointment; nor back
with his authority those that do, compelling men to worship them, swear to
them, blaspheme Gods name, pollute Gods rest, etc. Nor may he oppress, abuse,
persecute, and destroy his subjects, or suffer them to be persecuted and
destroyed, and especially upon such accounts. 2. He is Custos utriusque
tabulae, keeper of both tables, both as to his own practice and worship, as to
the Author, Object, Ultimate end, medium, and way of it; He is to receive and
do nothing, but as Gods commands approve, and so as to the manner of his
worship in spirit and truth; his use and observation of Religious oaths,
observation of Gods Sabbath or rest, carriage to his subjects, etc. And in
respect of others; He has power to see that Gods worship be preached and
practiced, purely and sincerely, without idolatry, superstition, or humane
inventions, mediums, and impositions; false oaths, or sinful; breach of
Sabbath, or additions of rests, otherwise than Gods word allows may he not
suffer; nor his subjects to oppress, defraud, or harm one another, especially
to oppress one another conscience; no, though they be Bishops; he may not
suffer them to bind upon his people their inventions, and inflict penalties
upon men, merely for nonconformity to their wills, where they declare their,
consciences dis-satisfied; but he may pull down all false objects, and mediums
of worship, impositions of forms and ceremonies that offend and trouble tender
consciences, or impositions of opinions, with penalties in such things where
persons may be of different apprehensions, and yet all fearers of God: he may
see that the Apostles practices in not imposing in things indifferent; yea,
decreeing against the practice of such things as all could not practice without
offense, as Acts 15.28, 29, 30. is to be observed. He may send forth his
Princes to teach the truth, as Jehoshaphat did with some Levites, yea and
preach it himself, if thereto fitted, etc.

You pleasured me a little, but you pleasured the Sectaries a great deal more,
in carving thus, or cramping rather the power of the Magistrate about Religion
to serve your own purpose, and your own party, as Praxiteles made the statue
of Venus Cnidia by his own Phryne: or like your friend Bellarmine, with the
fifteen marks that he gave of the Catholic Church, which he thought might some
way or other be fitted to his Roman Lady. While you were limning the several
parcels of the Magistrates power, you took care to prevent all prejudice to
your other opinions, whatsoever they were, or whatsoever they might be for the
time to come, in alea hominum, as the fall of the Die may happen, and still as
you went along, you were casting your eye upon that Saint which Salmasius
speaks of and calls Diva Independentia, in the eleventh Chapter of his
Defense of the King. And I observe this your Picture is almost all shadow, and
dark, or negative. In your first Paragraph, and in the greater part of your
second, you say not what the Magistrate may do, but what he may not do. So you
lay a Restraint upon him, in stead of teaching what authority he has. Of him
that was the first founder of a sect of the Academicks, Arcesilas by name.
Lactantius wrote thus, De falsa Sap. in the third book: Constituit novam non
philosophandi philosophiam: He set up a new kind of no kind of Philophie; and
you have found out here a new kind of no kind of Church Government for the
supreme Magistrate to busy himself about. He must not do this, nor he must not
do that. His ruling must be to see that none rule in impositions of forms, or
opinions; and that is, that every man may rule and do in religion what he will,
what is good in his own eyes, which is Hemlock that will grow of it self, in
such times especially, when there is no king in Israel.

He, is to receive and to do nothing, but as Gods commands approves] You speak
confusedly, as you do also soon after, when you say, [ Otherwise then Gods word
allows he may not suffer] I am to tell you therefore, that Gods word allows
many things that are not commanded nor appointed by him in his word. And this
is sufficient to justify them, that there is nothing in Gods word against
them, or forbidding them.

Without Idolatry, Superstition, or humane inventions] For the two first of
these we are agreed; but for humane inventions I differ from you: for your
words carry with them a denial of the Churches authority, in framing; and the
Magistrates authority in confirming Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical.
And this your doctrine concerning humane inventions and impositions, I take to
be Superstition: the true nature of which consists in taking away the
indifferency of things indifferent: whether it be in placing holiness and Gods
worship, in the practice of such things as are not enjoined of God: Or in
abstaining from such things as (...) displeasing to him, which he has no where
prohibited. He that forbids in Gods service humane inventions, that are
neither impious, nor imposed as parts of Gods worship, makes more negative
precepts than God has made. As the Apostle says of meats, 1 Cor. 8. Neither
if we eat are we the better, neither if we eat not are we the worse. The like
may we say of Vestures, and all things of an indifferent nature, whether we use
them or use them not, we are neither the better nor the worse; and to say we
are the better or the worse, is superstition.

But when you say, He has power to see that Gods worship be preached and
practiced purely and sincerely, without idolatry, superstition, or humane
inventions, you add not a word touching heresy and error in belief: is not
the word of God a rule tam fidei quam cult^ucirc;s? and is there not false
doctrine, as well as false worship? It is true that [ purely and sincerely] do
comprehend very much; but your addition following I take as a diminution: you
limit and restrain what you say to idolatry, superstition, and humane
inventions: yea; within a few lines you make it a part of his authority to
pull down impositions of opinions. You leave us unsatisfied, neither do I think
that you are able to give any good reason, why the Prince should set himself
against Idolatry, more then against Heresy and why Christians may not have as
much liberty in the practical worship of God, as they may have in their
opinions and belief; there being a mutual and necessary connection betwixt these
two principal and integral parts of Religion. And even while you speak against
tolerating idolatry and superstition, your principles plead for them, even for
all sorts of idolatries: For if men must cleave only to what they understand,
and walk in what they are satisfied in; there is no idolater that will readily
understand you, or be satisfied with what you can say, so as to be brought off
from his idols, and betake himself to the true God, and his true worship.

False oaths or sinfull] The Magistrate may give an oath: if it be a false
oath, it is his fault that takes it, not his that gives it. For never yet was
any man put to swear that such a thing, or such an opinion is true: and
therefore he could not be put upon it to swear that which is false. He that
some years now past, wrote a Discourse of conforming in Revolutions of
Government, page 54. complains of the dangerousness of those Assertory oaths,
which require us to swear that such or such a thing or opinion is true, which
may seem clearly so to the learned contrivers of those oaths, but not so to
others.] What you mean by false oaths I know not: but I think this Author
aimed at the oath of Supremacy; but he was very much mistaken in supposing
that oath to be assertory of the Kings Supremacy: If that be it that is sworn,
it is not a false oath, but it is a very vain one to swear that which the Court
knows already, and is firmly persuaded of. An oath is an end of doubt and
controversy. What is the doubt? It is not whether the King be Supreme or no:
but whether the party sworn believes it or no: So that it is a kind of
Purgatory oath, whereby the party clears himself from the suspicion of a
Papist, by denying a chief point of Popery.

Additions of rests] You may charge them with additions of rests, who hold
their festival days to be more holy than other days are: and equal to the Lords
day or Christian Sabbath, and the observation of them to be a part of divine
worship. Thus the Papists do: and thus the Papists say the Protestants do not:
and you may safely be so courteous as to believe them. That cannot be said to
be added to any thing, that is not of the same nature with it; as he that
expounds the word of God, does not add to the word, unless he makes his
exposition to be equal to the word, and of the same authority with it. The
Hebrews by the ministry of Moses received of God their Canon Law, touching
Government of the Church, as well as they did their Civil-Law for Government of
their State or Nation. And we will suppose that the Christian Church which is
left more at liberty, is not now deprived of that authority and power, which
the Church of God in the time of the old Testament had, in setting apart some
days of rest, either annual or occasional; either of rejoicing or humiliation
as do witness their feast of Purim, and their feast of Dedication, and their
Fasting-days, which were not of divine command, and are mentioned Zechar. 7.5.
and 8.19.

Merely for nonconformity to their wills]Those who through want of age, or of
ought else, know nothing of Episcopal Government in England, more then you here
tell them, you would make believe leeve thus speaking, that it is merely
arbitrary, no way limited or regulated. But you cannot be so ignorant as not to
know thus much, that none are punished for nonconformity to the Bishops will.
What penalty any man suffers, is for not observing the Laws of the land, and
the Canons of the Church; which Laws and Canons are not made, but by such
persons as are assembled by virtue of the Kings Writ: nor are they taken notice
of, unless they be approved by the Royal assent. Here therefore you either
speak unadvisedly, or else against the Kings Authority in matters
Ecclesiastical.

Impositions of forms] If forms be lawful (as I am sure they are) imposition
cannot make them unlawful. What you may do of your own liberty, you may do
likewise when you are enjoined to do it; Unless (as some place holiness in
observing men's precepts) you place holiness in breaking of them.

He may see that the Apostles practices in not imposing in things indifferent,
yea, decreeing against the practice of such as could not practice without
offense, as Acts 15.28, 29. be observed.

First, The Apostles did impose in things indifferent. Eating meats offered to
idols, was lawful in it self, or indifferent, else S. Paul would not have
taught and resolved the Corinthians, that they might buy them, and eat them
without question, as Gods creatures with thanksgiving; provided that they did
not eat them formally or religiously, with conscience of the idol: yet the
Apostle by a decree commanded to abstain from them: but I pray observe well in
what manner that was done: for that decree was (1) Temporary, lasting but for a
time; and [2) Local, not Universal, or all the Christian world over, but
concerning only the Church of Antioch, and the Churches depending on it, where
many of the Jews had their abode.

Secondly, Other things which they found indifferent, so they left them: though
they did not decree the practice of them, they did not decree against the
practice of them, as you say they did.

Thirdly, It is a very vain imagination of yours, that the Apostles had such
regard to them that could not practice without offense, those things that were
imposed; and that therefore they would impose only things necessary. The
particulars (excepted Abstinence from fornication) were necessary, how? not in
themselves, but for the peace of the Church at that time. It was thought
requisite to compose and settle some differences, and prevent some offenses, by
enjoining forbearance from some few things for a while.

Those whom you call Dissatisfied in Conscience, and persons of different
apprehensions, may be such as the Apostle calls Ignorant. If any man be
ignorant, that is, wilfully ignorant, when sufficient care has been taken for
his information, let him be ignorant; and such he calls contentious: and if
any man be contentious, the Custom, much more the Law of the Church is enough
to silence him. And he faith further, Mark them which cause divisions and
offenses. Never would there be any order or constitution of a Church, but mere
confusion, if nothing must be decreed to be practiced that cannot without
offense be practiced, by those that are ready to cause divisions and offenses.

He may send forth his Princes to teach the truth, as Jehoshaphat did with some
Levites, yea, and preach it himself, as David and Solomon did, if thereto
fitted, etc.

You have drawn a kind of vail over three several places or parts of this
your picture; the vail of, etc. I will not attempt any where to strike it, lest
I be served as Zeuxis was in Pliny, when he hastened upon the stage, to look
what it was that might be underneath the curtain that his Antagonist had
painted. Yet would I gladly know whether within this last, any such thing as
CALLING be couched or no; for my part I think it is contained under Fitness,
and that no man is fitted to officiate in public that is not called; and that
there is Ecclesiastical Idoneitie, as well as Moral; and the one requisite in a
preacher, as well as the other. But if I guess aright by your words, you are
not of that mind, but think (with some others that walk disorderly) that
Abilities, Competencie of knowledge, Boldness, Volubilitie of language, and
what else there is of that kind; without an outward Call, do sufficiently
furnish any man to be a public preacher. But the examples you bring are no
proofs. Jehoshaphat sent out preachers ad docendum, that the people might be
taught; and with them he sent Priests and Levites, who taught the people, 2 Chronicles. 17.9. The Princes did and spoke what was proper to them; and the Priests
and Levites likewise did their part, and theirs was to Teach: Deuteronomy. 33.10.
They, the tribe of Levi, shall teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law.
And as the case was at that time, when the people were to be reclaimed, and
brought back to the God of their fathers; had the Priests and Levites gone
forth alone, without civil Authority, directive, coercive, and coactive, they
might probably have been mocked and contemned, as the messengers were that
Hezekiah sent to give warning of keeping, the Passover.

Yea, preach it himself as Ddvid and Solomon did.] David and Solomon were
Kings, but with-all they were Prophets, extraordinarily inspired, Penmen of
holy Scripture: and may all Kings be preachers because Solomon was so? If you
have done the supreme Christian Magistrate any injury, in what you have now
written; here, if it be compensation, you make it in giving him more than is
his own, or than of right belongs to him. Artic the 37 of the Church of
England, We give not our Princes the ministering of Gods word. To which Article
rather than you will conform, you choose to give countenance to the slanders of
the Papists, and so far as you can, to make them good. Calvinistis in
Angliamulier quadam est summus Pontifex: so said Bellarmine during the Queens
reign: and we are quit with them now for the story of the woman. Pope which
they tell us of, so cried Sancta clara, And to that purpose you seem to close
with the Anabaptists, teaching that gifts do fit for ministerial duties,
without any other door of entrance; extending this liberty particularly and
expressly to Kings and Princes. The leaven of which doctrine (if it be
encouraged) may attempt Magistracy as well as Ministry, that every one may
take upon him the office of ruling and judging that is thereto fitted.

When John the Baptist refused to baptize our Savior Jesus Christ, who was
without all comparison more excellent than himself; our Savior willed him to
forbear, and not to insist upon the worthiness or unworthiness of their
persons, but to do at that time what was decent and behovefull to be done, and
to fulfill all righteousness, namely, of good order, and of that vocation which
each of them had taken upon him to perform, answering his reason to this
effect, as if he had said; When the more worthy is to be baptized, then he that
is less worthy, if he be called to it, and in place for it, may and ought to
baptize him; this is right and just, decent and orderly. It may so fall out,
that an auditour or person of private capacity, is of so good endowments,
industry, and learning, as that his Teacher publicly authorized, may well be
taught many things by him, even such things as belong to his own profession,
and may say, I have need to be taught by you: yet the private person must not
usurp the public place, because he is the more able, and the better fitted of
the two. Remember the Apostles rule, Let all things be done decently and in
order.

CHAP. VIII. The Law.
Sect. 2. Was there ever such a Non-sensicall thing found? he faults those
answers, as denying that which he proves out of them.]

You are not the first that has spoken contradictions, nor shall I be the last
that confuteth an Adversary out of his own words. You assigned five uses of
the Law. To be a Rule of life, was none of the five: yet I proved it to be a
rule, by consequence from your first use, To show what is sin. You taught it
not directly: and every one could no gather so much from your words. But they
who held the Law to be neither ruling nor binding; might nevertheless continue
in that mind still. But I have gained thus much, and like wise so may others,
that you have spoken out and confessed the truth, and I am glad to hear it. I
pray you keep your self to it for the time to come.

Sect. 3, I know no reason for your loud challenge of wrong and dishonestie:
you faulted Ministers for being Teachers of the Law, to such as were not well
principled for duties. If there be some men so unqualified, that we must not
preach the law to them, then it is no rule to the unconverted, which was all I
said, and I might well say it from you. According to your Divinity, so far as
I can perceive, the principles are not many. There is one, To believe that God
loves us: and he that believes this, is in a manner converted. But as I think,
we may talk of duties to those that have not principles, not any principle to
perform them, that so they may know what need they have of a principle which
might enable them to perform them: and that in the mean time, they may do ea
quasunt Legis, what the Law commands for the substance of it, though not as
they ought for the manner.

In your Sect. 4. I shall not need to take notice of any thing, saving how you
justify your answer to your Question 290.

If I say in making Latin, according to Tullyes or Quintilians style, a man
observes all the rules of Grammar and Rhetoric, is it all one as to say, that
gives a supersedeas to all Grammar and Rhetoric, and teaches them to have no
use or need of them? Who ever had to deal with an unhappier Reviser?

But, first, when you asked the child the question, Ought thou not to walk
in the observation of the ten Commandments? why did you not teach him to answer
plainly and positively, Yes? whereas the Answer that you framed for him,
amounts to a Negative: In acting forth Faith and Love I do observe also those
Commandments] which is as much as if you had told him, that he shall not need
to observe the ten Commandments, otherwise than by acting forth Faith and Love.

And secondly, for your similitude from Grammar-learning, I answer, He that
has attained Tullyes or Quintilians style, may well lay aside and neglect all
Grammar-rules, and rules of Rhetoric, and needs them no more than an
ordinary countryman, that has by custom learned to speak true English, does
stand in need of an English Grammar, which he never yet looked into, it may be
never heard of. As he that can swim well, throws away his bladders, and the
lame man that has recovered his legs at the Bath, leaves his crutches there
that helped him thither. And will you say, or dare any man say, that he who
has attained the highest degree of Faith and Love that is attained in this
world, may neglect, forget, or not give heed to the ten Commandments? Where is
our obedience to Gods Law, if our eye be not upon his Law? or what is
obedience, but as it is in Psalm. 119.6. To have respect to all Gods
Commandments? So you have mended the matter well with your similitude; you
teach children, even children at their first, to observe the ten Commandments
as Cicero observed the rules of Rhetoric, who was himself a rule to Rhetoric.

The fifth Section is full of heavy complaints and charges. I showed how you,
as well as some others, did mistake the Apostles words of, The Law being a
Schoolmaster to christ, because he speaks not comparatively of a believer
with an unbeleever, but of the state of the Gospel with the state of the Old
Testament. Here you say, That I have merely slandered you, and you have been
for many years of my mind for all these things.]

Answ. 1. It being an ordinary mistake of others, who recede from the
Antinomians more then you do, I had no reason to leave you out.

2. If you were indeed of that mind then, and so had been for many years, you
did not hold so long; for after not many leaves turned over, I find you of
another mind, page 83. [ The Apostles did not bring men under servitude, as
Moses formerly, but to Sonship.] You make an opposition betwixt Servitude and
Sonship; whereas it should be betwixt manhood and minority of age, or the
like; if you had continued in that mind you were of. Our Reader must now do
his part to judge who is wronged, and how far. And as for the satisfaction you
would have of me: it is in your power to clear and set right with others your
own reputation. And so long as you charge your pretended Orthodox, with seeking
Gods promises by the works of the Law, and with establishing their own
righteousness; and while you say, that Teachers of the Law, do they know not
what; you will be thought to be an Antinomian, whether you be one or no.

He adds some pretty stories of what manner of Schoolmasters some had.]

That proverbial form, Velut Epicitharisma post fabulam, Rhenanus explaineth by
the custom of the preachers in his time, which was after some deep discourse
of dark points in Divinity, to tell some fine and pleasant story of some
Saint or other our of the legend, to keep the people from falling sleep. If the
Reader thought so well of my stories, as you do, they might somewhat serve to
refresh him, being possibly (though it were but early) grown dull and heavy
with reading. But I rather think that you grew dull betimes; for the instances
that I alleged, were not to show what schoolmasters some had; but to show
that a Pedagogue, which is S. Paul's word, does not signify a schoolmaster in
the vulgar notion, though perhaps it must be rendered so; but one that waited on
great men's sons, to teach them how to behave themselves, and to frame their
manners agreeable to their state.

I omit your explications, and come to the close of this chapter.

I said, The Law with other Scriptures is of use to instruct, reprove, etc.
which is all one in sense with the rule of obedience. Only I contented my self
with the Scripture Phrase, and used not that of the Churches.

Something it was then, I was sure, that you would not let fall such a word,
that the Law should be a Rule, or that it should Bind. When you would not
speak as the Church speaks, well might I think you did not mean as the Church
means. The Apostle Paul, who bids us be of one mind. 2 Cor. 13.11.
beseeches us also that we speak all the same thing. And when he would have us
to glorify God, Unanimes, uno orc, Romans 15.6. with one mind and one mouth;
can you imagine but that he would have us to instruct and teach the people with
one mind, and one mouth? This humor of yours is a bad symptom, and as it may
be hurtful to the Church of God, so most certainly it is scandalous. They that
know the old guise of heretics, will think never the better of you for keeping
your self so close to the Scripture Phrase, but have reason to think the worse.
Arius being required by the Emperor to deliver a confession of his Faith, gave
it so, that he observed the bare words of Scripture, (...) Sozom. 2.28. They
suspected him the more for this, and found him the more fraudulent. Concluding
therefore this matter, I tell you, that by your delivering your self in such a
manner, you have caused the offense that is given, contrary to the doctrine
which we have learned, Romans 16.17. Neither is it much material, whether your
opinion were such as I charged you withal, or not; so being that it were
vehemently probable by your words that such your opinion was.

CHAP. IX. Professors to break bread.
IN your ninth chapter, which concerns Laymens administering the Eucharist,
you put me to a double task: first, I must prove it is your opinion, because
you seem to deny it: and secondly, I must prove the same your opinion to be
false, because yon seem to maintain it.

That Christ in the instituting of it appointed or designed Ministers only to
do it, or makes any mention of them, I find not.]

To what purpose is this said, but to show that others not ordained may give
the Eucharist? But you can find that every man must abide in his calling; and
that none must walk disorderly, nor invade another place or work. But what
think you of the constant practice of the Church? Has not Custom, if there be
no more, the force of a second law, as well as of a second nature? But-you
find our Savior limiting the Sacrament, as well as the word, saying, Go teach
all nations baptizing them. But you find the ministration of the word limited
to certain persons; How shall they preach unless they be sent? No man takes
this honor to himself. Paul and Barnabas must be separated to the work. If
preaching the word be proper to persons set apart, then administration of the
Sacraments also: The reason is, because the Sacraments are but the word or
Gospel made visible, and do contain, after their manner, what is in the word,
and somewhat more; namely, a plainer representation to our senses, a nearer
application, and a mutual stipulation and agreement: The word may be preached
to infidels, and propounded to them by way of parley: The Sacraments contain
the solemn confirmation of the agreement between the parties. It is the Sealing
of a Will, Writing, or Covenant, that is the most authentic and formal act for
making up the instrument. My argument then is this: The Eucharist contains in
a Sacramental manner, that which is in the word, and somewhat more too. If a
person ordained, and none else must administer the word, then he and none else
is to administer the Eucharist.

Our brethren of the Congregational way, as they do communicate with others in
the word and prayer, but not in the Sacraments, whence they are termed
Semi-separatists; so in their declaration of their faith and order, although
they allow others besides Pastors and Teachers to preach the word publicly
and constantly, page 58.. 13. yet they say. The Lord Jesus has appointed his
Ministers to bless, and set apart, and give the bread and wine in the Lords
Supper, page 94.. 3. And while you differ from them in this and diverse other
points of moment, you cannot take your place, which otherwise you might, among
the Congregationales Orthodoxi, in the scheme that George Horn, who calls
himself Honorius Reggius has drawn, to hold all the Sects of Great Britain.

He should have done better to have showed in what chapter and verse Christ or
his Apostles said, Let none but ordained Ministers administer the Sacraments,
than to have told us what a curse the Council of Trent, a Popish Antichristian
Council, ordained against others, besides to whom they allow ministering of
them: but of that not a word.]

But you know I named not that Council, as intending to ascribe any value or
authority to it, but only to show how the Protestants disclaimed the opinion.
Diverse errors are there anathematized, which the Protestants never held; but
by so doing the world was invited to believe, that such errors they held. I
named Calvin then, who says in his Antidote, that no man in his right senses
does think so: and now I name Chemnitius in his Examen: who misliking the
opinion, proves also that Luther never held it, but opposed it while he opposed
the Anabaptists. And Dr. Whitaker in Defense of his Answer to Campians ten
Reasons, lib. 8. Quis nescit, neque Laicis, neque Diaconis concedi, ut
Eucharistiam conficiant? Wno knows not this, that neither Laymen nor Deacons
may consecrate the Eucharist? I return you answer therefore: You should have
done better to have taken notice why I alleged the Council of Trent, namely,
to show how the Protestants universally neglected the curse there framed, and
detested the error there condemned; than to tell us it was a Popish
Antichristian Council: but of that not a word.

The Church of England in her Cate-chisme does not mention the Minister in
treating of the Sacraments.

But the 23 Article makes provision, That none shall administer the Sacraments
before he be lawfully called.

Nor Ursin.] In the definition of a Sacrament he does not: but under the fourth
head, What the agreement is, and what the difference betwixt the Word and the
Sacraments, the fourth particular of the agreement is in these words, Utraqne
Deus exequitur per Ministros Ecclesiea: God does deal both Word and Sacraments
by the Ministers of the Church.

Whether those men that Peter commanded to baptize Cornelius and his household,
were ordained or not, no body can tell.]

Some will tell you that Peter himself baptized them; neither is it said that
Peter commanded any to baptize them, but jussit haptizari, he commanded them to
be partakers of that Sacrament: or if he commanded any man to baptize them. you
cannot tell but he to whom he gave that charge was ordained: and have far more
reason to think he was, than to think he was not.

I think you may remember who it was that once brought an argument to your
present purpose, in behalf of persons unordained, from the name Eucharist,
which signifies, Giving of thanks. [What fault is it if some of Gods people
administer a Thanksgiving?] and I do remember that a certain Author, that
wrote against mixed Communions, brought twenty arguments to prove the Lords
Supper not to be a converting Ordinance; and fetched one of them, namely the
eleventh from the name Eucharist: The Euchharist, says he, is an Ordinance of
Thanksgiving, and Consolation, but unconverted persons are not to be called to
thanks and joy, but weeping and mourning.] So that from the word Eucharist,
which yet is not directly found in Scripture, but assumed by the Church, to
note, The Lords Supper; while one maintains, that He who is not a converted
Christian may not be partaker of it; another would maintain, that He who is but
a professed Christian, and no more, may be the minister of it. Both which
opinions are as unwarrantable, as the reason taken from the Name is weak and
groundless. For in words and names, we must not regard what their original is,
and their etymology, or whence they came; but what they are brought to by use
and custom: if Eucharist does signify Thanksgiving in the Greek; yet in the
Church of God, it is appropriate to the Lords Supper in common acception. But
secondly, take the word in that sense, whence it is taken to denote the Lords
Supper, and it does not signify Thanksgiving, but Benediction or Blessing,
and, as may easily appear by conferring the Evangelists, To give thanks is to
bless: as when many sit down to meat at table, we will suppose that all of them
give thanks morally; yet formally, one does give thanks; or which is the same,
blesses the table. and when Justin Martyr Apolog. page 76. makes mention of
(...) speaking of the Lords Supper, it is plain that he took Eucharist for
Consecration, or Sacerdotal benediction, and not for giving of thanks. From the
consecrating of the bread and wine, or blessing of them, which is but one act,
the whole service is called the Eucharist. So that this word being rightly
understood, affords a solid argument against laymens administering the Lords
Supper. For to whom does it belong to bless, but to the Priests and the
Ministers, under both the old and new Testament? Deuteronomy. 10.8. to this office he
separated the Tribe of Levi: to bless persons and things, and in this also
consisted chiefly the priesthood of Melchisedek, before the law of Moses was
given. And this may well be supposed, and is moreover recorded to have been the
practice of Christ and his Apostles. So to conclude this matter: as the people
would not eat until Samuel came, because he did bless the sacrifice, 1. Sam.
9. I hope there are none but Anabaptists, or (who are the same with somewhat
more learning, and more errors) Socinians, that will presume to eat, until a
public authoritative minister does according to peculiar duty, bless the
Sacrament.

CHAP. X. Of the twofold Resurrectian.
FOr distempered or greensick appetites, that long for unwholesome food, you
have in this chapter especially made provision: A thousand years reign upon
earth in all worldly felicity before the day of judgment. But you say, though
you speak besides the ordinary common rode, yet von trust not besides the
Scriptures, nor the judgment of the ancient Orthodox.

They had need be Scriptures of clear evidence, or proof, that should be
brought to call in question so many principles of Divinity plainly delivered
in holy writ, quite contrary to this millenarian fancy, that Christ should
come from heaven, and raise the Saints and reign with them a thousand years;
and after that space, the wicked should rise and receive sentence at the day of
judgment.

First, The Scripture says, Act. 3.21. The heavens must contain Jesus Christ
till the times of the restitution of all things: and in our Creed, we believe
that Christ from thence that is, from heaven, shall come to judge the quick and
dead. But by this opinion, he should continue on earth so many years, and then
judge the world.

Secondly, The day of judgment is secret and unknown; shall be hid from the
world, and come like a snare when men shall not think of it: but by this
opinion all men shall know certainly when it shall be, namely at the term of a
thousand years.

Thirdly, It makes two Resurrections of the body, one a great distance of time
after the other. We believe but one Resurrection of the just, and unjust: the
Athanasian Creed ( at whose coming all men shall arise with their bodies, they
that have done good and they that have done evil.) The words are most clearly
grounded upon what our Savior says, Joh. 5.28. The hour is coming in which
all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, they
that have done good, unto the Resurrection of life, and they that have done
evil, unto the Resurrection of Damnation. Dan. 12.2. Many, or the multitude of
them that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake, some to everlasting
life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. And those that are christ's,
and whom the Father has given him, he will raise up at the last day, not at
the first day of the Resurrection, as you imagine, Those that are Christ's at
his coming, and the rest afterward: but believers shall be raised at the last
day. Joh. 6. four several times there it is so said, namely 39, 40, 44, 54
verses, I will raise him up at the last day. It is not the last day, if a
thousand years follow. The trump of God, at the sound of which the dead shall
rise, 1 Thessalonians. 4. is called the last trump. 1 Cor. 15.52. last, not because
there were any the like before it, but because there shall be none after it:
yea because there shall be nothing at all after it: it shall be in the last
hour, when an end shall be put to all things in this world.

Fourthly, Our Savior says, Joh. 14.3. I will come again and receive you unto
my self. Christ shall come back to take his disciples with him, not to abide
with them upon earth, but to place them in the mansions of his fathers house,
which he went to prepare for them.

Fifthly, This opinion makes the kingdom of God to be of this world, contrary
to what our Savior says: and to consist in meat and drink, contrary to what
the Apostle says: whereas the children of the Resurrection shall be equal to
the Angels, Luke 20.36. and the body raised shall be, not a natural but a
spiritual body, 1 Cor. 15.44. and therefore shall not need natural but
spiritual refection and delight.

Sixthly, Whereas the Church of God is either militant or triumphant: either
subject to temptations and exercised with crosses on earth, or else crowned
with victory and glory in heaven: By this opinion the Church for so many years
shall be neither, or betwixt both: out of heaven, but reigning on earth without
sin, without ordinances. And whereas the Church of God upon earth is a mixed
society of good and bad, and is to continue such till the last, the tares must
grow with the wheat till the harvest, which is the end of the world: by this
opinion, the wheat shall grow alone without the tares, the just reign without
the unjust, long before final consummation.

And Lastly, According to the Millenarians new Creed, the joy of the Saints in
Gods presence, and the pleasures at his right hand shall not be for evermore,
or perpetually continued; but be broken asunder and intermitted, not with
absolute misery, but with happiness so far inferior to that of heaven, in
degree, and in kind, that it may well be interpreted and taken for a degree of
unhappiness. When Peter saw but a figure or glimpse of the celestial light, he
forgot all things, and would never by his good will, have come down from the
mount. And can we think, that the glorified Saints, who are perfectly blessed
with the sight of Gods face, shall be rewarded with leaving heaven, and coming
down to enjoy the tastless pleasures of an earthly Paradise?

Had you observed your own rule you gave us before, page 11. [ Contrary to
things plain and fundamental, no difficult saying is to be enterpreted,
because it would be against the Analogy of Faith,] you would never have
suffered your self to be carried away with such a dream as this is. A very
learned Commentatour, who tells us, he hestowed above thirty years study
upon the book of the Revelation, after all this says, he found it an easier
matter to say what the thousand years are not, than to say what they are, or
what is meant by them: and yet there lies your greatest strength of Chiliasm,
Saint Paul's Epistles are hard to be understood: you could once allege it to
weaken the testimony taken thence. Is not S. John's Revelation, especially the
twentieth Chapter, much more hard? In your first chapter you could spy a mote
of Judaism, where there was none: but behold a beam here which you would not
see, while you interpret spiritual promises by a temporal kingdom, which is
the main and blinding error of the Jews to this day.

Now I come to consider the Texts of Scripture upon which you ground this
opinion.

1 Cor. 15. 23. Every man shall rise in his own order: and is that only the
just? are they every man? they that are Christ's at his coming: he says not
then, all men at his coming, as men commonly say.]

Elsewhere it is said, All men, good and bad shall rise at his coiming. I named
before, joh. 5.28. I name now Maith. 25.31. When the Son of man comes, he
shall separate one from another, as the shepherd divides the sheep from the
goats: must they not both be raised before they be separated? 2 Thessalonians. 1. It is
righteous to recompense rest to you who are troubled, when the Lord Jesus shall
be revealed from heaven, taking vengeance of them that know not God. 2 Timothy
4.1. Jesus Christ shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing: if the
quick and dead, then the unjust: and if they be judged, they must be raised
first.

And secondly, whereas it is said, Every man shall rise in his own order.
Unusquisque, Every one extends no further than to Christ and his body
mystical: first Christ the Head, and then those that believe in him; not
denoting any orderin believers, as if one should rise before another; much less
does it extend to unbeleevers, or show how they shall rise: which is proved
further, because ver. 22. To be made alive, as I take it, is never understood
but of resurrection to life; to which stands in opposition, resurrection to
condemnation.

Why says Christ, he that does good shall be rewarded, Luke 14.14 at the
resurrection of the just, if the just and unjust shall both rise together? why
speaks he of that as a distinct period?

He does not speak of it as a distinct period of time, but as of a distinct
state. Many things may differ very much, which yet may come to pass together.
The prisoners that are innocent, or that have obtained a pardon, may call the
Assizes, the time of enlargement and delivery; and yet upon the very
judgement-day, when they are acquitted and sent home, other malefactors may be
sent back to prison and execution.

1 Cor. 15. 24. Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the
kingdom to God the Father. Now plain it is that he shall not deliver up the
kingdom then when the just shall rise; for they shall reign with him:
wherefore also it is said, He shall judge the quick and the dead, at his coming
and in his kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.1. that implies, that he shall not deliver up the
kingdom at his coming, but when he has reigned with his Saints that here
suffered with him. If Death be put down at his coming, where is his reign till
that be put down?

You loose your self and all that follow you in your confusions, while you
choose rather to lead the ignorant, than to tread in the steps of the learned
that have gone before you. There is a twofold kingdom of our Savior Jesus
Christ. The first, Natural, Absolute, and Essential to him as he is God, equal
with the Father, with whom he reigns from everlasting to everlasting: of this
kingdom shall be no end, and as he never received it of any, so shall he never
surrender it. The other is a Ministerial or Oeconomical Kingdom, belonging to
him as he is Mediator, having all power given him in heaven and earth, for the
good and salvation of his Church, whereof he is the Head. This kingdom
consists in dispensing his gifts diversely for the edification of his people
by his Spirit, Word, Ministry, and Ordinance, and in subduing Sin, Satan,
Death, and all enemies of what kind soever. This kingdom he has received of
his Father, and shall at last deliver it up. As if a king should give authority
and commission to his eldest son, to go and reduce to due obedience a
rebellious country, lying at some distance: which work being done, the son
returns, renders up his Commission, delivers to his Father the possssion of a
peaceable kingdom; yet cease not to be his Fathers son as he was before. The
text you bring out of 2 Timothy 4.1. and that of Romans 8.17. and 2 Timothy 2.11, 12.
do speak of the first kind of kingdom. But that of 1 Cor. 15.24. speaks of
the second kind of Kingdom, which shall at the end of the world cease; when
the Churches warfare shall have an end, and her immediate communion with God
shall begin; when the blessed and glorious Trinity shall be all things in all
men, shall supply the want or absence of all things: there shall not be
(because there shall be no need of them) Magistrate, Minister, Word, Sacrament,
Temple, Sun, or Moon.

Then comes the end, you tell us that then, or deinceps should be afterward:
but others think it were better rendered mox, statim; that is, by and by, or
presently after. Strange that the Apostle should say, Every one in his own
order, and yet find no order or time for the resurrection of the unjust; if
there be, it is not mentioned with the just.]

Answer. Under this Unusquisque, no other are comprehended, but Christ and they
that are Christ's: the term here reaches no further: you may find just and
unjust mentioned elsewhere: Acts 24.15. I have hope toward God, that there
shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and the unjust. The
twentieth chapter of the Revelation, the fourth and sixth verses do imply two
Resurrections, the first, and the last: yet not both of the body: but one of
the soul from the death of sin and error during this world: The other of the
body out of the dust of the earth at the end of this world. These two
resurrections are plainly and distinctly laid down by our Savior in the fifth
chapter of S. John's Gospel; the first in the 25 verse; The hour is coming and
now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that
hear shall live. The second in the 28 and 29 verses, The hour is coming, when
all that are in the graves, shall hear his voice, and shall come forth.

It Is a Resurrection after they had been beheaded, and therefore not in this
life time: now if that be not the last Resurrection: then there is a
Resurrection follows in which the rest shall rise, ver. 5.12.

I answer, but I neither rehearse nor retort your insulting words. The fourth
verse speaks neither of bodies, nor of resurrection, but of souls only and
expressly, I saw the souls of them that were beheaded, and they lived and
reigned; to wit in heavenly glory: it is not said, they rose again, or lived
again.

But the rest of the dead lived not again.] That is, Satan detained many still
in Paganism, and Antichristianism, who would not rise out of sin and error.

Until the thousand years were finished.] That is, Not all that time of Satan's
binding: not that they rose afterward, but they rose not at all: it is not a
limitation of the time, but an absolute denial.

This is the first Resurrection.] Which is as if he had said thus; This living
again that I speak of, is to be understood of the first Resurrection, which is
from the death in sin: and I pray mark it well It is not the same life or kind
of living, that is affirmed of those in the fourth verse, and denied of those
in the fifth; it is said of those, quod vixerint, that they lived: of these,
quod revixerint, that they lived again. And betwixt these two there is not to
be conceived any Synonymus contradiction, but a diversity Metaphorical: Those
in the fourth verse lived the life of glory: those of the fifth verse did not
arise or live again to the life of grace. And you unskilfully put together the
fifth verse with the twelfth: whereas the fifth speaks of the first
Resurrection, the twelfth of the second or last, which is of the body at the
day of Judgment.

Because you say, that though you speak besides the ordinary rode, yet you
speak not besides the Scriptures. I would desire your scholars whom you
instructed in the Doctrine of the Millenarians, though very obscurely in your
Catechism, and have added now an explication or vindication of it, That they
would read over that chapter, which you refer them to, and which has from the
beginning of this error, been accounted the principal place of Scripture
giving countenance to such belief: that is, the twentieth chapter of the
Revelaion, you say the dead in Christ shall rise first, and reign with him a
thousand years, and then the rest shall rise to judgment of condemnaion, by
themselves apart. Now in reading this chapter, they shall find, that after the
thousand years are expired, there follows, what? The Resurrection of the
ungodly? no. But Satan loosed: Cog and Magog going forth to battle with armies
of innumerable soldiers, making war against the Saints, and which are to be
devoured with fire from heaven. And whence should these wicked ones be? there
were none but the just living upon the earth: for the rest of the dead lived
not again, for all that time. If they read on, to the 12 verse, there Saint
John sees the general judgment at the last, when both sea and land give up
their dead, they were judged every man, according to their works, good as well
as bad, and they were condemned who were not written in the book of life; not
those who were not raised at the first Resurrection. And if the chief authority
of Scripture for your opinion be so palpably impertinent, and the proof taken
thence so weak; how weak is your opinion! So much for the Scriptures which you
bring. Now we are to consider the judgment of the ancient orthodox.

To say nothing that Justin Martyr, one of the ancientest of the primitive
writers, tells us that in his times all that were in all things orthodox
Christians, so believed. Dial. with Tryph. So also Tertull. lib. 3. contra
Marc. and Lactant. lib. 7. the Reader that has the books may, if he please,
consult them, I study brevitie.

You would not name Cerinthus, who was somewhat more ancient, though much more
heterodox: yet he it was who broached the opinion you speak of: so witnesses
Saint Augustine in his eight book of heresies. He held it indeed in a more
gross manner: some of the fathers following, refined it from the more feculent
parts. Justin Martyr had it from the Jews, with whom he conversed, and his
opinion is merely Judaical, that Jerusalem shall be built again enlarged and
beautified: and that the Prophets and the Patriarchs, the Jews and the
Proselytes, who were before Christ's coming, shall meet there in a joyful
manner: but not that all they who belong to Christ shall be raised with them,
as you teach. And secondly, you would not let us know, because you studied
brevitie, what authorities your authors had for that their belief, though
fairly, you give us leave to consult them. Now I find that the first place
brought by the first of your three, is out of Isa. 65.22. As the days of a tree
are the days of my people] the meaning whereof is to be gathered from the words
next before: the similitude is taken from the matter there spoken of: They
shall not plant, and another eat: they shall not plant a tree, and then never
live to taste of the fruit; but they shall last as long as the tree: so it
follows in that verse, They shall long enjoy the work of their hands: as
elsewhere, the just is compared to a tree for growth and continuance; so here
he is compared to this tree here spoken of. Now your Author, after the
Septuagint reads thus: As the days of the tree of life so shall the days of
my people be. The days of the tree of life, he understood to be a thousand
years, which Adam should have lived had he not transgressed the law given. But
eating of the other tree, the tree of knowledge, he could never attain to that
age, nor any of his posterity. But that he took to be the age that men should
live to, after the first Resurrection. Thirdly, In those words of his (...) you
are to know that [(...)] is restrictive; he does not say that all Christians
held it, but they that were in all things orthodox, did hold it, because he
held it himself, and therefore held that to be a part of orthodoxy: But some
who were orthodox, but not in all things, did not hold it: for you may read a
little before that he confisseth, Multos vero qui purae piaeque sunt
Christianorum sententiae, hoc non agnoscere, Many pious and right good
Christians did not acknowledge so much, not regarding what some thought who
were called Christians, but were impious Atheists, and blasphemous, (...),
every way, or in all things. And that learned writer, who would without so much
as pretending any copy, insert a negative, (...), does make Justin speak to
this effect, some blasphemous Atheists are orthodox Christians, but not in all
things. Not those that are in all things impious, but those that are in some
things orthodox, must stand in opposition to that limitation, in all things
orthodox. Tertullian held this opinion too, but it was when he was not a man of
the Church, but had fallen to Montanism, and this was a piece of his Montanism
too, as he says in his third book against Marcion. cap. 24. Novae prophetiae
sermo testatur: it was witnessed by the new prophecy: but this we might not
know because you were in have. Lactantius also was of this mind, but his chief
proofs, were partly from the Sibyls, with Virgils Eclogue, and partly from the
prophesies of the old Testament, which he understood lit^rally and marvelously:
whereas we be taught by the Apostle Peter, Act. 2.16. and by the Apostle James,
Act. 15.15. to apply those prophesies to the time of the new Testament, or
Christ's first, not his second coming.

Now because you give this regard to ancient writers, and the ages foregoing, I
will produce one argument of this kind against your Millenarian belief, and
then conclude this chapter: and it is this. That opinion which was generally
condemned by the Church of Christ, and was afterward upheld by none for above
the space of a thousand years, is no Catholic doctrine, nor sound belief: But
this opinion that Christ Jesus should raise his Saints, and reign with them
upon earth for the space of a thousand years, being condemned, was not held by
any for above the space of a thousand years: Therefore it is no Catholic
doctrine. The Major I hope needs no proof with you at this time: but because
it may seem not safe or good discretion to adventure much upon a Negative; I
desire leave to mollify and interpret the Minor with this request, that I may
have liberty to think so, until you be able to produce some instance to the
contrary. And the space I mean, is that betwixt S. Hierom who opposed it, and
the Anabaptists who revived it. And if there be any policy in the Papists
coining the lives of some of our Reformers to discredit their doctrine, I am
sure it is no credit to any opinion to claim parentage or resuscitation from
the Anabaptists.

CHAP. XI. How God had power enough to help man.
TO the Question, What God had done for man? when part of your Answer was, That
God had power enough to help him; I noted, that though your Answer was true,
yet it seemed to argue thus: He can do it, therefore he has done it; which I
said is not safe. And I suspected a dark insinuation of this, that God had done
all he could do to help man being fallen. Hereupon in this Chapter, although
you are angry with me for collecting any such thing, so much as by way of
intimation from your words. And although secondly, you charge the adverse
party with thinking so; yet in the third place, you own and acknowledge it to
be true, what I said might be darkly gathered from your Answer, and you think
it must pose me, and all men else to tell, What he could have done more; as if
you cared not what you say, so you may revile and contradict. It must be left
to the Reader to compare the first of these with the third, and to judge
whether there be wrong offered to you, or to your companion, who would not
believe but that God releeved the whole world, when he had means and
opportunity, you needed not to except against me for saying, That in things of
this world we walk by sight: and to say, that it seems I walk so, rather then
by faith. The Apostle Paul did walk by Faith, and gives this the reason why he
did so, because he was absent from the Lord, and saw him not; but in things of
this life he did walk by fight. Be pleased therefore to know, that in that
saying of the Apostles, 2 Cor. 5.7. We walk by faith, not by sight; the word
Faith is taken in a proper and strict meaning, as it stands opposed to sight,
and it is called the evidence of things not seen. In things of this present
world, we walk by sight, not by faith: not by faith strictly taken, yet by
faith largely taken, we may walk in this life, and yet walk by sight too, like
as Thomas both saw and believed. Augnst. Enchirid. 8. Melius hanc appellamus
Fidem, quam divina eloquia docuerunt, earum scilicet rerum quae non videntur:
It is best to call that by the name of Faith, which is of things not seen, as
holy Scripture uses to speak.

You prove that your Adversaries hold, God cannot help the most part of men,
because Dr. K. said, He can have no new immanent Act of will: So then that
only which he has willed be can do,] and (our party may answer) He had not
power enough, for he cannot will anew concerning them, and he had so willed
already as to tie his hands.]

You seem to speak both ignorantly and unreverently of Gods Attributes. It is
no wonder you should be jealous of our liberty, who are afraid lest Gods
Decrees should deprive him of his own Liberty and Power, as if his hands were
tied, if he may not repent, and do what formerly he intended not to do.
Liberty is, to be at ones own determination; whereas you make it all one with
inconstancy, or changeableness of purpose and resolution. His hands are tied,
who cannot do what he would do, or who is hindered from using the power that he
has: not who will not do what he can do, or that abides constant to his
purpose. Omniscience and Omnipotence, together with all manner of perfection,
are an infallible argument or proof, as well as a cause of Unchangeableness.
The Roman Lelius intending a good work for the Commonwealth, and the benefit
of the poor; when he found that he was over-powred by a contrary faction of the
wealthier sort, would move no further in it, but let it fall; and because he
did so, he gained the name of Sapiens, and was called afterward Lelius the
wise. It is oftentimes a part of wisdom in man, to alter his intention, and
enter into new counsels: but such wisdom it is as is accompanied with some
weakness or other, as of ignorance, or improvidence, or impotence: all which,
and all the like are far removed from the infinite majesty of God. If any
understanding man upon deliberation, and choice, and good reason resolves to
do or not to do this or that, are his hands now bound from doing the contrary?
It has pleased God thus far to reveal his mind, that he will have mercy upon
whom he will have mercy: and can you now say to any man, according to the
tenor of the doctrine you oppose, God will have no mercy on you; he is not
able to help you, he has otherwise determined? you cannot. But you may bethink
your self how you can answer to God, for thus traducing his secret will, with
which he has forbidden you to meddle, haviug reserved it to himself, together
with the reason and account of his judgments, which are as the great depth,
and ought to be trembled at: but you should not talk of them in so taunting a
manner as you do in this Section.

Sect. 3. See then Reader, if their Divinity give not indeed cause for
Epicurcan Atheism, to live as they list, and take their destiny; saying as
Seneea Dum fata sinunt vivite l^ti -- Nec illa Dco virtisse licet Quae nexa
suis currunt causis. Surely this is liker an old chip of the Manichees or
Stoics fate, then any thing I said, or M. G looks like Marcion.]

You and your Divinity find more solace in Seneca's Hercules furens, or
Lucians (...) than in Gods holy word, whatsoever you pretend and promise. Job
says, chap. 23. v. 13. He is in one mind, and who can turn him? what his soul
desires that he does: he performs the thing that is appointed for me. The
Apostle Paul says, Ephesians. 1.11. He works all things according to the power of
his own will. And can you say, that God does not ordinate, dispose, and
overruled the actions of wicked men to his glory? To deny Gods Providence is
impious: To call it Stoical fate, is profane, and belongs to profane noveltie
of words. There be many differences betwixt Heathens fate or destiny, and
divine Providence; you named one even now, though it may be unawares, Necilla
Deo vertisse licet. As it differed from their God, or gods, so it overruled
them, and they stood in aw of it. But God is not subject to his providence; but
his Providence is his will, that is, Himself And here your followers may be
pleased to take notice whom you follow: and if they cannot know you by your
self, they may know yon by your companions. You follow the pelagians. Alvarez
de Auxil.1.1..9. Pelagius hanc conclusionem inferebat, siasseratur quod Gratia
Dei humana merita antecedat, and ex nolentibus volentes faciat, per talem
gratiam libertas destruitur humani arbitrii, and necessitas fatalis inducitur.
Pelagius reasoned thus, If Gods Grace go before man's works, and of unwilling
makes us willing, such Grace destroys the liberty of man's will, and brings
in fatal necessity. Here the Reader may see whom you look like.

Now because you have of your courtesy found out a parallel for our party,
the sect of the stoiks, and have in this your piece minded us of it thrice
already; we do accept it, and we do own it, so far as we may; and where we may
not, we refuse it, and return it to you again.

First, It is well done of you, that you compare us with those Philosophers
that were Dogmatici, that did admit and retain peremptorily some opinions, and
as resolutely refuse some other: and that you do not liken us to those fects,
whose profession consisted either in arguing about the truth on both sides: or
in perpetual seeking after it: or in doubting of it: or in contemning of it, as
not worth the seeking. Your party has for a long time been charged to be too
much distant from the Stoics in this: and to incline too far to those that
were called Scepticks: while they have pleaded, that there is no infallible
judgment upon earth: and that as we condemn others, so others condemn us, with
such like goodly reasons as these, in behalf of indifferency in Religion. When
Erasmus said, he was not for his part much delighted in positive assertions;
Luther told him it was not spoken like a Christian. Non est hoc christiani
pectoris non delectari assertionibus: Absint a nobis Sceptici and Academici.
Adsint velipsis Stoicis his pertinaciores assertores. Toll assertiones and
Christianismum tulisti. Of all the sects the Scepticks and the Epicureans were
most contrary to Christian Religion. Castellio that great Christian, at least
as some have lately called him, howbeit he was so violent and fierce against
his Adversary, as if he had felt the ground he stood on; yet tells plainly
his own mind, Nondum nota veritas est: The Truth is not yet known; de Qu.
Imped. p. 22. So it might be the Truth he opposed for ought he knew. But
Socinus, who taking another name put forth those works, says cloppenburgh,
would assure us, that though we attain not to know the truth thereby, we shall
clearly perceive what is not the truth. So that the power he had, was only for
the demonstration of Error, not for edification in the Truth, as great a
Christian as he was.

Secondly, the Stoics were the most serious and severe of all the
Philosophers, the most religious and devout, the most patient, just, and sober
that were to be found among the heathens. Let Seneca, Epictetus, and M.
Antoninus, in what they have left upon record, be witnesses for themselves and
some what also for the rest. The which I allege now, not intending to make any
comparison between one party and another: but to this end only, to note that
their opinion of Destiny and Fatalitie, was no manner of hindrance to piety
and virtue; and to prove that it is a wicked slander to teach or imply, that
the Doctrine of Gods Predestination is a principle breeding profaneness and a
vicious life. But to say that it causes Epicurean Atheism, is a senseless
slander: for Epicurus quite contrary to Zeno's fate, set up Fortune to be a
governess of the world, and held that the gods took no heed to what men did
upon earth, but suffered all things to run at random. And shall that opinion
that ascribes too much to Gods Providence, as if he did all things whatsoever,
and necessitated men to sin, as you blasphemously infer; breed in men an
opinion, that he does nothing at all, and not so much as regards what men
do? Shall Christian Stoicism breed Epicurean Atheism? here you did strike and
lay about you blindfold. They who were most contrary to the Stoics, and
opposite in the extreme, were most swinish and brutish in their lives. Away
therefore with this your slander, I know not whether more shameless or senseless.

Thirdly, the Stoics were most constant assertours and most strenuous
defenders of that which we call Free Will, and they called (...), meaning
thereby that power which every man has over his own mind, and over his own
actions. It is therefore another slander, to teach that the doctrine of the
divine Decrees does deprive men of their liberty, and makes them rather to be
stocks then voluntary agents. Man's will may be and always is free, as to that
root of liberty which is essential to man, though his Person in the mean time,
be in slaverie or bondage to sin and vice.

Fourthly, The Stoics, as they taught fate, so they taught withal confatalia,
diverse other things attending upon fate: which we call means. Whereby that
which is fatal or decreed to come to pass, shall indeed, when due time is, be
brought to pass. seneca Nature. Quaest. lib. 2. c. 38. Fatum est ut hic disertus
sit; sed si liter as didicerit: ab codem fato con^inctur ut liter as discat;
ideo discet. If it be any man's fate to be a learned man; it is in his fate also
that he apply himself to his study: and therefore he shall do so: and herein
they accorded with our Religion. A good Christian never said nor thought; if I
be chosen to heaven I shall be saved, whether I live well or ill; because he is
taught that God did from the beginning, choose to salvation through
sanctification of the spirit and belief of the truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. So when the
time comes, he gives those things that pertain to Godliness as well as life,
and calls to virtue as well as glory, 2 Pet. 1.3. And a rational Christian
will never object and cavil, saying; If men did know that they be ordained to
life eternal, it is the next way to make them neglect godliness and holy
conversation: for he that speaks thus, probably speaks against his own
conscience which I prove thus: if this man were infallibly and undoubtedly
assured by a divine prophecy, that his son being now but young, should
hereafter when he shall attain to full ripeness of age, be advanced to some
chief place of judicature in the State, or some chief preferment in the Church;
he would not thereupon grow negligent in bestowing that cost and culture which
is requisite upon that his son: but I am certain he would the more diligently
and more vigorously and cheerfully take care for his liberal education, that he
may be fitted and qualified for such promotion. And give what instance you
will, you shall without fail find it true, that the assurance or confidence
that any man has of accomplishing any purpose, end, or design; does sharpen
his endeavor, and encourage him, in prosecuting those means, by which such a
design is usually brought to pass.

This being the doctrine of your pretended orthodox, and this the nature and
consequence of it, I pray you what may we think of Tilenus and his favorable
summarie of the Synod in the late History of the five Articles, 1. page 41.
giving in for the result of the first Article of the five, that God elected to
salvation a very small number of men ( without any regard to their faith or
obedience whatsoever) whereas the Canons, which surely are the Result, speak
quite contrary, by name the eight Canon of the first Article. Scriptur a unicum
praedicat beneplacitum, propositum, and consilium voluntatis Dei, quo nos ab
aeterno elegit, and ad gratiam, and ad gloriam, and ad salutem and ad viam
salutis: there is not a twosold election, purpose, or counsel of God, but One;
even that whereby he chooses both to Grace and Glory, to Salvation, and the
way that leads to Salvation.] Such dealing may be left off, out of honesty,
by them who think it is any credit to their cause to use it.

Thus far we are not, neither need we to be ashamed of being, Stoical: if
therefore you think good at any time to represent us as Stoics, let not them,
let not us be misreported: for both acknowledge liberty of will: and both
acknowledge a necessary connection of the Decree, and the intervening means: and
if you say otherwise, you wrong them and us, and all those that take things on
your word.

But besides these particulars now named, the stoics had a high conceit of the
freedom of their will, determinately to good. They imagined that they had
power to frame and fashion themselves anew, as it were to the highest degree of
virtue, that man's nature is capable of. Seneca Epist. 41. stultum est optare
cum possis a te impetrare. non sunt ad caelum elevandae manus. It is a foolish
part for a man to pray for what he may have of himself. And Ep. 31. Exurge modo
and ^e quoque dignum finge Deo. Now here we leave them, and the free will of
theirs; and I leave it to you to consider, who they be, that are nearest of kin
to them: and who they be, the face and scope and import of whose doctrine, may
be thought to draw nearest to them. So much for Stoicism.

You charge us with Manicheism also. But you tell us not wherein. Those that
have reckoned up above twenty heresies that Manes held, have told us that it
were an endless thing to reckon them all. If it be that about Free will, that
you mean, I did say but little, yet enough for that matter, in my Review, page
144. And according to what in the next chapter following this you tell me, page
58. It is a weakness to bring an argument, or charge, which you know I have
answered, and yet to take no notice of the answer] as you do not, neither here,
nor yet in your 27 chapt. where is the proper place, if any thing you had to
say to it.

But I would gladly ask you, whether you know any man, that has so much
impudence, as to say, that S. Augustine was a Manichean: if he were, how comes
it to pass, that he was so great an adversary to that sect: if he were not,
how come those men to be Manicheans whose Doctrine is the same that his was, as
I hope you have so much modesty as to acknowledge, what danger they are in to
fall into Manicheism, or something that is worse; who deny Gods Providence in
the evil of sin, so far as commonly they do deny it, I wish they would timely
consider and beware. So much for Manicheism.

Verily all my instructions given to seek the Lord, imply that I think, God can
do more than he has done. Though what he could have done more for our
redemption, and for providing salvation for us, than to have given his only
son to death for us, and raise and glorify him, as he has done, I suppose,
must pose all men, when the time comes, when God will be cleared in his
sayings, and in his doings, and that shall be his appeal. Judge between me and
my vineyard, what more could have been done etc. and that to little comfort to
the censurers of his goodness now, which we desire, together with his power and
wisdom to adore.]

Whether or no, you have and how far, in this chapter, impeached three of Gods
most sacred attributes, namely. First, his Immutabilitie, while you reckon it
for an error to say, that he cannot will anew. Secondly, his Providence, while
you compare it with the Stoics fate. Thirdly, his Omnipotence, while you speak
as if he could do no more than he has done for man's salvation, whatsoever he
is able to do for other things; This leave to others to judge, who are more
able to judge and whom it better becomes to give their censure. Of this I am
well assured, that without doing wrong, more or less, to these three aforesaid,
and divesting God of them so far, as to think him like our selves in things
which argue our imperfection, which the fiftieth Psalm reproves as wickedness:
The Remonstrants Divinity can never consist, nor hold together while the world
stands. And of these three attributes, I understand the second, namely Gods
Providence, to comprehend 1. his seeing and foreseeing all things, 2. his
upholding or maintaining all things, in their being and actions. 3. his orderly
directing and governing all things, to his own ends, and according to his own
will. Yea, whosoever looks into their writings and is not partial, will soon
perceive what expense they are continually put to, in making good their first
breach; what waste and havoc they make of their old stock and patrimony to
maintain the title of their late purchase. And you show your self as bad as the
worst of them, in giving such a maim and imperfect enumeration of the mean and
helps that God has afforded to salvation. [ H^ has given his Son to death,
raised him, and glorify him] and here you stay and tell us, there is n^ more
that could be done, very offensively; yet giving us fairly leave to guess, when
at other times, you speak of any further help, or grace, or strength, and
divine assistance; whether thereby you mean any thing, or nothing.

The means to life eternal, are of two sorts. The frist called Media immediata,
or Media interna: internal and immediate means, by which a Christian is placed
and set in the state of regeneration, and life spiritual, as Faith, Repentance,
Sanctification, and justification, these are proper to the Church invisible, or
mystical body of Christ. The second, media mediorum, Or Media externa, outward
means tending to produce the former sort of means; as not only Preaching of
the Gospel, sending of Pastors, Administration of the Word and Sacraments,
which are common to the Church visible; but moreover, the Incarnation of
Christ, his Passion and Resurrection, which are in some sort, and in a sense
formerly explained, common to all the world. Now you have omitted the former
sort of Means, and mentioned only this latter and most remote, of Christ's
Death and Rising again; as if you had rather follow Puccius and Huberus, whom
both Papist and Lutheran count Monsters, than conform to the Doctrine of the
reformed Churches.

It is a Custom, with you, and with other men of your mind, to deface and
obscure Gods Grace, by discourse tending to set forth his Mercy and Goodness,
and Love to all mankind. But such Mercy it is, by which none are saved: no man
is brought to heaven by universal Grace, or that sufficient Help, that is given
to all men, You may, for that matter, believe your Dutchman in his Diatriba,
page 17. Divitias illas bonitatis divinae omnes fastidirent, nisi abundans
misericordia Dei quosdam sib^ separasset, quibus efficacem vocationem, ac
finalem perseverantiam, dare ab aeterno decrevisset, praeteritis aliis quos
demum propter impoenitentiam and insidelitatem esset damnaturus. The riches of
Gods goodness would be despised and abused even by all men, unless the mercy of
God had set apart and chosen some, upon whom he did decree from eternity to
bestow effectual vocation and final perseverance in Grace, while he passed by
others, who at last are to be condemned for their impenitence and unbelief.]
This Doctrine therefore that you so zealously obtrude upon the world, is no
such friend to the world as may be imagined. For while you plead for some kind
of intention and will that God has to save all men, you do withal, violently
plead against any absolute intention he has to save any man in particular.
Corvinus contr. Molin. cap. 12.. 25, 26. Admittimus, fieri potuisse, ut nemo in
Christum crederet: ut nulla sit Ecclesia. We grant it follows for what we
teach, that there may be no church at all, and not one true believer. And it
cannot well be otherwise, because the preventing Grace you speak of, (I mean
those of your mind) is no other than is given in the first Covenant, whereby
God does teach and instruct, command and forbid, and threaten and promise. All
this was done in the covenant of works, in which yet they continued not, Hebr.
8.9. And if it be not this grace you mean, why should you bring the examples of
the Angels in heaven, and Adam in Paradise, to prove the Apostasy of Saints,
and that true grace may fail? And doubtless should man be left now as he was at
the first creation, in manu consilii sui, Ecclus 15. in the hand of his
counsel, (a place commonly brought to the present purpose) he must needs be
seduced now, who fell when he had a far greater stock of strength wherewithal
to resist and stand. And as the grace you plead for, and the only grace you
think, is to be had, is the same by which Adam stood, and notwithstanding which
he fell; so is it no other nor better than that grace which is bestowed upon
the reprobates:; for whom your Adversaries do believe, Christ did and does as
much as you hold he did and does for the elect: both the one and the other
being left to their own freedom, and to their own power, of Believing, and
repenting, and Persevering, and then it may readily be decided, to which
doctrine the world is most beholden. we are on both sides agreed that Christ
died for all men, on condition of their faith in him; we say that every man
shall be pardoned that believes: and you will not say that any man shall be
pardoned and saved, whether he believe or no. Thus far we differ not. But when
it comes to the question, on, Whether the Son of God did merit for us the
grace of Faith, and Regeneration and Perseverance; we maintain that he merited
these for his elect: and you utterly deny that he merited these for any: and
then it may easily be decided, after all the idle and emprie words that are
commonly taken up, who they are that most straiten the merits of Christ, and
who are most forward to deny the benefits of his passion.

But the Text in Isai 5. is often alleged and insisted on, and by you twice in
this chapter; What could have been done more to my vineyard that I have not
done? Where First, you are to note, that it is an enclosure, it is a vineyard
that is spoken of, there fore no Universalist must draw this beyond the bounds
of the Church, or make use of it to prove, that all men have sufficient help to
salvation. The vineyard of the Lord of hosts, is the house of Israel, and he
deals not so with every nation as he did with that nation.

Secondly, It is granted there could no more be done then was done, for
external means and helps exhibited to a visible, national, constituted Church
namely, for Doctrine, Sacraments, Prophets, Pastors, Miracles, and manifold
mercies and encouragements. But is there nothing more to be done or could there
nothing more be done toward the bringing forth fruit to life eternal? Paul may
plant Apollos may water, but God gives the increase If it pleased God, whose
will is always just, though it may be secret to us, at that time by the
ministry of his servants, and mercies of diverse kinds, to plant and to water
the Church of Judah and Jerusalem, and not to give increase, must it needs be
indeed because he could not do it? yes, at least so we are told. He may be
allowed to be able to force an ordinary natural vineyard to bring forth good
grapes, but to a Rational vineyard he could not do it. So that the Question is
not now, what God does, or has done for his Church, or lost mankind; that is
a modest inquiry: but it is affirmed broadly, He could not do more than he has
done. I think we may boldly say, A few such propositions as this is, are
competent to blast and dcfame any cause that stands in need of such supporters.

We have often heard it affirmed to this purpose, That God could not create
Adam in a state free from danger and possibility of falling into sin; because
this had been to make him unchangeable, which God only is. Whereas there is
nothing can be imagined but God can do it, if it please him to do it, both in
heaven and earth, unless such things as do import either impotence in the
Creator, or contradiction in the creature: but what had there been of the one
or the other if by his Grace and Power he had kept the understanding of Adam
from being overclouded with error, his will and affections in perfect and
entire obedience? no more than there was in the Angels that fell not, or than
there shall be in preserving the elect for ever in heaven, God is only wise,
and only has immortality, we may add and immutability: of himself, and
independently, perfectly, and infinitely: yet he has by Communication, made
the Angels and spirits of men wise and immortal; so he might have made Adam
unchangeably good, though not unchangeable as He himself is. And such Doctrine
as you here deliver, and some others teach agreeably hereunto, is no way
consonant to Christian belief: for as it does too plainly deny Gods
omnipotence, contained in the first Article of our Creed; so does it also
directly ^run counter to those many promises where God has said, he will do
that which you say he cannot do; as namely that in Jeremy 32.40. I will put my
fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me.

At the end of this chapter, You desire to adore Gods goodness, power, and
wisdom.] There be other Attributes of God to be thought on, and to be adored;
as his unchangeableness, and his justice, commonly called in Scripture Wrath
whereby he punishes sinners. Which though you named not here, yet you might
well have named them in your Catechism, where I scarce find any more than
these three in that description of God which you set down.

Qu. 12. What souldst thou remember, mind or consider in God?

A. His Power, Wisdom, and Goodness exercised for and about me, his will
concerning me, and end to which he made me.]

There be few Catechists (if there be any) that speaking of Gods Attributes
reckon up so few as these, or that make mention of Goodness, but none of
Justice, or some thing equivalent. The Apostle, Romans 11.22. propounds the
Goodness, and the Severity of God equally to be considered and adored: and
Marcion, as Tertullian witnesses, lib. 1. ^25. Removit a Deo severitates:
considered only in God his Goodness, and nothing over against it: all
Goodness, no Severity. I lay not this opinion to you: but thus much I say, This
dealing of yours looks more like Marcion, than any thing your Adversaries have
said, does look like the Manichees.

CHAP. XII. Of Universal Redemption.
IN the differences that are about the point of Universal Redemption, I had
some hope that you and I should have been upon a reasonable good accord. But it
falls out quite otherwise: for as you tell me, page 60. that I believe it
because the Church believes it [for the veneration of the Church]. So now you
will not hold it because I hold it, but you argue diversely against it, page 57.
But if you bring arguments against your own opinion, you must answer them
yourself, because I know no body will do it for you, and then the solutions
will please you the better, because they are your own.

Sect. 3. In adding that as the reason. why the ransom is not profitable to
all men to eternal life, because it is not given to all men to believe, he
innovates from the Scripture, which no where assigns that as the cause, but
men's not receiving the grace of God.

Diverse things may concur to one effect: and it may be said, because one of
them is wanting, the effect is not produced. A soldier may die of a dangerous,
but curable wound received in the field, that is the true cause of his death:
but may it not be said truly, that he lost his life because he wanted a
Surgeon? and a traitor is executed because he; wanted a pardon. Man's
infidelity is the cause why he receives not benefit by Christ's death, but may
it not be said withal, that he receives not benefit by it, because it is not
given him to believe? But I innovate from Scripture. I wish you would once
leave your wonted manner of making people think you keep your self more
punctually to Scripturd than others do. Let the words of Moses be considered,
Deuteronomy. 29.4. The Lord has not given you ^ heart to perceive, and eyes to see.
Though great signs and miracles were wrought before their eyes, yet they
perceived them not, because God gave them not to perceive. Let those words of
our Savior be considered, giving the reason why his heavenly doctrine was
revealed to some, and not to others: it was not only because some gave better
ear then others did; but, So it seemed good in thy sight, Matthew. 11.26. and
those words of his, Joh. 10.26, You believe not, because you are not of my
sheep, as I said unto you. Sheep, that is, say you elsewhere, meekened and made
docible: then look to the 16. verse, Other sheep I have which are not of this
fold, the I must bring. Were the Gentiles yet uncalled, meekned and made
docible already? No. By sheep therefore are meant elect, such as belonged to
God by election, without reference to any sheep-like disposition found in them
before they were brought. In Gods counsel they appertained to his flock,
according as the elect in Corinth are called his people: Acts 18.10. I have
much people in this city: not with reference to any frames or qualities they
had before they were called. And I pray mark those words, [ as I said unto
you;] but where was that said? that we may the better gather the meaning of
what is said here. I will refer you, who would be thought not to swerve the
least from what you find in Scriture, to Joh. 8.47. and Joh. 6.36. Ye have
seen me and believe not: All that the Father gives me shall come unto me. To
come, is to believe: and they come whom God does give, and none else; and they
whom God gives were his. Joh. 17.6. Thine they were, and thou gave them me.
These be the causes you find in Scripture, no other frames and dispositions
why one believes and another not.

Sect. 3. You lay down considerations touching Gods giving Faith; The sum is
this.

He gives Faith to all that hear the word, as well to them that believe not,
as to theem that believe; as he gave the Israelites Manna lying before them
upon the ground: they might take it if they would; if they would not take it,
they might leave it. Man's not having does not argue Gods not giving. The
sluggard cannot say, God gave him not provision, when he might have had it,
would he have labored for it.]

And where is now that malicious and standerous Adversary that dares to accuse
you, as if you taught that Faith is not Gods gift? God gave Faith to Judas, but
he would not take it, as he gives the slothful man bread that starveth for
want of it, because he will not stretch forth his hand to labor. He likewise
gave Faith to Peter, as he gives to the diligent hand that makes rich. With
you, or in your doctrine, To give, is no more than to offer: but in good,
common, and ordinary sense, That which is offered may be rejected: but that
which is not received, cannot be said to be given. And still you presuppose
that man has always spiritual life, and can come when he is called, and can
take what is tendered to him, and can eat what is set before him: Whereas if you
did not innovate from Scripture, you might learn and teach others, How Faith
which is said to be Gods gift, is the chief part of that spiritual life by
which a Christian lives: and that very hand by which he receives and lays
hold of Gods promises: and that appetite of the soul, by which it longs after
the heavenly bread. And until this be obtained, all that is said or done, or
propounded by way of Object to man's heart, is no other than appositiones
epularum circumpositae sepulchro, as messes of meat set upon a grave, or a
banquet that is offered to an idol, that can neither eat nor smell. I am sure
you innovate and invert the Apostles words, who says thus; It is not of him
that wills, but of God that shows mercy. But you say to this effect, That
this man is saved, and not another, it is not of God that shows mercy, for
he shows mercy to all: but it is of man that wills and accepts his
mercy. It is not of God that gives, but of man that takes: for God gives to
all that will take. And when the Apostle Paul says thus to Timothy, [ if God
peradventure will give them repentance] his meaning must be but this: If it
pleases God to propound to their minds such reasons and arguments, that would
prevail with those that are disposed as they ought to be. A thing which Timothy
himself might do well enough. But when he says, Siforte if peadventure, he
intends some singular and rare matter, and of great difficulty, scarce to be
hoped for; not a common gift, vouchsafed to all that hear and are outwardly
called.

It is well said it is given to you to believe or suffer: but it follows not,
that God either did not, or would not have given the same to others, in the
serious listening to him: in the means and Spirits concomitancie therewith
given. All that come are drawn, it follows not, all that are drawn come.]

But who gives the serious listening you speak of? Who gives eyes to see, and
ears to hear, and a heart to perceive? Whatsoever your concessions be, or how
far soever you yield, you take care not to endanger nor part with your beloved
Principle though never so rotten. It must be of man that wills, and of man
that listeneth, why one believes, and another not.

The Spirits concomitancy therewith given] they should speak of this, that hold
any such thing needful, beside the word for producing faith, but you draw so
deep of the Socinian lees, as to count them breeders of Fanatics that hold it.
I deny not but there is a working of the spirit of God, which causes some
degree of illumination and conviction, in the hearts of the hearers ordinarily,
but not universally: for some hear and understand not, their hearts being like
the high way, the seed that is sown, the wicked one catches away, and it
takes no manner of place at all: and in the Acts of the Apostles, some
believed, others doubted, a third sort mocked. But though there be ordinarily
such a working of the spirit accompanying the word, yet I utterly deny that
this is always accompanied with that saving and quickening power or efficacy
which causes true faith, and is sufficient to salvation; for it were
sufficient and universal, if it were able to remove man's rebellious
disposition, and were granted to all, then all men would be saved. For what
should hinder?

Not all that are drawn come] whether that be so or no, may soon be known by
considering other expressions of the same thing, in that place, John 6.37. All
that the Father gives shall come. and v. 65. No man can come unto me except it
were given unto him of my Father. and v. 45. Every man that has heard and
learned, comes, and v. 44. No man can come except the Father draw him. To
give, and to draw, and to teach, are of the same import. All that are given,
and all that are taught, and likewise all that are drawn, do come.

Your Masters have thought that they eluded this word of Drawing, and fairly
came off, from all force of argument from thence, when they found out that it
was to be interpreted by teaching, in the very next verse following, they shall
be all taught of God: not remembering that Gods teaching is not like men's: and
that none teaches like him. No; nor so much as considering, how that it
follows in that very verse, Every man that has heard and learned comes.
Which, as it wholly overthrows that evasion of theirs, manifestly also
shows the falsehood, and absurdity of what you here say, not all that are
drawn, come.

In your 8 Section, you yield that Gods Grace does remove infidelity, but not
give faith, unless thus explicated ["Faith or power to beleeve] this I take to
be all one with what some others say, that He does not give credere, but only
posse credere, and for this you quote, Hos. 11.4. I did take off the yoke on
their jaws and laid meat before them. This is spoken of the civil state of the
Israelites: and when you have made it appear that the yoke there mentioned is
to be taken for a muzzel, you are driven to betake your self to a vein of
allegorizing, for proof of your opinion, when it is well known that many plain
and direct places prove the contrary. Your other texts show what God does
outwardly to a Nation or Church visible: but do not show, that he does no more
than so, in the conversion of a particular person.

Sect. 9. Therefore he may think with himself, if I be of the former, I must be
brought in, take what course I will; and if of the other, I must perish take
the best course I can. Therefore I had as good take the present good things,
while I may have them, and live as I list.]

He must needs be a man absurd and unreasonable, and for the time given over of
God, that shall in earnest speak in his heart after this manner. And if ever he
return to his right wits, he will begin thus rather to argue with himself: If
God has chosen me to be a Saint in heaven, and does intend to bring me to
glory; then I must out of all doubt believe, and repent, and amend my ways, and
continue in Gods holy laws to my lives end, knowing that without holiness no
man shall see the Lord. And although the book of election be now closed up, and
a seal set upon it; yet there is an inscription upon that seal, which I can
easily see and read, Let every one that names the name of Christ depart from
iniquity. But if God does intend to condemn me to Death eternal, it will be for
my wickedness, and for my rebellion, and for being so graceless as to argue
thus scornfully against Gods mercy, and the duty that I ow to him. I will
therefore with my utmost diligence apply my self to the faith and fear of his
most sacred name, and take heed while I live of such desperate and blasphemous
thoughts, knowing they proceed from none but the Devil, who out of his endless
malice to God, and envy toward me, would persuade me to be a more sot in
things concerning life eternal, than he dares to persuade me to be, in matters
of this life and bodily health: For if I knew assuredly, that God did now
purpose to prolong my life, to such a term of years, it were too gross a
temptation to be put upon me, to make me believe, that it were well done of me,
henceforth to cast off all care of providing food and raiment, and avoiding
deadly dangers; and not to call for a boat when I am to pass over the water;
and when I go into the field to battle, to leave my armor behind me. In those
things therefore that far more nearly concern me, I will never be so vile an
hypocrite, or in effect, so forlorn an atheist, as to discourse and conclude in
such a sort upon supposal of Gods foreknowledge and determination, whatsoever
some have told me, I may do.

CHAP. XIII. Whether all in Adam be pardoned.
THe Doctrine maintained by you in this chapter, is; That although all sins
whatsoever springing from the sin of Adam be forgiven as of due debt, through
Gods mercy, and the sacrifice of his Son; Nevertheless, by the manifestation
of this his Death and Sacrifice, and by occasion of this his goodness made
known to men, all their actual sins become new debts, because they are done
against Gods Grace and Truth shining upon all men. In defense and explication
of this detestable Doctrine. You afford us a twofold distinction: the first is
this, such sinning as does arise from force of natural corruption, is not
charged upon men, but only sinning voluntarily and unnecessitatedly against
the Truth striving to reclaim them, page 63. The second distinction is so fine,
and of so great subtility, that it flies quite away from all good sense. You
distinguish of sins considered before, or without Christ's coming, from sins
considered as before, or without his coming, and you ask page 68. if I cannot
so abstract, as to consider them, as in the root, and according to what they
had only by virtue of that from what they are as against Grace vouchsafed.]

But what say you in the mean time to those sins, that are both natural, or in
some sort necessitated by corruption of nature, and voluntary too, as many
sins, if not the greatest part of them, are? Shall they be forgiven as natural,
and punished as voluntary? Consider sins, as before, or without Christ's coming:
they would yet have been against light, the light of nature: and should not
they have been charged upon any man, because they were not against the light of
grace, or the Gospel? And know you not, that to love darkness more than light,
resisting of the truth, and hatred to be reformed, and offending against mercy
and goodness, are all of them as necessarily derived from the root you speak
of, and are as truly parts and products of our hereditary pravitie, as any sins
are whatsoever you can name?

The chief place of Scripture you allege, is Joh. 15.22, 24. If I had not
come, they had not had sin, it had not been charged upon them.] You make a
twofold coming of Christ, of this sort: One as he came spiritually in his light
and truth into the world in all ages, upon the account of his death undertaken,
page 65. the second, when he came in man's nature to suffer that death. It is to
your purpose that you should mean the first. But that cannot be meant, because
it is said, If I had not come and spoken: and, If I had not come and done the
works that none ever did: of his second coming therefore it must be meant. Now
let me ask, Had Christ's capital enemies no sins to be charged upon them before
Christ came, or unless he had come? You have had some dealing with the people
called the Quakers: Did ever any of them take a text of Scripture more crudely
than you do this? Was there no guilt of sin laid to the Nation, upon killing of
the Prophets or messengers sent beforehand, till the Son himself came?
Doubtless there was a stock of sin charged upon them before, though now it came
to be completed, and filled up in measure. It is wonder you would not compare
this with other places, which might soon have showed you how soul your error
was. Or why would you not view the context, or that which went before? v. 20.
If they have persecuted me; and v. 24. You have both seen and hated me. It was
the kind of sin; Persecution and hatred: and it was the degree of the sin, it
was hatred without a cause: it was malice against cause to the contrary;
against so many good deeds, convincing and obliging. That was the sin which
they had not been guilty of, if Christ had not come.

You bring another text, Sect. the last, out of Romans 5.14. where you say the
Apostle implies a distinction answerable to what you make. Some sins are after
the similitude of Adams transgression, namely, against light, knowledge, and
engagement, or with free unnecessitated consent: Other sins are not so. Now man
being fallen and restored again, sins as Adam did upon a new engagement by
Christ's death against Gods goodness, and some liberty brought into their
wills.] Answ. Adams sin was against a positive and express law: others, till
Moses came, sinned against the law of nature written in their hearts. The
Apostle speaks nothing of light, nor of liberty, nor engagement; and dare you
set on soot such a pestiferous opinion as you do, because the Apostle implies
something answerable, which yet he does not? Where does he so much as obscurely
or implicitly teach, that all men from the beginning were brought to a new
engagement, new light, and new liberty in their wills? Or where does he say,
that some sins are forgiven of due debt, and some not but upon Repentance?

Your discourse in the other Sections is so frivolous, that I must not bestow
much time upon it. I will consider that place which you bring in your 10.
Section, the which (as it seems) you esteem alone sufficient to uphold the
Universalists cause, and to prove the necessity of teaching their doctrine, as
without which there is no hope of any good to be done upon any man in the world
by preaching of the Gospel. The words are, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. The love of Christ
constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all
dead; and that he died for all, that they which live, should not live unto
themselves, but unto him. But I suppose you would not have spent so great a
part of the fourth chapter of your Essays, in your boisterous and uncharitable
deductions from that place, if you had bestowed a little time rightly to
understand it. Be pleased therefore calmly to take notice: First, that the
Redemption there spoken of, is not that universal Redemption which you so much
insist upon, but that which is efficacious and actually applied, so that a
Christian thereby is regenerated, justified, and sanctified; and, Those for
whom Christ is said to have died, had been dead, and were now alive; and ought
therefore in all good reason, not to live to themselves, but to him that died
for them. The like exhortation and upon the same ground, we find Romans 14.9.
Christ died that he might be the Lord of the living, and that they might live
to him: and 1 Pet. 4.1, 2. forasmuch as Christ has suffered for us, let us
cease from sin; and live the rest of our time to the will of God. And if it be
such a Redemption as is actually salutiferous, and brings with it a new life;
and if it be such a Redemption of which Sanctification is a consequent, as
clearly it is by the Apostles discourse, and by parallel places, then it cannot
be that which is called Universal. This is further confirmed, because

Secondly, The love of Christ there spoken of, is not in probability to be
taken actively, for that love wherewithal Christ loves us; but passively, for
that whereby we love Christ. To this sense the scope of his words there do best
suit, as even they seem to acknowledge who interpret it otherwise. He would not
have them to imagine, that what he spoke of the Dignity of his Ministry,
tended to his own commendation, or that such carnal end or design had any
place in him: If we be besides our selves, as you may think we are, it is for
Gods sake, whom we seek and serve: The love we bear to him compels us to do
what we do, whom alone we desire to know, and no man else, and nothing else.
And if it be the love active that is there spoken of (for I will not much
contend with you about it) then we are to know there is a twofold love that God
bears to man (as well as a twofold Redemption) A general love spoken of Joh.
6. So God loved the world: and a particular or special love, most commonly
understood where his love is spoken of. Romans 5.8, 9. Love to the justified, and
those that shall be saved. 1. Joh. 4.19. Love that causes us to love him
again: we loved him because he first loved us: and such must that love be that
constrains, and that causes ecstasy, that sets us as it were besides our
selves: and is not likely to be that which is born toward all mankind,
whatsoever in right reason it ought to be.

And thirdly, whereas you say that the Apostles were carried out to all their
service for Christ, because of the love he bare to all men, as if they would
not have been half so zealous in preaching the Gospel to all men, if they had
not thought all men had been alike chosen without difference, and no man had
been denied the gift of Faith; it is a very weak fancy of yours. What they
did, was principally done for the elect people of God: for his Bodies sake
which is the Church, Col. 2.24. for the Elects sake, 2 Timothy 2.10. As for the
rest, they knew and testified, and held themselves contented, that they were
unto God a sweet savor even of death unto death, in them that perish. The love
they bare to Christ, did carry them on to do the work appointed them, leaving
unto God the success of their work, and unto his secret counsels: and though
they might labor in vain, and spend their strength for naught, yet were they
well assured that their judgment was with the Lord, and their work with their
God.

Fourthly, suppose that not only Ministers and Preachers of the word did
believe it, but they could moreover make all their hearers believe it firmly,
that Christ died for all without any difference, and loved them all, not
preferring one before another, would it work much upon the disobedient? I think
not. If you go about to wash a raw brick, you do naught but turn it all to
mire; tell an obstinate and hardened sinner of mercy that is in store for him,
and the Gospel and blood of Christ, he will but turn this grace into
wantonness, and be so much the more dissolute. You think all the world might be
brought home to God by preaching his love to them, and telling men of his
goodness and kindness to sinners. But have you never known many undutifull
children, who have yet been tenderly beloved of their parents, and have known
so much too? Absalom was not ignorant how dearly his Father affected him, and
desired his good above any thing, yet still he continued an ungracious rebel.
And what if he had made him partaker, yea wholly possessour of his Kingdom and
Government in his life time? The Chronicles of after Ages have recorded what
have come to pass in like case, and may teach us to conjecture, whether that
would have brought him to any further sense of his duty; who knows not how
little good is done by doing good to ill natures? Kindness will never alter
kind; nor will an ill-disposed man be gained to the friendship of another,
whom he hates through a natural antipathy, by courtesies, and entreaties, and
significations of good will toward him. Every man's experience can witness so
much, and how little policy it is to heap benefits upon the ungrateful, out
of hope to win them. Fit deterior qui accipit, says Cicero. Men are the worse
for endearments and obligations: Understand it of those that are bad and
ill-affected of themselves, or to such an one. But so are all men naturally to
the most righteous God: and it is not common kindness, nor ordinary knowledge
of his love, that will reclaim them.

Lastly, It may reasonably be demanded of you, how it comes to pass that this
general love ot God toward men, should do so much with them, and prevail so
far with them; and yet his special love should do so littles; yea, should
rather be prejudicial to holiness. So those of your party use to cry out,
that absolute election, special and eternal love, do cause men to cast off all
care of their salvation, and of walking in the way that leads to life, and do
serve only to make men proud and haughty. And in your Funeral Sermon, 1648.
The Pharisee, say you, thought he could not have been so good as he was, if God
had not had special and eternal love and favor toward him.] But will not a
special love, and that considered comparatively too, do as much as the general
love? it enflamed David's zeal, that he was chosen and preferred before Saul, 2 Samuel 6.21. And arguments are often brought to move the Israelites to obedience,
from the favor and good will that God did bear toward them, more then toward
any other nation. He that believes the special love, believes the general
also, and receives as much benefit from the appearance of Gods love declared
in the Gospel, as any others do: for what is there that should any way hinder
them?

Now because you think that you must maintain, some sins are forgiven
absolutely, as of due debt, because otherwise universal Redemption,
presupposes two payments of the same debt, one from the Savior of the world,
another from the person impenitent or unbeleeving, page 61. It is unjust to
require two payments of the same debt.] I desire your attention to what I shall
now say. The work of the Son of God in behalf of lost mankind is set forth to
us diversely; under the term and likeness of Reconciliation, or Atonement of
parties that are at distance: of a Sacrifice offered to propitiate the Deity:
of Adoption, whereby not only pardon for malefactors, but further, the state
of sons and heirs is procured: of Redemption, whereby captives are ransomed by
some price paid: of one that is punished in another stead, or for another
fault, or that does satisfy or discharge the debt, which some other owes.
These particulars, with diverse others, being of a different nature one from
another; cannot all of them, perfectly agree to the work of man's salvation,
that Jesus Christ wrought. With men ordinarily, there is a numerical
punishment, applied to a numerical or individual fault. But when Christ was
smitten for our sins, the punishment was one, but of infinite value, applicable
to the sins of all men, were there more than there are, or ever will be. In
this similitude therefore, the respect of punishing the same fault twice, must
be forborne: so must that also, touching a double payment of the same debt. But
take the other similitudes; Reconciliation there may be, and Adoption there may
be, which may come to nothing for want of the condition: and a general ransom
may be many ways defective, as to some persons: and a Sacrifice may be offered,
and the God not appeased; according as the Latins make a difference betwixt
Sacrificare and Litare: to your argument therefore I answer, when the payment
or satisfaction is absolute, as to all effects, then there is no other
satisfaction to be expected.

But when it is absolute as to some effect, and conditional, as to some other;
then it is neither against reason, nor justice, nor custom, but that a
payment, pardon or satisfaction may be twofold. The General ransom is absolute
thus far, that Gods justice or wrath is appeasable. All sins are venial, and
way made for pardon, the Covenant of works notwithstanding. But thus far it is
conditional, that it shall not be actually beneficial for any to life eternal;
but according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace, namely, upon Repentance
and Belief in the Son of God. I gave you the similitude of a general pardon
granted from the King: to which you say not one word to the purpose, but most
impertinently betake your self to the point of Freewill, in the fourth Section
of your former chapter. And as for the injustice you speak of, I answer, had we
our selves of our own, paid these our debts: or had our Surety and Redeemer
paid them and satisfied for them so, as that all men should by virtue of his
sacrifice have been instantly discharged from all their sins, and admitted to
possession of life, no condition whatsoever intervening: or had Almighty God
made any such promise or agreement, with his son our Savior, to bestow faith
and repentance upon all those, for whom he was to lay down his life: in any of
these cases, it had not been just to demand a second payment. But inasmuch as
God himself did freely procure the ransom and satisfaction for our sins; It
was free for him to annex thereto, what conditions it pleased him. There is
therefore no wrong done to such persons as are punished for their sins, after
the price of their ransom is accepted, because they did neither pay that
ransom, nor perform the condition required.

CHAP. XIV. Election, what it is.
Sect. 1. and 2. You needed not to have troubled your self, to find out some
that have spoken as you did. I employed so much, and yet thought you
blameworthy, not them; because you were busied about an ill work. Moreover, Of
all things, Definitions ought to be deliberate and well weighed, and it is one
thing how some learned writers may chance sometime to speak, while they are
discoursing before grown and well grounded Christians; another thing what words
you use in delivering the first principles to new beginners: who if they be not
instituted very warily may fall into some heresy, the name whereof they never
yet heard. For as that which deceived Nestorius, was the want of good attending
and taking heed to the first beginning of the union or combination betwixt God
and man; so likewise to treat of the Incarnation, in such a manner that
children may think there are not only two Natures in Christ, but two Persons,
may breed in them the same opinion that Nestorius held.

Sect. 3. It is Beza's one of his own Masters; from him I received the notion,
and gave both terms, chose or purposed to choose.]

When two several men shall do, or shall say the very same thing, it comes to
be quite another thing.

His Elegit, and Decrevit eligere, differ not much. But they are not all one
with yours: if your Doctrine and Definition of Election, be the same with his;
then may his authority make for you: his meaning is, that from eternity he
purposed to choose us when we should come to be fallen in Adam, and not when we
come indeed to believe: or howsoever it be, he seems to take Election there
for a transient action, whereas others take it for an immanent. You might take
the term from Beza, but the sense you had from your other Masters. And who was
their Master? Socinus Prelect. 13. page 63. Eligendi verbum declarat cligendi
decretum. paulus affirmare non dubitat Deum suosjam glorificasse. Here you have
your Doctrine and your proof too. How you make it good, that none are said to
be Elected before they be called, falls to the Readers share to consider, and
to see what regard you give to testimonies of Scripture.

That the Elect signify, not chosen, but choice, I know not who says.]

The evasion is so common, to make Elect and Reprobate to be Adjectives and not
Participles, and to denote a Quality in man, no Act in God; that it is much
you have not taken notice of it. I will now name one of your Masters, whom you
diverse times have alleged here: Hemingius de Great. univ. page 25. Primo hoc
tenendum est quod Electus, non sit Participium, ut quidam falso putant, sed
nomen habitus seu formae haercntis in anima, hominis credentis. But though I
have helped you to the notion, yet that you may not think it worth your taking
notice of, to your purpose, I pray observe that in all reason, Elegit nos,
contains nos electos, if he chose us, we are chosen. and 1 Pet. 2.4.
Disallowed of men, a Deo autem electum, but chosen of God, it must needs have
the force of a Participle; and though it be but an Adjective verbal, yet has
it the signification passive, as (...) which I hope they will give us leave, to
render by a Participle, called, until they can tell us how we may render it
otherwise. But were it but a Substantive, it were sufficient to make good the
Doctrine, that you oppose. Romans 11.7. Electio consecuta est: the Election has
obtained. The rest were hardened: where, as I think, you must interpret, the
election, by the elected, by virtue of the opposition to c^eteri, the rest, in
the other member of the verse. Another of your Masters Huberus, a downright
Universalist, howsoever he seems to overlook all inferior learning and cries
out upon Grammaticuli and Discipuli Libanii, and Pagana Grammatica; is yet
content to stoop to so low game, as to tell us, that eligere, in the Etymoligie
of it, is extrahere ex miseria omne humanum genus: not to choose, but only to
take out, or draw out. Thus you may say that Jeremie was elected out of the
Dungeon, and Joseph out of the pit, as the Midianites passed by. I think it was
wisely done of him, that drove away all the true birds out of sight, when he
had a mind to set forth, and to commend his deformed counterfeits. And here
presently you observe the Grammatical case, to prove that God chooses men when
they believe. 1 Pet. 1.2. chosen in the sanctification of Spirit: and yet you
cannot but know that those who have very good skill in the Greek, turn it, to
sanctification; others into, or unto sanctification. You may compare it with
Ephesians. 1.4. he has chosen us that we should be holy, or to be holy: not, being
holy, or because we were holy: And inasmuch as S. Peter in those words
mentions all the persons in the Trinity, ascribing Election to God the
Father, Redemption to the Son, and Sanctification to the holy Ghost, it is best
to understand these three works apart, and not to make Election and
Sanctification all one, as you would do.

Here be three things further to be considered in this chapter.

1. Whether our Savior Christ be chosen first. 2. Whether he be chosen to
salvation. 3. Whether he alone be personally chosen.
To the first of these, your words are Sect. 4. He faults me for beginning with
Christ in the Doctrine of Election; a great offense to them that lay him by
therein, and give him not the Preeminence in all things; could not he see that
to be the Apostles method, he chose us in him, then not, but with respect to
him, as his chosen ones, seeing we receive from him and his fullness, and grace
for grace.]

Until you be able to show, out of the very words of the pretended Orthodox,
not out of Tilenus and Arcana Dogmatum, that they lay aside Christ in the
Doctrine of Election, you must give me leave to think that these words are a
great slander: and withal, a great argument, that neither you nor yours are
able to speak any thing, against your adversaries opinion, because you will not
represent it as it is, but must alter it, and pervert it, and make it quite
another thing, before you dare to meddle with it. For their constant Doctrine
is, That the Decree of Election to life does include the means by which it is
brought to pass; the first and chief whereof, is Christ Jesus the Redeemer. And
although the end, and the means toward it, be thought upon together by every
wise agent at the same time, yet the intention of the end, does precede the
means, in nature, or as others call it, in signo rationis, in reason; because
the end propounded, is the true Reason, and the true Cause, why the Means are
such as they are. When you described Election, to be the choice of the man
Christ, to be united with the Word, I told you it was an innovation, and I
should think it ^o, till I knew some one or other that herein went before you.
In stead of naming any such, you tell me of some, that lay aside Christ in the
doctrine of election. I send you now a kind of second challenge, to name them
that do so: and now if you can, you may answer both the challenges together.

But then, say you, Christ should not have the preeminence in all things.] To
this I answer, That our Savior Christ is not now in this inquiry, to be
considered absolutely as the second person of the Trinity, coequal with the
Father, God blessed for ever: But as he was incarnate, and did take upon him
man's nature in the fullness of time, and suffered. As he is the most high God
and Creator of us and all things, so we and all things are for him, Coloss.
1.16. yet though all things were made by him, and for him; nevertheless, as it
is in the Nicene Creed, For us men and for our salvation he came down from
heaven, and was incarnate. His incarnation was for the sake of his Passion:
therefore did he take upon him our flesh, that he might be capable of so mean
an office, as to die for us, Hebr. 2.14. And can you think that both these, his
Incarnation and his Passion, with other parts of his mediation, were in nature
or reason first thought upon, as being the end why the Church was? If our
Savior Christ must have the preeminence in all things, as you mean, even of
Gods purpose in sending him, then man was to be saved that Christ might come.
The Son of God is rightly preferred before us and all creatures: yet is not
every thing that he did, or suffered, so far to be preferred before man's
benefit, but that man's salvation, may as the end be preferred in the reason or
order of causalitie, before that action or passion of his. He was foreordained
of God for our Redemption, 1 Pet. 1.19, 20. And he is to be considered as the
instrumental cause by which we are brought to life, as the chosen servant of
God, by whom his will and pleasure does prosper and take effect, Isa. 53. v.
10, 11. You seem to fear, that inasmuch as the end is more honorable and
valuable than the means, if we be the end why Christ was chosen to be Gods
servant, then we should be more honorable than Christ is. But you are
mistaken; for that rule does hold only in those means, which having no
absolute goodness or worth of their own, are only valuable by that relation
which they bear unto their ends: otherwise it holds not: for the Angels are
more worthy and honorable then men, yet are sent forth as ministering spirits
for the good of men. The Angels are superior to men, yet may man's benefit be
above, and preferred before some actions ministerial of the Angels. The King
may condescend to do some action for his meanest subject; yea to sign a pardon
for a rebellious subject, or a traitor; in which case he valueth the life of
his subject before the setting to his own hand or seal, otherwise he would not
do it: And yet, I hope, the King has still the preeminence in all things.

There is no just cause of your distaste in this matter, nor of any man's
dissent, if it be well considered, how they who teach, that the end or fruit of
Christ's Incarnation, is the salvation of Gods elect, not only in general but
in particular; for whose respect and benefit it was that Christ was sent; do
withal readily acknowledge, that the end or fruit of man's salvation is, that
Christ may have the honor of it, and that it may be as the Apostle faith, Ephesians.
1.12. To the praise of his glory. So that our Savior is no way disparaged or
undervalued, but still and ever, Of him, and To him are all things.

Many of them who seem to honor Christ more than others do, in beginning with
him, and making him the foundation of election, do indeed most dishonor him;
for they make him a foundation possibly without any building upon it: a head,
possibly without any body: a King without any subjects. For while we suppose
all means necessary to salvation afforded to all men, it may be according to
what they teach, that not one shall believe, or if he do, he may fall away.

While you tell us, That Christ having the preeminence in all things, is worthy
to have it in election too, page 71. I pray take heed lest it be indeed you
that would have the preeminence, and that while you seem to honor Christ, you
do not indeed honor your self, your own power and natural abilities. If your
Adversaries doctrine prevail, then all the glory redounds to God and his
grace. But if God does choose his Son Jesus Christ, and send him into the
world, and then chooses all those that believe in him, (if any there be that
will believe in him, for all may if they will) then if you be chosen, it is
because you believe: you are worthy and fit to be chosen, because you are in
Christ, and then you may thank your self, and not say with the Pharisee, one of
the pretended Orthodox, God I thank thee, I am not as other men are.

If he chose us in him, then not but with respect to him.

It is granted [not without respect to him] if you mean not without respect had
to Christ's Passion, by which our Redemption is wrought, and our election is
completed in the execution of it. But it is denied if you mean thus: not
without respect to him as the cause why we were elected. For though the means
be the cause of producing the effect; yet are they not the cause why the effect
is determined, and resolved upon to be produced. For example: God destinated
food and medicine to be the means to maintain man's corporal life and health: so
that food and medicine are in some sort, the cause of man's life and health, yet
are they not the cause why God was moved to give to man life and health Page
74. The election of his Church (well-said, that is not of uncalled.)

They may be the Church of God in his counsel of election, before they be his
called and gathered Church. Matthew. 1.21. He shall save his people from their
sins. Ephesians. 5.25. Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he
might sanctify it. Christ had his people as yet uncalled, and a Church as yet
unsanctified.

I named two places to prove that the love of God did precede the sending, or
purpose of sending his Son. The first, So God loved the world, that he gave his
Son: the other, God loved us and sent his Son. To this you say, The Church and
the world are not all one; and are resolved not to pity me, because I am not
humble, but to laugh at me that I may be ashamed.] It shall not trouble me
which of the two likes you best, either the one or the other: or you may, if
it please you, forbear both the one and the other, and be sober. I named two
places, the latter of them you wholly omitted, for had you mentioned that,
there had been no color for your vain and swelling words, for it is plain by
the Apostles discourse, 1 John 4. when he said he loved us, he meant not the
world but the Church. And the former place of the two I explicated, to prevent
all cavil, if it might have been, in these words, [Whether it were Gods love to
mankind in the general, or in special to the elect, his love does go before
his purpose to send his Son,] where you could not but see, that I foresaw what
might be objected from the ambiguitie and different acception of the word
world: for take it how you will, my argument held firm to my purpose; and the
second place is without exception.

Page 75. Zanchy another of his own party will condemn him, for making
election before the purpose of sending Christ.]

Against his authority I set Peter Martyrs, Loc. Com. page 457. Christus
primum and praecipuum Praedestinationis effectum est.D.Prideaux Fascic. page
138. Includitur christus ut Caput mediorum in exequendo. Wollebius, Chr. Th.
1.4. Christus ut Mediator, est electionis exequendae medium. Alvarez De Incarn.
verb. Div. page 451 In genere causae objectivae, prius nostro modo intelligendi
voluit Deus salvare homines, quam mittere salvatorem, quia Incarnatio verbi
fuit volita in remedium peccati. Bannes tom. 1. page 297. Unio hypostatica est
effectus praedestinationis totius corporis mystici, That is, That God did send
his Son into the world, did proceed from divine predestination, as the chief
part of the means to accomplish it.

Page 75. That the Apostle calls election the foundation of God, 2 Timothy 2.19.
is one of the Elders traditions: it is but a private interpretation so to take
it, no other Scripture says it: but to say, Christ is the foundation, as laid
in the Apostles doctrine, which is not shaken by man's falling off, is more
agreeable to Sc^iture, and to the Apostles scope in that place.]

It is the Tradition of your Elders also. Hagu^-Remonstrants, page 112. Edit.
Bert. Fundamentum Electionis. Esto. They did grant, that the foundation there
spoken of, is Election. So in this, as in many other things you have outgone
your masters. See that it be for the better: for some wax worse, as you are
admonished a little before at the 16 verse of that chapter, and at the 13 verse
of the next.

You go on resolutely, and say, It is but a private interpretation. But what
mean you when you say so^ a private interpretation in the place of S. Peter, is
propria expositio, a man's own interpretation, as the word is taken elsewhere, as
Acts 1.25. Judas went to his own place: and Jude v. 6. the angels left their
own habitation. And when you say, Christ is the foundation, that is indeed your
own interpretation: for it is no man's else that I know. Those Sectaries who
would anull all duties, upon pretense to magnify Christ and his grace, are
wont to say, that the New Creature, and the New man, are to be meant of Christ:
and by Love, 1 Cor. 13. and the armor mentioned Ephesians. 6. Christ is meant: and
good works, say they, are not as they are commonly thought to be, the way to
glory, because Christ is the way. And as you may remember, in one of your
published discourses, to that text of Psalm. 119. Blessed are the undefiled in
the way, alleged to prove perfection in this life, you give this answer
[Christ is the way: we grant some undefiled and complete in Christ] Thus your
Antinomian spots do now and then break out, and appear, though you be angry to
hear of it: and thus you may think to honor Christ, while you wrest and abuse
his word, and may seem to be zealous for him, but your zeal is not according to
knowledge. It is true that Christ is, and is called a foundation: yet is he not
every foundation that any where is spoken of. Christ is the Resurrection, is
there therefore no other resurrection? neither is it true that no other
Scripture says it. There be diverse other places that say in effect, that Gods
election is a firm foundation against falling away, and being seduced: Matthew.
24. If it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect. Romans 9.11. That the
purpose of God according to election might stand. The election have obtained,
but the rest were hardened, Romans 11. His meaning is, the elect have obtained;
but he says, the election, to intimate that they obtained, non qua fideles,
not as faithful, nor in any other regard; but the groundwork or foundation of
final perseverance was election. But you hardened your forehead too much when
you wrote thus, That your exposition is most agreeable to the Apostles scope in
that place: for his scope is clearly this, Though some eminent professors be
fallen away, and others be gone after them, yet let not this shake your
confidence that are true believers, because your safety and preservation is
laid upon a firm foundation, even Gods eternal purpose, which makes the
difference betwixt you and them. This I will evince to be the Apostles intent,
1, by that word Nevertheless: which word is manifestly exceptive, exempting
some from falling away, even those that are his: 2, by a parallel place, which
you cannot so easily shift off: 2 Thessalonians. 2. having set forth the mavelous
prevalence of Antichristian seducers, and the fearful estate of those that
were seduced; for the comfort of Gods people he does ground the difference of
them from the Apostates, upon the foundation of Gods election, v. 13. But we
are bound to give thanks to God always for you brethren, beloved of the Lord,
because God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation through
sanctification of the spirit, and belief of the truth. If God chooses, and
calls, and justifies, and glorifieth, who can be against us? what shall
separate us from him? But when Christians shall be struck with the fear of a
spreading Apostasy, and begin to think with themselves thus: This defection
thus increasing may go on, and swallow us up also; It is no manner of relief or
satisfaction, to say; Though we and all men fall away, and be given over to be
deceived, and to believe lies; yet Jesus Christ the Son of God continues the
treasury of all his blessings: a sure foundation to them that believe in him,
he abides firm as a rock, though we and all men that now cleave to him, come
to suffer shipwreck one after another. Therefore that is no way likely to be
the scope of the place.

Next is to be considered, whether our Savior Jesus Christ be chosen to
salvation. In the funeral sermon upon which you wrote your exercitations, and
called them Essays, when you met with that saying, [That there should be any
one chosen, was the infinite free mercy of God in Christ] you would scarce
admit it to pass under your approbation, unless with this your interpretation
[It was Gods infinite mercy to choose and save one man even the man Christ
Jesus] which proposition of yours, howsoever you may please your self therein,
has little salt or savor in it. For then is God merciful when he helps his
creatures out of misery. To save, and mercy in saving, these terms, in all
reason suppose a lost estate. It was infinite mercy in God to send a Savior:
but to save a Savior, comes too near the scoff of the Jews. If thou be the
king of Israel, save thy self. There is little hope of him being a Savior that
stands in need himself to be saved. What they said had thus much of truth in
it, He who needed a Savior, was not likely to save others. Howbeit that Death
from which they would have him save himself, was the means to save us.

Was not Christ chosen to life and salvation, as man? could any part of the
seed of David or Abraham, have escaped death, or been glorified in life, had it
not been chosen of God thereto, and that by Christ's dying?]

Here you implie and teach plainly enough, that Christ by his own dying escaped
death, and attained the life of glory: and that he came to save himself as well
as others. And this were not so ill as it is, if want of sense were the worst.
For death being the stipend of sin, if Jesus Christ had need, by reason of the
common law and manner of men, to save himself from Death; then how could he be
our high Priest, holy and undefiled, and separate from sinners, and a spotless
sacrifice offered on our behalf?

There is no Christian that has learned his Creed, and been well instructed in
those words of the third Article [conceived by the holy Ghost] but must needs
take check at what you have here written. That which is born of the flesh, is
flesh. The imputation, and the pollution of Adams sin, are conveyed to all his
posterity, by natural or carnal generation. But Jesus Christ, as man, was
conceived supernaturally: and that stream or flux of original sin, which
universally and uninterruptedly descended upon mankind from the first Adam;
was cut off and stopped by the miraculous work of the holy Ghost, so that
Christ's humane nature was not defiled thereby, but was preserved free from all
taint and touch of the flesh, or sinful corruption. And because as he was man,
he had no father, therefore is he said to be FACTUS Romans 1.3. and Gal, 4.4. not
Genitus, not begotten but made, made of a woman, or, of the substance of his
mother: and because he was so, and that by the holy Ghost, Ideo quod nascetur,
sanctum: Luke 1.35. Therefore that which was born of her, was holy, perfectly
exempted from sin, and the guilt of sin, otherwise than as the took upon him
the sin and guilt of others.

You quote two places for your purpose, Zach. 9.9. Thy king comes having
salvation, or, saving himself: you choose to take it passively, with the Jews
who take occasion hence to calumniate; rather than actively, with the most and
best interpreters. Christ was called Jesus, because he saved his people, not
because he was saved: or if it be said, that he saved himself, it was that he
might not be swallowed up of Death after his passion. The other text is Hebr.
5.7. He offered prayers to him that was able to save him from Death and was
heard: this is spoken of bodily Death, which our Savior did in some sort, for
a time, shrink from, praying that the cup might pass from him: and he was saved
from Death, so as that he triumphed over Death: or if you understand it of his
prayer upon the cross, what is that to salvation from Death eternal, and the
wrath of God in the world to come? which salvation we stood in need of, but he
needed not.

Lastly, We are to consider whether only Christ, and none else, be personally
chosen. Now although this be your Doctrine plainly, yet you will not allow me
to gather it out of the Answer in your Catechism: which in effect, and in brief
was this. Election is that whereby God did choose Jesus Christ to be united to
the Godhead, and all that believe in him, to blessing. Here I observed thus.
All in general, none in particular, not any determinately. Hereunto you make
answer. I thought the general had included the particulars, not excluded them.
I am sure in stead of having new Doctrines, he has new Logic. All in general,
therefore none in particular.]

I answer first; A General does include every particular: but All in general,
does not include any one in particular. And secondly, the Generals, wherever
they are, include the particulars, but where the generals are only upon
supposition, it is possible the particulars may have no positive being.
Whosoever does perfectly keep the law of God, shall be saved. This proposition
is true in the general: yet in particular no one person in the world shall be
saved by keeping the law of God. So when it is said whosoever believes shall
be saved, this being the Election which you teach; there may in the event be
some particular person saved, but as to the choice, no one particular person is
chosen before another, because they are all without any difference beforehand.
Neither said I, All in general, Therefore none in particular. It should be
supplied thus, nevertheless none in particular, and I have told you, who of
your own party held, that though salvation be intended to all, yet possibly to
none particular it may befall. And let me tell you now, what you heard not yet
from me, that the second part of the Definition that you give of Election, is a
mock-answer as well as the first. For as the first part is, of the union of the
two natures in one person, that is, the Incarnation; So the second is,
concerning the Gospel, but not at all, concerning Election. For what is the
Gospel? He that believes shall be saved. Mark 16.16. The preaching of Christ
crucified to save them that believe. 1 Cor. 1.21. And this is that very thing
which you in words metaphorical, others of your party in words more proper, do
call Election; both removing the old terms, bounds and words; faulting modern
systemes, to make way for new-coined opinions.

The Gospel proffers life upon condition of believing: As the Law did upon
condition of working: Gods purpose of Election, 1. ordains life eternal
absolutely, not whether we believe, or no, as is constantly, and as I think
unconscionably by some objected; but without any such conditional proviso of
believing, because 2. it ordains ^aith and all other means infallibly
conducing to eternal life. So there is difference enough between the Doctrine
of the Gospel, and the Decree of Election (though they be made all one by them
that lay the grounds of the study in Divinity in the modern systome of the
Racovian Catechism, as may be seen there in page 231.) but in doing so, they
attempt to break open the seal which the Apostle speaks of, 2 Timothy 2. and to
publish all that is contained and concealed under it, Even this, All men that
believe, shall be saved. But enough has been said of this chapter.

CHAP. XV. Election in believing.
Page 79. You interpret those words of the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. from the
beginning, thus; from the beginning of the Gospel preaching amongst them, like
as the same phrase is used. 1 John 2.24. let that abide in you which you have
heard from the beginning.]

But I pray you, are these parallel places? If you did intend to gather the
meaning of the Scripture, by conferring one place with another, why did you not
confer this with Ephesians. 1.4. he has chosen us before the foundation of the
world? you should compare places that are alike, and speak of the same thing,
as these two do, and not find out a place where the same word is used of quite
another matter. Or did the Apostle intend to free from the danger of defection,
those that believed at the first hearing, more than those that believed a while
after? To be chosen out of the world, I said, is Vocation, not Election.

This you say, is a sorry shift. Election, is not so large as Vocation, for
many be the called, few the chosen.

You will not rightly deliver the grounds of Divinity, if you cannot
distinguish betwixt Vocation external and Vocation internal. Of the former it
is said, Many are the called, few the chosen. Of the other, the Apostle
speaks to this effect, Romans 8. All that are called, were elected, are
justified, and shall be glorified.

He says, The Lord has chosen him that is godly, is to be understood of
choice to office, that is, the kingdom, Psalm. 4.3. a piteous evasion. Chooses
he godly men always to be kings?

But the Psalmist speaks but singularly, so that you need not to extend it to
all godly men. In behalf of the exposition which I gave, I have this
authority. Grotius, Sanctum suum, id est, unctum. Tremellius, Ut Regem quem
designavit, statuat. Lyra, Fecit mirabilem vocando de gregibus ad regni jura.
Genebrard, Celebrem reddidit me Davidem a se consecratum. D. Hammond, --
separated me to be his Vicegerent upon earth, conferring with Psalm. 78.70. be
chose David also his servant. Ainsworth, God had promised David the honor of
the kingdom. Calvin, Communem sententiam sequi tutius judico, ^uod Deus regem
elegerit. So that it is the common exposition which I gave: so you may see how
rash you are in censuring those that gave approbation to this, which you call a
piteous evasion.

If in Psalm. 65. Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, be meant of choosing or
admitting to the Church visible, then Judas and the Pharisees were blessed
men.]

Yes, they were blessed after such a manner as all the members of the Church
visible are blessed, Psalm. 84.5. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house. Yet
hypocrites may dwell in Gods house. You must know therefore that blessedness in
such like cases, does not signify blessedness absolute, but respective and
particular: and the intent is only to speak well of, or to commend the
condition of them whom we call blessed. Blessed are thy servants that stand
before thee and hear thy wisdom. Happy is the man that has his quiver full of
them. Blessed are the barren. Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the
son of Nobles. You may find it otherwise rendered, Ecclus 25. Well is him that
dwells with a wife of understanding. Well is him that speaks in the ears of
him that will hear. With whom it is well, he is called blessed. Thus may we say
that Judas and the Pharisees were blessed men, or happy men, in hearing and
conversing with Jesus Christ; as Solomon's servants were in standing before him;
not that they were absolutely blessed or happy persons. Having thus bewrayed
your ignorance and vulgar conceptions unbecoming a learned man, nevertheless
with these words you put an end to this chapter

I may conclude he has piteously cavill'd here, and made sorry and senslese
evasions: whether out of wilfulness, or some hand of the Lord infatuating him,
I know not: but me thinks that he himself, and all that read him, should be
ashamed of it. I heard that a Doctor and some reverend men in C. gave
approbation to this piece of his. I hope it is not so: for if it be, I greatly
fear God has infatuated the men of this generation, because of their too long
and stubborn opposition of the truth, that they should commend things so
senseless.]

In your last leaf you charge my review with want of three things, Logic,
Ethics, and Theology. Doubtless you had too little of something or other,
when you wrote after this manner: for which your manner you deserve no other
answer than this, (...) that so you may accompany Cyclops in the den. But
because you are pleased at the end, in correction of the mis-printings to take
notice of an ugly parenthesis, as you call it, and to put a deleatur upon it,
and s iquid aliud ejusdem gener is inveniatur, and upon any thing else that may
be found like unto it; if you be content, we are agreed, that these lines bear
that parenthesis company, and be thrust in among the Errata of your own, which
you there distinguish from those of the press. So proceed I to that which
follows.

CHAP. XVI. Election in personal considerations.
Sect, 1. IN Election to life we cannot be considered as fallen in Adam, and be
chosen in Christ, one consideration destroys the other, as he that gives
another a cup of water as a disciple, does not give it him simply as to a
thirsty man,]

You may think you have got the start of me, in crying ont, weakly, piteous,
senseless. There is no great hurt done; but who can otherwise think of this, and
a great deal the like of yours, but as weak and worthless? May not a cup of
cold water be given to a Christian both because he is thirsty and wants
relief, and also because he is Christ's disciple, and in that regard claims
relief? at the very same time that he is considered as a Christian, he is also
considered as thirsty, else the gift were not worth the giving. So may we be
considered as fallen in Adam, and needing help; and withal as ordained to
obtain life eternal by Jesus Christ our Redeemer.

In the fourth Section, he that is loath to read over all your book, may find
enough for a taste, how to judge of your dealing. I did say that the meaning of
those words Ephesians. 1. He chose us in him, was not that God chose Christ first,
and in choosing him chose us. I proved it out of the words in the seventh
verse, and the like manner of speech there, [in whom we have redemption, the
forgiveness of sins.] I asked, had Christ forgiveness first, and we in him? No.
Now to have forgiveness is to be forgiven. Mark 3.29 He that shall blaspheme
against the holy Ghost, has never forgiveness, Acts 10.43 Whosoever believes
in him shall receive remission of sins. Redemption and forgiveness are here
taken passively: as they are taken actively, so they may be said to be in
Christ. I might have said thus, for so I meant: Was Christ forgiven first, and
then we in him? Was Christ redeemed first, and we in him? and then I had
prevented that most absurd and impertinent vagarie of yours, of partaking of a
feast by coming into the house where it is, with a great deal the like, which
when you wrote, I wonder where your senses were wandering. I call you back
therefore, if I may, and I tell you, We were forgiven and redeemed in Christ;
yet Christ was not forgiven and redeemed first. So were we chosen in Christ,
and yet Christ was not chosen as we were chosen.

For the clearer understanding of this matter, and of those words [We were
chosen in Christ] it is needful to distinguish. The word [Christ] may be taken
two ways: First, personally, for the Son of God made man, and suffering for us:
Secondly, collectively, as it signifies a mystical body, whereof Christ is the
Head; a body congregated of Christ and all believers incorporate with him. You
take it in this latter sense, as if we were chosen because we were united to
him, or after we were made one with him. But I have showed that it is to be
taken in the former sense; for the person of the Mediator in whom, that is, by
whom, by whose blood, V. 7. we were ehosen to salvation, or to be brought to
life: as he is taken not for a person, but for a collective body, so indeed,
not otherwise, we may be said to be chosen into him; but no way in him, as you
me^n.

You think, If election of the Church do in nature or reason precede the choice
of a Mediator; then we cannot be chosen in Christ, because we are chosen
before the confideration of him.] It is more irksome to speak to him that will
not understand, than to him that cannot. Let me use a few words to your layman,
whosoever he was that had the good hap to epsy this contradiction: for this is
likely to be that which you speak of in the twentieth chapter. My friend, you
intend to build an house, this is your end and purpose, this you think of
first; next, you think of hiring workmen, and providing materials, as means
toward building the house: and yet you cannot for the least moment of time,
think to build an house not having wherewithal; without workmen and materials.
You intend to cross the haven, this is your first purpose; next you think of
taking boat; you think of one before the other, and yet you think of them both
together. Likewise it is but one purpose, desire, or resolution of yours to
make a voyage into France, and to go a shipboard; you intend these two both
together, yet in reason the first of these is first, because you desire the
other only in order to that, If neither you nor your friend can understand
this, you are more fit to meddle in other matters, than in finding out
contradictions.

Your Essay, that names written in heaven should be the qualities of godly,
meek, merciful, written ever in heaven, but put upon men when they believe,
came out of Socinus's shop, as I told you some where before, though you have
hammered it more then any other that I know of. The names of believers are
according to their frames, and you quote Solomon's Proverbs, The wise in heart
shall be called prudent.] I told you that qualities are not names: Prudent is a
quality: so is righteous, poor in spirit, merciful. Here you answer somewhat
nicely [" Prudence is the quality, Prudent the name.] You shall not need to
tell me of my new Logic, I have enough left of my old to tell you, that
Prudence is a quality in the Abstract, and Prudent is a quality, no less, in
the Concrete; so they are both qualities, but neither of them any man's name.
But you, as before you confounded qualities with names, now confound Grammar
with Logic, as if those things which differ in the one, must differ in the
other also. I can discern nothing further in this Chapter, concerning which
there is need of any notice to be taken, or to be given. I shall only give you
this my reason against this new Essay. When we read that there are in heaven
names written in a book, it is borrowed from men's custom, who are wont to set
down in writing the names of certain persons in a book, scrol, or catalogue, to
the intent that their persons may be for sundry purposes, the more certainly
remembered in time to come. So that though there be no book, or writing with
God, yet is there somewhat like it; and the thing it self is found among men.
But as for your kind of book or writing, a book full, not of proper names, but
Adjectives, or Qualities, it is no where found, that I can tell of, neither
know I where to look for it. Therefore unless you and yours can invent this,
you have invented nothing.

CHAP. XVII. Jacob and Esau.
CHAP. XVIII. Pharaoh.
I Dare trust any Reader with your xvii chapter throughout, if his senses be
but awake, though they be not much exercised. Only I observe what
encouragement you give him at the beginning, while you explain your meaning of
that in your Catechism, [The Scripture says not, that the Election of Jacob,
and the rejection of Esau were personal; by personal evidently meaning as
considered in their own persons without Christ] for, First, you then explained
your self in the very next answer thus; Not personally, but nationally;
therefore it is too bad tosay that you evidently meant any thing else than
Nationally. Secondly, though something has been said touching election
personal and withal in Christ; yet for Esau's rejection, how that should be,
not personal but in Christ, or not without him, you should have helped your
Reader in this, who is not always of so quick invention as your self. As for
your xviii chapter, I know nothing in it, but may receive satisfaction either
from what has formerly been said, or from what hereafter follows.

CHAP. XIX. Vessels of honor and dishonor.
Sect. 1. He says, I interpret a vessel of honor, upon which any honor is
conferred, whereas I spoke only of Divine honor, and in things heavenly, or
relating thereunto.]

And what other honor, could I mean, than Divine? yea, how could you otherwise
take me, when I expressed what I meant by any, when I added, though for the
duration temporary and transitory, for such are all the honors which he
mentions.] I hope you do not take temporary, for temporal.

That the preposition, In, in honorem, To honor, does not import a permanent
condition, you would prove from Isai. 14.2. Where people are taken in servos
and in ancillas, for servants and handmaids. Must they therefore be ever so?
may they not be made free?]

But 1. In servos, denotes a state, or condition, which is more than aid, or
choice means toward an estate, as you made it. And 2. Bondage, your own
instance, is a state permanent and final, during life. It is true, that a slave
may be made free: it is possible, but it is accidental to slaverie, not of the
nature of it. And strangers were not released at the year of Jubilee, as the
Hebrew bondmen were, but their bondage did abide from one generation to another.

The potter makes a vessel for honor: that is his final end: yet it may be
marred on the wheel: and he may turn it, and make another vessel. Jer. 18.3,
4.]

The Apostle Romans 9.20, 21. shows Gods absolute power to dispose of men
finally as it best pleases him, by the likeness of a Potter, that out of the
same lump of clay, frames one vessel to honorable use, another to
dishonorable: the similitude is taken out of Isai. or at least, is the same
that the Prophet there uses, Chap. 45. v. 9. Woe to him that striveth with his
maker: shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, what make thou? (whether
it be meant of Cyrus, who though a great Monarch, yet was wholly at Gods
dispose for the work that he had in hand: or whether it was spoken to check the
peoples impatience, that thought long for their deliverance, and to make them
willing to abide Gods leisure) S. Paul applies it to Predestination, and the
eternal state of men, in the life to come; This is most evident by that which
goes before, and follows in that discourse. The same similitude you may find
used also in Ecclus 33.12, 13. Some men he blesses and exalts and sets
near himself: some he curses and sets low, and turns out of their places:
As the clay is in the Potters hand, to fashion it at his pleasure, so is man in
the hand of him that made him. I pray take you heed that you be not like to
Balaam, who though he knew Gods mind or purpose, yet because he liked it not,
would needs go and inquire again, if possibly he might be brought to speak
according to his own desire. You would fain have the Apostles words refer to
the eighteen chapter of Jeremy, where indeed is spoken of a Potter, and the
clay in his hand, but quite to another purpose, namely this: A Potter, when he
is framing any one earthen vessel upon the wheel; can, with the turn of his
hand, make quite another of it, and not that which he began to make. Amphora
coepit institui, currente rota cur urceus exit? as on the contrary, sometimes
he that thinks to write but a few lines, when his hand is in, writes a long
discourse: currente rota, dum urceum cogito, Amphoram fecit nanus; said one
that wrote much more than he thought to have done. So says God by his Prophet
there: if I intend to bring, and be bringing evil against a Nation; upon their
Repentance I can and will upon the sudden, turn away the evil that was
hastening toward them. And if I promise, and begin to do good for a people, to
plant and establish them; if they in the mean time prove disobedient to me, I
can instantly turn my intended mercies into judgments, and destroy in stead of
building them. You may easily discern a difference betwixt thief two; namely
the Power or Liberty, that a Potter has to make several vessels to several
lasting uses, as it pleases him: (which the Prophet Esaias, and the Apostle Paul
speak of) And the Power or Facility that he has to make or mar one and the
same vessel, before it be finished (which is spoken of in the Prophet Jeremy)
And let not the Vorstian Divinity so blind your eyes, that you cannot
distinguish betwixt Gods promise, threatenings, exhortations to Repentance, and
revealed will, which is daily resisted on the one hand: and on the other, his
hidden purpose, which always takes effect, or his secret will, that never is
resisted, and cannot be disappointed.

2 Timothy 2.21. If a man cleanse himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto
honor; must either signify that he that is not so, may be made so -- ]

A man is made a vessel of honor, 1. By Election, from the beginning. 2. In
time, By Vocation and Sanctification, he therefore that through Gods Grace,
cleanses himself, may know he was elected a vessel to honor: so that in these
words the Apostle does but repeat in effect, what he said before, v. 19. Let
every one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity: as if he had
said. In a great house are vessels of several sorts, some to honor some to
dishonor, known only to God, who knows who are his, who not. If any man be
desirous to be certified that he is a vessel made to honor, Let him forsake
iniquity, let him keep himself free from the defilements of sin; for by this,
Gods purpose according to Election is executed, and also assured to them that
are heirs of life.

CHAP. XX. Whether the works of God do preach Chists mediation.
AGainst your opinion, that Heathens were in some sort Christians, and the
Rain, Sunshine and other worldly blessings do preach the Gospel to them, I
brought some Arguments, which you endeavor thus to put off.

Sect. 2. Gods works may manifest what men take no notice of. The Sun does
shine though I do not see it, and a man may speak what no body hears.

I will briefly show you the vanity of this your allegation. 1. That which God
is said indeed to manifest, is indeed made known to most men in the world. As
the heavens declare the Glory of God; so there is no Nation of what different
speech or language soever, where their voice is not heard. And 2. The Doctrine
of your Catechism was, that Gods works do bring a man to Faith in Christ: and
your Quest. 154. with the Answer, is this.

Quest. How does God speaking in his works conduce to Faith? Answ. Inasmuch as
they evidence God, and what is to be known of him to us, they evidence to us]
which cannot be unless we hear and see: and they dispose the heart to receive
more clear Revelation.]

Can that dispose the heart, which the heart does not perceive? This Answer of
yours, you say sect. 3. passes current without exception amongst the Answers of
his commendation.]

But what makes you think, I commend all the Answers in your Catechism that I
passed by, and did not mention? I pray do not abuse your self and me so far as
to imagine it. But that I should commend this Answer, that contains the same
Error and falsehood that the other did, because I took it not in among them, is
the most idle fancy that could come into your head.

Sect. 4. The humblest souls are usually best at seeing. Even as there be many
poor despised illiterate men that see more into Christ and heaven, than many
proud ministers, scholars, and Universitie men, that swell with conceits of
their science and despise them.]

He that will believe readily what you say, and take it upon your word, though
it be weak and unsound, shall have the commendation of an humble Christian.
Papists are brought to think, that when they renounce their own understanding,
and blindfold follow their guides, it is a high act of humility: and you would
have it thought that all they who question what you deliver, do swell with
pride and self conceit, and a high opinion of their own knowledge. But as
worldly want does not always make men humble, nor penury starve pride,
according to what Solomon says in the twelfth of the Proverbs, There is that
honors himself and lacks bread, and as Gregory in his Pastoral, enlarges
the observation; Plerumque personarum ordinem permutat qualitas morum, ut dives
humilis sit, pauper elatus, that is, Men's qualities and demeanours for the most
part run quite a cross their estates and degrees: the richer sort being in
their carriage low and gentle, while the poor are stiff and lofty. So there be
many ignorant and illiterate people, that are intolerably proud, undervaluing
disdainfully, all knowledge and knowing men; and on the other side, there are
many men as eminent and as much above others in humility, as they are in
learning and parts and promotion.

You tell us somewhere who bred the Quakers: but who is most like to do it? who
talks most like them? their name is new, but their manner S. Jerome thus
taxes to Marcella, Crassam rusticitatem pro sanctitate habent, quas^^dcirco
sancti sint si nihil scierint. Downright rudeness they count is holiness, as
if because they knew nothing, they must be therefore more holy than others are.
There be some laymen, whom perhaps you may think to gain upon, and to gain to
you, while you complie with them and join with them in reproaching the Clergy.
But as love that is caused by undue means, does not long continue, but is
unstable and fastidious, like fishes, says Plutarch, that being taken with
medicated baits, are unwholesome and nothing worth: So when you have pleased
some ill-disposed people in reviling their Ministers, your example has taught
them to do the like by your self, as well as others; and of this you have had
experience. But after that conference came abroad, wherein G. W. produced your
self against your self, reading out of your book the testimony you gave
against the Ministers; although you reasonably well shifted off one of the
particulars from your self at that time; yet I thought you might have been more
wary of your words afterward: but I find it otherwise. One of the badges you
there bestow upon your brethren, is, That they are more mindful of the fleece,
than the flock.] Whether it be true or false that you said, it was very rashly
spoken of you, because it is a hard matter for you to know what others mind,
and what they mind most. But do you well know what you meant by the fleece? If
you meant not the fleece of the flock, it is scarce tolerable sense: and if you
did, it is a manifest falsehood and injury. For in England the maintenance of
the Clergy is theirs, by the same law by which any man holds what he has and
enjoys. And is your understanding so extremely superficial, as to think it is
theirs who pay it, and not theirs who take it? or that the Laws of the Land
should enforce any man to give away that which is his own to another, though
never so much against his will? Another may come and out-go you, but in your
own way, and bewail the iniquity of the times, that creditours should fleece
their debtors, so as daily they do, when they take what is due to them: and
complain of the Nobility and Gentry of the land for fleecing their Tenants
twice a year. It may be you are troubled with an noise you have heard of some
Minister, that is compelled to sue at Law some of his neighbors, for taking
away some of the fleece from his back, hazarding the loss of all the rest for
being so litigious. But whether he be more troubled, and more grieved at his
own loss and charge, or at the dishonestie of the people that put him to it,
That you know not; and till you do know, you are bound in civilitie and
charity to think the best. But you proceed further in this vein.

I remember my reverend Tutour, M. Henry Hall of Trinity College, once said
to us his pupils, We sit here (speaking of the Universitie-fellows) poring on
our books, and filling our selves with notions (or to that purpose) when the
poor contrymen (or Ministers) run away with the true and heavenly
understanding.

With your good leave, I should think, that he did not speak of persons absent
(which had been to little purpose) but as he spoke to his pupils, so he spoke
of them too, who might be so disposed as to need such caution and advice; or
howsoever, it was good that they should know, that sanctifying grace is not
attained always, nor only by learning and study: and it is good likewise for
all men whatsoever to know, that it is sooner and more probably attained by
knowledge and reading, than by lasiness and ignorance. But why do you not speak
against other vocations and employments, as well as against that of scholars
and learned men? It is their profession to pore on books (if you will needs
call it so) and fill their heads with notions: it is their particular calling,
and it sets them never the further off from Religion, nor out of the way to the
general calling of Christianity. Why will you not let every one abide in his
calling, according to the Apostles appointment? Why do you not speak aginst
manufactures, and merchandising; against navigation, against building and
rigging of ships; against rearing fair houses, and providing costly furniture?
Why not against keeping Courts, and surveying lands? for a poor countryman
that never busied himself about any of these matters, may run away with the
true understanding. But howsoever the world goes, you must have your years
mind of flinging at Universities, and Philosophy, and humane learning, without
any color of good reason, but not without a great suspicion of an ill intent.
For suppose that these things were merely secular and worldly, nevertheless to
the pure all things are pure: and we may use the world, and all things therein,
so we abuse them not: but all Arts and sciences may be, and they are
serviceable to the true Religion, and the worship of the only true God:
provided that they do not overruled, but be kept in good order and subjection.
If you would refuse to join with those, that will prove man has Free Will to
good, out of Aristotle's Ethics, or with those that conclude a Christian is
justified by doing just actions, out of the principles of moral Philosophy; it
were commendably done of you. But when you take delight and a small occasion to
inveigh against these peculiar and appointed places, where nature and natural
faculties are polished, and perfected, by accession of art and study, for the
better service of God in the State, and in the Church: and when to maintain the
sufficiency of Scripture-doctrine, for preaching the Gospel, against the
incroachment of Philosophy; you bring such arguments as will hold as much
against lips and lungs, as against Logic and Metaphysics: This is no good
humor of yours, and it may be a very bad one. And in you especially it is the
more absurd and incongruous, who promote the New Light; That the works of
Creation preach the Doctrine of the Gospel: yea, who say Essay page 14. The
works of God are true preachers of God, but the force of their voice is taken
off, by many of these Ministers that run without Gods message.] You that speak
so much of the open school that is in the creatures, praising Gods name, and
declaring his glory and goodness; do but destroy what you build, in girding
thus at schools of learning. For Arts and Sciences, and the study of them, do
serve for lectures, or for commentaries upon the great book of the world. Who
can search out and contemplate the influences and motions of the heavenly
bodies? Who can set forth the History of Plants, Stones, Metals, Meteors,
Fishes, Birds, and Beasts, and the works of the six-days-Creation, but such men
as have their education in places dedicated to learning and study? You talk of
a School that God has opened, and you do what you can to seal up the doors of
it. One thing I must tell you further, that the greatest enemies that
Christians ever had, most opposed and sought to hinder Christian schools: and
the most pestilent heretics that have arisen since the Reformation, have most
of all declaimed against Scholastical and Academical knowledge. And you will
never persuade indifferent persons to believe any otherwise, but that you speak
against learning and learned men, to this end, that your errors and abuses
that you put upon the people, may not be discovered: for always among the
blind, he that is half-sighted is king.

I am sure many laymen that cannot read Latin, could see the faults of M. H.
arguings, when both himself and (if I may credit reports) diverse
Universitiemen, were not so good at seeing them: overmuch light makes some men,
almost if not altogether blind.]

If want of Latin be a good help to see by, it may be this was the design of
the new method, to make experiment in curing by contraries; and to put out our
lights the better to clear up our ey-sight. It is very well that you have
declared your self in your seventh chapter against Impositions of Opinions. I
may therefore freely dissent from you in this matter, and I will give you some
reason. There is difference betwixt the light of the Sun, and that light which
enlightens the mind; because the sensitive power, and the organ of the body
are but weak and narrow, and if there be an undue application or proportion of
outward light, all will be spoiled. But humane understanding, after Gods image,
being of vast capacity or comprehension, there is no fear that the
intellectual light, which is so sparingly dispensed in this life, whether by
acquisition or infusion, should oppress or any way corrupt the faculty of the
mind. How it fares with you, I know not; but as for others in all ages, the
more they have waded into the abyss of knowledge, the more they have confessed
their own ignorance. This light does discover darkness: but that it should
cause any, or make some men blind, is a blind and blundering conceit of your
own. And now we will return to the particular controversy of this chapter.

Sect. 6. You will not grant that the Sun did shine upon Adam after he was
fallen, as it did before; or if it did, yet it spoke not the same language,
because it spoke God kind to sinners, which it could not do before man sinned.]

It is pity to interrupt you in these your deep speculations. Go on, I pray,
to prove, that when you turn homeward the wind blows not as it did: and that
the Sun does not shine alike upon the dial, but speaks a new language every
hour of the day; with plenty of the like, never heretofore thought reasonable
or credible.

He brings the saying of the scoffers to confirm his assertion, and justifies
the truth of it, when the Apostle tells us, that saying proceeded out of their
wilful ignorance, and minds them that since the creation of the world, all
things, did not continue alike, for God overflowed the creation with a flood.]

Thus did the impostours argue: If the world has lasted for so many ages, then
it will always last: But it has lasted for so many ages: Therefore it will
always last. Now the Apostle does not deny the Assumption, or second
proposition, but directs his answer to the Connection; as if he had said thus:
It is too great ignorance to think the world must always continue, because it
has continued so long: for know they not that God is the Lord of nature? know
they not that he made this earth as standing and emergent out of the waters,
and that after so many years, the waters were let loose upon it, and wasted it?
The course of nature therefore does not abide constant and unmoved, but the
power of God countermands it at his own will 2 Pet. 3.7. The heavens and the
earth which now are, by the same word are kept in store: the Apostle confuteth
them, not from the change or alteration that was upon the flood, but from the
word or power of God that caused the flood: The same hand, or power, or word,
that drowned the world, shall when time comes put an end to it by fire. So
that when the scoffers said, All things continue alike from the first creation,
it was true as they meant it; namely, of a continued course of the heavenly
motions, and of the seasons of the year: winter and summer, day and night:
These and the like abide as they were at the first, notwithstanding the deluge,
according to Gods promise, Genesis 8. The earth had long ere S. Peter's time
out-worn the flood, and the Psalmist says as much, psalm 119.91. They continue
this day according to thine ordinances.

Sect. 7. Evident it is, they preach God merciful to sinners, as well as just
to punish sin: and the one is the contents of the Gospel, as much as the other
of the Law.

If by mercy you mean goodness, and forbearance, and patience, these are
evidently seen in the works of God. But what is all this to pardon and
redemption? where in the mean time is purchase and satisfaction?

And yet actions, if mere actions, are subject to various interpretation, and
therefore to misinterpretation: witness the two Service-books that were left
upon the Altar over night, and in the morning scattered in pieces all over the
Church. When Julius Caesar at a time made a speech to his soldiers, the greater
part of them being at a distance, could not well understand what he said, but
they perceived by his gesture, that he spoke of the ring upon his finger, and
thought that he had promised to them all, the honor and revenue of Knighthood:
whereas he only told them thus much: that rather than not satisfy their
utmost arrears, he would part with all that he had, even to the ring of his
finger. Ceremonies which are actions appointed to teach and instruct, are
usually accompanied with a word of instruction. When Esaias walked barefoot; and
Jeremy wore a yoke about his neck; when Agabus bound himself with Paul's girdle,
and the Gourd withered that shadowed Jona's head; if something had not been
spoken, as well as done, there would as little knowledge have been gathered, as
David would have gathered from the arrows that Jonathan shot, if they had not
before been agreed upon the token. The eternal Power, and Godhead, and Wisdom,
are seen in the world: but can you tell us one place in all the Scriptures, one
word of Institution, whence it may appear, that God ever intended to give
notice of man's Redemption through Jesus Christ, by the works of Creation and
Providence? If you cannot, it is put to your choice, whether you will hold your
peace, or speak to no purpose: as you do in that which follows here. [How else
lead they to Repentance, if they witness not mercy to the penitent, Romans 2.4,
5.]

In answer to which place, I have thus much to say. First, That reproof of the
Apostle, is bent against the Jews, or if it be to the Gentiles, it is after
they were made partakers of the Gospel, or the publication of it. And Secondly,
To whomsoever he speaks, he is in that place, even to the middle of the third
chapter, whetting the Law, and brightning the face of Moses, not preaching the
Gospel. Repentance belongs to the Law, which enjoyneth and commands it. The
Rule that directs me to walk in the way, directs me also to return into it,
when I am out of it. Before the Fall, Gods bounty led to Obedience and due
service. After the Fall, Gods bounty leads to Repentance, as a part of our
Obedience and as necessarily prerequired to all future obedience in such a
case. It is true that God pardons all that do repent; but this is by virtue
of the Gospel, and is a Privilege of believers. His long-suffering to usward,
is that none should perish, but sooner or later, come to the knowledge of the
Truth, 2 Pet. 3.9. But this is the question, whether every inducement to
repent, even among heathens and infidels, does include and contain in it, a
promise of mercy and pardon: this I deny, upon this reason, because, then the
Gospel should be contained in the Law, and the promise of forgiveness, in a
duty of obedience. But the Law and the Gospel being two several things, ought
in our consideration to be kept apart. He that invites to Repentance shows
plainly he would not have the offender or delinquent to go on, in doing wrong,
but would have him prevent heaping up wrath verse. 5. and increasing his
condemnation: but he does not always show that he is ready to pardon what is
past: that this is so, appears by this similitude. A Landlord commenceth suit
against one of his Tenants, in order to his ejectment, for not paying his Rent;
in the mean time this Tenant, makes strep and waste, still wronging and by
diverse abuses provoking his Lord, who nevertheless is kind to him, as to his
other Tenants, in countenance, invitations, and other courtesies. A servant of
the Lord thus speaks to the Tenant. My Masters fair and civil carriage toward
you, may invite you to be sorry for what you have done, and make you ashamed
to demean your self so undutifully and injuriously. In this case he is invited
to repent; but he is not put in hope that the suit shall be let fall, and he be
still continued in possession.

Page 105. They preach God merciful to sinners, and that is the contents of
the Gospel. Whence else do poor heathen in distress cry to him for mercy and
help, as in Psalm. 107. and Jon. 1. or offer sacrifice in all ages, if they had
not instruction into the propitiousness of God, as well as into his being?

Forasmuch as sacrifices do ow their original to Divine institution, and the
will of God made known by his word to the Patriarchs; It is consequent that the
heathen, who did also offer them, did not gather that duty of their Religion
from the contemplation of this visible world; but that it must be reckoned
among those Remains of broken knowledge, which from Gods people were diffused
among the nations, but much and many ways vitiated and corrupted.

Now you have taught in these words, two great errors, yea, if I may call them
as they seem to me, unchristian, and heathenish. 1. That all worship, done to
any God, is done to the true God. 2. That all kindness, that God shows to
sinners, is the manifestation of his Gospel. And thus have you broken down the
hedge of the vineyard, or enclosure; and laid it open, in waste and in common,
to all the world of Pagans and Infidels: for never was there nation so
barbarous, but did homage to a God, one or other. You have brought, not Greeks
into the Temple, but Idolaters, continuing in their Idolatries, into the
Christian Church, and yielded to them the knowledge of the only true God, and
of him whom he has sent, Jesus Christ. Or rather, as some have taken away all
Idolatry against the second Commandment, by making the first and second all
one. So have you taken away all Idolatry against the first Commandment, when
you thus make all one, the true God with Idols, or false Gods, or a confused
conception of a Deity at large. The 107 Psalm says that seafaring men, cry
unto the Lord in their distress: if you read the Psalm from the beginning, you
will find Gods own people the Hebrews to be spoken of: or what if it be
extended to others, that in their distress they cry unto God? The young Ravens
call unto him for their meat; And the eyes of all things are said to look up to
him. The earth and clouds cry unto him in a drought. You may read in another
Psalm this prayer, which you may reconcile as well as you can, with that which
you allege out of the 107. Pour out thy wrath upon the Heathen that have not
known thee, and upon the kingdoms that have not called upon thy name. You bring
the first chapter of Jonas, where every man cried unto his God: and yet you
know that none of them cried to the true God, till Jonas awoke and called upon
him. They cried to them who were no Gods, but Idols. Gal. 4.8. When you knew
not God, you did service to them, which by nature, are no Gods. But what were
they then? the same Apostle tells you, in the first Epistle to the
Corinthians, the tenth chapter and the twentieth verse, The things which the
Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to Devils, and not to God. You have raked
fair, to find out your universal Grace in the Idolatrous sacrifices which
Pagans offered. Paul and Barnabas might have spared the rending of their
clothes, and saved their out cry. Sirs, what do you mean to do these things?
And the Lystrians might have answered thus: but that they wanted such a Priest
as your self at their elbow to have prompted them: these are no such vanities
as you imagine, for by them we do testify our hope in God, and in his Grace;
and by them we do celebrate his propension to pardon our misdoings. We have
always served the living God that made heaven and earth, and redeemed all men.
Neither has he suffered us to walk in any wrong ways, but has been propitious
to us in his love and mercy, and has trained us up in his school. The Sun
passes over our heads every day we rise, preaching Gods name and bringing
tidings of his Goodness; and when the night comes on, the Moon and the Stars
succeed and take their course, uttering to us his saving knowledge: you may
tell us more plainly what we knew before; but we have had sufficient teaching
long ere you set foot among us. This speech is molded in your Doctrine,
delivered in this Section; and because it is very bad, false and blasphemous,
it better becomes the priest of Jupiter that was before the City, than A
servant of God, in the Gospel of his Son.

I would ask you where you find Gods kindness to sinners called the Gospel. In
the old Testament the preaching of the Gospel contained the knowledge of him
that was to come: one of Adams posterity; the son of David, the son of
Abraham: called the Messiah in Daniel; and in Esaias 53. a person is described
that should come and suffer, bearing the sins of Gods people. In the new
Testament the Contents or Sum of the Gospel is, Christ crucified, and God in
Christ reconciling the world. When the Apostles preach the Gospel they speak of
Jesus, and the Son of God, and the man whom he has appointed. But as for rain
and food and fruitful seasons, which you call the contents of the Gospel, they
speak of these, as witnesses indeed of Gods goodness, but as such witnesses,
that notwithstanding, the nations went their own ways. Yea, and God suffered
them so to do. Act. 14.16. He suffered all nations to walk in their own ways,
Nevertheless, he did them good, and gave them rain from heaven. This utterly
overthrows the false Doctrine throughout this chapter, or wheresoever else by
you delivered, manifestly showing your self a perverter of the Gospel, while
you make the creatures to be preachers of it. Notwithstanding his ordinary
goodness, or common kindness, he suffered them to perish. His temporal
blessings therefore were not able to reclaim them, nor were they intended for
the conversion of their nations: if they had been so, then it could not be
said, God suffered them to go on in their own ways nevertheless. Act. 17.30.
The times of this ignorance God winked at. That is to say, he overlooked them,
he neglected and despised them. He hid himself and was wroth. They were times
of ignorance, and during these times, God did hide himself, therefore he did
not manifest himself, as in the Gospel, or by way of any saving knowledge.

Page 106. That something of the Gospel contents is held forth universally in
the works of God, D Amyrald learnedly proves against Spanhemius. Let M. H.
answer him.]

I might say, let Dr Amyrald answer the promise which he made to the national
Synod at Alenzon, that he would afterward forbear to teach such doctrine, for
which you now commend him to your Reader. But why should that be done again
that is sufficiently done already? You speak as if to this day he lay
untouched, and that no man yet ever meddled with him. Whereas I should think you
cannot but know, he has been answered before now, purposely, and that by
diverse. I rather think you read none of their answers, because they make not
for you; and then (as persons resolute and pertinacious in their opinions, a
great man was wont to call Triremes (...), Galleys having all their oars going
on one side) if you bestow time upon such writers and none else, as serve to
nourish you in your belief, you can make little progress in the search of
Truth, beause your motion is still round and homeward, and if you be in an
error, it is like you will still continue so. And yet I must tell you, I would
gladly see you answer D^ Amyrald in all those points wherein you differ from
him, which you can tell, are very many, and very material. And I would gladly
know that you hold universal Grace no otherwise than Amyrald does. In the mean
time, I will tell you a short story out ot Athaneus of a Spartan: now you know
that Country was known to be of a very hard breed. This man, sitting down with
others at a feast, and not observing what they did, made somewhat more have to
eat of a certain sort of fish, that was set before him, than he had good skill
to sever the meat from the shell that was hard, and withal full of sharp
pricks or bristles: but having well broken and subdued the harder parts with
his teeth, and tasting the meat what it was, being somewhat loath to lose the
pains he had taken, resolved thus with himself. Thou art, said he, a very
naughty kind of food: yet I will not leave thee now, but I will never meddle
with thee more. I find now that these Polemicks are but a harsh diet, very
crabbed and thornie, the which who so loves, had need to have according to the
Comicks bold metaphor, calceatos dentes, and must not stick at any thing that
is tendered to him. And though I may seem too forward and rash, in thus
undertaking (as you call it) and falling on, I will not now go back, nor give
you over: but I purpose therewithal not to be so hasty in engaging with any
other. Yet as Florus said of Hannibal, having gotten the advantage of the
ground, and of the wind, vento and pulvere pugnabat; you do not trouble me much
with your blows, or weapons. I fear not your armor, nor yet your arguments, no
nor yet your uncivil and disparaging language. But you drive me out of the
field with your dust: you confound me with your confused significations. I
cannot plainly perceive your meaning, and when I think that I have it, you have
another at hand, because it concerns you not a little to deal in obscurities
and ambiguities, and to have your reserves ready, and places of retreat. And
you either cannot or will not perceive my meaning: As here in the Section next
following, that which I thought had been plain enough to be understood, you
have so taken, snatching one part from the other, as to wring out an
impertinencie from my words, that never came into my mind, that so you might
have something to busy your self about. Quintilian will have his Orator so to
speak, not only that he may be understood, but so clearly and in such a
manner, that he cannot possibly but be understood, even by those that are
negligent in hearing, and are minding other matters. There he some, and you may
be one of them, that through their wilfulness make this advice of his to be
needful, and a very difficult task too: you are quick enough and ready to
defend whatsoever it be you chance to say: and you seem as backward to
apprehend what another meaning is. But I pray, if you find no tolerable sense
in what you read, look it over again, and mark it better, lest the fault be
found to be in your self.

As for universal objective grace, by whomsoever maintained, it seems to
implicate in the terms: as does the Catholick-Romane, that is an universal
particular Church. To which purpose may briefly be considered, wherein grace,
as it is grace, consists. Some will tell you that it is not grace, because it
is given to one and denied to another, but because it is given to the unworthy.
But the elect Angels were confirmed by grace, and yet were worthy so far as any
creatures can be worthy: And our Savior Jesus Christ was full of grace, and
did partake of Gods favor in the highest degree; yet withal was most worthy.
Others say, that if it be grace, it must be added to nature and natural parts
or perfections. Now this indeed is true of Gods grace showed to man; but does
no way agree to grace in general, neither has it any place in such grace as
one man shows to another, or as a king shows to one or more of his servants
or subjects.

But you may say to me thus: The subjects of a kingdom may be supposed, even
every one of them, more or less obnoxious to the strictness or rigor of law,
for submitting to a forreiner invading, or a domestic usurping: if the king be
pleased to pardon every one of them, not excepting any; this would be a great
grace, and yet is universal: therefore there may be universal grace without any
opposition in the terms. To this I answer, Although the grace of the king thus
pardoning all his subjects be universal in some respect, that is, in respect of
the persons, yet it is singular in respect of the case, or of the time, and in
respect of the kings carriage to his subjects otherwhile. And if he should in
like manner pass by all offenses against him and his crown, during his whole
reign; this semper-lenitas were not grace, but an aberration in government, and
a kind of injustice through excess of clemency and remissness. But Gods
goodness in creating all things, and his providence in governing and disposing
all things; these two shining forth from the beginning of the world to the end,
cannot be called grace, as being no way singular: For according to Scripture,
and common custom of speaking, grace always implies something singular, or
particular therein.

CHAP. XXI. Rahab and Cornelius.
IN my second Edition, because I see it might be questioned touching Cornelius,
I left him out, and mentioned besides Rahab, Naaman and the Ninevites.]

And are these any better instances to prove that Faith has been wrought by
means of Gods works? Jonas preached to the Ninevites, and what Faith they had
was by his means: and Naaman was a Proselyte, and desired so much earth from
the land of Israel, as might serve for an altar, and resolved thenceforth to
offer neither offering, nor sacrifice to any but the Lord.

Rahab was brought to her Faith by the works of God for Israel, which she heard
of before the spies came to her.]

That which Rahab knew of the true God, was made known by the Church, as the
Apostle speaks in another case, Ephesians. 3.10. Whether by the Church as a glass,
or whether by the ministry or teaching of the Church, that was the school,
and not the school of the creatures in which she was taught. God was pleased to
work faith in her by the miracles she heard of, so way was made for further
instruction.

For proof that there is variety of means to saving faith, you send me to Romans
2. If uncircumcision keep the Law, it shall be counted for circumcision. Whence
you seem to argue thus: Pagans, Infidels uncircumcised may keep the Law, and do
as much, yea more than some Jews or Christians that have the written word and
Sacraments as variety of means. Answ. There were many of the Gentiles, who
were Proselytes to the Jews Religion, and remained uncircumcised, who had the
knowledge of the true God, and walked in obedience to him. Jews inwardly and in
the Spirit, which were better Jews than others who were circumcised and
disobedient. What gather you hence, for variety of means? or from the other
place following, chap. 3. v. 21. The righteousness of God, without the Law is
manifested, being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets? Where [Law] in the
first place is taken strictly for the doctrine of the Moral Law, whether
written or natural, as it stands in opposition to the Gospel: and the
righteousness of God without the Law, is elsewhere in other words, called The
Righteousness of faith without works, or without works of the Law. And in the
second place [Law] signifies the writings of Moses, in which Evangelical
promises were many ways contained. When you broach such new and scandalous
opinions as you do, it is not sufficient to refer to chapter and verse; you
should bring the words, and show wherein consists the strength of your argument
or proof.

CHAP. XXII. False conceptions. Four instances.
I Did not quarrel with you, as you say I did, for making cruelty a false
conception, but for setting it in opposition to all mercy. If you saw not
this, it was your own blindness, whether wilful or no, I say not, because I
know not.

He taxes me with partiality, for putting four false conceptions into the same
different character, or else I know not wherefore.]

I think indeed the subtillest of all our Readers is not able to find out what
should be the partiality to include four false conceptions in the same
different character. And withal I think the meanest of all, if he dare
adventure to read plain English, may soon see where lies the partiality,
namely, in that you charged upon three several parties what they held and
owned: but to the pretended Orthodox you laid that which they owned not.

He says more than I dare affirm I thought of, when I mentioned it.]

You dare not affirm that you thought of it; yet you say here [It is a word
that borders upon their principles.] Now it comes into your mind, but you
thought not of it then. But you dare to say: [I was guilty of the charge,
because I did not pass it by untouched] so you know my thoughts better than
your own. But if I must give credit to you in what you say, though you speak it
very faintly, why would not you believe me for what I disclaimed so earnestly?
As it is morality and honesty not readily to question what others say in this
kind; so is it also to say nothing in this kind, but that which may readily
be believed.

Is this man fit to review a Catechism, that would have me put amongst false
conceptions of God, that he is just or severe

I will endeavor to recollect your understanding and your thoughts, if you
will give me leave. Mercy is one of Gods Attributes; Justice likewise is one
of Gods Attributes: All mercy is a false conception of him: All justice
likewise is a false conception of him: you, in stead of this latter, named
Cruelty. Now though All justice and No Mercy be a false conception of him,
and he be not such; yet if he were such, he were not cruel, because cruelty is
unjust severitie. And if God were All justice, and did show no mercy at all,
nor free any man out of the misery into which he is fallen; he were not yet
unjust. All justice is one thing, this God is not, because he shows mercy:
unjust is another, this God should not be, did he show no mercy. It was
therefore ill done of you, in that you would not set All justice, but cruelty,
in opposition to all mercy; for in so doing you did obliquely asperse good
Christians, as if they thought that God were so; and God himself, as if he
should be so, did he show no mercy. And though I am willing to believe all
things that may be believed, yet I can scarce believe but that this term
proceeded from the same spirit that those other horrid terms did, that I
rehearsed out of your other work. And now I answer to your scornful question,
and I say, I may be as fit to review your Catechism, as you are to review the
Reviewer, who could not understand him, no, not so much as where the
partiality should lie, unless it were in the different character. So much
might serve for this drowsy chapter, save that you are here suddenly turned a
great friend to the Papists, and to Bellarmine. For the first, you say, "You
spoke generally without respect to persons] at that time by chance you were
altogether Ideal, and dealt in Abstracts only, not stooping to immerse your
thoughts in gross particulars: neither did you charge it on the Papists, (to
think God is like an old man) there be many ignorant Protestants as guilty of
it as they, I fear] They are guilty then, and so you think them, but you did
not charge it on them, but on the Protestants. I hope if I tax you now for
partiality, you will know wherefore it is. But what follows hence to your
purpose? You that can tell us that many godly persons think, the time of
Beast-worshipping is not yet over; you that can find Beastly doing, and the
voice of the Dragon, in pressing humane ceremonies, are you so ignorant as not
to know, that there be Relliquie Latii, certain Remains of Popery, though not
by Law established, yet kept alive, and warm in the breasts of many half-baked
Protestants? You grant the Papists to be guilty of it: and I said not, they
only were: but whosoever they be that are guilty of it, they own and justify
the opinion and the practice, which is sufficient for my purpose.

Yet I think he speaks falsely of Bellarmine; for though he held it lawful to
picture God in forma hominis senis, it follows not he thought him like an old
man. Sure he knew God to be a Spirit. Its true Bellarmines juudgement was
naught in that, but I think Mentiris Bellarmine, had been better of the two,
than Mentiri de Bellarmino.]

I shall not trouble my self about the comparison, which is the better, or
which is the worse of these two. To give Bellarmine the lie, or to belie
Bellarmine. Let him look to the first that said it, if you know who it was: but
I must take notice of mine own charge, which is this; Mentiris de Bellarmino,
and clear my self as well as I can from speaking falsely of him, and which is
worse, from lying. And this is no hard matter to do. For first, you yield the
Papists to be guilty of this false conception: some Protestants also as you
doubt: but Papists doubtless: thus much your words import. And I trow you
reckon Bellarmine among the Papists, and what is become now of Mentiris de
Bellarmino? You that accuse me, do also acquit me from belying Bellarmine. But
secondly I alleged his words speaking of picturing only, but not of any
likeness: yet every picture is a likeness, every image is a similitude,
though every likeness be not a picture or image, as one egg is like another,
yet is not the image of it. If therefore the Cardinal held it lawful to
picture God like an old man, it must needs follow that he thought him like an
old man: as thirdly, he might lawfully do in those things wherein an old man
excels another man. We may lawfully think God to be like some creature,
though not in any thing that imports infirmity or imperfection. God made man
in his image, how can that be if God be not in some things like him? And he is
like the Sun, why else should he be called a Sun, in the Psalm; and the Father
of lights by S. James? who yet notes his unlikeness to the Sun, in that he
makes no shadow by turning, the most dark body being to him as a globe of
crystal: and he was like that shape or resemblance described in Dan. 7.9.
otherwise he would not have appeared in it. Likeness, is of very great extent
and latitude, and a small matter may denominate one thing like another. And
fourthly, whereas you say, he knew God to be a Spirit; you know also the Angels
to be spirits, yet they may, be pictured like young men, and the Cherubims were
pictured like winged wights, by Gods appointment. By this your reason, God
cannot be pictured at all; and then he should forbid that which cannot be done:
whereas God does not command any thing, nor forbid any thing, that is
absolutely impossible: we may possibly, represent God in a picture, but we must
not. So that I have no way wronged, or falsified or belyed Bellarmine. Now
though I will not say to you, mentiris pro. Bellarmino, and set you on work to
compare this, with your other two above; yet any one may plainly see, how you
have run your self a ground, and are gravelled more ways than one, for
Bellarmines sake, who yet will con you no thank: and if you had done him any
service, he might thank me, because for my sake it was, that you became his
Advocate.

CHAP. XXIII. The Remedy to be general.
Sect. 1. THe Son of God did offer, a full perfect and sufficient oblation and
and satisfaction for the sins of the whole world. That is as much as I desire,
or assert.]

If you may have leave to interpret the words, of the Article, or Liturgy,
according to your own meaning and Doctrine, and contrary to the known meaning
of the Church, it is as much as you need to desire. But where does the Church
of England teach that all sins proceeding from the first Adam, are forgiven of
due debt to the impenitent without further and particular application of
Christ's Death? Windeck, a Papist, who wrote largely of the efficacy of Christ's
Death, and mustered up 286 arguments to prove that he died for all men, yet
called puccius, Execrabile monstrum, who held that Christ's Death was actually
efficacious to procure justification, and restore life to all men whatsoever,
until by new wickedness they rejected that life, and drew a second destruction
upon themselves; and his opinion he calls stultum and paganicum paradoxon, a
foolish and heathenish paradox, and praesentissimum venenum, a poisonous
Doctrine that dispatcheth presently, and kills outright those that take it
in. I pray you therefore learn to distinguish between that Redemption which is
universal; and that which is particular, belonging only to such whom God does
choose, and to whom he vouchsafes the gift of saving faith. Had you done so
now, you would have contented your self with those places of Scripture that
show Christ died for all, and not confusedly and dangerously have added those
places which speak of the justification, vevification, and salvation of
believers; as namely these two: Romans 3.23, 24. All have sinned. being justified
freely by his Grace. All have sinned, and all are justified by his Grace.]
Answ. If all absolutely that have sinned, be justified, why should he restrain
it v. 22. to them that believe? The scope of the Apostle is this, to prove that
the Jews, who thought well of themselves, in regard of their excellencies and
privileges above others, have nevertheless no other way to be justified, and
saved, but even as the Gentiles are saved: and that is, by believing. For
because they have sinned as well as others, and have no righteousness of their
own, more than others have, they must be justified as others are, by the
righteousness of another. Because all have sinned, therefore all that are
justified, must be justified by Grace, and none can be justified otherwise. So
also is the extent to be taken Romans 11.32. God has concluded them all in
unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all, that is, each people, Jew as well
as Gentile.

Romans 5.18. By the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all men to
justification of life.] Answ. The meaning is, that as all that sprang from the
first Adam as their head, or root, were guilty of Death; so all that belong to
the second Adam, are partakers of life: the very next verse before, there is a
restraint to them that receive the abundance of Grace. Gal. 3.22. The Scripture
has concluded all under sin, that the promise might be given to them that
believe. Is it not the constant Doctrine of the Bible, that the benefit Christ's
Death, as to life, and justification and forgiveness, is limited to them that
hear, and to them that come; To them that eat and drink of him: to them that
believe, and to them that obey? will nothing serve with you to mitigate and
mollify the (...), the rigidum, and the aridum of the letter, but that against
reason, against so many Parallel places, and the generally received Doctrine of
Christians, the universalitie of mankind must be intended? It may be you
regard the testimony of Conradus Vorstius, more than you do some others: hear
his words in his Commentary upon the Epistle to the Romans chapter 5. v. 18.
Apparet eos graviter errare, qui ex hoc loco colligere conantur omnes omnino
homines per Christi gratiam actu regenerari and justificari; nec perinde
quenquam perire posse, nisi qui acceptam gratiam malitiose, suaque
impaenitentia atque incredulitate, novam Dei indignationem sibi attrahere
velit. Quae sententia haud dubie valde periculosa est. That is, It is evident
that those men are in a grievous error, that from this place endeavor to
gather, that all men whosoever are by Christ's grace, actually regenerate, and
justified, and that none do perish but such as wilfully reject this grace, and
through unbelief draw upon themselves, a second time, Gods wrath and
indignation; which opinion, out of all doubt, is very pernicious.] Yet this
opinion you contend for, with all your might, as if it were as true as the
Gospel, as if it were the very Gospel, and as if all that gainsay it were
hinderers of the Gospel.

Concerning the equality of Gods love toward men, you refer me to your
Essays, where you say thus; page 20. He may take his own liberty to give more
or less, as he pleases, and yet deal equally and graciously with all.] Which is
either a manifest contradiction, or a sophistical ambiguitie. Gods ways are
equal, that is just, whether he give more or less: yet are they not equal, that
is, is, alike to all, because he gives to one, more than to another.

CHAP. XXIV. Reasons why the remedy should be general.
HOW does it appear that such holders of it love others, seeing they are my
adversaries for holding it, because I hold it not in all things as they do? Is
enmity to a man because he is not of their mind, a sign of love? For he says
not, they be my dissenting brethren, but my adversaries. God grant their other
frames be righter, for not he that commends himself, etc.

I intended not to commend my self, nor all that are of my mind in these
matters, but spoke indefinitely of your adversaries: if but some, if but a few,
it is sufficient. And I hope you will never infect your own party with that
dangerous point, as you count it, of Pharisaisme, to say, Non sumus sicut
caeteri: though now you are ready to censure us for this, and to suspect us
for the rest. But as not he that commends himself, is always the best, no more
is he that is the forwardest to censure others. There is difference betwixt an
adversary and an enemy: howbeit you, by virtue of your trope called
confusion, do make them all one. May not a man wage law against his friend, and
yet be his friend still? they that plead the causes of other men, are
adversaries one to another, and yet out of the court agree well enough among
themselves. May not one Christian Prince wage war against another Prince, and
yet be in Christian Charity? he may. And what do you call them, that call you
adversary? You call them the pretended orthodox: which is a term more
censorious, by far, and more supercilious then adversary, which has no hurt
in it, I am your advarsarie, and you are mine: and no man thinks amiss of us
for this, unless perhaps he mislike the cause why we are so. And thus much
shall serve for this hungry cavil, and also for this chapter.

CHAP. XXV. Signs of Gods love.
IN the second section you explain your self, and what your meaning is, when
you usually teach, that we should not gather Gods love to us by faith,
obedience, new frames and repentance; namely we may gather by these that the
benefits of Christ's passion are applied to us for our spiritual life, but we
must not gather by them that the Remedy is provided for us. This will I
believe to have some truth, or at least some reason in it, when I shall believe
that there was ever any Christian, that did search into his own heart, and seek
there for good desires and good affections, and inclinations, to the intent he
might thence conclude and know assuredly, that Jesus Christ died for all men in
the world: or when you can show me, who he was, that ever yet taught any
Christian to do so. You made profession in your fourth page above, That you
armed the children against the dangers and deceits of the pretended orthodox,
as Antidotes are to be given against the present reigning diseases.] Now their
doctrine is that a Christian person from the fruits of sanctification in his
thoughts, words, and works, and especially from the frame and disposition
position of his heart, may gather the love of God and the benefits of Christ's
death for his glorification in heaven. This was the reigning disease, this was
the Doctrine against which you framed your Antidote: and not against this, that
we should take heed how we conclude from fruits of holiness that the Son of God
offered a sacrifice for the sins of all the world, or that he is the Savior of
all men, especially of them that believe. I cannot imagine you spoke against
that which never any man did, or was taught to do; but against that rather
which all good Christians do practice, except those that are commonly called
Antinomians. There is a seal of Gods spirit, which is in this life set upon
those that are his, and by which he will own them at the last: and is not set
upon those that are none of his. This difference you cannot endure should be
made or spoken of; He is a Pharisee that is not as other men are, but if he
gives thanks to God that he is better than others, better than this Publican,
or suppose then this malefactor, or this traitor, which he sees, or hears
to be executed; This, this is the poison that needs the Antidote, this is
Pharisaisme, that must be cried down, this is the spirit that must cast out:
this must be followed upon all opportunities and occasions. I noted before how
you plied this point in one of your funeral sermons: and in another which you
preached the year before upon Prove. 14.32. page 12. your words are. But thou
would have some sign or token of the truth of this as concerning thee from
him in something to be done by him to thy soul -- then do thou as that
adulterous generation, Mat. 12.39. which Christ reprooveth seeking signs and
tokens: and if thou should persist in that way, thou may be given up to
delusion to believe a lie.]

But when the Apostle in the second Epistle to the Corinthians and the last
chapter, bids them, Examine themselves, whether they be in the faith, and
prove their own selves; did he bid them do that for which our Savior reprooved
the Scribes and Pharisees? Thus you teach: but they are deluded that believe
you. You co^plain, Brief Disc. page 21. That too many of the Teachers love to
slumber, and content themselves with Dreams in stead of searching out the
Truth, and giving it forth to the people.] Is this the truth you have searched
for, and found it out at last to impart to the people? or what shall we call a
sick man's dream?

I will suppose that most of your Auditors had sormerly learned, and could then
remember that part of the Church-Catechisme, wherein they were taught to
profess and rehearse after this manner: I believe in God the Father who has
made me and all the world: and in God the Son, who has redeemed me and all
mankind: and in God the holy Ghost who sanctifies me, and all the elect people
of God. And I will suppose also that some good Christian well weighing these
words with himself, should not rest contented with the common love of God, who
created all things, and hates nothing that he has made: nor with that
general love of Christ, whereby he redeemed all mankind; but should endeavor
further to find that he is sanctified by the holy Ghost, having heard that
there is a seal of the Spirit: and every seal is more than a sign, but a sign
it is, having heard also of the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5. If now this
person should be persuaded by you and your Sermon, that if he goes on in this
way, he is descended of that wicked and adulterous generation of the Scribes
and Pharisees, that tempted God, and provoked our Savior by calling for
signs, I cannot think you have done any good service for his soul, but rather
that he forsakes the right way, and gives over the truth, to be abused by you.
When we look for fruits of Faith, this is not to enquire whether Christ died
for us, or not, for he dyed for all; but whether the holy Ghost has sanctified
us or not, because he sanctifies only the elect people of God, and
consequently whether we have Christ's death applied to us according to his
special intention. If you had perceived any of your people so fond, as to
apply that reproof, Mat. 12.39. for confirmation of the doctrine you elsewhere
teach; By the place and office you are in, and by your skill and learning in
Logic and Languages, you should have informed them, that a Sign, there,
signifies a Miracle, or a Wonder, above the sphere and force of nature, as Isa.
7. Ask thee a sign, ask it in the depth, or in the height above. And Mark 16.
The Apostles confirmed the word with signs following; much less ought you to
have put such a conceit into their heads, as if when they examined their own
hearts, as the Apostle bids them, they were as blameworthy, as some Atheist
or Epicurean, who after all the Demonstration which he daily sees, should
demand some miracle, some sign or proof extraordinary, that God is, and that
he guides this present world.

Sect. 4. The Analogy of Faith, I conceive, is rather that proportion of the
Faith every man has, which the Apostle would have none to exceed in his
prophesying, than any Systeme to be subscribed by all.]

I was not interpreting the Apostles words, Romans 12.6. Nor did I say they are
to be meant of a sum of those things that are to be held and believed, rather
than of the proportion of Faith, that every man has, and yet I think there may
as much be said for that interpretation, as for this. But the Analogy of Faith
in common acception is taken for a brief Summary of Christian Belief, as the
Apostles Creed, whatsoever it may signify in the place whence it was first
taken. Therefore you might very well have let this pass without trouble to the
Reader about it: And so would I, but that your self used this word in the very
same sense, here, above at page 121. Who is there that does not lay down some
things fundamental, contrary to which no difficult saying is to be
interpreted, because it would be against the Analogy of Faith] And how comes
it to pass that you forgot your self so soon? or what is the reason that you
may speak after the common manner, and I may not?

You often bring up the Pharisee and his words, as making much against your
Adversaries, in that he thanked God, he was not as other men are.] Upon this I
noted that a Saint may say, what the Pharisee said, with another mind and to
another intention than the Pharisee said it. To this you answer Sect. 6. It was
not the Pharisees saying, but his doing, in trusting in himself that he was
righteous, and thence despising others, that I blamed.

But (1) you quoted Luke 18.11. which contains nothing but his words. (2)
Doing, if take at large, comprehends saying. To speak, in old Logic, belongs
to the Predicament of Action. Indeed if you restrain it by way of opposition;
then, to say is one thing, and to do, is another, yet here in this case they
meet and are all one, according to your opinion, and according to your words,
in this place. To give thanks for being better than other men are, is saying
and it is doing too, for it is despising of others. To trifle is one thing, to
write is another: yet he who sets down in writing mere trifles, to no purpose
but that he may write something or other, does at the very same time, both
write and trifle. (3) One of your English Masters, is nothing so nice, as you
would seem to be, and yet I think you be both of a mind, for having taught that
in the gifts of Tongues and Prophesying, with the like, given for the public
service of the Church, God makes the difference. But in gifts of
Sanctification, as Faith and obedience, Man makes the difference and not God:
he gives this rule touching these graces, page 266. App. Evang. Take heed of
the Pharisees form of Thanks for Graces with comparison to other folks] I see
nothing to the contrary but that he who thinks good to follow this rule, must
so understand it, not but that he may think himself better then others are, but
he must be wary that he thank not God for it, as if He had made any such
difference betwixt man, and man: he must by all means take heed of that: And
then it is easy to see, that upon pretense of being lowly, like the poor
Publicane, he shall indeed be more proud then was the Pharisee, who though he
insisted more then was fit upon his own righteousness such as it was; yet
sticked not to give God thanks, that he was so righteous. (3) Why may not a
well-disposed Christian give to God the glory of his Grace, and thank him with
such like words as the Pharisee used, that he is so good as he is, and no
worse; and yet withal, at the same time, with the Publicane, be cast down in
his mind, and cry to God for mercy and pardon, because he is so bad as he is,
and no better? I pray think further of it, lest you be too forward in your
judgment, and condemn the righteous together with the wicked. And lastly, I
would desire you, and all that abound in this sense of yours, to remember, that
as Pride, which consists in reflecting too much upon the good we have, is
reckoned among the deadly sins; so is Envy likewise, which causes us to be
grieved and discontent at the good that others have. And as there is danger of
the one, in those, who exceed others in partaking of Gods graces; so is there
no less danger of the other in those that come behind, and have received a less
measure of his love and favors. Let not your mind be always on the Pharisee
despising the Publican, but think now and then of Cain, who was wroth because
his brothers sacrifice was accepted, and slew him because his works were more
righteous than his own: and of Esau who hated Jacob because of the blessing:
and of Jacobs sons, who hated Joseph because his Father loved him more than he
loved them, and yet they hated him more because of his great preferment that
was foretold, and because of the blessings that were upon the crown of the head
of him that was separated from his brethren. And as God does variously dispense
his blessings temporal and spiritual, even as ^ seems good to him, and as
Princes have their favorites, and our Savior had the Twelve, and of them, one
beloved Disciple; If it pleases God Almighty, who is debtor to none, to give
to his beloved, sleep, that he will have his Darlings, and bestow upon them all
affluence, without their care and thought-taking, while the labor of others,
and all their industry is lost; you will never be able to give any good reason,
why they may not be sensible of so much, and why they may not with modesty be
thankful for it. And if they be so, it is not the example and the words of the
Pharisee that will justify any man, who shall thereupon say, They are proud,
and despisers of others; but let him rather fear lest it be thus taken and
interpreted, as if he were therefore their enemy, because God is their friend.
Because I will not trouble my self or others with what has been said, or what
need not be said, I pass on to your next chapter.

CHAP. XXVI. How faith is wrought.
IF you do not think the Remonstrants Doctrine worthy of Defense, and your self
able to defend it, why do you deliver, and publish it? If you do, why do you
deny it when you are challenged for it, and charged with it? It were fair to
deal plainly, and not to give your mind to shifts and subterfuges, disclaiming
what you hold, and teaching it then, when you deny it, as here you do in this
chapter.

The Hague-Remonstrants were afraid, it would be destructive to man's nature, if
he should be wrought upon any otherwise than suadendo, which I Englished, by
persuading, and you now say, I confound suadendo with persuadendo, counselling
with persuading.] I answer, whatsoever difference there is betwixt suadere, and
persuadere, in some Latin writers (for it is not in all) we have in our
language but one word for both, and that is persuasion, for suasion is no
English. And 2ly Brandius the Translator of that Conference does in the very
next place before use the word persuadere and persuasio, thrice within the
compass of one sentence, in the very same signification, with suadet, in the
words that I alleged, page 310. praeter alia omnia persuadendi dona, quibus
alii aliis praest are possunt, rogamus fratres, quando volumus persuasionu
rations inter se conferenao ponderare, agatne ille fortius in persuadendo, qui
aeterna and incorruptibilia dona promittit, co quitantum temporalia and
corruptibilia? Illud est discrimen inter allicia Dei and Satanae. I alledg the
words at large the rather, that withal it may be seen, how little they ascribe
to God in the conversion of a sinner, even as much as is in the object, which
he propounds, and no more. And 3ly It is nothing material to our enquiry,
whether the counsel be followed or no, whether it be suadendo, or persuadendo,
by persuading or by counselling: the question is, What or how much is done by
him, that does either counsel, or persuade. The counsel given is the same,
whether it be followed, or not followed. Who determines the will to follow the
good counsel that is given? The Apostle says, Phil. 2.13. God works in us
to will: so say you too, by giving us good counsel to follow: but if that be
all, he works it in us, according to our good pleasure, and not of his good
pleasure, as the Apostle there adds. Persuasion say you, does it with the
perswasible] but who makes them perswasible? The work of grace is to open the
deaf ear, and to make the stubborn and refractory become willing to hear and
obey.

Having alleged Cameron by way of scorn (for so I take it) Sect. 1. In your
third you bring him in again, saying, Deus ista omnia facit persuadendo. God
does all these things by his persuasion: but in in the same page he says, God
in this life works Charity in us, as he does in the life to come, sic ut
fieri non possit ut non amemus. So as that it cannot be otherwise but that we
must love him, and after in the 75. page, Those who are converted, are so
illuminated. Ut non possint non converti: that they cannot but be converted. Is
this your Illumition, and persuasion?

Sect. 3. I thought the new spirit and heart had followed Faith.

Regeneration is an entire work, though in appearance and to our apprehension,
some things go before, and some other follow. As faith is a Principle of
spiritual life, so is it withal a part of spiritual life. As the life in the
Heart, is a part of Natural life, and withal a principle of Natural life: So
Faith goes before the new frame, as a part of the new frame.

CHAP. XXVII. No man can hear of himself.
Sect. 2. LEt the Reader view my Answer, and judge of my Reviewers honesty,
when he thus wrote, where say I they are both alike without any difference so
called? Nay I say quite otherwise; for in saying of the latter, it is a gift
brought to us by the word of God, which I say not of the former, I expressly put
a Difference.]

Let the Reader judge hardily, and spare not, I am willing withal: let him
look narrowly, and tell what he finds, whether in you, or in me, either of
Dishonesty, or of Sycophancy. Your Answer in the Catechism was this. As the
ability to hear the Gospel outwardly, is of Gods gift, so the word outwardly
heard, brings to men by the gift of God power of more inward hearing and
attention.] Hereupon I noted thus; To hear outwardly, and to hear inwardly, are
in this answer called both alike, without any difference, Gods gift, and as far
as we may guess by his words here, and in other places both of them are of like
extent thus far, that look where he gives the outward hearing he gives the
inward also. Whatsoever the means be, by which he conferreth the gift, still
the one is his gift as well as the other, he gives this, no more than he
gives that, which way soever he gives it. May they not both be said by you,
to be his gift without difference, and yet be given by somewhat different
means? But you must be born withal for writing thus, if you have nothing more
solid to bring forth.

If the power to hear with inward intention, be an act of special Grace, why
does our Savior fault some for stopping the ear lest they should hear: it was
not the outward ear they stopped with their fingers, but their inward with
their oppositions to God; and if that was not opened, no ground to stop it.]

The will is corrupted as well as other faculties of men unregenerate, so that
they lie under a natural and a voluntary corruption. As it is a natural
corruption, so they cannot hear and obey; their ears are stopped: as it is a
voluntary corruption, so they are willingly disobedient and stop their own
ears. A prisoner, that is besotted with his manner of life, and his companions,
and prefers it before his liberty, may say, I will not come forth; and you
cannot thence prove that he may come forth if he will.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of falling from Grace.
Sect. 2. HE adds such a faith as is feined and unsound may belost, and truly I
think it is not worth the keeping: no loss in loosing such a faith, seeing if
kept it would do a man no good, A man may lose it for the better even for a
righter faith. But I am persuaded that is not it, which the Apostles and Christ
warn men of, and bewailed, or feared any for, that they should lose what made
them but Hypocrites.]

Hy pocrisie is a moral crime: An Hypocrite is a dissembler, He that takes upon
him and personates what he is not. But if you will extend the term so far as to
comprehend such as want saving Grace, and are not yet made partakers of
spiritual life, howsoever otherwise morally qualified, and conforming in duties
of Religion: or if you will put the case of one that is an Hypocrite indeed, in
the common sense: If he loses his faith, he does not lose that which made him
an Hypocrite, though he loses that, notwithstanding which, he was such. But as
an Hypocrite is not so bad, as a vicious and openly profane and ungodly person,
so an unsound faith is better than none, and a faith historical or temporary,
better kept than lost; Although you very rashly, as I suppose, not
deliberately, do here teach to the contrary. For I pray observe well, first
that Historical faith is a true faith in the kind of it, has a true being,
and is of good use and benefit: and it is best for them that have it, to hold
what they have, and not think of losing it for a better; for though it be not
justifying faith, nor a part of it, nor yet a degree of it; yet is it a step
toward it, according to Gods ordinary way of proceeding in the conversion of
sinners; and as a stock whereupon is engrafted saving Faith, when God is
pleased, to make that Christian a member of the Church invisible, who was
before but a member of the Church visible. And as in the vision of the great
tree, that figured the estate of Nebuchadnezzar, the stump of it was left in
the ground, because God intended to restore him; So there is more hope of good
intentions toward him, who preserves in himself found principles of Religion,
though he be unsanctified, than another who goes aside in the by-ways of
unbelief, or misbelief. And secondly, as for faith temporary, it is not so
called, because it never endures but for a time, but because it is apt in the
nature and constitution of it, to abide but a while, and then to fail. For in
two cases a temporary believer does not fall away. 1. When persecution does
not arise, nor any temptation on either hand; for then he may persevere in his
faith, during his life. 2. When it pleases God to make use of this common
Grace, as preparatorie to saving Grace, and to indue the temporary believer
with true justifying faith, which is his mere gift, not produced by the utmost
of natural and civil persections, but bestowed only upon the heirs of life. In
a visible constituted Church. God brings men home to himself ordinarily by
Degrees, working in them first that which is natural, and that which is moral;
and then that which is spiritual. And they which quench the spirit, even in the
common gifts thereof, forsake their own mercies, and are no friends to their
own salvation, though you seem to advise all men, that are not as they ought to
be, to turn Atheists or Pagans, for so they must do, if they lose all their
faith.

Page 135. Such were the Galatians, they ran well; were the sons of God by
faith. Yet the Apostle says so many of them as were justified by the Law,
were fallen from Grace.]

In that place, the word Grace, does signify the Doctrine of Grace, as 1 Pet.
5.12. This is the true Grace of God wherein ye stand, in other places also
where Grace, is opposed to the Law: and it is as much as if he had said; You
that are justified by Law, are fallen from the Gospel, or Doctrine of Faith.
You are revolted from the Covenant of Grace, to the Covenant of works.

I answer therefore, first, The defection of a particular Church, from sound
Doctrine to error or unbelief, is no good argument to prove the revolt of a
particular believer from the habit of saving Grace; no not so much as of any
one individual person from sound doctrine; for an erroneous generation might
rise up in the stead of these who held the truth to their dying day.

And secondly, It does not appear that those Galatians who stood in Grace, did
now fall from Grace. They did run well, and now they did intermit their course,
not forsaking the right way, but halting or stumbling in the way, and doubtless
were recovered by the Apostles admonition, as he was persuaded they would be,
chapter 5. v. 10. I have confidence in you that you will be no otherwise minded
than yon have been. Neither does he speak absolutely in the words you bring,
but rather conditionally, as if he had said thus, if ye be justified by the
Law, ye are fallen from Grace, as he says v. 2. if ye be circumcised. So that
from the Galatians, there is no such abundant proof as you speak of,

The temporary believer is not said to have wanted truth of faith but root.]

If they had no root, then they had no truth of Faith, but only leaves of
profession, which Simon Magus had, and many other, who yet are said to believe.
But it is a heart of unbelief, that causes to depart from the living God; Heb.
3.12. It was the last sort of hearers, and they only, that did receive the
word in an honest and good heart, that is the difference of this fourth kind
of hearers from the other three, and must therefore be in the fourth only, and
without such a heart, they might have some faith, but they could never have a
justifying faith, of which only the question is.

The foolish virgins had oil in their lamps, else how could their lamps have
burned or gone out? But they took not oil in their vessels to supply their
lamps, they treasured not up the word of God in their hearts.]

A Parable, is as an instrument of Music, it is unskilfulness to strike
besides the strings. Oil in their lamps, is the profession of Christiantie in
outward works and words. Oil in their vessels, is inward Grace, or Faith,
whence outward professon is maintained and supplied, There was a difference
from the beginning, between the foolish and the wise; and between their lamps,
which were not alike provided for: and thence it was, that the one sort went
out, and the other continued burning, That it was true oil that was quite spent
and burnt out, as good as that which the other virgins had to feed their lamps
withal, is a consideration belonging, not to the scope or intention of the
Parable, but to the frame or constitution of it. But have you the confidence to
maintain that they had truth of faith, when yet you say, The word of God was
not in their hearts?

The house that fell had no good foundation, because they did not do what they
heard.]

You might rather have said, they did not what they heard, because they had no
good foundation. Action is rather the superstructure, than a groundwork. But if
they did not do, what they heard, then they had not true faith: for true faith
is always operative, and attended with works, otherwise it is but the
counterfeit of faith.

What need of warning true believers, to take heed of falling, or of fearing
offense taking, if they were out of all danger of taking offense and falling?
the Apostles implie no such impossibility of their falling.]

Exhortations to a mixed society or congregation, must be so delivered, as to
fit one sort of hearers, as well as another, and to be useful to all: In the
Epistles that the Apostles wrote to the Churches, in which were good and bad;
when they speak to the good, they speak as if they were all such; and when they
direct their speech to the bad, they often speak so, as if they were all bad. I
desire you would remember this rule, whenever you fetch any argument of this
kind from the manner of the Apostles writing to any society of Christians:
and if you had thought of it now, you would never have laid any great weight
upon that place, Gal. 5.4. Ye are fallen from Grace; for in the third chapter v.
26. he says ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. Such
warnings and exhortations are useful to all: for as the secure are awakened:
and the unsound may hereby be made better than they are; so are true believers
held in that state which they have attained. By fear of falling away, they are
preserved from falling away. Care and watchfulness are spiritual graces of God,
whereby they continue steadfast. When many of Christ's disciples being offended
left him, their departure endangered the rest: the twelve therefore he kept by
him, by asking them thus, will ye also go away? As for such impossibility of
falling away, as you speak of, I know not any. That which certainly shall not
in the event come to pass; may yet be possible in it self to come to pass. For
the Saints considered in themselves to fall away, is a thing possible, yea,
very probable, such is their weakness, such is their danger. But upon
supposition of Gods Decree, and promise, and preservation, it is impossible
that it should be. They are as frail as glasses, but they are held by a wary
hand. God will not suffer them to be tempted above their strength, but knows
how to deliver them out of temptation. He will not suffer the rod of the wicked
to rest, to abide long upon the lot of the righteous, lest the righteous put
forth their hands to wickedness. He shortens the days of trouble, that the
Elect be not born down, nor sink under the burden. And sometimes speedily takes
them away, lest malice should alter their understanding, or deceit beguile
their soul.

To prove that there is a difference betwixt true believers and Apostates
besore their fall, I alleged several places, to which you have answered
severally and largely. But you have said nothing that has made any of those
testimonies to that purpose, invalid. The two first did show, not only, that
there is a difference, but that the ground of that difference, is in Gods
secret counsel. To those two, I shall only add now some other the like, and
then conclude this chapter. Joh. 17.12. None of them is lost, but the son of
perdition. And what that signifies, you cannot better understand, than by
conferring with a parallel place of the same subject, namely, Joh. 13.18. I
speak not of you all, I know whom I have chosen: in each of these texts Judas
is he that is excepted, and in the one he is called the son of perdition; in
the other he is said, not to be chosen: and thence it was, he fell away, and
was lost. And that Election to life is spoken of there, and not to Office, is
certain and evident, for Judas was chosen to be an Apostle. When the Jews, in
so great a part fell off from the true Church, it was a very great offense. How
does the Apostle remove it? Romans 11.7. Israel has not obtained, that which he
seeks for, but the Election has obtained it. When some turned the Grace of
God into wantonness, S. Jude to prevent the scandal, says that such false
teachers and their followers, were not good at first, and at best, but such as
crept in unawares, and were before of old ordained to this condemnation. And
when the generality of the inhabitants of the earth, did wonder after the
Beast and worship him, there is in serted a clause of difference, betwixt them
and others, and that difference derived from the very fountain, or foundation
of God, the Elect are excepted Revel. 13.8. All whose names are not written in
the book of life, from the foundation of the world.

CHAP. XXIX. The will of God.
IF it please the Reader to peruse first mine, and then yours, and but compare
them together, I suppose he will not think it needful, that any thing more be
written now, about the title or subject of this chapter. When we are speaking
of the will of God, you betake jrour self to the Free will of man, bringing
forth such fragments as have often been served up. I shall only take notice of
some other things which you have fallen upon, no way belonging hither. For you
are like a valiant Gamester and will have at all, (...) Joannes ad oppositum,
as you can hold up any thing that you have said, you can oppose whatsoever
another says, yea sometimes although it be your own opinion.

Sect. 2. But he says God is to be worshipped in spirit and truth now, and not
as before Christ's coining in outward rites, shadows and ceremonies, which then
bare a great part of Gods service. I am glad M. H. is for such spiritual
worship, if it be in realitie, for he may have, it is likely, a secret
intention, contrary to his revealed sayings, as he signifies of God.]

Soon after this, about the beginning; of your next Section, you call it a
Threed-bare distinction of, A Revealed will, and secret, and like better of
Conditional and Absolute. I told you then, you had often heard it, and I like
it the better for being common and ordinary. You say little to it there, and
here you make a Jest upon it: and a jest if it be a threed-bare one, as this
is, is stark naught: but if withal it be profane, and Lucianical, it is the
more abominable.

To understand, and to make out the twofold will of God, manifestly delivered
in holy Scripture, it concerns you as well as others, and I think you cannot
do it better than others have done: For example, Exodus 7.3, 4. God commanded
Pharaoh to let the people go: at the very same time he hardened Pharaoh's
heart, that he might not let them go. Yours of Conditional and Absolute, will
not help the matter here, unless you can tell what should be the condition in
this case. You that hold God wills all men to be saved in your sense, without
any difference, till they themselves make it, not conferring one place of
Scripture with another, and one principle of Faith with the rest, must make two
contrary wills, or else deny, whether directly or by consequence, Gods
omnipotence. It being a most certain truth, in Reason, and in Religion, gion,
that God does whatsoever he will, both in Heaven and in Earth. But others say,
consonantly to other parts of Christian Divinity, that Gods revealed will is
not always properly a will, but only figuratively, interpretatively, or by way
of likeness. He is said to will because he seems to will, in declaring what
he wills should be man's duty, and what he will accept and approve of, if
performed. Now because this is declared by the Law or Commandment, therefore it
is called his revealed will. This is no way contrary to his will whereby he
peremptorily determines what he himself will do, and what shall inevitably come
to pass, which because he has not discovered to us, except matter of prophecy,
or promise, is therefore called his secret will.

Or, that it is his will, by way of approbation, he approves, allows and
likes well of universal and perfect obedience, and the salvation of all men
as agreeable to his nature and general inclination, and as morally good:
though he does not completely and perfectly will it, so as to effect it.

And that his will to save all men consists in procuring a Savior or
Redeemer for all men, and ordaining means of salvation more or less for all
men; not in causing those means always to take place. Thus have we been taught
by those whom you had done better to follow, than to take the chair of the
scorners, and make a mock of what you cannot or will not understand.

But were not the Ceremonies of Gods appointing then, more warrantable and
suitable to David's spiritual worship, than Rites or Ceremonies of man's
Institution now, that God never commanded? might not a man expect more blessing
then in observing them, than in the other now? I durst not determine
positively.]

You compare the Rites and Ceremonies given to the Jews by Moses, with the
Ceremonies of Man's Institution now. And you do it so, that the people may
think, the Rites established in our Church, are appointed as appertaining to
Gods service, no less than those which were imposed upon the people of the Jews
in the old Testament. Wherein you deal very injuriously with the Church of
England, and with the consciences of the weak.

Before the Liturgy is declared, that what of Ceremonies is retained, is for
Discipline and Order, and not to be esteemed equal with Gods law.

When the Gileadites had erected an Altar, on the other banck of Jordan, and
that of their own heads, without divine command, yet as a Ceremony some way
significant in religion; the other Tribes were highly offended at it, taking it
to be a corruption of the true worship, and a kind of defection from the God
of Israel. But so soon as they heard them protest against any such intention,
and declare that they meant it only as a witness of their consent in Gods
worship, and of their joint-profession with their brethren that dwelt in the
land of Canaan; they gave over presently, laid aside their jealousy add
suspicion, and rested well content.

They who have endeavored to satisfy the Non-conformists, did fully declare
these things to be matters of indifferency, no part of divine worship, no way
necessary to salvation, no more than any thing else that is done, and ought to
be done at the command of a Superior. They did always disclaim any opinion of
necessity, or efficacy ascribed by Papists to their Ceremonies, any obligation
of Conscience, otherwise than in civil Laws, which God in the general has
commanded us to observe. The more to blame are they that will not at last,
after so many protestations and declarations receive satisfaction.

If any of those high-flown Anabapists with whom you have discoursed, who are
against civil customs, yea against customs of Civility, as well as against
Ecclesiastical Laws, and will not come at our Churches because they have been
defiled with; Mass, should argue thus against you, as you have in a sort taught
them to do; Might not a man expect more blessing in going to the Temple at
Jerusalem, which was of divine dedication, appointed and consecated by God
himself, descending from heaven, and by his cloud of glory, owning it for the
place of his mansion and abode, than we can expect in going to our Churches,
which are but of man's institution and consecration? I suppose you would shape
him some answer or other, I pray let that answer serve for you both.

Upon occasion of those words in the Church-Cathechisme, [ To keep Gods holy
will, and Commandments] you asked your Scholar, what is the will and
Commandment of God concerning thee? And you taught him to answer thus: Gods
will is that I should be saved.] Upon this I noted, that Gods will to save men,
is matter of belief, not of practice, therefore not of precept, hereto now you
answer, That God commands us to be saved, I prove from Isa. 45.22.] and there I
find these words, look unto me, and be ye saved; this is your proof, because Be
ye saved, is the Imperative mood forsooth! and that is as much as commanding. A
most worthy argument! but more worthy of G. F. or G. W. than of their
Antagonist: but better becoming one of your Laymen that can read no Latin, than
your self: for if they could, they might there have found it, and salvi eritis,
or ut servemini. I hope your skill in Logic will help you, not to make two
preceps of those words, but to resolve them into a precept and a promise: or if
you be resolved to hold you to your Grammar and your Moods, then let me tell
you, that though it be called the Imperative, yet it is not always so, but now
and then something else, as Precative, carrying prayer or entreaty, for
otherwise you will teach, not the Soldier only with a sword in his hand, but
any other beggar, when he asks Alms, to command, for they make use of the
Imperative Mood: and Postulative, or requesting as Pay me that thou owe, a
Demand, not a Command: and Concessive or granting, as sleep on now, and take
your rest: and Hortative, as Be of good courage, fear not: and Constitutive,
causing something to be, or be made, which was not before, as Gods Voice at the
Creation, Fiat, and the Kings, Sois Chevalier: and Lastly, Promissive, as Do
good and live for evermore: So, that which you call a Command, is a Promise,
Look unto me, and ye shall be saved. He commands us to look to him, and if we
do, he promises to save us.

CHAP. XXX. The Conclusion.
IN your last chapter there is little I shall take notice of, besides that
which you have in effect mentioned twice before, namely page 2. pressing
ceremonies and domination in the Church yon call Beastly doing, and the voice
of the Dragon, and page 36. The Magistrate must not exercise the Authority of
the Dragon, in appointing Ordinances of worship, and here you are at it again.

If the time of Beast-worshipping be not yet over, (as many godly persons think
it is not) then the Scripture says, all that then dwell upon the earth are
false worshippers, only excepted, whose names written in the book of life.]

And many godly persons know, that there have been, and are still many ungodly
persons, who would gladly overthrow and destroy all Christianity upon pretense
of Antichristianisme. The Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 2. has given us warning of the
danger incident to Reformation, and what the Devices and Machinations of Satan
are at such a time, and what his Method: and that is this, to drive men from
one extreme to another. Witness the case of the incestuous Corinthian there,
who being at the first tolerated in his wickedness without any manner of
censure, was in the next place well nigh plunged into despair, and swallowed up
of sorrow; through over-rigorous dealing. When the abuses of Popery were to be
reformed, not only the welminded laid to their hands, but persons also
worldly, godless, and enemies to Religion joined with the rest in the
destructive part, but intended to promote Atheism, when they set themselves
against Superstition. Heretics also, whose opinions lay on that side, were
zealous in their manner, but their zeal was more like Wildfire, which they
threw in, to have marred all, if it might have been. For after that Antiquity
came to be a badge ot Popery then (1) whatsoever was found to have been
practiced by the Papists in Church-orders, was for that reason rejected. Not a
stone must be taken from Babylon, for a foundation, or a corner. If the least
matter of all were yielded, it was as a peppercorn in acknowledgement of the
Antichristian Government. And (2) even the most sacred Articles of our
Christian Faith, have been denied, as having come from Rome, and thither were
to be returned. So the name of Antichrist, the Beast, and the Dragon, served
the turn for many heresies, and for all profaneness. A Discourse came forth
entitled, The storming of Antichrist, a right proper and well chosen word, of
which they know the meaning, who had experience of the Wars, and laying siege
to Towns, and strong places, and assaulting them: storms of wind, tempests of
hail, and of Lightning, do spare nothing that is in their way, having no
regard, showing no mercy, making no difference: for being mere natural Agents,
they always act according to their utmost power and might. So describes the
Poet his hardy Soldiers, (...). not likening them to Wolves and Lions, which
have been known to relent, and their mouths have been as it were stopped; but
they fought as it were a flame, fell on like a tempest, noting, says the great
Scholiast, (...), that they were irrationally impetuous, violent without sense
or reason, without mean or measure. And much like these stormers were some of
those that went among our Reformers both first and last. You seem to extend
Beastworship very far, even to those matters in question betwixt us. But you
give no instance, nor shall I insist upon any. I know you can, if you will,
distinguish betwixt Popery, and the Christian Religion; and if you do not
consider apart, what belongs to one, and what belongs to the other, what to
Error, and what to Truth; you may soon do that which tends to the weakening
and undermining of the whole building. Diverse of the Papists have twitted us
with the Jews, laying to our charge Judaisme for refusing some Apocryphal
books, and for condemning Image worship, as the Jews do now; and for saying
that a man cannot forgive sins, as they also said: and for insisting upon the
Law of Moses, and the precedents of the old Testament, to prove that unto
Christian Kings belongs the supremacy in ordering matters of Religion in a
Nation: he that argues thus, say they, is more like a Jew than a Christian.
The Anabaptists had learned this Lesson too; for when they were bent upon such
a confusion, as should take away the difference betwixt Clergy and Laity,
they were wont upon occasion to revile the Priests and Levites, as blind and
ignorant, (...) demanding of John the Baptist, by what authority he did what he
did: as if observation of order in the Church, and pretense of Authority in
Gods worship and service were points of Judaical blindness and infidelity.
Against all these and such like let us remember that the Jews were once the
only true Church of God, and our Christianity came to us from them, and
through their hands, and we are all but proselytes to their Church. So that as
they had once all the Substantials of the true Religion, both for belief and
practice, we cannot suppose but that they do retain many of them still. In like
manner the Christian Religion came to us, through the Church of Rome, not from
the Church of Rome; and our profession is but to remove the additions and
superstructures of the Papists, by which the right belief and worship have been
corrupted; and to throw out the earth with which the Philistims had filled the
well, and stopped the springs. Antichrists are many, there is false worship on
both hands, Anarchie is beastly doing, as well as Tyranny; and Confusion, as
much as Usurpation.

I cannot but think some prejudice aagainst my person (I know not wherefore
being so mere a stranger to him) has clouded his reason.]

By this Clause, he that will may judge of all your book, as of the sack by a
handful, for it is like the rest, full of confidence, but void of reason, as
if your Doctrine were so blameless, that nothing could be spoken against it:
Perhaps against your person some may harbor prejudice, but against what you
teach and write, no man, unless his reason be overclouded, can justly except.
You should have been well assured first, that there was any such prejudice born
against you, before you took such thought, and put your self to a loss in
seeking what might be the cause of it. For my part, I am as much to seek, what
should be any the very least ground of such a vain surmise.

Some little while after the coming forth of this your Piece, a friend of
mine, and of yours too, who does nor much give his mind to read Controversies,
nor was at that time much inclined out of his good nature, to pity my
condition, did ask me thus; Who bade you begin? And because this question is
very consonant to your sense, I will now give you the Answer to it. And first,
if my charge, which is that I began, be in reference to those multitudes of
right-believing Christians, who have a long time been offended at your
Doctrine, My Defense is this, that if any other whosoever had before
endeavored to hinder the spreading of your errors; then, as I could not have
begun, so I would not have followed. There arose indeed some contest between
the Reverend Doctor and your self about Vniversity-learning, but for other
Heterodoxies of yours, no man, so far as I know, gave notice or public
warning. I began therefore because none other would, though very many much
better might. But I suppose, the meaning of the question was not, why I rather
than another, but why I would begin with you, when as you gave me no
provocation. But I pray consider well, they are the Schismatics, who, though
they abide, give just occasion unto others for to depart; He that denies the
debt, begins the suit; and he that invades my right, sends for the process.
Will you not give others leave to defend their own against you, and and to
continue in the things that they have learned, and contend for the Faith once
delivered to them, which you with your Innovations and inventions have
corrupted? you began when you taught and promoted so many opinions contrary to
what we have received; when you wrought upon the people to draw them after you;
when at last you took advantage of their age, to sow your Novelties among them
early, lest they should take a resolution to hold their own, after they were
once prepossessed with the truth; when you presumed to contrive your errors
into Question and Answer by way of Catechism, with impression upon impression,
for the instruction of children, as if you meant to lay a groundwork for the
men of the next generation to be built upon, because the men of this generation
are infatuated. In the next place I desire you to consider, that you have
(further than by teaching otherwise) provoked, and as it were sent a challenge
to those that are not of your mind. In the Preface to your Open Door upon
these, You do in a manner complain of the cowardice of your Adversaries, "that
will gird and argue when they get into a Pulpit, where none may interrupt them,
but they will not Abide An argument or two to their faces.] And in your Essays,
where you took a very little occasion to begin, I find these words, page 16.
perhaps you may say, or some for you] and page 22. But happily you or some other
may reply] as expecting the debate would not end there, but that some or other
would maintain the Duel. I do suppose therefore that whatsoever show you make,
you are not much offended. Maffeius writes of Ignatius Loiola, that he had
donum lacrymarum, Tears at command, and could weep when he would, and as he
would, more or less: So I think you can be angry at any time, and chide when
you have a mind to it, though you be in sport, and take upon you great
displeasure then, when you are best of all content and pleased. I pray Sir, be
persuaded to believe, that I bear you no manner of grudge, nor did ever ow you
ill will, as you never gave me the least occasion; and if in this Answer of
yours, you have given me any, I have not taken it. It belongs not to me to say,
how far my reason is clouded, but my affection toward you continues very
fair. And for the opinions between us controverted, I am where I was. You have
brought nothing of moment wherewithal to strengthen and support that cause to
which you are a wel-willer, nor yet to incline those that are wavering and
unsettled, to be of your mind: but a twine thread will draw that which is
coming: and those whom you have misled, you may mislead still, until God be
pleased to show them better.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 32. read infallibili. 39. (...). p. 53. lin. 20. this; some in. 56. l.
17. large. 58. Hildebr. p. 73. l. 9. Princes. 74. Petrasanota. 129. l. 14. for
if it. 163. Systeme. 198. Atheneus. 35. l. 22. blot out is uncertain.

The Table.
1 Chap. Touching the Epistle before the Catechism 1 Page 2 Chap. The word
Creatours 23 Page 3 Chap. Sinful lusts 27 Page 4 Chap. The Tree of knowledge
29 Page 5 Chap. The prepared Sacrifice 45 Page 6 Chap. Head of the Church 54
Page 7 Chap. The Magistrates power in Religion 59 Page 8 Chap. The Law 75 Page
9 Chap. Professors to break bread 82 Page 10 Chap. Of the twofold Resurrection
88 Page 11 Chap. How God had power enough to help man 103 Page 12 Chap. Of
Universal Redemption 123 Page 13 Chap. Whether all in Adam be pardoned 132 Page
14 Chap. Election what it is 144 Page 15 Chap. Election in believing 163 Page
16 Chap. Election in personal considerations 167 Page 17, and 18 Chap. Jacob
and Esau, Pharaoh 172 Page 19 Chap. Vessels of honor and dishonor 173 Page 20
Chap. Whether Gods works preach Christ's mediation 178 Page 21 Chap. Rahab and
Cornelius 201 Page 22 Chap. False conceptions, four instances 203 Page 23 Chap.
The Remedy to be general 209 Page 24 Chap. Reasons why the Remedy should be
general 213 Page 25 Chap. Signs of Gods love 215 Page 26 Chap. How Faith is
wrought 224 Page 27 Chap. No man can hear of himself 227 Page 28 Chap. Of
falling from Grace 229 Page 29 Chap. The will of God 238 Page 30 Chap. The
conclusion 244 Page
FINIS.

