THE WAY and MANNER OF THE REFORMATION OF THE Church of England DECLARED and
JUSTIFIED: Against the Clamors and Objections of the Opposite Parties.

By PETER HEYLYN, D. D.

MALACH. 2. 7. Lab^a Sacerdotis custodient Sapientiam, and legem requirent ex
ore ejus: quia Angelus Domini Exercituum est. Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that rule
over you, and submit your selves; for they watch for your souls, as they that
must give account, that they may do it with joy and not grief. LONDON, Printed
by E. Cotes for Henry Seile over against St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet,
M.DC.LVII.

TO THE READER.
THe occasion which induced me to the writing of this Discourse has been
already touched at in our general Preface, and shall be shown thee more at
large in the following Preamble or Introduction. Let it suffice thee now to
know, that it was done on an occasion really given, and not in supposition
only, the better to bring in the Design which I have in hand; and that it gave
such satisfaction to the Party for whose sake it was undertaken, that it was
thought fit by some to have it published for the Use of others. But being
published by a faulty and imperfect Copy, I caused it presently to be called
^in; not willing it should go abroad (though without my Name) till it were
able in some measure to defend it self, if not to justify the Author. Being
now set upon a resolution, which God bless me me in, of vindicating this poor
Church (as far at least as in me is) in her Forms of Worship, her Government
and established Patrimony, together with the Times and Places destinate to her
Sacred Offices; I have thought good to place this Tractate in the Front, as a
Praecognitum or necessary Manuduction unto all the rest. The way and manner of
the Reformation of the Church of England declared and justified, cannot but
give a good Relish unto all that follows, being no other then the Essential
parts and branches of that Reformation. If thou art satisfied in this, it will
be a fair Omen to me, that the rest may not prove unwelcome. And that thou
may peruse it with the greater cheerfulness; I will not keep thee longer in
the Entrance of it; it being no good Husbandry to waste that Friend in petit
Matters, whom we endeavor to preserve for nobler favors. And so fare thee
well.

The Contents of the Chapters*
SECT. I.
THe Introduction sh^wing the Occasion, Method, and Design of the whole
Discourse. page 1. 1. Of Calling or Assembling the Convocation of the Clergy,
and the Authority thereof when convened together. 3. 2. Of the Ejection of the
Pope, and vesting the Supremacy in the Regal Crown. 10. 3. Of the translation
of the Scriptures, and permitting them to be read in the English tongue. 13. 4.
Of the Reformation of Religion in the points of Doctrine. 19. 5. Of the
Reformation of the Church of England in the forms of Worship; and the times
appointed thereunto. 28. 6. Of the power of making Canons, for the well
ordering of the Clergy, and the directing of the people in the public duties
of Religion. 34. 7. An Answ^^ to the main Objections of either Party. 38.
SECT. II.
1. That the Church of England did not innovate in the Ejection of the Pope,
and settling the Supremacy in the Regal Crown. page 46. 2. That the Church of
England might proceed to a Reformation without the approbation of the Pope or
the Church of Rome. 52. 3. That the Church of England might lawfully proceed to
a Reformation without the help of a General Council, or calling in the aid of
the Protestant Church. 62. 4. That the Church did not innovate in translating
the Scriptures and the public Liturgy in to vulgar Tongues, and of the
Consequents thereof to the Church it self. 70. 5. That the proceedings of this
Church in setting out the English Liturgy were not merely Regal; and of the
power of Sovereign Princes in Ecclesiastical affairs. 79. 6. That the Clergy
lost not any of their just Rights by the Act of submission, and that the power
of calling and confirming Councels did anciently bel^ng to the Christian
Princes. 86.
The Errata of the First Part to be thus Corrected.
Pape 1. for New read Your, p. 8. r. conv^ni^ntly, p. 9. r. p^iviledged, p. 9.
r. ejection, p. 11. l. 10. r. enact, p. 12. l. 22. r. final, p. 13. l. 16. to
Phil. and Mary, add, yet were they all revived in the 1. of Elazabeth, p. 19.
l. 19. r. Sacraments, p. 25. l. 17. r. not on it, p 30. r. Holbeck, p. 34. r.
Warham. p. 56. l. 11. r. four, p. 58. l. 7. r. Canon Law, p 63. l. 27 r. come,
p. 76. l. 6. dele to the Popes authority on the one side, or the other side, p.
72. l. 7. r. of it into the, p. 84. l. 22. r. formerly, p. 93. l. 23. r.
continued, p. 95. l. 7. r. humble, p. 181. l. 1. r. we shall see hereafter, p.
194. l. 6. r. one new body, p. 251. l. 20. r. Nicomedia, p. 254. l. 2. r.
derived, p. 258. l. 1. r. Sabbath, p. 292. l. 10. r. hint, p. 296. l. 21. r.
praefantes, p. 300. l. 23. r. cure. p. 342. l. 3. dele Greek and.

The Way of the Reformation of the Church of England Declared and Justified,
etc.
The Introduction.
Showing the Occasion, Method, and Design of the whole Discourse.
My dear Hierophilus,
_(...) company is always very pleasing to me; but you are never better
welcome then when you bring your doubts and scruples along with you, for by
that means you put me to the studying of some point or other, whereby I benefit
my self, if not profit you. And I remember at the time of your last being with
me, you seemed much scandalized for the Church of England, telling me you were
well assured that her Doctrine was most true and orthodox, her Government
conform to the Word of God and the best ages of the Church; and that her
public Liturgy was an extract of the primitive Forms; nothing in all the
whole Composure but what did tend to edification and increase of piety. But for
all this, you were unsatisfied (as you said) in the ways and means by which
this Church proceeded in her Reformation, alleging, that you had heard it many
times objected by some Partisans of the Church of Rome, that our Religion was
mere Parliamentarian, not regulated by Synodical Meetings, or the Authority of
Councels, as in elder Times; or as Dr. Harding said long since in his Answer
unto B. Jewel, That we had a Parliament Religion, a Parliament Faith, and a
Parliament Gospel: To which Scultingius and some others after added, that we
had none but Parliament Bishops, and a Parliament Clergy; that you were apt
enough to think that the Papists made not all this noise without some ground
for it, in regard you have observed some Parliaments in these latter days so
mainly bent to catch at all occasions, whereby to manifest their power in
Ecclesiastical matters, especially in constituting the new Assembly o^ Divines
and others. And finally, that you were heartily ashamed, that being so often
choked with these Objections, you neither knew how to traverse the Indictment,
nor plead Not guilty to the Bill. Some other doubts you said you had, relating
to the King* the Pope, and the Protestant Churches, either too little or too
much looked after in our Reformation, but you were loath to trouble me with too
much at once. And thereupon you did entreat me to bethink my self of some ^it
Plaster for the Sore which did often afflict you, religiously affirming that your
desires proceeded not from curiosity, or an itch of knowledge, or out of any
disaffection to the Power of Parliaments; but me^rly* from an honest zeal to
the Church of England, whose credit and prosperity you did far prefer before
your life, or wha^soever in this world could be dear unto you; Adding withal,
that if I would take this pains for your satisfaction, and help you out of
these perplexities which you were involved in, I should not only do good
service to the Church it self, but to many a wavering member of it, whom these
objections had much staggered in their Resolutions. In fine, that you desired
also to be in^ormed how far the Parliaments had been interessed in these
alterations of Religion, which happened in the Reign^ of K. Hen. the 8. K. Edw.
the 6. and Queen Elizabeth? what ground there was for all all this clamor of
the Papists? and whether the Houses, or either of them, have exercised of old
any such Authority in matters of Ecclesiastical or Spiritual nature, as some of
late have ascribed unto them? Which though it be a dangerous and invidious
subject (as the times now are) yet for your sake, and for the Truths, and for
the honor of Parliaments, which seem to suffer much in that Popish calumny, I
shall undertake it; premising first, that I intend not to say any thing to the
point of Right, whether or not the Parliament may lawfully meddle in such
matters as concern Religion; but shall apply my self wholly unto matters of
Fact, a^ they relate unto the Reformation here by Law established. And for my
method in this business, I shall first lay down by way of preamble, the form
of calling of the C^nvocation of the Clergy here in England, that we may see by
what Authority they proceed in their Constitutions, and then declare what was
acted by the Clergy in that Reformation: In which, I shall begin with the
ejection of the Pope, and settling the Supremacy in the Crown Imperial of this
Realm; descending next to the Translation of the Scriptures into the English
Tongue, the Reformation of the Church in Doctrinals and Forms of Worship, and
to proceed unto the Power of making Canons for the well ordering of the Clergy,
and the direction of the people in the Exercise of their Religion; concluding
with an An^wer to all such Objections (by what party soever they be made) as
are most mate^ial. And in the canvassing of these points, I doubt not but it
will appear unto you, that till these late busy and unfortunate Times, in
which every man intrudeth on the Priestly Function, the Parliaments did nothing
at all either in making Canons, or in matters Doctrinall, or in Translation of
the Scriptures: next that that little which they did in reference to the Forms
and Times of Worship, was no more then the inflicting of some Temporal or legal
penalties on such as did neglect the one, or not conform unto the other, having
been first digested and agreed upon in the Clergy way: and finally that those
Kings and Princes before remembered, by whose Authority the Parliaments did that
little in those Forms and Times, did not act any thing in that kind
themselves, but what was warranted unto them by the word of God and the example
of such godly and religious Emperors and other Christian Kings and Princes, as
flourished in the happiest times of Christianity. This is the sum of my design,
which I shall follow in the order before laid down: assuring you that when you
shall acquaint me with your other scruples, I will endeavor what I can for your
satisfaction.

1. Of calling or assembling the Convocation of the Clergy, and the Authority
thereof when conveen'd together.
ANd in this we are first to know, that anciently the Archbishop of the several
Provinces of Canterbury and York were vested with a power of Convocating the
Clergy of their several and respective Provinces, when, and as often as they
thought it necessary for the Churches peace. And of this power they did make
use upon all extraordinary and emergent cases, either as Metropoli^ans and
Primates in their several Provinces, or as Legati nati to the Popes of Rome:
but ordinarily, and of common course especially after the first passing of the
Acts or Statutes of Praemuniri, they did r^strain that power to the good
pleasure of the Kings under whom they lived, and used it not but as the
necessities and occasions of these Kings, or the distresses of the Church did
require it of them; and when it was required of them, the Writ or Pr^cept of
the King was in this form following. R^x, etc. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri
N. Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo totius Angliae Primati and A^ostolicae sedis
L^gato salutem. Quibusdam arduis and urgentibus negotiis d^f^nsionem and
securitatem Eccle^ae Anglicanae, ac pacem, tranquillitatem, and ^onum publi^um,
and defensionem Regni nostri, and subditorum nostrorum ejusd^ m concernentibus,
Vobis in Fide and dilectione, quibus nobis tenemini, rogando mandamus, quatenus
praemissis debito intuitu attentis and ponderatis universos and singul^s
Episcopos vestrae Provinciae, ac Decanos and Priores (...) and non exemptos,
nec non Archidiaconos, Conventus, Capitula, and Collegia totumque Clerum
^ujuslibet Dioceseos ejusdem Provinciae, ad c^nveniendum coram vobis in
Ecclesia Sancti Pauli London. vel alibi, prout melius expedire videritis,
cumomni celeritate accommoda modo debito Convocari faciatis; Ad tractandum,
consentiendum and conclud^ndum super praemissis and aliis quae sibi clarius
proponentur, tunc and ibidem ex part nostra. Et hoc si^ut nos and statum Regni
nostri, ac honorem and utilitatem Ecclesiae praedictae diligitis, nullatenus
omittatis. Test meipso, etc. These are the very words o^ the ancient Writs,
and are still retained in these of later Times; but that the Ti^le of Legatus
sedis Apost^licae, then used in the Archbishops style was laid aside together
with the Pope himself; and that there is no mention in them of Abbots, Priors,
and Conven^s, as being now not extant in the Church of England. And in this
Writ you may observe; first, that the calling of the Bishops and Clergy of the
Province of Canterbury to a Synodical* Assembly, belonged to the Arch bishop of
that Province only (the like to him of York also within the Sphere or Verge of
his Jurisdiction.) Secondly, that the nominating of the time and place for this
Assembly was left to the Arch Bishops pleasure, as seemed* best unto him;
though for the most part, and with reference unto themselves and the other
P^elates, who were bound to attend the service of the King in Parliament, they
caused these Meetings to be held at the time and place, at, and to which the
Parliament was or had been called by the Kings Authority. Thirdly, That from
the word Convocari used in the Writ, the Synodical meetings of the Clergy were
named Convocations. And fourthly, That the Clergy thus assembled in Convocation
had not only a power of treating on and consenting unto such things as should
be there propounded on the Kings behalf, but a power also of concluding or not
concluding on the same as they saw occasion: Not that they were restrained only
to such points as the King propounded, or were proposed in his behalf to their
c^nsideration; b^t that they were to handle to his business with their own,
wherein they had full power when once met together.

In the next place we must behold what the Archbishop did in pursuance of the
Kings command for calling of the Clergy of his Province to a Conv^cation, who
on the receipt of the Kings Writ presently issued out his Mandate to the B^sh^p
of London (D^an by his plac^ of the whole College of Bishops of that Province)
^equiring him immediately on the sight hereof (and of the (...) and included in
it) to cite and summon all the Bishops, and other Prelates, Deans,
Archdeacons, and capitular Bodies, with the whole Clergy of that Province,
that they the said Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, in their own persons, the
Capitular Bodies by one Procurator, and the Clergy of each Diocese by two, do
appear before him at the time and place by him appointed, and that those
Procurators should be furnished with sufficient powers by those which sent
them, not only to treat upon such points as (...) England, and to give their
counsel in the same: sed ad consentiendum ^is quae ibidem ex com^un^
delibe^a^ione ad honorem Dei and Ecclesiae in praemissis contigerint
concorditer ordinari; but also to consent both in their own names, and in the
names of those who sent them, unto all such things, as by mature deliberation
and consent should be there ordained. Which Mandate being received by the
Bishop of London, the several Bishops cited accordingly, and intima^ion given
by those Bishops unto their Archdeacons for summoning the Clergy to make
choice of their Procurators, as also the Chapters, or capitular Bodies, to do
the like: The next work is to proceed to the choice of those Procurators. Which
choice being made, the said Chapters under their common seals, and the said
Clergy in a public Writing subscribed by them, do bind themselves sub
Hypotheca omnium bonorum suorum, under the pawn and forfeiture of all their
goods moveable and immovable (I speak the very words of these public
Instruments) se ratum, gra^um and accep^um habere quicquid dicti Procuratores
sui nomine and vice suis fecerint, etc. To stand to and perform whatsoever
their said Procurators, in their name and stead, shall do, determine and
consent to. The like is also done in the Province of York; but that the Arch-B.
thereof sends out the summons in his own name to the suffragan Bish^ps, the
Province being small, and the Suffragans not above three in number. Finally, as
the Convocations of the Clergy in their several Provinces were called by the
Archbishops only, the Kings Writ thereunto requiring and authorizing; so by
the same powers were they also dissolved again, when they had done the business
they were called about, or did desire to be dismissed to their own affairs. At
which time by special Writ or Mandates to the said Archbishops, expressing the
calling and assembling of the Convocation by ve^tue of the former Prec^pt, it
is declared, That on certain urgent causes and considerations moving his
Majesty thereunto, he thought fit with the advice of his privy Council, that
the same should be again dissolved: Et ideo vobis mandamus quod eandem
praesentem Convocationem hac instanti die debito mod^ sine ulla dilatione
dissolvatis, sive dissolvi faciatis, prout convenit; and therefore did command
them to dissolve it, or cause the same to be dissolved in the accustomed manner
without delay. Which Writ received, and not before, the Convocation was
dissolved accordingly: and so it holds in Law and practice to this very day.

I have the longer staid on these public Forms, partly because not obvious
unto every eye; but specially to let you see by what Authority the Clergy are
to be assembled in their Convocations, and what it is which makes their Canons
and Conclusions binding, unto all those which send them thither, or entrust
them there. Their calling by the Kings Authority makes their meeting lawful,
which else were liable to exceptions and disputes in Law, and possibly might
render them obnoxious to some grievous penalties; and so would their
continuance too after the writ was issued for their Dissolution. As on the
contrary their breaking or dissolving of their own accord, would make them
guilty of contempt, and consequently subject to the Kings displeasure; for
being called by the Kings Writ, they are to continue till dissolved by the
Kings Writ also, notwithstanding the dissolving of the Parliament, with which
sometimes it might be summoned. And so it was resolved in terminis, by the
chief ^udges of the Realm and others of his M^jesties Counsel learned, May 10.
anno 1640. at such time as the Convocations did continue sitting, the
Parliament being most unhappily dissolved on the Tuesday before, subscribed by
Finch Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, Manchester then Lord privy Seal, Littleton
chief justice of the Common-plea^, Ban^es Attorney General, Whitfield and Heath
his Majesty's Sergeants, Authority enough for the poor Clergy to proceed on,
though much condemned and maligned for obedience to it. [Now as they have the
Kings Authority not only for their Meeting, but continuance also; so also have
they all the power of the whole National Clergy of England, to make good
whatsoever they conclude upon: the Archbishops, Deans, Archdeacons, acting in
their own capacities, the Procurators in the name and by the power committed to
them, both by the Chapters or capitular Bodies, and the Dioces^n Clergy of both
Provinces. And this they did by virtue of that power and trust alone, without
any ratification or confirmation from King of Parliament, until the 25 year of
King Henry the 8. At which time they bound themselves by a Synodical Act
(whereof more hereafter) not to enact, promulge, or ^xecute any Canons,
Constitutions, or Ordinances Provincial in their C^nvocations for time coming,
unless the King^ Highness by his Royal Assent command them to make promulge,
and execute the same accordingly. Before this time they acted absolutely in
their Convocations of their own Authority, the King^ Assent neither concurring
nor required; and by this sole Authority which they had in themselves, they did
not only make Canons, declare Heresy, convict and censure persons suspected of
Heresy, in which the subjects of all sorts (whose Votes were tacitly included
in the suffrages of their Pastors and spi^itual Fathers) were concerned alike.
But also to conclude, the Clergy whom they represented in the point of
Property, imposing on them what they pleased, and levying it by Canons of their
own enacting. And they enjoyed this power to the very day in which they tendered
the submission, which before we spoke of. For by this self-authority (if I may
so call it) they imposed and levied that great Subsidy of 120000 l. (an
infinite sum as the Standard of the Times then was) granted unto King Henry the
8. anno 1530. to free them from the fear and danger of the Praemuni^i. By this
Benefit of the Chapter called Similiter in the old Provincial, extended
formerly to the University of Oxon only, was made communicable the same year
unto Cambridge also. By this Crome, Latimer, Bilney, and diverse others, were in
the year next following impeached of Heresy. By this the Will and Testament of
William Tracie of Toddington was condemned as scandalous and heretical, and his
body taken up and burnt not many days before the passing of the Act of
Submission, anno 1532.

But this power being thought too great or inconsistent at least with the Kings
Design touching his divorce, the Clergy were reduced unto such a straight by
the degrees and steps which you find in the following Section, as to submit
their power unto that of the King, and to promise in verbo sacerdotii, that
they would do and enact nothing in their Convocations without his consent. And
to the gaining of this point, he was pressed the rather, in regard of a
Remonstrance then presented to Him by the House of Commons, in which they
showed themselves aggrieved, that the Clergy of this Realm should act
Authoritatively, and supremely in the Convocations, and they in Parliament do
nothing, but as it was confirmed and ratified by the Royal Assent. Which
notwithstanding, though this Submission brought down the Convocation to the
same Level with the Houses of Parliament; yet being made unto the King in his
single person, and not as in conjunction with his Houses of Parliament, it
neither brought the Convocation under the command of Parliaments, nor rendered
them obnoxious to the power thereof. That which they did in former times of
their self-authority (in matters which concerned the Church) without the Kings
consent cooperating and concurring with them, the same they did and might do
in the Times succeeding, the Kings Authority and Consent being superadded,
without the help and midwisery of an Act of Parliament, though sometimes that
Authority was made use of also, for binding of the subject under Temporal and
Legal penalties, to yield obedience and conformity to the Churches Orders.
Which being the true state of the present business, it makes the clamor of
the Papists the more unreasonable; but then withal it makes it the more easily
answered. Temporal punishments inflicted on the refractory and disobedient in ^
Temporal Court, may add some strength unto the Decrees and Constitutions of
the Church, but they take none from it: Or if they did the Religion of the
Church of Rome, the whole Mass of Popery, as it was received and settled h^^e in
Qu. Marios Reign, would have a sor^y c^utch ^o stand upon, and might as justly
bear the name of a Parliament Faith, as the reformed Religion of the Church of
England. It is true indeed, that had those Convocations which were active in
that Reformation, being either called or summoned by the King in Parliament, or
by the Houses separately, or (...) without the King; or had the Members of the
same been nominated and impo^^ered by the House alone, and intermixed with a
considerable number of the Lord and Commons; (which being by ^he way, the Case
of this New Assembly, I do not see how any thing which they agree on (...) the
Clergy, otherwise then imposed by a strong hand, and against their priviledge^)
Or finally, had the conclusions or results thereof been o^ no effect, but as
reported to (...) confirmed in Parliament, the Papists might have had some
ground for so gross a c^u^nny, in calling the Religion which is now est b^ith^d
by the name of a Parliament Religion, and a Parliament G^spel. But so it is not
in the C^se which is now before us, the said ^ubmissi^n notwithst^nding. For
being the Convocation is still called by the same Authority as before it was,
the Members of that Body (...) stil^ the some privilege. with the same freedom
of debate and determination* and which is more, the P^ocurdtors of the Clergy
invested with the same power and trust which before they had: there was no
alteration made by the said (...), in the whole constitution and composure of
it, but only the addition of a greater and more excellent power. Nor was there
any thing done here in that Reformation, but either by the Clergy in their
Convocations, and in their Convocations rightly c^lled and canonically
constituted, or with the council and advice o^ the Heads thereof in more
private conferences; the Parliaments of these Times contributing very little
toward i^, but acquie^cing in the Wi^dome of the Sovereign Prince, and in the
piety and zeal of the Ghostly Fathers. This is the Ground work or Found^^ion of
the following building. It is now time I should proceed to the Superstructures
beginning first with the Election of the Pope, and vesting the Supremacy in
the Regal Crown.

2 Of the Ejection of the Pope, and vesting the Supremacy in the Regal Crown.
ANd first, beginning with the Ejection of the Pope and his Authority that led
the way unto the Reformation of Religion which did after follow: It was first
voted and decreed in the Convocation, before ever it became the subject of an
Act of Parliament. For in the Year 1530. 22 Hen. 8. the Clergy being caught in
a praemunire, were willing to redee^ their danger by a sum of money; and to that
end, the Clergy of the Province of Canterbury bestowed upon the King ^he sum of
100000 l^. to be paid by equal portions in the same Year following; but the
King would not so be satisfied, unless they would acknowledge him for the
supreme Head on earth for the Church of England; which, though it was hard
meat, and would not easily down amongst them, yet it passed at last. For, being
thoroughly debated in a Synodical way, both in the upper and lower Houses of
Convocation, they did, in fine, agree upon this expression. Cujus (Ecclesi^e
(...) To this they al consented and subscribed their hands, and afterward
incorporated it into the public Act or Instrument, which was presented to the
King in the Name of his Clergy, for the redeeming of their error, and the
grant of their money, which as it does at large appear in the Records and Acts
of the Convocation, so it is touched upon in a Historical way in the Antiq.
Britan. Mason de Minist. Anglic. and other Authors; by whom it also does
appear, that what was thus concluded on by the Clergy of the Province of
Canterbury, was also ratified and confirmed by the Convocation of the Province
of York (according to the usual custom) save that they did not buy their
pardon, at so dear a r^te. This was the Leading Card to the Game that followed.
For on this ground were built the Statutes, prohibiting all Appeals to Rome,
and for determining all Ecclesiastical suits and controversies within the
Kingdoms, 24 H. 8. c 12. That for the manner of electing and conse^rating of
Archbishops, and Bishops, 25 H. 8. c. 2^. and the prohibiting the payment of
all Impositions to the Court of Rome; and for obtaining all such dispensations
from the Sea of Canterbury, which formerly were procured from the Popes of
Rome, 25. H. 8. c. 21. Which last is built expressly upon this foundations. That
the King is the only supreme Head of the Church of England, and was so
recognized by the Prelates and Clergy, representing the said Church in their
Convocation. And on the very same foundation was the Statute raised, 26 H. 8.
c. 1. wherein the King is declared to be the supreme Head of the Church of
England, and to have (...) which were annexed unto that Title, as by the Act it
self does at full appear: Which Act being made (I speak it from the Act it
self) only for corroboration and confirmation of that which had been done in
the Convocation did afterward draw on the Statute for the Tenths and first
frui^s, as the point incident to the Headship or supreme Authority, ^6 H. 8. c.
3.

The second step to the Ejection of the Pope, was the submission of the Clergy
to the said King Henry, whom they had recognizanced for their supreme Head. And
this was first concluded on in the Convocation, before it was proposed or
agitated in the Houses of Parliament, and was commended only to the care of
the Parliament, that it might have the force of a Law by a civil Sanction. The
whole deba^e, with all the traverses and emergent difficulties which appeared
therein, are specified at large in the Records of (...), Anno 1532. But being
you have not opportunity to consult those Records. I shall prove it by the Act
of Parliament, called commonly The Act of submission of the Clergy; but bearing
this Title in the Abridgment of the Statutes set out by Poulton; That the
Cler^y in their Convocations shall enact no constitutions without the Kings
assent. In which it is premised for granted, that the Clergy of the Realm of
England, had not only acknowledged, according to the Truth, that the
Convocation of the same Clergy, is, always has been, and ought to be
assembled always by the Kings Writ; but also submitting themselves to the
Kings Majesty, had pr^mised, in verbo Sace^dotis, That they would never from
henceforth presum: to attempt, allcadge, claim, or put in ure, enact promulge,
or execute, any new Canons Constitutions, Ordinances provincial, or other; or
by whatsoever other name they shall be called in the Convocation, unless the
Kings most Royal Assent may to them be had, to make, promulge, and execute the
same; and that his Majesty do give his most Royal Assent and Authority in that
behalf.

Upon which groundwork of the Clergies, the Parliament shortly after built
this superstructure, to the same effect, viz.

That none of the said Clergy from thenceforth should presume to attempt,
allege, cla^m, or put in^ure, any Constitutions, or Ordinances Provincial, or
Synodals, or any other Canons; nor shall enact, promulge, or execute any such
Canon^, Constitutions, or Ordinances Provinc^s^, (by whatsoever name or names
they may be called) in their Convocations in time coming (which always shall
be assembled by the Kings Writ) unless the same Clergy may have the Kings in st
Royal Assent and License to make, promulge, and execute such Canons,
Constitutions, and Ordinances Provincial, or Synodical, upon pain of every one
of the said Clergy doing the contrary to this Act, and thereof convicted, to
suffer imprisonment, and make fine at the Kings Will, 25 H. 8. c. 19.

So that the statute, in effect, is no more then this, an Act to bind the
Clergy to perform their promise, to keep them fast unto their word for the time
to come, that no new Canon should be made in the times succeeding in the favor
of the Pope, or by his Authority, or to the diminution of the Kings R^yal
Pre^ogative, or contrary to the Iuwes and statutes of this Realm of England, at
many Papal Constitutions were in the former Ages: Which statute I desire you to
take notice of, because it is the Rule and Measure of the Churches power in
making Canons, Constitutions, or whatsoever else you shall please to call them
in their Convocations.

The third and small Act, conducing to the Popes Ejection, was an Act of
Parliament, 28. H. 8. c. 10. entit^led, An Act ex^inguishing the (...) of the
Bishop of Rome. By which it was enacted, That if any person should extol the
Authority of the Bishop of Rome, he should incur the penalty of a praeminire;
that every Officer both Ecclesiastical and Lay should be sworn to renounce the
said Bishop and his Authority, and to resist it to his power, and to repute any
Oath formerly taken in maintenance of the said Bishop, or his Authority, to be
void, and finally, that the refusal of the said Oath should bejudged High
Treason. But this was also ushered in, by the determination first, and after by
the practice of all the Clergy. For in the year 1534, which was two years
before the passing of this Act, the King had sent this Proposition to be
agitated in both Universities, and in the greatest and most famous Monasteries
of the kingdom, that is to say, (...) Romans, dejure competat plusquam alii
cujamque Episco^o extero? By whom it was determined Negatively, that the Bishop
of Rome had no more power of right in the Kingdom of England, than any other
foreign Bishop. Which being testified and returned, under the hands and seals
respectively (the Originals whereof are still remaining in the Library of Sr
Robert Cotton) was a good preamble to the Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy,
assembled in their Convocation, to conclude the like. And so accordingly they
did, and made an Instrument thereof subscribed by the hands of all the Bishops,
and others of the Clergy, and afterward confirmed the same by their corporal
Oaths. The copies of which Oaths and Instrument you shall find in Foxes Acts
and Monuments, Vol. 2. fol. 1203. and fol. 1210, 1211. of the Edition of John
Day Anno 1570. And this was semblably the ground of a following statute, 35 H.
8. c. 1. wherein another Oath was devised and ratified, to be imposed upon the
Subject, for the more clear asserting of the Kings Supremacy, and the utter
exclusion of the Popes for ever; which statutes, though they were all repealed
by an Act of Parliament, 1 and 2d of Phil. and Mary, c. 1. save that the name
of supreme Head was changed unto that of the supreme Governor, and certain
clauses altered in the Oath of Supremacy. Where (by the way) you must take
notice, that the statutes which concerns the Kings Supremacy, are not
introductory of any new Right, that was not in the Crown before; but only
declaratory of an old, as our best Lawyers tell us, and the statute of the 26
of H. 8. c 1. does clearly intimate. So that in the Ejection of the Pope of
Rome, which was the first and greatest step toward the Work of Reformation,
the Parliament did nothing, for ought it appears, but what was done before in
the Convocation, and did no more than fortify the Results of Hely Church, by
the addition and corroboration of the Secular Power.

3 Of the Translation of the Scriptures, and permitting them to be read in the
English Tongue.
THE second step toward the Work of Reformation (and indeed one of the most
especial parts the^eof) was the Translation of the Bible into the English
Tongue, and the permitting all sorts of people to peruse the same, as that
which visibly did tend to the discovery of the errors and corruptions in the
Church of Rome; and the intolerable pride and tyranny of the Roman Prelates,
upon which grounds it had been formerly translated into English by the hand of
Wi^kliff, and after on the spreading of Luthers Doctrine, by the pains of
Tindal, a stou^ and active man in King Henry's days, but not so well
bef^iended as the work deserved: especially considering ^^at it happened in such
a time when many printed Pamphlets did disturb the State (and some of them of
T^^dals making) which seemed to ^end unto sedition, and the change of
Government. Which being remonst ated to the King, he caused diverse of his
Bishops, together with sundry of the learn d'st and most eminent Divines of all
the Kingdom to come before him: Whom he required freely and plainly to declare,
a^wel what their opinion was of the foresaid Pamphl^^, as what they did think
fit to be done concerning the Translation of the Bible into the English Tongue;
And they upon mature advise and deliberation unanim usly conden ned the
aforesaid B^oks of H^r^sie and Blasphemy (no smaler crime:) then for
translating of the Scriptures into the English Tongue, they agreed all with one
assent, that it depended wholly on the will and pleasure of the Sovereign
Prince, who might do th^rein as he conceived to be most agreeable to his
occasions* but that with reference to the present estate of things, it was more
expedient to explain the Scripture to the people by the way of Sermons, then to
permit it to be read promiscuou^^ by all sorts of men: yet so that hopes were
to be given unto the Laity, that if they did renounce their errors, and
presently deliver to the hands of his Majesty's Officers all such Books and
Bibles (which they conceived to be translated with great fraud and falsehood) as
any of them had in keeping; his Majesty would cause a true and catholic
Translation of it to be published in convenient time, for the use of his
Subjects.

This was the sum and substance of the present Con^erence, which you shall find
laid down at large in the Registers of Archbishop Warham.

And according to this advice the King sets out a Proclamation, not only
prohibiting the buying, reading, or translating of any the aforesaid Book^s,
but straightly charging all his Subjects which had any of the Books of
Scripture, either of the Old Testament, or of the New, in the English Tongue,
to bring them in without delay. But for the other part^ of giving hopes unto
the people of a true Translation, if they delivered in the false (^ or that at
leas^ which was pretended to be false) I find no word at all in the
Proclamation. That was a work reserved unto better times, or left to be
solicited by the Bishops themselves, and other Learned men who had given the
counsel; by whom (indeed) the people were kept up in hope that all should be
accomplished unto their desires.

And so indeed it proved at last. For in the Convocation of the year 1536. the
authority of the Pope being abrogated, and Cranmer fully settled in the Sea of
Canterbury, the Clergy did agree upon a form of Petition to be presented to the
King, That he would graciously indulge unto his subjects of the Laity the
reading of the Bible in the English Tongue, and that a new Translation of it
might be forthwith made for that end and purpose.

According to which godly motion, his Majesty did not only give Order for a
new Translation, which afterward He authorized to be read both in public and
private; but in the interim he permitted CROMWELL, his Vicar General, to set out
an Injunction for providing the whole Bible both in Latin and English, after
the Translation then in use, (which was called commonly by the name of
Matthewes Bible, but was no other then that of Tindal somewhat altered) to be
kept in every Parish Church throughout the Kingdom, for every one that would
repair unto, and caused this mark or character of Authority to be set upon them
in red Letters, Set forth with the Kings most gracious License; which you may
see in Fox his Acts and Monum. p. 1248. and 1363.

Afterward when the new Translation so often promised, and so long expected,
was complete and finished; printed at London by the Kings Authority, and
countenanced by a grave and pious Preface of Arch Bishop Cranmer; the King sets
out a Proclamation dated May 6. Anno 1541. Commanding all the Curates and
Parishioners throughout the Kingdom, who were not already furnished with Bibles
so authorized and translated, as is before said, to provide themselves before
Al. hallowtide next following, and to cause the Bibles, so provided, to be
placed conveniently in their several and respective Churches, straightly
requiring all his Bishops, and other Or^inaries, to take special care to see
his said commands put in execution.

And therewithal came out Instructions from the King to be published by the
Clergy in their several Parishes, the better to possess the people with the
Kings good affection toward them in suffering them to have the ben^fi^ of such
Heavenly Treasure; and to direct hem in a course by which they might enjoy the
same to their greater comfort, the reformation of their lives, and the peace
and quiet of the Church. Which Proclamation and Instructions are still preserved
in that most admirable (...) of Sr Robert Cotton.

And unto these Commands of so great a Prince, both Bishops, Priests, and
People, did apply themselves with such cheerful reverence, that Bonner (even
tha^ b^oud^ (...) as he after proved) caused six of them to be chained in
several places of St Paul's Church in London, for all that (...) so (...)
inclined to resort unto, for their edification and instruction, (...) Book
being very chargable, because very la^ge, and therefore called commonly (for
distinctions sake) The Bible of the greater (...).

Thus have we seen the Scriptures faithful translated into the English Tongue,
the (...) Churches, that every one which would, ^igh pe^use the same, and leave
permitted to all people to buy them for ^hen private use, and re^de them to
themselves, or before th^i Families; and all the brought about by no other
means then by (...) Kings Authority only, grounded on the advice and judgment
of the (...).

But long it was not (I confess) before the Parliament put in for a share, and
claimed some interest in the Work; but whether for the better, or he worse, I
leave you to judge. For in the year 1542. the King being then in agitation of a
League with Charles the Emperou^, He caused a complaint to be made un^o him in
this Court of Parliament, That the (...) ^ranted to the people in having in
their hands the Books of the Old and New Testament, had been much abused by
many false glosse^ and (...) which were made upon them, tending to the seducing
of the people especially of the younger sort, and the raising of sedition
within the Realm.

And thereupon it was enacted by the Authority of the Parliament (on whom He
was content to cast the envy of an Act so contrary to ^is former gracious
Proclamations) That all manner of Books of the Old and New Testament, of the
cr^^^ty, false and untrue Translation of Tind^^, be forthwith abolished, and
forbidden to be used and ke^t. As also, that all other B^bles not being of
Tindals Translation, in which were sound any Preambles or Annotations, other
then the Quotations or Summaries of of the Chapters should be purged of the
said Preambles and Annotatious, either by cutting them out, or blotting them in
such wise, that they might not be perceived or read. And finally, That the
Bible be not read ^penly in any Church, but by the leave of the King, or of the
Ordinary of the place; nor privately by any Women, Artificers, Apprentices,
Iourney-men, Husbandmen, (...), or by any of the Servants of Yoomen, or under,
with several pains to those who should do the con^trary.

This is the substance of the statute of the 34 and 35 H^^. 8. c. 1. Which
though i^ shows that there was somewhat done in Parliament, in a matter which
concerned Religion, (which howsoever if you mark it, was rather the adding of
the penalties, than giving any resolution or decision of the points in
question) yet I presume the Papists will not use this for an Argument, that we
have either a Parliament Religion, or a Parliament Gospel; or that we stand
indebted to the Parliament for the use of the Scriptures in the English Tongue,
which is so principal a part of the Reformation. Nor did the Parliament speed
so prosperously in the undertaking (which the wise King permitted them to have
a hand in, for the foresaid ends,) or found so general an obedience in it from
the common people, as would have been expected in these Times, on the like
occasion; but that the King was fain to quicken and give life to the Acts
thereof, by his Proclamation, Anno 1546. which you shall find in Fox his book,
for 1437.

To drive this Nail a little further: The terror of this statute dying with H.
8. or being repealed by that of K. Ed. 6. c. 22. the Bible was again made
public; and not only suffered to be read by particular persons, either
privately, or in the Church; but ordered to be read over yearly in the
Congregation, as a part of the Liturgy, or Divine Service: Which how far it
relates to the Court of Parliament we shall see anon; But for the publishing
thereof in Print for the use of the people, for the comfort and edification of
private persons, that was done only by the King, at least in his Name, and by
His Authority. And so it also stood in Q Elizabeth's time, the translation of
the Bible being again reviewed by some of the most learned Bishops, appointed
thereunto by the Queens Commission (from whence is had the name of the Bishops
Bible) and upon that review, re^printed by her sole Commandment, and by her
sole Authority left free and open to the use of her well-affected and religious
subjects. Nor did the Parliament do any thing in all Her Reign with reference
to the Scriptures in the English Tongue, otherwise then at the reading of them*
in that Tongue, in the Congregation, is to be reckoned for a part of the
English Liturgy, whereof more hereafter.

In the translation of them into Welsh, or British, somewhat indeed was done
which does look this way. It being ordered in the Parliament, 5. Eliz. c. 28.
That the B. B. of Hereford, St David's, Bangor, Landaff, and St Asaph, should
take care amongst them for translating the whole Bible, with the book of Common
Prayer, into the Welsh or British Tongue, on pain of forseiting 40 l. a piece
in default hereof. And to encourage them thereunto, it was enacted that one
book of either sort being so translated and imprinted should be provided and
bought for every Cathedral Church, as also for all Parish Churches and Chapels
of Ease, where the said tongue is commonly used; the Ministers to pay the one
half of the price, and the Parishioners the other.

But then you must observe withal, that it had been before determined in the
Convocation of the self-same year, Anno 1562. That the Common Prayer of the
Church ought to be celebrated in a tongue which was under stood by the people
(as you may see in the book of Articles of Religion, Art. 24. which came out
that year) and consequently, as well in the Welsh or British, as in any other.
Which care, had it been taken for Ireland also as it was for Wales, no question
but that people had been more generally civilized, and made conformable in all
points to the English Government long before this time. And for the new
Translation of K. James his time, to show that the Translation of Scripture is
no work of Parliament, as it was principally occasioned by some passages in the
Conference at Hampton Court, without recourse unto the Parliament, so was it
done only by such men as the King appointed, and by His Authority alone
imprinted, published and imposed, care being taken by the Canon of the year,
1603. That one of them should be provided for each several at Church, at the
charge of the Parish. No flying in this case to an Act of Parliament, either to
authorize the doing of it, or to impose it being done.

4 Of the Reformation of Religion in points of Doctrine.
NExt let us look upon the method used in former Times in the reforming of the
Church, whether in points of Doctrine, or in forms of Worship, and we shall
find it still the same. The Clergy did the work as to them seemed best, never
advising with the Parliament, but upon the post-fact, and in most cases not at
all. And first for Doctrinals, there was but little done in K. Henry's time,
but that which was acted by the Clergy only in their Convocation, and so
commended to the people by the Kings sole Authority, the matter being never
brought within the cognizance of the two Houses of Parliament. For in the year
1536. being the year in which the Popes Authority was for ever banished, there
were some Articles agreed on in the Convocation, and represented to the King,
under the hands of the Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and inferior Clergy usually
called unto those Meetings; the Original whereof being in Sr Robert Cotton's
Library I have often seen: Which being approved of by the King, were forthwith
published under the Title of Articles devised by the Kings Highness, to stable
Christian quietness and unity amongst the people. In which it is to be
observed: First, that those Articles make mention of Sacraments only, that is
to say, of Baptism, Penance, and the Sacrament of the Altar. And secondly,
That in the Declaration of the Doctrine of Justification, Images, honoring of
the Saiuts departed; as also concerning many of the Ceremonies, and the fire of
Purgatory, they differed very much from those Opinions which had been formerly
received in the Church of Rome; as you may partly see by that Extract of them,
which occurs in Fox his Acts and Monuments, Vol. 2. fol. 1246.

For the confirming of which book, and recommending it to the use of the
people, His Majesty was pleased in the Injunctions of the year, 1536. to give
command to all Deans, Parsons, Vicars, and Curates, so to open and declare in
their Sermons, and other Collacions, the said Articles unto them which be under
their Cure, that they might plainly know and discern, which of them be
necessary to be believed and observed for their salvation, and which d^ only
concern the decent and politic Order of the Church. And this he did upon this
ground, that the said Articles had been concluded and condescended upon by the
Prelates and Clergy of the Realm in their Convocation; as appears in the very
words of the Injunction: For which, see Fox his Acts and Monuments, fol. 1247.
I find not any thing in Parliament which relates to this, either to countenance
the work, or to require obedience and conformity from the hand of the people.
And to say truth, neither the King nor Clergy did account it necessary, but
thought their own Authority sufficient to go through with it; though certainly
it was more necessary at that time, then in any since: The power and reputation
of the Clergy being under foot, the King scarce settled in the Supremacy so
lately recognized unto him; and therefore the Authority of the Parliament of
more use then afterward, in Times well balanced and established.

It Is true, that in some other year of that Princes Reign, we find some use
and mention of an Act of Parliament in matters which concerned Religion; but it
was only in such Times when the hopes of Reformation were in the Wane, and the
Work went retro^^^ For in the year 1539. being the 31. H. 8. When the Lord
(...) power began to decline, and the King was in a necessity of compliance
with His Neighboring Princes, there passed an Act of Parliament commonly
called the statute of the six Articles (or the Whip with six strings.) In which
it was enacted, That whosoever by word or writing should preach, teach, or
publish, that in the blessed Sacraments of the Altar, under form of Bread and
Wine, there is not really the natural body and blood of our Savior Jesus
Christ, conceived of the Virgin Mary, (or affirm otherwise thereof then was
maintained and taught in the Church of Rome) should be adjudged an Heretic,
and suffer death, by burning, and forfeit all his Lands and Goods, as in case
of High Treason.

Secondly, That whosoever should teach or preach, that the Communion of the
blessed Sacrament (in both kinds) is necessary for the health of man's soul,
and ought to be maintained.

Thirdly, Or that any man after the Order of Priesthood received, might marry,
or contract Matrimony.

Fourthly, Or that any woman which had vowed and professed chastity, might
contract Marriage.

Fifthly, Or that private Masses were not lawful and laudable, or agreeable to
the Word of God.

Or sixthly, That curicular Confession was not necessary and expedient to be
used in the Church of God, should suffer death, and forfeit Lands and goods as
a Fellon, 31 H. 8. c. 14.

The rigor of which terrible statute was shortly after mittigated in the said
Kings Reign, 32 H. 8. c. 10. and 35 H. 8. c. 5. and the whole statute
absolutely repealed by Act of Parliament, 1 E. 6. c. 12. But then it is to be
observed first, that this Parliament of K. H. 8. did not determine any thing in
those six points of Doctrine which are therein recited; but only took upon
them to devise a course for the suppressing of the contrary Opinions, by adding
by the secular Power, the punishment of Death, and forfeiture of Lands and
Goods, unto the censures of the Church, which were grown weak, if not unvalid;
and consequently, by degrees became neglected ever since the said K. Henry took
the Headship on Him, and exercised the same by a Lay Vicar General.

And secondly, you must observe, that it appears evidently by the Act it
self, that at the same time the King had called a Synod and Convocation of all
the Archbishops, Bishops, and other learned men of the Clergy, that the
Articles were first deliberately and advisedly debated, argued and reasoned, by
the said Archbishops, Bishops, and other learned men of the Clergy, and their
opinions in the same declared and made known, before the matter came in
Parliament.

And finally, That being brought into the Parliament, there was not any thing
declared and passed as doctrinall, but by the assent of the Lords Spiritual,
and other learned men of the Clergy, as by the Act it self does at large appear.

Finally, Whatsoever, may be drawn from thence, can be only this, That K. H^n.
did make use of his Court of Parliament for the establishing and confirming of
some points of Popery, which seemed to be in danger of a Reformation. And this
compared with the statute of the 34 and 35, prohibiting the reading of the
Bible by most sorts of people, does clearly show that the Parliaments of those
times did rather hinder and retard the work of Reformation, in some especial
parts thereof, than give any furtherance to the same.

But to proceed: There was another point of Reformation begun in the Lord
C^^mwels time, but not produced, nor brought to perfection till after his
decease; and then too, not without the Midwifery of an Act of Parliament. For
in the year 1537. the Bishops and others of the Clergy of the Convocation, had
composed a Book, entitled, The Institution of a Christian Man; which being
subscribed by all their hands, was by them presented to the King, by His most
excellent judgment to be allowed of, or condemned. This book, containing the
chief heads of Christian Religion, was forthwith printed, and exposed to
public view. But some things not being clearly explicated, or otherwise
subject to exception, he caused it to be reviewed and to that end, as Supreme
Head on Earth of the Church of England (I speak the very words of the Act of
Parl. 32. H. 8. c. 26.) appointed the Archbishops and Bishops of both
Provinces, and also a great number of the best, learned, honestest, and most
virtuous sort of the Doctors of Divinity, men of discretion, judgment, and good
disposition, to be called together; to the intent, that according to the very
Gospel and Law of God, without any partial respect or affection to the
Papistical sort, or any other sect or sects whatsoever, they sh^^ld declare by
writing, and publish, as well the principal Articles and points of our Faith
and Belief; with the Declaration, true understanding an^ observation of such
other expedi^nt points, as by them, with his Grace; advice, council, and
consent, shall be thought needful and expedient; as also for the lawful Rights,
Ceremonies, and observation of Gods service within this Realm.

This was in the year, 1540. at what time the Parliament was also sitting; of
which the King was pleased to make this especial use, That whereas the work
which was in hand (I use again the words of the statute) required ripe and
mature deliberation, and was not rashly to be defined and set forth, and so not
fit to be restrained to the present Session, an Act was passed to this effect,
That all Determitions, Declarations, Decrees, Definitions, and Ordinances, as
according to Gods Word, and Christ's Gospel, should at any time hereafter be set
forth by the said Archbishops and Bishops, and Doctors in Divinity, now
appointed, or hereafter to be appointed by his Royal Majesty, or else by the
whole Clergy of England, in, and upon the matter of Christ's Religion, and the
Christian Faith, and the lawful Rights Ceremonies, and Observations of the
same, by his Majesty's advice and confirmation under the great Seal of England,
shall be by all his Graces subjects fully believed, obeyed, observed, and
performed to all purposes and intents, upon the pains and penalties therein to
be comprised, as if the same had been in (...) and (...) and fully made, set
forth, declared, and contained in the said Act, 32. H. 8. c. 26. where note,
That the two House of Parliament were so far from ^edling in the matter which
was then in hand, that they did not so much as require to see the
Determinations and Decrees of those learned men whom His Majesty had then
assembled, before they passed the present Act, to bind the Subject fully to
believe, observe, and perform the same; but left it wholly to the judgment and
discretion of the King and Clergy, and trusted them besides, with the ordaining
and inflicting of such pains and penalties on disobedient and unconformable
persons as to them seemed meet.

This groundwork laid, the work went forwards in good order, and at last being
brought unto as much perfection as the said Archbishops, Bishops, and other
learned men would give it, without the cooperation and concurrence of the
Royal assent; it was presented once again to the Kings consideration* who very
carefully perused it, and altered many things with his own hand; as appears by
the book it self ^^ll extant in the famous Library of Sr Robert Cotton; and
having so altered and corrected it in some passages, returned it to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, who bestowed some further pains upon it; to the end,
that being to come forth in the Kings Name, and by his Authority, there might
be nothing in the same which might be justly reprehended.

The business being in this forwardness, the King declares in Parliament, Anno
1544. being the 34 year of his Reign, his zeal and care, not only to suppress
all such Books and Writings as were noisome and pestilent, and tended to the
seducing of his subjects; but also to ordain and establish a certain form of
pure and sincere Teaching agreeable to Gods Word, and the true Doctrine of the
Catholic and Apostolic Church, whereunto men may have recourse for the
decision of some such controversies, as have in Times past, and yet do happen
to arise.

And for a preparatory thereunto, that so it might come forth with the greater
credit, he caused an Act to pass in Parliament for the abolishing of all Books
and Writings, comprizing any matters of Christian Religion, contrary to that
Doctrine, which since the year 1540. is, or any time during the Kings life,
shall be, set forth by his Highness, and for the punishment of all such (and
that too, with most grievous (...)) which should preach, teach, maintain, or
defend any matter or thing contrary to the book of Doctrine, which was then in
readiness, 34, 35 H. 8. c. 1. Which done, He can^ed the said book to be
imprinted in the year next following, under the Title of Anecessdry Doctrine
for all sorts of people; prefixing a Preface thereto in his Royal Name, to all
his faithful and loving Subjects, that they might know the better in those
dangerous Times, what to believe in point of Doctrine, and how they were to
carry and behave themselves in points of practice.

Which Statute, as it is the greatest Evidence which those Times afford to
show, that both, or either of the Houses of Parliament had any thing to do in
matters which concerned Religion; so it entitles them to no more (if at all to
any thing) then that they did make way to a book of Doctrine, which was before
digested by the Clergy only, revised after, and corrected by the Kings own
hand; and finally, perused and perfected by the Metr^politan.

And more then so (besides, that being but one Swallow, it can make no Summer)
it is acknowledged and confessed in the Act it self (if Poulton understand it
rightly in his Abridgment) That recourse must be had to the Catholic and
Apostolic Church, for the decision of Controversies. Which as it gives the
Clergy the decisive power, so it left nothing to the Houses but to assist and
aid them with the Temporal Sword, when the Spiritual Word could not do the
deed, the point thereof being blunted, and the edge abated.

Next, let us look upon the time of K. Ed. 6. and we shall find the Articles
and Doctrine of the Church (excepting such as were contained in the book of
Common Prayer) to be composed, confirmed, and settled in no other way, then by
the C^ergy only in their Convocation, the Kings Authority cooperating and
concur^ing with them.

For, in the Synod held in London, Anno 1552. the Clergy did compose and agree
upon a book of Articles, containing the chief heads of the Christian Faith;
especially, with reference to such points of Controversy, as were in
difference between the Reformators of the Church of England, and the Church of
Rome, and other Opponents whatsoever which after were approved, and published
by the Kings Authority.

They were in number 41. and were published by this following Title; that is to
say, Articuli d^ quibus in Syno^ London. Anno 1552. (...) Religion is
firmandum, inter Episcopos and alios and Eruditis (...) Convenerat, Regia
authoritate in lucem Editi. And, it is worth our observation, that though the
Parliament was held at the very time, and that the Parliament passed several
Acts which concerned Church Matters; as, viz. An Act for Uniformity of Divine
Service, and for the confirmation of the book of Ordination, 5 and 6 Edw. 6. c.
1. All Act declaring which days only shall be kept for Holy days; and which
for Fasting days, C. 3. against striking or drawing weapon, either in the
Church or Churchyard, C. 4. And finally, another Act for the legitimating of
the Marriages of Priests and Ministers, C. 12. Yet neither in this Parliament,
nor in that which followed, is there so much as the least syllable which
reflecteth this way, or medleth any thing at all with the book of Articles.
Where, by the way, if you behold the lawfulness of Priests Marriages as a
matter Doctrinal; or think we owe that point of Doctrine, and the indulgence
granted to the Clergy in it, to the care and goodness of the Parl. you may
please to know, that the point had been before determined in the Convocation,
and stands determined by and for the Clergy in the 31 of those Articles, and
that the Parliament looked on it as a point of Doctrine; but as it was a matter
practical, conducing to the benefit and improvement of the Commonwealth. Or if
it did, yet was the statute built on no other groundwork, than the Resolution
of the Clergy, the Marriage of Priests being before determined to be most
lawful (I use the very words of the Act it self) and according to the Word of
God, by the learned Clergy of this Realm in their Convocations, as well by the
common assent, as by subscriptions of their hands, 5, 6. Edw. 6. chap. 12.

And for the time of Queen Elizabeth, it is most manifest, that they had no
other body of Doctrine in the first part of her Reign, then only the said
Articles of K. Edwards book; and that which was delivered in the book of
Homilies of the said Kings time: in which the Parliament had as little to do,
as you have seen they had in the book of Articles.

But in the Convocation of the year, 1562. being the fifth of the Qu. Reign,
the Bishops and Clergy taking into consideration the said book of Articles, and
altering what they thought most fitting, to make it more conducible to the use
of the Church, and the edification of the people, presented it unto the Queen,
who caused it to be published with this Name and Title, viz. Articles whereupon
it was agreed by the Archbishops, and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole
Clergy in the Convocation holden at London, Anno 1562, for the avoiding of
diversity of Opinions, and for the establishing of Consent touching true
Religion; put forth by the Queens authority.

Of any thing done, or pretended to be done, by the power of the Parliament,
either in the way of approbation, or of confirmation, ^ot one word occurs
either in any of the printed books, or the public Registers.

At last, indeed in the 13th of the said Queens Reign (which was 8 years full
after the passing of those Articles) comes out a statute for the redressing of
disorders in the Ministers of holy Church: In which it was enacted, That all
such as were ordained Priests or Ministers of Gods Word and Sacraments, after
any other form then that appointed to be used in the Church of England; all
such as were to be ordained, or permitted to preach, or to be instituted into
any Benefi^e with ^ure of souls, should publicly subscribe to the said
Articles, and testify their assent unto them Which shows (if you observe it
well) that though the Parliament did well allow of, and approve the said book
of Articles, yet the said book owes neither confirmation, nor authority, to the
Act of Parliament. So that the wonder is the greater, that that most insolent
scoff which is put upon us by the Church of Rome, in calling our Religion by
the name Parliamentaria Religi^, should pass so long without control; unless,
perhaps, it was in reference to our Forms of Worship, of which I am to speak
in the next place.

But first we must make answer unto some Objections which are made against us,
both from Law and Practice. For Practice; first, it is alleged by some out of
Bishop Jewel, in his Answer to the cavil of Dr Harding, to be no strange matter
to see Ecclesiastical Causes debated in Parliament; and that it is apparent by
the Laws of King Inas, King Alfred, King Edward, etc. That our godly
forefathers, the Princes and Peers of this Realm, never vouchsafed to treat of
matters touching the common State, before all controversies of Religion, and
Causes Ecclesiastical had been concluded, Def. of the Apol. part 6 chap. 2.
sect. 1.

But the answer unto this is ea^^e: For first, if our Religion may be called
Parliamentarian, because it has received confirmation and debate in
Parliament, then the Religion of our Forefathers, even Papistry it self
(concerning which so many Acts of Parliament were made in K. Hen. 8. and Q.
Mary's time) must be called Parliamentarian also.

And secondly, it is most certain, that in the Parliaments or Common-Councels
(call them which you will) both of King Inas time, and the rest of the Saxon
Kings which B. Jewel speaks of; not only Bishops, Abbots, and the higher part
of the Clergy, but the whole Body of the Clergy generally had their votes and
suffrages, either in person, or by proxy. Concerning which, take this for the
leading Case; That in the Parliament or Common Counsel in K. Ethelberts time,
who first of all the Saxon Kings, received the Gospel, the Clergy were convened
in as full a manner, as the Lay-Subjects of that Prince: Convo^ati communi
Concilio tam Cleri, quam Populi, says Sr H. Spelman in his Collection of the
Councels, Ann. 605. p. 118. And for the Parliament of King Ina, which leads
the way in Bishop Jewel, it was, (says the same Sr H. Spelman, p. 630. Communi
Concilium Episcoporum, Procerum, Comitum, nec non omnium Sapientum, Seniorum,
populorumque totius Regni; Where, doubtless, Sapientes and Seniores (and you
know what Seniores signifies in the Ecclesiastical notion) must be some body
else then those which after are expressed by the name of Populi, which shows
the falsehood and absurdity of the collection made by Mr Pryn, in the Epistle to
his book against Dr Cousins, viz. That the Parliament (as it is now
constituted) has an ancient genuine, just and lawful Prerogative, to establish
true Religion in our Church, and to abolish and suppress all false, new, and
counterfeit Doctrines whatsoever. Unless he means upon the post-fact, after
the Church has done her part, in determining what was true, what false, what
new, what ancient; and finally, what Doctrines might be counted counterfeit,
and what sincere. And as for Law, it is true indeed, that by the Statute, 1
Eliz. cap. 1. The Court of Parliament has power to determine and judge of
Heresy; which at first sight seems somewhat strange; but on the second view,
you will easily find that this relates only to new and emergent Heresies, not
formerly declared for such in any of the first four General Councels, nor in
any other General Council, adjudging by express words of holy Scripture; as
also that in such new Heresies, the following words restrain this power to the
Assent of the Clergy in their Convocation, as being best able to instruct the
Parliament what they are to do, and where they are to make use of the secular
sword for cutting off a desperate H^retick from the Church of CHRIST, or rather
from the body of all Christian people.

5 Of the Reformation of the church of England in the Forms of Worship; and
the Times appointed thereunto.
THis rub removed, we now proceed unto a view of such Forms of Worship as have
been settled in this Church, since the first dawning of the day of Reformation,
in which our Parliaments have indeed done somewhat, though it be not much. The
first point which was altered in the public Liturgies, was that the Creed, the
Pater-^^ster, and the Ten Commandments, were ordered to be said in the English
Tongue; to the intent, the people might be perfect in them, and learn them
without book, as our phrase is. The next, the setting forth and using of the
English Letany, on such days and times, in which it was accustomably to be
read, as a part of the service. But neither of these two was done by
Parliament; nay, (to say truth) the Parliament did nothing in them. All which
was done in either of them, was only by the Kings Authority, by virtue of the
Headship or Supremacy, which by way of recognition was vested in him by the
Clergy, either cooperating and concurring with them in their Convocations, or
else directed and assisted by such learned Prelates, with whom he did advise in
matters which concerned the Church, and did relate to Reformation. By virtue of
which Headship or Supremacy he ordained the first; and to that end, caused
certain Articles or Injunctions to be published by the Lord Cromwell, then his
Vicar General, Anno 1536. And by the same did he give order for the second, I
mean, for the saying of the Letany in the English Tongue, by his own Royal
Proclamation, Anno 1545. For which, consult the Acts and Monuments, fol. 1248,
1312. But these were only preparations to a greater work which was reserved
unto the times of K. Edw. 6. In the beginning of whose Reign there passed a
statute for the administering the Sacrament in both kinds to any person that
should devoutly and humbly desire the same, 1. E. 6. c. 1. In which it is to be
observed, that though the statute do declare, that the ministering of the same
in both kinds to the people was more agreeable to the first I^stitution of the
said Sacrament, and to the common usage of the primitive Times. Yet Mr. F^x
assures us (and we may take his word) that they did build that Declaration, and
consequently the Act which was raised upon it, upon the judgment and opinion of
the best learned men, whose resolution and advice they followed in it, fol.
1489. And for the Form by which the said most blessed Sacrament was to be
delivered to the common people, it was commended to the care of the most grave
and learned Bishops, and others, assembled by the King at His C^stle of
Windsor; who upon long, wise, learned, and deliberate advice did finally agree
(says Fox) upon one godly and uniform Order for receiving of the same,
according to the right rule of Scriptures, and the first use of the primitive
Church, fol. 1491. Which Order, as it was set forth in print, Anno 1548. with a
Proclamation in the name of the King, to give authority thereunto amongst the
people so was it recommended by especial Letters (...) unto every Bishop,
severally from the Lords of the Council to see the same put in execution; A
copy of which Letters you may find in Fox, fol. 1491. as before is said.

Hitherto nothing done by Parliament in the Forms of Worship, but in the
following year there was For the Protector and the rest of the Kings Council
being fully bent for a Reformation, thought it expedient that one uniform,
quiet and godly Order should be had thoroughout the Realm, for Officiating Gods
divine Service. And to that end (I use the words of the Act it self) appointed
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and certain of the most learned and discreet
Bishops, and other learned men of the Realm to meet together, requiring them,
that having as well eye and respect to the most pure and sincere Christian
Religion, taught in Scriptures, as to the usages in the Primitive Church, they
should draw and make one convenient and meet O^der, ^ite and fashion of Common
Prayer, and Administration of Sacraments, to be had and used in this his
Majesty's Realm of England. Well, what did they being thus assembled? that the
Statute tells us: Where it is said, that by the aid of the Holy Ghost (I pray
you mark this well) and with one uniform agreement they did conclude upon and
set forth an Order, which they delivered to the Kings Higness, in a Book
entitled, The Book of Common Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, and
other ^ites and Ceremonies of the Church, after the use of the Church of
England. All this was done before the Parliament did any thing. But what was
done by them at last? Why first, considering the most godly travail of the
Kings Highness, and the Lord Protector and others of his Highness Council, in
gathering together the said B. and learned men. Secondly, the Godly prayers,
Orders, Rites and Ceremonies in the said Book mentioned. Thirdly, the motives
and inducements which inclined the aforesaid learned men to alter those things
which were altered, and to retain those things which were retained; And
finally, taking into consideration the honor of God, and the great quietness
which by the grace of God would ensue upon it; they gave his Majesty most
hearty and lowely thanks for the same, and most humbly prayed him, that it
might be ordained by his Majesty, with the assent of the Lords and Commons
assembled in Parliament, and by authority of the same, that the said Form of
Common Prayer and another, after the Feast of Pentecost next following, should
be used in all his Majesty's Dominions with several penalties to such, as
either should deprave or neglect the same. 2. and 3. E. 6. cap. 1. So far the
very words of the Act it self. By which it evidently appears, that the two
Houses of Parliament did nothing in the present business, but impose that Form
upon the people: which by the learned and religious Clergymen (whom the K.
appointed thereunto) was agreed upon, and made it penal unto such as either
should deprave the same, or neglect to use it. And thus does Poulton (no mean
Lawyer) understand the Statute, who therefore gives no other title to it in his
Abridgement published in the year 1612 than this, The penalty for not using
uniformity of Service, and Ministration of the Sacrament. So then the making of
one uniform Order of celebrating divine Service, was the work of the Clergy,
the making of the Penalties, was the work of the Parliament. Where let me tell
you by the way, that the men who were employed in this weighty business (whose
names deserve to be continued in perpetual memory) were Thomas Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterbury, George Day Bishop of Chichester, Thomas Goodrich B.
of Ely and Lord Chancellor, John Ship Bishop of Hereford, Henry Holb^rt Bishop
of Lincoln, Nichol^s Ridley Bishop of Rochester, translated afterward to
London, Thomas Thirleby B. of Westminster, Doctor May D^an of S. Paul's, Dr
Tailor (then Dean afterward) Bp of Lincoln, Dr Haines Dean of Exeter, Dr
Robertson afterward Dean of Durham, Dr Redman Master of Trinity College in
Cambridge, and Dr Coke then Al^ner to the King, afterward Dean of Westminster,
and at last Bp of Ely; men famous in their generations, and the honor of the
Age they lived in: And so much for the first Liturgy of King Edwards Reign; in
which you see how little was done by authority or power of Parliament, so
little, that if it had been less, it had been just nothing. But some exceptions
being taken against the Liturgy by some of the preciser sort at home, and by
Calvin abroad, the book was brought under a review: and though it had been
framed at first (if the Parliament which said so erred not) by the ^yd of the
Holy Ghost himself; yet to comply with the curiosity of the Ministers and
mistakes of the people, rather then for any other weighty cause, As the Statute
5 and 6 Ed. 6. cap. 1. it was thought expedient by the King, with the assent of
the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, that the said Order of Common
Service should be faithfully and godly perused, explained, and made fully
perfect.

Perused and explained; by whom? Why, questionless by those who made it; or
else, by those (if they were not the same men) who were appointed by the King
to draw up, and compose a Form of Ordination for the use of the Church. And
this Assent of theirs (for it was no more) was the only part that was ever
acted by the Parliament, in matter of this present nature; save that a Statute
passed in the former Parliament 3 and 4 Ed. 6. c. 12. unto this effect, that
such form and manner of making and consecrating Archb. Bi-shops, Priests,
Deacons, and other Ministers of the Church (which before I spoke of) as by six
Prelates and six other men of this Realm, learned in Gods laws, by the King
to be appointed and assigned, shall be devised to that purpose, and set forth
under the great Seal, shall be lawfully used and exercised, and none other.
Where note, that the King only was to nominate and appoint the men, the
Bishops and other learned men were to make the Book; and that the Parliament in
a blind obedience, or at the least upon a charitable confidence in the
integrity of the men so nominated, did confirm that Book, before any of their
Members had ever seen it, though afterward indeed, in the following
Parliament, this Book, together with the book of Common Prayer, so printed and
explained, obtained a more formal confirmation, as to the use thereof
throughout the Kingdom, but in no other respect; for which see the Statute 5
and 6 Ed. 6. c. 1. (As for the time of Qu. Elizabeth, when the Common prayer
book now in use (being the same almost with the last of King Edward) was to be
brought again into the Church, from whence it was cast out in Queen Mary's
Reign; it was committed to the care of some learned men; that is to say, to M
Whitehead (once Chaplain to Queen Anne Bullen) Dr Parker, after Archbishop of
Canterbury, Dr Grindal, after bishop of London, Dr Cox, after Bishop of Ely, Dr
Pilkington, after Bishop of Durham, Dr May, Dean of Saint Paul's, Dr Bill,
Provost of Eaton, after Dean of Westminster, and Sr Tho: Smith. By whom being
altered in some few passages which the Statute points to, 1 Eliz. c. 21. it was
presented to the Parliament, and by the Parliament received and established
without more (...) troubling any Committee of both or ^ither Houses to consider
of it, for ought appears in their Records. All that the Parliament did in it,
being to put it into the condition in which it stood before in King Edwards
Reign, partly by repealing the Repeal of King Edw. Statute^, made in the first
of Q. Mary, c. 2. and partly by the adding of some farther penalties on such as
did deprave the book, or neglect to use it, or wilfully did absent themselves
from their Parish-Churches. And for the Alterations made in King James his
time, b^ing small in the Rubric only; and for the additions of the
Thanksgivings at the end of the Letany, the Prayer for the Queen and the Royal
Issue, and the Doctrine of the Sacraments at the end of the Catechisi^e, which
were not in the book before, they were never referred unto the Parliament, but
were done only by a^thority of the Kings Commission, and stand in force by
virtue only of His Proclamation, which you may find before the book; the
charge of buying the said book so explained and altered, being laid upon the
several and respective Parishes, by no other Authority than that of the
eightieth Canon, made in Convocation, Anno 1603. The like may also be affirmed
of the Fo^mes of prayer for the Inauguration day of our Kings and Queens, the
Prayer-books for the fifth of November, and the fifth of August, and those
which have been used in all public Fasts: All which, without the help of
Pa^liaments, have been composed by the Bishops, and imposed by the King.

Now unto this discourse of the Forms of Worship, I shall subjoyn a word or two
of the times of Worship, that is to say, the Holy days observed in the Church
of England; and so observed, that they do owe that observation chiefly to the
Church ^ power. For whereas it was found in the former times, that the number
^f the holy days was grown so great, that they became a burden to the common
people, and a great hinderance to the thrist and manufactures of the Kingdom;
there was a Canon made in the Convocation, An. 1536. for cutting off of many
superstitious and supe^fluous Holy days, and the reducing them into the number
in which they now st^nd (save that St G^orge's day, and Ma^y Magdalens day, and
all the Festivals of the blessed Virgin had their place amongst them) according
to which Can^n, there went out a M^nitory from the A^chbp of Canterbury, to all
the Suffrag^ns of hi^ P^ovince, (...), which is still extant on Record. But
being ^he authority of the Church was then in the wane, it was thought
necessary to confirm their Acts, and see execution done upon it by the Kings
Injunction: which did accordin^ly come forth with this Form or preamble; That
the abolishing of the said holy days, was decreed ordained and established by
the Kings Highness Authority, as sup^eam Head in earth of the Church of
England, with the common consent and assent of the Prelates and Clergy of this
^is Realm in Conv^cation lawfully assembled and congregate. Of which see Fox
his Acts and M^numents, fol. 1246, 1247. Afterward in the year 1541, the King
perceiving with what difficulty the people were induced to leave off those Holy
days, to which they had been so long ac^ustomed, published his Proclamation of
the twenty third of July, for the abolishing of such Holy days (amongst other
things) as were prohibited before by his Injunctions: both built upon the same
foundation, namely, the resolution of the Clergy in their Convocation.

And so it stood until the Reign of King E. 6. at which time the Reformation of
the public Liturgy drew after it by consequence an alteration in the present
business, no days being to be kept or accounted holy, but those for which the
Church had set apart a peculiar office, and not all those neither: For, whereas
there are several and peculiar offices for the day of the Conversion of Saint
Paul, and the day of Saint Barnabas the Apostles; neither of these are kept as
holy days, nor reckoned or esteemed as such in the Act of Parliament wherein
the names and number of the holy days is precisely specified, which makes some
think the Act of Parliament to have had an overruling power on the Common
prayer Book; but it is not so, there being a specification of the holy days in
the book it self, with this direction, These to be ^bs^rved for Hol^ days, and
non^ other; in which the Feasts of the Conversion of St, Paul, and the Apostle
Barnabas are omitt^d plainly, and upon which specification the Stat. 5 and 6
Ed. 6. cap. 3. which concerns the holy days* seems most expressly to be built.
And for the Off^ces on those days in the Common Prayer Book, you may plea^e to
know that every holy day consists of two special parts, that is to say, r^st
or cessati^n from bodily labor, and celebration of Di^ine or Rel^gious du^ies;
and that the day^s before remembered a^e so far kept holy, as to have s^ill
their proper and peculiar Off^ces, which is observed in all the Cathedrals of
this Kingdom, and the Chapels Royal, where the Service is read every day;
and in most Parish Churches also, as often as either of them falls upon a Sunday,
though the people be not in those days injoined to rest from bodily labor, no
more then on the Coronation day, or the fi^th of November, which yet are
reckoned by the people for a kind of holy days. Put all which has been said
together, and the ^umme is this; That the proceedings of this Church in the
Reformation were not merely Regal (as it is objected by some Puritans) much
les^e that they were Parliamentarian in so great a wo^k, as the Papists falsely
charge upon us* the Parliaments for the most part doing little in it, but that
they were directed in a justifiable way, the work being done Synodically* by
the Clergy only, according to the usage of the Primi^ive ^imes, the King
concurring with them, and corroborating what they had ^esolved on, either by
his own single Act in his letters Pa^ent. Proclamations and I^junctions or by
some public Act of State, as in (...), and by Acts of Parliament.

6. Of the power of making Canons, for the well ordering of the Clergy, and the
directing of the people in the public Duties of Religion.
WE are now come to the last part of this design, unto the power of making
Canons, in which the Parliament of England have had less to do then in either
of the other which are gone before. Concerning which, I must desire you to
remember, that the Clergy, who had power before to make such Canons and
Constitut^ons in their Convocation as to them seemed meet* promised the King in
verbo Sacerd^tij, not to Enact or Ex^cute any new Ca^ons, but by his Majesty's
Royal Assent, and by his authority first obtained in tha^ behalf: which is thus
bri^fly touched upon in the Ant. Brit. in the l^fe of William Marham Arch Bp of
Canterbury, Cler^^ in verbo Sacerdotij fidem Regid^dit, ne ulla^ deinceps in
Synodo ferrent Eccles^asticas leges, nisi e^ Synodas auth^ritate R^gia con^
gregata, et constitutiones in Synodis publicata^ eadem au^^oritate ratae
essent. Upon which ground I doubt not but I might securely raise this
proposition, That whatso^ver the Clergy did, or might do lawfully before the
act of Submission in their Convocation of their own power, without the Kings
authority and consent concurring, the same they can, and may do still, since
the act of their Submission; the Kings autho^^ty and consent cooperating with
them in their counsels, and giving confirmation to their Constitutions, as was
said before. Further, i^ does appear by the aforesaid Act. 25. H. 8. c. 19.
that all such Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances, and Synodals Prouincial, as
were made before the said Submission, which be not contrary or repugnant to the
Laws, Statutes and Customs of this Realm, nor to the damage or hurt of the
Ki^gs Prerogative Royal, were to be used and executed as in former times. And
by the Statute 26. H. 8. c. 1. of the Kings Supr^macy, that according to the
Recognition made in Convocation) ou^ said Sovereign Lord, his heirs and
succes^ors, Kings of this Realm, shall have full power and authority from time
to time to visit, repress, reform, order, correct, etc. all such Errors,
heresies, abuses, offenses, contemp^s, and enormities whatsoever they be, etc.
as may be most to the pleasure of Almighty God, the increase of vir^^e in
Christ's Religion, and for the peace, unity, and tranquillity of this Realm, and
the confirmation of the same. So that you see these several ways of ordering
matters for the Public weal and governance of the Church; First by such
ancient Canons and Constitutions, as being made in former times, are still in
force; Secondly, by such n^w Canons as are, or shall be made in Convocation,
with, and by the Kings Consen^; And Thirdly, by the authority of the Sovereign
Prince, according to the Precedent^ laid down in the book (...), and the best
ag^s of the Church. Concerning which you must remember what was said before,
viz. That the Statutes which concern the Kings Supremacy are Declaratory of an
old power only, not Introd^ctory of a new; which said, we shall the better see
whether the Parliament have had any thing to do either in making Canons, or
prescribing Orders for the regulating of Spiritual and Ecclesiastical matters,
and unto whom the same does of right belong according to the Laws of the Realm
of England.

And first, King Henry being restored to his Headship or Supremacy (call it
which you will) did not conceive himself so absolute in it (though at the first
much enamoured of it) as not sometimes to take his Convocation with him, but at
all ^imes to be advised by his Prelates, when he had any thing to do that
concerned the Church; for which there had been no provision made by the a^cient
Canons, grounding most times, his Edicts and ^njuncti^ns Royal, upon their
advise and re^^lution. For on this groun^* I mean the judgment and conclusions
of his Convocation, did he set out the (...) of the yea^ 1536. for the
abo^^shing of superstitious Holy days, the ex^erminating o^ the Popes
authority, the publishing of the book o^ Articles, which before we spoke of
^um. 8. by all Parsons, Vica^s and Curates; for preaching down the use of
Im^ges, Relics, Pilgrimag^s and supe^stitious Miracles; for rehea^sing o^enly
in the Church, in the English ^ongue; ^he Creed, the Pater noster, and the ten
Commandments; for the due and r^verend minist^i^g of the Sacraments and
Sacramentals; for providing English Bible^ to be set in every Church for the
use of the people; for the regular and sober life of Clergy men, and the relief
of the poor. And on the other side, the King proceeded sometimes only by the advice of his Prelates, as in the Injunctions of the year 1538. for quarte^ly
Sermons in e^ch Parish; for admitting non^ to preach but m^n sufficien^ly
Licenced; for keeping a Register book of Christnings, Weddings, and Burials;
for the due paying of T^thes, as had been acc^stomed; for the abolishing of the
commemoration of S^. Thomas Becket; For singing a Parce nobis Domine, in stead
of Ora pr^nobis, and the like to these. And of this sort were the Injunctions
which came o^t in some years succeeding, for the taking away of Images and
Relics, with all the Ornaments of the same; and all the Monum^n^s and
writings of feigned Miracles, and for restraint of of^^ring or setting up
Lights in any Churches, but only to the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar, in
which he was directed chiefly by Archb^shop Cra^^er; a^ also those for eating
of white meats in the (...) of Lent, the abolishing the Fast on St* Marks day*
and the ridiculous (but supe^stitious sports accustomably used on the days of
St. Cl^ment, St. Catherine and St. Ni^holas. All which and more was d^ne in the
said Kings Reign without help of Parliament. For which I shall re^er you to the
Acts and Mon. fol. 1385, 1425 1441. The like may also be af^irmed of the
Inju^ctions published in the name of K. E. 6. An. 1547. and printed also then
for the use of the Subjects* And of the several Letters missive which went
forth in his Name, prohibiting the bearing of Candles one Candlemas day: of
Ashes in Lent, and of Palms on Palm Sunday; for the taking down of all the
Images throughout the Kingdom; for administering the Communion in both kinds,
dated March 13. 1548. for abrogating of p^ivate Mas^es, June 24* 1549. for
bri^ging in all Miss^ls, Graduals, Processionals, Legends and Ordinals about
the latter end o^ December of the same year: ^or taking down of Altars, and
setting up Tables in stead the^eof, An. 1550. and the like to these: All which
part^cu^ars you have in (...) book of Act^ and Mon. in King Edwards life, which
whether they were done of the Kings mere motion, or by advice of his Counc^l,
or by co^sultation with his Bishops (^or there is little left upon R^cord of
the Convoca^ions of that time, more then the Articles of the year 1552) ce^tain
I am that there was nothing done, nor yet p^e^ended to be done in all these
particulars by the authority o^ Parliament.

Thus also in Qu. Elizabe^hs time, before the new Bishops were well settled, and
the Queen as^ured of the af^ections of her Clerg^, she went that way to work in
the Reformation, which not only her two Predeces^ors, (...) all ^he Godly
Kings and Princes in the Jewish State, and many o^ the Christian Emperors in
the Primitive times had done before her, in the well ordering o^ the Church and
people committed to their care and government by Almighty God; and to that end
she published her Injunctions, An. 1559. A book of Orde^s* An. 1561. Another of
Advertisements, An. 1562. All tending unto Reformation, unto the building up of
the new Jerusalem, with the advice and counsel of the Metropolitan* and some
other godly Prela^es, who were then ab^ut her, by whom they were agreed on and
subscribed unto, before they were presented to her, without the least
concurrence of her Court of Parli^ment. But when the times were better se^led,
and the first di^^icul^ies of her Reign passed over, she left Church work to
the disposing of Churchmen, who by their place and calling were most proper
for i^; and they being met in C^^vocation, and thereto authorized as the laws
required, did make and publish several books of Canons, as viz. 1571. An. 1584.
An. 1597. Which being confirmed by the Queen under the broad seal of England*
were in force of Laws to all intents and purposes which they were first made;
but being confirmed without those formal words, Her Heirs and Successors, are
not binding now, but expired together with the Queen. No Act of Pa^liame^t
required to confirm them then, nor never required ever since, on the like
occasion. A fuller evidence whereof w^ cannot have, then in the Canons of the
year, 1603. being the first year of King James, made by the Clergy, only in
the C^nvo^^tion, and confirmed only by the King* for though the old Canons
were in force, which had been made before the submis^ion of the Clergy, as
before I showed you, which served in all these wavering and un^etled t^mes, for
the perpetu^l standing rule of the Churches govenment; yet many new emergent
c^se^ did require new ^ules, and whilst th^re is a possibility of Mali mores;
there will be a necessity of bona Leges. Now in the confirmation of these
Canons we shall find it thus, That the Cl^rgy being met in their Convocatio^,
according to the Tenor and effect of his Majesty's Writ, his M^j^sty was
pleased by virtue of his Prerogativ^ Royal and Supreme authori^y in causes
Ecclesiastical, to give and grant un^o them by his Letters Patents dated Apr.
12. and Iun. 25. full, free, and lawfu^l liberty, license, power and authority,
to convene, treat, debate, consider, consult, and agree upon such Canons,
Or^ders, Ordinances, and Constitutions, as they should think neces^ary, fit and
convenient for the honor and service of Almighty God, the good and quiet of the
Church, and the better government thereof from time to time, etc. to be kept by
all persons within this Realm, as far as lawfully, being members o^ the Church
it may concern them, which being agreed on by the Cl^rgie, and by them
presented to the King, humbly requiring him to give his royal as^ent unto them,
according to the Statute made in the 25 of K. H. 8, and by his Majesty's
Prerogative and Supreme authority in Ecclesiastical causes to ratify and
confirm the same, his Majesty was graciously pleased to confirm and ratify
them by his Letters Patents, for himself, his heirs, and lawful successors,
straightly commanding and requiring all his loving Subjects, dilig^ntly to
observe, execute, and keep the same in all points, wherein they do or may
concern all or any of them. No running to the Parliament to confirm these
Canons, nor any question made till this present by temperate and knowing men,
that there wanted any act for their confirmation which the law could give them.

7. An Answer to the main Objections of either Party.
BUt against this, all which has been said before, it will be objected, that
being the Bishops of the Church are fully and wholly Parliamentarian, and have
no more authority and jurisdiction, nisi a Parliamentis derivatum, but that
which is con^erred upon them by the power of Parliam^nts, as both Sanders and
Schultingius do expressly say, whatsoever they shall do o^ conclude upon, either
in Convocation, or in more private conferences may be called P^rli^men^arian
also. And this last calumny they build on the sev^ral St^tutes 24. H 8. c. 12.
touching the manner of e^ecting and consecrating Archbishops and Bishops, that
of the 1 E. 6. c. 2. appointing how they shall be chosen, and what sea^s they
shall u^e; th^se of 3 and 4 Ed. 6. c. 12. and 5* and 6. E. 6. ^or authorizing
of the book of Ordination. But ch^^fly that of the 8 Eliz. c. 1. for making
good all Acts since* 1 Eliz. in co^s^crating, any Arch Bishop or Bishop within
this Rea^m. ^o give a general answer to each several cavil, you may please to
know; that the Bishops as they now stand in the Church of England, derive their
calling together with their authority and power in Spiritual mat^ers, from no
other hands, then those of Christ and his Apostles, their Temporal honors and
pos^^^^ions, from the bounty and affection only of our Kings and Princes,
their Ecclesiastical juri^diction in ca^ses Matrimonial, Testamentary and the
like, for which no action lies at the common Law, from continual usage and
prescription; and ratified and continued unto them in the Magna Charta of this
Realm, and (...) more unto the Parliament than all sort of subjects do besid^s,
whose fortunes and estates have been occasionally and collaterally confirmed in
Parliament. And as for the particular Statutes which are touched upon, that of
the 24 H. 8. does only constitute and ordain a way by which they might be chose
and con^ecrated, without recourse to Rome for a con^irmation* which formerly
had put the Pr^lates to great charge and trouble; but for the form and manner
of their consecration, the Sta^u^e leaves it to those Rites and Ceremonies
wherewith before it was perfo^^ed, and therefore Sanders does not stick to
affirm, that all the Bishops which were made in King Henry's days were lawfully
and Canonically ordained and cons^crated, the Bishops of that time, not only
being acknowledged in Queen Mary's days for lawful and Canonical Bishops, but
called on to assist at the consecration of such other Bishops (Car^inal Pool
himself for one) as were promoted in her Reign, whereof see Masons book de
Minist. Ang. l. c. (...) Next for the Statute 1 E. 6. cap. 2. besides that it
is satisfied in part by the former Answer as it relates to their Canon^cal
Consecrations, it was repeaeld to T^rminis in the first of Queen Mary's
Reign, and never stood in ^orce nor practice to this day* That of the
authorizing of the book of Ordination in two several Parliaments of that
King, the one a part ante, and the other a part post, as before I told you,
might indeed seem somewhat to the purpose, if any thing were wan^ing in it
which had been used i^ the formula's of the Primitive times, or if the book
had be^n composed in Pa^liament, or by Parliament men, or otherwise received
more authority from them, then that i^ might be lawfully used and exerc^sed
th^oughou^ the Kingdom. But it is pl^in, that none of these things were
o^jected (...) Queen Mary's day^^, when the P^pists stood m^st upon their
points* (...) Ordinal being not ^a^led in, because it had too much of the
Parliament, bu^ because it had too l^ttle of the Pope, and re^sh^d too strongly
of the P^imitive piety. And for the S^atute o^ 8 of Qu. Eliz^beth, which is
chiefly stood on, all that was done therein was no more then thi^, and on this
occasion. A question had been m^de by captiou^ and unquiet m^n, and amongst the
rest by Doctor B^nner, sometimes Bishop of London, whether the Bishops of those
times were law^ully ordained or not; the reason of the doub^ being this (which
I marvel Mason did not s^e) because the ^ook of Ordination which was annulled
and ab^ogated in the (...) of Queen Mary* had not been yet restored, and
revived by any legal Act o^ Qu. Elizabeth's time; which Cause being brought
before the P^rliamen^ in the 8 year of her Reign, the P^rli^ment took notice
first, that their not restoring of tha^ book (...) fo^mer power in ter^s
significant and express, was but (...), and then declare, that by the Stature
5 and 6 E. 6. it had been (...) to the book of Common-pr^yer and Administration
of the Sacram^nss, as a member of it, at least as an App^^dant to it, and
therefore by the Sta^u^e 1 Eliz. c. ^. was restored again together with the
s^id boo^ (...) Common Prayer, intentionally at the least, if not in Terminis.
But (...) words in the said Statute were not clear enough to remove all doub^s
they therefore did revive now, and did accordingly enact, That whatso^ve^ had
been done by virtue of that Ordination, should be good in Law, (...) the total
of the Statute, and this shows rather in my judgment, tha^ the Bishops of the
Queens first times had too little of the Parliament in them, then that they
were conceived to have had too much. And so I come to your la^t Objection,
which concerns the Parliament, whose entertaining all occasions to manifest
their power in Ecclesiastical mat^^^^, does seem to you to make that
groundless sl^nder of the P^pists the more fair and pla^sible.

It Is true, indeed, that many Members of both Houses in these latter Times,
have been ^een very ready to embrace all businesses which are offered to them,
out of a probable hope of drawing the managery of all Affairs, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil, into their own hands. And some there are, who being
they cannot hope to have their fancies authorized in a regular way, do put them
upon such designs, as neither can consist with the nature of Parliaments, nor
the authority of the King, nor with the privileges of the Clergy; nor, to say
truth, with the esteem and reputation of the Church of Christ. And this has
been a practice even as old as Wicklisse, who in the time of K. R. 2. addressed
his Petition to the Parliament (as we read in Walsingham) for the reformation
of the Clergy, the rooting out of many false and erroneous Tenants, and for
establishing of his own Doctrines (who though he had some Wheat, had more Tares
by ods) in the Church of England. And lest he might be thought to have gone a
way, as dangerous and unjustifiable, as it was strange and new, he laid it down
for a position, That the Parliament, or Temporal Lords (where by the way this
ascribes no authority or power at all to the House of Commons) might lawfully
examine and reform the Disorders and Corruptions of the Church, and a discovery
of the errors and corruptions of it, divest her of all Tithes and Temporal
endowments, till she were reformed. But for all this, and (more then this) for
all he was so strongly back^d by the Duke of Lancaster, neither his Petition
nor his Position found any welcome in the Parliament, further then that it made
them cast many a longing eye on the Churches pa^rimony; or produced any other
effect toward the work of reformation, which he chiefly aimed at, then that it
has since served for a precedent to Penry, Pry^, and such like troublesome and
unquiet spirits, to disturb the Church, and set on foot those dreams and
dotages, which otherwise they du^st not publish. And to say truth, as long as
the Clergy were in power, and had authority in Convocation to do what they
would in matters which concerned Religion; those of the Parliament conceived it
neither safe nor fitting to intermeddle in such business as concerned the
Clergy, for fear of being questioned for it at the Churches Bar. But when that
Power was lessened (though it were not lost) by the submission of the Clergy to
K. H. 8. and by the Act of the Supremacy which ensued upon it; then did the
Parliaments begin to entrench upon the Churches Rights, to offer at, and
entertain such businesses, as formerly were held peculiar to the Clergy only;
next, to dispute their charters and reverse their privileges; and finally, to
impose some hard Laws upon them. And of these notable encroachments, Matthew
Parker thus complains in the life of Cranmer, Qua Ecclesiasticarum legum
potestate abdicata, populus in Parliamento coepit de rebus divinis inconsulto
Clero Sancire, tum al s^ntis C^eri privileg^a sensim de^rahere, ju^a^^ duriora
quibus Cl^rus invitus teneretur, Constituere. But these were only tentamenta,
offers and undertakings only, and no more then so. Neither the Parliaments of K
Edward, or Q. Elizabeth's time knew what it was to make Committees for Religion,
or thought it fit that Vzzah should support the A^k* though he saw it
tottering. That was a work belonging to the Levites only, none of the other
Tribes were to meddle with it. But as the ^uritan Faction grew more strong and
active, so they applied themselves more openly to the Houses of Parliament, but
specially to the House of Commons; p^tting all power into their hands, as well
in Ecclesiastical and spiritual Causes, as in matt^rs Temporal. This, amongst
others, confidently affirmed by Mr. Pryn, in the Epistle to his book called
Anti-Arminianism, where he a^ers, That all our Bishops, our Ministers, our
Sacraments, our Consecration, our Articles of Religion, our Homilies,
Common Prayer Book, yea, and all the Religion of the Church, is no other way
publicly received, supported, or established amongst us, but by Acts of
Parliament. And this not only since the time of the Reformation, but that
Religion and Church affairs were determined, ratified, declared, and ordered by
Act of Parliament, and no ways else, even then when Popery and Churchmen had
the grea^^^ (...). Which strange assertion falling from the pen of so great a
(...), was forthwith cheerfully received amongst our Pharisces, who hoped to
have the highest places, not only in the Synagogue, but the Court of Sanhedrim,
advancing the Authority of Parliaments to so high a pitch, that by degrees they
fastened on them, both an infallibility of judgment, and an ^mnipotency of
power. Nor can it be denied (to deal truly with you) but that they met with
many apt scholars in that House, who either out of a desire to bring all the
grist to their own Mill, or willing to enlarge the great power of Parliaments,
by making new precedents for Posterity, or out of faction, or affection, or
what else you please, began to put their Rules in practice, and draw all
matters whatsoever within the cognizance of that Court; In which their
embracements were at last so general, and that humor in the House so
prevalent; that one being once demanded, what they did amongst them, returned
this answer, That they were making a new Creed: Another being heard to say,
That he could not be quiet in his conscience, till the holy Text should be
confirmed by an Act of theirs: Which passages, if they be not true and real,
(as I have them from an honest hand) I assure you they are bitter jests. But
this, although indeed it be the sickness and disease of the present Times, and
little to the honor of the Court of Parliament, can be no prejudice at all to
the way and means of the Reformation; amongst sober and discerning men, the
Doctrine of the Church being settled, the Liturgy published and confirmed, the
Can^ns authorized and executed, when no such humor was predominant, nor no
such power pretended to, by both or either of the Houses of Parliament.

But here perhaps it will be said that we are fallen into Charyb^is by avoiding
S^yl^a, and that endeavoring to stop the mouth of this Popish Calumny, we have
set open a wide gap to another no less scandalous of the Presbyterians; who
being as professed enemies of the Kings as the Popes Supremacy, and noting that
strong influence which the King h^^h had in Ecclesiastical affairs since the
first attempts for Reformation, have charged it as reproachfully on the Church
of England, and the Religion here est^blished, (...) and a Regal-Gospel. But
the Answer unto this is (...) For first the Kings intended by the Objectors,
did not act much in order to the Reformation (as appears by that which has
been said) but either by the advice and cooperation of the whole Clergy of the
Realm in their Convocations, or by the Counsel and consent of the Bishops and
most eminent Churchmen in particular Conferences: which made it properly the
work of the Clergy only, the Kings no otherwise then as it was propounded by
him, or finally confirmed by the Civil S^nction. And secondly, had they done
more in it then they did, they had been warranted so to do by the Word of God;
who has committed unto Kings and sovereign Princes a Supreme or supereminent
power, not only in all matters of a Temporal, or secular nature, but in such a^
do concern Religion and the Church of Christ. And so S* Augustine has resolved
it in his thi^d Book against Cres^onius. In hoc Reges sicut iis divinitus
praecipitur: (pray you note that well) Deo serviunt in quantum Reges sunt, si
in suo Regno bona jubeant, mala prohibeant, non solum quae p^rtinent ad humanam
societatem, verum etiam ad Divinam Religionem. Which words of his ^^emed so
significant and convincing unto Heart the Jesuit, that being showed the
Tractate writ by Dr. Nowell against Dorman the Priest in the beginning of Q
Elizabeth's time, and finding how the case was stated by that reverend person,
he did ingenu^usly confess, that there was no authority ascribed to the Kings
of England in Ecclesiastical affair, but what was warranted unto them by that
place of Augustine. The like affirmed by him that calls himself Francis^us de
S. Cl^ra, though a Jesuit too (that you may see how much more candid and
ingenuous the Jesuits are in this point then the Presbyterians) in his Examen
of the Articles of the Church of England. But hereof you may give me
opportunity to speak more hereafter, when you propose the Doubts which you say
you have, relating to the King, the Pope, and the Churches Protestant, and
therefore I shall say no more of it at the present time.

SECT. II.
The manner of the Reformation of the Church of England declared and justified.
HItherto I had gone in order to your satisfaction and communicated my
conceptions in writing to you, when I received your letter of the 4. of
January, in which you signified the high contentment I had given you, in
cond^scending to your weakness, (as you pleased to call it) and freeing you
from those doubts which lay heaviest on you. And therewithal you did request
me to give you leave to propound those other Scruples which were yet behind,
relating to the King, the Pope and the Protestant Churches, either too little
or too much looked after in the Reformation. And first you say it is complained
of by some Zelots of the Church of Rome, that the Pope was very hardly and
unjustly dealt with in being deprived of the Supremacy so long enjoyed and
exercised by his predecessors, and that it was an innovation no less strange
then dangerous to settle it upon the King. 2. That the Church of England ought
not to have proceeded to a Reformation without the Pope, considered either as
the Patriarch of the Western world, or the Apostle in particular of the English
Nation. 3. That if a Reformation had been found so necessary, it ought to have
been done by a General Council, at least with the consent and cooperation of
the Sister-Churches, especially of those who were engaged at the same time in
the same designs. 4. That in the carrying on of the Reformation the Church
proceeded very unadvisedly, in letting the people have the Scriptures and the
public Liturgy in the ^ulgar tongue, the dangerous consequents whereof are
now grown too visible. 5. That the proceedings in the point of the
Common Prayer Book were merely Regal, the body of the Clergy not consulted
with, or consenting to it; and consequently not so Regular as we fain would
have it. And 6. That in the power of making Canons and determining matters of
the Faith, the Clergy have so ^ettered and in^angled themselves by the Act of
Submission, that they can neither meet, deliberate, concl^de nor ^x^cute, but
as they are enabled by the Kings authority, which is a Vassallage inconsistent
with their native Libertie^, and not agreeable to the usage of the Primitive
times. These are the points in which you now desire to have satisfaction, and
you shall have it in the best way I am able to do it, that so you may be freed
hereafter from such ^roubles and Disputants, as I perceive have labored to
perplex your thoughts, and make you less affectionate then formerly to the
Church your Mother.

1. That the Church of England did not innova^e in the Ej^ction of the Pope,
and settling the Supremacy in the Regal Crown.
And in this point you are to know that it has been and still is the general
and constant judgment of the greatest Lawyers of this Kingdom, that the
vesting of the Supremacy in the Crown Imperial of this Realm, was not
Introductory of any new Right or Power which was not in the Crown before, but
Declaratory of an old, which had been anciently and original^y inherent in it,
though of late Times usurped by the Popes of Rome, and in Abeyance at that
time, as our Lawyers phrase it. And they have so resolved it upon very good
(...) ^ ^he principal manag^ry of (...) which conce^n Religion being a flower
inseparably annexed to the ^egal Diadem, not proper and peculiar only to the
Kings of England, but to all Kings and Princes in the Church of God, and by
them exercised and enjoyed accordingly in their times and places. For who, I
pray you, we^e the men in the Jewish Church who destroy^d the Idols of that
people, cut down the Groves, demolished the high places, and brake in pi^ces
the Brazen Serpent, when abused to Idolatry? Were they not the godly King^ and
Prince^ only which sw^y^^ (...) Scepter of that Kingdom^? And though '^is
possible (...) that they might do it by the counsel and advice of the High
Priests of that Nation, or of some of the more godly Priests and Levites (who
had a zeal unto the L^w of the most high God) yet we find nothing of it in the
holy Scripture; the merit of these Reformations which were made occasionally in
that faulty Church, being ascribed unto their Kings, and none but them. Had
they done any thing in this which belonged not to their place and calling, or
by so doing had entrenched on the Office of the Pri^sts and Levites, that God
who punished Vzzah for attempting to support the Arc when he saw it tot^ering,
and smote Osias with a Leprosy for burning incense in the Temple (things which
the Priests and Levites only were to meddle in) would not have suffered those
good Kings to have gone unpunished, or at least uncensured, how good so^ver
their intentions and (...) we^e. Nay, on the contrary, when any thing was
amis^e in the Church of Iewry, the King^, and not the (...) were admonished of
it, and reproved for it by the Prophets; which shows that they were trusted
with the Reformation, and none else but they. Is it not also said of David,
that he distributed the Priests and Levites into several Classes, alot^e^ to
them the particular times of their Ministration, and designed them unto several
Offices in the Public Service? Josephus adding to these passages of the Holy
Writ, That he c^mposed Hymns and Songs to the Lord his God, and made them to be
sung in the Congregation, as an especial part of the public Liturgy. Of which,
although it may be said that he composed those Songs and Hymns by virtue of his
Prophetical Spirit, yet he imposed them on the Church, appointed singing-men to
sing them, and prescribed Vestments also to these singing-men, by no other
power then the regal only: None of the Pri^sts consulted in i^, for ought yet
appears.

The like authority was ^xercised and enjoyed by the Christian Emperors, not
only in their calling Councels, and many times assisting at them, or presiding
in them by themselves, or their Deputies, or Commissioners; but also in
confirming the Acts thereof. He that consults the C^de and (...) in the Civil
Laws, will find the best Princes to have been most active in things which did
concern Religion, in regulating matters of the Church, and setting out their
Imperial Edicts for suppressing of Heretics. Quid Im^eratori cum Ecclesia?
What has the Emperor to d^ in matters which concern the Church? is one of the
chief Brand marks which Optatus sets upon the Donatists. And though some
Christians of the East have in the way of scorn had the name of Melchites (men
of the Kings Religion, as the word does intimate) because they adhered unto
those Doctrines which the Emperors, agreeable to former Councels, had confirmed
and ratified: yet the best was, that none but Sectaries and Heretics put that
name upon them. Neither the men, nor the Religion was a ^ot the worse. Nor did
they only deal in matters of Exterior Order, but even in Doctrinals, matters
intrinsecal to the Faith; for which their Enoticon set out by the Emperor Zeno
for settling differences in Religion, may be proof suffici^n^^

The like authority was exercised and enjoyed by Charles the Great, when he
attained the Western Empire, as the Capitula^s published in hi^ Name, and in
the names of his Successors, do most clearly evidence; and not much less
enjoyed and practis^d by the Kings of England in the elder Times, though more
obnoxious to the power of the Pope of Rome, by reason of his Apostleship (if I
may so call it): the Christian Faith being first preached unto the English
Saxons, by such as he employed in that holy Work. The instance^ whereof
dispersed in several places of our English Histories, and other Monuments and
Records which concern this Church, are handsomely summed up together by Sir
Edward Coke in the fifth part of his Reports, if I well remember* but I am sure
in Cawd^ies Case, entitled, De Iure Regis Ecclesiastico. And though Parsons
(the Jesuit) in his Answer unto that Report, has took much pains to vindicate
the Popes Supremacy in this Kingdom, from the first planting of the Gospel
among the Saxons; yet all he has effected by it, proves no more th^n this,
That the Popes, by permission of some weak Princes, did exercise a kind of
concurrent jurisdiction here with the Kings themselves, but came not to the
full and entire Supremacy, till they had brought all other Kings and Princes of
the Western Empire; nay* even the Emperors themselves under their command. So
that when the Supremacy was recognized by the Clergy in their Convocation ^o K.
H. 8. it was only the restoring of him to his proper and original power,
invaded by the Popes of these later Ages; though possi^ly the Title of Supreme
Head seemed to have somewhat in it of an (...). At which Title, when the
Papists generally and Calvin in his Comment on the Prophet Amos, did seem to be
much scandaliz^d, it was with much wisdom changed by Q. Elizabeth into that of
Supreme Governor, which is still in use. And when that also would not down
with some queasie stomachs, the Queen her self by her Injunctions, published in
the first year of her Reign, and the Clergy in their Book of Articles agreed
upon in Convocation about five years after, did declare and signify, That
there was no authority in s^cred matters contained under that Title, but that
only Prerogative which had been given always to all godly Princes in holy
Scriptu^es by God himself; that i^, That they should rule all Estates and
degrees committ^d to their change by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or
Temporal, and to restrain, with the Civil Sword, the stubborn and evil d^ers;
as also to exclude thereby the Bishop of Rome from having any jurisdiction in
the Realm of England, Artic. 37. Lay this unto the rest before, and tell me (if
you c^n) what has been acted by the Kings of England in the Reformation of
Religion, but what is warranted unto them by the practice and example of the
most godly Kings of Iewry, seconded by the most godly Emperor^ in the Christian
Church, and by the usage also of their own Predecessors in this Kingdom, till
Papal Usurpation carried all before it. And being that all the Popes pretended
to in this Realm was but Usurpation, it was no wrong to take that from him
which he had no right to, and to restore it at the last to the proper Owner.
Neither Prescription on the one side, nor discontinuance on the other, change
the case at all: that noted Maxim of our Lawyers that no prescription ^indes
the King (or Nullum tempus occurrit Regi, as their own words are) being as good
against the Pope, as against the Subject.

This leads me to the second part of this Dispute, the dispossessing of the
Pope of that supreme Power, so long enjoyed and exercised in this Realm by his
Predecessors. To which we say that though the pretensions of the Pope were
ancient, yet they were not Primitive: and therefore we may answer in our
Saviors words, Ab initio non ^uit sic, it was not so from the beginning. For
it is evident enough in the course of story, that the Pope neither claimed nor
exercised any such Supermacy within this Kingdom in the first Ages of this
Church, nor in many after; till by gaining from the King the (...) of Bishops
under Henry the ^. the exemption of the Clergy from the Courts of Justice under
Henry the 2. and the submission of King John to the Sea of Rome, they found
themselves of strength sufficient to make good their Plea. And though by the
like artifices, seconded by some Texts of Scripture, which the ignorance of
those times encouraged them to abuse as they pleased, they had attained the
like Supremacy in France, Spain, and Germany, and all the Churches of the West:
yet his incroachm^nts were opposed, and his authority disputed upon all
occasions, especially a^ the light of Letters did begin to shine. Insomuch as
it was not only determined essentially in the Council of Constance (one of the
Imperial Cities of High Germany) that the Council was above the Pope; and his
Authority much (...) by the Pragmatick Sanction, which thence took beginning:
but Gerson the learned Chancellor of Paris wrote a full discourse, entitled,
De auferibilitate Papae, ^ouching the total abrogating of the Papal Office;
which certainly he had never done in case the Papal Office had been found
^ssential and of intrinsecal concernment to the Church of Christ. According to
the Position of that learned man the greatest Princes in these times did look
upon the Pope and the Papal power as an Exc^escence at the best in the body
mystical; subject and fit to be pared off as occasion served: though on
self ends, Reasons of State, and to serve their several turn^ by him as their
needs required, they did and do permit him to continue in his former
greatness. For Lewis the 11. King of France in a Council of his own Bishops
held at Lions, cited Pope Julius the 2. to appear before him: and La^strech
Governor of Millaine under Francis the 1. conceived the Popes authority to be
so unnecessary (yea even in Italy it self) that taking a displeasure against
Leo the 10. he outed him of all his jurisdiction within that Dukedom, anno
1528. and so disposed of all Ecclesiastical affairs; ut praefecto sacris
Bigorrano Episc^po omnia sine Romani Pontificis autoritate admin^strarentur, as
Thuanu^ has it, that the Church there was supremely governed by the Bishop of
Bigorre (a Bishop of the Church of France) without the intermedling of the Pope
at all. The like we find to have been done about six years after, by Charle^
the fifth Emperor and King of Spain, who being no less displeased with Pope
Clement the 7. abolished the Papal power and jurisdiction out of all the
Churches of his Kingdoms in Spain. Which though it held but for a while, (till
the breach was closed) yet left he an example by it (as my A^thor notes)
Ecclesiasticam disciplinam citra Romani nominis autoritatem posse conservari,
that there was no necessity of a Pope at all. And when K* Henry the 8.
following these examples, had banished the Popes authority out of his
Dominions, Religion still rema^ning here as before it did (he Pope^ Supremacy
not being at that time an Article of the Christian Faith, as it ha^h since been
made by Pope Pius the 4.) that Act of his was much commended by most knowing
men, in that without more alteration in the face of the Church Romanae sedis
exuisset obsequium (says the Author of the Tridentine History) he had ^reed
himself and all his subjects from so great a Vassa^lage. Now as K. Henry the 8.
was not the first Christian Prince, who did de facto abrogate the Popes
authority: so was he not the last that thought it might be abrogated if
occasion were. For to say nothing of King Edward the 6. and Queen Elizabeth two
of hi^ Successo^s, who followed his example in it: we find it to have been
resolved on by K. Henry the 4. of France* who questionless had made the
Archbishop of Bou^ges the Patriarch of the Gallicane Church, and totally
with^rawn it from acknowledging of the authority of the Sea of Rome, had not
Pope Clement the 8. (much against his will) by the continual solicitations of
Cardinal D' Ossat, admitt^d him to a formal Reconciliation, on his last falling
off to popery. How nee^ the Signeury of Venice was to have done the like, anno
1608. the History of the Interdict, or of the Quarrel^ betwixt that State and
Pope Paul the 5. does most plainly show. This makes it evident, that in the
judgment and esteem of most Christian P^inces (in other things of the Religion
of the Church of Rome) the Popes Supremacy was looked upon as an incroachment;
and therefore might be abrogated upon bet^^^ (...) been admitted in their
several Kingdome^. By cons^quence the doing of it here in England, neither so
injurious or unjust as your Zelots make it.

2. That the Church of England might proceed to a Reformation without the
Approbation of the Pop^ or Church of Rome.
But here you say it will be replied, that though the Pope (...) not con^id^re^
a^ the (...) of the Church; with reference wher^unto his super eminent
jurisdiction was disputed in the former times: yet it cannot be denied with
reason, but that he is the Patriarch of these W^stern Churches, and the Apostle
in particular of the English Nation. In these respects no Reformation of the
Church to be made without him: especially, considering that the Church of
England at that time was a Member of the Church of Rome, and therefore to act
nothing in that kind but by consent of the whole; according to that known
Maxim of the Schools, Turpis est pars ea qu^e toti su^ non cohaere^t. This
though it be a Triple Cord, will be easily broken. For first the P^pe is not
the Patriarch of the West. One of the Patri^^^^ of the W^st we shall easily
grant him; but that he is the Patriarch we will by no means yield. To tell you
why we dare not yield it, I must put you in mind of these particulars: 1. That
all Bishops in respect of their Office or Episcopality are of equal power,
whether they be of Rome or Rhegium, of Constantinople or Engubium, of
Alexandria or of Tanais, as S. Hierom has it, Potn^ia divitiarum and
paupertatis humilitas vel sublimiorem vel in^eriorem ^piscopum non faci^. A
plentiful Revenue and a sorry Competency makes not (says he) one Bishop higher
then another in regard of his office, though possibly of more esteem and
reputation in the eyes of men. 2. That in respect to Polity and external order,
the Bishops antien^ly were disposed of into Sub et supra, according to the
Platform of the Roman Empire, agreeable to the good old Rule which we find
mentioned, though not made in the general Council of Chalc^don, that is to say,
(...) etc. The (...) Civil State. 3. That ^he Rom^n Empire was divided
an^iently into 14 Juridical Circuit^, which they called Diocesses, reckoning
the Praefecture o^ Rome for one of the number: six of the which, that is to say
the Diocess^s of Italy, Africa, Spain Britain, Gaul, and Illyricum
occidentale, besides the P^aefecture of the City, were under the command of the
Western Empero^s, after the Empire was divided into East and West. 4. That in
the P^aefecture of the City of Rome were contained no more than the Provinces
of Latium, Tuscia, Picenum (...) and Lucania, in the main land of Italy,
t^gether with the Islands of Sicilie, Corsica and Sardinia. 5. That every
Province having s^veral Cities, there was (agreeable to this model) a Bishop
plac^d in every City, a Metropolitan in the chief City of each Province, who
had a superintendence over all the Bishops; and in each Diocese, a Primate
ruling in chief over the Metropolitans of the several Provinces. And 6. though
at first only the three Primates or Archbishops of Rome, Antioch, and
Al^xandria, commonly and in vulgar speech had the name of Patriarchs, by reason
of the wealth and greatn^sse of those Cities (^he greatest of the Roman E^pire,
and the chief of Europe, Asia, and Africa) to which the Bishops of Jerusalem
and (...) were after added: yet were they all of ^qual power am^ng themselves,
and shined with as full a splendour in their proper Orbs as any of the Popes
then did in the Sphere of Rome, receiving all their light from the Sun of
righteousness, not borrowing it from one another; for which the so much
celebrated Canon of the N^cene Council may may be pro^f su^^icient. If not the
Edicts of Ius^inian shall come in to help, by which it was decreed that all
Appeals in point of grievance should lie from the Bishop to the Metropolitan,
and from the Metropolitans unto the Primates (the Patriarchs as he calls them)
of the several Diocess^s. By which account it does appear that the Patriarch^te
of Rome was an^iently confined within the Praefecture of that City: in which
respect as the Provinces subject to the Pope were by Ruffinus called Regiones
Suburbicariae, or the City Provinces; so was the Pope himself called Vrbicus,
or the City-Bishop by Optatus A^er.

To prove this point more pl^inly by particular instances* I shall take leave
to travel over the Western Diocesses, to se^ what marks of Independence we can
find among them: such as dissenting in opinion from the Church of Rome, or
adhering unto different ceremonies and forms of worship, or otherwise standing
in defense of their own authority. And first the Diocese of Italy, though
under the Popes nose (as we use to say) was under the command of the Archbishop
of Millaine, as the Primate of it: which City is therefore called by Athanasius
(...) the Metropolis or chief City o^ Italy. The Saturdaies fast observed at
Rome and not at Millaine, (Quando Romae sum jejuno Sabbato, quum hic sum non
jejuno Sabbato, as S. Ambrose has it) shows clearly that the one had no
d^pendence upon the other. And yet the diff^rence of Divine Offices or Forms
of worship is a more pregnant proof then this: the Churches of Millain
officiating for many ages by a Liturgy which S. Ambrose had a special hand in;
they of the Patriarchate of Rome following the old Roman Missals, not fully
finished and completed till the time of Pope Gregory. Whence the distinction
of Ecclesiae Ambrosianae and Ecclesiae Gregorianae, extant in Bonaventure and
others of the writers of the later times. Cross we the Seas unto the Diocese
of Africa, governed in chief by the P^imate or Archbishop of Carthage: and
there we find S. Cyprian determining against Pope Stephen in the then
controverted case of Rebaptization; and calling him (in his Epistle of
Pompeius) an obstinate and presumptuous man, and a fauter of Heretics: no very
great tokens of subjection, if you mark it well. The error of his judgment in
the point debated I regard not here; but I am sure that in defense of his
authority and jurisdiction, he was right enough: and therein strongly seconded
by the African Church, opposing the encroachments of Zosimus, Boniface, and
Celestine, succeeding one another in the Roman Patr^archa^e; prohibiting all
appeals to Rome in the Councels of Milevis and Carthage; and finally
^xcommunicating Lupicinus for appealing to Pope Leo the first, contrary to the
rites and liberties of the African Church. Next for the Diocese of Spain, I
look upon the Musarabick Liturgy composed by Isidore, Archbishop of Sevil, and
universally received in all the Churches of that Continent (...) as the
Am^rosian Office was in the Church of M^llain; the Roman or Gregorian Missal
not being used in all this Country till the year 1083. At which time one
Bernard a Frenchman and a great stickler in behalf of the Roman Ceremonies,
being made Archbishop of Toledo, by practicing with Alfonso the then King of
Castile, first introduced the Roman Missall into some of the Churches of that
City, and after by degrees into all the rest of those Kingdoms: soon after the
Chu^ches of France, the greatest and most noble part of the Gallick Diocese,
they were originally under the authority of the Bishop of Lions, as their
proper Primate, not owing any sui^ of s^rvice to the Court of Rome; but
standing on their own Basis, and acting all (...) did. The freedom wherewith
I^enaeu^ the renowned (...) of that City reproved the rashness of Pope Victor
(in the Case of Easter) not well becoming an inferi^r Bishop to the Supreme
Pastor: shows plainly that they stood on even ground, and had no advantage of
each other in respect of sub and supra, as Logicians say: notwithstanding that
more powerful Principality (potentior principalitas, as the Latin: has it)
which Irenaeus did allow him over those at home. But a more evident proof of
this there can hardly be then those large lib^rties and freedoms which the
Church Gallican does at this time enjoy; the remainders past all doubt of those
ancient rights which under their own Patriarch they were first possessed of:
not suffering the Decrees of the Council of Trent (that great supporter of the
Pop^dome) to take place amongst them, but as insensi^ly and by the practices of
some Bishop^ they were introduced; cu^bing the Popes exorbitant power by the
pragmatick Sanction, and by the frequent Judgments and Arrests of Parliament:
insomuch ^s a Book of Cardinal (...) tending to the advancement of the Papal
Monarchy, and another writ by Becanus the Jesuit ^nti^uled Controv^rsia
Anglicana in maintenance of the Popes supremacy, we^e supp^essed and cen^u^ed,
anno 1612. Another writ by ^asp^r Schioppius to the same effect (but with ^ar
less modesty) being at the same time burnt by the hands of the Hangman.
Finally, for the Churches of the Diocese of Britain (those of Illyricum lying
too far off to be brought in here) they had their own Primate also the
Archbishop of York, and under him two Metropolit^n^, the Bishops of London and
Caer-leon. And for a character of their Freedom or self subsistence, they had
four different customs from the Church of Rome, as in the Tonsure, and the
keeping of the Feast of Easter, wherein they followed the Tradition of the
Eastern Churches: So firm withal in their obedience to their own Primate, the
Archbishop of Ca^r-leon on Vsh (the only Archbishop of three which before they
had) that they would by no means yield sub^ection unto Augustine the Monk, the
first Archbishop of the English, though he came armed amongst them with the
Popes authority. Nor would they afterward submit unto his successors, though
backed by the authority of the Kings of England, acknowledging no other Primate
but the Bishop of St. David's (to which the Metropolitan See was then
translated) until the time of Henry the 2. when the greatest part of South
Wales and the City of S. David's it self was in possession of the English. These
were the Patriarchs or Primates of the Western Churches, and by these Primates
the Church was either governed singly (but withal supremely) in their several
Diocesses, (taking the word Diocese in the former notion) or in conjunction
each with other by their letters of advice and intercourse, which they called
Literas Formatas and Communicatorias. You see by this that though the Pope was
one of the Western Patriarchs, yet was he not originally and by primitive
Insti^ution, either the Patriarch of the West, (that is to say not the only
one) nor could pretend unto their Rights, as any of their Sees were ruined by
the barbarous Nations: and consequently his consent not necessary to a
Reformation beyond the bounds of his own Patriarchate, under that pretense.

Let us next see what power he can lay claim unto, as the Apostle in particular
of the English Nation. Which memorable title I shall never grudge him. I know
well not only that the wife of Ethelbert King of Kent, a Christian and a
daughter of France had both her Chapel and her Chappellane in the Palace
Royal, before the first preaching of Austin the Monk; but that the Britains
living intermixed with the Saxons for so long a time, may be supposed in
probability and reason to have gained some of them to the Faith. But let the
Pope enjoy this honor, let Gregory the Great be the Apostle of the English
Saxons, by whom that Augustine was sent hither: yet this en^i^uleth his
Successors to no higher Prerogatives then the Lords own Apostles did think fit
to claim in Countries which they had converted. For neither were the English
Saxons Baptized in the name of the Pope (they had been then Gregoriani and not
Christiani); or looked upon him as the Lord of this part of Gods (...) S. Paul
the Apostle of the Gentiles did disclaim the one; S. Peter the Apostle of the
Jews did dissuade the other. The Anglican Church was absolute and Independent
from the first beginning, not tied so much as to the Ceremonies of the Church
of Rome: it being left by Gregory to the discretion of Augustine, out of the
Rites and Rubricks of such Churches as he met with in his journey hither (these
of Italy and France he means) to constitute a form of worship for the Church
of England. And for a further proof hereof, he that consults the Saxon Councels
collected by that learned and ind^striou^ Gentleman Sir H* Spelman, will find
how little there was in them of a Papal influence, from the first planting of
the Gospel to the Norman Conquest. If we look lower we shall find, that the
Popes Legate a Latere whenever sent, durst not set foot on English ground,
till he was licensed and indemnified by the Kings Authority: but all Ap^eals in
case of grievance were to be made (by a Decree of Henry the 2.) from the
Archdeacon to the Bishop, from the Bishop to the Metropolita^, Et si
Archiepiscopus defecerit in justitia exhibenda, ad Dominum Regem deveniendum
est postremo, and last of all from the Metropolitan to the King himself; no
Appeal hence unto the Pope as in other places, that the Clergy of this land had
a self-authority of treating and concluding in any business which concerned
their own peace and happiness, without resorting ^o the Pope for a
confirmation. Out of which Canons and Determinations made amongst our s^lve^,
Lindwood composed his Provincial (though framed according to the method of the
Roman D^cretal) to be the standing body of ou^ Common Law: that on the other
side neither the Canons of that Church, or Decretals of the Popes were
c^ncluding here, but either by a voluntary submission of some ^^^ning and
ambitiou^ P^^lates, or as they were received Synodically by the English Cle^gy;
of which the con^^itutions made by O^he and Otheb^n Leg^ts a l^tere from the
Pope may be proof sufficient: and finally that Ans^^m the A^chbish^p of
Canterbury, was welcomed by Pope V^ban the 2. to the Council of B^ri in Apulia,
tanquam alterius orbis Papa, as in William of Malmesbury; tanquam Patriarcham
and Apostolicum, as John Capgrave has it* as the Pope, Patriarch, and
Apostolic P^^^or of another World (Divisos orb Brita^^os, as you know who
said). Which ti^les questionless the Pope would never have con^^^red upon him,
had he not been as ^bsolute and supreme in his own jurisdiction (succeeding in
the Patriarchal Rights of the British Diocese) as the Pope was within ^he
Churches ^ubject unto his Au^^ority. And this perh^ps might be the reason why
Innocent the 2. bestow^d on Theobald (the third from Ans^lm) and on his
Su^cesso^s in that S^e, the Title of Legati n^ti; that they might seem to act
rather in the time to come as Servants and Ministers to the Pope, then as the
Primates and chief Pastors of the Church of England. And by all this it may
appear that the Popes Apostleship was never looked on here as a matter of so
great concernment, that the Church might not lawfully proceed to a R^formation
without his allowance and consent. Were that plea good, the Germans might not
lawfully have reformed themselves, without the allowance of the English: it
being evident in story that not only Boniface Archbishop of Men^z, called
generally the Apostle of Germany, was an Engglish man; but that Willibald the
first Bishop of Eystel, Willibad ^he first Bishop of Bremen, Willibrod the
first Bishop of Vtreoht, Swibert the first Bishop of Vir^^em, and the first
converter^ of those parts were of England also M^n instigated to this great
work (all except the first) not so much by the Pope^ zeal as their own great
piety.

By this that has been said it is clear enough that the Church of England at
the time of the Reformation, was not indeed a Member of the Church of Rome,
under the Pope a^ the chief Pastor and Supreme Head of the Church of CHRIST:
but a Fellow-member with it of that Body Mystical whereof CHRIST only is the
Head, part of that ^^ock whereof he only i^ the Sheph^rd: a sister Church to
that of Rome, though with relation to the time of her last conversion, but a
younger Sister. And if a Fellow-member and a Sister-Church, she might make use
of that authority which naturally and originally was vested in her, to reform
her self, without the leave of the particular Church of Rome, or any other
whatsoever of the Sister-Churches. The Church is likened to a City in the Book
of God, a City at unity in it self, as the Psalmist calls it; and as a City it
consists of many houses, and in each house a several and particular Family.
Suppose this City visi^ed with some general sickness, may no^ each family take
care to preserve it self, advise with the Physician, and apply the Remedy,
without consulting with the rest? Or if consulting with the rest, must they
needs ask leave also of the Mayor or principal Magistrate, take counsel with no
other Doctors, and follow no other course of Physic then such as he commends
unto them, or imposes on them? Or must the lesser languish irremediably under
the calamity, because the greater and more potent Families do not like the
cure? Assuredly it was not so in the primitive times, when it was held a
commendable and lawful thing for National and particular Churches to reform
such errors and corruptions as they found amongst them; nor in the Church of
Judah neither, when the Idolatries of their N^ighbours had got ground upon
them* Though Isra^l transgress^, (...) not Judah sin, says the Prophet Hosea
chap. 4. Yet Israel was the greater and more numerous people. Ten Tribes to
two; two of the ten the eld^st sons of their Father Jacob, all of them older
then Benjamin the last begotten* being the second of the two: which
notwithstanding the Kings of Judah might and did proceed to a Reformation,
though those of Israel did refuse to cooperate with them. The like was also
done de facto and de jure too in the best and happiest-times of Christianity:
there b^ing many errors and un^ound opinions condemned in the Councels of
G^ngra, Aquilia, Cart^age* Mil^vis; and not a ^ew cor^up^ions in the practical
part of Religion reformed in the Synods of ^liberis, Laodic^a, Arles, and
others in the fourth Century of the Church: without advising or consul^ing with
the R^man Oracle, or running to the Church of Rome for a confirmation of their
Acts and doings* though at that time invested with a greater and more powerful
princi^ality then the others were. No such regard had in those ti^es to the
Church of Rome, though the elder Sister, but that another National Church might
reform without her: nor any such consideration had of the younger S^sters, that
one should ^arry for another till they all agreed, though possibly they might
all be sensible of the inconvenience, and all alike desirous of a speedy
Remedy. But of this more anon in Answer to the next Objections.

Proceed we now a little ^urther, and let us grant for once that the Church of
England was a Member at that time of the Church of Rome, acknowledging the Pope
for the Head thereof: yet this could be no hindrance to a Reformation* when the
pre^ended Head would not yield unto it, or that the Members could not meet to
consult about it. The whole Body of the Church was in ill condition, every part
unsound, but the disease lay chiefly in the head it self, grown monstrously too
great for the rest of the Members. And should the whole body pine and languish
without hope of ease, because the Head (I mean still the pretended Head) would
not be purged of some supe^fl^ous and noxious humors occasioning giddiness in
the brain, dimnesse in the eye, deafn^sse in the ear, and in a word, a general
and sad distemper unto all the Members? The Pop^ was grown to an exorbitant
height both of pride and power; the Court of Rome wallowing (as in a course of
prosperous fortunes) in all volup^uousnesse and sensuality. Nothing so feared
amongst them as a Reformation* wher^by they knew that an abatement must be made
of their pomp and pleasure. Of these corrup^ions and abuses as of many others
complaint had formerly been made, by Armachanus* Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln,
S. Bernard, Nic^ de Clemangis, an^ other conscientious men in their several
Count^eys: (...) noted and informed against by Wic^l^sse, John (...), etc. Bu^
they complained (...) who was resolv^d not to hear the voice of those (...),
c^armed they never so wis^ly. The Church mean while was in a very ill
condi^i^n, when he that should prescribe the cure, was beco^e the si^kn^sse.
Co^^^dering therefore that a Reformation could not be obtained by the Popes
consent, there was no r^medy but that it must be made without it. The Molten
Calf mod^lled by the Egyptian Apis, and the Altar patte^ned from Dam^s^us, had
made the Israelites (in all probability) a^ great idolaters as their (...), if
the High priests that set them up might have ha^ their Will. Nor had it been
much better wi^h the Church of CHRIST, if Arianism could not have been
suppressed in particul^r Churches, because Liberius Pope of Rome, (supposing
him to be the Head of the Church in g^neral) had subscribed unto it, and that
no error and corruption could have been reformed, which any of the Popes (whose
Graves I am very lo^h to open) had been guilty of, but by their permission. The
Church now were in worse estate under Christian Princes, then when it s^ffered
under the power and tyranny of the Heathen Emperors, if it were not lawf^l for
particular Churches to provide for their own safety and salvation, without
resorting to the Pope: who cannot every day be spoke with, and may (when spoken
with) be pressed with so many inconveniences nearer hand, as not to be at
leisure to attend such businesses as lie furth^r off. And therefore it was well
said by Danet the French Ambass^dor when he communic^ted to the Pope his
Ma^^ers purpose of Reforming the Ga^^^can Church by a National Council: Is
(said he) Paris were on fire, would you not count the Citizens either Fools, or
Madmen, if they should send so far as ^iber for some water to quench it* the
River of S^ine running through the City, and the Marno so near it?

3. That the Church of England might lawfully pr^ceed to a Reformation without
the help of a General Council, or calling in the aid of the Protestant Churches.
But here you say it is object^d, that if a Reformation were so necessary as we
seem to make it, and that the Pope wa^ never like to yield unto it, as the case
then stood; it ought to have been done by a General Council, according to the
usage of the Primitive times. I know indeed that General Councels (such as are
commonly so called) are of excellent use, and that the name thereof is sacred
and of high esteem. But yet I prize them not so highly as Pope Gregory did, who
ranked the ^our first General C^uncels with the four Evangelists: nor am I o^
opinion that they are so necessary to a Reformation either in point of Faith or
corruption of manners, but that the business of the Church may be done without
them. Nay, might I be so bold as to lay my naked thoughts before you (as I
think I may) you would there find it to be some part of my Belief that there
never was, and never can be such a thing as a General Council truly and
properly so called: that is to say, such a General Council to which all the
Bishops of the Church (admiting none but such to the power of vo^ing) have bin
or can be called together by themselves or their Proxies. These which are
commonly so called, as those of Nice, Constant^nople* (...), Chal^^don, were
only of the (...) of the Roman E^pire. Chri^tian Churches ^xisting at that time
in Ethiopia and the Kingdom of Persia (which made up no small p^rt of the
Church of Christ) were neither present at them, nor invi^^d to them. And yet
not all the P^elates neither of the Roman Empire, nor some from ^very Province
of it did attend that service: those Councels only being the Assemblies of some
Eastern Bishop^, such as could most conveniently be drawn together: few of the
Wes^e^n Churches (none at all in some) having or list or leisure ^or so long a
journey: For in the so much celebra^^d Council of Nice, there were but nine
Bishops s^nt from France, but two from Africa, one alone from Spain, none from
the (...) of (...), and out of It^ly, which ^ay nearest to it, none but two
Priests appeared at all, and those as Legat^ from the Pope, not authorized to
represent the Italian Churches; so that of 318 Bishops which were there
assembled, there were but twelve in all, (besides the L^gats of the P^pe) for
the Western Churches: too great a dispropor^ion to entitle it (...) the name of
General. And yet this was more General then the rest that followed: there being
no Bishops of the W^st at all in the second and third, but the Popes
themselves: and in the 4 none but the Legates of the P^pe to supply his place.
So that ^hese (...) were called General, not that they were so in themselves,
but that there was a grea^e^ c^nc^urse to them from the n^^ghbouring Provinces,
then was o^ had been to some o^^ers on the like occasions. Which if it be
enough to (...) a General (...), I s^e no (...) called so too, summoned in the
case of (...) the Patriarch at that time of that ^amous City. For ^he
condemning of whose Heresy there conveen^d not the Bishops of that Province
only, but the Pa^ria^ch o^ Hi^rus^lem, the Bish^p of Caesarea in Palestine,
B^zra in Arabia, Tarsus in Cili^^a, Caesarea in Cappadocia, of Iconium in
Ly^a^ni^, o^ Neo-Caesare^ in Pontus, besides many others from all places, of
the (...) rank and qu^lity, but of lesser fame: not ^o say any thing (...)
Dionysius P^triarch of Alexand^ia, (...) bu^ not (...) in regard of sickness,
which d^f^ct he recompens^d (...) and int^rcourse* or of Dion^sius Pope o^
Rome, so (...) by the Puritan or (...) that he could not shine. So that if the
present of two of the fou^ Pat^iarchs, and the invi^ing of the others, with the
Bishops of so many distant N^tions as were there assembled, ^uffice to make a
General Council; the Council of Antioch might as well have the name of General,
as almost any of the rest which are so entitled.

But laying by th^se thoughts as too strong of the Paradox, and looking on a
General Council in the common noti^n, ^or an Assembly of the Prelates of the
East and West, ^o which the four Patriarchs are invited, and from which no
Bishop is excluded that comes commissionated and instructed to at^^nd the
(...). I cannot think them of such consequence to the Church of God, but that
it may proceed without them to a Reformation. For certainly that saying of S.
Augu^tine in his 4. Book against the two Epistles of the Pelagians, cap. 12. is
^xceeding true, Paucas fuisse haereses ad quas superandas necessarium fuerit
Concilium plenarium occidentis and orientis, that very few Heresies have been
crushed in such General C^uncels. And so far we may say with the learned
Cardinal, that for seven Heresies suppressed in seven General Councel^ (though
by hi^ leave the seventh did not so much suppress as advance an Heresy) an
hundred have been quashed in National and Provincial Synods: whether confirmed
or not confirmed by the P^pes authority, we regard not here. Some instances
here^f in the Synods of Aquileia, Carthage, Gangra, Milevis, we have seen
before, and might add many others now, did we think it necessary. The Church
had been in ill condition, if it had been otherwise, especially under the power
of Heathen Emperors, when such a confluence of the Prelates from all parts of
the world would have been construed a Conspiracy against the State, and drawn
destruction on the Church and the Persons both. Or granting that they might
assemble without any such danger, yet being great bodies, moving sl^wly, and
not without long time and many difficulties and disputes, to be rightly
constituted: the Church would suffer more under such delay by the spreading of
Heresy, then receive benefit by their care to suppress the same. Had the same
course been taken at Alexandria for suppressing Arius, as was before at Antioch
for condemning Paulus; we never had heard news of the Council of Nice; the
calling and assembling whereof took up so long time, that Arianism was diffused
over all the world before the Fathers met together; and could not be suppress^d
(though it were condemned) in many ages following after. The plague of Heresy,
and leprosy of sin would quickly overrun the whole face of the Church, if
capable of no other cure then a General Council. The case of Arius, and the
universal spreading of his Heresy compared with the quick rooting out of so
many others, makes this clear enough.

To go a little further yet, we will suppose a General Council to be the best
and safest Physic that the Church can take, on all occasions of Epidemical
distemper; but then we must suppose it at such times and in such cas^s only,
when it may conveniently be had. For where it is not to be had or not had
conveniently, it will either prove to be no Physic, or not worth the taking.
But so it was, that at the time of the Reformation, a General Council could not
conveniently be assembled, and more then so it was impossible that any such
Council should assemble; I mean a General Council rightly called and
constituted, according to the Rul^^ laid down by our Controversors. For first
they say it must be called by such as have power to do it. 2. That it must be
intimated to all Christian Churches, that so no Church nor people may plead
ignorance of it. 3. The Pope and the four chief Patriarchs must be present at
it, either in person or by Proxy. And lastly, that no Bishop is to be
excluded, if he be known to be a Bishop and not excommunicated. According to
which Rules, it was impossible I say, that any General Council should be
assembled at the time of the Reformation of the Church of England. It was not
then as when the greatest part of the Christian world wa^ under the command of
the Roman Emperors; whose Edict for a Gen^ral Council ^igh^ speedily be posted
over all the Provinces. The Messengers who should now be sent on such an errand
unto the Countries of the Turk, the Persian, the Tartarian, and the great Mogul
(in which are many Christian Churches, and more perhaps then in all the rest of
the world besides) would find but sorry entertainment. Nor was it then, as
when the four chief Patriarchs, together with their Metropolitans and Suffragan
Bishops, were under the protection of the Christian Emperors, and might without
danger to themselves or unto their Churches, obey the intimation and attend the
service: those Patriarchs with their Metropolitans and Suffragans, both then
and now langu^shing under the tyranny and power of the Turk, to whom so general
a confluence of Christian Bishops, must n^eds give matter of suspicion, of just
fears and jealousies, and therefore not to be permitted (as far as he can
possibly hind^r it) on good Reason of State. For who knows better the^
themselves how long and dangerous a war was raised against their Predecessors
by the Western Christians for recovery of the Holy Land, on a resolution taken
up at the Council of Cle^mont; and that ^^^ing war against the Turks is still
^steemed a cause sufficient ^or a General Council. And then besides it would be
known by whom this General Council was to be assembl^d* if by the Pope, as
generally the Papists say, he and his Court were looked on as the greatest
grievance of the Christian Church: and 'twas not probable that he would call a
Council against himself, unless he might have leave to pack it, to govern it
by his own Legates, fill it with Titular Bishops of his own creating, and send
the Holy Ghost to them in a Clok^bag as he did to Trent. If jointly by all
Christian Princes (which is the common Tenet of the Protestant Schools) what
hopes could any man conceive (as the times then were) that they should lay
aside their particul^r interesses, to center all together upon one design? or
if they had agreed about it, what power had they to call the Prelates of the
East to att^nd the business, or to protect them for so doing at their going
home? So that I look upon the hopes of a General Council, I mean a General
Council rightly called and constit^ted, as an empty (...). The m^st that was to
be expected was but a meeting of some Bishops of the West of Europe, and those
but of (...) party only: such as were excommunicated, (and th^^ might be as
many as the Pope should please) being to be excluded by the Cardinals Rule.
Which how it may be call^^ ^n Oecumenial or General Council, unless it be a
Topical Ecumenical, a Particular-general (as great an absurdity in Grammar, as
a Roman Catholic) I can hardly see.

Which being so, and so no question but it was, either the Church must continue
without ^eformati^n, or el^e it must be lawful for National pa^ticular
Churches to reform themselves. In such a case the Church ^ay be reformed per
parts, Part after part, Province after Province, as is said by Gerson. But I
do not me^^ (...) trouble you with this Dis^^^^. (...) may reform themselves by
National or Provincial Coun^^ls, (...) Church general will not do it, or that
it cannot be effected by a General Council, has been so fully proved by my
Lord of Canterbury in his learned and elaborate discourse against Fisher the
Jesuit, tha^ nothing can be added unto so great diligence. But if it be
objected, as you say it is, that National Councels have a power of Promulgation
only, not of (...) also: I answer first, that this runs cross to all the
current of Antiquity, in which not only National but Provincial Councels did
usually determine in the poin^^ of Faith, and these too of the greatest moment,
as did that of Anti^ch; which if it were somewhat more then a National, was
notwithstanding never reckoned for a General Council. I answer secondly as
before, that for one Heresy suppress^d in a General Council, there have been
ten at least suppressed in National and Provincial Synods; which could not be in
case they had no power of Determination. And thirdly, That the Articles or
Confession of the Church of England are only Declaratory of such Catholic
Doctrines as were received of old in the Church of CHRIST, not Introductory of
new ones of their own devising; as might be evidenced in particular, were this
place fit for it. But what needs any proof at all, when we have Confession? For
the Archbishop of Spalato (a man as well studied in the Fathers, as the best
amongst them) ingenuously acknowledged at the High Commission, that the
Articles of this Church were profitable, none of them Heretical; and that he
would defend the honor of the Church of England against all the world. And
this he said at the very time of his departure, when his soul was gone before
to Rome, and nothing but his carcass left behind in England. The like avowed
by Davenport, or Franciscus a Sancta Clara (call him which you will) who makes
the Articles of this Church rightly understood according to the literal
meaning, and not perverted to the ends of particular Factions, to be capable of
a Catholic and Orthodox sense: which is as much as could be looked for from
the mouth of an Adversary. So much as cost one of them his life (though perhaps
it will be said that he died in prison) and the burning of his body after his
death; though he endeavored to save both by a Retractation. So that in thi^
case (...) we have omni^ been, (...) amiss in the proceedings of this Church,
with reference to the Pope or a General Council.

But you will say, that though we could not stay the calling of a General
Council, which would have justified ^ur proceedings in the eyes of our
Adversaries* it had been requisite even in the way of civil Prudence to have
taken the advice of the Sister-Churches, especially of those which were ^ngaged
at the same time in the same designs: which would have add^d r^putation to us
in the eyes of our Friends. As for the taking counsel of the Sister-Churches,
it has been t^uch^d upon ^lready, and therefor we shall say no more as t^
that particular: unless the Sister-Churches of these later tim^^ had been like
the Believers in the infancy of the Ch^istian Faith, when they were all of one
heart and one soul, as the Scripture has it, Act. 4. their couns^ls had been
(...), if not destructive. It Is true inde^d, united Councel^ are the stronger
and of greater weight, and not to be neglected wh^re they may be had; but where
they are not to be had, we ^ust act without them. And if we look into the time
of our Reformation, we shall find those that were engaged in the same design,
divided into obstinate parties; and holding the names of Luther and Zuinglius
in an higher estimate then either the truth of the Opinion in which they
differed, or the common happiness of the Church so disturbed between them. The
breath not lessened, but made wider by the rise of Calvin, succeeding not long
after in the fame of Zuinglius: besides, that living under the command of
several Princes, and those Prince^ driving on to their several ends; it had
been very difficult, if not impossible to draw them unto such an Harmony of
affections, and consent in judgment, as so great a business did require. So
that the Church of England was necessitated in that conjuncture of affairs to
proceed as it did, and to act that single by it self, which could not be
effected by the common Councels, and joint concurrence of the others. It Is
true, Melanchthon was once coming over in King Henry's days, but st^id his
journey on the death of Queen Anne Bullen, and that he was after sent f^r by
King Edward the sixth (Regis Literi^ in Angliam vocor) as he affirms in an
Epistle unto Camerarius, anno 1553. But he was staid at that time also on some
other occasion, though had he come at that time he had come too late to have
had any hand in the Reformation, the Articles of the Church being passed, the
Liturgy reviewed and settled in the year before. And it is as true that Calvin
offered his assistance to Archbishop Cranmer, for the reforming of this Church;
Si quis mei usus esset, as his own words are, i^ his assistance were thought
n^edfull to advance the work. But Cranmer knew the man* and refused the offer;
and he did very wisely in it. For seeing it impossible to unite all parties, it
had been an imprudent thing to have closed with any. I grant indeed that Martin
Bucer and P^ter Martyr (men of great learning and esteem, but of different
judgments) were brought over hither, about the beginning of the reign of K
Edward 6. the one of them being placed in Oxford, the other in Cambridge; but
they were rather entertained as private Doctors to m^derate in the Chairs of
those. Universities, then any ways made use of in the Reformation. For as the
^i^st Liturgy which was the main key unto the work, was framed and settled
before either of them were come over; so Bucer died, before the compiling of
the Book of Articles, which was the acc^mplishment thereof: nor do I find that
Peter Martyr was made use of otherwise in this weighty business, then to make
that good by disputation, which by the Clergy in their Synods or Convocations
was agreed upon. By means whereof the Church proceeding without reference to
the different interesses of the neighboring. Churches, kept a conformity in
all such points of Government and publ^q^e order with the Church of Rome, in
which that Church had not forsaken the clear Tract of the primitive Times:
retaining not only the Episcopal Government, with all the concomitants and
adjuncts of it, which had been utterly abolished in the Zuinglian Churches, and
much impaired in power and jurisdiction by the Luth^rans also: and keeping up a
Liturgy or set form of worship, according to the rites and usages of the
primitive times, which those of the (...) congreg^^io^s would not hearken to.
God certainly h^d so disposed it in his heavenly wisdom, that so this Church
without respect unto the names and Dictate^ of particular Doctors, might found
its Reformation on the Prophets and Apostles only, according to the
Explications and Traditions of the ancient Fathers: and being so founded in it
self, without respect to any of the differing parties, might in succeeding Ages
sit as Judge between them; as being more inclinable by her constitution to
mediate a peace amongst them then to espouse the quarrel of either side, to the
Popes authority on the one side, or on the other side. And though Spal^to in
the Book of his Retractations, which he calls Consilium re^eundi, objects
against u^: That besides the public Articles and confession authorized by the
Churches, we had embraced some Lutheran and Calvinian Fancies (multa Lutheri
and (...) dog^ata, so his own words run) yet this was but the (...) of
particular men, not to be charged upon the Church as maintaining either. The
Church is constant to her safe and her first conclusions, though many private
men take liberty to embrace new Doctrines.

4. That the Church did not innovate in translating the Scripture^ and the
public Liturgy into vulgar tongues; and of the consequents thereof in the
Church of England.
The next thing faulted (as you say) in the Reformation, i^ the committing so
much heavenly treasure to such rotten vessels, the trusting so much excellent
Wine to such musty bottles: I mean the versions of the Scriptures and the
public Liturgies into the usual Languages of the common people, and the
promiscuous liberty indulged them in it. And this they charge not as an
Innovation simply, but as an Innovation of a dangerous consequence; the sad
effects whereof we now see so clearly. A charge which does alike concern all the
Pr^testant and Reformed Churches, so that I should have passed it over at the
present time, but that it is made our^ more specially in the application; the
sad effects which the enemy does so much insult in being said to be more
visible in the Church of England, then in other place^. This makes it our^, and
therefore here to be considered, as the former were. First then they charge it
on the Church as an Innovation, it being affirmed by Bellarmine in his 2. Book
De verbo Dei, cap. 15. (whether with less truth or modesty, it is hard to say)
Vniversam Ecclesiam semper his tantum linguis, etc. that in the Universal
Church in all times foregoing the Scriptures were not commonly and publicly
read in any other language but in the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin: this is (you
se^) a two-edged sword, and strikes not only against all Transla^i^ns of the
Scriptures into vulgar languages for comm^n use, but against reading those
Translation^ publicly (...) part o^ the Liturgy, in which are many things as
the Cardinal tel^ u^ quae secreta esse debent, which are not fit to be made
known to the common people. This is the substance of the charge, and herein we
join issu^ in the usual Form with Absque hoc, sans ceo, no such matter really;
the constant current of Antiquity does affi^m the contrary: by which it will
appear most plainly that the Church did neither innovate in this act of hers,
nor d^via^e therein from the Word of God, or from the usage of the best and
happiest times of the Church of CHRIST. Not from the Word of God, there is no
doubt of that, which was committed unto writing that it ^ight be read, and read
by all that were to be directed and guided by it. The Scriptures of the Old
Testament first writ in Hebrew, the Vulgar language of that people, and read
unto them publicly on the Sabbath dai^s, as appears clearly Act. 13. 15. and
15. 21. translated afterward (by the cost and care of Ptolemy Philadelphus
King of Egypt) into the Greek tongue, the most known and studied language of
the E^stern world. The N^w Testament first w^it in Gr^ek for the self-same
reason, (but that St. Matthew'^ Gospel i^ ^ffirmed by some learned men to have
been written in the Hebrew) and written to thi^ end and purpose, that men might
believe t^^t JESUS is the CHRIST the Son of GOD, and that believing they might
have use in his Name, Joh. 20. verse. ult. But being that all the Faithful did
not understand these Languages, and that the light of h^ly Scripture might not
be likened to a Candl^ hidden under ^ ^ushel: it wa^ thought good by many ^odly
men in the P^i^itive tim^s to translate the same into the ^an^uag^s of the
Countries in which th^^ lived, or of the which th^^ had been Na^ives. In which
respect S Chrysostom then banished in^o Armenia, translated the New Testament,
and the P^alms of David, into the Language of that people; S. Hierom a
Pannonian born, translated the whole Bible into the Dalmatick tongue, as
Vulphilas Bishop of the Go^hes did into the G^thick* all which we find
together without fu^ther search, in the Bibliotheque of Sixtus Senensis, a
learned and ingenu^us man but a Pontifician, and so less partial in this
cause. The like done h^re in England by the care of Athelstan causing a
Translation of the Saxon Tongue; the like done by Method^us, the Apostle
Gen^r^l of the Sclaves, translating it into the Sclavonian for the use of those
Nations: not to say any thing of the Syriack, Aethiopick, Arabic, the Pe^sian,
and Chaldaean Versions, of which the times and Authors are not so well known.
And what I pray you, is the vulgar or old Latin Edition, (of late times made
Authentic by the Popes of Rome) but a Translation of the Scriptures out of
Greek and Hebrew for the ins^ruction of the Roman and Italian Nations, to whom
the Latin at that time was the Vulgar Tongue? And when that Tongue by reason
of the breaking in of the barbarous Nations was worn out of knowledge, (I mean
as to the common people) did not God stir up James, Archbishop of Genoa, when
the times were darkest (that is to say, anno ^290. or the^eabouts) to give some
light to them by translating the whole Bible into the Italian, the modern
Lan^u^ge of that Country? As he did Wi^lef not long after, to translate the
same into the English of those times, (the Saxon Tongue not being then commonly
underst^od) a copy of whose Version in a fair Velom Manuscript I have now here
by me, by the gift of my noble Friend Charles Dymoke, Hereditary Champion to
the Kings of England. So then it is no innovation to translate the Scriptures;
and less to suffer these Translations to be promiscuously read by all sorts of
people: the Scripture being as well MILK for Babes, as strong Meat for the man
of more able judgment. Why else does the Apostle note it as a commend^ble
thing in Timothy, that he knew the Scriptures from his childhood? and why else
does S. Hierom speak it to the honor of the Lady Paula, that she made her
maids learn somewhat daily of the holy Scriptures? Why else does Chrysostom
call so earnestly on all sorts of men to provide themselves of the holy Bibles,
(...), the only Physic for the Soul, as he calls it there: inviting to the
reading thereof not only men of learning and public business; but even the
poor Artificer also, as is acknowledged by Senensis whom before we mentioned.
And why else does S. Augustine inform his Auditors, that it suffices not to
hear the Scriptures read in the Congregation, unless they read also in their
private Ho^ses. Assuredly if Boys and Girls, if Servants and Artificers are
called upon so earnestly to consult the Scriptures, t^ have them in a Tongue
intelligible to them in their private Fa^ilies; and are commended for so doing
as we see they are: I know no rank of men that can be excluded.

Let us next see whether it be an Innovation in the Church of CHRIST, to have
the Li^urgies or Comm^n-prayers of the Church in the Tongue generally
understood by the comm^n People, which make the greatest number of all Church
Assemblies. And first we find by the Apostle not only that the public Praye^s
of the Church of C^rinth, were celebrated in a language which they understood;
but that it ought to be so also in all other Churches, Except (says he) ye
utter by the voice words easy to be understood, how shall it be known what is
spoken? How shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned say Ame^ to thy
giving of thanks (and consequently to thy Prayers also) if he understand not
what thou say? 1 Cor. 14. 9. 16. What say the Papists unto this? Do not both
Lyra and Aquinas expressly grant in their Commentaries on this place of
Scripture, that the common Service of the Church in the Primitive times was in
the common vulgar language? Is not the like affirmed by Harding in his Answer
to Bishop Jewels challenge, Art. 3. Sect. 28. Adding withal, that it was
necessary in the Primitive times that it should be so; and granting that it
were still better that the people had their Service in their own vulgar Tongue
for their better understanding of it? Sect. 33. Having thus Confitentes reos,
we need seek no further, and yet a further search will not be unprofitable. And
on that search it will be found that the converted Jews did celebrate their
divine Offices (^ractatus and oblationes, as the Father has it) most commonly
in the Syriack, and sometimes in the Hebrew tongue; the natural ^anguages of
that people: as is affirmed by S. Ambr^se in 1. ad Cor. cap. 14. and out of him
by Durand in his R^ti^n^le Divinorum. Eckius a great stickler of the Popes,
affirms in his Common places, that the Indians have their Service in the
Indian tongue; and that S. Hierome having translated the whole Bible into the
D^lmatick, procured that the Service should be celebrated in that Language
also. The like S. H^erome himself in his Epistle to Heliodorus, has told us
(...) the Bessi a Sarmation people: the like S. Basil in his Epistle to the Ne^
caesareans, assures us for the Egyptians, Libyans, Palestinians, Phenicians,
Arabians, Syrians, and such as dwell about the B^nks of the River Euphrates.
The Aethiopians had their M^ssal, the Chaldeans theirs; each in the language of
their Countries, which they still retain: So had the M^scovites of old, and all
the scattered Churches of the Eastern parts, which they continue to this day.

But nothing is more memorable in this kind then that which Aenaeas Silvius
tells of the Sclavonians, who being converted to the Faith made suite unto the
Pope to have the public Service in their natural Tongue: but some delay being
made therein by the Pope and Cardinals, a voice was heard, seeming to have come
from Heaven, praying, Omnis Spiritus laudet Dominum, and omnis lingua
con^iteatur ei: whereupon their desires were granted without more dispute.
Touching which Grant there is extant an Epistle from Pope John the 8. to
Sfentopulcher King of the Moravian Selaves, anno 888. at what time both the
Latin Service and the Popes authority were generally received in those parts
of Europe. Which Letter of Pope John the 8. together with the Story above
mentioned, might probably be a chief inducement to Innocent the 3. to set out a
Decree in the Lateran Council, importing that in all such Cities in which there
was a concourse of diverse Nations, and consequently of different Languages, (as
in most Towns of Trade there does use to be) the Servi^e should be said, and
Sacraments administered, Secundum diversitates nationum and linguarum, according
to the difference of their Tongues and Nations* And though Pope Gregory the 7.
a turbulent and violent man, about 200 years after the Concession made by John
the S. in his Letter to Vratislaus King of Bohemia, labored the cancelling of
that privilege, and possibly might prevail therein as the ^imes then were: yet
the Liburnians, and Dalmatians, two Sclavonian Nations, and bordering on Italy
(the Popes proper seat) do still enjoy the benefit of that indulgence, and
celebrate their Liturgy in their own Language to this very day. So that the
wonder is the greater that those of Rome should stand so stiffly in defense of
the Latin Service, which the common people understand not, and therefore
cannot knowingly, and with faith say Amen unto it. For though the Latin Tongue
was Vulgar in a manner to those Western Nations, amongst whom the Latin
Service was first received, and for that cause received because Vulgar to them:
yet when upon the inundation of the barbarous nation, the Latin tongue
degenerated into other Languages, as in France, Italy, and Spain; or else was
quite worn out of knowledge as in Britain, Belgium, and some parts of the
modern Germany, in which before it had been commonly understood; it was both
consonant to piety and Christian Prudence* that the Language of the common
Liturgies should be altered also. The people otherwise either in singing
David's Psalms, or repeating any parts of the daily Office, must needs be like
those Romans or Italians which S. Ambrose speaks of; who loved to sing Greek
songs by rote (as we use to say) out of a mere delight which they had to the
sound of the words; nescientes tamen quid dicant, not understanding one word
which they said or sung.

The blame and guilt of Innovation being taken off, we must next examine the
effects and dangerous consequents; more visibly discerned at this time in the
Church of England, then was or could have been believed when they were first
intimated. Amongst these they reckon in the first place the increase of
Heresies, occasioned by the mistaking of the true sense and meaning of the Holy
Scripture; and to that end it is said by Bellarmine, that the people would not
only receive no good by having the Scripture read publicly unto them in their
national Languages, Sed etiam caperet detrimentum, but on the contrary are like
to receive much hurt. However, acciperet facillime occasionem errandi: because
thereby they would most easily be led into errors: which gave occasion unto
some (as he tells as there) to call the Scripture Librum Haereticorum, the
Heretics Book. So he in his 2. Book and 15. chapter, De verbo Dei. The like
says Harding in his Answer to Bishop Iewel's Challenge, Art 3. sect. 31. The
Nations (says he) that have ever had they Service in the vulgar Tongue (where
note that some Nations never had it otherwi^e) have continued still in Errors,
Schisms, and certain Judaical Ceremonies, etc. In the next place they ^eckon
this, that by permitting Scripture and the public Liturgies to be extant in
the Vulgar Tongues, all men would think themselves Divines, and (...) authority
of the Prelates would be disesteemed; So Harding in his Answer to Jewels
Apology. l 5. fol. 460. that the people not content with hearing or (...) the
holy Scripture, would first take upon them to be Expositors, and at last to be
Preachers also, which in effect is that which is charged by Bellarmine. And for
this last, the present Distempers and consusions in the Church of England (out
of which they suck no small advantage) gives them great rejoicing, as seeing
their predictions so exactly verified. In answer to the first we need say no
more, then that there have been Sects and Heresies in all times and Ages: never
so many as in the first ages of the Church (witness the Catalogue of S.
Augustine, Philastrius, and Epiphanius) in which the Scripture was translated
into fewer Languages then it is at the present. 2. That this is no necessary
effect of such Translations (for we see few new Heresies started up of late in
France or Germany, where such Translations are allowed of) but a mere possible
Contingency, which (...) may be or may not be, as it pleases God to give or to
withdraw his grace from a State or Nation. And 3. That as according to the
Divine Rule of the Apostle, we must not do a thing positively evil, in hope
that any good, how great soever, may come of it: so by Analogy thereunto, we
must not debar the people of God from any thing positively good, for fear that
any contingent mischief may ensue upon it. But of this I shall not say more
now, as being loath to travel on a common place. The point has been so
canvassed by our Controversors, that you may there find Answers unto all
Objections.

That which does most concern me to consider of, is the second consequent,
because it does relate more specially then the other did to the present
condition and estate of the Church of England. Although the Charge be general
and equally concerning all the Protestant and Reformed Churches: yet the
Application makes it ours, as before I said, and as ours, properly within the
compass of my present design. And though I will not take upon me to Advocate
for the present distempers and confusions of this w^etched Church (which no man
can lament with a greater tenderness, or look on with more indignation then I
do, and I think you know it): yet I must tell you that it is neither Novum
crimen C. Caesar, nor ante haec tempora inauditum, for those of the inferior
sort to take upon them the inquiry into sacred matters, to turn Expositors
(...) (...), as the spirit of delusion moves them. The people have had an itch
this way, i^ all times and Ages. The Satyrist thus complained of it amongst the
Heathens; -- Ecce inter pocula quaerunt
Romulides satu^i, quid dia Poema^a narrant.


That is to say, The wel-^ed Romans in their Cups, do sit
And judge of things contained in holy Writ.
And the Apostle does complain of it among the Christians, where he informs us
of some ignorant and unstable men, which wrested some hand places of S. Paul's
Epistles, as they also did the other Scriptures, to their own destruction, 2
Pet. 3. 26 and wrest them so they could not (I am sure of that) did they not
take the liberty of expounding also. Look lower to S. Basils time, when
learning did most flourish in the Church of CHRIST, and we shall find the
Emperors Cook (or the Clerk of his Kitchen at the best) as busily dishing out
the Scriptures, as if it were no more then serving up his Masters diet from the
Kitchin-hatch: paid home by that good father for his overgreat sauciness, with
this handsome scoff, Tuum est de pulmento cogitare, non Divind decoquere, that
it belonged unto his office to provide good pottage for the Court, not to Cook
the Scriptures. But this was not the folly only of this Master Cook, who
perhaps (though better fed then taught) might now and then have carried up the
Chaplains Mess, and having heard their learned conferences and discourses, was
apt enough to think himself no small fool at a joint of Divinity. That whole
age was extremely tainted with the self-same p^^cancy; of which S. Hierome in
his Epistle to Paulinus makes this sad complaint. Whereas (says he) all other
Sciences and Trades have their several and distinct professors, Sola
Scripturarum ars est quam omnes passim sibi vendicant; only the Art of opening
or rather of undoing a Text of Scripture, (as the phrase is now) was usurped by
all: Hanc garrula anus, hanc delirus senex, etc. The prattling Gossip and the
doting Sire, the windy Sophister, and in a word, all sorts of people do presume
upon, dismembring the body of the Scriptures, and teaching others before they
have learnt any thing that is worth the teaching. Some with a supercilious
look, speaking big words discourse of holy Scripture amongst silly women:
others (the more the shame) learn that of women which afterward they may teach
to men, and some with no small volubility of tongue, and confidence, teach that
to others which they never understood themselves: Not to say any thing of those
who having a smack of humane learning, and coming so prepared to handle the
Holy Scriptures, do with ent^c^ng words feed the ears of the people, bearing
their Auditors in hand quicquid dixerint legem Dei esse, that whatsoever they
deliver is the Word of God, nor will vouchsafe to learn what the Prophets and
Apostles do conceive of the matter, but very incongruously produce some
Testimoni^s out of holy Writ to make good their corrupt imaginations; as if it
were an excellent, not a pernicious way of teaching, to wrest the sense of holy
Scripture, and thereby to accommodate it to their present purposes! Has not
the Father given us in this place and passage a most excellent Mirror, wherein
to see the ill complexion of the present times? does not he set them forth in
such likely colors, as if he rather did delineate the confusions of the
present Age, then lament the miseries of his own? May not both Factions see by
this, what a condition the poor Church of England is involved in by them? The
sight whereof although it justify them not in their several courses, as being
not without example in their present practices): yet it may serve to let you
know that as the distractions and confusions under which we suffer, are not the
consequents of our translating of the Scriptures and public Liturgies into the
common vulgar Tongues, so ^t is neither ^ew no^ stran^e that such confusions
and distractions should befall the Church.

5. That the proceedings of this Church in setting out the English Liturgy,
were not merely Regal; and of the power of Sovereign Princes in Ecclesiastical
affairs.
Having thus proved that nothing has been done amiss by the Church of
England, with reference to God^ Word, the testimonies of godly Fathers, and the
usage of the primitive times, in leaving off the Latin Service, and
celebrating all Divine Offices in the English Tongue: I am to justify it next,
in order to the carrying on of that weighty business, whether so Regular or
not, as we fain would have it. I see you are not scrupled at the subject matter
of the Common Prayer Book, which being translated into Greek, Latin, French,
and Spanish, has found a general applause in most parts of Christendom; no
where so little set by as it is at home. All scruples in that kind have been
already fully satisfied by our learned Hooker, who has examined it per parts,
and justified it in each part and particular Office. But for the greater honor
of it take this with you also, which is alleged in the Conference of Hampton
Court, touching the Marquess of Rhosny (after Duke of Sally and Lord High
Treasurer of France) who coming Ambassador to King James from Henry the 4. and
having seen the solemn celebration of our Service at Cante^bury, and in his
Majesty's Royal Chapels, did often and publicly affirm, that if the Reformed
Churches in France ^ad (...) the same Orders as were here in E^gland, he was
assured there would have been many thousand Protestants in that Kingdom more
then were at that time. That which you seem to stick at only is in the way and
manner of proceeding in it: which though you find by perusal of the papers
which I sent first unto you, not to have been so Parliamentarian as the Papists
made it; yet still you doubt whether it were so Regular and Canonical as it
might have been. And this you stumble at the rather, in regard that the whole
Body of the Clergy in their Convocation, had no hand therein, either as to
decree the doing of it, or to approve it being done; but that it was resolved
on by the King (or rather by the Lord Protector in the Kings Minority) with
some few of the Bishops; by which Bishops and as small a number of learned
Churchmen, being framed and fashioned, it was allowed of by the King,
confirmed or imposed rather by an Act of Parliament. Your question hereupon is
this, Whether the King (for his acting it by a Protector does not change the
Case) consulting with a less^r part of his Bishops and Clergy, and having their
consent therein, may conclude any thing in the way of a Reformation, the
residue and greatest part not advised withal, nor yielding their consent unto
it in a formal way. This seems to have some reference to the Scottish Liturgy
(for by your Letter I perceive that one of the chief of your Objectors is a
Divine of that Nation) and therefore it concerns me to be very punctual in my
Answer to it.

And that my Answer may be built on the surer Ground, it is to be consid^red,
first whither the Reformation be in corruption of manners, or abuses in
Government, whether in matters pr^ctical, or in points of Doctrine. 2. If in
matters practical, whether such practice have the character of Antiquity,
Vni^ersality, and Consent, imprinted on it; or that it be the practice of
particular Churchs, and of some times only. And 3. if in points of Doctrine,
whether such points have been determined of before in a General Council, or in
particular Councels universally received and countenanced; or are to be defined
de novo on emergent controversies. And these Disti^ctions being laid, I shall
answer briefly. First, if the things to be reformed be either corruptions in
manners, or neglect of public duties to Almighty God, abuses either in
Government or the parties governing: the King may do it of himself by his sole
authority. The Clergy are beholding to him, if he takes any of them along with
him when he goes about it. And if the times should be so bad, that either the
whole body of the Clergy or any (though the greatest) part thereof should
oppose him in it; he may go forwards notwithstanding, punishing such as shall
gainsay him in so good a work, and compelling others. And thi^ I look on as a
Power annexed to the Regal Diadem, and so inseparably annexed, that Kings could
be no longer Kings if it were denied them. But hereof we have spoke already in
the first of this Section, and shall speak more hereof in the next that
follows. And on the other side, if the Reformation be in points of Doctrine,
and in such points of doctrine as have not been before defined, or not defined
in form, and manner as before laid down: the King only with a few of his
Bishops and learned Clergy (though never so well studied in the point disputed)
can do nothing in it. That belongs only to the whole Body of the Clergy in
their Convocation rightly called and constituted; whose Acts being ratified by
the King, bind not alone the rest of the Clergy in whose names they Voted, but
all the residue of the subjects of what sort soever, who are to acquiesce in
their Resolutions. The constant practice of the Church, and that which we have
said before touching the calling and authority of the Convocation, makes this
clear enough. But if the thing to be Reformed be a matter practical, we are to
look into the usage of the primitive times. And if the practice prove to have
been both ancient and universally received over all the Church, though
intermitted for a time and by time corrupted: the King consulting with so many
of his Bishops and others of his most able Clergy, as he thinks fit to call
unto him, and having their consent and direction in it; may in the case of
intermission revive such practice, and in the case of corruption and
degeneration restore it to its Primitive and original luster, whether he do it
of himself, of his own mere motion, or that he follow the advice of his Council
in it; whether he be of age to inform himself, or that he does rely on those
to whom he has committed the public Government; it comes all to one: so they
restrain themselves to the ancient patterns. The Reformation which was made
under Josias, though in his Minority and acting by the Counsel of the Elders as
Josephus tells us, Antiqu* Iud 1. cap. was no less pleasi^g unto God, nor
less valid in the eyes of all his subjects; then those of Ieh^saphat and
H^zekiah in their riper years, and perhaps acting ^i^gly on the str^ngth of
their own judgments only without any advice. Now that there should be
Liturgies for the use of the Church, that those Liturgies should be celebrated
in a language understood by the people: that in those Liturgi^s there should be
some prescribed Forms for giving the Communion in both kinds, for Baptizing
Infants, for the reverent celebration of Marriage, performing the last office
to the sick and the decent burial of the Dead, as also for set Feasts and
appointed Festivals; has been a thing of primitive and general practice in the
Christian Church. And being such, though intermitted or corrupted, as before is
said, the King advising with his Bishops and other Church^men (though not in a
Synodical way) may cause the same to be revised and revived: and having fitted
them to edification and increase of piety either commend them to the Church by
his sole authority, or else impose them on the people under certain penalties
by his power in Parliament. Saepe Coeleste Regnum per Terrenum proficit. The
Kingdom of Heaven (said Reverend Isidore of Sevil) does many times receive
increase from these earthly kingdoms; in nothing more then by the regulating
and well ordering of Gods public worship.

We saw before what David did in this particular allotting to the Priest the
Courses of their Ministration, appointing Hymns and Songs for the Jewish
Festivals, ordaining singing-men to sing, and finally prescribing Vestments for
the Celebration. Which what else was it but a Regulating of the worship of God,
the putting it into a sol^mn course and order, to be observed from time to time
in succeeding ages? Sufficient ground for Christian Princes to proceed on in
the like occasions: especially when all they do is rather the reviving of the
Ancient Forms then the Introduction of a new. Which as the King did here in
England by his own Authority, the Body of the Clergy not consulted in it; so
possibly there might be good reason, why those who had the conduct of the Kings
affairs, thought it not safe to put the managing of the business to a
Convocation. The ignorance and superstition of the common people was at that
time exceeding profitable to the Clergy, who by their frequent Masses for the
quick and dead rais^d as great advantage, as Demetrius and the Silver-Smith by
Dianas shrines. It happened also in a time when many of the inferior Clergy had
not much more learning then what was taught them in the Missals and other
Rituals, and well might fear that if the Service were once extant in the
English tongue, the Laity would prove in time as great Clerks as themselves. So
that as well in point of Reputation, as in point of P^ofit, (besides the love
which many of them had to their former Mumps^mus) it was most probable that
such an hard piece of Reformation would not easily down, had it been put into
the power of a Convocation: especially under a Prince in Nonage, and a state
unsettled. And yet it was not so carried without them neither, but that the
Bishops generally did concur to the Confirmation of the Book (or the
approbation of it rather) when it passed in Parliament: the Bishops in that
time and after, (till the late vast and most improvident increase of the
Lay-nobility) making the most considerable, if not the greatest part of the
House of Peers; and so the Book not likely to be there allowed of, without
their consent. And I the rather am inclined unto that Opinion, because I find
that none but Tunstall, Gardener and Bonner were displaced from their
Bishoprics, for not submitting in this case to the Kings appointments; which
seems to me a very strong and convincing argument, that none but they dissented
or refused conformity. Add here, that though the whole body of the Clergy in
their Convocation were not consulted with at first (for the Reasons formerly
recited) yet when they found the benefit and comfort which redounded by it to
good Christian people, and had by little and little wean^d themselves from
their private interesses, they all confirmed it on the Post-fact: passing an
Article in the Convocation of the year 1552. with this Head or Title, viz.
Agendum esse in Ecclesia lingua quae sit Populo nota, which is the 25. Article
in King Edwards Book. Lay all that has been said together, and the result of
all will be briefly this, that being the setting out of the Liturgy in the
English ^ongue was a matter practical agreeable to the Word of God and the
Primitive tim^s; that the King with so many of his Bishops and others o^ the
Clergy as he pleased to call to Counsel in it, resolved (...) on the doing of
it; that the Bishops generally confirmed it when it came before them, and that
the whole body of the Clergy in their Convocation (the Book being then under a
review) did avow and justify it: The result of all I say is this, that as the
work it self I say was good, so it was done not in a Regal but a Regular way,
Kings were not Kings if regulating the external parts of Gods public worship
according to the Platformes of the Primitive times, should not be allowed them.

But yet the Kings of England had a further right as to this particular, which
is a power conferred upon them by the Clergy (whether by way of Recognition or
Concession, I regard not h^re) by which they did invest the King with a Supreme
Au^hority not only of confirming their Synodical Acts not to be put in
ex^cution without his consent; but in effect to devolve on him all that power,
which firmly they enjoyed in their own capacity. And to this we have a paralled
Case in the Roman Empire, in which there had b^^n once a time when the Supreme
Majesty of the S^ate was vested in the Senate and people of Rome, till by the
Law which they called Lex Regia, they transferred all their Power on Caesar,
and the following Emperors. Which Law being passed, the Edicts of the Prince or
Emperor was as strong and binding as the Senatus Consulta and the Pl^bis^ita
had been before. Whence came that memorable Maxim in Justinians Iustitutes;
that is to say, Quod Principi placuerit legis habet vig^rem. The like may be
affirm^d of the Church of England, immediately before, and in the reign of K.
Henry 8. The Clergy of this Realm had a Self-authority in all matters which
concerned Religion, and by their Canons and Determinations did bind all the
subjects of what rank soever, till by acknowledging that King for their supreme
Head, and by the Act of submission not long after foll^wing, they transferred
that power upon the King, and on his Successo^s: By do^ng wher^of they did not
only di^able themselves from concluding any thing in their Convocations, or
pu^ting their results into execution without his con^ent; but put him into the
actual p^ssession of that Authori^y which properly be^onged to the supremacy,
or the supreme Head, in as ^ull manner as (...) the P^pe of Rome, or any
d^l^gated by and under him did before enjoy it. After which (...), whatsoever
the King or his Successors did in the R^form^tion, as it had vertually the
power of the Convocations; so was it as effectual and go^d in law, as if the
Clergy in their C^nvocation particularly, and in terminis, had agreed upon it.
Not that the King or his Successors were hereby enabled to exercise the K^i^s,
and determine Heresies, much less to (...) the Word and administer the
Sacrament^, as the Papists ^alsly gave it out; but as the Heads of the
Ecclesiastical Body of this Realm, to see that all the members of that Body
(...) perform their duties, to rectify what was found amiss amongst them, to
preserve peace between them on emergent differences, to reform such errors and
corruptions as are expressly contrary to the word of God; and finally, to give
strength and motions to their Councels and Determinations, tending to
Edification and increase of Piety. And though in most of their proceeding^
toward Reformation, the Ki^gs advised with such Bishops as they had about them,
or could ass^mble without any great trouble or inconvenience, to advise
wit^all; yet was there no nec^ssity, that all or the greatest part^ of the
Bishops should be drawn together for that purpose, no more then it was
anciently in the Primitive Times for the godly Emperors to c^ll together the
most part of the Bishops in the Roman Empire, for the ^st^blishing of the
matters which com^erned the Church, or for the godly Kings of Judah to call
together the greatest part of the Priests and Levites, before they acted any
thing in the Reformation of those corruptions and abuses which were cr^pt in
amongst them. Which being so; and then with^^l considering as we ought to do,
that there was nothing a^tered here in the state of Religion, till either the
whole Clergy in their (...) the Bishops and most eminent Churchmen had
resolved upon it; our Religion is no more to be called a Regal then a
Parliament-Gospel.

6* That the Clergy lost not any of their just Rights by the Act of Submission,
and the power of calling and confirming Councels did anciently belong to the
Christian Princes.
If you conceive that by ascribing to the King the Supreme Authority, taking
him for their Supreme Head, and by the Act of Submission which ensued upon it,
the Clergy did unwittingly ensnare themselves, and drew a Vas^allage on these
of the times succeeding, inconsistent with their native Rights, and contrary to
the usage of the Primitive Church: I hope it will be no hard matter to remove
that scruple. It Is true the Clergy in their Convocation can do nothing now, but
as their doings are confirmed by the Kings authority, and I conceive it stands
with reason (as well as point of State) that it should be so. For since the two
Houses of Parliament, though called by the Kings Writ, can conclude nothing
which may bind either King or Subject, in their Civil Rights, until it be
made good by the Royal Assent; so neither is it ^it nor safe, that the Clergy
should be able by their Constitutions and Synodical Acts, to conclude both
Prince and People in spiritual matters, until the stamp of Royal Authority be
imprinted on them. The Kings concurrence in this case devesteth not the Clergy
of any lawful power which they ought to have, but restrains them only in the
exercise of some part thereof, to make it more agreeable to Monarchical
Government, and to accommodate it to the benefit both of Prince and People.
It Is true the Clergy of this Realm can neither meet in Convocation, nor
conclude any thing therein, nor put in execution any thing which they have
concluded, but as they are enabled by the Kings authority. But then it is as
true withal, that this is neither inconsistent with their native Rights, nor
contrary unto the usage of the Primitive Times. And first it is not
inconsistent with their native Rights, it being a peculiar happiness of the
Church of England to be always under the protection of Christian Kings; by
whose encouragement and example, the Gospel was received in all parts of this
Kingdom. And i^ you look into Sir Henry Spleman's Collection of the Saxon
Councels, I believe that you will hardly find any Ecclesiastical Canons for
the Government of the Church of England, which were not either originally
promulgated, or after approved and allowed of either by the Supreme Monarch of
all the Saxons, or by some King or other of the several (...), directing in
their National or Provincial Synods. And they enjoyed this Prerogative without
any dispute after the Norman Conquest also, till by degrees the Pope engrossed
it to himself (as before was shown) and then conferred it upon such as were to
exercise the same under his authority: which plainly manifests that the Act of
Su^mission so much spoke of, was but a changing of their dependence from the
Pope to the King, from an usurped to a lawful power, from one to whom they had
made themselves a kind of voluntary slaves, to him who justly challenged a
natural dominion over them; and secondly, that that submission of theirs to
their natural Prince, is not to be considered as a new Concessi^n, but as the
R^cognition only of a former power.

In the next place I do not find it to be contra^y to the usage of the
primitive times. I grant indeed that when the Church was under the command of
the Heathen Emperor^, the Clergy did assemble in their National and Provincial
Synods of their own Authority: which Councels being summoned by the
Metropolitans, and subscribed by the Clergy, were of sufficient power to bind
all good Christians who lived within the Verge of their Jurisdiction. They
could not else assemble upon any exigence of affai^s but by such authority. But
it was otherwise when the Church came under the protection of Christian
Princes: all Emperors and Kings from Constantine the Great (till the Pope
carried all before him in the darker times) accompting it one of the principal
flowers, (as indeed it was) which adorned their D^adems. I am not willing to
beat ^n a common place. But if you please to look into the Acts of ancient
Councels, you will find that all the General Councels (all which deserve to be
so called, if any of them do deserve it) to have been summoned and confirmed by
the Christian Emperors, that the C^uncel of Arles was called and confirmed by
the Emperor Constantine, that of Sardis by Constans, that of Lampsacus by
Valentinian, that of Aqui^eia by Theodosius, that of The^^al^nica (National or
Provincial all) by the Emperor Gratian: that when the Western Empire fell into
the hands of the French, the Councels of A^on, Ment^, Meld^n, Worms, and Colen
received both life and motion ^^om Charles the Great and his Successors in that
Emp^re; it being evident in the Records of the Gallican Church, that the
opening and confirming of all their Councels not only under the Caroline but
under the Merovignean Family, was always by the power, and sometimes with the
Presidence of their Kings and Princes, as you may find in the Collections of
Lindebrogius, and Sirmondus the Jesuit: and finally that in Spain it self
(though now so much obnoxious to the Papal power) the two at Bracara, and the
ten first holden at Toledo, were summoned by the Writ and Mandate of the Kings
thereof. Or if you be not willing to take this pains, I shall put you to a
shorter and an easier search; referring you for your better information in this
particular to the learned Sermon preached by Bishop Andrews at Hampton Court,
anno 1606. touching the Right and power of calling Assemblies, or the right use
of the Trumpets. A Sermon preached purposely at that time and place for giving
satisfaction in that point to Melvin and some leading men of the Scottish
Puritans, who of late times had arrogated to themselves an unlimited power of
calling and constituting their Assemblies without the Kings cons^nt and against
his will.

As for the Vassallage which the Clergy are supposed to have drawn upon
themselves by this Submission, I see no fear or danger of it as long as the two
Houses of Parliament are in like condition; and that the Kings of England are
so tender of their own Prerogative, as not to suffer any one Body of the
Subjects to give a Law unto the other without his consent. That which is most
insisted on for the proof hereof, is the delegating of this power by King Henry
the 8. to Sir Thomas Cromwell (afterward Earl of Essex and Lord high
Chamberlain) by the name of his Vicar General in Ecclesiastical matters: who by
that name p^esided in the Convocation, anno 1536. and acted other things of
like nature in the years next following. And this (especially his presiding in
the Convocation) is looked on both by Sanders and some Protestant Doctors, not
only as a great debasing of the English Clergy (men very learned for those
times) but as deforme satis Spectacu^um, a k^nde of Monstrosity in nature. But
certainly those men forget (though I do not think my self bound to justify all
King Harr^es actions) that in the Council of Cha^^^don* the Emperor appointed
certain Noblemen to ^it as Judges, whose names occur in the first Action of
that Council. The like we find exemplified in the Ephesine Council, in which
by the appointment of Theod^sius and Valentinian then Roman Emp^rours,
Candidianus, a Count Imperial, ^ate as Judge o^ President; who in the managing
of that trust over acted any thing that Cromwell did, or is objected to have
been done by him as the Kings Commissioner. For that he was to have the first
place in those public meetings as the Kings Commissioner, or his
Vicar General, which you will, (for I will neither trouble my self nor you with
disputing Titles) the very Scottish Presbyters, the most rigid sticklers for
their own pretended (and but pretended) Rights which the world affords, do not
stick to yield. No va^^allage of the Clergy to be ^ound in this, as little to
be feared by their submission to the King as their Supreme Governor.

Thus Sir according to my promise, and your expectation have I collected my
Remembrances, and represented them unto you in as good a fashion as my other
troublesome affairs, and the distractions of the time would give me leave* and
therein made you see, (...) my judgment fail not, that neither our King or
Parliaments have done more in matters which concerned Religion and the
Reformation of this Church, then what has formerly been done by the secular
Powers, in the best and happiest times of Christianity; and consequently, that
the clamours of the Papists and Puritans both, which have disturbed you, are
both false and groundless. Which if it may be serviceable to your self, or
others, whom the like doubts and prejudices have possessed or scrupled, It is
all I wish: my studies and endeavors aiming at no other end, then to do all,
the service I can possibly to the Church of God; to whose Graces and divine
Protection you are most heartily commended in our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, By

Sir, Your most affectionate friend to serve you, Peter Heylyn.


