A SERMON Preached at Market Harborow In the County of LEICESTER, On the 17th
day of February, 1684/5. Being the day On which our Sovereign Lord JAMES II.
Was there Proclaimed KING, etc.

By THOMAS HEYRICKE, Minister of Market Harborow.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Heyrick, at Grays-Inn-gate in Holborne. 1685.

To the Right Honorable JOHN Earl of Rutland, Baron of Haddon, Lord Roos of
Hamelake, Trusbut, and Belvoyr, and Lord Lieutenant of the County of Leicester.
My Lord,
IF we consider what pains Men will take to be exquisitely wicked, what
diligence they will use to serve the worst Masters in the worst of Causes; and
as if the way to Hell was not broad and steep enough, with the sweat of their
Brows; loss of their Estate, Rest, and Ease, procure to themselves Infamy,
Death, and Damnation. It not only shows us the Malignity and Poison of their
Natures, that can never rest; but is still throwing them sometimes into the
Fire, and sometimes into the Water: but it reminds us of that indispensable
Obligation and Duty every Virtuous and Loyal Soul lies under, with his utmost
Power, Integrity, and Sincerity to serve his God and his King, and purchase
Heaven and Happiness. And since there is not the most contemptible Instrument,
but by our Enemies is made use of, and has his task allotted him; some to
revile the Government, some to invent some to spread Rumors and Fears; some to
assist with their Heads, some with their Hands, and those with their Purses;
every little wheel helping to move on the ill modelled Fabric: and since every
Loyal Person has an interest and share in his Prince, every one is concerned
in the safety of the Father of his Country; in such times when he is visibly
aimed at by ill-designing Men; I thought I might claim the privilege of
Craesus Son, and cry (God) save the King!

And I am the more emboldned to shelter my self under your Lordships
Protection, because though my unfitness for so great an Attempt as this might
deter me; yet I am assured the design cannot be unacceptable to your Lordship,
who have showed so steady and unbyassed a Loyalty, even in the worst of times;
all your Actions having carried that Spirit of Loyalty, Worth, and Grandeur,
that as they are the glory of this Age, so they may be a Pattern for succeeding
Times.

How needful it is that every one in his several Station should countermine
that restless Party, and quench those Fires they incessantly kindle; Your
Honors Prudence must needs be sensible of, who, not only are placed in Birth
and Authority eminently above, and have a true Prospect of those occurrences
which we but darkly apprehend; but having in your own Person set the Tumultuous
rage of that Seditious Band; which yet has given a luster to all your glories,
the Rabble having no sense of Virtue, but to hate it; and there being no more a
pregnant sign of true worth, and Excellency than their Malice: as Christianity
was honored by being Persecuted by a Nero. Vouchsafe, Great Sir, to accept
this small Testimony of that boundless honor and service I have for your
Lordship, and may the Honesty and Integrity of the Design Atone for the other
Faults, since it comes from an heart full of Gratitude for former Favors, and
from him whose highest Ambition (next to serving his God and his King) is to
show how much he is, My Lord,

Your Lordships most Humble, and Most Obliged Servant THO. HEYRICKE.

Proverbs 21*1. The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the Rivers of
Water: he turns it whithersoever he will.
THere is nothing more unworthy the Prudence of Man, nothing more dangerous to
a Prince or a Nation, nothing more unbeseeming a Christian and derogating from
the honor of God, than for men to entertain and nourish unreasonable Fears,
unaccountable Jealousies, and torment themselves and others with Chimaera's of
their own brain, and fires of their own hot heads. Yet is this sin no less
common than destructive; it seems to be the complexional sin of the Zealots of
our present Age; who have no better way to prove themselves to be Israelites
indeed, but by inheriting that hereditary disease of the Jews, murmuring
against Moses and against God.

Sure if Content be the Top and Aim of happiness, and all our Sweat and Toil,
our weary days and wakeful nights are spent to procure it; if Riches, Honor
and Glory, and all other worldly Goods are therefore desired, because they are
supposed to be the way to Content; so many handmaids to that mighty Queen. And
if there be nothing that is a greater canker to Content than Fears and
Jealousies; if there is no misery equal to living in continual fears, which
sets the mind upon the wildest Attempts, and most dangerous Projects to rid it
self of that intolerable load; if these are such mortal enemies to Content,
that they can never meet in one subject, but bear an irreconcilable hatred one
toward another: that man must needs be concluded to have forfeited all his
Prudence, that will entertain such a nest of Hydras in his breast; studiously
and industriously cherish and nourish them, till they have shed that incurable
venom into his Soul, which will for ever blast all the Comforts and Joys of
his life.

Nor does this evil terminate (as it might have been hoped) in the Authors; for
then the sin would have been but the punishment of the sinner; but it is a
contagious Disease, a spreading Leprosy; it seizes on the Neighborhood, and
involves them in the common ruin. It is safer conversing with a man that has
a Plague Sore on him, than with one that is thus infected. The one is said to
have a burning desire that every one should catch the contagion; and this shows
his, by his unwearied diligence to infuse his venom into others, which if he
cannot or dare not by discourse vent that Adders poison that is under his lips,
he has yet a way of conveying it by signs, by down looks, dejected
countenance, broken and interrupted sighs, shaking of the head, or holding up
the hand, and other such mischievous gesticulations; so that like the
Basiliske, he can kill with the very sight.

It has not seldom been found, that by fears and jealousies artificially
raised, and fomented by ill-designing men, people have been frighted out of
their Wits and their Loyalty: For, when the thoughts are once set on the wing,
who knows where they will stop? and what bounds can be set them? especially, in
an object of fear infused into weak, credulous, and cowardly spirits; then what
Magnifying-glasses do they look through! every molehill becomes a mountain,
and every shadow a formidable monster; till their heads being filled with
frightful apprehensions, and their hearts with Pannick fears, they dream of
nothing but Slavery, Chains, and Death, till like Orestes or Judas, lashed with
their own furies, they have run upon Death for fear of meeting it, as that
Soldier that killed himself for fear of the Enemy. How many men have been
frighted and shouted into War! as though some invisible Demon took delight to
hiss us into Quarrels? How many, forced on by their own fears, have wilfully
plunged themselves into greater miseries than ever they could have endured, had
all they themselves dreaded fallen upon them?

Indeed, from seditious talk to seditious acting is but one step, they seem to
be brothers of the same womb, one a little more grown than the other: When the
heart is once inflamed with talk, it is hard to keep the hand still; so that
from unreasonable fears once infused, there is a natural chain of Evils linked
one upon another, till it terminates in the bottom of Hell. Fear procures
hatred and discontent; that is the assured mother of Murmuring, for fire cannot
be hid. Murmuring is naturally the seed of Sedition, as that is Rebellion
inchoate, and begun; and Rebellion, as it was the first cause of, so it is the
precipitous passage to Hell. So that mischievous fears and jealousies, as they
are commonly infused by the Devil, or some wicked men his Agents, so they
terminate in Hell, they run but round the circle and meet again.

But, that which ought to be dearest to us, our Christian Religion is
dishonored by these discontents and murmurings, nothing being so contrary to
the precepts, intent, and life of Christianity, to the custom of the Primitive
times; to Love, the characteristical note of a Christian, Jo. 13.35. and the
command of being content in all estates; nothing so derogatory from the Honor
of God, as distrust of the Providence of God, and discontent at the
dispensations of it.

This is the Land, and ours are the Times, and I need not tell you who are the
men, that are most guilty of this Vice: There are a sort of volatile spirits,
that can never rest; men that love confusion, and would sure have been good
inhabitants of the Chaos; men whose souls are too fierce and active for their
bodies, and pent up in too narrow a room, with their incessant motion wear them
to nothing. They have the food and look of Envy; they feed on crude and noxious
humors in a Commonwealth; and they have the meager looks and snakes of Envy,
only she wears them on her head, and they in their bosoms. They thirst for
Innovations and Changes, and grow sick with ease; like some fish that live and
delight in the Cataracts and falls of water, and die in still streams: They
suck in ill news as the sweetest repast; and relate it and add to it with such
visible satisfaction, that no Epicure takes more in his choicest Dainties.

Whether this Sin proceeds from Pride and Conceit, as there is no Rebellion but
has a tincture of that; for every Rebel thinks he is fit to govern; or from
disappointed Counsels, for Ambition in the mind, is like Choler in the body,
once stopped turns to poison; or whether from cowardice and fear, as it
generally does. From an ill habit of Body, or an ill turned Soul; or whether
(which is most likely) they are really possessed; for the Devil, ever since he
fell, never found any delight in any thing but mischief; I shall not now
pretend to determine. This is sure, they are like spiders that will spin out
their bowels to make thin webs that every fly will break through. They are
deservedly their own Tormentors, undeservedly the Torments of the Nation, and
wickedly and profanely the Scandals of Religion. So that, this being so
spreading and contagious a Disease, it may seem needful to search what Remedies
are most suitable to stop the further growth of it.

The Kings Heart, etc.
These are the words of Solomon, to whom God imparted the greatest share of
Wisdom that any mere man was possessor of; and as Proverbs are short sentences,
wherein there is much Wisdom lap'd up in few words; so of all that ever were
writ, those of Solomon, that was enlightened by the Spirit of God, are most
excellent; and, as if when he wrote this, he had had a Prophetic view of
future times, this seems designed for such an Age as ours, and like a
well-drawn Picture, seems to look upon all in the room, and has a peculiar
prospect to our days. This Text seems to have reference both to the Prince and
the Subject, and the scope of it is on one hand, to re-mind the Prince of that
Moderation, Justice, Clemency, and other Kingly Virtues whereby he should
enoble his Reign; since his Actions must n^eds be peculiarly known to God, in
whose hand, even his Heart, his Thoughts, Designs, and Intentions are. On the
other hand, it teaches the Subject that Quietness and Peace, that Obedience and
Trust they ought to have in their Princes, since not only by God Princes
Reign, but by him they are guided and governed, and their heart turned
whithersoever he pleases.

The Text seems divided into three parts. First, a Proposition laid down, that
the Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, (in his power). Secondly, an
Illustration of it by a simile, ( as the Rivers of water.) Thirdly, the
Exertion of this Power -- ( he turns it withersoever, etc.) Every word has
its Emphasis -- the Kings heart -- not only his Words which are heard, his
Actions which are seen, but this Heart, an Abyss that no one can search, a
depth no one can fathom; his very thoughts which no ear hears, no eye sees, nor
can any reason or understanding follow the unaccountable wanderings of them; all
these are in the hand of God. Prudence or Modesty, or other considerations can
set bounds to our words; fear, honor, or interest to our deeds; but who ever
yet could set bounds to the thoughts of another, or what invisible and
inexplicable setters must they be, that can bind up the imagination. But such
care does God take of his Viceroys here on earth, that, not only their words
and thoughts, of which cognizance may be took; but even their heart, their
thoughts, (the shop where all actions are forged) even this is in the hand of
God, and he models it and turns it which way ever he will. Among the many ways
wherein it may be said to be in the hand of God, I shall mention two.

1. By way of direction. God vouchsafes to Kings a more immediate influx of
his Spirit; this was seen in Saul, whom when Samuel had Anointed King, he told
him, the Spirit of God would come upon him, 1 Samuel 10. 6. and it was made good,
1 Samuel 11.6. for when Saul heard the tidings of the men of Jabeth Gilead, it is
said, the Spirit of God came upon him. So when God had cast off Saul from being
King, and David was Anointed in his stead, 1 Samuel 16. 13. the Spirit of God
came upon David from that day forward, and an evil Spirit from God upon Saul.
God stamps something great and excellent on the Souls of Princes, above those
of common men; he sets his own Seal upon them, allays them nearly to himself,
and calls them Gods, Psalm. 82.6. And since Angels are supposed to exceed men in
knowledge, not so much from the purity of their essence, as from their nearness
to God, and being continually in his presence: with what submission ought we to
obey the commands and directions of our Princes, who are thus directed by God;
and how ought we to forbear censuring their Actions, since our Souls are not
elevated enough to know their ends and designs, nor to see upon what center
they turn round. They have lofty conceptions that we are not capable of, and
the scene of things looks with one face to us that are below, and with another
to those above. God gives them singular and extraordinary endowments, that they
may go in and out before his people. What common mind is able to comprehend the
goodness, clemency and tenderness of a good King toward his people. What Tongue
is able to express that mercy, so inherent to our Kings, till it has been
almost fatal to them; who can express that pity and compassion a King (a true
Father of his Country) has for an afflicted Nation. David, when he saw the
Angel that smote the people, cried out, Lo I have sinned, I have done wickedly,
but these sheep what have they done? let thy hand be, I pray thee, against me
and against my Fathers house, 2 Samuel 24.17. When Iphigenia was to be
Sacrificed, the Painter drew the Spectators grief with all possible Art; but
when he came to her Father, he drew a veil over his head, it being a grief not
to be delineated; in such a manner may the tenderness of a King to an afflicted
people be a little shadowed out. God who is all mercy fills them with mercy,
who is all wisdom, gives them a liberal portion, and directs them with his own
right hand.

2. By way of protection and defense, the Kings heart is in the hand of the
Lord, and who shall tear it thence? in that hand that has done so many
wonders, that mighty hand and outstretched Arm; he that touches him touches
the apple of his eye, he hides him under the shadow of his wing. And though
providence is interest in all things in earth as well as heaven, in the
concerns of a Peasant as well as of a Prince, yet if in any thing it is more
careful than other, it is in the preservation of Princes. And surely the
miraculous protection both of our late Sovereign of blessed memory, and this
our present King, from open force and private Conspiracy, has sufficiently
showed the finger of God was there. So that the happiness of the King, and the
safety of the people is in the same hand, the same arm protects them both.

I know there are too many men, that seem to repine, that the Kings heart is in
the hand of the Lord; they would have it in their own; they would prescribe
rules and methods of Government, and all should move according to the model
laid in their own brains. They that were but of yesterday would give Laws to
the world, and correct the ancient of days, and they that know not what a day
will bring forth, would have the guidance of Providence for future ages, and
prescribe the limits in which it should move.

We have seen the times, when men, whether out of a belief that Providence
wanted their helping hand, and the wheels of it could not stir without their
assistance; or whether out of a distrust of the wisdom, power, justice, or
goodness of God, is hard to determine, had a design to alter the course of
Nature and Succession against the Laws of God and Man; and as if God did not
know what was best for us, so well as themselves; as if Gods will was not the
rule of Justice, but they would call him to the Humane Bar, as once his
Vicegerent was served; contrary to Gods revealed will, they attempted such a
piece of Injustice, that the fairest Apology that can ever be made for it, is,
that they would have done evil that good might come of it. But it is no unusual
thing, when men are denied their requests at the hands of God, because they ask
amiss, to seek it by evil means; as Saul in his despair went to the Witch of
Endor, 1 Samuel 28. that therefore we may not depend so much upon our selves, and
our own wisdom, as that of God, let us consider two things.

1. The wisdom of God, in whose hand the Kings heart is. That there is an
infinite wisdom, that runs through the smallest causes, effects, and
circumstances, and that as the Spirit did upon the waters in the Creation. Genesis
1. it does brood upon the mighty frame, and produces all those various
occurrences that happen in the world; will appear to any one, that with a
serious judgment does consider the order of things, either in Heaven Gods
Throne, or in Earth his Footstool. It Is writ in Heaven in glorious Characters,
the Sun, Moon and Stars, and it is no less visible in this lower world; every
chive of grass sets it forth. What branch of it is there that we can
comprehend, and what small stream of it is there that will not swallow us.
Heaven is not so much higher than the earth, as Gods wisdom is above ours, ours
is not so much as a dust of the balance, or a drop to the ocean. That small
weak knowledge we have, is conveyed to us by the senses, by species and
objects, which being received, are laid up in the brain like impresses of a
Seal in wax: from these we discourse, argue, conclude, and after all our labor
spent, the deceitfulness both of the objects and of our senses considered, and
that neither any thing here below is capable of giving as true wisdom; nor if
it was, were we capable of receiving it.

It appears that after all, our wisdom is but elaborate folly, and all our
knowledge but an acquired madness; and there is not one of the lowest rank of
Angels, but is as much superior to us in knowledge, as we are above the vilest
Infect. When on the contrary, God knows all things by, and in himself, all
things that were, are, or shall be, without deceit, imperfection, confusion, or
mixture: nor had this his knowledge any beginning or increase as ours, but was
from eternity to eternity, is the cause of all things, and contains all things
in it self, comprehends all things by one eternal immutable act of
understanding, and that in a moment: what is our weak knowledge if compared to
this, got with labor and toil, by discourse, reading, and other helps; blind
and uncertain, transitory and fading, and at best of little use, of lesser
extent, and least perfection.

But that which comes nearer to our present purpose, will be the consideration
of the wisdom of God, in respect of the dispensations of Providence, which
produces great and glorious designs, beyond the reach, thought, and
imaginations of men, and contrary many times to their designs; not unlike a
skilful Architect, when the Scheme of the building being contrived and modelled
in his careful thoughts, allots to the workmen their several tasks, without
making them acquainted with the grounds and reasons of it. Those men whom God
ordains to bring his sacred purposes to pass, at the same time perhaps have
designs of their own, and yet unknown to themselves, are the instruments of his
holy will. This was visibly seen all along in the life of Joseph, each Agent
had his design apart: no one trouble that fell upon the neck of the other, but
might have been to a natural eye looked on as a signal judgment; yet all of
them workt together the most unparellel'd instance of heavenly wisdom; the
advancement of Joseph, the safety of his Fathers Family, and the bringing them
into Egypt, in order to the promised Canaan. The Caldeans besiege Jerusalem
and take it, and carry away that miserable Nation captive: the increasing their
Dominion, and filling themselves with spoil was that which stimulated them on,
but God's secret design was to punish that Idolatrous Nation, and to fulfill his
purpose so long foretold by his holy Prophets. Let Vespacian besiege Jerusalem,
and reduce to ruinous heaps that City of God, let him triumph in the Conquest
of millions of that presuming, stubborn, and senceless people: He, carried on
by rage and ambition, undertakes it; but God had a farther design, and made him
his Scourge, to punish that execrable people, to fulfill the Prophecy of our
blessed Savior, Mat. 24.2. and to revenge the innocent Blood of his
well-beloved Son on that cursed Nation; nay, as the highest piece of Wisdom,
God can bring even good out of evil, and what is looked upon as the most
dreadful judgment, becomes in the end the greatest mercy. Attila from the
farthest North, brings an inundation of Goths into Italy, and over runs all
Christian Nations; the holy men, even of those times looked upon this as an
unparellel'd Judgment, but God designed and brought other things to pass; and
whereas they thought all Religion and Learning was buried under the ruins of
the Roman Empire. God made those Barbarians a Scourge to Luxurious Rome, then
buried in Vice, Sensuality, and Effeminacy, and what was the greatest, his
Wisdom ordered those Conquerours to be over come by those they had conquered,
and to be converted to Christianity.

Men design one thing and God another; they contrive, but God brings to pass;
at what time, in what manner, and to what end he himself best pleases. O the
depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, How unsearchable
are his judgments, and his ways past finding out; For who has known the mind
of the Lord, or who has been his councellor, or who has first given to him,
and it shall be recompensed to him again, for of him, and to him and through
him are all things to whom be honor and glory for ever and ever. Romans 11.33. I
am apt to believe, the not understanding and weighing this wisdom of
Providence, or the impatience of men's spirits, that will not stand still and
see the Salvation of God; will not wait the leisure of Providence, but judge
and censure it beforehand; has been the cause of so many errors in judgment,
and so many worse in practice. For we would have things move as fast as our
thoughts, and in that method that best pleases us. He that looks carelessly and
superficially upon Providence, is like the blind man our Savior cured, Mark
8.24. that saw men as Trees walking. But the deeper he searches, the more
satisfaction he finds, till he sees every thing clearly. And he that with
impatience looks upon it, finds things abortive, and his mind is lost in the
number of possible events. For take the actions of Providence separately, and
they seem irregular, disorderly, and confused; like Tapestry in broken pieces;
but put the parts together, and they will show their beauty, and discover their
genuine and surprising symmetry. We know not now what blessings lie in the womb
of Providence for us; why should we anticipate our misery by our fears, and
torment our selves before the time, for those things that may never come. For
we are as often deceived in our fears, as we are in our hopes. It Is sure, our
Prudence as well as our duty to settle our minds upon God, to leave all to his
infinite wisdom, who will order all things for our good, much better than we
could our selves.

The next thing which more peculiarly belongs to the Text, is the power of God,
(...) signifying his power, which we render his hand. This is sure, what ever
the infinite wisdom of God orders, the infinite power of God brings to pass;
which is so great, that it cannot be restrained to, or censured by our weak
imaginations: nor must we think that that is impossible with God, which to our
weak capacities seem so. For if there be many actions of men, of which beasts
are supposed to have no knowledge, nor can comprehend the manner how, or the
reason why they were acted; why should we expect to know the extent of Gods
power, since there is an infinitely greater distance between the God of Heaven,
and the wisest of the sons of men, than there is between the best of men and
the vilest Creature. So that were we in greater slavery than the Jews under the
Brick-kills of Egypt, in greater straights than they at the Red Sea, when the
Mountains hemmed them in on both sides, the Sea was before, and their enemies
behind: did all humane helps fail, and we were left a secure bait for
destruction. Yet the same God that parted the Red Sea, could make a passage for
our escape, and bring us out by wondrous means beyond our hopes. For his arm is
not shortened, but his hand is stretched out still. And we have reason to
believe so, when we consider that nothing is done but by this infinite power,
and nothing can be acted against it. The highest Angels stand upon the brink of
nothing; and did God leave them to themselves but one moment, they would fall
into that gulf from whence of themselves they could never get out: for, as
their passage from Nothing to Being was by an infinite power creating, so their
Fall from Being to Nothing* again, would necessarily follow, without an
infinite power preserving. Nay, not all the power of Angels, wit of Men, and
industry of all Creatures joined together, could preserve a worm one moment
without an influx of Being from God: they would be as unable to preserve it, as
to create one anew. The Nodus perpetuitatis, as it is called by Plato, is in
the hands of God. But as this power of God is the cause of all things, and acts
in all things, so nothing can act against it, all our endeavors are as vain,
as that man's would be that strove to stop a ship under sail, by setting his
shoulders to the side. Pharaoh may harden his heart and not let the people of
Israel go; but they shall at last be brought out by an high hand. Joseph's
Brethren may think, by their selling him to the Ishmaelites, they had eluded
the succession of his Prophetical Dreams, but that way they took for his ruin,
shall be turned to his advancement. So that as this power of God administers
matter of comfort, since all things are acted by it, and nothing but by its
permission; so it shows the desperation of those men that will fight against
God, and strike at him through his King on earth, as Witches kill by Effigy.

We have thus seen, that the heart of our King is in the hand of God, and there
let us leave it, as in a sacred Treasure-house, and come to the next
particular, the simile by which it is illustrated.

As the rivers of water, some take it thus, that God rules the heart of Kings
as he does the Rivers of waters; and we are assured, that God has set them
their bounds, which they shall not pass, nor turn again to cover the earth,
Psalm. 104.9

And that merciless and restless Element the Sea, has its limits, hitherto
shall thou come and no farther, and here shall thy proud waves be stoped, Job
38.11. Nothing is more rapid and furious than water, and nothing more
headstrong than the thoughts of men; both of them are deaf to reason and
entreaty, and both of them scorn a curb or bridle. What will not water
overflow? and what will not our thoughts bear down? so that since the Element
of water is supposed by Philosophers to be higher than the Earth, the finger of
God is seen in setting its bounds that it does not overflow it: and the same
wonder is shown in our thoughts, which though they continually tower above, yet
God has bridled them so, that they do not drown the little world of Man. Both
water and thoughts are things extremely fluid, and require a solid body to
contain them, and God has took care of them both. So that in this sense, the
Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, he has set it bounds and limits, he
fills it with the dew of heaven, and with water of life from himself, who is
the fountain; and orders that he should refresh the thirsty parts of the earth,
and cheer and make glad the weary, as the Psalmist in the 104.10. expresses, he
sends the springs into the valleys, which run among the hills, they give
drink to every beast of the field, and the wild asses quench their thirst, by
them shall the fowls of the air have their habitation which sing among the
branches. Our King under God is the dispenser of happiness, our happiness is
bound up in him. God only has made this difference, God is the fountain, and
the King the stream.

Others, with more reason, suppose this simile to be took from skilful
Husbandmen, which in those dry Southern Countries where water was precious,
used to draw Rivers and Streams from their wonted passages, by artificial
Channels and Cuts into thirsty grounds, refreshing, cherishing, and making them
fruitful. The experience that not only small, but mighty Rivers can thus be
drawn to leave their former Bed, to seek a new one; Babylon, once the glory of
the world, dearly bought; which being by its situation upon the Euphrates, one
of the chief Rivers of the world, impregnable, yet saw by several Cuts and new
Rivers made by the Medes and Persians, her streams drawn away, and the enemy
enter her by the Rivers dry and forsaken Channel. So that God can draw away the
heart of a King from its natural Channel to do good, turn the stream of his
thoughts, against even his will, design, and intent, to nourish and cherish
that which of its own bent, and naturally, it would never have done.

And since water, which is a fluid body, and naturally by its own weight tends
to the center, yet by the help of Art, can contrary to its own Nature, be made
to ascend, and be carried to high and far distant places: so can man's heart,
which naturally tends to evil, crawles on the ground, and like the Serpent
licks the dust, be made by God to fly up to heaven and take it by force. So
that could we suppose, that the heart of a King was naturally cruel, unjust,
and tyrannical, (which God be praised we of all Nations have no reason to do)
yet we are assured, it is in the hand of God, he can turn it contrary to its
nature, make it ascend, fill it with all heavenly virtues, and in one moment
make as great a change, as there was between Saul the Persecutor, and Paul the
Preacher. So that were all our fears just, which wicked and unreasonable men
suggest, which those private and hidden Traitors intimate; yet what reason have
we to despond, while we have a God of infinite wisdom, power, and mercy to
depend upon.

But blessed be God, we have all the assurances that an indulgent Prince can
give his Subjects, that neither our Religion, nor our Liberties shall be
violated; never so undeserving a Nation had such a prospect of unmerited
blessings. We have another Phoenix sprung out of the ashes of the former; a
Prince that has lived by continued and successive wonders of Providence, by
Land and by Sea, at home and abroad: his life and heart was in the hand of God,
and neither the rage of the waves, nor the madness of the people could tear him
thence. A Prince that has been thus the care of Providence, is sure in
infinite wisdom reserved for great Actions and glorious times. What may not we
hope for from the Son of a Martyr?

This brings me to the last particular, God turns it, etc. This is the wheel of
Providence, upon which all our thoughts turn round; we would fain look into
futurity, but it is a book that no one can open, and it is locked up among the
Secrets of the Almighty. We would know the events of time to come, but it is a
boundless Ocean, an unfathomable Abyss, where all our Reason is ship-wrack'd
and sunk. To satisfy therefore our thoughts, that they may not run upon
needless curiosities, I shall undertake to show how God will deal with us. And
to that end, lay down two Propositions, from which any one may gather the
consequence. And since the stress seems to lie upon the word (will) he turns
it whether soover he will. The first shall be; That God always wills us good.
Secondly, nothing hinders him from doing good but sin.

God is eternally, essentially good, the author of all good, and all the
streams of goodness that water the world owe their original to him. And as he
is good, and fills all things living with plenteousness, so he always wills
good to us; not the death of a sinner, but that he should turn and live. He
uses all Methods and Topics of persuasion to invite us to, and for our good,
and when we refuse, his holy Spirit goes sad away. We see it in every object,
feel it in every blessing, and speak it in every breath we draw:

Nor is there any thing that stops the current of his goodness but our sins,
they are the clouds that hinder this Sun from arising upon us with healing in
his wings. Sin is that which is enmity toward God, and which he cannot see with
allowance. The dreadful effects of sin were early seen in the Creation; no
sooner was sin acted, but a curse followed, as naturally as the effect does the
cause; a dreadful and contagious curse fell not only upon the actors, but on
the whole creation; which has continued in an in-unterrupted line to our days,
which no changes could alter, nor no time devour. And that misery is now our
portion, that in sorrow we must eat our bread, we owe it still to that fatal
cause. That one breach of the Law was such a sea breach, that it let in an
ocean of miseries, which not all our labor ever since could get out.

So that God never punishes till we have sinned, and then unwillingly too, and
not till he has used all ways to reduce us. Judgments are wrested out of his
hand by our importunate and loud crying sins. So that as men cheerfully and
readily go about that to which their nature inclines them; but with reluctance
and ill will to that which is against their temper; so God who is goodness, and
whose mercy is over all his works, showrs down blessings with a liberal hand,
but dispenses Judgments sparingly, with grief and sorrow, and washes even the
wounds he makes, as Christ did at Jerusalem with his tears.

So that would he know how God will deal with us, there is no need of having
recourse to the hidden book of the Stars with Astrologers, or to deceitful
prophesies, with the inquisitive and credulous, or to Endor with Saul; the way
is short, and the labor small; let us search our own Consciences, that is an
unerring book, and all the lines are written in truth; it is the only book of
fate we need, it is without deceit or fraud, and will plainly tell us what we
merit; it is like the righteous man bold as a Lion, it knows not bribes, and it
fears not threatenings, it will speak, and it will be heard in the greatest
hurry of business or delights. Would we know how God will deal with the Nation?
it is not hard to determine. View the crying sins and iniquities, the scarlet
and crimson sins that have overspread the face of it; and what do these merit
at the hand of a just God without repentance; a sinful Nation never wanted
misery: no sooner did the Jews run after other Gods, but they were sold into
the hand of the heathen, and they that hated them were Lords over them; and no
sooner does a Nation repent and turn to God, but he prevents them with
blessings.

These things being so, surely those men that are so inquisitive into future
times, and fill their own, and others heads with fears, discontents and
murmurings; that revile the Government, and like flies stick upon sore places
and pass by the sound: it would be well, if these men would but examine their
own breasts, and know whether their own sins have not given an helping hand to
those miseries they bear; and since no evil is alleviated, but rather doubled
by fearful and feeble expectations of it; and the true way is to use those
means which are conducive either to overcome or bear it; and since repentance
is the only way to prevent Judgments, it would sure better become them to begin
the Reformation at home; and if they must be inquisitive, let it be in their
own breasts: if they must be censorious, let it be on their own actions; and if
custom or nature leads them to revile, let it be their own sinful lives. They
would find matter enough in themselves, no doubt, for their busy restless
thoughts, their mischievous surmizes, and their fester'd spleenes to work upon.

And since this is an age, wherein every one pretends to be a Politician, and
meddles with the Secrets of Government; and thinks it his birthright to
censure those at the Helm, it would be well, if these men would learn to govern
themselves; and yet that most beautiful and glorious victory; if they must be
Politicians, let them study the insinuations, deceits, treacheries, seditions,
and rebellions of their own lusts; the arts they make use of, the specious
pretenses they carry, and the secret ambushes they continually lay for them.
Let them search out the weapons, policy, machinations, and engines of their
great enemy the devil, and study how to countermine him. And if their ambitious
spirits must be great, let their Kingdom be within; every one has an Empire in
his own mind, let them be absolute there. There they may lay their Kingdom as
wide as they will, without incroaching upon another right; make Laws without
infringing others liberty, and command and dictate without intruding into
another office. But why should he who is a coward at home, think to be valiant
abroad, he that has lost his own liberty, think it his right to enslave
others, and he that is submissive and cringing at home to a sordid vice, think
it is his Province to be Lordly and Imperious over others. It Is sure a piece of
extravagant kindness to have business wait him at home, and to be busy abroad.
It Is sure a sign of incorrigible folly to leave his own house on fire, that
calls for his help, and run about to instruct others how they may regulate
their Families.

Let us therefore all of us keep our thoughts at home, turn our eyes into our
own bosoms, and spend all the rancor and malice of our hearts upon sin, which
is Gods and our Enemy. And since our sins took away from us our Martyred
Sovereign Charles the First, and God in Judgment to this Land punished sin with
sin, in that unnatural and horrid Murder. since it has took from us the
Mirror of Princes, a King of Mercy and Clemency, CHARLES the Second, let us by
our Repentance stop future Judgments, and beg of God that he would so turn the
heart of our present Sovereign, that it may not be turned from us; but that
Kings may be nursing Fathers, and Queens nursing Mothers to the Church. And
that neither our neglect, coldness, or hypocrisy in Religion, nor any other
cause may provoke God to take away our Candlestick from us; but that we may be
happy in our Prince, and our Prince in us; and that we may be a Nation whom God
may take delight to do good to.

FINIS.

