Meetness FOR HEAVEN Promoted in some brief MEDITATIONS UPON COLOS. 1.12.

Discovering the nature and necessity of habitual and actual Meetness for
Heaven here, in all that hope for Heaven hereafter.

Designed for a Funeral Legacy.

By O. H. an unworthy Minister of the Gospel of Christ.

Psalm. 73.24. Thou shall guide me with thy Counsel, and afterward received me
to Glory. Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they that do his Commandments that they may
have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the
City. London, Printed by J. R. for T. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns
in Cheapside.

AN EPISTLE To my Dearly Beloved Hearers, Friends and Neighbors, and others
that will be at the cost to buy, or take the pains to read this small Treatise.
Dearly Beloved,
A Desire after Happiness is so engraven in the Nature of Man, that it was
never put to the debate, whether he would be happy or no? This needs no choice;
all are agreed in this as the end of a rational Agent: And therefore at last
Felicity was accounted a Goddess among the Romans, and St. Augustine tells us,
that Lucullus built her a Temple; only he wonders that the Romans that were
worshippers of so many Gods, had not given Divine Honor to Felicity sooner;
which alone would have sufficed in stead of all the rest of their Deities,
which he reckons up, and says at last of Numa, that having chosen so many Gods
and Goddesses, it is strange he neglected this; [An eam forte in tanta turba
videre non potuit?] but though they at last had got a notion of Felicity, yet
having no true Piety, that veneration ended in the greatest misery and
infelicity, nothing but Wars ensued. Vid. Aug. de civit. Dei, lib 4. cap. 23.

This indeed is the case: All men would be happy, but few know the due object
and true means leading to Happiness; It is possible (as the same Father says
there) to find a man that is unwilling to be made King; [nullus autem
invenitur, qui se nolit esse foelicem] that is, loath to be made happy: But
indeed most men blunder in the dark, and few find the thing they seek: The same
Father tells us, (de civ. Dei, lib 19. c. 1.) that Varro in his Book of
Philosophy, that had diligently searched the various Opinions of men about the
chiefest good, reduces them to two hundred eighty eight Sects or Sentences;
[non quae jam essent, sed quae esse possent?] and Augustine reduces them to
their several heads: But I pass by Heathens that are bewildred in the dark, and
know no better: Even professing or pretended Christians either do not
understand, or will not embrace the way of Peace and Rest. The Lord looked down
from Heaven upon the Children of Men, to see if there were any that did
understand and seek God. They are all gone aside, they are altogether become
filthy, there is none that does good, no not one. Psalm. 14.2, 3. All mankind is
degenerate; and few are regenerated: We set out for Hell as soon as we are
born; and till converting Grace turn us Heaven-wards we go blindfold to the
pit: The whole World lies in ignorance and wickedness. 1 John 5.19. But no
such ignorance as that which is wilful. This is the condemnation, that light is
come into the world, and men love darkness rather then light, because their
deeds are evil; Joh. 3.19. No man perishes but by his own will. Men will sin,
and love death rather then life. You will not come to me, (says Christ) that
you may have life. Joh. 5.40. He that rejects the means, rejects the end:
All they that hate Christ, love death: Prove. 8.36. They do both, not directly,
or designedly, but interpretatively, and consequentially. Most men observe
lying vanities, and so forsake their own Mercies. Jon. 2.8. as he leaves the
East that goes to the West: My people, says God, have committed two evils,
[Observe it; it is but one act, yet there is two evils in it, what are they?]
they have forsaken me, the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out
cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water. Jer. 2.13. Oh what evil is
in the bowels of one sin! But especially in the sin of Unbelief. The evil of
sin brings on the evil of punishment. Miss of Heaven, and you purchase Hell.
What mad man will refuse this gift that is better then Gold? What beast will
run into a pit or praecipice? But some men make a jest of Heaven; as that
Bishop, who, when one said, I hope to see you at your Diocese ere long;
replied, I fear I shall be in Heaven before that time come: Others, like
Martha, are so encumbered in the World, that they are staked down to Terrene
Objects; and Answer, as he that being asked, if he saw the Eclipse, answered,
No, I have so much business on Earth, that I have no leisure to look up to
Heaven: This is most men's ease. Alas, the World eats out many men's Religion, as
the Sun shining eats out the fire: So that men are as dead to Religion, as if
Heaven were but a dream; and as hot upon sin, as if Hell had no fire, or were
all vanished into smoke: Nay, it is well, if some look not on Heaven and Hell, as
if they were but a Fable or Romance, a scarcrow to fright weak headed people,
or the mere invention of designing Priests to keep men in awe: But they shall
know one day to their cost, that there is an Heaven by the loss of it, and that
there is an Hell by the torments of it: Let these ask the rich man in torment,
whether there is an Hell or no? Targum says, the dispute betwixt Cain and Abel
was, concerning a World to come: And indeed this is the Controversy betwixt
the faithful and unbelievers: Though the wicked say the Creed, wherein they
profess a belief of the Resurrection, Judgment, and Eternal Life; yet its but
notional, not experimental, practical: They know nothing of it initially,
inchoatively, by feeling the beginnings of it here, and living to the rates of
it: It is to be feared that the greatest part of Mankind will fall to the
Devils share: How little are men concerned about a future state! How many put
away from them the evil day! Some have a foolish imagination that Heaven is
every where; that there is neither Heaven nor Hell but in a man's own
Conscience, and then they can shift well enough; for they can stop the mouth of
a bawling Conscience, and speak Peace to themselves: But how long will either
of these last? When God arms a man against himself, he shall be a
Magormissabib, a fear round about: Witness Cain, Saul, Judas, that thought Hell
was easier then his own Conscience, and therefore desperately leapt into it; to
the crushing of his Body, and the damning of his Soul: They shall find that
there is an Heaven and Hell after this natural Life is ended. It is recorded of
Peter Martyr, that he lying upon his Deathbed discoursed sweetly of Heaven;
Bullinger standing by alleged that in Phil. 3.20. Our Conversation is in
Heaven: True, said the sick man, it is in Heaven, [sed non in Coelo Brentii,
quod nusquam est,] not in the Heaven of Brentius; which is no where: There is
doubtless a [Coelum Empyreum,] called a Third Heaven, or Paradise, into which
Paul was wrapped in his Extacy, 2 Cor. 12.2, 4. into which Christ was carried
Body and Soul, Luke 24.51. The habitation of Gods Holiness and Glory, Isa.
63.15. Its true God himself is called Heaven, Dan. 4.26. The Heavens do rule.
So Matthew. 21.25. And its as true, God fills Heaven and Earth, Jer. 23.24. And
its true, where the King is there is the Court: But yet God manifests himself
far differently in all places; he is in Hell by the execution of his Justice,
in Heaven by manifestation of his Grace, on Earth by displaying both, and his
other Glorious Attributes, according to his infinite Wisdom and Pleasure.

But let vain Men please themselves in their fond conceits; or desperately leap
into the other World, let you and me duly weigh the vast difference betwixt
Graceless and Gracious Souls in this and in the other World, and though men
will not believe, because they see not any such difference; yet a time is
coming, when they shall return and discern betwixt the righteous and the
wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves him not. Mal. 3.18.
Then all the World must be ranked into two Regiments, sheep and goats; the one
at Christ's right hand, the other on his left; to the one he will say, come ye
blessed, to the other go ye cursed. Mat. 25.32 -- 46. They that love not to
hear discriminating Truths here, shall meet with discriminating Acts at that
day: And can we think that there will be such a difference at that day, and is
there none in this World? Yes certainly: Though all things come alike to all,
as to common Providence in this World, Eccles. 9.2. yet Grace makes a
difference in Persons dispositions here, and there will be a vast difference in
Divine Dispensations hereafter, much greater then betwixt a Man and a Bruit;
yea, like that which is betwixt an Angel and a Devil. Oh that men would study
and understand this now! Grace makes the difference now, and Glory compleats it.

1. In point of Assimilation: Gods Children are like their Father now, but
shall be more like him at that day; 1 John 3.2. Our former similitude is from
Faith, and so imperfect; but the latter is from immediate Vision, and so
perfect and complete.

2. In point of Satisfaction: In this World the weary Soul is working toward
its rest, Psalm. 116.7. and does by Faith enter into this rest; Heb. 4.3. yet
there is another remaining, ver. 9. Some satisfaction is in Ordinances, Psalm.
36.8. but more in that Blessed Morning, when Gods Children awake, Psalm. 17.15.

3. In point of Participation: For Gods Children are not tantalized, by
beholding that they have no right to; no, they have Heaven by appropriation by
Faith here, so Ephesians. 2.8. and by complete possession in the other World;
abundant evidence of peculiar relation, Rev. 21.3.

4. In point of Fruition: Gods Children do enjoy fellowship with God already in
this world; 1 John 1.3. but alas, it is but through a glass darkly, but then
face to face immediately; 1 Cor. 13.12. Now it is but rarely, but now and then,
but then constantly and perpetually, as the Angels that always behold the face
of our Father. Matthew. 18.10. Their Eye is never off God, even when they are
sent on any Errands to Earth about the Saints: Its defective in degree here,
but full and complete above: Its often obstructed and obscured here, but above
this Glory shall be revealed in us, Romans 8.18. and so never darkened or
eclipsed with clouds of interposing guilt.

O ye Children of men, prove your Fathers will, and your selves Children; make
sure of this Inheritance; make no reckoning of the stuff of this World; for the
good of the upper Country above is before you; Heaven will pay for all your
losses, and countervail all your crosses here: No matter how your Names are
written on Earth, in Dust or Marble, if they be written in Heaven. Some say
this World is but a shadow of that above; look you for the lineaments of that
Kingdom above, to be pourtrayed on you. Basil asserted One Hundred Sixty Five
Heavens. You must pass by all the fancyed Heavens of Men, and look for a City
that has foundations, whose builder and maker is God. Heb. 11.10. Take this
Kingdom of Heaven by violence. Matthew. 11.12. Get a Copy of Grace in your hearts
out of Scripture Records, the Court Rolls of Heaven; so you are sure of it, and
lay hold of Eternal Life. 1 Timothy 6.19. Heaven must be begun here, or never
enjoyed hereafter. Holiness of Heart and Life is like the Old Testament
Tabernacle, an example and shadow of heavenly things. Happiness is the
enjoyment of good, commensurate to our desires; and our desires must be suited
to that happiness. Critics observe, that the word [(...)] which signifies
happiness, is plural; not only denoting a confluence of many good things to
make one happy, but because there is an happiness in this life, preparing for
and anticipating the happiness in the other. They differ not in kind but
degree; that above is the same state, but in an higher stature; the same Book
but in a more correct Edition, and a larger Character. The Saints above differ
from us as Man from a Child, as Noon sun from the Morning light; we are in the
same house, only they are got into the upper room; at the same feast only they
are at the upper end of the Table. Let us make have after them: They were once
as you are, grovelling on this Dunghill, but are exalted to the Throne; aspire
you to the same preferment: It may be had, it must be had or you are undone:
Study the way of God, how this Inheritance is made over to the Sons of Men, and
that is, 1. By Regeneration. Matthew. 19.28.2. By Adoption. Romans 8.17.3. By
Donation. Luke 12.32. 4. By right of Redemption. Joh^ 10.28. Ephesians. 1.14. and
they say, he that has bought a Slave may dispose of him as he please, by his
will: Our Lord made his will thus, Joh. 17.24. Father, I will that where I am
these may be also. Clear this and clear all, then you are safe; fail in this
and you are undone.

But this is not all; you are not only to get and clear up a title to this
Inheritance, but to press after a due meetness for it; and this is the design
of this small Treatise, which was (for the substance of it) Preached and Writ
Thirty Five Years ago, and now revised and published upon these Considerations.

1. For my own help and furtherance in preparation for Heaven, having passed to
the sixtieth year of my Life, (the date of the Life of Paul the aged) within a
few days; and my Lord only knows how soon my sun may set, though I cannot say,
my Natural Vigor either of Body or Mind is in the least abated; but I am
mortal, and am loath to be surprised unawares.

2. I see a great failure in my self and other Christians in this, that
terminate our studies and endeavors in getting a title, and then think all is
well, we need no more; but surely there is much behind; we have abundance of
work upon our hands for obtaining actual meetness, without which we cannot
evidence our habitual meetness.

3. I never yet met with any Treatise upon this subject, though it be of great
importance for every Christian; surely Heaven is worth minding, and methinks
Abraham's Query in another case should be ours, Genesis 15.8. O Lord God, whereby
shall I know that I shall inherit it?

4. I have observed a commendable practice of some Christians; which is, to
order some Books to be distributed at their Funerals: The first that I knew of
that nature was Mr. R. A. his Vindiciae Pietatis, and some other practical
pieces, which by Gods Blessing have done much good: Such a Memorandum would I
bequeath as my last Legacy to you, my dear People, amongst whom I have labored
above thirty nine years in public and private, serving the Lord in some
measure of Integrity and Humility, with many Tears and Temptations, through
variety of Dispensations, Excommunications, Banishments, Confiscations and
Imprisonments; but out of all these the Lord has delivered me, and set my feet
in a large place, and God that searches the heart knows what has been my
design in studying, preaching, praying, preparing you a place to meet in to
Worship God; and what are the agonies and jealousies of my Spirit to this day,
least I leave any of you unconverted, and so cashiered from Gods presence at
the great day; and now at last I solemnly charge you before God, and the Lord
Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels, that you rest not in a graceless state
another day, lest that be the last day, and you be found unready: And I
solemnly require you that have a principle of Grace, gird up your Loins, trim
your Lamps, and observe these few Rules, and the dispositions mentioned in this
small Treatise: I only hint further; Be much in the love of God: Daily act
Faith on Christ: Walk in the Spirit: Design Gods Glory: Intermit not holy
duties: Be not content therein without communion with God: Mingle Religion with
civil acts: Increase every Grace: Redeem time: Profitably converse with Gods
Children: Aim at perfection: Maintain tender Consciences: Keep strict accounts:
Study the life of Heaven: Be still doing or getting good: Set God before your
eyes: Trample on worldly things: Live in daily view of death: Be nothing in
your own eyes: Be much in heavenly praises: Say, O Lord, who am I, and what is
my Fathers house, that thou have brought me hitherto? What is man, what am I,
the least and worst of the children of men, that the heart of God should be
working for me, and toward me, in infinite bowels of eternal love! That the
Lord Jesus should shed his heartblood for me! That the holy Spirit should take
possession of me! That God should provide such an inheritance for me! Assure me
of it by precious Promises, seal it to me in his holy Supper! That ever God
should give me an heart to fear him: Heal so many backslidings: Prevent total
Apostasy: Pardon all my iniquities: Vouchsafe me such large privileges: Supply
my wants: Hear my Prayers: Help me over so many a foul place in my journey:
Brought me to the borders of Canaan: Given me so many foretasts of the promised
Land: Tells me the Jordan of death shall be driven back, and give me a safe
passage to Heaven: O Blessed, blessed be God, all this is from sovereign Grace:
God does what he pleases: I would not exchange this hope for the worlds
possessions: Eternity will be little enough to be taken up in the praises of
rich grace. Thus the gracious Soul may quickly lose it self in these Divine
Praises and Contemplations, as that zealous German Martyr, Giles Titleman, who
in his Prayers was so ardent, kneeling by himself in some secret place, that he
seemed to forget himself, being called many times to meat; he neither heard nor
saw them that stood by him, till he was lift up by the Arms, and then gently he
would speak to them as one waked out of a deep sleep: Oh that there were such a
spirit in Gods children! That our hearts were so intent on things above, as to
pass through the world as unconcerned in it! Then shall you be content to leave
all, and go to Christ! Then will you not be afraid of the King of Terrors,
though armed with Halberts, Racks, Fires, Gibbets; then will you have a
brighter Crown, and higher degrees of Glory, and shall shine as the brightness
of the Firmament, and as one Star differs from another in Glory, so you will be
set in the highest Orb; and having had largest capacities on Earth, shall have
fullest joys in Heaven: I will conclude with the blessed Apostles Prayer 1 Th.
3.12, 13. The Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward another,
and toward all men, even as we do toward you; to the end he may stablish your
hearts unblameable in holiness before God, even our Father, at the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ with all his Saints: Amen and Amen, Thus prays

Your Servant in our dearest Lord, Oliver Heywood.
^
COLOS. 1.12. Giving thanks unto the Father, which has made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.
CHAP. I. The Text opened; Doctrines raised and explained.
PRayer and Praise are the two wings upon which a devout Soul mounts
Heavenwards: Prayer fetches down occasions of Praise: These two are as
Chariots and Factors to maintain intercourse betwixt God and his Children. Paul
was a great man in both, for after the Inscription, Subscription and
Benediction in this Epistle, he falls to Praise, ver. 3. then to Prayer, ver.
9. and in the Text he falls again to Praise and Thanksgiving; wherein observe,
1. The Duty, Praise. 2. The Mercy for what.


In the former observe, 1. The Act, giving thanks. 2. The Object, the Father.


1. The Act, (...): It signifies a being of a good Grace, having a very
grateful Spirit, and expressing it in words and actions. Col. 3.15 Be ye thank
full; or be ye amiable one to another, or grateful, both in conferring and
receiving Benefits: But here it referrs to God.

Obs. 1.
That thank fullness is the duty and property of a Christian.

Thankful retribution for Mercies is the study and enquiry of gracious Souls;
Psalm. 116.12. Prayer and Thanks are like the double motion of the Lungs; the
air of Mercy that is sucked in by Prayer is breathed out again by the duty of
Praise. O happy Christian that can and must in every thing give thanks! 1 Th.
5.18. This is, (Christianorum propria virtus) says Hierom, a practice proper
to Christians, to be heartily thankful for crosses, as Job was chapter 1.21.

2. Here is the object of this Thankfulness, that is God, under the notion and
relation of a Father: God imports Glory and Majesty; Father signifies Mercy,
Love and Clemency.

Doct. 2.
It becomes Christians to approach to God as an indulgent Father.

Oh how much sweetness and endearedness is in this word Father, therefore
Christ teaches us to begin our Prayers with [ Our Father]; this relation
quickens our Faith, and engages Gods Love, Bowels; his care, power, and all
for his Children, Matthew. 6.32. There Is comfort in a Father, much more in an
Heavenly Father: Evil men may be good Fathers, Mat. 7.11. how much more will a
good God be a good Father; [ Tam Pater nemo, tam pius nemo] none can be so
good, and so much a Father as he.

2. The matter and ground of Thankfulness referrs to God the Fathers care and
kindness to all his Children: This is twofold.

1. Providing for them an inheritance. 2. Preparing them for it.
1. Providing for all his Children an inheritance; Wherein are considerable
four things; 1. The nature of Heaven, inheritance. 2. The quality of it, in
light. 3. The Inhabitants, Saints. 4. Their right to it, partakers.


A word of every of these.

1. The nature of this Celestial Glory; it is called an inheritance, partly
alluding to Isreal's possessing the Land of Canaan; partly to signify that it
is not given us for our Merits, but by his Free Grace and Mercy, therefore
called the Reward of the Inheritance, Col. 3.24. because it is conveyed as by a
Father to his Child, of bounty, and not earned as wages by a Servant, due from
his Master.

Doct. 3.
God as a Father gives Heaven as an inheritance to his Children.

All Gods Children are heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ. Romans 8.17. Oh
happy Souls that are heirs to such an inheritance!

2. The property or quality of this inheritance; its in Light: Which is meant,
(1.) Of the light of Truth or Faith; or that Gospel light whereby Gods Children
are savingly enlightened: Or, (2.) Of Light of glory, where there is perfect
Light and Delight, Joy and Felicity, for God dwells in inaccessible Light. 1 Timothy 6.16.

Doct 4.
Heaven is a place and state of unexpressible Light.

Rev. 21.23. And the City had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine
in it, for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof.

3. Here is the proprietors, the owners of this glorious inheritance; i. e.
Saints, sanctified souls; its purchased for them, vouchsafed to them only;
others have nothing to do with it; no dirty dogs or filthy swine shall trample
on this golden pavement. 1 Cor. 6.9. Rev. 21.27.

Doct. 5.
Only Saints (or sanctified souls) are heirs of Heaven.

Without holiness no man shall see God, Heb. 12.14 No grace no glory. The
inhabitants of that City are called, yea, are really holy. Isa. 43.4.

4. But how come they by this high Honor? Have they a good Title to it? Answ.
yes, they are partakers of it; so faith the Text, [(...)] Either that which
falls to them by lot; then it is the decision of Heaven; these are joined: Acts
8.21. Or else by a persons own choice, which (our Lord says) shall not be
taken away. Luke 10.42.

Doct. 6.
Every Saint of God is already partaker of an Heavenly Inheritance.

The promise, (or the Mercy promised) is sure to all the seed, Romans 4.16. Why
so? Because it is by Grace on Gods part, and by Faith on our part: And God will
have it so of his good pleasure.

A sincere Christian partakes of Heaven.

1. In Pretio.] In purchase: The price is laid down for it; its a purchased
possession, Ephesians. 1.14.

2. In Promisso.] Its theirs by promise, as Canaan was Isreal's by promise; and
that Land of Promise was a Type of this Heavenly Inheritance. Jam. 1.11.

3. In capite.] Saints partake of Heaven by their union to their Head who is in
Heaven; Ephesians. 2.6. -- And has made us sit together in Heavenly places in Christ
Jesus. Oh happy Souls!

4. In primitiis.] In the first fruits or earnest; 2 Cor. 5.5. -- Who has also
given unto us the earnest of his Spirit. [ Pignus redditur, Arrha retinetur:] A
pledge is restored, but an earnest is retained, because its part of the
bargain. A faithful Man will not run back from his bargain, nor lose his
earnest: Nor will the Covenant-keeping God: He is faithful who has promised,
who will also do it.

2. The other part of the Text in the second branch, is not only providing an
inheritance for his Children, but preparing them for that inheritance. Solomon
says, Wisdom is good with an inheritance. Eccl. 7.11. Alas, what should a Fool
do with a great Estate? Yet it often falls out so, that worst Men have most of
the World: But, says Mr. Jo. Dalleus on this Text; It is not so here as in
worldly things, that fall into the hands of those that are most incapable to
improve them right; but God gives a suitable share of true Wisdom with this
inheritance: As when Saul was anointed King, he was turned into another man; 1 Samuel 10.6. Alas, what is Heaven to us unless we be fit for it? Our dear Lord
Jesus that went to prepare a place for us, must also prepare us for that
blessed place. In this second branch we have, 1. Something employed. 2.
Something expressed.


1. That which is employed, is that no Man is fit or meet for Heaven by nature.
Thence observe,

Doct. 7.
That every Soul by nature is altogether unmeet for Heaven.

2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we are [(...)] sufficient or meet (for its the same word
with this) of our selves to think any thing as of our selves. Alas, what Merit,
either of congruity or condignity, can there be in Man to obtain Heaven? If he
cannot think well, sure he cannot will well, act well, to deserve or fit
himself for such a Mercy; especially since Man by nature is a Child of wrath, a
Limb of Satan, dead in sins, banished out of Paradise, has no heart to look
that way; nay has enmity in his mind to what is good. God does all: [ Dignatus
est nos assumere.] The Sun of Righteousness shines on these dunghill souls: He
alone makes Vessels of Honor: He fills them with the Treasures of Grace, and
fits them for Glory: [ Inhabiles habiles faciens;] Of unfit making them fit, i.
e. meet for his glorious presence.

2. Here is something expressed that is held forth in these two propositions.

Doct. 8.
That all those and only those that shall eternally partake of the Heavenly
inheritance in the other World, are made meet for it in this World.

Doct. 9.
That its a transcendent Mercy worth thanking God for, to be made meet for
Heaven.

Of these two last in their order.

1. That all those, and only those that shall partake of the Heavenly
inheritance in the other World, must be made meet for it in this World.

All that I shall do in the Doctrinal part is, 1. For Explication. 2.
Confirmation.


1. To show what this meetness is, then prove the necessity of it.

CHAP. II. Distinctions about meetness for Heaven: What habitual meetness is:
Both relative and real.
1. FOR a more methodical proceeding in explaining this Subject, I shall
premise some distinctions, by which you may understand what that meetness for
Heaven is, that I mean.

1. There is an [ aptitudo Legalis and Evangelica,] a Legal and Evangelical
meetness. Since the fall of Man, no mere Man can fulfill all Righteousness, or
by his own power attain to any thing pleasing to God; so a legal meetness is
not attainable; We have all sinned and come short of the glory of God: See Romans
3.23, 24. chapter 8.2, 3, 8. Gal. 3.10.13.

2 Did. There is an [ aptitudo operum and personae, i. e] meetness of works,
and of the person: This explains the former in the Covenant of Works, the
person was accepted for the works sake; but in the Covenant of Grace the work
is accepted for the persons sake: If the person be accepted in the beloved,
Ephesians. 1.6. God owns both person and offering, as he did Abel, Heb. 11.4, 6. But
what proportion can the best Services of the best Men bear to this Eternal
Reward? Luke 17.10. Nor can Humane Sufferings purchase this Glory to be
revealed. Romans 8.18.

3 Did. There is [ aptitudo perfecta and progressiva,] a perfect, complete
meetness for Heaven: This is compatible only to the Spirits of just men made
perfect, Heb. 12.23. But who can say I have made my heart clean; I am pure from
my sin. Prove. 20.9. Alas, we know but in part, and so love but in part. 1 Cor.
13.12. Even Paul that was perfect in point of sincerity, yet was not already
perfect in point of degree, but was pressing forward, Phil. 3.12-15. Christians
here below are but [ in via non in patria] in the road to perfection, singing
the song of degrees, and not in the height of Zion. Sincerity is Gospel
perfection, and the Christians preparation, together with a progressive motion.

4 Did. There is [ aptitudo habitualis and actualis] an habitual and an actual
meetness for Heaven; or which may be thus distinguished; there is a [ jus
haereditarium, and a jus aptitudinale] an hereditary right, and an aptitude or
actual fitness for this Inheritance: My Text includes both, and I shall open
both; for they are both necessary in their kind; and in this sense Gods
Children are said to be counted worthy of Kingdom of God, 2 Thessalonians. 1.5. and
says Christ, They shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy, Rev. 3.4.
And therefore are we exhorted to walk worthy of God, who has called us unto
his Kingdom and Glory, 1 Th. 2.12. It imports a convenience, suitableness,
answerableness in a limited Gospel-sence; like Children of such a Father, as
Heirs of such an Inheritance, as Candidates for such an Office and Honor:
There is a ((...)) seemliness appertaining to every Calling; Princes,
Magistrates, Ministers, must have a decency and suitableness to their
Profession: So here.

Well then, I shall chiefly speak to this twofold meetness. 1. Habitual
meetness, which is in opposition to perfect unmeetness, i. e. a state of
Nature, Unregeneracy. 2. An actual meetness, which is contra-distinct from
imperfect meetness; and both are necessary in their kind.

Quest. 1. What is that habitual meetness for the Inheritance of the Saints in
Light, without which Men can never attain to it, or have eternal possession of
it?

Answ. This habitual meetness consists in a twofold change; 1. Relative. 2.
Real.


1. It consists in a Relative change: This also is twofold, viz. (1.)
Justification. (2.) Adoption.


(1.) The poor sinner is standing at Gods Bar as a guilty Malefactor, under the
dreadful Sentence of a just Condemnation, for all the World is become guilty,
((...)) subject to judgment, before God, Romans 3.19. Not a Son of Adam can plead
innocence. Its well if we be as the blushing Rose, the Lilly-whiteness is lost.
He that believes not is condemned already, John 3.18. and the wrath of God
abides on him, verse 36. It was on him when he was born; and it abides still on
him, if not taken off him by Justification: Who can think the Prince will
promote him to Honor that is under an attainder for Treason? He must be
cleared of that charge, or he is fitter for Execution then Promotion. Pardon
must precede preferment. You must be first in Christ Jesus, and then there is
no condemnation to you, Romans 8.1. You must be received into Favor before you
be promoted to Honor. The sinner must be justified before he can be glorified.
Romans 8.30. Never think of ascending to Heavenly Glory under the load of guilt:
That guilt will shut Heavens gates against thee: The guilt of one sin will
press a Soul, (yea, millions of Souls) to Hell; for the wages of sin is death.
Romans 6.23. O therefore, what need is there of Justification as the introduction
to Salvation! You must be justified by his grace, if ever you be made heirs
according to the hope of Eternal Life, Tit. 3.7. Never think your sins will be
blotted out in the day of refreshing, except you repent here and be converted:
Acts 3.19. You must be justified by faith that you may have peace with God
here, and so rejoice in hope of the glory of God: Romans 5.1, 2. You cannot think
to leap from the Bar to the Throne: But must be cleared by order of Justice,
through Christ's satisfaction in the Court of God. This, this is absolutely
necessary to a meetness for this Heavenly Inheritance.

(2.) Adoption: This is another Relative change. Alas, by nature we have quite
lost our Filiation, and so forfeited our Child's part of the Heavenly
Inheritance: We are (exules a Regno) banished out of Paradise, and there are
placed Cherubims, and a flaming Sword, which turns every way to keep the way of
the Tree of Life: Genesis 3.24. Yea, we are voluntarily gone into a far Country,
have wasted our substance, disowned our Fathers house, are feeding swinish
Lusts, and feeding our selves with poor husks of worldly things; and till we be
adopted and admitted again into our Fathers house, we are not fit to eat the
Childrens Bread, or heir the Child's Inheritance: God himself has contrived a
way how to settle the best Inheritance on such as he finds strangers. Jer.
3.19. But I said, how shall I put thee among the Children, and give thee a
pleasant land, a goodly heritage of the hosts of Nations? Then I said thou
shall call me, my Father, and shall not turn away from me: Oh blessed
contrivance! And will any think to cross Gods contrivance! Shall Men's solly
challenge infinite Wisdom! Is not the Heavenly Inheritance Gods own to give?
And does not our Lord say, such honor shall be given to them for whom it is
prepared of my Father. Matthew. 20.23. Can you think to wrest Heaven out of Gods
hands whether he will or not? And must he falsify his word to gratify you?
Will he set the Crown on Rebels heads? Or give this Inheritance of Saints to
the Devils slaves? No, doubtless you must be adopted Sons, or no Lawful Heirs.
Bastards heir no Land. Jephthahs Brethren thrust him out, saying, Thou shall
not inherit in our Fathers house, for thou art the Son of a strange Woman.
Judge. 11.2. And what bold intruder art thou, that dare expect to claim such
an Inheritance as Heaven without the relation of a Son? Adam its true, was Gods
Son by Creation; but alas, he and we in him have quite lost that sweet
Relation; and we must either be restored in Christ, Gods well-beloved Son, or
we are like to be banished for ever: God sent his own Son, -- that through him
we might receive the adoption of Sons: Gal. 4.5, 6. And have you the Spirit of
his Son in your hearts to cry Abba Father? which elsewhere is called the spirit
of Adoption. Romans 8.15. Tell me not that all Men are the Sons of God: So were
the Devils: God will make you know that this is a peculiar privilege, known to
very few, enjoyed by fewer; but it is the fruit of singular Love, and is
attended with this unparalleled advantage of seeing God as he is; and a day is
coming when these Sons and Heirs in disguise shall then be like their Father; 1 John 3.1, 2. then Atheists that will not believe that there is any such
difference among Men, and bold intruders, that dreamed of a right, without
pretending or proving their Adoption, shall be utterly confounded.

2. But besides this Relative change, there is also a real change upon those
Souls that God makes meet for Heaven, and this consists in 1. Conversion to
God. 2. Covenanting with God.


1. Conversion to God: This is expressed in the words immediately following my
Text, Ver. 13. Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has
translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son. This is a description of
Conversion, and a preparation for Glory: Compare this with Acts 26.18. See
there the privilege annexed: Observe it, Conversion makes Saints, and only
Saints partake of this Inheritance: If all the Men on Earth, and Angels in
Heaven, should join their Forces together, they could not save one unconverted
Soul: Truth it self has asserted it with a solemn asseveration, Matthew. 18.3.
Verily I say unto you, except ye be converted, and become as little Children,
ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: The like does the same mouth
assert with a fourfold asseveration; Joh. 3.3, 5. I wonder often how careless
sinners ners that are conscious to themselves that never any such work passed
on them, can eat and drink, or sleep quietly, and never so much as ask this
question; Am I converted or am I not? If I be, when or how did my Soul pass
through the pangs of the new birth? What tears, fears, what groans and agonies
has it cost me? What fruits has it brought forth in me? Where Is this new
Creature, the Divine Nature, the Image and Seed of God working Heaven-wards?
What stamp, what sheep-mark can I show, as the fruit of Gods being at work on
my Soul, and an earnest of this glorious Inheritance? But if there be no such
change, (as I doubt there is not) how can I be quiet? Sure my pillow is soft,
or my heart hard, and my Conscience seared, that hear or read my own doom in
such a Scripture, from the mouth of the Judge himself, standing at Heaven-gates
and shutting me out, as if he named me, saying, Be gone thou unconverted
sinner; I know thee not; converting Grace never changed thy Heart or Life;
though I often summoned thee, and knocked at thy door, yet thou had no heart
or desire to turn from thy sinful ways, nor so much as fall down on thy knees,
and ask this grace of Conversion of me, or use the means for it, or so much as
examine whether thou have it or no, but wentest on in a golden dream, and now I
must tell thee roundly to thy cost, depart, oh be gone from my presence thou
poor wretched unconverted sinner: This state, this place is for none but
sincere Converts.

2. Covenanting with God: When the glorious day of our Lords appearing shall
spring, he calls forth his covenanted people to crown his gracious promises
with complete performance. Psalm. 50 5. Gather my Saints together, those that
have made a covenant with me by sacrifice: q. d. I take little notice of common
or outside Worshippers, they shall be set on my left hand; but there is amongst
you some serious Souls that look beyond the Ordinance, I have observed them,
they have solemnly devoted themselves to me, and accepted me in a Covenant-way:
These, these are the persons, and these only, that I have taken for the lot of
my inheritance, and for whom I have laid up a safe and satisfying inheritance:
But to the uncovenanted soul, or hypocritical pretender to covenant, God will
say, What have thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou should take
my covenant in thy mouth? Psalm. 50.16. What ground have thou to own me? Or to
claim any thing from me for this world or another. Man as a creature can have
no intercourse with God, but in a Covenant-way; much less can a sinner expect
any good from God, but by virtue of Covenant: But what can thou say for this
promised Inheritance, that have nothing to do with the promises? For all the
promises of God in Christ are yea and amen; 2 Cor. 1.20. But thou have never
spent one hour solemnly to review and renew thy Baptismal Covenant, and engage
thy Soul to God; and since thou art an Alien from the Commonwealth of Israel,
and a stranger from the Covenant of Promise, by consequence thou art without
Christ, and without God in this world, and therefore without hope of a better
state in the other world: Ephesians. 2.12. But strangers and foreigners are become
fellow-citizens with the Saints of this new Jerusalem; ver. 19. How is that?
Doubtless by taking this sacred Oath of Fealty and Allegiance to the King of
Heaven: By Covenant you have a title to all the good things of Earth and
Heaven. Sinner think of this, thou that love to be loose, and scornest the
setters of this Holy League; thou do in effect say, I will have none of God,
Christ, Pardon, Heaven: If I must have them on no other terms, but under such
bonds and obligations, let them take this Heavenly Inheritance for me: And do
thou think this golden chain of honor, worse then the Devils iron fetters of
sin, and amazing reward of flames and torments? If you need not God and Heaven,
be it known to you, God needs not you; but can strain for the revenue of Glory
to his Justice in your necessary confusion, because you would nor voluntarily
submit to his terms for so glorious an Inheritance.

CHAP. III. What actual meetness for Heaven is in the exercises of Graces.
2. THE next general head I am to treat of, is to discover what is the Souls
actual meetness for this glorious Inheritance, supposing the foresaid habitual
meetness, both relative and real: For all a Christians work is not done when
his state is changed, and he becomes a Saint; nay his work does but now begin
as a Saint, to get into an actual meetness for Glory. This, this is the
business of a Child of God: The former has a remote meetness; this puts into a
proximate or nearer er capacity for Heaven. The former renders the Christians
state safe, this sweet and comfortable. This is the Man that has set all
things in order for another world, that has nothing to do, but to pass over
the Jordan of Death into the Canaan of Heaven; this is the Man that is point
blank meet, mouth-meet (as it were) for Heaven, fit to take his flight into
another World: Interpreters think this word [(...)] sufficient, or meet,
answers to the Hebrew word [(...) dai]. Lev. 12.8. If she be not able to bring
a Lamb: [ Heb. thus, Her hand find not sufficiency of a Lamb.] The word is
attributed to God, who is, [(...), God allsufficient, Genesis 17.1.] But as God is
sufficient and suitable to all his Creatures, so by the same Almighty grace he
will make Creatures suitable to his mind and ends: So then this word is rather
to be rendered by [ idoneus] meet, then [ dignus] worthy; yet worthy in a
Gospel qualified sense. Observe it, those judge themselves most unworthy, whom
God and Man often judge most fit and worthy, Luke 7.4. They said, he is worthy
for whom he should do this; but ver. 6. himself says, I am not worthy thou
should enter under my roof. And thus it is with a gracious Soul, looking up
and seeing the holiness of Gods infinite Majesty; looking forward and beholding
the moment of Eternity, and purity of Heaven; looking inward and backward, and
seeing his many iniquities and great deformity: Oh, cries the sensible
Christian, who is fit for Heaven? Oh how unmeet am I for this glorious state or
high honor? Its true, but grace makes of Rebels, Subjects; of Subjects,
Servants; of Servants, Sons; of Sons, Heirs; of Heirs he so disposes and
qualifieth them, that nothing will content them below this inheritance of the
Saints in light; and their Spirits shall be so suited to it that the great God
will judge them worthy to obtain that world and the resurrection from the dead,
-- to be equal to the Angels, as being the children of God, and the children of
the resurrection. See Luke 20.35, 36. As the Christian by conversion is the Man
cut and shaped out for Heaven, so whiles he lives he is and must be still a
squaring, hammering, modelling for further meetness for it; and as God is said
to work us for the self-same thing, 2 Cor. 5.5. [(...)] by curious contrivances
of efficacious grace, to put sinners into a capacity for glory: As Goldsmiths
who burnish Gold; and Carvers or artificial Ingravers in Wood and Stone, who
make one part of their work suit and fit another: So also Christians themselves
must work out their own salvation, Phil. 2.12. [(...)] i. e. Leave nothing
undone which God has enjoined you to do in this World, in order to a due
preparation for Heaven. This in general is a meetness.

More particularly, this actual meetness for Heaven consists in these four
things.

1. A lively exercise of suitable graces. 2. A clear evidence of our spiritual
state. 3. A dispatching work off our hands. 4. A being mortified to time, and a
longing to be in Heaven.
1. A lively exercise of suitable graces: i. e. Such graces as actually
capacitate for glory; its true every grace does qualify for glory, for grace
is glory begun, and glory is grace consummate: But there are some graces that
have a direct tendency to, and whereby a Christian does (as it were) lay hold
on eternal life, as the word is, 1 Timothy 6.12, 19. e. g.

(1.) The grace of Faith, which is the substance of things hoped for, and
evidence of things not seen. Heb. 11.1. It ventures all upon a promise; sees
him that is in visible, ver. 27. and represents Heavenly Objects as close at
hand, and embraces them, v. 13. [(...)] drawing the Object to them, as the
word signifies: Overlooking or overcoming all these worldly visible Objects.
Faith spies something beyond Time or Clouds, of more worth then all the World,
and hazards all for the obtaining of it: When Faith is upon the wing, it soars
above the Sun, and fetches down Heavenly objects and incomes into the Soul: It
is like the spies, and brings a cluster of the grapes of Canaan; even Joy and
peace in believing, Romans 15.13. yea, Joy unspeakable and full of glory; 1 Pet.
1.8. Yea, the lowest actings of the faith of adherence dare commit the keeping
of the Soul into his Creators hands, 1 Pet. 4.19. and is persuaded, God will
keep that which he has committed to him, 2 Timothy 1.12. And this composedness is
an antedating of Heaven. Alas, faith the poor Christian, I know not certainly
how I stand for Heaven; I dare not yet say my Faith will end in the saving of
my Soul; but this I dare say, God is merciful to souls; Christ dyed for
sinners; he is faithful that has promised; the Covenant is well ordered, and
sure some Souls shall be saved, and why not I? I hang on his Free Grace, I come
with Tears in my Eyes, Confession in my Mouth, Grief in my Heart for my sins; I
am weary of my burden and labor in my travels God-wards, who can tell but. I
may find rest? He has said, those that thus come to him he will in no wise
cast out; I will venture this way: I have tried all other ways but they are in
vain; its but losing my labor, which I am sure I shall not, if my Faith be but
sincere: This Soul is in the confines of the promised Land; and is meet for
this Inheritance.

(2.) Hope. As Faith brought Heaven down to the Souls Eye, so Hope carries out
the Soul to this future enjoyment. This Anchor is cast into the vast Ocean of
Eternity, but finds sure Anchorhold, for it enters into that within the Vail,
Heb. 6.19. and this centers the tossing sinner on the rock of Ages: It sees
Heaven opened, and it self in Gods time advanced with Lazarus into Abraham's
Bosom, and is content at present to bear the roughness and affronts he meets
with in his way, saying, these things will be mended when I get home: Nay, the
Text says, we are saved by hope, Rom 8.24. Hope anticipates its revenues, and
like a young heir takes up upon trust, and lives at the rate of that
Inheritance he is heir to. Thus the Christian gets everlasting Consolation,
because he has good hopes through Grace, 2 Thessalonians. 2.16. O says the Believer,
Divine Revelations have so fully demonstrated the reality of future Glory, that
my Faith no more doubts of it then of going to Bed at night, and why should not
my Flesh (and Spirit) rest in hope? Psalm. 16.9. Why should not then my heart be
glad? Why may not my glory rejoice? Yea, I will rejoice in hope of the glory of
God, for my hope will not make me ashamed. Romans 5.2, 5. I dare venture my hopes
and my all in this blessed Covenant-bottom. My soul, hope thou in God, for I
shall yet praise him, and that for ever. Psalm. 42.11.

(3.) Love: That Is a grace that shines brightest in its proper Orb above; but
the more it is exercised here below, the more of Heaven: Love resembles the
Soul most to God, and raises the Soul to an Heavenly Life: God is love, and he
that dwells in love dwells in God, and God in him. 1 John 4.16. The Soul
that is carried out to God in pure flames of holy love, has mounted already
into the highest Region, and bathes it self in those pure streams that raise
and ravish the Spirit in a continued ecstasy: The more Love, the more
fittedness for Heaven: If love be increased and abound, our hearts are
established unblameable -- at his coming, 1 Th. 3.12, 13. Yea, the more Love,
the more of Heaven; for what is our love, but a reflection of Gods love; 1 John
4.19. Oh, says the Christian, I feel the sweet beams of the Sun of
Righteousness warming my heart; methinks those Heavenly sparks have set me in a
flame, that when I am Musing the fire burns; when I am Praying or Praising God,
my Soul mounts up to my Lord as pillars of smoke; and I love to be near him,
and to be acting for him. Oh how sweet is every Love-letter that comes from
him! How pleasant are some tokens of love that come from the hand and heart of
my beloved! Here is the soul that is meet for Heaven.

(4) Humility and Self-denial. Will you believe it? The lower the Christian
casts himself down, the nearer Heaven: But this is a truth; Matthew. 5.3. Blessed
are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. God makes his
court in the humble and contrite Spirit; Isa. 57.15. Oh says Christian, this
grace have I found in me, that duty is performed by me, this corruption have I
mortified; that burden have I born; what say I? That I have done this or that?
O no, By the grace of God, I am what I am, -- I labored, yet not I, but the
grace of God, 1 Cor. 15.10. I dare not say any thing is my own but sin; and
what is performed by me is mixed with sin and imperfection: [ Horreo quicquid de
meo est,] I tremble for fear (says Luther) at any thing that is of mine own: I
must not depend on mine own Righteousness; O that I may be found in Christ! I
am nothing, can do nothing, deserve nothing but Death and Hell: If ever I be
admitted into Heaven, it must be upon the account of Christ; his Merits upon
the Cross; his Intercession in Heaven. That Is an excellent Text, Rev. 19.7, 8.
Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him; for the marriage of the
Lamb is come, and his Wife has made her self ready: But how is she ready? Why,
to her was granted, that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and
white; for the sine linen is the righteousness of Saints. Indeed its no other
then Christ's Righteousness imputed: This is the upper garment that must not
only cover our nakedness, but the tattered rags of our own Righteousness,
whether that relate to a glorious state of the Church on Earth or in Heaven, I
dispute not: But I am sure its the bravest suit that she can put on, and she
will look trim in that only; and woe to them that appear in their best inherent
Righteousness: Let the proud self-justiciary say, [ Coelum gratis non
accipiam,] I will not have Heaven gratis, or for nothing, I will pay a
proportionable rate for it; then thou art like to go without it, for its not
saleable Ware; Romans 9.31. But let a poor self-condemning Publican come and beg
Pardon and Heaven for Christ's sake, and God will not deny him: For he resists
the proud, but gives grace and glory to the humble, Jam. 4.6.

CHAP. IV. Meetness for Heaven, in clear evidences of Title to it.
2. THe next particular wherein a meetness for Heaven does consist is
Assurance, or grounded evidence of our title to this Heavenly Inheritance; for
no Man is ready to go out of this World, but he that has solid grounds of his
safe estate for another World; for doubts breed fears, and those lears beget
unwillingness to go hence: He dare not dye that knows not whither he must go,
and he is not meet for death that has not used Gods appointed means to obtain
assurance, a thousand to one a Soul at uncertainties has been a slothful
negligent Soul, for in an usual way, diligence be gets assurance: For so says
the Apostle, Heb. 6.11. We desire that every one of you would show the same
diligence to the full assurance of hope, to the end that ye be not slothful;
ver. 12. So 2 Pet. 1.10. Give diligence to make your Calling and Election sure:
And what then? Why then, ver. 11. he adds, For so an entrance shall be
ministered to you abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. A Ship may make an hard shift to get sneaking into the
Harbor, with Anchors lost, Cables rent, Sails torn, Masts broken; these get
safe in, but with much ado; but oh how gallantly, does another ride in, to the
credit of her Master, good example to others, comfort and satisfaction to all
in the Ship, when she comes in with Sails spread, Flags up, Trumpets sounding,
and well Victualled; surely these come in bravely. This is just the difference
betwixt a lazy Professor that wants assurance, and an active Christian in his
voyage to this blessed Haven. God requires this assurance; means are appointed
for attaining it; serious Christians have gained it, so may thou, and so
must thou endeavor after it: You Will say, how is it got? By what means may a
Christian come to the assurance of his title to this Heavenly Inheritance, that
he may be meet or fit to take possession of it at death?

I Answer, in general it must be supposed that you have a title, which is your
habitual meetness, or else how can you be assured of it? You that are
unregenerate, you have a greater work to pass through before you are capable of
obtaining assurance: But supposing this, I answer.

1. An holy diligence in increasing, exercising graces, and performance of
duty. This I hinted before. Acts evidence habits: Improving grace is Gods way
to clear up grace: Blowing up sparks will best discover them: A flame is sooner
discerned then a spark in the embers: Christians by stirring up the gift of God
discover it: 2 Timothy 1.6. Motion is a good evidence of life: Activity for God,
and tendency Heavenward will put you out of doubt: All duties tend to
assurance, or spring from it: Striving, running, fighting, will be crowned with
clear evidence: God loves to crown diligence: To him that has ( i. e. uses
and improveth well what he has) shall be given, and he shall have abundance; (
i. e. more grace and the comfort of it) as the collision of Flint and Steel,
begets light; so the acting of grace produces this fruit, viz. Assurance: For
the work of righteousness is peace, and the effect of righteousness quietness
and assurance for ever. Isa. 32.17. Now, now, the Soul is ready for glory, when
he is in duty, above duty, with God in the lively actings of grace, which is a
part of, and a prologue to glory. The Christian is going from strength to
strength, till he appear before God in Zion. Oh happy soul that is thus upon
the wing!

2. Reflection upon Heart and Life, and comparing both with the word of God.
This is Gods way to get assurance: Have I the conditions of Gospel-promises,
Faith and Repentance? Do those graces within me answer the characters of such
in the Scriptures? Does my Soul echo to the experiences of Saints in the word
of God? Can I follow the Rules and prescriptions that my Lord has laid down;
To deny my self, take up his Cross and follow him? Have I the essential
characters of a Christian? I dare not believe Satan and my own treacherous
heart; I will examine and prove my self; 2 Cor. 13.5. I will not spare my self
in any thing; I will be impartial, and deal faithfully by disquisitive trial
now, as I would be found in the decisive trial at the last day: Its a matter of
life and death: I will lay judgment to the line: I will go to the Law and to
the Testimony: The word must judge me at the great day, it shall be my judge
now: No matter what the World says of me; nor must I be determined by the
votes of the best Christians, or Godly Ministers: I must, and will, and do
prove mine own work, and then I shall have rejoicing in my self alone, and not
in another, Gal. 6 4.

3. Appealing and approving the heart to God. Alas, the best Christian is too
apt to be partial in his own case, or blind at home; our Minds are as ill set
as our Eyes, neither of them apt to look inwards; and when we do look, alas, we
are apt to look through a false or flattering glass, or our Eye is vitiated
with bad humors; and therefore must we with Job appeal to God, chapter 10.7. Thou
know that I am not wicked: And chapter 23.10. He knows the way that I take:
And though David had communed with his own heart, and his spirit had made
diligent search, Psalm. 77.6. yet he challenges God to a further privy search;
Psalm. 26.2. Ezamine me, O Lord, and prove me; try my reins, and my heart. And
again, Psalm. 139.23. Search me, O God, and know my heart; try me, and know my
thoughts: Not as though God were ignorant of them till he searched; but its
spoken after the manner of Men: And that God might further acquaint David, with
the secrets of his heart. Thus the sincere Christian faith, Lord, I set my self
before thee as a glass in the Sun; look upon me, look through me; thou know
all things; see how my heart is affected toward thee; discover to me the
inmost working of my Soul; if there be any secret guile in folding it self in
the lurking-places of my heart, bring it to light; if there be any flaw in my
evidences, let me see it before it be too late: I am too apt, through self-love
to judge the best, but do thou declare my state and my frame as it is: Thou
that must be my judge shall be my witness. My witness is in Heaven, and my
record is on high; Job 16.19. Here Is a Soul usually comforted in his integrity,
and such an one is meet for Heaven.

4. Praying to God for the shinings and sealings of his Spirit: For indeed let
all these means be used, yet evidence will not come unless God be pleased to
shine upon his own grace in the Soul: My Conscience, says Paul, bearing me
witness in the Holy Ghost, Romans 9.1. and Romans 8.16. The Spirit it self bears
witness with our Spirit that we are the Children of God. This indeed is the
Sun-light assurance. This alone scatters all mists, answers all objections,
banisheth all doubts and fears; and oh what an honor and satisfaction is it to
a Child of God, that the Third Person of the Sacred Trinity should come down
and give in its infallibe Testimony at the Bar of a Believers Conscience! This
is like the Son of God coming down into our nature, and dying for us. Oh
transcendent condescension! Oh unparalleled privilege of Gods Children! Yet
this is purchased by Christ, and promised to Believers, not only to be a
Witness, but a Seal. 2 Cor. 1.22. and 5.5. Ephesians. 1.13. This is often, yea
ordinarily given after believing; and when it comes, it brings its own evidence
along with it: So that the perplexed Child of God, after many fore conflicts,
struglings, ruggings, sad thoughts of heart, comes at last to some consistency,
as to expel fears, cares, doubts, and now at last is brought to that, that he
no more questions Gods love then his faithfulness; and this usually comes in
after some notable wrestlings at the Throne of Grace in Prayer, according to
that Joh. 16.24. Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my name: ( i. e. Very little
comparatively, and as you shall do.) Ask and ye shall receive, that your joy
may be full. God will have his Child to beg when he designs to give, to
exercise our Obedience, and to honor his own Ordinance: Then he gives
assurance, and the joy of his Salvation; and now the believing Soul is meet to
be translated into the joy of his Lord.

But you will say, is none meet for Heaven but such as have assurance? Then
what shall a poor doubting Soul say of it self, that is dark, and much
discouraged as many a good Soul is?

Answ. 1. A title to this Inheritance is necessary, but knowledge of this title
is not absolutely necessary. Many have dyed safely, though under clouds. Our
Lord himself, cried dying, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? There was
Relation, my God, yet in some sense he was forsaken.

2. There Is degrees of assurance; as he that said, Lord I believe, help thou
mine unbelief. Few enjoy a full plerophory, and those that have it, yet have it
not at all times. Mr. Paul's Bains said dying, Sustentation I have, but
suavities spiritual I do not feel.

3. Its one thing what God does in an arbitrary way of suspending the comforts
of his Spirit from the best of his Saints, (yea he withheld them from his own
Son) and another thing, what may, and usually is, the effect of Man's sloth and
negligence; which is too commonly our case; as Mr. Dod answered him that
complained of want of assurance, why Man, assurance may be had, and what have
you been doing all this while?

4. Yet this will hold good, that a clear evidence of our title is a great
meetness and readiness for Death: For though assurance be not necessary [ ad
esse] to the being of a Christian; yet its necessary [ ad been esse] of a
Christian, i. e. to his well being, or comfortable passage through, or parting
out of this World; for if we must draw near to God in a duty with full
assurance of Faith, Heb. 10.22. much more at death.

Oh what a vast difference i^ there betwixt a Soul carried (...) the wing of
Faith, and flames o^ Love, in an ecstasy of Joy, and the poor doubting,
heartless, disconsolate Soul! The former is like some high Mountains, that are
above Storms and Clouds, as they say Olympus is clear and beautiful? Oh the
calmness and serenity of the well assured Christian! He has a double Heaven,
well at present, better presently; its but shooting this gulf, crossing this
Jordan, passing this style, as Dr. Tailor said, and I shall be in my Fathers
house. Death it self, as terrible as it is, in it self and to others, is a
stingless Serpent; my Friend and Fathers Servant sent to fetch me home; Angels
shall guard me; my Lord will bid me welcome; my Christian Friends gone before
will make Heaven ring with shouts of joy at my landing safe, and my Soul shall
ever be with the (...) But alas, the poor doubting Soul, whose evidences are
not clear, cries out, Alas, dye I must, and dye I dare not; I dare not say God
is my God, Christ my Savior, the Spirit my sanctifier, Promises the Charters
that convey the Inheritance to others I cannot apply; whither I am going I know
not; God carries strangely to me; I remember God and am troubled; guilt stares
me in the face; I am conscious to my self of thousands of sins; and though I
have been long bungling about Faith and Repentance, yet I am not sure they are
sincere and saving, and whether God will receive my sad departing Soul: [
Anxius vixi, dubious morior, as that great Man said,] I have lived under fears,
I dye under doubts, and God knows what will become of me, and I may thank my
self; alas, this is the fruit of my sloth, security, my slipping into sin
backslidings from God, intermittings of duty, careless and heartless
performances; woe is me, what will become of me! These are the astonishing
thoughts of a poor doubtful dying Soul: And is this Man meet for Heaven? He may
be right for the main, but he cannot make Death welcome.

CHAP. V. Meetness for Heaven in dispatching our work here, off our hands.
3. THE next thing wherein our meetness for this blessed Inheritance does
consist, is in dispatching our main work in the world, that God sent us to do;
whatever that is God expects we should dispatch it, and get it done; this we
must all address our selves cheerfully to do, and be very diligent in doing it,
Eccles. 9.10. Whatsoever thine hand finds, and do it with thy might. This is
(...) a time of working, the other world is a day of retribution; and when the
Child of God has wrought his days work, its a fit time to go to Bed. Thus our
dear Lord tells his Father, Joh. 17.4, 5. -- I have finished the work that thou
gave me to do: And now, O Father, glorify me with thy own self.

Quest. What work is it that God sets before Men to dispatch and manage?

Answ. There is a fourfold work lies upon a Christians hands to manage in this
world.

1. Personal Spiritual work, Soul work, wherein God is more immediately
concerned; which is the glorifying of God, and saving his own Soul: God has
involved these in one, they are inseparable companions, and its a mighty
business: Our Lord says, I have glorified (...) on the Earth: This in (...)
measure is required of us, and the sincere Christian makes it his design. Thou
know, Oh my dear Lord, what is that which has lain highest in my heart ever
since thou openedst mine Eyes: The earnest desire of my Soul has been to be
nothing in mine own eyes, that God alone may have all the glory; I will confess
and give glory to God; I will, and through grace have desired, to make it my
business to give glory to God by believing, repenting, obeying, fruit-bearing;
yea in eating, drinking, and whatsoever I do in natural, moral or civil
actions. This, this is the mark I shoot at, my highest aim, that God in all
things may be glorified, through Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 4.11. And my business is
in order thereto, to study how to please God, and to abound more and more, 1 Thessalonians. 4.1. to obey Gods Commandments, and to do those things that are pleasing
in his sight; 1 John 3.22. and oh that my Person and Prayers might be accepted
in Christ! The salvation of my Soul is more dear and precious then this poor
perishing Carcass. My grand enquiry is, what must I do to be saved? This is the
one thing needful; other things are upon the by. Oh that I could work out my
own salvation! I appeal to thee Lord, how many griefs and groans, prayers and
pains, fears and tears, this main concern has cost me: I know there is much of
this work about my precious Soul yet undone; but thou know the main is
dispatched: I have fought a good fight, finished my course, kept the faith. 2 Timothy 4.7. And now my Land-business is done, let me go to Sea, and launch out
into that boundless ocean of eternal happiness.

2. Temporal work, the business of our Callings and particular occasions. This
also the dying Christian is drawing into a narrower compass, that he may
voluntarily leave the world, before the world leave him; the Christian having
had his head and hands full of business in his younger days, when old age
comes, is glad of a [ quietus est, or] writ of ease, that he may [ vacare Deo]
be at more leisure for God in holy duties. Methink, says the good heart, I
have had my share, both of the employments and enjoyments of this lower world,
and am well content to shake hands therewith: I can behold with pity the
laborious Ants and Pismires running upon this Molehill, and busily scrambling
for a little dust; let them take it, God has made my hands to be sufficient
for me; I have what will bear my charges to the grave; let it go, I am glad I
have so fairly parted with it; I would not be to enter again upon this busy
stage, or put forth to this tumultuous Sea; I have now other things to mind; I
have now the great work to mind, of setting straight my accounts for another
world; my Peace to make with God; an Eternity to provide for, which the affairs
of the world have thrust out, or distracted me in: This, this shall be my
employment for the future; for what will it profit a man to gain the whole
world, and lose his own soul? I leave all these things to others that succeed
me.

3. Relative work. This also may be in some respects dispatched off our hands;
and the doing of it makes more meet for Heaven. This is not to be slighted,
for it is needful in its place. When King Hezekiah was sick unto death God
sends him this Message; Set thine house in order, for thou shall dye and not
live, Isa. 38.1. [ i. e. Make thy Will, and dispose of thy domestical concerns,
so as may be a prevention of quarrels and contentions in thy Family after thy
decease:] And ver. 3. it is said, that Hezekiah wept sore: Why so? Was not
Hezekiah a Godly Man? Was not his Soul in a readiness for death? Yes doubtless,
for he dare appeal to God that he had walked before him in truth, and with a
perfect heart: What then was the matter? Why Hezekiah had yet no Son, Manasseh
being not born till three years after this, q. d. Lord, if it may be thy will,
spare my Life, and give me a Son, for if I dye at this time, I know not how to
dispose of the Crown, I am likely to leave the Church and State in miserable
distraction and confusion, through the great uncertainty of a succession, and
the proneness of the people to backslide to their false Worship. God heard his
Prayer, gave him a lease of his Life for fifteen years: But this is a duty to
all, though it be more necessary to some then to others: But however its useful
to settle the Mind at ease, and prevent outward ill consequences, and inward
disturbances of Spirit; but as that good Man was loath to go off the stage
Heirless, so other circumstances may call for the settlement of their Families
by their last Will and Testament; especially when Children are left young, etc.
Yea, and others also may say, now God has lengthened out my days to see my
Children brought up, and hopeful for Religion, settled in Callings and Families;
there was but this Child, or that business that I desired to see well ordered,
as to my Family-affairs: As Jacob closed up his Blessing of Dan, Genesis 19.48. I
have waited for thy salvation, O Lord. Now at last, since God has wrought on
such a Child, I will say with old Simeon; Lord, now let thou thy servant
depart in peace, according to thy word, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation.
Luke 2.29, 30.

4. Another work to be dispatched off our hands is public work. This concerns
men in a public or private capacity; as when Moses had led Israel out of
Egypt, and through the Wilderness, he had dispatched his work, and having been
faithful in Gods house he was fit to dye. So when Joshua had conquered many
Kings in Canaan, divided the Land to Israel, he got a discharge and fell
asleep. Thus David, after he had served his own generation by the will of God,
fell on sleep, and was laid unto his Fathers; Acts 13.36. And so Aaron, Samuel,
and the rest of the Prophets, marched off the Field by the order of our great
Lord General, when they had dispatched their warfare, and delivered their
message: Your Fathers, where are they? and the Prophets do they live for ever?
Zech. 1.5. And indeed to what purpose should they or we live, when our work is
done? Especially when Gods servants have not only dispatched that work that
concerns present, but future Generations: For this is also the work of our
present day. Thus Solomon built God an house for future times: And the Apostle
Peter lays in for after ages, 2 Pet. 1.15. Moreover, I will endeavor that you
may be able after my decease, to have these things always in remembrance! Its
the property of a good man to take care that Religion may live when he is dead.
Ambrose says of Theodosius, I loved the man exceedingly, that when he dyed he
was more sollicitous for the Churches then his own danger. Then indeed is the
Christian meet for Heaven when he has dispatched his work on Earth, and laid a
foundation for good in after times; however bears his testimony against
corruptions in future generations; as Moses, Deuteronomy. 31.26.-30.

Quest. You will say how can any man be said to dispatch his work till his life
be done? Surely the date of work and life run parallel.

Answ. 1. Active; doing work may be often at an end, when suffering work is but a
beginning; for God often reserves suffering work to the last, that patience may
have her perfect work; that the Christian may be perfect and entire wanting
nothing: Jam. 1.4. The Christian has little to do, but lie in bed, and
patiently wait Gods pleasure; and this usually follows on doing Gods will: See
Hebr. 10.36. This is indeed a great work to bear our burden patiently,
cheerfully, thankfully and fruitfully; and say, well for the present, and will
be better shortly; the greatest part is then over.

2. Though something be to be done or suffered, yet when the greatest part of a
Christians work is done, it may be said it is finished. So it was with our
Savior; Joh. 17.4. I have finished the work which thou gave me to do. But
was not dying upon the Cross for the sins of Men a principal piece of Christ's
work? Answ. It was so nigh, that he speaks of it as already done; so ver. 11. I
am not in the world; for he was just a going out of it: Besides he had done
most of his work, and was ready pressed to do the work fully, the rest that was
behind: And when our Lord had tasted the vinegar, he said, it is finished. Joh.
19.30. This is a closing word, as giving up the ghost was a closing work.

3. Sometimes Divine Providence takes off Gods children from much of their work
before their days be ended; this is obvious to a rational eye that then their
work is done, as sometimes by natural causes. Thus Isaac, Jacob could presage
their own death by the certain prognostic of death, namely, old age: Others by
some sickness, Consumptions, which are usually mortal: Others are taken off
most of their work by Persecutions, Prisons, etc. Others are taken off the
stage of the World by violent death: As a dying Minister said on the Scaffold,
Isaac was old and knew not the day of his death, I am young, and know the day,
manner, and instruments of my death: Its but a nodding the head, and death does
its office. Now my work is ended.

4. Yet once more: Some godly Ministers and Christians have had a kind of
instinct, that death was approaching even in their best health and younger
days; and so consequently of the dispatch of their work; as some Creatures by
natural instinct foresee a falling house. So we find of Bishop Juel, that long
before his sickness he foretold it approaching, and in his sickness, the
precise day of his death; he dyed in the fiftieth year of his age. The like we
have of James Andreas, who foretold the year, yea, hour of his death. I shall
but add one instance of that Holy Man of God, and my dear Friend Mr. Isaac
Ambrose, his surviving Wife told me of his solemn farewell he gave to his
Daughter, and some other Friends: Yea, the very day of his death several
Friends from Garstang visited him at Preston, with whom he discoursed piously
and cheerfully, telling them he had finished his work, having the night before
sent his discourse of Angels to the Press, attended them to their Horses,
returned, dyed that Evening in his Parlour, where he had shut up himself for
Meditation. Thus Gods children are made meet for Heaven by dispatching their
work on earth.

CHAP. VI. Meetness for Heaven, by being mortified to Sin, Time, and Earthly
Objects, and being elevated to Heavenly Objects.
4. THE last thing wherein meetness for Heaven does consist, is a being dead or
being mortified to all things below and alive, and lively to God and things
above. It is true, converting grace deadens the heart to all sublunaries, and
lifts it up to divine things: Yea, sometimes the first convictions take off the
sinners Spirit more then is meet, and quite damps the affections to lawful
comforts, and makes him think he must do nothing in worldly business, but give
himself to Reading, Praying and Hearing; but Gods grace in a little time
discovers this to be a Temptation: Yet as grace gets the upper hand, and the
Christian mellows and ripens for glory, so he is mortified and gradually
transformed and advanced.

1. By further victory over his corruptions; for as the Christian perfects
holiness in the fear of God, so he does by degrees cleanse himself from all
filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit. 2 Cor. 7.1. Sin and grace being like two
buckets at one chain, as the one comes up the other goes down: Or as the ebbing
and flowing of the Sea, where it gains in one place it loses in another; the
more holiness, the less sin. Now the Christian grows stronger and stronger; The
inward man is renewed day by day, 2 Cor. 4.16. So the body of sin is weakened,
till at last, his fleshly lusts are laid at his feet, and spiritual sins pay
tribute to the grace of God in his Soul. Pride, hardness, unbelief and
security, keep the Christian humble and watchful, jealous of himself, and
maintaining spiritual conflicts against them, so occasionally he is a gainer by
his losses, a riser by his falls; however the Christian grows more in sight of,
and serves under the burden of sin; as Paul he cries out, Oh wretched man that
I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Romans 7.24. O says the
Christian, what shall I do with this untoward heart? I am weary of these
Daughters of Heth: Fain would I get rid of this indwelling corruption: Sin I
hope has not dominion over me; but oh when shall the time come that it shall
have no indwelling within me? But this is my grief and I must bear it, I am
discontentedly contented with my burden: Discontent with sin, content with Gods
pleasure: But there is nothing makes me weary of the World but sin: Could I live
without sin, I should live without sorrow: The less sin the more of Heaven:
Lord set me at liberty.

2. By loosening the affections from all worldly enjoyments. Oh how sapless and
insipid does the World grow to the Soul that is a making meet for Heaven. He is
crucified to the World, and the World to him, Gal. 6.14. In vain does this
Harlot think to allure me by her laying out her two fair Breasts of Profit and
Pleasure. Surely I have behaved and quieted my self, as a Child that is weaned
of his Mother: My Soul is even as a weaned Child; Psalm. 131.2. There Is no more
relish in these gaudy things to my palate, then in the white of an Egg; every
thing grows a burden to me, were it not duty to follow my calling, and be
thankful for my enjoyments. Methinks I enjoy my Wife, Husband and dearest
Relations, as if I had none; I weep for outward losses, as if I wept not;
rejoice in comforts below as if I rejoiced not; 1 Cor. 7.29. -- 30. my thoughts
are taken up with other objects: The men of the world slight me, many seem to
be weary of me, and I am as weary of them: [ Non est mortale quod opto] Its
none of these earthly things that my Heart is set upon; my Soul is set on
things above, my treasure is in Heaven, and I would have my Heart there also: I
have sent before me all my goods into another Country, and am shortly for
flitting; and when I look about me, I see a bare, empty house, and am ready to
say with Monica, [quid hic facio?] what do I here? My Father, Husband, Mother,
[ Jerusalem above,] my Brethren, Sister, best Friends are above: Methinks I
grudge the World any thing of my Heart, and think not these temporal visible
things worth a cast of my Eye compared with things invisible and eternal: 2
Cor. 4. 18. I do not only say with afflicted Job, chap. 7.16. I loath it, I
would not live always; but even with Solomon in the top of all Earthly felicity,
Eccl. 2.17, 18. Therefore I hated life, -- yea I hated all my labor which I
had taken under the Sun: i. e. In comparison, or in competition with Heavenly
enjoyments.

3. By spiritualizing Worldly things, and using them as steps by which the Soul
mounts Heavenwards. The Believer considers these things were made not for
themselves but for higher ends: All things are as Talents to trade with for
another World, Matthew. 25.16. for an account must be given of them; not only
Ordinances and Gospel-priviledges, but Providence both sweet and severe, yea,
Creature-comfors, yea, all visible objects. Thus our Lord [who had grace in
perfection] made notable Spiritual improvement of outward Water, Bread, vines
for holy ends; and the more Heavenly the Christian is, the liker he is to his
Head, and so meeter for Heaven. Whatever this golden hand of Faith touches is
turned into Gold. The Christian fetches honey thus out of the hard Rock: Out
of the eater comes meat. O says the believing Soul, if meat be so sweet to an
hungry stomach, how much more excellent is Gods loving kindness? If drink be so
refreshing to the thirsty soul, oh how sweet are those rivers of pleasures?
Surely his love is better then wine. If it be so pleasant for the Eyes to
behold the Sun, how amiable is the Son of Righteousness? How sweet is home to
the weary Traveller? And the Haven to the weather-beaten Mariner? But
infinitely sweet and contentful is Heaven to the tempted, burdened, tired
Saint: Methinks all I see, and do, and have, minds me of my home; and says,
Arise, depart, this is not thy rest. When I am abroad in a storm, I have to a
shelter: Oh think I then, that I were with my dear Lord, who is as the shadow
of a great Rock in a weary Land! When I consider my dim Eyes, my decrepit Feet,
my palsy Hands, my panting Lungs; Oh think I, when shall this silver cord be
loosned, and the bowl broken at the Cistern? That my Soul may return to God.
This is a pitiful ruinous Cottage, when shall I be brought into the Kings
Palace? In this my Earthly Tabernacle methinks I find now a pin loosened, and
a stake taken down, then I say and sigh with the blessed Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.4.
We which are in this Tabernacle do groan being burdened, not for that we would
be uncloathed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life.
Here Is the Soul taking wing to fly into another World.

4. The Christian is made meet for Heaven by intimate familiarity with the God
of Heaven: This indeed is the height of a Christians perfection on Earth. The
fitter for, and freer intercourse with God, the fitter is that Soul for glory.
What is Heaven but the enjoyment of God? The nearer God the nearer Heaven; for
where the King is there is the Court: Truly, says the Apostle, Our fellowship
is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. 1 Jo. 1.3. Communion with
God, and assimilation to God is the life and perfection of our Religion; and
the former leads on to the latter, 2 Cor. 3.18. But we all with open face,
beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image
from glory to glory, as by the spirit of the Lord. As grace increases glory
increases; and the vision of God (though but through a glass, mightily
increases grace, and fitteth for glory. Now it is said of some great persons,
that they have spoken more with God then with Man. Oh faith the Christian, I
could not tell how to spend my time if my Soul had not sometime free access to,
and intercourse with my best friend above. Oh that it were oftener and longer; [
sed rara hora, brevis moka] it were a brave resemblance of Heaven to have fixed
communion with him; but however I write that day as black and lost wherein God
and my Soul are not together. I cannot be content in a public ordinance when I
miss my beloved: I follow him into my Closet, and there usually I find him whom
my Soul loves: O then think I, that God would now stop this breath, and
translate my Soul into his immediate presence! That as its said of Moses that
he dyed at the mouth or kiss of God, Deuteronomy. 34.5. (so some read it) that he was
kissed to death, or overpoured with divine embraces: Would to God it were thus
with me! Methinks I am loath to part with these first fruits without a full
harvest; now let me go over Jordan, and see that goodly Mountain and Lebanon:
Oh let me not return down into this tempting world, to be banished again from
thee! O come thou down to me, or take me up to thee: Its pity my Soul should be
thus tantalized with the sight of that which I cannot at present enjoy; well,
since it is thy pleasure I am content to be dismounted and descend down to take
my lot with the rising Sons of Adam; only I will be stretching out Neck and
Arms, and be looking for, and hasting to the coming of my dear Lord. Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly: Make have my beloved, and be thou like to a Roe, or to a
young Heart upon the mountains of spices.

Object. You will say, such an height of meetness for the Heavenly inheritance
as you have described is not practicable or attainable in this life; if none be
saved but such as you have described, woe be to all the world.

Answ. 1. Most part of men are not capable of this actual meetness, not having
the habitual; namely, a relation to God, and a principle of saving grace; and
no wonder if unexperienced persons call this Enthusianism, and unintelligible
nonsense, for wisdom is too high for a fool; its not to be thought strange if
some speak evil of that they know not, and turn real experiments into a
ridicule: Alas, they have no grace, how then can they exercise it? How can they
evidence a title to Heaven that have none? How can they dispatch their work,
that never begun it to purpose? Or be mortified to things below, that have
their portion in this present life, were never divorced from their lusts, and
have no treasure above? We may pity such souls, for Salvation is far from the
wicked.

2. But Wisdom is justified of her Children. Sanctified souls know what these
things mean, and though the best complain of their low seize, yet the
weakest sincere Christian can set to his seal, that something of these things
he has found in his bosom as to sincerity, and is aiming at further degrees,
and is not content to sit down short of perfection, but is pressing toward the
mark for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Phil. 3.14.

3. There Is a great difference in Christians seize in this world. Some
active vigorous souls get nearer to God then others; some are Children, others
Fathers, others are young Men, that are strong, and the word of God abides in
them, and they have overcome the wicked one, 1 John 2.12, 13, 14. The meanest
child God has in his Family will own and follow his Father, though some dare not
say, he is my Father: But some are grown up to great intimacy with God, as that
choice man of God, Mr. Holland, that said on his Deathbed, Speak it when I am
gone, and Preach it at my Funeral, that God deals familiarly with man.

4. Yet its every ones duty to endeavor after the highest pitch of meetness
that is attainable in this life: For as it is the nature of true grace to
become deeper and deeper, like the waters in Ezekiels vision, and ascend higher
and higher, as the flame or rising Sun; so the Christian dare not but obey Gods
command to grow in grace, and sees it necessary to comply with our Lords
command, Mat. 24.44. Therefore be ye also ready. And this is one reason
(amongst the rest which I shall next add,) what a Godly dying Minister of my
acquaintance said, That the best preparation of the best man, is all little
enough when we come to dye. But more of this anon. This is the former head,
What is that meetness for Heaven that Christians must have, or endeavor after.

CHAP. VII. Some Reasons propounded why such must be made meet for Heaven here,
that hope to be saved hereafter.
THE second head in the Doctrinal part, is the Reasons of this point, That all
those and only those that shall eternally partake of this Heavenly Inheritance
in the other World, are made meet for it in this World: In handling this I
shall endeavor not only to evince the truth of it, but convince the Conscience
of the necessity of it, and persuade the Affections to comply with it.

1. Its fit persons be made meet, because no man by nature is meet for Heaven.
Man is estranged from God, even from the Womb, Psalm. 58.3. and are these fit to
live with God till brought nigh? Man is shapen and conceived in sin, Psalm.
51.5. and is this fit to dwell with an Holy God till sanctified? Man is dead in
trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.1. and is such a dead block meet to converse with
the living God? Man is darkness, Ephesians. 5.8. and what fellowship has
righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion has, light. with
darkness? 2 Cor. 6.14. Man by nature is a child of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. and how can
dried stubble dwell with consuming fire? Alas, we are all enemies to God in our
minds, Col. 1.21. yea, enmity it self, Romans 8.7. and can two walk together
except they be agreed? Amos 3.3. Can the sin-revenging God and the guilty
sinner hold intimate correspondence till they be reconciled? O no, it will
never be: Heaven and Hell will as soon join as God and an unregenerate sinner:
Will the holy God take such vipers into his bosom? Can you imagine God will
deface or lay aside his immaculate Holiness, to take you from the Swine-sty
into his holy Sanctuary? What cleanly person can endure to have a filthy swine
a bed and board with him in his Parlour or Bedchamber? Shall the throne of
iniquity have fellowship with thee? Psalm. 94.20. No, no, God is of purer eyes
then to behold iniquity, with liking and delight. Hab. 1.13. If God should take
men [ a caeno ad coelum] from the dunghill into his Palace, others would
conclude that God is reconciled to sin, that its an harmless thing, and not
that abominable thing which his Soul hates: No, it can never be; graceless
sinners, so remaining cannot dwell with God. Psalm. 5.4, 5.

2. Because this is the divine ordination and appointment, that there should be
a connection betwixt grace and glory, holiness and happiness: Psalm. 84.11. As
Sin and Hell are joined by divine commination, so Grace and Heaven are knit
together by divine promise. So says the Text, Romans 2.7, 10. To them who by
patient continuance in well-doing, seek for glory and honor, and immortality,
eternal life. This is a connection of grace, not of merit; of promise, not of
debt, yet inviolable, for Gods Justice and Truth are engaged in it. Its fit the
infinite God should distribute his Mercies to whom, and upon what terms he
pleases; now he has said peremptorily, without holiness no man shall see the
Lord: Heb. 12.14. All things are ordered and wrought after the council of his
will; Ephesians. 1.11. First he chooses them before the foundation of the world, that
they should be holy: Ephesians. 1.4. They are redeemed to be holy, Tit. 2.14. called
with an holy calling, 2 Timothy 1.9. and therefore they are holy Brethren that are
partakers of this Heavenly calling: Heb. 3.1. Let wicked scoffers mock on to
their guilt and cost: Such there are in the world, and such must they be if
they think to inherit Heaven: Its Gods ordination: you must be Saints in this
world, or never Crowned as Saints in the other; though Canonized for Saints by
Men, when gone. Consider sinner, whose word shall stand? Gods or thine? Thou
hopest to go to Heaven without Saintship, or meetness for it; God says it, yea
swears it, Heb. 3.18. that thou shall never enter into his rest. This is Gods
council, that men must be brought through Sanctification to Salvation, 2 Thessalonians.
2.13. and can you think to overturn his appointed Will, or contradict his
Councels? Must the Earth be forsaken for thee? Must the immutable God falsify
his word to save chee against his will, yea, against thy will? For thou wilst
not come to him for life: God will not be merciful to any wicked transgressour:
The eternal determination of Heaven is recorded in that chain of Salvation,
Romans 8.30. and all the Men on Earth and Devils in Hell cannot break one link of
it: Predestination, Vocation, Justification, Salvation or Glorification: Go try
the turning Day into Night, or Winter into Summer, or stop the course of the
Sun, before thou think to divert the proceedings of grace in the salvation of
Souls; but its vain to attempt either; for his council shall stand, and he will
do all his pleasure.

3. This is the design of God in all his Ordinances to make Souls meet for
Heaven: It pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching to save them that
believe. 1 Cor. 1.21. Ministers and Ordinances were given for perfecting of the
Saints. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. This is the means of Conversion, the power of God to
salvation; Romans 1.16. the means of edification, of resolution of doubts,
consolation and confirmation; so are the Seals of the Covenant given to this
end, to bring Souls onward to this glorious Inheritance. Now, Sirs, consider,
shall you receive this grace of God in vain? Shall all the Ordinances be lost
upon you? You must give account of Sabbaths, Sermons, Sacraments, shall they be
the savor of death unto death to you, or the savor of life unto life? Alas,
how do poor Ministers toil and travel, pray and watch, weep and sigh, to the
breaking of their Loins, spending of their Spirits, to bring you to God and
Heaven, and you pretend kindness to us, but have no real kindness to your own
Souls, we dare not but warn you in the name of Christ, lest you fail of the
grace of God, and fall short of this Inheritance: We watch for your Souls as
those that must give an account: O let us do it with joy and not with grief.
Heb. 13.17. If it be uncomfortable to us, it will be unprofitable to you? Must
our sweat and labor be in vain? But it will not be in vain to us, for our work
is with the Lord, we shall not lose our reward: God will pay the Nurse, though
the Child dye: Our Crown will be given us, if we be faithful, though we be not
successful, for that is in Gods hands: But woe be to those souls that have
sitten under powerful Ordinances, and miss of this Inheritance! O woe, woe to
you, you cannot miss of Heaven, but be plunged into a deeper Hell: O ease our
Hearts, and save your own Souls: Kill us, and damn your selves; nay, murder
your selves, and you again Crucify Christ, whose person we represent: Rather
give us leave to espouse you to one Husband, [(...), I have fitted you, as
things that are pieced together, glued or soddered, let us do so with you,]
that we may present you as chaste virgins in Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2. Would to God
this were the fruit of our labors.

4. This is the design of all Gods Providential dispensations: Mercies,
afflictions, smiles, frowns, come upon this errand to make Souls meet for
Heaven: Cords of love draw, rods of wrath drive the poor sinner from Hell to
Heaven: The Sunshine of Love comes to melt and thaw our frozen hearts that God
may set a stamp upon us: The loving kindness of God leads to Repentance. Romans
2.4. Oh what an influence will Gods native goodness have upon an ingenuous
Spirit. As the Sun attracts vapors from the Earth, so this Son of
Righteousness should and will (if our sturdy hearts hinder not) raise our
hearts Heavenwards. Its pity we should stop here in the streams, but that
thereby we should be led to the fountain, and follow the beams up to the Sun:
May this long-suffering of the Lord be your salvation: 2 Pet. 3.15. May love
constrain you to love God: May these load-stones so attract you, and these
grapes of Canaan enamour you, that you may never rest till you appear before
God in Zion: And what are all Gods rods and redoubled strokes for, but to
awaken you out of security? Peat your fingers off from the world? Weaken your
corruptions, and purge and furbish your Souls, as vessels for the high shelf of
glory? For our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory; 2 Cor. 4.17. How is that? Surely by
working the Soul into a fitness for that glory. This furnace melts away the
dross of our Spirit. Sea-tossings clear the liquor of grace; this dark night
fits for the pleasant morning; these pangs prepare us for deliverance; these
blustering storms fit souls for the peaceable fruits of righteousness, being
sanctified by the Spirit, and improved by Faith. Affliction is Gods Physic,
which makes sick, but prepares for sweet health; and shall we frustrate Gods
ends in this also? What, are you content with a Heaven here, and an Hell
hereafter? Nay can you be content with an Hell in both worlds? Must these be
parboilings for everlasting burnings? God forbid. Look at the Lords end in
these sufferings, and let it be yours.

5. The time of this life is the only time men have given them to be made meet
for Heaven. This life is a praeludium to an eternal state: Its a Seminary for
another world. Gal. 6.7, 8. -- Whatsoever a man sows that shall be also reap:
He that sows to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that
sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting. Seeding is a
preparatory to reaping; yet men must expect only to reap that kind of grain
that is sown; none can think to reap Wheat that sowed Oats; and you know there is
more abundunce in the reaping then in the sowing: So in this case, Hell
torments will be more exquisite and eternal, then the profit and pleasure of
the sinner in sinning: Heavens joys will infinitely furmount the Christians
labors and sorrows in this world; and there is great equity in both, for the
object sinned against is infinite, and satisfaction can never be made by a
finite Creature; and the grace, from whence flows Eternal Life, is infinite,
and will have an endless duration: But the point I am upon is to demonstrate
the necessity of making meet for Heaven in this world, or it will never be
done: Now or never. When the door is shut, the gulf fixed, and the Soul loosed
from the Body, and launcht out into that vast ocean of Eternity, there is no
returning back to get the oil of grace, or be fiting the Soul for another
world: Eccl. 9.10. What soever thine hand finds to do, do it with thy might;
for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave
whither thou go. Time lasts not, but floats away apace; but what is
everlasting depends upon it. [ Hic aut accepimus, aut amittimus vitam aeternam]
In this world we either win or lose eternal Life: The great weight of Eternity
hangs on the small and twittered thread of time: Now is the accepted time; now
is the day of salvation: 2 Cor. 6.2 This is our working day, our market time;
surely it becomes us to lay that Foundation well, that bears such a
Superstructure: To cast that Anchor safely that is entrusted with a Vessel so
richly laden; Oh Sirs, sleep now, and awake in Eell, from whence is no
redemption. Suppose by misdemeanour you had forfeited your Estate and Life, and
upon much intercession, the King causes an Hourglass to be turned, and set
you a work to do, or lesson to learn; if you performed it you are pardoned and
promoted, if not, tortured and executed: Oh how diligent would you be! What
pains would you take? The case is your own, Sirs, Heaven and Hell are before
you; according to your improvement or non-improvement of this hour of life, so
must you fare; dream not of a Purgatory; as the Tree falls so it lies: You
enter by death into an unchangeable state, only the Body at the Resurrection
will be joined to the Soul to be partner with it in weal or woe, bliss or bane
for ever. The state here is [ tempus operis] the time of working; hereafter [
mercedis] of reward: Oh look, before you leap into another world. That Is the
fifth Reason.

6. The Christian must be made meet here for the Inheritance above, because he
has abundance of work to do, and privileges to enjoy, in order to the full
possession of this blessed Inheritance above: We have many graces to exercise,
duties to perform, corruptions to subdue, temptations to resist, burdens to
bear, mercies to improve, that will never be managed to purpose without a
qualification for managing them: And observe it, the same disposition is
requisite for making a Christian meet for any duty, that is requisite to make
him meet for glory; the same habitual principle, and drawing it forth into
lively exercise: Not only must the man of God be perfect, thoroughly furnished
unto all good works; 2 Timothy 3.17. but every Christian, that is a vessel unto
honor, must be sanctified and so meet for his Masters use, and prepared unto
every good work: 2 Timothy 2.21. Alas, an unsanctified heart is unfit for
spiritual service. Solomon says, The legs of the lame are not equal, [he halts
and goes limping] so is a parable in the mouth of fools: Prove. 26.7. How
aukwardly and bunglingly does he go to work in sacred things; just as an
unskilful person handles a Lute, a Viol, or Instrument of Music: or as the men
of Ephraim could not frame to pronounce Shibboleth aright: Judge. 12.6. There
must be a suitableness betwixt the Agent and Acts: No carnal heart can do any
one good work well; materially he may do what is good, but not formally as
good; in a good manner, for a good end; acceptably to God, or profitably to
himself: For they that are in the flesh cannot please God; and without faith
its impossible to please God. Romans 8.8. Heb. 11.6. And can we think God will
carry them to Heaven that never struck a right stroke, or never did one hours
work for God, that he would accept? A graceless sinner is like the fruitless
Vine tree, Ezekiel. 15.3, 4, 5. that is not meet for any work, but it is cast into
the fire for fuel; just so is that branch (that is professionally) in Christ,
that bears not fruit, its taken away, -- and cast into the fire and burned.
Joh. 15.2.-6. The Divine Wisdom is seen in suiting means to the end, object to
the faculty, back to the burden: Now graceless sinners are not fit for Gods
work, and if they be not fit in this world, they will never be fit.

2. The Christian has many privileges to enjoy which he must be meet for even
in this world, as Reconciliation, Justification, Adoption, Joy in the Holy
Ghost, Peace of Conscience, Communion with God, Audience of Prayers, etc. All
these God has promised, Christ has purchased for his Children, and they are
Childrens bread, and must not be given to dogs: God will not throw away his
Mercies on such as value them not, but scorn them; they set light by precious
delicates of his Table, Mat. 22 5. The whole slight the Physician: Mat. 9.12.
The full soul loathes the honey comb: The carnal heart will not thank God for
pardon and grace; and can we think God will force his Blessings on such
ungrateful miscreants, that scorn both him and his kindness? No surely, there
are some that long for these Blessings, and will thankfully accept them: See
Acts 13.46, 48. and 28.28. Yea, he will make you prize them, and part with all
for them, or you shall never have them: What think you, does not the great God
take care to secure his own glory, as well as Man's felicity? And would it not
be dishonorable to God to bestow his richest treasures and pleasures of grace
on such as despise them, and take more pleasure in rooting in the sordid
dunghill of sensual delights, then in seeking first the Kingdom of God, which
consists in righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. Romans 14.17. Alas,
Honor is not seemly for a fool: Prove. 26.1. As a Jewel of Gold in a swines
snout, so is a fair Woman without discretion. Prove. 11.22. These silly fools
are not meet to sit as Princes with the King at his Table, because they want a
Wedding Garment of suitable disposition for so high a privilege. Mat. 22.12.

CHAP. VIII. Another Reason drawn from the necessary consistency of a
Christians meetness for so glorious an Inheritance.
7. THE last Reason why souls must be made meet for Heaven is, because other
wise there would be no consistency or suitable harmony betwixt men and glory:
If their natures be not changed, they will not have a suitableness of
disposition to the glorious state above. The truth of this I shall demonstrate
in these 4 particulars.

1. None but persons made meet for Heaven will have any mind to leave the
world, and go to God. A carnal unconverted soul is totally unwilling to go
hence; they fancy to themselves an Eternity below: Their inward thought is,
that their houses shall endure for ever: Psalm. 49.11. Yea, themselves; for they
put far from them the evil day, and sing a requiem to themselves, as the fool
in the Gospel; and no wonder, for they live by sense, and know what they have
here, but know not what they must have hereafter: As the old doting Monk, that
showed his brave accommodations, saying, These things make us unwilling to dye.
It was an usual saying among the Heathens, [ soli Christiani sunt mortis
contemptores] that Christians only are contemners of death: This is applicable
to sincere Christians. Stoical apathy will not do it, but Faith will. Julius
Palmer, the Martyr, said, To them that have their Souls linked to the Elesh,
like a Rogues foot to a pair of stocks, it is indeed hard to dye; but for him
who is able to separate Soul and Body by the help of Gods Spirit; it is no more
mastery for such a one to dye, then for me to drink this cup of Beer: Nay, when
the Christian is upon good terms with God, he desires to be loosed or dissolved
and to be with Christ, Phil. 1.23. Yea, this is the disposition of a Soul meet
for Heaven, that he loves and longs for Christ's appearing; 2 Timothy 4.8. but the
sincere Christian that is not actually meet son Heaven (though through grace he
be habitually meet) often shrugs at the approach of death, and is glad to chide
himself out, and say as that holy man, [Egredere mea Arima, egredere,] Go out,
my Soul, go out, what art thou afraid of? And surely that man is more
acceptable to God, and comfortable in death, that has set all things straight,
and has nothing to do, but surrender his Soul into Gods hands; this man will
make his Lord welcome any hour of the day, or watch of the night; but the other
is like a Maid undrest and unready, though for the main she love her Friend,
and desire his coming, yet in the present juncture and under those
circumstances, she is surprised and troubled that he should find her in that
pitiful pickle. This is the case of the unmeet Christian.

2. None but Souls meet for Heaven are fit for death, through which all must
pass. Its true, the Apostle does discover to us this mystery, (which among the
rest he might receive in the third Heavens,) 1 Cor. 15.51. We shall not all
sleep, but we shall all be changed; but this change is a peculiar dispensation
in the end of the world, and this change is equivalent to death. This is
certain, the fruit of the curse, the sting of death will fasten her fangs on
the unconverted soul, that is under the covenant of works, and is not in Christ:
Its only the sincere Christian that can sing that [(...),] the Song of Triumph;
or can make that brave challenge, 1 Cor. 15.56, 57. O death where is thy sting!
O grave where is thy victory? Only our Captain Jesus has disarmed death, and
it is only for his members; others are left to its rage: Death feeds on them;
Psalm. 49.14. it has a full morsel of them. The first death kills the Body, and
the second death damns the Soul; but blessed and holy is he that has part in
the first Resurrection, on such the second death has no power. Rev. 20.6. Oh
happy state of real Saints! Christ, our David, has conquered this Goliath: The
Ark of the Covenant has driven back this swelling Jordan: [Tollitur mors non
ne sit, sed ne obsit;] This Serpent may hiss and hit, not hurt; strike down it
may, not strike home; it may thrust Gods Children into the Grave, not into
Hell: Nay, our Lord sets his, not only above the danger by death, but fears of
death, that are thus meet for Heaven; Heb. 2.14, 15. that can say, as that
gracious Gentlewoman, a Martyr, written by me Anne Askew, that neither wishes
for death, nor fears his might, and as merry as one that is bound for Heaven:
But oh the woeful state of a graceless sinner! that is in Natures state, and
loves and lives in sin, lies and dies in the old Adam. That Is the sadest word
in all the Bible, pronounced twice in a breath by our blessed Lord, Joh. 8.21,
24. Ye shall dye in your sins, i. e. under the guilt of your sins and sentence
of condemnation: This is surprising from what he adds in the first place,
whither I go you cannot come; that is to Heaven, whither sinners cannot enter:
You Will say, then no man can enter into Heaven, for all men are sinners even to
the last breath. When are men cleansed, is it [ in Articulo mortis] in the
passage of the Soul out of the Body? In Answer to this question, see 3 Opinions
in Dr. Tuckney. Theses and Praet. Theol. ubi videa praeclare furius disputata
p. 269. ad p. 292.
May not all be cleansed alike then? Answ. Its true all are sinning to the last
gasp of breathing out their Souls; but

1. You must distinguish betwixt a state of sin, and having fin: The best have
relics of Original corruption as long as they live: The death of the body will
only annihilate the body of death: Death is not properly the punishment, but
period of sin: It reigns not in Gods Children at present, it shall not remain
in them when dead: The guilt of sin is already gone, for there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. and the filth, yea,
being of sin is taken away, as soon as death strikes the stroke.

2. I see not but the mighty God can perfectly expel sin out of the Soul, and
also perfect defective graces in the instant of the Souls separation from the
Body, as well as he did infuse a principle of grace into the Soul in an instant
at the Souls first conversion; for by death the spirits of just men are made
perfect; Heb. 12.23. Mind it, it is just men not wicked; God will not infuse
grace into men ordinarily in their passage out of the world; [ qualis vita,
finis ita;] as men live, so they dye; and if men imagine God will put another
principle into their hearts just as they pass out of this World; as this is a
daring presumption, so they will be mistaken; for how is a departing Soul
capable of such receptions or reflections as are necessary in the work of
conversion? Alas, the Eyes being set, Lips quivering, Memory failing, and the
Body in a cold sweat, is unfit for any thing; their hopes giving up the ghost
as their breaths depart; and its a wonder that the Souls of wicked men go
quietly out of their Bodies; its strange they depart not as the Devils out of
the Demonaicks rending, raging, tearing, foming; but if Conscience be asleep,
death will awake it; could you follow their departing Souls a minute out of
their Bodies, you would hear howlings and roarings.

3. Heaven will not receive any Souls but such as are made meet for it on
Earth. Rev. 21.27. There shall in no wise enter into it any thing that
defiles, neither what soever works abomination, -- for without are dogs.
Rev. 22.15. They say Ireland will not brook a Toad, a Snake or venomous
Creature to live and like in it: I am sure Heaven will not admit, but cast out
an unsanctified heart. The Legions of apostate Angels knew this, who abode not
one moment in that holy place after they left their innocence. It is said of
the Halcyons nest, that it will hold nothing but its own Bird: The same may be
said of Heaven; the Serpent could wind himself into the Earthly Paradise, but
none of the Serpentine brood shall once peep into this Heavenly Paradise. For

(1) The Text says, It is an Inheritance; now an Inheritance is for none but
Children; its true all Gods Children are heirs, Romans 8.17. but none shall
inherit Heaven except Children: By nature we are Children of Wrath; by grace
and adoption Children of God. All Gods Children are begot again, to a lively
hope for this incorruptible inheritance. 1 Pet. 1.3, 4.

(2.) Its the inheritance of Saints, i. e. of holy sanctified Souls. Persons
must not think that Heaven is like Mahemets Paradise, where there is delicious
fare, pleasant gardens, fair women, and all sensual delights, fit lettice for
an Epicures Lips. No, no, Heaven is a state of perfect, immediate and perpetual
enjoyment of God, suited to the raised faculties of a sanctified Soul.

(3.) Its the inheritance of Saints in light. Its a bright and lightsome state,
suited to seeing Souls; blind sinners can see no beauty there; such as are not
changed from darkness to light are not fit for that state; see Acts 26.18.
Alas, a blind man can take no content in beautiful objects, though the Sun
shine never so gloriously. Heaven and light are synonymous; but light and
darkness are directly contrary: If we say that we have fellowship with him, and
walk in darkness, we lie and do not the truth; 1 John 1.6. and such dark
sinners are far from a suitableness to this state and place of light. O
therefore poor sinners consider this, the holy God hates all the workers of
iniquity; the holy Heaven is no sanctuary for Rebels and Traitors; God will not
take such vipers into his bosom; thou must either be renewed or never received
into glory; it is an undefiled inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.4. a dirty sinner must not
enter; this would disparage and contradict all Gods Attributes, as his Justice,
then God should give to the wicked according to the work of the righteous; it
would blemish his Holiness, as though unclean were delighted in equally with
the clean; it would contradict his Truth, as though God regarded not what he
said or swore, that no unclean thing shall enter there: Every Attribute would
have dirt cast upon it, if God should save the unsanctified Soul: Nay, it
contradicts the undertakings of Jesus Christ, who came to save his people from
their sins, not in their sins: It exposes the office and operations of the
Holy Ghost, whose office it is to sanctify sinners, and prepare Souls for
Heaven; that sinner must surely be in a desperate case that must un God the
infinite Jehovah, God blessed for ever, or else he cannot be saved.

4. The unsanctified sinner would by no means like in Heaven. Heaven would be
an Hell to him, except his Nature were changed and renewed. Most Men mistake
the nature of Heaven; they only look upon it as a place of happiness; it is so,
but withal it is a state of perfect holiness: They are holy privileges,
enjoyment of God, and what care wicked men for his company? They say unto God,
depart from us; and their choice shall be their punishment: They are holy joys
and delights; how will they like that who were never pleased but with sensual
laughter, which is madness? There Is holy company above of Saints, but they
cannot abide to be near them on Earth, how then can they like to be associated
to them in Heaven? There is holy employment above, but alas, they are not at
all qualified for, nor can they be delighted in the work of loving, praising,
or taking pleasure in God. Augustine has a saying, [ Canticum novum and vetus
homo male concordant.] That the new Song and old Man agree not well together:
-- No man could learn that new Song, but the hundred forty four thousand,
which were redeemed from the earth. Rev. 14.3. Alas, they have not hearts nor
harps tuned for it. Suppose it were possible that our Lord should bring an
unsanctified person to Heaven, says one, he could take no more felicity there,
then a beast, if you should bring him into a beautiful room, to the society of
learned Men, or a well furnished Table; when as the poor thing would much rather
be grazing with his fellow bruits; thus a poor graceless sinner would rather be
with his Cups or Queans, at best in his Markets, and counting his Bags, but
there is no such things in Heaven; therefore if he were there, he would be quite
out of his Element; [ tanquam Piscis in avido] as a Fish in the Air, or a Bird
in the Water, or Fire? Can you charm a Beast with Music? Or can you bring him
to your melody, or make him keep time with your skilful quire? So the Anthems
of Heaven, says one, fit not a carnal man's mouth, suit not his ear: Poor
wretches, they now think Sermons long, Sabbaths long, Prayers and Praises long,
and cry, what a weariness is it? When will it be over? And are these think you,
fit for this Heavenly employment to all Eternity? where this noble company of
Celestial inhabitants, serve God day and night in the Temple. Rev 7.15. Alas,
the poor unregenerate sinner has no faculties suited to such a glorious state
and work, as that above is; the Mind, Will, Memory and Conscience, are like a
full stomach that loathes the honeycomb: These old Bottles cannot hold the new
Wine of glory: You may as well hew the Marble without Tools, or draw a Picture
without Colors, or build without Instruments or Materials, as a Soul not
qualified with Grace can do the work of God acceptably either on Earth or in
Heaven Oh, Sirs, think of this, you must be prepared, fitted, qualified for
Heaven here, or else Heaven will be no Heaven to you.

CHAP. IX. An use of conviction and lamentation over Souls that are unmeet for
Heaven.
I Now proceed to Application, and all the Uses I shall make of this point
shall be of Lamentation and Exhortation.

1. Of Conviction, Humiliation, Lamentation. A man would think upon such plain
demonstrations as are often laid before sinners in the ministry of the Word, they
would once at last reflect upon themselves and say, am I thus or thus
qualified? Upon what terms stand I for another world? Am I an adopted child of
God? Am I justified? Am I converted to God, and brought through the pangs of
regeneration? Have I made a covenant with God, and taken God for my God, and
given my self to him? What saving work has passed upon my heart? If I should
come to you one by one, and pose you with this solemn question, Friends whither
bound? Whither are you going? Are you for Heaven or Hell? Oh no, you will say, God
forbid, but that we shall go to Heaven! God is a merciful God; Christ dyed to
save sinners; we do not doubt but through the merits of Christ, we shall be
saved as well as others: Alas, Sirs, these are too general grounds, to build
your hopes of Salvation upon. God is merciful, but he is also just; Christ dyed
for sinners, but do you imagine all shall be saved by him? Let me ask you a few
sober questions, and answer them not according to your fancies, but according
to Scripture rule: Do you believe that all men shall be saved? What is Hell
then for, that is so often mentioned in the Bible? Or do you think that the gates
of Heaven are as wide as the gates of Hell, or that as many shall be saved as
damned? Dare you so directly contradict our blessed Savior, and give him the
lie? Mat. 7 13, 14. Can you imagine that our Lord Jesus (who is the doorkeeper
keeper of Heaven) will admit any but those that he says he will entertain? Or
do you think he will admit those that he says he will keep out? What think
you, can any secretly steal in unknown to him, or forcibly thrust in against
his will? Is the infinite all-seeing God grown so weak or blind that you can
cousen or conquer him? Or can you bribe him to let you in with fair words or
large gifts? Or dare you stand to plead in his face that you are qualified and
meet for Heaven, when he tells you, that you are not? Do you think there is
such a thing as a groundless presumption, or rotten hope that will give up the
ghost? Is not the Devil a cheat? Are not your hearts treacherous? And are not
they fools that trust these, and will not try by the word what they affirm? And
have you solemnly and faithfully tried your title to Heaven? Have you not taken
all for granted without a serious proving of your state, merely because you
would have it so? And are you content to do so in temporals? And will you madly
venture your immortal Souls on such grounds as you dare not try? And can you
think to escape the strict trial of the omniscient God? Sirs, the business is
important; Heaven and Hell depend upon it: We Ministers that believe an
Eternity, and certainly know upon what terms Souls are saved, dare not but be
faithful to you, and declare the whole council of God.

I must, 1. Tell you who those are that are far off Salvation, and are utterly
unmeet for this Inheritance, and can pretend no claim to it. 2. Such as pretend
a claim, but its groundless, and but a pretended claim, and cannot be made out
on Scripture grounds.

1. Their are a sort of persons within the pale of the visible Church, (for I
here meddle not with Heathens or Jews) that are [ ipso facto] point blank
excluded, in as plain terms as can be spoken. These are a sort of sinners that
carry the black brand in their foreheads, of whom a man may say without breach
of charity, these carry visibly the doleful tokens of eternal death and
damnation. View two catalogues of these, one is in 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Know ye not
[ i. e. Methinks you cannot plead ignorance in so notorious a case so often
inculcated,] that (1.) the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God: [
i. e. That grind the poor, overreach their brethren, when they have them at
advantage, God is the avenger of such, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. therefore not the rewarder
with Heaven.

(2.) Neither Fornicators shall inherit the Kingdom of God. Such filthy goats
must be set at Gods left hand. This sin [as venial a sin as its reckoned by
some] is damning, and excludes men from Heaven. Do you think such dirty dogs
shall ever trample on this golden pavement? when God would not suffer even the
price of a whore or dog to come into his house. Deuteronomy. 23.18.

(3.) Nor Idolaters, gross, or more refined; for God will not permit his
children to keep company, or familiarly converse with such on Earth, 1 Cor.
5.11. and therefore shall not be associated to them in the other world, and God
is not well pleased with such. 1. Cor. 10.5, 7.

(4.) Nor Adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind,
shall inherit the Kingdom of God, such filthy Sodomites shall rather have fire
from Heaven, then be admitted into that holy place. These horrible acts of
filthiness are not fit to be named among Saints, and surely the committers of
them cannot be entertained among Saints: See Ephesians. 5 3, 4. They are given up.
Romans 1.24.

(5.) Nor Thieves. Not only open robbers by the highway, or breakers of
houses, but gamsters that cheat others, or purloyning wastful Servants,
deceitful Tradesmen, or wilful Bankrupts, that basely get others Estates into
their hands and never intend to pay their just debts: These men, without
restitution, shall have their illgotten silver and gold to torment them like
burning metal in their bowels. Jam. 5.2, 3.

(6.) Nor Covetous. These are fitly joined to Thieves, that run out with
inordinate affection to the world, and suck her breasts with great delight;
that enlarge their desires as Hell: These must be shut out of Heaven, for they
have their portion in this present life, Psalm. 17.14. and are real Idolaters.
Col. 3.5. Ephesians. 5.5. These must be banished Heaven.

(7.) Nor Drunkards. Not only such as bruitifie themselves, and drink away
their Reason, but such as sit long at it, continue till wine inflame them; yea
though they be not intoxicated, yet they purchase a woe to themselves, that are
mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink. Isa. 5.11, 22.

(8.) Nor Revilers. These are properly annexed to drunkards; for the godly are
usually the drunkards song, that scoff and jear at serious godliness, and break
their scurrilous jests upon the holiest Saints; but there is no railing among
Angels or Saints in Heaven, Jude 9. nor shall such come there: And one would
think they do not desire to come there, with those they so abuse.

(9.) I may add Backbiters, that love to take up and blaze abroad a false
report against their Neighbors; these are excluded Gods Tabernacle, Psalm.
15.1, 3. that fling all the dirt they can in the face of such as do them no
hurt, wounding them secretly with a privy stab, or behind their backs; God will
hold the door of Heaven against such.

(10.) Swearers, that profane the glorious and tremendous name of the eternal
God by horrible oaths, curses and execrations: Blasphemers of old were to be
put to death, and if men now spare them, the flying roll of curses shall go out
against such, and cut them off, Zech. 5.2, 3, 4. Those that swear fall into
condemnation. Jam. 5.12.

(11.) Liars, that invent or utter lies upon any account whatsoever; these
carry their own doom in their Consciences, and they may read the doleful
sentence in Rev. 21.27. There shall in no wise enter into it any thing that
defiles, -- or makes a lie. The God of truth hates liars, and will banish
them from his court, as David did. Psalm. 101.7.

(12.) Apostates, that once made a fair show, but are renegadoes to the truth,
way, people, worship of God; they bring a great reproach on Religion; and our
blessed Savior pronounces such as put their hand to the plow and look back,
to be unfit for the kingdom of God; Luke 9.62. Gods soul will have no pleasure
in them. Heb. 10.38. Oh the dreadful end of these that turn their backs on
Christ. 2 Pet. 2.20, 21.

Hearken, you sinners, if any of you be of this number, read and tremble,
there is no room for you in this glorious City above, you must be shut out:
Living and dying in this estate there is no more mercy for you then for the
Devils: Heaven is shut against you, Hell is open for you: How can you escape
the damnation of Hell? Mat. 23.33. Alas, you are daily filling up the measure
of your sins; the Ephah is well nigh full; the other sin, the other neglect more,
and next news you may hear, the talent of Lead may be cast upon the mouth of
the Ephah, and thy Soul carried into thine own place: Zach. 5.7, 9. One Oath
more, one Lie more, one fit of Drunkenness more, and thy iniquity is full, thy
Soul is gone. Who can tell but God may say to thee as to the rich man, Luke
12.29. This night shall thy Soul be required of thee: Or as the word [(...)]
they, that is the Devils shall require thy Soul. Oh how greedily are infernal.
Fiends watching for a commission to break, thy neck in thy traveling, or to
strangle thee in thy bed, and hurry thee headlong into Hell with them! Thy
iniquity is filling up; the sunshine of prosperity ripens it apace; the sweet
rain of Gospel Ordinances brings Weeds to perfection as well as Corn. As Gods
children are making meet for Heaven, thou art making meet for Hell. Romans 9.22,
23. What if God willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known, endured
with much long-suffering, the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction: [(...)]
Made up, made ready, like sticks dried and bundled up to be cast into the fire.
It is not said that God fits them for destruction, as its said, ver. 22. of the
vessels of mercy which he had before prepared unto glory: No, no, there needs no
more to a sinners making meet for Hell, but a leaving him to himself; he will
fall apace downwards to damnation with his own weight. Ah sinner, thou little
know how soon thy foot may slip off this slippery battlement on which thou
stand, into the precipice of eternal destruction. Little do thou know how
soon that flaming sword that hangs over thy head by the twine-thred of thy
natural Life, may fall upon thee and separate Soul and Body, and follow this
stroke of vengeance into the other world. Methinks thou should not eat nor
drink, nor sleep quietly in this so dangerous, damnable estate. Every sin thou
committest is a treasuring up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath.
Romans 2.5. Look to it, the Judge stands before the door; Death is ready to lay
its cold hand of arrest upon thee: There Is but a step betwixt you and death;
and that door that lets you out of time sets you in eternal torments; and are
you taking long strides to Hell? Shall you not be there soon enough? Can you
not sink your selves low enough? Must you needs add drunkenness to thirst?
Impenitency to your sin? Alas, you love to wander, you hate to be reformed;
yea, you hate instruction, and cast his words behind you. Psalm. 50.17.
Ministers follow you from the Lord with tears, entreaties, arguments to
persuade, and means to direct, and willingness to assist you the best they can
in your preparations for a future state, but you are shy of conversing with
them; you conceal your state from them; they spend their time in studying to do
you good; they spend their Lungs in speaking to you, in speaking to God for
you, but all does no good, they cannot be heard till it be too late; no warning
will serve. Men say as that evil Servant, My Lord delayeth his coming -- so
begin to eat and drink with the drunken: Let them know, the Lord of that
Servant will come in a day when he looks not for him, and in an hour that he
is not aware of; and shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his portion with
the hypocrities, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Mat. 24.48, 49,
50.51.

CHAP. X. An Answer to the Objection of vain pretenders to a meetness for
Heaven.
Obj. BUT some may say, you speak terrible things against the profane, but I
bless God, I am none of those, my case is better then those before described, I
carry fairly in my Conversation, none can challenge me for the foresaid gross
enormities, I keep Church, hear Sermons, pray as well as God gives me grace,
none are perfect, I hope God for Christ's sake will pardon my defects; I repent
of my sins from the bottom of my heart, and believe in Christ, and do as well
as I can; God help us, we are all sinners; God will not be so severe as you
say: I hope I shall go to Heaven as well as others.

Answ. Its not as I say, or you say, but as God himself says; do I say any
thing but what the holy God says in the Bible? Object against it and disprove
it; but must not the Word of God judge you another day? Has he not told us in
his infallible word who shall be saved, and who shall be damned; and will you
believe God or your own self deluding hearts? Besides, I stand upon habitual
meetness chiefly: What art thou man in point of state? Art thou a child of God
or a child of the Devil? Tell not me that thou have done this or that good
work, but art thou savingly converted from sin to God? Have thou that
renovation that necessarily accompanies Salvation? This I have spoken to.

But that which I shall briefly hint at, is to tell you that many go as far as
Kadesh-barnea, that reach not Canaan: Many go far, that dye in the Wilderness;
and set out fair, yea hold on long, that yet never obtain this Heavenly
Inheritance. Strive to enter in at the strait gate, says our Lord, for many I
say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. Luke 13.24.

1. You say you carry it fairly and live civilly: Alas, civil Righteousness and
abstaining from gross sins will not do. Abimelech an Heathen was an exact
Moralist, Genesis 20.6. Paul unconverted was blameless. Phil. 3.6. These were not
Saints nor fit for Heaven.

2. You say you keep Church, attend on Ordinances, hear the best Preachers, so
did those that heard Christ himself, Luke 13.26. yet at last are rejected with
an [ I know you not]; so did they. Ezekiel. 33.31, 32.

3. You say you Pray, and perform many Religious duties, so did the Jews of old
that were stark naught, and rejected; Isa. 58.1, 2. so did the Pharisees, in
Luke 18.11, 12. Some have the form but want the power of godliness; 2 Timothy 3.5.
these are lifeless blocks.

4. You say you own the Orthodox Faith, and are not guilty of Heresy; so did
they Romans 2.24, 28. Creeds make not Christians. A sound head and unfound heart
may be companions. The Scribe answered discreetly and orthodoxly, Mark. 12.34.
and was not far from the Kingdom of God, but never came into it.

5. You say you have honest purposes and endeavors; yea, some seize in
growing better and mending what is amiss; its well; but Saul said, 1 Samuel 16.21.
I will no more do thee harm; yea, Herod reformed and did many things. Mar.
6.20. All this is good, but not good enough for Heaven.

6. You say, but my reformations were begun and attended with strong
convictions, and troubles of Conscience; but this will be no good evidence, for
Cain had great terrors; Genesis 4.14. Felix had his tremblings; Acts 24.25. yea,
The damned Devils believe and tremble. Jam. 2.19.

7. But I repent of my sins you will say, and mourn sore: I reply, have thou
considered well whether it be a worldly sorrow that works death, or a godly
sorrow that works repentance to Salvation? 2 Cor. 7.10. Saul wept sore; Ahab
humbled himself; Esau sought the blessing with tears; Heb. 12.17. Judas
repented himself; Mat. 27.3. yet all short.

8. You say, but I associate with Gods people, am well accounted of, can have
testimonials under the hands of eminent Ministers, Christians. I answer, so
high did the foolish Virgins artain, they had Lamps, Oil in them, waited for
the Bridegroom, yet the door was barred upon them, with an [ I know you not.]
Mat. 15.1.-12. Some have a name to live, but are dead. Rev. 3.1.

9. But God has given me notable gifts of memory, knowledge, utterance in
discoursing, praying, which surely he will not reject. I answer, so had they
Mat. 7.21, 22, 23. gifts of Preaching, Miracles, yet even these meet with an [
I never knew you.] Gifts and grace are different things. See 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3.

10. But I have grace, I have the grace of faith, love, good desires. I answer,
Simon Magus also believed, and was baptized, yet had neither part nor lot in
this matter, for his heart was not right in the sight of God. Act. 8.13.21.
There is a feigned as well as unfeigned faith, a dissembled love, unfound
desires, legal repentance.

11. But I have put forth my self in extraordinary acts of Piety, zeal for
Religion, Reformation, sufferings for God: I doubt not but this inheritance
belongs to me. I answer, all this thou may do, and be no Candidate for
Heaven. Jehu was a great reformer, yet a rotten-hearted hypocrite. 2 Kin.
10.16, 28. Young Joash was so zealous for a season. 2 Chronicles. 24.4, 17. What
strict observers of the Sabbath were the Scribes and Pharisees? Luke 11.42.13,
14, 15.

12. You Will say further, Oh but I have assurance of my good estate, and not only
so, but some joy and peace of Conscience, which are as so many foretasts and
prelibations of my future happiness. I answer, its well, but see to it that
they be of the right stamp; the stonyground hearers anon with joy receive the
word. Mat. 13.20. Balaam had brave raptures in hearing the words of God, seeing
the vision of the Almighty, and beholding the glory of Gods people Israel, he
fell into a trance. Number. 24.4, 5, 16, 17. and there are that taste of the word
of God, and powers of the world to come. Heb. 6.5, 6. yet such may fall away
irrecoverably. Oh how many catch at the promises, and are pleased with a sweet
discourse of freegrace! Alas, these long for, and love Gospel-delicacy, as
Children delight in sweet-meets: And as Dr. Ames says, Arminian grace may be
but the effect of a good dinner. Good nature working toward that which suits
the fancy, but sound conviction and deep humiliation never prepared the Soul to
a judicious relish of divine things, nor do they produce those blessed effects
in heart and life, as in Gods Children.

Oh how many poor sinners are going on in a golden dream, and fear no danger,
till they be past hopes of recovery! Many think they are traveling toward
Heaven, and never question it, till as they are stepping out of this world (as
they think) into Heaven, miss their footing and drop down into Hell: That never
see their error till it be too late to retrieve it. Oh that men were awakened
in time! If you stay till death have struck its stroke it will be too late. [
Imparatum inveniet dies judicii, quem imparatum invenerit ^^es mortis.] The day
of judgment must needs find him unready, that the day of death finds unready.
Men have a conceit that the interval betwixt death and judgment may do great
things to make them meet for Heaven, but they are mistaken: Death launcheth you
into the boundless ocean of Eternity. It is appointed unto men once to dye, and
after that the judgment. Heb. 9.27. Ah, Sirs, what think you? Is there an
Heaven or Hell after this life, or is there not? And are you not certain
whether you do enter by death into eternal happiness or misery, and yet can you
be quiet? If you were not loose in your belief of future things, you would be
restlefs as long as you are doubtful. You owe your ease to nothing but your
Lethargy. If you were not infidels you would be distracted. What Man! The next
moment may be roaring in Hell, and not repent on Earth! He is worse then a
Devil that trembles not under divine wrath. What if it have not siezed on you,
as on Devils! The flame is at next door; wrath hangs over your heads; the only
reason you see it not, is because you are blind: The Lord open your eyes, and I
need not preach terror to you, your hearts will meditate terror: Fearfulness
will surprise you hypocrites, and make you say, Who among us shall dwell with
the devouring fire, with everlasting burnings? Isa. 33.14. Its a wonder you do
not run up and down like mad men; surely you have taken some Opium to cast you
in a dead sleep, or intoxicate your Spirits: Or as some Malafactors do, that
dare not dye sober: Yea, some wiser Heathens took great draughts of Wine,
saying, That no voluptuous person can go in his Wits into an invisible state.
But is this a making meet for Heaven or Hell? Can rational persons think to
escape the ditch by winking? Or will men say, as its reported of Robert Duke of
Normandy, (William the Conquerours Father) going on Pilgrimage to Jerusalem,
falling sick, was born in a Litter on Saracens shoulders, and said, He was born
to Heaven on the Devils back? Alas, will you trust the Fiend of Hell to bring
you to Heaven? Is he grown so full of charity to Souls? Oh forlorn case of
miserable sinners! have you no better a friend then Satan? That you can be
content to be rockt asleep in his cradle, and carried with ease to Hell, rather
then ride in our Lords chariot paved with Love, to Heaven? Is security your
best fence against misery? Can these poor fig leaves of temporary Righteousness
secure you from divine Vengeance? Can you be content to stand by that another
day, that you dare not put to the trial here?

Alas, I am afraid; 1. Some are ignorant sots that know not what is necessary
to a meetness for Heaven. Most think if they have but time to say at death, [
Lord have mercy upon me; God forgive me my sins; Lord Jesus receive my Soul,]
they think they have made their peace with God, especially if they can say they
forgive all the world, and dye in charity with all, and send for the Minister
to pray with them, and receive absolution and the Sacrament, when (perhaps)
they are little fit for such a solemn Ordinance; then the Minister recommends
their Souls into Gods hands, commends them at their Funeral, and now they are
certainly gone to Heaven; these poor wretched sinners blessed their Souls
whilst living, and men must praise them and account them blessed when dead.
Psalm. 49.18.

2. Most are inconsiderate: They consider nothing but mere objects of sense,
like the kine of Bashan, go out at their breaches, every one at that which is
before her. Amos 4.1, ^3. They never mind things out of their natural sight;
they put far away the evil day, Am. 6.3. little thinking what will be in the
end of their sensual ways: Jer. 5.31. Either they say, to morrow shall be as
this day, and much more abundant; Isa. 56.12. or else in Atheistical scorn and
mockery; Let us eat and drink for to morrow we dye: 1 Cor. 15.32. Let us be
merry while we may; we shall never be younger; when we are gone all the world
is gone with us; as if there were no reckoning or rendering day, or retribution
in the other world; but let such study Eccl. 11.9, 10. Romans 8.13. Luke 12.19,
20. Psalm. 9.17.2 These. 1.6, 7, 8, 9. Job. 3.18. Psalm. 50 23. Oh Sirs,
disappointments are dreadful: Its sad with a witness to be confident of Heaven,
and yet doomed to Hell. As Hamilcar dreamed he should the next night sup in
Syracusa, which indeed he did, not as a Conqueror, (as he hoped) but as a
Prisoner: Oh, how will it double your damnation, to live in confident hopes of
reigning with Christ, yet to be judged by him, and banished from him for ever!
If you say Soul take thine case, and God say, Devil take his Soul: Whether of
these think you, will prevail?

CHAP. XI. An Exhortation to all persons to get meet for Heaven.
2. THE latter Use is Exhortation; 1. To Sinners. 2. To Saints to get meet for
this Heavenly Inheritance. The former by an habitual, the latter by actual
meetness for this glorious state.

I shall need to say the less to move you to it; having urged practical Reasons
from our natural unmeetness, divine ordination, the design of ordinances,
providence, the season of life for it, the work and privileges here require
it, the inconsistency of a contrary-frame to that glorious inheritance: Most of
these are levelled to the state of unsanctified, graceless Souls, therefore I
shall say the less to that branch. Oh that I had here the Tongue or Pen of an
Angel! The Bowels of blessed Paul to persuade sinners to look after a meetness
for Heaven. Consider,

1. What else have you to do in the world? Your very Children will tell you
that Man's chief end is to glorify God and enjoy him for ever: If you attain
not these ends you live in the world to no purpose, you are unprofitable
cumber-grounds.

2. You frustrate Christ's undertakings in the world, and do what you can to
render all his merits useless; you tread under foot the Son of God, count the
blood of the Covenant an unholy thing, and despise, if not despite the spirit
of grace; Heb. 10.29. you say plainly I like not the purchase, I will have none
of it; you call Heaven cabul, a dirty thing; as Hiram called Solomon's twenty
Cities he gave him: And can you think much to be dealt without Heaven, that
thus judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life? Acts 13.46.

3. Every day sets you nearer Heaven or Hell. Its reported of the Pious Lady
Falkland, that going to bed at night, she usually said, Now am I nearer Heaven
by one day then never I was. One day added to your time is a day taken away
from your life. Oh think when you have heard a Sermon, or spent a Sabbath, I am
now nearer Heaven or Hell; this word has been to me the savor of life unto
life, or of death unto death: 2 Cor. 2.16. It sets me forward some way; if I
bring forth meet and suitable fruit, I shall receive a blessing from God; if
briars and thorns, I am rejected, nigh to a curse, whose end is to be burned.
Heb. 6.7, 8. The word either hardens or softens. Woe be to me, if all that God
does does further my more dreadful condemnation.

4. Eternity brings up the rear of time. If it were but a making fit for a days
pageantry, there would be no such great need of curiosity to get matters ready;
though its said, Jer. 2.32. Can a Maid forget her ornaments, or a Bride her
attire; though often it is for the short show of a Marriage day: Oh but this is
for Eternity. That curious Painter being demanded why he bestowed so much
labor on his Picture, answered, [ Pingo Eternitati.] I paint for Eternity.
Indeed there is nothing of value but what relates to Eternity. Eternity gives an
accent and emphasis to all created beings. The Apostle thought all visible
sublunaries not worth a cast of his eye in comparison of this Eternity. 2 Cor.
4.18. See a Book called [ Glimpse of Eternity, on that Text.] Alas, Sirs, is
Eternity nothing with you? Oh my Friends, this (if any thing) is worth
preparing for, to be for ever with the Lord, to enjoy God ten thousands of
millions of years, or to be banished from his presence, and be tormented with
Devils and damned Souls for ever. Oh this word for ever is amazing, A godly man
in company sat in a deep muse, and being demanded what he was thinking of?
Answered, only with repeating [ for ever, for ever, for ever,] for a quarter of
an hour together: This is indeed a confounding consideration. Oh that you would
solemnly lay upon your hearts the great things of another world! On the one
hand the enjoyment of God, Christ, the company of Saints, Angels, the
perfection of your natures, a crown of glory, fullness of joy and pleasures at
Gods right hand for evermore, through the perpetual Ages of a boundless
Eternity: This were worth praying, groaning, obeying, suffering for a thousand
years, to get read, for, and possessions of at last. On the other hand, to
think of the sting of Conscience, the company of Devils and damned Souls, the
loss of God, Christ, Heaven, your precious Souls, the burning Lake, the
bottomless Pit, the scorching Flames, and this for ever and ever, an endless
duration. Oh Sirs, if you should but look down into that stupendous gulf, what
a change would it work in your hearts? You would banish your vain company, lay
aside your worldly business, cast off your sensual pleasures, and mind nothing
else till your Souls be secured to all Eternity. This would be as the cry at
midnight, Behold the Bridegroom comes, go ye forth to meet him. Matthew. 25.6.
As sleepy as they were this startled them; so it would you, as if you heard a
voice as out of the Clouds; Sinner thou art now summoned to appear before the
dreadful tribunal of the all seeing Judge, to receive thy final sentence, and
to be sent to an everlasting state of weal or woe; stay not one moment in thy
state of unregeneracy; have, have, yea make post have out of it; fall to the
work of Faith and Repentance as for thy life; defer not one day; now or never.

You Will say, can I make my self meet for Heaven? What can I do? The work is
Gods. I answer, God is the efficient, but he will make you instruments in this
work. Gods grace and Man's duty are very consistent. Study Phil. 2.12, 13. Up
and be doing, and God will be with you. Though God must turn, yet you must
endeavor to turn your selves. Ezekiel. 18.30, 31. Though God make you a new
heart, yet he will have you make you a new heart. Oh Sirs, fall close to the
work, examine, prove, try your states by the rule of the Word; attend the most
piercing, powerful Ministry; search out all your iniquities, and confess them
before the Lord with grief, hatred and shame; beg converting grace as for your
lives; plead with God for pardon through the Blood of Christ; solemnly renew
your Paptismal Covenant in taking God for your God, and giving up your selves
to him, and then read, meditate, watch and pray, mortify your beloved lusts,
obey the commands of God, and do these things speedily, seriously and
constantly, and see what the effect will be. If you will fall to it, well and
good, if not, you are guilty of self-murder; and remember you are this day
warned.

2. I turn me to truly gracious Souls that are in a safe state for the main, as
to habitual meetness, but I fear are far short of that actual meetness that is
requisite, as to a lively exercise of suitable graces; clear evidence of
spiritual state; dispatching work off their hands; being mortified to time, and
longing for Heaven. Alas, the wise Virgins slumbered and slept. I fear few of
us are in that readiness we ought to be in, might have been in, or that others
have attained to; nay, its well if now our Souls be in that frame that
sometimes we have been in: What decays of love, zeal, tenderness; what
backslidings, deadness, hardness, worldliness, formality do Gods Children fall
into? What staggerings in our Faith of the reality of unseen things? How
uncertain about our Title to this Inheritance? Does not our slavish fear of
death show thee? Our instability and variable motions in Religion; our
distractions in holy duties; our frequent closing with temptations, and too often
stepping aside into sin; our intermitting duties of Gods worship, and
strangeness growing betwixt God and our Souls; our unreadiness in our accounts;
our unwillingness to go to God: All these too sadly demonstrate our unmeetness
for Heaven. Alas Friends, are we not yet meet! Let us be ashamed of our
slackness; what have we been doing with all that time, these helps and
privileges we have had? Have not many young ones and others out-stript us, and
are got to Heaven, that set out after us? Are we not ashamed of our loytering
and lagging behind? What Is become of the many warnings we have had in our
selves and others? Have we any greater matters to mind? Do we not bring
dishonor to God, and discredit to our Religion by our backwardness? And can we
have that comfort and confidence in meeting the Bridegroom of our Souls as is
fit? Alas, our Lord will be less welcome if he surprise us unawares, as I have
told you. Ah Sirs, you little know how near death is, and therefore should be
always ready to meet our Lord. It is matter of great lamentation that so few of
Gods Children are meet for their home; and like wayward Children are loath to
go to bed, though God has taken a course to weary us out of the world. The
Lord help us to lament and lay to heart our great unmeetness for Heaven. When
sin, security, senselesness, steals in upon thy Spirit, search it out, mourn
for it, confess it, beg a pardon of it, and recover thy self quickly out of it;
be not satisfied with any distance from God; recover thy wonted familiarity
with thy best friend, and mend thy pace toward Heaven, as a man in his journey
that has been hindered, hies the faster, to recover his way, lost by his stay;
breath after more likeness to God, fitness for every dispensation, and long to
be with God in Heaven. Alas Sirs, you little know how near you are to Eternity.
You see the sands that are run to the nether end of the glass, but the upper
part (as one says) is covered with a mantle, you know not how few sands are
yet to run. God forbid that you should have your Evidences to procure, when you
should have them to produce. If you be not sure of Heaven, you are sure of
nothing, all worldly things must leave you, or you must leave them. Dispatch
all, but this, off your hands, and be as the bird on her wings to her nest, or
the traveller, whose mind is still on home, home, nothing will please him but
home. Say with Calvin, [Vsquequo Domine?] How long Lord, shall my Soul be at a
distance from thee? Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

CHAP. XII. The second Doctrine briefly handled, that a meetness for Heaven is
a mercy worth thanking God for.
I Proceed briefly to explain the second Doctrine in my Text, which is,

That its a transcendent Mercy worth thanking God for, to be made meet for the
Heavenly Inheritance.

If we must thank God for Daily-bread, for Houses, Health, Estates, Worldly
comforts and accommodations for our Bodies, how much more should we thank God
for Heaven, and a meetness for Heaven? without which we shall never come there.

The truth of this I shall demonstrate in these seven particulars.

1. Spiritual Mercies are of most worth, and deserve most thanks from us to
God: But this is a Spiritual Mercy, Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all Spiritual Blessings in
Heavenly places in Christ. It is [(...),] and so may signify spiritual things
as well as places; i. e. Graces, Privileges, Comforts, or whatever has a
tendency to the good of the Soul, or eternal Salvation in Heaven: These indeed
are a Benjamins portion, a goodly heritage, the quintessence and marrow of all
Blessings. If God should give you the whole World, and put you off therewith,
you are cursed and wretched; if he give you Grace and Glory, you are happy, if
you had nothing else. Our Lord thought that a plenary Benediction, (with which
he begins his first Sermon) Matthew. 5.3. Blessed are the poor in Spirit, for
theirs is the kingdom of God. There Is the mercy promised, and the qualification
for it, both choice Blessings.

2. That which is the purchase of Christ is worth our thanking God for; but
this is the fruit of Christ's purchase: Its not only a purchased inheritance,
nor did Christ only purchase us to be heirs of this inheritance, but he has
purchased a meetness in Believers for that Inheritance. Tit. 2.14. Who gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. How do men thankfully
celebrate Christ's Nativity? But that mercy of Christ's being born into the
world, (though transcendently great) will never advantage you, unless Christ be
in you, the hope of glory, Col. 1.27. his dwelling in your hearts by Faith,
Ephesians. 3.17. intitles you to the inheritance he has purchased. Look within thee
Man, as well as without thee, and above thee, for the fruits of Christ's
purchase, and occasions of thankfulness to God.

3. The operations and fruits of the Spirit are surely worth thanking God for;
but this is one of the most glorious fruits of the Spirit, to fit Souls for
Heaven. Our Lord promises to send the Holy Ghost to supply the want of his
Bodily presence, and it is the richest gift that ever proceeded from Father and
Son; such as have it, out of their Belly flow Rivers of living water, Job.
7.38, 39. God is to be admired in all the saving works and actings of the
Spirit, the convincing, humbling, sanctifying, supporting, satisfying, sealing,
comforting, quickening, enlarging, confirming, witnessing, and reviving
operations of it. Alas, we had never looked after God, had not the Holy Ghost
knocked at our doors; we had been blind in the things of God, but that the
Spirit enlightened us; dead but that the Spirit enlivened us; we had wandered
for ever, but that the Holy Spirit reduced us, our hearts had been for ever
hardened from Gods fear, had not Gods Spirits softened us; we should have been
unlike God, but that the Holy Ghost stamped Gods Image upon us; whatever has
been done upon our Spirits to fit us for Heaven, the Holy Ghost has been the
Agent; yea, that Spirit that we have quenched, grieved, resisted, vexed; what
cause then have we to be very thankful? This is the golden Oil, that runs
through the golden pipes of Ordinances into the candlestick of the Church.
Zech. 4.11, 12.

4. The Gospel Dispensation is great matter and ground of thankfulness: It is a
mystery which in other ages was not made known to the sons of mon: Ephesians. 3.4, 5.
But what is the marrow and main design of this Gospel-revelation? Why, ver. 6.
That the Gentiles should be fellow heirs, and of the same body, and partakers
of his promise in Christ by the Gospel. Oh glorious design! Oh blessed Charter!
But what are we better unless we be partners of this privilege? Therefore
chap. 2.19. says, Christians are fellow-vitizens with the Saints. This is the
Gospel way of infranchising and incorporating poor strangers in the Immunities
of Heaven, and surely this is worth thanking God for. The Charters of some
Cities cost them dear, and the Chief Captain said to Paul, with a great sum
obtained I this freedom; Paul said, [and so may Believers say in this sense,]
but I was freeborn. Acts 22.28. Though it cost Christ dear, yet it costs us
nothing, but reception. This new Jerusalem is built all of Freestone, and
shall not our shoutings echo, grace, grace to the Head-stone, Jesus Christ?
Zech. 4.7. Especially since our freedom rescues us from Hellish tortures, as
Paul's did him from scourging; and makes us heirs of Heaven.

5. Peculiar advantages not afforded to all, gives grounds of thankfulness;
such is this. Our Lord said, Matthew. 11.25, 26. I thank thee O Father, Lord of
He aven and Earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them unto babes. Alas what have any of us, but what
we have received? Discriminating kindnesses call for the greatest gratitude:
What did God see in any of us that might procure for us Heaven? Or within us
what preparation for Heaven? You and I are of the same polluted lump of Mankind
as others: Most unlikely to become heirs of such a glorious inheritance as
Heaven is. What could God see in us to attract his heart to us? Nay, what did
he not see in us to turn his stomach against us? It was the kindness and love
of God our Savior: Not by works of Righteousness which we had done, but
according to his Mercy he saved us. Tit. 3.3, 4. Alas, what loveliness could
God see or foresee in us to make us Children, then heirs of God, joynt-heirs
with Christ? We may say with honest Judas, Job. 14.22. How is it that thou will
manifest thy self to us, and not unto the world? It must be answered, Even so
Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. When thousands are left, why art
thou taken? How came it to pass that when Philosophers and wise Sages of the
World, bewildred so in the dark about felicity, that God should show you the
right way to true happiness, and lead you into it, and in it? Surely all is of
free grace.

6. Fittedness to any duty or dispensation is a Mercy worth thanking God for:
Such is the Christian frame that makes meet for Heaven; such a person is fit to
do Gods will, or suffer Gods will; he is suited to a prosperous and adverse
condition; his foot stands in an even place; like a Watch in a Man's pocket,
turn it this way or that way, it keeps its motion; so the Christian in all
conditions, his station and motion Heaven-wards. The righteous shall hold on
his way, and he that has clean hands shall be stronger and stronger. Job 17.9.
He is [ utrinque paratus] ready for any thing that God calls him to: Like the
man of God mentioned, 2 Timothy 3.17. That is perfect, thoroughly furnished unto
all good works. Oh what a blessed thing is it to be in a capacity to embrace a
motion to pray, read, conser, meditate, receive the Lords Supper upon an
invitation from Men, or summons from God! The Church in Cant. 5.2. found the
want of this, when she says, I sleep, but my heart waketh; i. e. I have the
principle, but want the exercise of grace; and alas, how unready was she to
entertain her beloved, though she had given him a call; and the sad
consequences of this unfit frame are obvious, both as to her sin and suffering:
But oh what a mercy is it to have an heart ready pressed for Gods service! Give
God the glory of it, and its worth something to be in a readiness for Mercy,
Affliction, Death, Judgment, as those are that are meet for Heaven. It was a
noble Speech of Basil, when Modestus the Prefect threatened Confiscation,
Torments, Banishment; he answered, He need not fear Confiscation that has
nothing to lose; nor Banishment to whom Heaven only is a Country; nor
Torments, when his Body would be dashed with one blow; nor Death, which is the
only way to set him at liberty. Polycarp was ready for Beasts, or any kind of
death, for he was ready for Heaven: For as this Christian is delivered from
danger by death, so from the fear of death. Heb. 2.15. Death it self is the day
break of eternal brightness to the Child of God; and is not this worth thanking
God for?

7. Heaven is surely worth thanking God for. Could we get a glimpse of that
state and place of glory, and this inheritance of the Saints in light, together
with our title to it; Oh how would it dazzle and transport us! its said that
the Temple of Diana was so bright, that the Doorkeeper still cried to such as
entered, Take heed to your Eyes: Much more may we say so of the surprising
glory of the Heaven of Heavens; and therefore our Lord says, None can see his
face and live: But death blows dust out of the Eyes of glorified Saints, and
the Morning Star at the Resurrection does so fortify the sight, that it can
behold this inaccessible light with admiration; even as all the Stars look upon
the Sun. Fear not little flock, says our Savior, Luke 12.32. for it is your
Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. Is not a Kingdom worth thanks,
and such a Kingdom; and to have this freely of gift, not to wade to it through
Wars and Blood, and all this by hereditary right, which is the clearest title.
Oh Sirs, do you know what Heaven is? It is the immediate enjoyment of God, an
immunity from all evils, a possession of all good, the perfection of our
natures, the maturity of our graces, the destruction of all sin, the banishment
of Satan and his temptations, the fullness of joy, and total death of all grief.
Indeed it is such a state as can neither be expressed nor conceived. How vile
and contemptible would all things below appear to one that with Paul, is rapt
up into this Paradise! I read of one Adrianus an Heathen, that was present when
Martyrs were examined and tormented, he asked, What was the Reason they
suffered such Tortures; it was answered in the words of that Text, 1 Cor. 2.9.
Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man the
things which God has prepared for them that love him: The very rehearsal of
which words converted this Adrianus, and he became a Martyr also. Oh what a
transcendent reward is there in these Mansions above! And God does not grudge
us the knowledge of these glorious things. He is not like some rich men that
will not let their heirs know, what they will do for them, till they dye; no,
the Text says, ver. 10. that God reveals them to us by his Spirit; and v.
12. that we may know the things freely given to us of God. We may know them
perceptively, not comprehensively; by Faith though not by Sense. We know but yet
in part, [ non rem sed aliquid rei] but then we shall know as we are known;
[not as God knows us; for our knowledge and Gods must not be so comparatively
likened, but] as holy Spirits know us both now and for ever, we shall both know
and be known by immediate intuition; yet in this world God gives his Children
(though differently) some glimpses and dark representations, [ per Species, as
through a glass] by Metaphors or Parables, and this discovery is to raise up
our hearts in thankfulness, admiration and longing desires to be above with God.

CHAP. XIII. Some practical Inferences from this Doctrine.
USE of all this briefly is in four consectaries.

1. That there is undoubtedly such a future state as bliss and blessedness for
Gods' Children after this life. There remains a rest to the people of God.
Heb. 4.9. I need not go about to prove this, its sufficiently and abundantly
confirmed by abler hands; not only from Scripture, but Nature, Reason, Divine
Providence in the world, and the grace of God in the hearts of his people.
Enough is said to silence Atheism in our Spirits, and to stop the mouths of all
Atheists on Earth. Can any rationally imagine that God should endow Man with
such a noble Soul, and endue that Soul with such noble faculties of Mind, Will,
and Conscience, and Affections, capable of knowing, loving, enjoying God, with
fears and hopes of a future state, and all this in vain? Can we think the holy,
just, good, wise, righteous God will always promote the wicked and punish the
godly, and not right these things in the next world? Has Christ come into the
world to no purpose? What would become of his Birth, Life, Doctrine, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession, coming to Judgment if there were no life
of future retribution? What would become of the precepts, promises,
threatenings, motives, means, helps to an holy life here, and to attain eternal
life hereafter, if there were no such thing? Can we imagine that the great God
governs the world by a lie. Are Heaven and Hell bug-bears, or mere imaginations
of brainsick fools? Is there not a reality in Satan's temptations, to draw or
drive us from God and future happiness? Or are there no Devils or Spirits, and
so by consequence no God? Away with these wild conceits, contrary to the
sentiments of all Mankind.

2. Then it follows that assurance is attainable; not only objective assurance,
that there is a glorious inheritance, and that God will give it to some; but
subjective also, that this is mine, that its for me; I have a title to it; else
how could persons thank God for making meet for this inheritance. This
assurance arises from actings of Faith, and produces rejoicing in hope of
this glory of God. Romans 5.1. The gospel is a gospel of peace, not of fears and
doubts. Assurance may be had, not only by divine revelation, but in the use of
ordinary means. I know in whom I have believed. 2 Timothy 1.12. Read on, and you will
find not only his assurance of his present state, but his perseverance and
future felicity; and its not his peculiar privilege, but common to other
Believers. 2. Cor. 5.1. Its true God is a free Agent, and may bestow it on
whom, and when he pleases: Some have it most clearly at first Conversion; as
Bernard for a time after his Conversion, remained, as it were, deprived of his
Senses, by the excessive consolations he had from God. Cyprian says, He
thought before his Conversion, it was impossible to find such raptures and
ravishments as now he found in a Christian course. Many a close walking
Christian can set his seal to this truth; only it ordinarily comes in after
hard conflicts, with temptation, wrestlings with God, much experience, and
exact walking with God: There is Salvation and there is the joy of Gods
Salvation. Psalm. 51.12. This (says Mr. Latimer) is the sweetmeats of the
feast of a good Conscience. There are many other dainty dishes at the feast,
but this is the banquet: This is better felt then expressed; but must be
endeavored after, prayed for: Ask, says our Lord, and ye shall receive that
your joy may be full. Joh. 16.24.

3. That the work of thankfulness is the great duty of a Christian. This, this
is the proper character and employment of a Christian. God commands it,
privileges call for it, gracious Souls have been much in it; it is
comprehensive of man's whole duty. Vrsin entitles the practical part of his
Carechism [ de Gratitudine] of Gratitude. Oh that Christians were more in it!
Praise is comely for the upright. This is the Epitome of Religion, the Emblem
of Heaven, the proper Air in which a Christian breaths: Its most acceptable to
God, creditable to Religion, and profitable to the Christian. Mr. Fox tells us,
the City Zurick ingraved the Year of their deliverance from Popery upon
Pillars, in Letters of Gold, for a lasting Memorial: And have not Christians
cause to thank God for grace and glory? The Heathens could say, Call a Man
ungrateful, and you cannot call him worse. Hezekiah brought wrath on himself,
Judah and Jerusalem, for not rendering to the Lord according to benefits done to
him. 2 Chronicles. 32.25. Oh Sirs, you little know what an evil ingratitude is; you
fill your Souls with guilt; you too much resemble wicked men whose character is
unthankful: 2 Timothy 3.2. That sin makes hard times; yea, it makes you like the
worst of Heathen, for which sin God gave them up; Romans 1.21, 24. you act
disingenuously, as those that have served their turns of God, and then disown
him. How can you own God in the next strait, that are so much in arrears? Will
not your mouth be stopped, and Conscience fly in your face? Do you not daily
depend on God for new Mercies? And is not thankfulness a natural duty? Is not
gratitude for Spiritual Mercies, a great evidence of your interest in them? And
is not every Mercy sweetened by thankfulness? Nay is not this a mean to
continue them? The more thankful any have been the more eminent they have been:
Their graces have shined and glistered like Pearls and Diamonds. Yea once more,
the more thankful you are, and the more cause of thankfulness you will both
have and see. Thankfulness for what you are sure you have, will produce a
fuller evidence of that you are doubtful of. The Lord humble us for our gross
ingratitude; which is (as one says) a Monster in Nature, a Solaecism in
Manners, a Paradox in Divinity, and a parching Wind to damme up the Fountain of
Divine Favors.

You Will say, Oh Sir, I could be thankful with all my heart, if I knew I were fit
for Heaven, and that my Soul shall at death enter into peace; but alas, as long
as I am doubtful and at uncertainties, how can I be thankful? Conscience would
check and condemn me; and indeed I have more cause to be humbled and ashamed
for my unmeetness, then thankful for any meetness I find in me for Heaven.

Ans. 1. There may be grounds both of humiliation and thankfulness in the same
soul and subject. Let the best Saints do the best they can, and attain to the
highest pitch imaginable, they shall have cause of humiliation for their
defects.

2. Holy jealousy, fears, cares, do well in Gods Children, to keep them
humble; and indeed, as grace increases, fight of imperfections increases, and
sense of short-coming; the more discoveries of Gods holiness, the viler will
the Christian be in his own eyes; as Job and Isaiah, Job 42. Isa. 6.5. and the
humbler the Soul is the fitter for God. Isa. 57.15. and 66.2. Thank God for
that humility.

3. You may and must be thankful for the Mercies which you have, and cannot
deny but God has vouchsafed: You have your lives for a prey; are out of Hell,
which is more then you deserve; you have abundant outward Mercies, do not these
deserve thankfulness? Yea, Christ has purchased grace and glory for some; nay
further, he has put thousands into possession of this inheritance, and should
not this make you thankful? Yea further, Heaven is offered to you, and you are
under the means of grace, and in a possibility of obtaining this happiness,
which Devils and damned Souls are not; and is not this ground of thankfulness?

4. Be sure you keep in mind the distinction of habitual and actual meetness
for Heaven: If you have not the former, either relative or real, be not adopted
or justified, are neither converted, nor covenanted with God, I say, the Lord
have mercy on you, your case is doleful; you have great cause of lamentation.
Oh man, I am not now speaking to thee; Be afflicted and mourn, let your
laughter be turned into mourning, your joy to heaviness. Jam. 4.9. Yea, you
graceless rich men, weep and houl, for your miseries that shall come upon you.
Jam. 5.1. I have not a word of comfort from the Lord to you. Your eatthly
inheritances shall be taken from you, and you shall be thrust into the dungeon
of Hell. You may for a while kindle a fire, and walk warm in the sparks you
have kindled, but, faith God, this shall you have of mine hand, ye shall lie
down in sorrow, Isa. 50.11. Stand you by while the Saints take comfort in their
portion. Read Isa. 65.13, 14, 15.

It is to you the heirs of promise, to whom I am now speaking, and bear you
this in mind, that its one thing to have right to this inheritance, another to
know you have right. Many a gracious Soul is much in the dark about its
relation, yet its state safe for the main. What say thou? Have thou not the
things that accompany Salvation? Heb. 6.9. Has not God been dealing with thy
heart, as he uses to deal with such as he designs for Heaven? Have thou not
seen thy woeful state by Nature? The necessity of Christ and grace? Have thou
not experienced a change from Nature to Grace, from Death to Life? Has not
this new birth cost thee griefs and groans, prayers and tears? Do thou not
delight now in what thou did disdain? Is not thy principle, rule, end,
otherwise then formerly? Have thou not changed thy company, courses, manner of
life? Speak out man, belie not thy self, deny not Gods grace; something like
grace thou see in thy self, and to be sure Satan and World oppose it, and man
and thy self could not work it. It is of God, a seed sown by the hand of
omnipotency. And he that has begun a good work in you, will perform it until
the day of Jesus Christ. Phil. 1.6.

As to actual meetness for Heaven, I refer you to what has been laid down
before; look it over, deal impartially; see if your experience do not answer
those heads; has not God helped you in the exercise of the graces of Faith,
Hope, Love, Humility? Has not God given you some grounded evidence of
sincerity, by diligence in duty, reflection on your state, appealing to God,
and pleading with God for the Spirits sealings? Has not God helped you to be
dispatching your work off your hands, Spiritual, Temporal, Relative and
Public? Are you not much mortified to corruption, worldly enjoyments, and have
you not spiritualized earthly things, and got more intimate familiarity with
God? What say you to these things? Do not your hearts echo back, with your [
probatum est] setting your seal to these things? I have not time nor room to
enlarge further; but I would have you diligently compare your selves now with
what you were some years ago. Is not your Repentance more Evangelical? Does not
the sense of divine love extort from you more tears of godly sorrow, and more
vehement hatred of all sin, purely it is offensive to God? Has not your Faith
been more vigorous in its actings upon your dear Lord? In closing more fully
with promises? Have you not been more frequent and serious in renewing your
Covenant with God? And have not such days and duties been solemn heart-melting
opportunities? Have you not been more constant and enlarged in the duty of
secret Prayer, with shorter intermissions and more favouriness? Do you spend
your time better then formerly? Do you fill up every vacancy with some useful
business for Earth or Heaven? Have you not more incomes of grace and assistance
in duties both as to matter and manner? To knit your minds, and raise your
affections to God, and sometimes suggest words to you? Do you not more concern
your selves for the Souls of Relations and others in Prayer and Discourse?
being more weighted with the necessity of their Conversion? Are you not more
endeared to Saints as Saints, though poor, or disobliging, and of a different
persuasion? Have you not got power over your Passions, to regulate them? And if
you feel unruly motions, can you pray them down, and through grace calm them?
Can you not put up injuries and affronts, and not only so as not to revenge and
forgive, but pray more heartily for the repentance and remission of such as are
most malicious against you? Is it not more the grief of thy heart when God is
dishonored, his Spirit grieved, his Gospel reproached by the sins of profane
or professors? If thou think any body is offended by thee, is it not more a
real trouble to thee then formerly? And thou can not be quiet till thou
seek Reconciliation? And if thou be conscious of giving them just occasion,
thou confessest thy fault and humblest thy self to them? Have thou not learned
more faithfully and discreetly to manage the duty of private admonition of an
offending Christian? Drawing out bowels of compassion for and to such as are
fallen? Do not public concerns of Church or Nation lie nearer thy heart daily?
Can thou not more rejoice in the gifts, graces, holiness, usefulness of
others, though it obscure thine? Art thou not more glad when corruptions are
mortified then gratified? When occasions of sinning are removed, rather then
afforded, though it cost thee dear? Do thou not more sensibly understand the
sweet life of faith in temporals? Committing all to God, thou find
provisions have been strangely made? Are not thy affections more spiritualized
toward dearest Relations? Do thou not love them in the Lord, and the Lord in
them, and can freely part with them upon Gods call? Art thou not more taken
up with Gods Mercies, to give him the glory of them, then any personal content
thou have in them? Is not thy heart daily more weary of the world, and longing
for Heaven? Yet after all this can thou not say, thou art nothing, deservest
nothing but Hell? And if God glorify his Justice in thy confusion, thy mouth
is stopped, and thou must justify him for ever with flames about thine Ears?
Do thou not account thy self the greatest of Sinners, least of Saints, and by
the grace of God thou art what thou art? And this thou can truly say, that
God is more thy exceeding joy, and Christ more precious to thy Soul then ever?

Can thou in thy sober, solid, settled frame, answer these questions, thy
state is safe and sweet, and thou art meet for Heaven; yet not so meet, but
still breathing after more meetness, till thy last gasp of breath; for no man
on this side death was ever meet enough, and all must be ascribed to grace,
grace in the foundation, grace in the topstone: I shall conclude all with a
part of a Poem in Mr. Herbert, called Grace; p. 52.

Death is still working like a Mole,
And digs my Grave at each remove:
Let Grace work too, and on my Soul,
Drop from above.
Sin is still hammering my heart
Unto an hardness void of love;
Let suppling Grace to cross his art,
Drop from above.
O come! for thou do know the way,
Or if to me thou will not move;
Remove me where I need not say,
Drop from above.
2 Cor. 5.8. We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent frrm the
body, and to be present with the Lord. Amen.

FINIS.
Some Books to be Sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside.
A Call to Sinners, such as are under sentence of Death, and such as are under
any prospect of it from the long suffering, and gracious, but most righteous
God.

Three Questions resolved briefly and plainly, viz. 1. What Conceptions ought
we to have of the blessed God? 2. What are those Truths, whereof the Knowledge
appears most indispensably necessary unto our Salvation; and (therefore) to
be first and most learnt by us? 3. What is the change wrought in a Man by Gods
H. Word and Spirit, before he can safely conclude himself passed from Death to
Life? Being the Sum of three Sermons.

The Christian Temper: Or, the Quiet state of Mind that Gods Servants labor
for. Set forth in a Sermon at the Funeral of Mrs. Vrsula Collins.

A seasonable Question plainly resolved, (viz.) What are we to judge of their
spiritual estate who neglect the Lords Supper.

And what is that discerning of the Lords Body in it, without which men do Eat
and Drink their own Damnation.

The Christians earnest Expectation and Longing for the Glorious Appearing of
the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ. Set forth in a Discourse occasioned
by the Decease of that Excellent Christian and Minister of Christ, Mr. Noah
Webb, late of Sandhurst in the County of Berks.

FINIS.

