SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE GEORGE Earl of Berkeley,
GOVERNOR, AND THE Company of Merchants of ENGLAND Trading into the Levant Seas.

AT St. PETER'S Church in Broadstreet. January 25. 1680.

By CHARLES HICKMAN, A. M. Student of Christ-Church in Oxon, and Chaplain to
his Excellency the Lord Chandois, Ambassador to Constantinople.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's. 1681.

To the Right Honorable George Earl of Berkley, GOVERNOR, And to the Right
Worshipful THE DEPUTY and COMPANY of Merchants trading into the Levant Seas.
Right Honorable and Right Worshipful,
IF I had judged this Discourse worthy of the Press, both the general consent
whereby you honored me with the Title of your Servant, and the particular
expressions of your Favor to me, would have obliged me to publish my gratitude
in this Dedication, though you had not obliged me by your Commands. But since I
understand how unreasonably I am censured for this Discourse, and that those
censures must in some manner reflect upon you also, who have been pleased to
afford me a more favorable Character; I find my self bound in honor, as well
as in gratitude and obedience, to vindicate both you, and my self, by this
Publication. The objections I need not here either repeat, or answer; they are
so groundless, that every rational man will be satisfied by reading the Sermon,
and they which are otherwise, will not be convinced by an Epistle. Against
these I humbly beg your Protection, and as in duty bound, I shall ever pray for
your happiness, and Dedicate my self wholly to your service.

My Lord, and Gentlemen, Your most obliged and Most humble servant Charles
Hickman.

A SERMON ON JOHN iv. 21, 12, 23. Jesus says unto her, Woman believe me, the
hour comes when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem
worship the Father.

Ye worship ye know not what, we know what we worship, for salvation is of the
Jews.

But the hour comes, and now is when the true worshippers shall worship the
Father in Spirit and in Truth.


IN these words our Savior determines the great Controversy which had long
depended between the Jews and Samaritans, as it was proposed to him by the
woman of Samaria, in these words. Our Fathers worshipped in this mountain, but
ye say that at Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship. Therefore for
the full, and profitable understanding of my Text, I shall consider 1. The
difference between the Jews and Samaritans. 2. Our Saviors method of
reconciling it, and 3. I shall apply the whole in some useful reflections upon
the differences of these our times.


1. The difference between the Jews and Samaritans was this; When the Tribes of
Israel were carried Captive into Assyria, the King of that Land transplanted
several Inhabitants of Babylon, and the Neighboring Provinces there, and
placed them in the Country of Samaria: where at the first they worshipped their
own Gods, without any respect to the God of Israel. But being terrified by
Lions which infested their Land, they wisely imputed this their danger to some
mistake in their Religion, concluding that the God of the Land had brought this
Calamity upon them for the neglect of his own worship, for they knew not the
manner of the God of the Land. Upon complaint hereof their King sent them one
of the Priests of Israel to instruct them; the Priest built them an Altar and a
Temple, and appointed Sacrifices therein, and so made a formal appearance of an
Independent Church of Israel.

Nevertheless though they feared the Lord, yet they served their Graven Images
also, for they thought they had sufficiently appeased the God of the Land by
appointing Sacrifices to him, but they could not forget the Gods of their
Native Country; so they set up Adramelech and Anamelech, the Gods of
Sepharvaim, every Nation according to their own inventions, and their Devotion
was absurdly divided betwixt the Idol and the living God.

This was the rise and original of the Samaritan Sect, in the days of
Salmaneser, seven hundred years before our Saviors time: this was the true
Antiquity of their Church, as we find it Recorded 2 Kings xvii. Howbeit this
was not the Antiquity pleaded by the woman in my Text, neither were these the
Fathers which she affirmed to have worshipped in the mountain, but as Nations,
so Religions also love to boast of a long descent, and derive their pedigree,
if it be possible, from the beginning of time: and if they want sufficient
Authority to make good their plea, a small pretense or Tradition will serve
their turn, and such a one it was whereby the Samaritans endeavored to
justify their separation.

For the Authority of Salmaneser not being sufficient to establish a Church in
opposition to the Temple of Jerusalem, they could find out no better expedient
both to quiet their own Consciences, and answer the objections of their
Adversaries the Jews, than by pleading a greater Antiquity for their Religion
than the Jews themselves pretended to, and that the worshipping upon that
mountain was countenanced at least, if not commanded, before the Temple of
Jerusalem was built, and this was no hard thing to prove. For we read Genesis
xxviii. that Jacob traveling over this mountain to Padan-Aram, saw a vision of
Angels ascending and descending; therefore he took the stone which he had put
for his Pillow and put it up for a Pillar, poured Oil upon the top of it, and
called the the name of that place Bethel, and he vowed a vow, that if God would
be with him, and bring him back to his Fathers house in peace; then the Lord
should be his God, and that stone which be set up for a Pillar should be Gods
house, and he would surely pay his tenths. And Genesis xxxiii. at his return he
did buy this parcel of ground and built an Altar there and called it El Elohe
Israel. (i. e.) God the God of Israel, according as he promised. This is that
Bethel which was afterward made the Seat of the Priests of Samaria, and the
solemn place of their worship, for so we read in the forecited chap. of 2
Kings, Then one of the Priests whom they had carried away from Samaria, came
and dwelt in Bethel and taught them how they should fear the Lord.

Here we find a very plausible pretense for the Samaritan service, and since it
was so contrary both to their ease and interest to go up to Jerusalem to
Sacrifice, no wonder if they made use of this Argument to serve God nearer
home. And now the woman's boast sounds big and significant, Our Fathers
worshipped in this mountain: Our Fathers ever since Jacobs time: Our Fathers
for these eighteen hundred years, which was seven hundred years before the
Temple of Jerusalem was built: and yet Ye say that at Jerusalem is the place
where men ought to worship. That by their Fathers they reckoned from their
Father Jacob we may conclude. 1. Because Jacob, as we have heard did really
worship in that Mountain. 2. Because they call Jacob Father with a particular
expression of Reverence; Art thou greater than our Father Jacob? 3. Because an
Argument drawn from their Fathers worship, had been of no force, if the date of
that worship had not commenced before the Temple of Jerusalem; and the
Samaritans must have confessed themselves, as indeed they were, Schismatics
and Apostates from the Church of Israel, they had then exposed themselves to
that terrible objection from the Jews, Where was your Religion before
Salmaneser? Whereas now they could confidently say to the Jews themselves,
where was your Religion before Solomon? when they thought their own as Ancient
as their Father Jacob.

And no wonder that they should call Jacob Father, and pretend to be of the
seed of Israel. For though after the Captivity the Land was at first inhabited
by the Babylonish Nations, yet in process of time many of the discontented
Jews, consulting their ease, their interest, or their humor, revolted to their
worship, when they had once made an appearance of a Church. It was no new thing
for the Jews to worship new Gods, and then much more might they worship him
after a new fashion. Novelties were still delightful to this unstable people,
and they were always flexible to every evil way, only stifnecked when they
should return unto the truth.

But if their calling Jacob Father be not a sufficient proof that they were of
the same Original with the Jews, yet we may well judge they were Brethren, by
the wrongs they did one to another. No enmity is so great as that between
divided friends; and as we observe in the Heavens, so likewise upon Earth,
there is no direct opposition, but between those Bodies which move in the same
Line, and have sometimes been in Conjunction: and this was the case of the Jews
and Samaritans: there was such a perfect abhorrence betwixt them, and the
difference of their Religion (little as it was, in respect of other Nations)
bred such a distance and strangeness in their Conversation, that though they
slighted all the world besides, yet they only hated one another. The Jews
accounted all Nations as strangers to them, but the Samaritans as their
enemies, which shows that they looked not upon them as Proselytes to their
Church, but Apostates from their Communion. Therefore there was no
Neighborhood or Correspondence amongst them, which made the woman admire and
say, How is that thou being a Jew ask water of me who am a woman of Samaria.
For, says the Evangelist, The Jews have no dealing with the Samaritans. And
therefore the Samaritans refused to entertain our Savior, Because his face was
as though he would go to Jerusalem. Those common civilites which Nature teaches
us to show unto all mankind, were here denied and grown out of date, because
they were almost, but not altogether of the same Religion -- En quo discordia
cives
Perduxit miseros --
It Is strange that the worship of God, which was designed to unite the minds of
men, and confirm the bonds of friendship, should be taught to divide our
hearts, and set Brother against Brother! That Religion, which is the highest
improvement of Nature, should blot out our first Principles of love, and make
us forget our Natural Affections! However a Jew may justify himself in this
obstinacy and hardness of heart, yet certainly we have otherwise learned Christ.

2. Therefore I proceed to show our Saviors method of reconciling this
difference; And as a Preface thereunto we cannot choose but admire this
wonderful instance of his Humility, how his Goodness here ushered in his Truth,
and by the tender expressions of his Love, he made way for the power of his
Reasons. Here we find the God of Truth conversing with a Samaritan that lived
in an Idolatrous error; the powers of Heaven and Earth, condescending to the
weakness of a woman; and she a Harlot too, living in Adultery, though he was
the perfection of all Virtue and Goodness. Nevertheless foregoing all these
inequalities, and forgetting the Native quarrel of their Countries, he friendly
salutes her, as if he were not a Jew, or she were no Samaritan. He friendly
informs her who he was, and confirms to her his Power, by discovering the
secrets of her heart; at length being convinced that he was a Prophet, she
proposes to him the grand question in debate, Our fathers worshipped in this
mountain, and ye say that at Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship.
To this, and to the whole controversy between them, our Savior makes answer
in three distinct Heads.

1. To the place of Worship. 2. To the object of Worship. 3. To the manner of
Worship.
And 1. to the place, the answer is: The hour comes when ye shall neither in
this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father. That is, the time is
coming, when the worship of God shall not necessarily be confined, either to
the Temple of Jerusalem, as it is at this day, or to the mountain of Samaria,
as ye pretend, but all places shall be indifferent unto God, and it shall be
lawful for all Nations to appoint unto themselves solemn places of worship,
without respect either to the Temple or the Mountain.

For while the promise was made only to Israel and his Seed, there was a
partition wall between them and the Gentiles, and their Sacrifices, which were
the types of that promise, were confined to their own Land: therefore their
worship was particular, and their Religion local, being continually celebrated
in one place. Which place in former days, whilst Israel was a Sojourning
Nation, was changeable at pleasure: and removed with their tents. Thus Jacob
set up a Pillar and called it Bethel, the House of God. And for many Ages the
Ark removed from house to house: but when their Nation was settled in the Land
of Canaan, and God had chosen Sion for his habitation, and his resting place;
then were all their Sacrifices consigned to the House of God, which was built
at Jerusalem, according as he had foretold, Deuteronomy. xii. 5. But unto the place
which the Lord your God shall choose out of all your Tribes, to put his name
there, even to his habitation shall ye seek, and thither shall ye come, and
thither shall ye bring your burnt Offerings, your Sacrifices, and your Tithes.
Here we find a restraint put upon the liberty which the Nation formerly
enjoyed, and though Jacob set up an Altar, and vowed to offer up his Tithes at
Bethel, yet now they would only be accepted at the Temple in Jerusalem; and
neither Prince nor people could separate themselves from the worship of that
place (as the Samaritans did) without the guilt of disobedience and Schism.

Nevertheless our Savior lays not this crime to their charge, but tells them
this dispute is now growing out of date. The time is coming when the
partition wall shall be broken down, and all Nations shall be equally admitted
to the worship of God, without any compliance to the Discipline of the Jewish
Church, which being both temporary, and local, was now in the fullness of time
to be utterly abolished. though the promise was made only to Abraham and his
Seed; and that promise solemnized only at the Temple; yet the time was coming
when the Temple should be destroyed, and God would raise up from those stones,
even from the ruins of the Temple; children unto Abraham. The mighty Fabric
should fall down, and in three days a more glorious than that should be erected
instead thereof. So much for the Place.

2. As for the Object of their worship, the answer is; Ye worship ye know not
what, we know what we worship, for salvation is of the Jews. Here the Samaritan
Church stood in great need of a Reformation: for though they feared the Lord,
yet they served their own Gods also, after the manner of the Nations. And
though by the frequent Conversion of Jews to their Church they had laid by the
grosser parts of their Idolatry, yet they kept their Idols, and graven Images
in their houses, and worshipped according to our Saviors words, they knew not
what. In this respect our Savior adjudges the Cause to the Jewish side,
alleging that though the Ceremonial part of their worship was now expiring,
yet the substance thereof should never change, God is the same for ever, and
the object of their worship shall remain throughout all Ages. They are the only
Church which truly acknowledges the only true God, and therefore Salvation is
of the Jews and from them it shall be derived to all other Nations.

But 3. Though the Jews did worship the true God, yet the manner of worship was
imperfect and deficient even amongst them: and the imperfection thereof
consisted herein; while their service depended upon outward forms alone, and
they were taught to offer up the fruits of their bodily labor for the Sins of
their Soul; whilst they measured their obedience by these dead works of the
Law, and their devotion only by hearing or repeating the forms prescribed by
Moses; then could this people draw nigh unto God with their mouths, when their
heart was far from him. When the Sacrifice was ended, their work was done; and
they could return to their sins with this satisfaction, that the Scapegoat, in
the wilderness had carried off all their transgressions that were past, and the
Goats in their Folds could expiate for all that was to come. Thus they thought
they might obtain forgiveness of their sins, without any Reformation of their
Minds: for their Flesh was always willing, but their Spirit was always weak.

Thus the Jews worshipped the true God by types and figures, but the Samaritans
worshipped types and figures for the true God: that worship was true but
imperfect, this was neither perfect nor true. Therefore for the instruction of
both Jew and Samaritan, our Savior tells them that The hour comes and now
when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth. In
Spirit first, to distinguish the Gospel-service from the shadows of the Jewish
Law, which in Scripture are called carnal ordinances. And then in Truth to
divide it from the Samaritan Idolatry, and all other superstitious errors. To
worship in Spirit therefore is to bow the knees of our heart, and not content
our selves with the outward devotion of the body alone, which could not make
him that did the service perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience; but to offer
up the only acceptable Sacrifice of a broken and contrite Spirit. To worship
God in Truth is to worship the true God in such a manner as he has directed,
without profaning his service, as the Samaritans did, by a mixture of
Heathenish Superstitions, and Idols which are called lies. And those who thus
worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth, our Savior terms the true
worshippers: for the discovery of whom I proceed in the third place to apply
the former discourse to the present times, that by our Saviors deciding this
Controversy, we may be able to pass some judgment upon the Controversies of
these our days, which have so miserably rent our Nation, and do lively
represent unto us the ancient discord between the Jews and the Samaritans.

And herein I must beg your favor and patience, if I am necessarily led, not
by my own inclinations, but by the method of my Text; to touch upon some of
those sores which so unhappily afflict us, that they cannot be healed without
handling, nor handled without regret and pain: and yet as I shall avoid all
unnecessary, unprofitable provocations, and endeavor with a tender hand not to
enlarge, but to close the wound; so I hope none will be offended at this
charitable design, especially in defense of that Church whereof of we all here
profess our selves to be Members.

1. Then, As in those days, so now also we find, that of all the disputes which
divide the hearts of men, and disaffect them from each other, there are none
raised with more Ignorance and Pride, carried on with more Heat and Animosity,
nor concluded with more Labor and Difficulty, than those which concern
Religion, and the different ways of worshipping God. No Opinion is so absurd
but it will serve to lay the foundation of a Schism amongst the discontented
inconsiderate multitude; and gain sturdy Proselytes too, in spite of all the
convictions of Reason; if it can plead either ease or interest in its behalf.
For though all Nations do agree in the certainty of a God, and the necessity of
his worship, yet when men think themselves so wonderfully wise, that neither
the height nor depth of his wisdom are beyond his reach; when they will intrude
into the Counsels of the Almighty, and shape his worship according to the
extravagance of their fancy, then does their wisdom degenerate into ignorance,
and the strength of their reason only betrays them to labor and folly. Hardly
do we guess aright at the things upon Earth, and with labor do we find the
things that are before us; but the things that are in Heaven who has searched
out, and thy Counsels who has known? said the wisest of men.

But though the Ignorance of man be great, yet generally his Pride is greater
than that; and those false Notions which in his vanity he has conceived, in his
obstinacy he will defend. There are few so ingenuous as to confess an error,
and the most ignorant are always the hardest to convince. They will impose
their own fancies upon others with that eagerness, as if they really were, what
they falsely style them, the only Divine Truths, and immediate Revelations of
God; and to disbelieve their Opinion, is to renounce their friendship. Thus the
Heathens, though they had no knowledge of God, yet they also would fight pro
aris and focis, for their Gods, as well as their Country; and the sharpest
Persecutions that the world ever saw, were raised by the Romish Emperors first,
and after them by their Successors, the Romish Bishops, against the professors
of the true Primitive Christianity. No wars are so bloody as those which are
backed with Religion; and when men fight, just as they pray, for they know not
what, the contention grows warm according to the Zeal of the Combatants, and
the war will end they know not when. For Empire may more easily be confined,
like the Ocean within its banks; and Interest knows its own bounds; only
Opinion is a boundless thing; like the overflowing of a River, it spreads
itself far and wide; and our thoughts, which are ungovernable in themselves,
cannot be overruled by any power. No prescription can be pleaded in the things
of God, and no length of time can reconcile the difference of belief. The Sword
it self which decides all other Controversies, has no control over the Minds
and Consciences of men, and though the Iron enters into their very souls, yet
it cannot subdue, or change one thought therein.

What shall we say then? is it the happiness or misfortune of our Natures, that
our Spirits are thus invincible, and no Authority is so great as that which
governs in our own breast? It Is a happiness in this, that neither tribulation
nor anguish, persecution nor death, principalities nor powers, can separate us
from the love of Christ, and the Faith in his Name; but it is a misfortune
likewise, that neither height nor depth, nor Angels nor Men, nor things present
nor things to come, can reclaim us from a false Religion, or bring us into the
paths of peace. It Is a happiness to those that have embraced the Truth, but a
curse to them that live in Error. And since every Party and Faction, how
erroneous soever, does yet conclude it self to be in the right, from hence we
may learn that the True Religion must not, because it cannot, be propagated by
violence and blood; but amidst all the several pretenses, whereby so many, and
so different Parties lay claim to the only true Church, if we would know to
whom this infant Primitive Truth belongs, we must direct our judgment as the
wise Solomon did, and give up the Cause to them that first lay down the Sword;
Righteousness and Peace can never be divided; and the Gospel of Truth is also
the Gospel of Love.

With what pretense then of Piety, or Christianity, can the enemies of our
Faith justify their reproachful and despightful usage of us? That they should
endeavor thus by Fire and Sword, to extirpate our Lives together with our
Religion, and lay both our Church and Nation in the dust. That they who are our
Brethren, bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh, should rise up against us,
and forget their Bowels of compassion, and their Fathers house. That they
should deny us the ordinary Civilities of mankind, and like Jews unto the
Samaritans, allow no dealings with us. That they should Excommunicate us from
their Society with the outcast of the people, and brand a whole Church with
the hateful title of wicked, and profane. That they should refuse to admit us
to their houses, because we come not into their Temples; and reject us because
our faces are as though we would go to Jerusalem. Have they found such dealings
from us? Has not our Church been still inviting them to her Communion, and
ready to embrace her greatest adversaries with the Arms of kindness? Is not
Peace and Submission her Glory, and Charity the very Character whereby she
stands distinguished from all other Churches? Has it not been her constant
Practice, as well as Profession, to promote a reconciliation of all differences
where it may be had, and only lament the want of it where it cannot be
obtained; to be industrious for the union and consent of her Children, and
favorably charitable to all peaceful Dissenters? Nay is she not upbraided for
being so? Is not this her Charity and Kindness become her reproach, and an
occasion to her adversaries to slander her for Heretical on the one hand, and
Popish on the other? And as such she has been used, she has suffered Martyrdom
under both these shapes, and as the Romans dealt with the Primitive Christians;
so they also put us under the hateful disguises of Lions, and Bears, and then
worry us, as if we were such indeed.

But certainly we are not more Idolatrous, or more Heretical than the
Samaritans; nor are they more Righteous than our Savior. And yet he dealt not
so with those that were enemies both to him and the Truth. When his Disciples
would have called down fire from Heaven to punish their unkindness, he reproved
their unwarranted Zeal, saying Ye Know not what Spirit ye are of, though their
worship was Idolatrous, yet he would give even Idolaters their due, and allow
them human affections, as well as human frailties: proving that a Samaritan may
be a good Neighbor, when neither Priest nor Levite would give two pence to
deserve that name. Though he was the wisdom of God from the beginning, yet he
condescended to the weakness of a woman, which was an enemy both to his Church
and Nation: he gently reproves her vice, and friendly corrects her errors, and
though his Disciples marveled at the sight, yet he thought it no disparagement
to his Divinity; for he came to call sinners to Repentance, and Preach the
Gospel to the Poor. And no wonder that he should do so, for what man is not
both poor and sinful in the sight of God? How blind is the Knowledge, and how
weak the Virtue of the best of us, when compared with those infinite
unmeasurable powers which are in the Fountain and Foundation of all our good?
And then how small will the distance appear between us men? It Is like the
dividing of a tittle, the whole is so small, that nothing but a
Magnifying-Glass can discover the difference of the parts. One Star differs
from another Star in Glory, and though the Moon makes some discovery thereof,
obscuring one, and leaving an imperfect luster upon the other, yet the Sun
Eclipseth all alike, all their glories disappear before him, and so the great
contention cease. Even so are our good deeds before God; they are so few, and
so imperfect, that it is not our merit; but his mercy alone that creates the
difference: he can forgive much as well as little; the Samaritan by him may be
termed good, and the Publican admitted to his presence, when the obstinate
conceited Pharisee shall be for ever excluded.

Therefore why boastest thou thy self, O vain man, as if all the treasures of
virtue and knowledge were centered in thy own breast? Who is ignorant and thou
art not ignorant, who is sinful and thou art not so? Despise not then the
weakness of thy Brother, lest thou also be despised; judge not his infirmities,
lest thereby thou bring a just judgment upon thy own head, lest thou also be
severely judged by the Righteous God; But rather study peace with all men, be
just to their merits, favorable to their frailties, and only severe upon thy
own self. So will God accept of thy humility, and thy humility will recommend
thy Faith; as thou have dealt with others, so will God deal with thee also he
will reward thy good deeds, and pardon what thou in ignorance have done amiss.
Then shall thy worship be always acceptable in his sight, and by granting thy
humble Petitions, he will turn all thy Prayers into Praises and Thanksgiving.

This is the first Character of the true worship taken from the temper of the
worshippers, it is our Saviors own Rule, Ye shall know them by their fruits,
and the Fruits of the Gospel we know, are Peace, Charity, Humility and Love;
Love is the fulfilling of the Law, and the great glory of the Gospel, and where
this virtue is wanting there can be no pretense of Godliness, no show of a
Christian Church.

The next Character may be taken from the place of worship; our fathers
worshipped in this mountain, said the Samaritans, to justify their Separation;
and so say the Romanists unto us, Our Fathers worshipped in this City, the
Fathers of the Church plead for us, and Antiquity is on our side, and where was
your Church before Luther? To this the Answer is as obvious as true, Our
Fathers worshipped at Rome, but not all our Fathers; for from the beginning
there were several pious and learned Fathers and Martyrs of the Christian
faith, that owned no dependence upon the Church of Rome. There was then a
Roman, but not a Roman Catholic Church. It was not Christian Humility and the
Primitive Simplicity of the Gospel, but Pride and Secular Interest that moved
the later Pastors of that Church to bring all Nations under their yoke. 'Twas
that Lordly humor which our Savior reproved in the sons of Zebedee, when they
strove to be accounted greatest, telling them that this ambition more became
the Heathens than his Disciples; the Kings of the Gentiles, ye know, exercise
dominion, but it shall not be so amongst you.

Our fathers worshipped at Rome, it may be so. So did Jacob in the mountain of
Samaria, when the whole Church of God consisted only in him, and his Fathers
house: and yet this was no plea against the worship of the Temple, when God had
chosen that place for his Habitation; and our Fathers who themselves worshipped
at Rome, have not told us that at Rome is the place where we also ought to
worship. If there must still be one Holy City to which all the tribes must go
up, certainly Jerusalem, that City of Peace, had been a fitter place for the
Seat of that Universal Empire, than Rome, which was always the Seat of War, and
only made great by Tyrannies and Invasions upon all the world. If that time of
liberty be come when our worship shall not be confined either to the Temple of
Jerusalem, or the Mountain of Samaria, we may also conclude; that neither at
Rome shall we worship the Father.

But yet our Fathers worshipped at Rome. It Is true, but Rome was not then what
now it is; their Church and Faith was then as glorious as now it is offensive to
all the world. It exercised then no unjust Usurpations, either upon the Persons
or Consciences of men, but taught Obedience to God and his Vicegerents upon
Earth. No man under what title soever sat in the Seat of God, imposing upon the
belief of others, and creating new Articles of Faith; but in all things they
submitted themselves to the word of God, as their only Universal Infallible
Judge. And there was our Church before Luther, and even before Popery it self.
But now since her innovoations are multiplied, and she has departed from the
Truth, no wonder if we forsake her in those things wherein she has forsaken
Christ, and fly from this City, because of her abominations. Her Fathers which
worshipped in that place, will not now justify these degenerated Children, and
since they boast so much of their antiquity, we must needs reckon the date of
their worship, like that of the Samaritans, not from their Father Jacob, a Holy
Patriarch, but from Salmaneser, a Babylonish Prince.

Again, Our Fathers worshipped in this mountain, and therefore so do we, said
the Samaritans. Thus also many amongst us say. Our Fathers the Apostles, and
Primitive Martys of the Church, worshipped in Mountains, Dens, Caves, and
private Houses, and therefore so may we also. To this I answer that the
Apostles worshipped in the Temple and Public Assemblies also, when they might
be permitted; and it was only the iniquity and necessity of the times that
drove them into private places; which necessity being now removed, a separation
from the Public Assemblies upon the bare account of Christian Liberty,
grounded upon that Practice of the Apostles, is no move justifiable, than that
of the Samaritans from the Jewish Church upon the Authority of their Father
Jacob. It Is as if we should say, Our Fathers the Apostles admitted none into
the Church by Baptism, unless they could first give an account of their Faith,
and therefore now also it is unlawful to Baptize Infants that have no knowledge
of Christ. Or thus, our Fathers Abel, Enoch, and others, were forced to marry
their own Sisters, when there were no other women in the world, and therefore
we may do the like. Here we see what was commendable in the Apostles is
pernicious in us, what was necessary in our Forefathers is abominable Incest
in our times: so deceitful may an Argument prove drawn from the practice of our
Fathers, if we make not allowance for the different circumstances, and
necessities of the times.

The third Character of the true worshippers may be taken from the object of
their worship. Ye worship ye know not what, said our Savior. And so may we
also say to the Romanists, ye worship Idols, Graven Images, Relics,
Sepulchers, Miraculous Trifles, Superstitious Legends, and ye know not what.
And though perhaps the more wise and learned of that Communion may be so
clear-sighted, as to look beyond this veil of wood and stone, and have an Eye
upon the true God, whom they thus falsely represent; yet certainly the ignorant
multitude fall down and pay a real worship to these beggarly Elements: and then
how can they themselves be excused, who by these unwarranted practices have
brought the people into Idolatry?

The fourth and last remark upon the worshippers of these times, may be
concerning the manner of their worship, which our Savior has commanded to be
in Spirit and in Truth. By Spirit here we must understand, first, the faculties
of the Soul, which is the Spirit of a man; and secondly the gifts of the Holy
Ghost, which is the Spirit of God. In the first sense we are taught that God is
a Spirit, and we must worship him in our Spirit; all our thoughts and inward
faculties must be employed in his service, and we must adore him with all our
heart, our mind, our soul, and our strength: our understandings must be clear
and apprehensive of what we want; our Wills must be ready and active to draw up
our wants into Petitions; and our affections must be zealous and inflamed to
hand up our Petitions to the Throne of Grace: so spiritual and refined, that
they may convey our Prayers to Heaven; so powerful and strong as to bring down
Heaven to us. And this is not to be done by painful noise and exercise of the
Body, but by the quick and sprightly motions of the soul. These are the
faculties which we must employ in the service of God, and thus we must worship
in Spirit.

But what man is sufficient for these things? Our understandings are naturally
so dull, our wills so corrupt, and our affections so disturbed, that of our
selves we know not what to ask, nor how to Pray. Therefore when according to
the first Rule we have by humility prepared our hearts for Prayer, then does
the spirit of God descend upon us, and help our infirmities: he builds upon the
Foundations of Nature, improves our understanding into a steadfast Faith,
quickens our wills and desires with a sure hope and confidence in God, and
inflames our affections with a Divine love. He so enlightens our Eyes as that
we may look up and behold the Heavens opened to admit our supplications, and so
purifies our hearts that we may be worthy to receive the rays of Divine Majesty
into our bosom in the happy return of our Prayers. These are the gifts or the
Spirit whereby he directs and assists us in our Prayers and Supplications, and
thus we must worship in Spirit and in Truth.

And if we take our measures of the Romish service by this Rule, we shall find
it very deficient. As for instance, their Praying in an unknown Tongue. How can
the spirit of a man be moved by that which he does not understand? How can a
man be edified by those words which only enter into his outward Ears, and never
sink into his heart? it is not the turning over so many Beads, nor the kneeling
so long upon our knees that compleats the worship of God, or prepares a
Sacrifice worthy of him; but the lifting up of our hearts, as well as our hands
to his Holy place: therefore we may say of this sort of Prayer as St. Paul did
of the Preaching in his time, yet in the Church I had rather speak five words
with my understanding, that by my voice I might teach others also, than ten
thousand words in an unknown Tongue. This practice savours too much of the
blind formal Devotion of a Jewish Synagogue, and can never be proved to be the
true Christian worship, except they can convince us that miraculous effusion of
the Spirit is still continued to the Church, and men may now understand these
unknown Tongues by the same Miracle whereby the Apostles spoke them.

And as the Romish Church is deficient herein, so our Dissenting Brethren,
notwithstanding all their pretenses to the Spirit, do not at all abound; who by
a new and strange Interpretation have forced this expression of worshipping in
the Spirit to signify only Extempore Prayer, and confined all these Noble and
Divine influences or the Holy Ghost, to the mean ungenerous purposes of
supplying the defects of our speech, and inventing words for our imperfect
thoughts. As if forwardness of behavior, confidence of Face, and readiness of
the Tongue, which are the reproachful Characters of a troublesome Companion,
were now become the only tests of a gifted Brother.

But supposing readiness of Expression to be really a gift of the Spirit, yet
how shall we know by what Spirit it is that this man speaks? There is a
deluding Spirit, which under a pretense of extraordinary Piety has drawn
multitudes together into extraordinary evils; and this is no new thing
especially in these our days. There is a Spirit of Contention, whereby many
pretend to a more eminent degree of virtue, and yet intend only a more eminent
place of honor to themselves. Such was the Spirit whereby the Sons of Zebedee
prayed, that they might sit one on the right hand of our Savior, and the other
on the left. There is a Spirit of Vanity and Ostentation, and such a one it was
that exalted Herod into his Throne, clothed him with his Royal Apparel, and
prompted to him that vainglorious Oration which he made unto the people. All
these Spirits fail not to give utterance to the person possessed therewith,
according to the mighty working of their Error, their Interest, or their Pride:
as particularly to Herod in so fluent and divine a manner, that the poor
deluded people took him not for a man but God. Therefore it avails very
little for a man to have the gift of speaking by the Spirit, except the people
have the gift also of discerning the Spirit by which he speaks; and this is a
gift not very usual or remarkable in those that are the admirers of this sort
of worship.

Since thercfore the Age of Miracles is gone, and the immediate impulse of the
Holy Ghost is departed from us, it is safer for us to trust to those Prayers
which the wisest and best of men amongst us (even those to whom under Christ we
owe our Religion and Reformation) have compiled with great Piety and Prudence,
and maintained with Constancy and Perseverance, even to Martyrdom; rather than
to rely on the unskilful undigested Prayers of every forward inconsiderate
worshipper. Who would not quit the wild roving fancies of such as Pray for they
think not, they know not what; to join in these Petitions which are so plain
and easy, that they are agreedable to the capacities of the meanest; so
judicious and accurate as to satisfy the wisest men: so full and copious as to
supply the wants of the greatest sinners, so Substantial, Pious and Grave, as
may befit the greatest Saints?

As for those therefore, that quarrel with the matter of our Prayers, we say no
more but that all human things are subject to errors, and when they can find
out better we shall willingly submit to the change. As for those that find
fault with the manner of them, and say these set Forms do stint the Holy Ghost,
and quench the Spirit; I answer it is very strange, that these words which were
composed with the greatest Art and Industry of man, and with as great a measure
at least of the Holy Spirit as any private person can pretend unto, should come
at length to be despised, as flat and insignificant. Rhetoric and a well
framed Composure were wont to raise our affections, and heighten our Devotion,
and can nothing move us now but what is remarkable for being mean, and the rude
product of our first thoughts? Certainly it is not the goodness, but the
newness of this fashion that draws the people after it; and the love of Novelty
is in all cases a sign of Levity, but in Religion it is commonly the cause of
Superstition. It Is only a debauched and wanton stomach that requires variety of
tastes, and a constant Appetite is not only the sign, but also the cause of
Health.

But I would willingly know wherein a set form of Prayers does stint the
Spirit; cannot our Spirit be touched with a sense of our wants, and an ardent
desire of a supply as well by a premeditated as an extempore Prayer? Cannot we
Pray as Spiritually, and as effectually in that perfect form of words which
were prescribed by our Savior, as in those which are conceived by man? Cannot
we lift up our hearts to God with as much Zeal and Devotion in one of the
Psalms of David (for they are Spiritual Songs) as in the sudden transports of a
private Spirit? dares any man be so presumptuous, so blasphemous, as to say
that these Forms of worship are cold, jejune, and do stint the Spirit? where
then is their Argument against prescribed Liturgies?

But what if the Spirit should be stinted! A Spirit is an unruly thing, and
it is fit it should be circumscribed. If the Spirit of St. Peter had been
confined within the bounds of Prudence, he had escaped many severe censures to
which the evtravagance of his Zeal exposed him. When he Prayed that they might
build Altars to Moses and Elias, the Evangelists upbraids him with a Spirit of
inconsideration. When he Prayed against the Passion of our Savior, he rebuked
his Spirit for Diabolical; saying, Get thee behind me Satan. And if the Spirit
of the Great Apostle was subject to such errors in Prayer, what greater
confidence can we have in our new unpractised uninspired professors?

To conclude, if neither the command of our Savior, nor the practice of all
settled Churches throughout the world, both Jewish and Christian, can be of
sufficient Authority to weigh down this new Model of Divinity: if nothing but
Mathematical Demonstrations can convince them of the truth, and the least
shadow of an Argumcnt will serve to confirm them in their errors: if neither
reason nor kindness can reclaim them: I hope it is no breach of Charity to think
that it is not the Spirit of Prayer, but the Spirit of Ostentation that
animates their Assemblies, and encourages this ungrounded Separation. And since
all human means have proved ineffectual, we must commit the Cause to God, who
is the searcher of all hearts, and Pray that by the power of his love he would
come amongst us, and turn the hearts of out disaffected Brethren: That he would
remove their prejudices, and enlighten their understandings; abate their heats,
and warm their affections toward us, that they would leave off their
uncharitable censures, and show forth the purity of their Faith by their
certain gifts of the Spirits, Humility and Love. That they would for once
suppose us to be but as Wise, as Virtuous, and as Sincere as they; and after a
kind impartial trial, I doubt not but their Charity will either pronounce us
good, or their Conversation will make us better.

FINIS.

