The Black Nonconformist, DISCOVERED IN More Naked Truth: Proving, That
EXCOMMUNICATION, CONFIRMATION, the two Great Episcopal Appurtenances, and
DIOCESAN BISHOPS, Are not (as now in use) of Divine, but Human MAKE and SHAPE;
AND, That not only some LAYMEN, but all the Keen-cringing CLERGY ARE
NON-CONFORMISTS

And, Except they Repent, Are Liable to be Indicted and Presented by
GRANDJURIES, to the Loss of their Spiritual Promotions, and Imprisonment
without Bayl, and the Patrons to PRESENT, as if they were Dead, when, in
Defiance of the Acts for Uniformity, They Practice ILLEGAL CEREMONIES, In
Enjoining to be worn, whether Men will or no, Ministering Divine-Service, The
HOOD, (FORSOOTH!) Or, at any time, except at the Communion, the SURPLICE,
Proved to be SURPLUS, or OVERPLUS.

In bowing to the ALTAR, at the Name, JESUS, to the EAST,
placing insignificant and idle (UNLIGHTED) CANDLES upon the ALTAR, not wearing
the COPE, at Communion-Times, using other Public Prayers in the Pulpit, than
what are in the COMMON PRAYER BOOK.


Also a LIBEL, and ANSWER (thereunto:) Fitted to every Man's Case (BE IT WHAT
IT WILL) that is Cited to ECCLESIASTICAL COURTS, whose SHALLOW Foundation is
unbared. And a true Table of ECCLESIASTICAL COURT-FEES, as it was returned into
the STAR CHAMBER, Anno Domini 1630. by the ECCESIASTICAL-FELLOWS themselves;
And compared with the Statutes.

ALSO, Concerning the Unlawfulness of GRANTING LICENSES To MARRY,
QUAKERS-MARRIAGES, Folly, as well as other evil Consequences of that NEW
LAW-MAXIM, viz. That no Non-Conformists ought to be Jurymen.


SHOWING ALSO, That, RELIGION, RELIGION, that should have been the World's
great Blessing, is become the Plague of Mankind, and the Curse of Christendom,
when attended with the BLACK REGIMENT, WRITS and LABELS; Citations and Libels;
Cures and Suspensions; Silencing and Excommunications; Sell-Souls and the Devil
of Hell; Canonists and Civilians; Superstitions and Fopperies; Noddings and
Cringings; Illegal, as well as Deformed-Vestments, and Scare-Crows; Hornings
and Stools of Repentance; Fire and Faggot; Bell and the Dragon; the
Bloody-Priests, and their Surrogates; Chancellors and Officials; Registers and
Gaolers; Benches and Executioners; Sumners and Promoters; Hangmen and
Apparitors.

The Second Edition.

Dedicated to the ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY, with all Modesty and Submission.

By EDM. HICKERINGILL Rector of the Rectory of ALL SAINTS in Colchester

LONDON, Printed by G. Larkin, and are to be Sold by Richard Janeway, and most
Booksellers in London. M.DC.LXXXII.

To the most Reverend Father in GOD, WILLIAM Lord ARCHBISHOP of CANTERBVRY,
Primate and Metropolitan of all ENGLAND, And one of His MAJESTY'S most
Honorable Privy-Counsellors, His GRACE.
SIR,
IN this Treatise your Grace will find somewhat suitable to you, in the Case of
Nectarius (not Archbishop, for that name was not then invented, but which did
Tatamount) Patriarch of the Arch-See of Constantinople.

Elected thereunto per saltum, or, rather vaulting and skipping into the
Holy-See or uppermost Seat in the Church, over the heads of all (not only his
equals, but by many degrees his) Superiors, contrary to the Canon Law of
Holy-Church, himself also being (then) but a Lay man (nay) and unbaptized.

To show us, that it is not the first time that the Church has cracked a
Commandment to dispense with rigor, and summum jus, in favor of great (and
not vulgar) merit.

For many reasons, therefore, (as well as for this great and concerned example
of Lenity against the strict Rules of Law) does this little Tract in all
lowliness expect (as well as fly so high as) your Patronage and Protection.

And Published, not so much in mine own behalf (for I need not your favor, but
impartial and equal Justice) as in the behalf of the many Dissenters and
Nonconformists to the strict Rules of the Act for Uniformity.

With which, if you cannot dispense or grant Indulgences, it concerns me as
little (or less) than your self, or, those Clergymen that are here proved to
be Non-Conformists when they too frequently practice Illegal Ceremonies, in
defiance of the Acts for Uniformity, that enjoins those (few) Ceremonies in the
Common Prayer Book, and no other, (mark that) no other Ceremonies, which (other
Ceremonies are therefore Illegal Superstitions, in enjoining the Surplice, and
yet forbearing the Cope (wherein none but Popish Priests are Conformists, or
arrayed (that I know of) at this day, and yet the Cope is as much commanded as
the Surplice.

And, besides, in bowing at the Holy Name of Jesus, (the impertinence (at
least) whereof, I have in all humility undeniably evinc't, in my Naked-Truth,
the second Part, except we also bow at the Holy Name of God, and the Holy Ghost
(names equally venerable) so often as we hear them; or also bow at the Name of
Jesus, every time a Blasphemer (which is too usual) swears by the Name of
Jesus; and yet no man dops the head, much less bows the knee there-at, no, not
in Sermon-time, when we hear the Minister 100 times in an hour name Jesus.

Or, as impertinent as that illegal and idle Superstition or Ceremony (in
defiance of the Act of Uniformity) so generally practiced by bowing to the
Altar, setting insignificant and unlighted Candles thereon, and bowing to the
East.

Nay, some have been so sillily and ridiculously Superstitious, as to ruin a
handsome Pile and Fabric, (to their own impoverishment, so far as to need or
get the Charity of others) only by rebuilding it worse, to make it face to the
left, and directly East and West; That so Men might bow to the Altar, and to
the East also, with one single Nod; Oh! most incomparable Achievement, and (no
doubt) meritorious.

Whereas Astronomy tells us (infallibly) that there is no such thing (really)
as East and West, but mere imaginary Points, and fictitious, (as the Figures of
the heavenly Dog and Bear) that being West to some others, which is East to us;
and East to others, which is West to us.

But besides the Folly, (so it may well be called) it is hereafter proved to be
a sin against the Act of Uniformity, to bow to the East or Altar; and not only
a Peccadillo, but so great, as to make us (except we repent, and reform that
wicked Error) to forfeit all our spiritual Promotions.

The tender Consideration whereof will (I hope) make us tender against
Nonconformists for our own sakes, (it had been better though for Charities sake)
to take off our keen and fiery edge against Dissenters, and Breakers of some
Branch of the Act of Uniformity, lest we pronounce our own Suspension and
Anathema, with the same mouth, and for the same Cause for which we censure and
sentence others.

I have here (modestly I hope) searched into the Nature, and tried the metal
and mettle of your great and only Weapon in your Arch-Court, or Court of
Arches, (but always under Correction, and with submission to better Judgments
and the Laws) Excommunication:

So often let fly in your Name, in that Court, though you seldom or never come
there to hear the Merit of the Cause, and the Witnesses viva voce, and face to
face; no wonder then if you make many Random-shots, and wide and beside the
mark; if you trust with implicit Faith in and to Registers, Notaries and
Advocates (those spiritual Hucksters of Souls) that live by Fees from sinners,
whose Purses they take upon the Highway to Heaven or Hell; and no Repentance
will serve the turn, except those motley, Ecclesiastical-Lay Merchants for
Souls be first pleased, that is, paid their Demands, ungodly, illegal Demands,
upon sight; at our utmost peril.

It Is a pretty Trade indeed, invented by the Pope and the Devil; delivering to
Satan by Excommunication, and delivering from Satan by Absolution, but not
without money in the Case. Thus precious Souls, for whom Christ dyed, are
truck't for, bought and sold, by these Ecclesiastical Merchant-Adventurers; a
gainful Trade it is too, if the Naked-Truth do not spoil the Market, (which is
more than probable.)

And if you would imitate our blessed Savior, (how well would so Gospel a work
become you to your Eternal Honor in this and succeeding Ages, namely) to whip
these Buyers and Sellers of Souls out of the Temple, though you can make a Whip
(as he did) but of small Cords, to slash and lash out these Silver-Smiths of
Diana, that coin Heaven and Hell, by that abominable craft getting their
wealth, making merchandise of Souls, to their own, as well as others
destruction.

Away with this Foppery out of the Church, and Spiritual Wickedness in High
places; I hate the Folly thereof, (discerned now by every Peasant, and derided)
as much as the Hypocriste of it: which you, in sober sadness, must confess and
lament as much as (nay, more than) others; sitting so high at the Helm, God
guide your hand.

I hope you will not draw your spiritual weapons upon me (though) for this
Honesty and Plain-dealing, instead of slashing the said Chequer-work black and
white, motley-colour'd Hucksters of Souls, and so disparage the Title -- Vestra
Clementia -- usually given to your Predecessors;

If you do, and I over-live you, do not speak to me to write your Epitaph to
Posterity.

And be not angry that I claim Kindred, spiritual Kindred and Alliance with
you, a Man so much above me, but of the same Order and Function.

There are none but bloated, big-swollen and imboss'd Vpstarts, that are
ashamed of their Kindred and Relations, because they are poor and low in the
world.

And it is below me to tell you how equal and alike we were, when we were both
Fellows of Colleges together, (in the days of Oliver) in the University of
Cambridge: yet I never took the Covenant, or any (State-Oath) in my life,
except that of Allegiance and Supremacy.

Therefore for the Sameness of our Function, and your own Coat, do not sit
unconcerned, and patiently look on, whilst the men of Doctors-Commons seem to
make you a Property and a Color, by your great Name and Authority, to abuse
me, (as they have done) and so crush me by Proxy, in your Court of Arches, This
should not be amongst Brethren.

I grant, you are Rich and I am Poor, What then? Do not take part with my great
Adversary the Bishop of London, (whom I never offended but by telling Truth)
because he is rich, great and powerful; but (as the Wiseman counsels you, Prove.
22.22.) Rob not the poor, because he is poor: neither oppress the afflicted in
the gate.

But open thy mouth, (Prove. 31.9.) judge righteously, and plead the cause of
the poor and needy; and (God-like) deliver the poor from him that is too strong
for him; the poor and needy from him that spoileth him, Psalm. 35.10.

The wicked in the pride of his heart (Psalm. 10.2, 9, 11.) does persecute the
poor; let them be taken in the devices that they have imagined: his mouth is
full of cursing, (Anathematizing) and deceit and fraud, under his tongue is
mischief and vanity; he lies in wait to catch the poor, he does man- catch the
poor, when he draws him into his net. He has said in his heart, God has
forgotten, he hides his face, he will never see it.

The Church-doors in Popish Countries, and also the Chappel-doors in
Monasteries, stand open all the day long, to let in, to the Altar, all those
that commit Murder (of which (there are more than a good many) make a Trade,
and their only Livelihood and Vocation.)

But to see (as I have seen) what rejoicing there was by the Parish Priests, or
the Monasteries, ( whose luck happened to be best, and nearest to the place where
the Murder was committed) how they would Joy, Huzzah, and Hallou, (as) at a
Prize -- A Prize --

For if the Murderer have got 20 Doubloones (the common price for a Murder) the
Altar-keepers will be sure to make him divide, share and go Snips; And then --
The Proudest He in Portugal, or Spain, or Italy, dare not touch the Murderer
for three days together (the time allowed for his Escape) no, not the King
himself can fetch him from Holy Church; for he also is afraid of the
Inquisition-men.

But what Conscience is there, that a poor Whore should be excluded the Church
and Sacraments, and yet the Church-doors open, and the Altar ready to receive a
Barabbas, a Robber and a Murderer? A mere gore-blood Religion sure, that a man
must part with his Humanity, before he can be proselyted or perverted thereto!
--

Indeed, the Tolerated and Public Stews, makes the Whores and the unmarried
Priests some amends, but they cannot play the Whore and Rogue there neither,
(though) by Authority, 'till they get a License, which must be paid for too, I
know it.

And can we think, but that it is a hard world for some sinners to be excluded
the Church and Sacraments, by greater Villains than themselves? And does not
all the world know, that not only gray hairs, five or six Caps more than needs,
Rheums, Coughs, and distempers of Body, but diseases of Soul too, by the Simony
of Flattery, and looking (through the fingers) at sin, are the best lifts to
Preferment, and helps to Government, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Jurisdiction
of the Holy-Chair (at Rome.)

Whither the Archpriest is no sooner crept by those old Serpentine and Pimping
Arts, but he writes himself (by strange contradiction) the Prince of the
Apostles, (who, Good Men! never had a Prince amongst them) but also he styles
himself -- Arch-slave -- also, or Slave of Slaves, Servant of Servants: And
(there) he says true; for none but the vilest of Slaves will so unman (as well
as unchristen themselves) to pimp to other Men's Lusts, thereby to gratify
their own Lusts of Avarice and Pride, to which they are first enslaved.
Arch-slave, or Servant of Servants? His Holiness is in the right on it, (I
profess) and therein, Infallible, whether his Worship considers it or no.

But I wonder not at his Greatness and Monstrous Ecclesiasticalship: For when
the Antichristian Clergy had once made the Silly-Bigotted World believe, that
they, their Commissaries, Registers and Sumners, were the only Buyers and
Sellers in the Temple, and, What do you lack? Would Men have Estates Real or
Personal, in Heaven, for ever; or, in Purgatory, for a certain term of years
for a less Sum, or be freed from Hell for Ever and Aye? Here Is your Men, (quoth
the Popish Priests) Chapmen, What do you lack? What do you buy?

Then, then, and not till then, they got the whipping-hand of the superstitious
world; for he that has got a hank over other Men's Souls and Consciences, their
Bodies and Estates (consequently) are, without dispute, at his Service and
Devotion.

And when a Priest can make a poor Lady believe, that he can damn her, or
absolve her, and has the Keys, and something else under his Girdle, and can let
her into (or shut her out from) the Church and Sacraments, so that she will but
show him all her Secrets, and unbosome her self in Auricular Confession:
(Cajoled thereunto superstitiously, and bug-bear'd by many lying Miracles (in
the Legend) of many that dyed, and got as far as Heaven-gates, but were glad to
return (a long and weary Journey) to earth again, to be confessed by a Priest,
before they could be let in, dying unshriv'd or unhousled) can such a Priest
(that has got the Lock and Key of a Ladies Closet and Secrets) have far to go
before he come at her heart?

And I have therefore wondered, that the jealous Italians, Spaniards and
Portugueze (that will not suffer any man (scarce a Brother) to see their Wives
face) should yet permit them to go to secret and auricular Confession, to a
young, vigorous, unguelt piece of Sanctity! (I had almost said, Hypocrisy!).

I could not but wonder ('till now of late) to find -- St. Ambrosie, Ora pro
nobis, in the Popish Letany or Mass? For what merit? Oh! Captain St. Ambrose
was the first Ecclesiastical-Hector, or Spiritual-Bravo, that in defiance of
God and the King, durst as malapartly, as barbarously and insultingly, (some
say) Traitorously shut the doors of the Church against his Prince and Emperor
Theodosius the elder, not admitting him to the Sacrament nor Divine Service,
'till the Emperor submitted to the proud insulting Priest, and promised (upon
his knees) that for the future he would be ruled; and so, he and the Priest
became Friends again.

Well, I see St. James (the Author (the Papists say of their Liturgy and Mass)
though he was none of the Twelve Apostles, yet was a Bishop and a Prophet too,
if he could so early insert (into the Churches Common Prayer Book) stout
Captain St. Ambrose, and make him pray for himself and all Christen-Souls, 400
years before he was born.

Oh! the merit of some men's Ecclesiastical Insolence!

But if Captain Ambrose was Canonized and Sainted for shutting the
Church-doors, and debarring a great Sinner from Divine Service and Sacraments,
Will not the men of the same Leaven Anathematize me, for opening the
Church-doors thus to Sinners, great Sinners, and small Sinners, and shut me out?

But it is better far, to eat with Publicans and Sinners, (as our blessed
Savior did) than to partake with Scribes, Pharisees, and Hypocrites, to whom
he denounced Woe, Woe, Woe.

Thus have I known Schoolboys (taught in the Church, but better fed than
taught) to bar out their Masters (and be Masters of Mis-rule) upon pretense of
Christmas and a Holy-time; and with a Brazen-face make Declamations and Verses
in praise of that precious Ecclesiastical Discipline.

But, if I come, I Will open the Church Doors again, and spread the Arms of Mercy
wide open and outstretched to as great a Latitude and Comprehension, (as our
Blessed Savior did) even to Publicans and Sinners, they shall eat with me; let
the Hypocrites eat alone, and (as fittest) by themselves, if they will not
vouchsafe to eat with Sinners; let them cringe and bow, and face to the Left,
to the Left -- to the East -- the East.

Sinners, (look you) Sinners, though they despise Sinners so much, in nomine
Domini, Sinners are the best Gryst that comes to their Mills: If it were not
for Sinners, the Bench (Ecclesiastical at least) would not be so scarlet as it
is; their Holinesses might sit alone, as well as a cold, if it were not for
Sinners, and look as lean as an Easter-Offering.

Sinners? quoth a; Who is this that despises Sinners, which our Blessed
Redeemer did not despise? by God's help, this little Book shall open the
Church-Doors to let in Sinners, in spite of the most self-conceited Hypocrite,
as far as the Old and New Testament will go; (I say) ipse dixi.

What? shall sin walk barefac't, magisterial, in open Court, and unrebuk't? And
shall the Naked-Truth be glad to hide its Head? Ha? shall the wicked
Extortioners of Doctors-Commons sin, and will you make me suffer? and be whipped
(for their faults) upon their Backs whilst they hold me up to you, Sir? look
you, my Lord, Is there any Conscience in this?

Look you, Sir, look you, (I am got into the Modern Rhetorical Phraze entailed
on some seats of Eloquence) can it be Justice (look you, my Lord) that I should
suffer because they sin, and I only wish and endeavor their amendment?

Just thus, does the unjust World abuse the poor Cuckolds, when (the
Naked-Truth on it is) the great and only fault is in the Cuckold-makers, the
Whore and Rogue.

And must he not have a face of Brass (look you) and a conscience of Steel, my
Lord, that shall vindicate that domineering (Popishly invented) Prelacy, which
the Holy Scriptures, and our Blessed Redeemer condemns, making all his
Disciples Spiritual-Levellers? Luke 22. Whose Disciples then are the Popish
Prelates? that in defiance of Christ, will domineer over the Clergy, their
Brethren, and vex them with Lawsuits, having great Interest, and great Power,
and withal, Purse-proud, to defend, in spite of Christ, that Antichristian
Lordliness and Clergical Tyranny over their Brethren, calling it as the Pope
(contradictione adjecto) first called it, Hierarchy, or the Holy Rule; But how
can that be Holy that the Holy Scriptures and the Holy Jesus decries and
condemns? and it was first Enacted and made a Law in England, when the Pope did
what he list both with King and People. They had, and we have a happy time
on it; yet most of these Popish Hierarchical Laws are abolished, and that was
stoutly attack't, though it still stands, and let it stand: I said, in my
Naked-Truth, Rome ( was not built, and) cannot be destroyed in one day; it
crumbles a pace.

If you be for Discipline and Spiritual Weapons, rather Draw upon the
Adulterers and Adulteresses, the Extortioners, impudent Extortioners in your
Spiritual-Courts, in Probates, Administrations, Visitations, Ordinations,
granting Licenses to Preach, Institutions, Inductions, Procurations; and, if
you have power to Anathematize and Curse, Curse the Cursers and Blasphemers of
the unparalled Age we live in.

In all the Reign of Edw. 6. I find no man taken upon the Writ de Excommunicato
capiendo, nor 'till the fifth of Queen Elizabeth, nor any legal Cursing or
Commination save that in the Common Prayer Book, denouncing of Gods Anger and
Judgments against Sinners, Cursed is he that smites his neighbor secretly,
and Cursed is he that lies with his neighbors wife, etc. and all the people
shall say, Amen.

Cursed is he that takes a reward to slay an innocent person, Deuteronomy. 27.25.
(that is) in plain English -- Cursed is the Suborner, that promises or
threatens a Reward, or Advancement (for there are two sorts of Advancements, or
Rewards belike, the Learned say) and Cursed is the Suborned, namely, Cursed is
the Mancatcher, and his Mate, or -- Comrogue; those two Judasses that give or
take a Reward to slay an innocent person: and all the people shall say, Amen.

Nay, if men be for Cursing, they may have their belly full, in Curses that are
not money-matters, nor causeless, and therefore shall come to pass.

For though the Curse causeless shall not come, Prove. 26.2. Yet the Curse of
the Lord is in the house of the wicked, Prove. 3.33.

Indeed, the Rubric does bewail that we have not the godly Discipline of the
Primitive-Church, where Sinners were punished in this World (by delivering to
Satan) for never any man in the New Testament escaped death when the Apostles
had delivered them over, for the destruction of the flesh ( that must be death)
that the spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.

No, alas, alas! we cannot kill men with a word, as did St. Peter and St. Paul,
upon great and terrible occasions to make an example of notorious Sinners.

The Pope therefore made the silly Bigot-Magistrate do, (what the Devil used to
do in the Apostles times) in killing and burning Heretics, and entituling the
Magistrate to the blood and odium, as well as to the honor of being the
surrogate of the Priests Revenge; the Magistrate had a happy employment on it;
but he durst do no other, lest upon his contempt of Canons of Holy-Church,
Holy-Church had served him with the same sauce.

In my Travels, in Popish Countries, as Portugal, Spain, etc. (whose
Laws-municipal are the Canon-Laws and Civil-Law) I have observed, that in the
grand business of the Inquisition, and Excommunication, the Lay-Doctors, the
Civilians do the business, but always under the Name and Authority of some
Bishop or Bishops.

Who, well knowing the way to the Wood, and that to be led gently by the nose
by those Lay-Doctors, is the shortest cut to Preferment, and to be an easy
Soul, or a tame Property, is a meritorious qualification in a Candidate for the
Holy See; it would make a man smile (if it were lawful to smile on so sad an
occasion) to see an old Nidget put on his Spectacles to write his Name under
the Sentence for burning a Heretic, which the Lay-Chancellors, and Officials
bring to him ready for his Wisdom's Subscription; though (poor old heart!) he
knew nothing of the matter, nor heard one Witness viva voce in the Cause.

Nay, they would be very angry, if he makes the least scruple or hesitation, or
enquiry; What? not trust his Delegates? his Lay-Vicars? not trust public
Notaries and Proctors? Advocates and Surrogates? that would not be guilty of an
Extortion or Wrong (I Will warrant) for any thing in the World, except money.

And truly (my Lord) you could not have troubled me worse than you did the last
Term, by the answer you gave me to my Letter, sent by a Gentleman my
Solicitor, saying, You knew nothing of the matter, nothing of my cause, or the
merit of it, for that you left all to your Under-officers.

Your under Officers? Why? they are the sort of men of Doctors-Commons, that
hitherto have seemed to Cite me, upon pretended Articles of Barretry (of which
neither you nor they are competent Judges; but you run the hazard (all of you)
of a Praemunire, if you take upon you to hale matters into your Courts that
belong only to the Jurisdiction of the Courts of our Lord the King) as if they
designed only under color of a Process, to get me in amongst them to affront,
abuse me, squeeze and crush me; they have done their utmost.

And, do what you will, I will never again appear at Doctors-Commons in your
Court, except you will secure me from affronts, and keep the Peace, that you
will be personally present there, and hear my defense, and be an ear-witness,
as well as a Judge, how I Will baffle them all.

Leave me to your Under-officers? Are you in Earnest? have a care your under
Officers, in meditating their Revenge on me, hit not you home, by bringing you
within the Statutes of Provisors, and Praemunire; if you with implicit faith
trust to them, they are in a fair way to it. But no Subject, how high so ever,
is too great for the Law, and Truth: they must, they must, (read all
Chronicles,) they always did buckle, and submit their sturdy necks to the Law,
or the Block.

Leave me to your Under-officers? Do you say so still? God defend: No, Sir, no,
leave me not in the hands of mine Enemies, and give me not over to the will of
mine Enemies, that hate me without a cause, without good cause, and only for
telling truth of their vile Extortions, and viler Merchandise of precious Souls.

Leave me to your Under-officers? nay, then I am well helped up; I am like to
have a hopeful time on it: Why? these men of Doctors-Commons, as you will see
hereafter in this little Book, they are flesh't upon me already, upon my Soul,
and upon my Purse too; Leave me to them? and they will bring you a Sentence for
you to suspend me, stop my mouth, silence me, or, perhaps Excommunicate me; but
throw away your Pen when you come to subscribe it: let me advise you for once,
trust them not with a power Legantine; what care they what inconvenience they
bring upon you or the Church? they shoot securely under the covert of your
great Name and Authority, whilst your Delegates do indeed by such Proxy
Sentence but make you a Surrogate of their private spleen, malice and revenge;
you cannot have a worse employment.

I know, my Lord, that you and many others that do not know me, will wonder
both at what I have written, and that I (durst) write what follows; but it is
because they do not know me, for those that do, will wonder at neither.
Common-talk or fame is seldom a good Limner, or Pourtrays any man true;
besides, it is so various too, (now) as of old, some said he was a good man,
others said, nay, but he deceives the people.

My own Cause in your Court (you will see) needs not ten Lines to answer all; no,
but I take willingly the occasion here given to search into your mysteries:
for, how can I, or any honest Englishman or Christian, sit unconcerned, when
we view such havoc made of Christian Souls? bought and sold, sent to Satan,
and thence redeemed, but not without Money, Money.

Fie upon it, Fie upon it, it is a burning shame it should be suffered; it is
against Conscience, Reason, Law, Equity and Religion. And shall these fellows
(bold and old in sin) be cherish't, and I accounted too bold to tell them of
their wickedness? And shall they have more of your countenance than I? do your
pleasure. But you ought not to judge re inaudita, and hearing but of one ear,
reserve but one for me, unstufft with prejudice, and if you had never so lawful
a Court, I neither need nor require a greater or other favor from you, whilst
I live: But to leave me to them? you shall not leave me to them; I Will wash my
hands of them, God bless me from them: I tell you here, I Will not come at them.

And I would have told you so at Lambeth, but I dare not come there neither,
without your Order and Permission; and when I writ to you, and the Gentleman (I
sent) ask't you, If you would have me to attend you? you said, No, you left all
to your under Officers; so that I have no other way but this public way to
approach your hand or ear: which is, I hope, a sufficient Apology for this
Humble Address, of which I trust you will not be an Abhorrer.

It Is true, these Vncivil-Civilians that make Markets of Souls, do but (I know)
truckle under the Clergy for a Livelihood; yet they are as petulant to the
Clergy, as if they were only their Sport or May Game, or poor tame Asses, fit
for nothing so much, as to be the Objects of their Wrath, and the Subjects of
their Affronts and Scorn.

Thus have I known wanton Jades kick the Hand that fed them, and made them fat,
nay, and throw their Masters too, when Provant pricked them.

I Prophecy (though) that I have taken off the keen edge of their only Tool,
these Ecclesiastical Fellows work (for money) with, viz. Excommunication, with
a poor Formality-Priest standing Surrogating in black, like -- at their right
hand, to see Livery and Seizin given of the Excommunicate Person that is
delivered to Satan, they shall fight hereafter, but with rebated Weapons, they
are so cruel in their Fulminations, and for such Trifles too.

That ever a Kingdom of Christians should be so long bewitched to believe, that
any can damn them, or forgive sins, save God only; or, that any man has power
on earth given him from God, to keep others from the Ordinances, the means of
Grace, the Sacraments, the Food of Souls, and the Bread of Life, because they
are Sinners; Sinners? Why there should need no Ordinances, nor Sacraments, if
it were not for Sinners; nor did ever any man receive the blessed Sacrament,
but Sinners all, except our Savior only.

The Soul is sick, it is granted, more need of Physic and Food: The whole have
no need of a Physician.

Nay, the first that ever partook of the Blessed Supper, if they were
Penitents, they were soon relaps't: For in Luke 22. in the 20th Verse, they
took it, and in the 24th Verse, they were no sooner come out from the Holy
Feast, but they fell a quarrelling and justling for the place, and striving (it
runs in the kind perhaps) which of them should be the greatest.

But the crafty Popish Priests finding that Sinners found the goodness and
sweetness of the Blessed Sacrament, and longed for it, and they were the only
Stewards of those Mysteries, they resolved to make the best benefit of the
Stewards place.

And indeed I have observed, in some Countries, where I have been, that when
(once) the Clergy have perceived that their Office was found so mighty
necessary, they resolve to take the occasion, and make their best advantage of
it.

Did the People find comfort in the Bread of Life, and also were made to
believe that none could Consecrate it but a Priest, or Popish Priest: Ay,
(quoth the Popish Priest) Sinner, Do you see? Do you see here what I have got
in my hands? Would you not be glad to have some? Nay, Hold -- Stand off -- Here
is the Bread of Life, but not a Bit upon a march, not a Bit upon the great
march and Highway to Heaven, though it would save your Soul, except you be
obedient to your Diocesan, nay, and swear Obedience to Canons and Laws of Holy
Church though you starve and dye for a Bit.

He therefore that can make a Sacrament, and debarr (ad libitum) sinners from
it, may well take the wall of all other Men in Christendom.

But there is no Scripture in the Old or New Testament (that ever I found) that
ever gave power to any Man, Men, or Church, to debar any Man from the
Sacraments, that is pleased to come to them; for such as were delivered to
Satan in the Apostles days, were therewith killed, their Flesh was destroyed.

It Is true, an impenitent Sinner he comes at his own peril, if he venture to
eat unworthily; but it is not a greater sin to eat unworthily, than not to eat
at all; rejecting of the Ordinance is certain damnation, whereas he that eats
unworthily, makes a hopeful Assay of Obedience to Christ; and as he said, Lord,
I believe, help my Unbelief; so it is acceptable worthiness, to say, Lord, I
endeavor to eat and drink worthily, help my unworthiness.

And as he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation;
so he that prays, preaches, or hears unworthily, preaches, hears and prays
damnation to himself.

Nor, need I tell you my Lord, that the world is generally mistaken in the
meaning of the word (...), unworthily, better Translated unbecomingly, or
unsuitably (namely) to the Institution; as when Men make the Sacrament of
Christ, or take the Sacrament of Christ, for no other Cause than a Test, or
State-Sacrament only, making it the Sacrament of a Corporation, or, of
Preferment only to get into a Ship, or a Fort, or on the Bench.

And this Construction of the word (...), we have in Ephesians. 4.1. Col. 1.10.
Phil. 1.27. 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. Romans 16.2. (...), as becomes Saints, for there is
none but Papists that plead the merit of Condignity, or, that any man is worthy
of God, or worthy the Gospel, otherwise than as endeavoring to walk becomingly
and suitably thereto.

And to back this Interpretation, I have the great Le Groot, or Grotius on my
side, a Name that with me out-weighs all the Popish Priests put together.

We are all Sinners, and the Sacrament's made on purpose for us, and none but
those that have the gift of God of discerning of spirits infallibly by the Holy
Ghost (as the Primitive Christians had) can judge of the truth of any man's
Repentance, or consequently setch power from the Scriptures to debar men from
the holy Ordinances, or shut the Church-doors against them.

I know, Priests have made a gainful Trade on it, but, abating that, By what
Authority Divine do they these things, and who gave them that Authority, (I
always except the Rubric in the Common Prayer Book?)

Sacramenta non sunt Vaenalia, Sacraments are too holy to be made Vendible
Commodities; And if my Child shall not be baptized, 'till I have compounded
with the Priest, whose Religion is -- No Penny, No Paternoster; Nor if I must
not come into the Church, but be barred out, 'till I have pleased, that is,
paid the Sumner, the Register, the Proctor, and the Court-Fees, Good Lord
deliver us.

I know many People think it is a hard world since the Inquisition and
High-Commission-Court were dissolved, now that Cursed Cows have short Horns; yet
let them comfort themselves with Excommunication, and the Writ de Excommunicato
Capiendo; for though the Writ de Heretico comburendo be burnt, and we cannot
burn an Heretic for our Lives, yet the Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo shall
imprison the Heretic, and bury him alive in a Jayl, and what would men have?
Methinks that should content them, Enough, Enough in all Conscience, a man
would think, if they have any Conscience in them. What would they be at? Do
they know? Do they not know when they are well? Will nothing serve -- but Hang
the Rogue, burn the Heretic, or crop the Roundhead in a Pillory?

Time was -- Ay, Ay, Time was, when a bold Fellow that durst speak the
Naked-Truth, or, tell Rich men of their Roguery, he had as good have eat his
Ears in the merry days of the Inquisition and High Commission, But who can help
the thing that will away?

Truly, my Lord, I daily expect the Effects of the Fury and Rage of the Devil,
and devilish men, that rage so much the more, as foreseeing their time is short.

But (blessed be God) my shoulders are as big and large (of the largest size)
as the most of Mortals, and can bear as much; I doubt not but they will try my
strength: A whole Legion of Sell-Souls will fall upon me for this little Book,
better make one Back crack, than not load the Wretch that takes away the Trade
of the Higlers and Retailers of Heaven and Hell, by which they have lived so
long and so plentifully.

But -- I believe in God -- not without some Faith and Hope (sure I have some
grounds for it) in your Grace and Clemency: And for all your sayings, that yet
you will alter your word, and not leave me to your Underofficers; Alas! I am
in their Clutches already, they have begun to squeeze me already, When shall I
get out of their hands, can you tell me?

How well will it become your Lordship, to heal the Breaches, and not stretch
the Wounds wider, they gape, and are ghastly enough already, and all that I
have hitherto writ (I told them so before but they would not believe) is but an
Earnest-penny of what I have at their service; And, to serve you and the
Church, I have much more in my head and heart.

I am scarce yet warm in my work ( extorted from me too) and I do but play a
little about the skirts of the business, though some, perhaps, could wish me
warm in Smithfield (their Christian requital for my great pains) if they might
have leave to carry me and the Fagots thither.

But those days are not (yet) come. To confute the Naked-Truth with the
Arguments of Bloody Bonner, a Bone-fire or a Jayl, a Dungeon and a Pillory.

Here Is enough, in all Reason, for a Letter, writ Raptim and in Haste, I dare
say, your Grace never had such another Letter (for length) in your life.

And take it not in dudgeon, that in memory of our mutual and spiritual
Alliance, I make bold to subscribe my self,

MY LORD, Your most loving Brother, Most obedient Son, And most humble Servant,
Edm: Hickeringill.
COLCHESTER, December. 4. 1681.
POSTSCRIPT.
THE said Bishop St. Ambrose was not ashamed of his spiritual Kindred, to his
Flock -- Vos miht est is Parents, qui Sacerdotium tulistis, vos, inquam, filii
vel parents, filii singuli, universi Parents. Ambrose, Tom. 3. p. 89. in Luke
18.

No, no, Bishop Ambrose was not ashamed of his poor Kinsmen and Relations
spiritual, as high and stout as he was; and scorned to Try them, Judge them,
much less Curse them, Silence them, Stop their Mouths, and Excommunicate them
by Proxy, or by his Under-officers.

And yet he was a great Ecclesiastical Judge, as well as your Lordship; not a
Judge at or of Common Law, Statute Law, the Municipal-Law, but a Judge by and
according to Canon Law.

Canon Law? Ay, if any Body can or does Judge by it this day: Canon Law,

Canon Law, four or five great Folio's of it, too bulky to get well into any
man's head, that is already stufft full of Divinity.

Canon Law? It Is as easy to make a Rope of Sand, as to make the Canon Law
agree with its self: one Canon and one Council does so thwart and thwack one
another.

Canon Law, in which whosoever is vers't, shall find enough to fit almost any
purpose; Had we not as good keep to the Canon of Holy Scripture? as to be led
(to Sentence) by Proxy, and Lay-Doctors of Canon Law, even just as they shall
nuzzle things into our heads.

But give me leave to mind you of one Canon Law more, most agreeable to our
English Laws: Council. Carthag. 4. Can. 22, 23, 29, 30, 32. Episcopus si Clerico
vel Laico crimen imposuerit, deducatur ad probationem in Synodum; and Can. 30.
Caveant Judices Ecclesiae ne absente eo cujus causa ventilatur, sententiam
proferant, quia irrita erit, imo and causam in Synodo pro facto dabunt.

Let the Ecclesiastical Judges have a care and look to that they pronounce no
Sentence in the absence of the Party accused, nor without consent of a Synod of
Presbyters; if otherwise, it shall be null and void, etc.

And most reasonable such (Presbyters too) as are of the Neighborhood; for
shall not our Temporal Estates, Free-holds, or Moneys, no, not in Trifles be
given away from us without a Jury of the Neighborhood; And shall our
everlasting Souls, and the liberty of our Bodies be given away by Proxy, and a
blind implicit Faith in the Certificavit or Significavit of a single,
malicious, peevish, interested, and revengeful Sell-Soul, Surrogate, Official,
or Register? King Balak himself could not with all his Gifts persuade the
wicked and mercenary Prophet Balaam to curse whom God had not cursed; but, in
spite of his teeth, he was glad to say, How can I desie, whom the Lord has
not defied? Yet he loved Cursing and Mischief in his heart and accordingly gave
King Balak most wicked counsel, which ended in mischievous Events on all sides.

No Judge, that has any thing of a Man in him, can pass Sentence of Death upon
a Malefactor, (that deserves it) without some yernings of the Bowels of Humane
Compassion to Humane Kind.

And shall a keen-spiritual Judge make no more of it, than to be yare and
brisk, and ready pressed and bent to anathematize, excommunicate, silence,
suspend and curse to eternal death, the Souls of poor Christians for every
Trifle, to the Pit of Hell, and his Body to the Jayl: Is this Christianity? Is
this Religion? Learnt we this of our Savior? God forbid. God forbid, that
Protestant-Bishops should be like the Bishops Lather speaks of (for this cause)
To. 2. p. 310. Adversus falsum nominatum ordinem Episcop. Perinde, etc. It is
with these wicked Bishops all one, as if the Devil himself should sit Mitred in
the Chair, and Rule the People.

The Introduction.
SOME that have thought my Pen already too sharp and smart (those especially
that have been galled, (sore men where the skin's off) and have (therefore)
long lay'n at catch for somewhat whereby they might accuse me) will now (good
men!) upon the reading of this Title Page, Hug themselves for joy to see me
again treat (at this time of day too) upon such touchy Subjects and Discourse,
that a man had need have the dexterity to split a hair, that shall handle them
pertinently, usefully, and yet safely and warily.

Besides, a Coxcomb knows not how to write of such deep and high, dark and
mysterious points of Divinity, Law and Policy; and none but a Coxcomb (say
others) will speak Truth in this lying, coging, fawning, dissembling,
perfidious and treacherous Age.

So that if I discuss these Arguments never so well and warily, yet if I speak
out, plain and home (there is Piety in it indeed, but) where is the Wisdom and the
Policy of it? says Sir Politic Would-be.

And, therefore, as for the Naked-Tiuth-men, tear them, rend them, fleece them,
shear them, hire Thompson and the Be-Jesuited Heraclitus to Libel them, belly
and slander them all the Kingdom over, hire some Welsh-Taffee, of a
Hackney-Tongue and Prostituted Conscience, with broad staring eyes brim-full of
Pride, Self-conceit and Fury, in all Companies, on all Occasions to bespatter
them, Trepan them, Teague them, Taffee them, and Man-catch them; nay, (if they
cannot be Godfreydiz'd nor Arnoldiz'd, yet) if you can hang them out of the
way, What should they do living here? Make an Example of such fellows as have
so little wit as to speak plain Truths in an Age of Hypocrisy. Did you never
see a Crow or Magottepye sit pecking, and cawing, crowing and chattering upon
an Asses back, or a Swines back? Why? these tame creatures are born for
affronts: However, if they be rich, use all Arts and Stratagems (imaginable) to
beggar them, that, Truth (if it will live and walk) may yet walk only the
length of a Jayl, and in a Threadbare-Coat.

Which puts me in mind of that Jeering, Leering old Doggerel Rhithmer that said
(of old) Curia Romana non captat ovem sine lana.
The Roman-Wolf is no such fool
To worry Sheep that have no Wool.


Some have (anciently) rendered it in English thus: The Court of Rome does
think it brave
To Man-catch such as Money have.


If any man think my style too Jocular and Airy for the gravity of a Divine,
and so grave a Subject; let such busy Censurers use their own Lumpish Dumpish
grave way, and lull themselves and their Readers asleep, and so get applause
beyond the fame of Opium: whilst this facetious (I was going to say this
Erasmus his) way of writing, catches the Reader gently, and insensibly, making
him a Captive Volunteer, and (once entered) he knows not how to desist, though
called away by business, hunger or sleep. What has any man to do with my way of
writing? I do as little care (as I have little cause to hope) for a Plaudite:
let Fame-catchers mind their stops, their cadences and their periods, I hate
Affectation as much as I do Hypocrisy or the Vulgar: I Will follow my own humor,
my Genius and Inclination, that which is most natural, is most to the life; and
I had rather please my self than any man alive; let Knaves and Slaves, and
Pimps and Sycophants cringe and skrew their faces after the fashion, the French
mode, or after the fashion of others, and Pimp for Preferment, I need none; I
am a plain free Englishman that love my Country, and my Countries welfare,
beyond their applause (I had almost said) or mine own repose, and so (God
willing) I Will live and die. Yet not to vapor too much of my Public Spirit, I
must confess ( the Naked Truth on it) what if the publick-weal be gratified by
any thing here writ, not I (but the men of Doctors-Commons) merit the thanks.

For I am (by my temper, complexion, choice and inclination) of a retired
Genius, I hate the crowd, a noise, a stage, or to be pointed at, or to appear
in public (but especially) in Print: though (thank my fate) it falls out
otherwise of late, and contrary to my beloved obscurity.

Yet this I can truly say (in my just Apology) that I never appeared in Print
of late years, but as I was hall'd, hurried and irritated by men that never yet
meddled with me but to their hurt.

But malice (like Murder and Gunpowder) will break out; (as it did on this
occasion) which forced me in my own defense thus to take the length of their
Sword, (I mean) their weapon, their only and nonesuch weapon, Excommunication.

Which might have slept (for me) in the peaceful Scabbard, but that four or
five Lay Elders, four Lay-Doctors of the Canon Law, and a Lay-Register, drew it
upon me (a Divine) the last week; Bless me! (thought I) here is courage with a
witness, for Laymen to attack a Spiritual person, and at his own
Spiritual-weapon too (Excommunication.)

And all this Delivery to Satan without the least fair Warning to bid me stand
to my Arms, shift for my self, and stand upon my Guard against the foul Fiend.

The best on it was, I was not so soon Thunderstrook with Excommunication for a
Nonne-no, but I was sooner Absolved, namely, within half an hour (and less)
after I first heard of it, but not without delivering my Purse; for the
delivering to Satan by Excommunication, together with the delivery from Satan
by Absolution in Doctors-Commons, cost me a Guiney (not to dissemble the
matter) neither more nor less; I believe I shall love a Guiney for this trick
(if it be but for this virtue inherent in it) the better as long as I live.

Old Poets tell a Tale of Charon the Ferry-man of Hell, that wafts men thither
over the dismal River Styx, but he makes them pay Ferriage, a Naubum, in Scotch
money Sex pennies, or a Baubee, in English two farthings for freight; but what
they paid for being Sculler'd back again, is not in the Book of Rates, (I
suppose) because it is needless, for Charon's- boat is always empty of
Passengers back again. They tell a tale of no man that ever returned from Hell,
except one Bag-piper, called Orpheus: and all may be but Fiction.

But I tell you a real Truth, and that every man knows to be true, the Trade is
current and settled long ago (first) by the Pope betwixt himself and the Devil,
and a brisk Trade (there has been) between the Devil and him, though of late
somewhat decayed; and the price of Souls to the Devil, and Hell and back again,
is much lowered of late days (though three hundred times better, and more
advanced than what it was in Charon's time; for the Pope (I say really and
truly without a Fiction, I know it to my cost to be true) made himself the real
Ferry-man of Hell, and though he did not carry Souls thither always himself, as
did his Predecessor Charon, yet he sent them thither by his Emissaries, for
nothing; but never suffered any man to be delivered from Satan, or absolved,
but he made him then pay for his Journey thither by Excommunication, before
ever he would suffer them to return by Absolution: and as bad as trading goes
(for the Naked-Truth has almost quite spoiled it; yet) it is to this day
absolutely the (best Trade) (I was going to say, (but that is a lie) but it is
still the) most gainful Trade in Europe; for you run no hazard, but of the
first waftage to Satan, and even then also, if ever they be suffered to return,
they pay sauce, they pay for all at last; besides, a man runs no great hazard
in stock, for a small stock will set a man up, a little Wax and Paper, and Pen
and Ink, (except the place might cost somewhat at the entrance and admittance
for a Garsome or Fine, but however) the Trade begins to brisk up again, and
sometimes they shall make you, of one particular Soul, (especially if it be a
Churchwarden's Soul) ten or twenty waftages; and for every waftage seven or
eight pound, if it be a weighty and rich Soul, and long upon the Road or
Voyage, for they go both by Land and Water; and of a poor Soul, and quick
passage, perhaps not above ten Groats, (or such a matter (I am sure) I am
within a shilling under or over, if it be a poor Churchwardens Soul) and
sometimes thirteen shillings and four pence, and sometimes (I may well say) a
Guiney.

Well! it is no laughing matter, (Gentlemen) Proximus ardet, it may be your own
turns in good time; there is no body has cause to laugh that I know but the
Pope, and such as he first constituted Sumners, Apparitor's, Surrogates, etc.
they indeed may well laugh, they win.

There are two Books of Naked-Truth (I ought to tell the Reader) the third
Part, and fourth Part, that are fathered upon me, but they are spurious, and
unlike me or my style; which is uniform (at worst) and some say so singular,
that I need not put my name thereunto, it is self-evident, I never writ more
Naked-Truths than This, and the Second Part of Naked-Truth; and the Vindication
thereof against Fullwood.

Nor had I writ this but upon the said occasion, nor troubled my self or the
World with my Notions, if I had not been troubled in their Spiritual-Courts;
for I love my retiredness, having been cloyed with the Flourish and Grandeur of
the World before I chose to settle my self in an obscure and dormant Function,
in being a Priest: In which silence I had for ever (as my desire was) lain hid,
but Providence will have it otherwise.

Yet, after two or three experiments, I think men are mad, possessed or
bewitched, to trouble me, or trouble themselves with me, incessantly to
instigate and provoke a man that studies to be quiet; if the Devil did not owe
them a shame.

The Reader cannot reasonably expect that accuracy of method, or spruce style
in so hasty a Birth, Conceived and Digested long ago, but writ every word in
that Weeks stay I made at London in the throng of other businesses; and far
from my Study, my Notes and my Books.

But he that will please to read St. Augustine in his 16th Sermon upon Gods
Word in St. Matthew; and in his first Book of the Lord's Sermon on the Mount;
and Athanasius, Chrysostom and Theophylact, and they will find that my Comment
here, upon Matt. 18.17. is not Heterodox, nor Singular.

I have but one thing more to beg of the Courteous Reader, viz. his Pardon for
several escapes, lapses and tautologies, not to be avoided but by writing it
over again: But I have no leisure, and less disposition to give it a second
draught.

Let it go, rough as it runs, blunt and unhewn, it is natural, and mine own.

But neither I, nor the Reader, will repent our cost and pains if this do but
help to blunt that keen and fiery edg of Excommunication, that has set all
Societies in Christendom together by the ears, and has been the great (if not
only) bane of Charity, (the sole Test and Truth of any Religion.)

The two most Learned Pen's -- Sir Thomas Moor and Erasmus ( Contemporaries and
great Cronies together) are both my Warrant and Authority as well as President,
for this Jocular way of writing on a weighty subject; which is nauseous, if it
be ( affected and) not free and natural.

But if it be genuine, it is the most profitable way of writing upon a grave
subject, because pleasant.

For the most tough and sinewy Arguments are then most effectual, when made
pliable to the capacity, and finely fitted to the head; which the said two
great names ('it is rare, two in one Age) had got the knack of; nor were any of
their time more beloved by some, or more hated by others:

The former hated -- even to death. The latter to damnation, or rather
Excommunication by the Pope and Friars; and yet (for his great Learning,
pleasant and facetious way of Writing) Canonized by others for a Saint: so that
setting one against the other, ('it is fancied that) he is neither in Heaven nor
Hell, but betwixt both, in a Limbus of his own.

However, the Town of his Nativity, (Roterdam) (as the seven
Islands-Mediterranean contended for the Honor of being the Birthplace of
Homer) in eternal memory of his Immortal Name, have set up his Effigies in
Brass, in their chief Church, (as I am informed) styling him for their own
Honor, as well as his, Erasmus Roterdamus.

But no man ever (yet) writ so well (since the Christian World (was and is) so
divided into factions) as to get every bodies good word, no, not our blessed
Jesus himself; some said true of him, as Peter, Thou art Christ the Son of the
Living God; and others lied, and said, Thou art a Samaritan, and have a Devil.

And it will always be so with the best of men, some shall not love him so
well, but others shall hate him as much, either through their Native Virulency,
Malignity and ill Humor, or else in envy of his Fame, Learning, Parts or
Prosperity, will endeavor to blacken him, and do him mischief.

And these Delinquents (the Fools and the Knaves) are by far the major part of
the World, and therefore it is reputation enough (and to be sure the most
lasting, and the way to be everlasting) if men be but acceptable to the few
honest and wise; who shall eternize the memory, for fools bolts are not sooner
shot than vanished, and the envy of knaves expires and ceases, and is buried
with, and in the Grave of the Worthy.

Besides, Truth is always prevalent and strongest at long run, if it be not
smothered by an Inquisition, or a Jayl, (the Popish methods of old, but) uot
practicable now, people are generally unhoodwinkt. And yet I deny not but the
World (I mean) the vulgar, are not guided by Reason, Truth, or solid Judgment,
but by Interest, Fancy, Opinion and Superstition, yet they are glad (always at
long run) for their own sakes, to suffer the few wise men to Guide them and
Conduct them through the Labyrinths and Precipieces into which their follies
have ted them.

But I have chosen (at my own peril) thus publicly to scribble my thoughts,
the greatest Ring-worms are best cured with Ink.

Come on, Man-catcher, with both thine eyes, staring and wide-open, in hopes to
snatch and catch at somewhat (here) that may (if possible) be wire-drawn and
wrested, to make any thing here writ, to seem to Interfere with the Laws of God
or Man.

OF EXCOMMUNICATION; The Only and Nonesuch Weapon of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction.
CHAP. I.
THE Thunder of Excommunication (say some) is a sacred piece of Ordinance, (and
if duly let off) is the most Terrible and Dreadful of all Claps.

Not to mention the after-claps that attend the Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo.

Crimes against the Common Law, or Statute Law, as they are of a different
Nature, of different Consequence, and different Dimensions (greater or lesser)
have proportionably different Penalties and Punishments.

Some merit a pecuniary Fine, some the Stocks, some the Whipping-Post, some
Imprisonment only, and some are Mortal sins, and merit the Ax or the Gallows.

But any the least contempt against the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction (if it be
but for not paying a Groat or two, or any such like least Piccadillo) is
punished by the greatest and most dreadful scourge on this side, Hell; namely, a
Delivery to Satan by Excommunication: And he that is the greatest Debauchee,
Libertine, Atheist or Blasphemer, (though I never heard that ever any such was
in my time Excommunicated; neither at Rome nor elsewhere) yet he thereby incurs
no other Censure, nor with more dismal Consequences, then for the aforesaid
small Peccadillo's are inflicted, viz. Excommunication.

The Consideration whereof put me upon a five-fold Inquiry.

1. Inquiry, Whether Christ or his Apostles ever made such an Ordinance as
Excommunication? And whether like to that in use amongst us at this day? 2.
Inquiry, Secondly, If they did, who were the Administrators thereof? 3.
Inquiry, Thirdly, Against what Offenders and Offenses Excommunication was made
use of? 4. Inquiry, Fourthly, How Excommunication at this day does agree with
the Laws of God, and the Laws of the Land? 5. Inquiry, Fifthly, What good or
harm Excommunication has done in the World?
All these require the greatest scrutiny, care, diligence, caution and
dexterity, to discuss.

In which work, though there are many, very many of greater abilities, yet none
I hope shall handle it with greater modesty, and always with due Reverence, and
humility, and submission to the Laws, and my Superiors, whose pardon I humbly
beg, if in any thing that follows I happen to transgress my bounds, in any
error of my Judgment, there is no error of my Will I am sure.

Besides, I am in my proper sphere, in treating of a point of Divinity, my
proper Province and Function; And so necessary, expedient and seasonable in
these times, and in this Age, which is (God knows) so full of scandals and
offenses, and so many millions daily liable to this terrible stroke, if the
Laws as they now stand, be (as all Laws ought to be, whilst they continue Laws)
put in Execution.

For I am persuaded (and so must every man that has a grain of Charity) that
not one Dissenter of a thousand; is wilfully and maliciously so; no man (who is
out of Bedlam) will willingly throw himself down a Precipiece; no man desires
any thing that he judges evil, it is impossible; no, it is want of sight and
understanding that makes men stumble, hesitate and fall: They walk in the dark,
and that is the reason that Scandals and Offenses are so many and numerous, and
our Divisions so great, that nothing but Illumination can make men walk
steadily in the way, the Kings Highway.

Some may well imagine that a man of my little Talent and Endowments cannot
publicly hold forth a greater or better Light; or show the way clearer than
those many thousands of more improved Knowledge and Advantages: And that
therefore I do but actum agere, and labor in vain.

However, I Will show my good will and charity, whilst wiser heads sit still.

For what Charity can there be in us whilst (with dry eyes, and unconcerned) we
see so many stumble and fall in the dark, and none lend a light, or a helping
hand (if possible) to reduce men into the unity of the Spirit, and the bond of
Peace: Let greater Luminaries carry their greater Lights in Dark-Lanthorns, but
it is better to set it on a Candlestick, and publicly, that it may give light
to all the House.

If I do no other good, than hereby to incite others to clear this dark and
mysterious management of Excommunication, it will be some satisfaction;
however, I promise my self and the Reader that I shall not wittingly nor
willingly express any thing contrary to the Law of God, and the Established Law
of the Land.

CHAP. II.
THis being Premised, I will begin with the first Query.

Query 1. Whether Christ or his Apostles ever made such an Ordinance as
Excommunication? And whether like to that in use at this day?

I answer, First, None can imagine that our Blessed Savior, the Prince of
Peace, the Restorer of breaches, that was meekness and lowliness it self,
should give many eager or frequent commands to extirpate or dismember any of
his Body; for he came to seek and to save that which was lost.

And therefore we meet but with one place in all the Gospel that gives any
color to Excommunication; namely, Matt. 18.17, 18.

But our Savior (after all the caution imaginable of a mild and private
previous proceeding and dealing tenderly with a Brother, a Jew, (that
trespasseth against, thee) betwixt thee and him; (which if it took effect, the
cause was stopped, and all further proceedings, it went no further;) but when the
method of cure proved ineffectual, The next remedy was (not to put him into the
Court, or present him, but) to take with thee one or two more; to which, if the
Trespasser would hearken, (though he had neglected and refused at the first
private Conference, yet) there also all proceedings were stopped, and the matter
privately hushed up, to avoid scandal; and the Church or Spiritual-Court never
heard a word of it, except these Prescriptions of our Savior did not effect
the Cure.

And then, (and not till then) by any warrant from the Gospel, was any man to
be put into the Court, or Sanhedrim, or, the matter told to the Church, or made
a public business of.

But then if the Criminal neglected to hear the Church, What then? Does he
command the Church to deliver him to Satan? He only says -- Let him be unto
thee as an Heathen-man and a Publican.

Which words can have no other Grammatical Construction, but that thou should
look upon him as a man that regards not the precepts and admonitions of the
Jewish Sanhedrim, more than does a Heathen-man or a Publican, that never
pretended to be subject to them, nor Subject in the Kingdom of God, and
therefore thou may take thy course at Law with him, and bring a Clausum
Fregit, or Action of Trespass against him, before the Roman-Magistrates, in
their Courts of Judicatory, as you may against a Heathen-man, (that is, a
Gentile) or a Publican.

For the Publicans (though many of those Excise-men, Toll-gatherers, or
Custom-gatherers were Jews by Nation and Religion too, and some of them Jewish
Christians, yet they) were Herodians, (that is) true Conformists to the
Romanyoke and Government; and therefore odious to the Puritanical Eygots (the
Hypocritical Pharisees) that looked with scorn upon all Mankind (and as Dogs
despised and hated all) if they were not of their Religion, or rather foolish
Superstition.

The best Comment upon Holy-Scripture is its self, and the best Interpreter of
our Blessed Savior's sayings, are his own and his Apostles Words and Actions.

A like Saying to this (of Matt. 18.17.) we have in Luke 17.3, 4. where our
Savior says, If thy Brother trespass against thee, if he repent, forgive him;
(that is) if he pay the Trespass, and make thee satisfaction, and confess his
fault, and be sorry for it, and promise amendment, (for without these there is
no true Repentance) then forgive him seven times, and seventy seven times, even
as often as he shall sin against thee; and neither Court him, nor Sue him in
the Spiritual-Court, (before the Sanhedrim or High-Priests-Court) nor yet in
the Temporal Courts of the Gentiles, or Heathen-men and Publicans.

For our Blessed Savior does not say, Let him be to the Church as a
Heathen-man or a Publican, which the Pope to color the Authority and Jus
Divinum of his Excommunications (as he does that of Christ to Peter -- Thou art
Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church) does without any ground or
color (as politickly as sencelesly) Construe and Interpret.

But our Blessed Savior only says, Let him be to thee, (to thee, not to the
Church) as a Heathen-man or a Publican: (that is) thou may lawfully then Sue
thy Brother Jew at Law, as well as any Gentile, or Heathen-man, or Publican.

Nor did ever any solid Scholar or Divine (that was not prejudiced and
forestalled in his Judgment, which is usually the same with that of their
Mothers and Catechisers, for few men have wit enough to see and choose their own
way, and know why and wherefore,) following (like Horses in a Teame) with Nose
in Tail of their Predecessors, I say,) never an unbyass't man that ever I yet
met with, could prove Excommunication out of Matt. 18.17. But what may be
concluded from the next, Ver. 18. shall be examined by and by.

But Matt. 18.17. (to my understanding) sounds much like that of St. Paul, 1
Cor. 6.) 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Dare any of you, having a matter against another,
go to Law before the unjust, and not before the Saints? Do ye not know (that
the Saints shall judge the world? and if the world shall be judged by you, are
ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters?

Know ye not that we shall judge Angels? how much more things that pertain to
this life?

If then ye have judgment of things pertaining to this life, set them to judge
who are least esteemed in the Church, I speak this to your shame.

Is it so that there is not a wise man amongst you? no not one that shall be
able to judge between his brethren?

But brother goes to Law with Brother, and that before the unbelievers.

Now therefore there is utterly a fault amongst you, because you go to Law one
with another: Why do ye not rather suffer wrong? Why do ye not rather suffer
your selves to be defrauded?

So that when Jews or Christians happen to live in subjection under a Gentile,
or Heathen-Government, than that of our Savior, Matt. 18.17. and this of Saint
Paul, 1 Cor. 6. is a Rule for them to walk by, as to going to Law.

But if the Romans had not Conquered and given Laws to the Jews (as they did in
our Savior's time) and also if Christians do not live under a
Heathen-Government, then Matt. 18.17. and 1 Cor. 6. has no place, nor is there
any occasion for those Rules, but they are Rules only in such cases; nor is it
heard of in an Age (I know it, that have lived amongst the Jews) that the Jews
go to Law one with another before the Christians, or put them into a
Court-Christian, or Court-Mahometan.

But in a Kingdom or Country where the chief Magistrates are Christians or
Jews, there is no place nor occasion for this Rule; namely, Let him be unto
thee as an Heathen-man or a Publican: And therefore this Text is nothing to
prove, or color Excommunication at this day, nor ever was in our Savior's
time; it is nothing to the purpose, but a foolish Popish groundless Comment.

But as this Comment arose from Popish Politics and Prelatical Usurpation, so
it was grounded, and is yet countenanced, by and from a vulgar error;

Namely, That the Synagogue or Sanhedrim amongst the Jews, was only a
Spiritual-Court, or Kirk-Administration; and that all the weapons they had, was
putting out of the Synagogue, or debarring and excluding from the Sacraments,
Ordinances, Divine-Service, and all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical-Communion: And
not one of a thousand at this day but so accept it.

Whereas in truth, the Sanhedrim, Kirk, or Synagogue, was no more a Spiritual
Ecclesiastical Court, than those amongst us in Westminster Hall, or at the
Assizes: For the Sanhedrim or Synagogue acted by a standing Commission of Oyer
and Terminer; there was not amongst the Jews (especially in our Saviors time,
when he spoke those words, Matt. 18.17.) two distinct Jurisdictions,
Ecclesiastical and Temporal, one for the Soul, another for the Body: (for such
differen Courts are apt to clash, and keep a quarrelling, or ado, with
Prohibitions, Consultations, and I know not what.)

But the Lord-Chief-Justice was also High Priest and Chief Magistrate: and all
the Inferior Courts had Jurisdiction over all Persons, and in all Causes
Ecclesiastical and Temporal, called the Sanhedrim, (the great, the less) and
sometimes, and usually, the Synagogue.

Which Synagogue, I say, was carried on by Commission of Oyer and Terminer, and
never Excommunicated any man; that is, never debarred any man Synagogue, Church
and never shut any man out of the Church or Temple if he was a Jew, though
never so profane.

But the Kirk or Synagoghe, Church or Judges, or Justices of Peace, Magistrates
(call them what you will, for they) were one and the same men, as they are at
this day in Turk^, Persia, and the greatest part of the well-governed World, as
well as in the Theocratye of the Jews, the Government of Gods own making.

Moses was Lord-Chief-Justice and Priest too, and Consecrated and Ordained
Aaron and his Son; Moses Promulgated Canons and Constitutions (not only
temporal, but) Ecclesiastical.

Joshua (nor Eleazar) was commanded by God to look to and take care that the
Israelites should be Circumcised the second time; neither was he to except any
amongst them, or debar them from the Ordinance, although the most wicked and
debaucht; (except happily they were Circumcised before upon another score, then
indeed I do not know how they should be Circumcised again.)

And God commanded Joshua (not Eleazar) to Celebrate the Sacrament or
Passover, as soon as they had got over Jordan; nor from that Sacrament was the
most vicious debarred, that ever we read of: the greatest Sinner sure had most
need of it, for the whole have no need of Physic, but them that are sick. Ely
was Lord-Chief-Justice and Chief-Priest too, and so was Samuel.

King David also was the Prophet David; 1 Chronicles. 23.5, 6. 1 Chronicles. 24.3.
and King Solomon the Wise, was Ecclesiastes or the Preacher, and both of them
ordered the House of God, and how matters should be carried on there; and
placed and displaced the Priests, and set them their Lessons, and told them
their business and their errand: and when Solomon's Temple was Built, he
Consecrated it himself, 2 Chronicles. 6.

Indeed good King Jehosaphat made a Council of State, or Sanhedrim or
Synagogue, of a mixed Company, part per pale, Priests among the Lords, Judges;
a compound of Clergy and Lay Elders, for the Judgment of the Lord, and for
Controversies, 2 Chronicles. 19.8, 9, 10, 11*
and all Causes that should come before them between Man and Man, City and
City, Blood and Blood, according to the Law and Commandment, Statutes and
Judgment: But afterward the Chief-Priest got the superintendency, and was the
chief Magistrate.

But our Blessed Savior did not like that Spiritual Men should dirty
themselves with the World, and Worldly matters; and therefore refused to be a
Judge, (when the Preferment was proferr'd him) in Civil-matters, and charges his
Disciples that they likewise should not exercise Dominion nor Lordship, as the
Princes of the Gentiles, Luke 22.25, 26. And St. Peter reads the Bishops or
Presbyters (for a Bishop was a Presbyter in those days) just such another
Lecture, 1 Pet. 5. But who minds what he or our Blessed Savior (either) do say
in the Case?

And yet we all pretend to be Christians.

Certainly that Constitution and Frame of Government that comes nearest to the
Platform (and is most agreeable and suiting with the Laws of God and is the
best Form, and Frame of Government.

Keep therefore and do them (says God by Moses, Deuteronomy. 4.6, 7, 8.) For this is
your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the nations, which shall
hear all these Statutes, and say, Surely this great nation is a wise and
understanding people.

For what nation is there so great, who has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord
our God is in all things that we call upon him for?

And what nation is there so great, that has statutes and judgments so
righteous; as all this Law which I set before you this day.

And in all that Law, (I will maintain it against the World) we do not read
that any man living was for wickedness deprived of the benefit of the means of
Grace, of the comfort and help of the Sacraments, Words, Sacrifices, or shut
out and excluded the Church or Temple.

Indeed the Leper, and the Unclean, etc. were debarred from the Crowd and
Assembly (for fear of Infection in that hot Country) but no man's wickedness,
or ill life and conversation, or misdemeanor, or contempt, or scandalous
behavior was punished by depriving him of the Word, or Sacraments, or means of
Grace (that we read of) in the whole Scriptures, either Old or New Testament.

And if it be not found in Holy-Writ, you may easily know whose invention it
was.

For the truth is, Covetousness invented it and Pride together; the Pope
invented it, and being greedy and rapacious with his Legions of Lordly Priests
and Cardinals that topt the whole World: and Money being a kind of necessary
Utensil in the Grandieur of Courts, as well as the sinew of War, and crocking
himself in vain by smutty Chemistry to find the Philosophers-stone, he turned
his Keys (of Heaven and Hell) into it, and made a Philosophers-stone of them,
and made them turn every thing (they touched) to Gold.

Has any man a mind to go to Heaven? you must ask the Porter leave, he keeps
the Keys (he says) of Heaven-gates, Come -- enter in, but first pay the Porter
leave your Purse behind you, you will need no money there; therefore -- Deliver
your Purse.

Our Blessed Savior (indeed) does say to Peter, Behold, I give unto thee the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth, shall
be bound in Heaven, and whosoever thou shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in
Heaven.

But what is all that to the Pope more than other Presbyters? For Christ gives
the same Commission to all the Disciples (after he had first breathed upon them
the Holy Ghost.) Joh. 20.22, 23. Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted
unto them, and whose soever sins ye retain they are retained.

And when the Pope or any other Popelings, or any other sort of people are
Successors to these gifts of the Holy Ghost, or that Christ would vouchsafe to
breathe upon them, or send down the Holy Ghost upon them, as he did upon the
Disciples, then (and not till then) has any Mortal man power upon Earth to
forgive sins.

For who can forgive sins but God only? said the Pharisees truly; but they
applied it wrongfully, through their ignorance of the Divinity of our Blessed
Savior, which he endeavored to Discover unto them, by (that saying to the
Cripple) Thy sins be forgiven thee; but they were blind and could not see.

Can any man in his wits imagine that God should give such power unto men (the
wickedest and vilest of men) to forgive sins?

Can any man be a good man, or indeed any thing in Religion, (in true Christian
Religion) without true Charity? 1 Cor. 13.
it is impossible, be his other qualifications and endowments never so great: be
he Pope, or Bishop, or Priest, or what he will.

And yet the Pope makes the silly Papists believe that he can fetch Souls (not
only out of Purgatory) but also make All Souls (in Hell) All Saints in Heaven,
and leave the Devils alone, if he list.

Can he so? the more uncharitable Devil he (then) by his own showing.

Had that wicked Levite a grain of Charity, that seeing a poor distressed man
miserably wounded, and that fell among Thieves, and turned his face (hard
heart) and looked another way, and went on the other side of the way, for fear
he should reach a helping-hand; give me the Samaritane for all such Levites.

Much less can the Pope have a grain of Charity, or (therefore) any goodness
(indeed) or Religion, or any Christianity, when he can (if he do not lie)
redeem all the damned out of Hell, now roaring in torments, and will not; and
all the Souls out of Purgatory (and the fire of Purgatory (the Papists hold) is
hotter than Nebuchadnezzar's fiery Furnace, but I cannot tell, nor I hope never
shall know:) and yet groaning and frying as they lie there, the Pope
(hard-hearted wretch!) can deliver them, but not a Soul of them, except they,
or somebody for them, down with their dust, and ready Darby; they will not
trust for a twelve-penny piece, (which is the price of a Mass (it seems) now a
days, but when I was in Spain and Portugal, they were cheaper, one might have
had two for a shilling, and thank you too; nay, an Irish-Fryar, a Teague
Benedicite would make you twenty Legs too into the bargain, with Abou, bou,
bou; by Chrees and by St. Patrick; Fait and Trot, by my Shoule, Joy.

Never did such a silly cheat reign so long before in the whole World, but it
was only because they kept the people in ignorance; and if any man durst offer
to enlighten them, and speak the Naked-Truth, the Pope, and his Inquisition and
Emissaries were as spightful, cruel and devillishly bloody as any are now
amongst us at this day against the Naked-Truth.

They are vildly loath to lose their domineering, insulting Kingdom of Darkness,
and are as mad as Bethlehem, if men will not be Asses and tame Beasts, and
suffer themselves (as of old) to be caw'd, crow'd over, and Priest-ridden.

It Is said of the Germans, That (just before) God had raised up Luther to awake
them and rowze them, they were grown so fottish and be-jaded (having so long
been Priest-ridden) that their Priests might almost have persuaded them (not
only to lie down and let the Priest whip them) or, (which is as bad or worse)
make them whip themselves (both of them daily Penances at this day in
Popish-Countries) but also they might easily have been persuaded (poor Asses!)
to eat Grass.

Surely English men are not so dull and tame to be Hen-peckt? or to be rid and
bestrid at such a rate, I hope: I confess, I have not the patience to endure it.

But though the Pope says Christ gave Peter (that is himself (he says) though
his name be Pius, Sergius, Innocent or Alexander) the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven; be it so, we will not now quarrel about it: yet, how the Devil and he
should be so kind, that the Devil should trust him or prefer him to a Porters
place in the Kingdom of Hell, I cannot imagine; I am sure there is no Scripture
for it.

Nor any reason, or any thing else in the case, but the Money-case.

I think, I have sufficiently evidenc't that in Matt. 18.17. there is nothing
like it; nor from (or in imitation of) the Jewish-Church, and Gods Platform of
his own making, neither God nor Christ, in the Old nor New Testament ever gave
Authority, Power or Command to any man, High Priest or Low-Priest, or any
Assembly of men, Clergy or Lay Elders to turn men out of the Church, and shut
and lock them out from Divine Ordinances (the comfort as well as cure of
Sinners) much less did ever prostitute such Sacred Mysteries to sale, and make
a Money-matter or a Money-business of it; this was the inyention of Pluto, the
Money-God, or Money-Merchant; or his Factors, the Popelings.

Nevertheless, though I assert this, yet I do not deny but the King and
Parliament may empower Bishops or who they please, to Excommunicate, but, I
say, I see no Scripture for Excommunication.

Indeed in our Saviors time the (...)and (...), the Sanhedrim or Synagogue, or
Courts of Justice were Jewish-Justice, but put into Commission by the Roman
Governor; the High Priest was a Jew, but ordained by the Emperor or Roman
Governor, nor durst not call a Court or Sanhedrim, but by permission of the
Romans.

Archelaus the Son of Herod was by his Father constituted and appointed (in his
lust Will and Testament) King after his Fathers Death, but he durst not own the
Name of King, till Caesar confirmed him.

Nor durst the High Priest act (till confirmed by the Roman-Governour,) in any
great affair; as Josephus relates in his 20th Book of Antiquities; and he was
in a grievous quandary for procuring the Death of James (the Just) the Brother
of our Lord, during the interregnum after Festus his Death, and before Abbinas
his Successor was arrived in Judaea in his Government.

But I say the Romans usually granted the Conquered Jews to use their own Laws,
and to be governed by their own High Priest and Countrymen, and Sanhedrim, but
always under favor and under correction still of the Romans.

This Sanhedrim or a Synagogue (then) was the same (in Christ's time) as
appointed in the Law of Moses; namely, the High-Court of Justice, and the
Lower-Courts of Justice, and all the Magistracy they ever had.

But our Blessed Savior he never changed the Government that was enacted and
established by Moses's Law, nor suffered his Disciples to innovate any thing in
the Civil-Government, or (which is all one) Spiritual-Government, Sanhedrim, or
Synagogue.

Which if our Savior had ever spoke against, no doubt but his Adversaries that
lay at catch would have accused him of it, and laid it to his charge, when they
so thirsted after his Blood.

Of this Court of Jewish-Magistracy our Savior speaks, when he says (in Matt.
18.17.) tell it to the Church, or Synagoge, or Sanhedrim.

Which, I say, was not a mere Spiritual Court, no, no, it was no Bawdy-Court,
but a Court of Justice, for Trying Causes, whipping men, beating them, stoning
them to Death.

In this Court St. Peter and St. John were threatened, and St. Stephen stoned,
Acts 7. And the same Court had stoned Peter and John too, but that they durst
not for fear of the people that were so taken with them, for that a notable
Miracle had been done by them in curing a Cripple that was born Lame from his
Mothers Womb, Acts 3. and this was such an evident demonstration of the hand of
God going along with them, and done so publicly, and only with a word in the
powerful Name of Jesus, that the people could not but admire it and applaud it.

Whereupon they were put to a notable plunge, and when they had laid their
Heads together, Acts 4.15. They were at their Wits end, and knew not what to
do, Acts 4.16. For on the one hand they resolved to do all the mischief they
could or durst; and on the other hand they had no other color for doing
mischief to the Apostles, but only that they had done good and cured a poor
Cripple, and that would bear no color for their intended cruelty against them;
What shall they do? What shall they do?

They were mischievously bent, and were resolved to do as much mischief as in
them lay; but that that perplexed them, and put them to this sad perplexity, the
people, the people could not be gulled with any colorable mist to blind their
eyes, and make them believe they punished the Apostles for Treason, or Sedition
or Heresy; therefore the Text says, Act. 4.21. Finding (they sought but they
could find) nothing how they might punish them (the Apostles) why could they
find nothing? it is answered in that Text -- Because of the people; for all men
glorified God for that which was done.

Ay, ay, that is the right and only way of return to God for manifestation of
any Naked-Truth by his Servants, to glorify his Name for the same.

And why should not the Sanhedrim have glorified God for the same, as well as
the people? Had not they Souls to save as well as the people? What was this
Sanhedrim or High-Court of Justice made up of? Who were the Members of this
Council?

It is answered, Acts 4.1. The Priests (Ay, Ay, I should have wondered else, at
a piece of mischief, if I had not found the Jewish-Priests there in the first
place, next) the Captain of the Temple, and the Sadduces.

A fine medley; of Priests, Soldiers, and Atheists; for so were the Sadduces:
the Jewish-Church was like to be well governed; nor do I wonder they went
about, in the next Verse, Acts 4.2. to suspend the Apostles ab officio, or
silence them from Preaching, being grieved (good hearts!) that they taught the
People: -- Whereupon they put them in Jayl for that Night, (designing to get
all or a greater number of their Council together (upon so good an occasion
too) And then appears a great Motley crew, made up of Rulers, and Elders, and
Scribes, and Annas the High Priest, and Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander, and
all the Highpriests Nephews, Cousins and Cousin-Germans.

This is only to show you what the Church was that our Savior speaks of, Matt.
18.17. Tell it to the Church, is as much as to say in England, -- Complain in
Westminster Hall, Sessions, or Assizes.

For want of the knowledge whereof, Excommunication has been counted a sacred
Ordinance, and every little gathered Church (as well as the great) took upon
them the Government, and thought themselves somebody, and would have power
over their own Members; to interdict, deprive, cut off, etc. and woeful work
they made with it; Johnson and others that fled to Holland, and had a
gathered-Church, and cut of, and cut off Heretics, and wrong Believers, till
he left himself alone, or but with one, that just jumpt with him in all things.

And indeed (as in the Mathematics) when a crooked Line deviates from a
straight Line, the further it reaches in length, still the greater distance and
more irreconcilable: so here this Text of Matt. 18 17. being mistaken and
wrong construed, the longer the error lasts, the greater mischief and the
harder to be reconciled.

For this Interpretation has leavened not only Diocesan, Synodical, but
Presbyterian, Independent, and Congregational-Churches, till they have fought
one another with this Spiritual-Weapon most Bloodily, and they knew not
wherefore; they are mistaken in the words of their Commission, Father forgive
them, they know not what they do.

I deny not but that a Bigot, Papist, Protestant, Presbyterian, or any other
Sect (that believes the Church has this power, at this day, to bind and loose,
and knows no better than the old Traditional-Interpretation of these words --
Tell the Church) have, and may still (if they please) be frighted out of their
little Wit with the thunder of Excommunication; thinking it Jure Divino, and
that the Thunder comes from Heaven.

But I doubt not, but to prove how far it is a mere earthly Cracker, and a
Bugbear, and frights none but Women and Fools; were it not for the Writ -- de
Excommunicato capiendo -- that follows in the Rear of it.

I know well how the Emperor Theodosius the younger was frighted out of his
little Wit, because a silly Monk had Excommunicated him, and could not eat*
drink, nor sleep till he absolved him; there has and will be Bigoted Fools and
Coxcombs to the Worlds end.

Nay, men that are in all other things wise, yet if they once be possessed with
the Spirit of Bigottism and Superstition, and be Priest-ridden, not minding
what the Holy Scriptures say, but what comments the Priests (for their own
lucre, and to uphold their Prelatical Hierarchy Dominion and Usurpation) put
upon it, are easily Bugbear'd with this cracker of Excommunication: as was that
bravest of Men and Warriors, the Emperor Theodosius the Elder, Excommunicated
by Ambrose, the greater sinner of the two.

Not but that the Emperor might be in fault, in some fault, (as what great
Warrior and Conqueror (as he was) can possibly be innocent, and have hands
clean from any stain of Blood,) but whether he was in fault or no, is not easy
to determine; read the Story in Nicephorus, and though the Emperor did command
the Soldiers to humble the City (that were certainly Traitors, and were Guilty
laesae Majestatis, in abusing most shamefully the Statues and Picture of his
dear Wife and Empress, and possibly the Soldiers might (they are apt enough,
to) exceed their Commission when there is good plunder in the case. But the
poor Emperor must pay for all, and smart for all.

For indeed he was not Emperor (but a Bigot) I mean, he did not know his own
Strength, Power and Authority, but suffered himself to be nuzzled by Ambrose,
that formerly had been a Captain, and now was made Bishop of the same Town
(Milan) that he had formerly been Governor of; but he forgot not his stout
heart, though he had put on his Canonical-Weeds: read but the Story, it is too
long here to insert, but, you will then (with me) pity the poor Bigot Emperor,
got into ill-handling, and under the clutches of a Priest that well knew the
Ascendant he had over him.

For even in these days a Bishopric begun to be a stately business, and not
only a good (but a great) thing, and had been so (of 100 years standing;)
namely, ever since the good Emperor Constantine had been so wonderfully
Enamored of them Bishops, and therefore he made them rich; and riches are apt
to make men proud; and pride is apt to make men fall: And there is an end on it.

But if the Sanhedrim or Synagogue had been a Spiritual-Court only (as men make
it that thus Construe -- Tell the Church) then certainly it was a Bloody Court
as well as a Bawdy Court; for St. Paul confesses that he had a Commission from
thence to Imprison men, and put them to Death, which surely was Law; or else
King Agrippa, and Festus the Roman-Governour would have chastised him for it,
when he confessed, Acts 26.10. that -- many of the Holy men he shut up in Prison,
having received Authority from the Chief-Priests (mark that) and when they were
put to Death, he gave his Vote for it; and punished them often in every Synagogue,
or Church; so that I say, Tell it to the Church, or Synagogue; (is) Complain to
the Justice, and no more.

And it is strange indeed that Christ should in those Words of Matt. 18.17. set
up a new Jurisdiction in the World, and the Apostles (who at that time knew
nothing of nulling any of the Law of Moses, or that Christ should die, and yet)
should make no exception to it, or question to have it more explained, if it
were to be a standing Sacred Ordinance to vouch Excommunication to the Worlds
end.

And as strange that none of the Evangelist, (but St. Matthew only) should make
any mention of it; only St. Luke 17.3. makes some little hint of forgiving our
Brother, but not a word of putting him into Court, or presenting him.

If we can but as well get over the 18th Verse, I fear Excommunication will
tremble and shake for fear of being Excommunicated its-self.

Matt. 18.18. Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth, shall
be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed in
Heaven.

And (to put in all the other Texts together, that the Bonarges's or Sons of
Thunder do muster up to maintain their Thunderbolts of Excommunication,) we
read, Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever
sins ye retain, they are retained, Joh 20.23.

So also, 1 Cor. 5. There Is an Order sent out for Excommunication, thereby
Decreeing the Incestuous Person to be Excommunicated. And, 1 Timothy 1.20. St.
Paul says he delivered Hymaeneus and Alexander unto Satan, to teach them better
things than to Blaspheme.

Also a Heretic after the first or second admonition reject: And for contempt,
2 These. 3.14. If any man obey not our word by this Epistle; note that man, and
have no company with him, that he may be ashamed.

Then, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5, 6, For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but
mighty through God for the pulling down of strongholds.

Casting down imaginations and every high thing that exalts it self against
the knowledge, of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ.

And having in a readiness to revenge (mark that) all disobedience when your
obedience is fulfilled. Which last Clause, I confess, I do not understand.

Then there is that of, With such an one, no, not to eat.

These are the chief, if not the only places, pretended to vouch the
Excommunication.

But as idle and far from the purpose as if we should alledg, Mark 16.17, 18.
to prove our selves Believers; namely, He that believes shall not be damned:
And these signs shall follow them that believe, In my name shall they cast out
Devils (hence comes the Popish Holy-Order called Exorcists, or Conjurers) They
shall speak with new Tongues.

Hence came the Opinion of the necessity of University-Learning, and to be a
Linguist before you are capable of being in Orders (or to be a Teacher or
Preacher.) They shall take up Serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing it
shall not hurt them; (but (here) in this the Popish Mimickry and
Mountebank-Tricks, in endeavoring to imitate the Holy Ghost, wanted courage
and faith to play tricks, and try conclusions:) They shall lay hands on the
sick and they shall recover (there is no danger in trying that experiment) but
because the Priest palming the poor sick man did not restore him to life, they
would palm him indeed (in their Holy Unction) and Anoint him with Oil in the
name of the Lord, but being fruitless, they say, it is not for life, but death,
not to cure, but kill, and they never anoint them but when the Physicians have
given them over and past Recovery: whereas the Apostles laying hands was for
their Recovery.

But now in Popish Countries (I know it) if once the Physicians have given a
sick man over, the Clergy have him then; and though nature (as many times)
shakes off and Conquers the Disease, yet they will not suffer the sick man to
take either Food on Physic, till they be paid for the Burial, and Funeral
charges, and his Legacies to Monasteries, Friars, Nuns, etc. made good in his
lifetime, and paid (live or die:) a most Barbarous, Inhumane and Devillsh
Religion, as ever any Prince could be converted unto, that did not also hope to
go snips with them in their Arbitrary-Tyranny, Cruelty, Oppression, and Bloody
mindedness.

But I say those Texts to Legitimate Excommunication, (that has so vexed and
perplexed, and ruined the Peace of Christendom, and all Christian-Societies, and
humanity it self, (the true Lycanthropye, that has turned men to Wolves, to
worry one another) is no more to the purpose to vouch Excommunication now a
days, because the Apostles could bind and loose, deliver to (and free from)
Satan, (no more I say) than that in Mark 16.16, 17, 18. can be brought to prove
that we are all Infidels, and shall be damned.

For immediately after he says, He that believes not shall be damned, he adds
marks and signs to know who shall be damned, or who does, and who does not
believe; namely, They shall cast out Devils, etc.

But hence comes the mischief in the Christian-Church, men will take upon them
to be Doctors, (and I know not what) Interpreters of Scriptures, but they never
mind the context, or if they do, they imbibe their Principles from their
Mother, or School-Dame, or Paedagogue, or Tutor. Hence, men of equal Parts and
Pregnancy live and dye Papists or Protestants. Wherefore? their Nurse, and
Paedagogue, and Education were such; (a fine account!) and yet every man knows
it is true: And they are no fools neither, in Trade, in Law, in Human-Learning
-- equally excellent, but Imbibed Superstitions few men have reason and
strength to shake off, as Sampson did his Cords and Wyths;

But every man is not a Sampson, the same would have hampered an ordinary man,
and made him a foolish prey to the Philistines, the Bloody Philistines, and
nuzled to it by a Female or a Wench, (a Dalilah.)

CHAP. III.
THus concerning Excommunication have men good men, Pious men, Learned men,
slavishly tied themselves (as I said before) like Horses in a Team, to follow
those that have gone before them, (their Predecessors) right or wrong;
especially if the Leaders be Jolly and Fat, Brisk, and well Accoutred, and
reputed in the World, that seldom judges right of Truth, but only through the
false spectacles of Interest and Education: so that they do not so much employ
their Learning and Wit to confirm Truth, but the Opinions that best fits their
Preferment, or best pleases their Genius, (namely) as Imbibed and Tinctured by
Education.

Otherwise it is impossible but men should know the fallacy of the consequence,
that what the Apostles could, did, or had order to do; therefore we may or must
do it: What nonsense is this?

Peter trod Water, (at Christ's bidding) and yet never a Priest in England dare
venture to follow him or imitate him, except he can swim; nor pretend (herein)
to be his Successor Apostolical.

Peter killed Ananias and Saphira with a word; there is never a Priest in the
World (I do not say will, but) can imitate him; if he could, he should not then
need to have employed the Magistrate in his drudgery -- to Burn Heretics, and
Jayl those that the Priests Excommunicate; (a mighty Honorable Employment) and
the Magistrate is mightily beholden to the Clergy for the Office, mean while
(But this by Parenthesis.)

Peter's shadow passing by, cured the sick; they that pretend to his
Apostolical Successors, and Apostolical men, never cured any man:

Peter with one Sermon Converted 3000 Souls: The Apostolical pretenders Preach
not one farthing better (many much less, I do not say much worse) than when
they were poor Priests.

Peter set ope' the Prison-Doors and made a Jail-delivery: But some the Goals
would fill, if they might have their Will.

Peter said indeed -- Silver and gold have I none -- And these indeed scarce
know when (nor think) they have enough.

In short, as I said once before, I protest, I do not know wherein St. Peter's
(pretended) Successor, imitates Peter, but in denying his Master; I wish I
could see him on the stool of Repentance, and weep (as Peter did) weep
bitterly: Instead of making others weep, with their Inquisitions,
High-Commissions, and their Tricks and Shams, making the poor Widow and Orphans
weep and curse them; Apostolical men! Successors and Imitators of the Apostle!
For shame no more! With what Forehead? I hate the Impudence more than the
Hypocrisy.

Paul labored with his hands to get a Living: others labor to undo men and
their Families. Paul had a Viper on his hand, did him no hurt; others have
Vipers in their hearts, and do as much hurt and mischief as in them lies.

Paul raised Jairus's Daughter to life; these, breathe nothing, but Goals,
Pillories, Excommunication and Destruction:

Paul Excommunicated Swearers and Blasphemers; and some Popes (History says)
and Apostolical men would Blaspheme upon occasion, Curse and Swear like
Hectors: But what and wherefore, in nomine Domini, do these men pretend Right
to Excommunicate, because St. Paul did it, or the Primitive Church of Corinth?
(that had both St. Paul's special order for it, and his Spirit, and his
Sentence, 1 Cor. 5.3, 4.)

They had Gifts of the Holy Ghost (particularly that, without which no man was
so impudent to bind or loose, or pretend to the power of the Keys in the
Primitive times, that wanted it) namely, the Gift of Discerning of Spirits.

St. Paul could see through a man, into him, into his very heart; so could St.
Peter, and therefore did that, which is a sin in any of us to do, that have not
the gift of Discerning of Spirits.

Therefore St. Paul called the Conjurer Elymas, Enemy of all righteousness, and
Son of a -- Devil: and St. Peter, by his Spirit, perceived that Simon Magus was
in the gall of bitterness and the bond of iniquity.

The Pope and Popelings are ready enough at calling of Names, but clavis
errans, they Nickname men, and call him a Child of the Devil, that is more a
Child of God (a thousand times than themselves) and yet they will be doing their
endeavor and good will to deliver them to Satan, and yet God will not suffer
Satan to take one of them that they Excommunicate, that we know of; no signs,
nor marks on it: but rather, as they say, of the Foxes proverbially, The more
they are cursed, the better they thrive. Take him Satan; Satan will not: then
take him Magistrate, he must.

Whereas the Apostle Paul, that made the Church of Corinth Excommunicate the
Incestuous person, it was for the destruction of the Flesh, and Diseases (as
they did Job, when God Excommunicated him or delivered him to Satan) either
killed him, or brought him nigh unto the Grave; if great Godly sorrow did not
intervene.

Away -- with this Mimickry and Pageantry, and Apish Imitation --

If we have the Spirit of the Apostles, we are Apostolical men indeed; they,
(Peter and John) Acts 8.17. Laid their hands on the Disciples, and they
received the gifts of the Holy Ghost.

So, the Pope and Cardinals, etc. they will be imitating, and seem to do
something, and they will Confirm by Laying on of Hands (but not that neither
right, according to their own Rubricks, as I Will show by and by) but cui bono?
Away with Lying and Vanity, let God be True and every man a Liar; I would
appeal to any man's Conscience, If ever he received any Gift of the Holy Ghost
by such Imposition of Hands, and speak the Naked-Truth now, and do not cogg,
lie and flatter your self, nor dissemble: any of you that ever was B --
Be-Pop't, or that any Pope would tell truly and not lie, Whether he felt
(whilst he was at it with Imposition of Hands) that any virtue went out of him,
as it did out of our Savior, when he did the Woman good.

Away, Away, with Folly and Pageantry at this time of day, God will not be
mocked; And every Plant that my Heavenly Father has not planted shall be
rooted out, says our Blessed Redeemer, and I believe him, let Hell and the
Pope think themselves never so cock-sure and culminant.

It Is readily granted that if any man was a Heretic, they should avoid him; or
reject him, and cast off his Company in ordinary Conversation; and if any
Brother walked disorderly, they should not eat nor drink, nor dine nor sup with
him, that he might be ashamed.

But to think, that God or good Men, the Prophets, Christ or his Apostles, did
ever in the Old or New Testament command any Men, Synod or Synagogue, Church or
Court, that they should shut the Church Doors, and shut out the worst of
Sinners from the Sacraments, or Communion, or hale them into Church (either) by
the Head and Ears; or (which is the same) Excommunicate him, or put him out of
Commons, (or the Communion) of the Church, the only Food and Cure of our Souls,
and made on purpose for Sinners, is an opinion as senceless and groundless as
it has been baneful and mischievous to all Societies, and the Peace of
Christendom.

I grant though, sacra sacris, and Holy things ought not to be cast to Dogs,
therefore the Text says, Examine your selves, and so eat of this bread and drink
of this cup.

Examine himself? It is not said examine him, Priest, and confess him, you
Priest, and Catechize him, John Presbyter, nor you Lay-Elder.

But let him examine himself, and so let him come -- but sao piculo, at his own
Peril.

But the Church, nor the best of men, are not defiled with communicating with
the vilest of sinners.

Was there ever any better than our Blessed Savior, or worse than Judas? yet
Christ eat the Passover with him, and probably, the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper; yet he then knew him, and had Published him a Traitor, whom (before) he
called -- Devil.

I hate the Puritanical Pharisaical Hypocrisy of any Religion; they shall be
defiled with communicating with Sinners, Drunkards! etc. And yet St. Paul and
the Church of Corinth (as good as the best of them) are not commanded to
forsake the Lords-Table, though we read that some came thither Drunk, and to
fill their Bellies with the Bread and Wine, 1 Cor. 11.21.

Alas! every man has enough to do (if he mind it well) to look after his own
Preparation, but that any that had not the Gist of Discerning of Spirits (nor
these neither) did Excommunicate, or forbid the Communion to any, in the Old or
New Testament, (I boldly say) it is false; Nor can they prove, but that he that
was delivered to Satan, did also come (if he could for Diseases) to Sacraments,
Prayers, and to Church, the ready road to have his Spirit saved in the day of
the Lord Jesus.

I wish they were cut off that trouble you, that is, I wish the Devil had them
in his power to inflict Death or Diseases upon them; for it is impossible that
the Apostles should be so uncharitable to their Spirits or Souls as to wish
them cut off from the Church, Militant or Triumphant; except by some
extraordinary and particular Revelation.

For cutting off, and delivering to Satan, are the same thing; and it is clear
the Apostles looked upon the Incestuous Person that was delivered over to Satan,
as a dying or dead man, because he adds -- That his spirit might be saved in
the day of the Lord Jesus.

And so both in the Old Testament (by the Septuagint) and in the New, the Word
(...)or (...), taking out of the middle of you (cutting off) is never used
(that I remember) but for the death of the Body or Soul: and therefore can
never signify Excommunication:

Besides, we never find in Holy Writ that Interdicting the Sacraments, or
debarring from the Communion, was ever used for a Punishment.

The Leper, or he that had touched a Dead Body, or a Menstrous Woman, etc. were
Excommunicated properly, or put from Holy Communion; but these Impediments did
as likely befall to the good as well as to the bad, and was not put for a
Punishment.

Oh! but this was a Type of Excommunication under the Gospel. That Is good, and
well said; a Type of that that never was, and never will be; first prove
Excommunication a Gospel-Ordinance, and then it is time enough to show where it
was Typified.

And as if Real (and not only Typical) holiness were not as requisite under the
Law as under the Gospel; it was a sin, then, (as well as now) to make many
Prayers when the hands were full of Blood.

And strange it is that the Apostle that warns Timothy, Tites, and the
Presbyters (or Bishops, for the Presbyters, Verse 17. are called Bishops, Ver.
28. Acts 20.17, 28.
) of Ephesus to do their Duty, should not, besides feeding the Flock, charge
them also to fleece the Flock, and starve the Flock, by depriving them of
Communion, or Spiritual-food, upon occasion, if Excommunication be the
Appurtenance of a Bishop or Presbyter.

And that our Blessed Jesus, that took such care to mind Peter, if he loved
him, to feed his Lambs and seed his Sheep; should not (if it be a sacred
Ordinance) speak a word, to fleece them, and scourge them, and interdict them
spiritual food, upon occasion, or, if they stray.

No, no, if they stray, thou that art a good Shepherd, reduce them; thou art
well kept and paid for the very nonce.

Which brings to my mind this Parable or Story, I will not say it is true and
real, more than the Parable of Dives and Lazarus: And it begins too just as
that Parable begins.

There was two certain rich men, which were Clothed in Purple and Fine-Linnen,
and fared sumptuously every day, but all these good things were frankly
bestowed on them at the mercy, and by the favor of the King, upon condition
(though) that they would be Shepherds and feed his Sheep, and anoint them for
the Scab, and underlook them, but not worry them, nor destroy them; nor Fleece
them, nor Shear them to their own private use, nor plague them, nor vex them,
though perhaps the Sheep might sometimes stray and straggle, and go a wrong
Road, and tire (perhaps) and fret the Shepherds with following and running
after them; yet they were not to revenge themselves upon the stray Sheep, and
set their Wit against theirs, but gently reduce them, and do nothing rashly,
maliciously, revengefully or peevishly, except perhaps some of the Sheep should
be incurably scab'd; and then the King promised he would give the Shepherds
good Wages and Hire, and they should want for nothing.

Who would have refused a Shepherds office upon these easy terms? or who would
desire better terms, than to do good, not to kill, not to do mischief, not to
destroy?

But so it happened, that the two Shepherds, though they had several Flocks, and
several fat Pastures, yet the Sheep grazed all on one Common in distinct
Flocks, whilst the Shepherds could meet together and view them, and over-see
them, and yet enjoy one another, feast together, and laugh and talk together.

And (as I said before) they wanted for nothing; but their Pouches was full of
Money, their Bottles full of good Wine, and their Scrips full of good Victuals,
and variety enough.

Yet, so it was one morning, one of the Shepherds came to the other puffing and
blowing, fretting and fuming, and so out of breath that he could scarce tell
his Tale.

At length, and after some pause, recovering himself, Brother Shepherd (quoth
he) was ever man so plagued as I have been this morning with running after a
stray Sheep, Wanton and Fat? I think he has led me a fair dance, I am so tired,
I have scarce breath enough left to tell you, and to make this complaint.

Indeed and indeed (quoth the other to his Brother) and is this true? yea, very
true (replied he) see but how I fret and sweat: his Brother being
tenderhearted, could not but pity and take compassion on his fellow Labourer,
and so much the more, because for ought he knew his own Flock might take
example thereat, and lead him a dance, he knew not how soon, and put him also
in the same pickle, sweat and balnio.

They parted (though) for that time to consider alone, and afterward join
Heads together and study how to be revenged of the said wanton fat Weather, if
it were but for example-sake to all the other fat Sheep in the Flock; (for the
lean Hags (poor Souls) were tame enough, they had more mind to graze and eat
than to be gamesome! and they kept them to sharper Commons, on purpose to make
them be gentle and easy to be guided.)

Well, something must be done, that was resolved; but what, or how to proceed,
they could not well tell.

Let Us eat him, says one; Ay, quoth the other, that would not be amiss, but the
craft's in the catching him; you saw I sweat with but running after him, and
could scarce give him a turn. Besides, we have Victuals enough of our own, and
need it not; and also the King has commanded, Feed my Sheep, but Fleece them
not, much more do not kill, Do not steal, let them live and 'mend: they would
have turned him out of the Flock too, but they had no Commission for that.

At length, one of them found out a Quirk, an Evasion, an Exception in their
Commission, viz. Except perhaps some of the Sheep should be incurably scab'd;
and, I say, He is a scabbed Sheep: How shall we prove that, quoth the other?
for I understand by you that he is so wanton he would never suffer you to come
so near him as to feel him and handle him; and for my own part, quoth he, I did
never so much as see him in my life, nor do I desire it, except we could get
him fast into some Pen or Pound: And then -- Wherefore it was resolved to catch
him; and to that purpose, they set their Shepherd's Dogs upon him, but what the
Issue was, I cannot tell.

For here is enough (for Diversion) of a Sheepish harmless Parable, at which no
man can be offended that is either innocent or wise; for none but a fool will
challenge it for his own, for his own Character.

And if any man think that this is too Jocular a way of writing upon a serious
Argument, I have the great examples of the most Learned Erasmus and Sir Thomas
Moor for my President.

And a Warrant in my Pocket beyond all exceptions (I mean) my Bible's in my
Pocket, where not only the Prophets, but our Blessed Savior gives countenance,
as well as Authority for Parables.

What got Joseph's Brethren by hating him yet the more for his Dreams and for
his Words? Genesis 37.8.


And what got the Chief-Priests and the Scribes by seeking to lay hands on our
Savior (and had done it then but that they feared the People) when they
perceived that he had spoken the Parable against them? Luke 20.19.
Come, come, it is much more pleasing to God and good men to repent and amend
our sins, than show our teeth, or bite such as tell us of them.

Nathan told the King his (own but modestly by way of Parable at first, yet
afterward) plainly told him to his head -- Thou art the man.

If some men I know had had David's Power (that want the grace that David had)
they would have put Nathan in Limbo for it, or have been revenged on him one
way or other.

But Holy David loved him the better for it all the days of his life, and kept
him his chiefest favorite to his dying day.

But Holy David was a man after God's own heart; the evil Spirit is too great
in some men's hearts, the evil Spirit of malice and revenge possesses them too
much to be good at any thing so readily, as mischief, mischief; to their power,
I mean, to their utmost: It is a sin to bid such -- God speed.

I never read of a Persecutor (though never so great) but came to an ill end.

What should I tell of the first Persecuting Emperor, Nero, that stabbed himself
to halves, and not being able to dispatch himself out of his pains, nor any
body so kind to do his business for him, roared out, Nec amicum habeo nec
inimicum: And after him Dioclesan, when he was glutted with Christian-blood,
fled from his Imperial Crown, and hid his hated head in a Garden.

It Is endless to tell Stories of this nature; to come nearer home to Cardinal
Pool, and Queen Mary's days, that after a short and Bloody Reign died both in a
day, whilst the bloody Bishops of London and Winchester, Bonner and Gardener,
(a precious couple of Shepherds, it is pity they should be parted) died soon
after miserably.

Let them go, some men will never take warning till the Devil fetch them.

Oh! how that bloody couple did lay about them, and pay poor creatures off,
Body and Soul, the Body delivered to the Flames, and first their Souls to Satan
by Excommunication; a wonderful good employment, (some think) I will not say --
Much good may't do them.

Some cannot believe that any Man should so be divested of Humanity, or humane
King (how forlornly wicked soever) as to (do what is storied of one) persuade a
Man (when he had his Sword at his Breast) to renounce his Christendom and Jesus
Christ, and then he would spare his Life:

Which the poor Creature did, in hopes of a Reprieve, and time to repent it in;
and then immediately he run him to the heart, that he might kill Soul and Body
at one fatal stab.

But sure I am, it is true of these Bloody Couple of Bishops beforementioned;
for they never delivered any Man's Body to the flames, but first they
Excommunicated him, and delivered him to Satan; in Faith and Hope, that they
had at once murdered Body and Soul together.

These are worse than Scribes and Pharisees; for though they looked upon our
blessed Jesus as a Friend of Publicans and Sinners, nay, as a Conjurer, and one
that had Confederacy with Beelzebub; nay (as a Samaritan, and) as one that had
a Devil; yet they never Excommunicated him, nor the Apostles, nor interdicted
them the Divine Service, Synagogues, Temple, Sacrifices, or Sacraments. No, no,
this debarring and depriving Men of the Sacrament, was brought in by Priestly
Lordliness, and Prelatical Covetousness; for if they can once persuade silly
Bigots that they are Apostolical men, and can bind and loose, and have got the
Keys of Heaven gates, and can open and let in, and absolve; and again, upon
displeasure, can shut out, and Excommunicate; undoubtedly, they may take the
wall of all Mankind, at least, of all Christendom.

But alas! alas! They have got the wrong Key, I Will prove it to them before I
have done with them; our blessed Savior's Keys that he left behind him to
Peter, were spiritual Keys; and his Kingdom was not of this world; nor the Men
(he left the Keys to) worldly-minded Men; and therefore he left not those Keys
of binding and loosing, on Earth, in Heaven, no, not to his own Apostles, until
first he had enabled them to use them infallibly; and therefore (mind the Text)
before he would tell them, Whosoever Sins ye Remit, they are Remitted; and
whosoever Sins ye Retain, they are Retained -- He first breathed on them, and
says unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost.

But if Men will turn Doctors and Preachers, and Interpreters of Scripture, and
never mind the Context; and out of a foolish Ambition, ascribe all that Christ
said to his Disciples, as if spoken to their own silly sinful selves, no wonder
that they err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God. The Gift of
the Holy Ghost, always infallible, never Clavis errans; never turning the Key
the wrong way, by hands awry, crooked, and warping, as Interest and Revenge,
Pride and Covetousness, Tyranny and Cruelty, Malice and Wickedness does annuate
and guide.

I hate and abominate this Apish Mimickry and Imitation.

Did the Apostles, by laying on of Hands, give the Holy Ghost?

The Pope would seem to be Somebody too, he would lay on Hands too, but Cui
Bono? who, but a Bigoted Coxcomb, found any good it did him?

Did the Apostles heal the Sick, anointing with Oil in the Name of the Lord?

The Pope would Ape it too a little, the clean contrary way, and he and his
little Priests will 'noint too, not for Health and Life, and to recover; but
for Death.

Did the Apostles cast out Devils?

The Pope would be a Devil-driver too, and his little Exorcists (though I never
met with many of them that were) Conjurers.

Did the Apostles speak with new Tongues?

Why the Pope then too makes it a necessary qualification of a Priest to be a
Linguist; and yet, to my knowledge, not a Friar in forty can speak true Latin.

Did the Apostle deliver the Incestuous Person (by his spirit) to Satan, and
also the Blasphemers?

Why, the Pope would be at it too, though he cannot Kill whom he Excommunicates
for Heretics, 'till he makes the silly Bigoted Magistrate, Gregory it for him:

And so, also most of the Popish Prelatical-tricks are mere Mimickry and Idle,
as well as Apish Imitation of the Apostles.

And he is fore't to pretend to this Juggle and Cheat, because his Ambition has
Entitled him, Peter's Successor, and his pretty Cardinals and Bishops,
Apostolical men; give the Word backward, for these -- Apostolical men;
Apostolical men.

Thus the Gypsies imitated Moses and Aaron with their Enchantments, Exodus 7.
till Aaron's Rod swallowed up their Rods; yet Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and
he and all his Conjurers looked upon all Religion as a humane Invention, till,
by being abominably Lousie, and (like Atheistical Herod) eaten up with Lice,
they confessed, Digitum Dei, the Finger of God.

Nor do I think the Popish Conjurers will ever part with their dear, dear,
precious, gainful; Money-Trade of the Keys, till some remarkable Judgment fall
upon them for the Abominable and Atheistical abuse.

Alas! the Keys ('it is plain) were no silver Keys, nor earthly, worldly men's
Keys, and therefore when Christ gave them to Peter, he calls them, Matt. 16.19.
The Keys of the kingdom of Heaven.

So that an Excommunicate Person (clave non errant) if justly and duly
Excommunicated (by Persons qualified, as the Apostles were, with the Gift of
the Holy Ghost, called the Gift of Discerning of Spirits, without which we
never read in Holy Scripture that any Man or Church took upon him or them to
Excommunicate any body) (I say) such an Excommunicate Person is by the
Evangelical Precept to be as much shut out of Church, as if he had never entered
in; or as much as (and no more than) a Heathen-man or a Publican.

But, that ever Christ or his Apostles, or the Primitive-Church, did ever
intend by Excommunication to lay claim to his Purse, or deprive him of his
Freedom, Liberty or Property, Moneys or Lands (as the Jesuits held, by
asserting that, Dominion is founded in Grace, and is the groundwork of the
Pope's Tyranny and Usurpation over Princes and their Subjects) is no where
found in Holy Writ, nor any such Appendix, Writ or Label hanging at any
Excommunication, that ever I heard of in the Gospel, or Primitive Church.

Nor the least hint in the Gospel, that our blessed Savior (who would not
suffer a Prelate (no not St. Peter) amongst his Disciples) should (under
color, and by virtue of Excommunication) grant them a License to rend and
tear, rant and domineer, (as, nay more than the Princes of the Gentiles) over
one another; much less by such a stratagem to deprive Nonconformists (Atheists,
or Libertines) of their Lands or Goods, Freedom or Freehold; nor ever
attempted any such Invasion of the Heathen Emperors Dominions, but quite
contrary, paid them Tribute, taught subjection to them by virtue of Religion,
not usurpation upon their civil Rights under color of Religion; and this no
Man can deny, who does believe our Savior when he said -- My Kingdom is not of
this world.

And therefore he never meant, (when he parted with these Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven to his Church and Servants) that they should flourish them, huff and
vapor with them, fight and quarrel, threaten and revenge, or vend their malice
with them, or (much less) knock Men's brains out with these Keys, or by the help
of these Keys, by more nimble conveyance, get into their Purses, or pick their
Pockets; or, (which is worse) lock them up in a Jayle by virtue of these Keys,
and deprive them of their Lands and Livings, Liberties and Properties: No, no;
it was the Pope, the Pope and his Offspring that first turned these Keys the
wrong way, (as I have said) and contrary to the way of Christ; for which he
(and all such as he) meritoriously deserves the name of Antichrist, or contrary
to Christ.

It Is Pride, devilish Pride (called what you will) that makes men Lord it over
God's Heritage, and enslave their Bodies and Souls too, together with
insatiable Avarice, in greedy Dogs that can never have enough, 'till they get
the Devil and all.

This makes the Popes (both the greater and the lesser) by the abuse of
Excommunication, or the power of the Keys, to cram their Coffers, to enrich
their Nephews, and satisfy their Whores, when decrepit old Age cannot
surrogate to their Lust; and therefore my Letany is, From the Popes (both the
greater and the lesser)
From Le Chese the French Confessor,
And from his Popish Successor,
Libera, Libera.

CHAP. IV.
ANd I Will justify it, it is but a Branch of Popery in any sort of people (that
decry the Pope and all his Works) if they do the very same things: whilst poor
men change their Lords (indeed) but not the Lordliness and Usurpation.

And that Incestuous Person that was Excommunicated and Delivered to Satan, I
Cor. 5.4. Wherefore was it? To what end and purpose?

The same Text tells us -- for the destruction of the flesh (his lustful Flesh,
or fleshly Lusts) not for the destruction of his Estate, Freedom or earthly
Privileges, but that his spirit might be saved: All the design, and all the
management, and all the consequences were spiritual, purely spiritual.

Our Blessed Savior (though it was proffered him, and some would never have
refused the Preferment, that have not the mind of Christ) would not be a Judge
in Civil matters, Counselor nor Privy-Counsellor.

For his Kingdom was a spiritual Kingdom, his Rule a spiritual Rule in men's
Hearts and Spirits, by his Word and Spirit; his Weapons were not Carnal but
Spiritual, for the bringing down of strong Holds; not Castles and Manors:

No, no, the Devil and the Pope, and such as follow the steps of Antichrist,
set up and maintain, and uphold this Anti-Kingdom in opposition to the Kingdom
of Christ; but the Pope was glad to uphold his tottering Kingdom with the
Inquisition, High Commission, Racks and Gibbets, Fire and Faggot, Fines and
Imprisonments; or (which is all one) deliver them over to the Magistate to be
Excontioners for him.

We thought it a fair deliverance from this Popish thraldom, when we were
delivered from the Inquisition, High Commission, Racks and Gibbets, Fire and
Faggot too (of late) by condemning the Writ de Heretico Comburendo.

I do not deny though but that the two last, Fines, (that is) unjust Fees and
Imprisonments, are to this day, in England, the Consequences of Excommunication.

But they are mistaken that think these Consequences are held forth to us in
the Gospel of Christ, or the practice of the Apostles or Primitive Church: No,
no, Fines and Imprisonments attend Excommunication upon another score; namely,
the Law of the Land, and therefore you hear me say nothing against it.

I know what I could say, if I were in place where (I might properly discuss
the point) but I have learnt to obey, and to mind only mine own business.

CHAP. V.
I Have heard some Lawyers say, that all Laws of man, which are contrary to
Gods Laws, are void, ipso facto, as soon as made; But what is that to this
affair?

But there are worse consequences of an Excommunication amongst us, than
Imprisonment, or the Fees, or rather Fines, severer consequences than what
attends the Writ de Excommunicato capiendo; for (if I mistake not) an
Excommunicate Person (and signified under the Bishops Seal to be such) shall
not sue at Law for his Debts, Lands, nor Estate; nor make a Will to dispose of
the same; or if he do, the Spiritual-Courts will not prove it; nay, some would
have it, that they shall not give their Suffrages and Votes in the choice of
Parliament Men: nor be suffered to Trade, nor to Buy or Sell; nay, in Popish
Times and Countries none may buy any thing of any Excommunicate person, Rev.
13.16, 17.
in pain of being also Excommunicate, neither give nor sell them meat nor
drink: For which cause it was, that Jane Shore was starved, and dyed in
Shore-ditch, no body durst relieve her, because she was Excommunicated: And
most of the Rebellions in the Reign of Henry VIII. was, because the Pope by his
Bull of Excommunication, dated December. 7. Anno Domini 1538. had deprived the
King of his Kingdom, and had absolved his Subjects from their Obedience:

Hard is the case (both of Kings and People,) when they lie at the mercy of the
Clergy, except they will be content to be Gospel Ministers and Servants of
Christ and his People, and not Lords, to tyrannize and domineer over God's
Heritage; such Pride, so contrary to the Gospel, will have a Fall, nay, 1 Pet.
5.3. Isa. 26.11.
it has had a Fall, yet some Men will never take warning, nor believe in God,
but trust to broken Cisterns, and their own Subtleties, which are Foolishness
with God.

I think, every Man that has Liberties or Properties to lose, (and the poorest
Man in England has Liberty to lose, though he have no Freehold) I say, it is of
Concernment to all Men to look about them, and have a care; God knows, whose
turn it may be next: For my part, I had rather anger the Great Turk, than a
peevish proud Surrogate, Register or Summer.

And indeed my private Concerns was the first occasion (to tell you true) of
making me look and pry into their nasty privy ways, Extortions, Oppressions,
under which His Majesty's Subjects, poor Widows and Orphans, groan remediless
to this day, notwithstanding so many Acts of Parliament for their Relief.

Does not the Statute of 31 Edw. 3, 4. tell us, That the Ministers of Bishops,
and other Ordinaries of Holy-Church, take of the People grievous and outrageous
Fines (where note by the way, that by outrageous Fines, is meant (by the
Statute) unjust Fees) for the Probate of Testaments? etc.

And the Statute of 3 Hen. 5, 8. begins thus --

Whereas the Commons of the Realm have oftentimes (mark that) in diverse
Parliaments (mark that) complained of that, that diverse Ordinaries do take for
the Probate of a Testament, etc. against Right and Law; etc. therefore, that
Statute reduced them to Two shillings sixpence, or Five shillings at the most.

A likely matter, that Spiritual Men can be held bound by a Statute, that could
bind and loose all the Commons and Nobles too at their pleasure.

A Statute Law bind them? No, no; no more than Samson's Withs, or New Cords
could hand-cuff the Giant; (that is) so long as (and no longer than) he list.

Therefore the Statute of 21 Hen. 8, 5. complains and complains, and tells how
often these Ecclesiastical Men had baffled the Statute, enumerating, and
particularly naming the two former Statutes here now recited, and reduces then
for the Probate and Inventory,

Sometimes to 6 d. sometimes to 2 s. 6 d. at most but 5 s. as I have more
particularly given you a Table of Fees, in my Vindication of the Naked Truth --
The Second Part: And all this, in pain of 10 l. one Moiety to the King, and the
other to the Party grieved, together, etc.

Then you will say, Why do they still take 20 s. 30 s. 40 s. and sometimes 50 s.
for a Probate? sometimes much more:

I answer, Because they are Impudent, as their Predecessors are complained of,
Statute after Statute, Parliament after Parliament, and to little purpose.

-- Go bind Samson; but you had best have a care you come not within his
Clutches: Go, and complain against them; To whom? you will say, perhaps, write
Naked Truths against them, that at length our Superiors may hear the Complaints
of the Widow and the Orphans oppressed grievously by their Extortions in
Probates, etc.

Does not God Almighty say, concerning the crying Sins of Sodom and Gomorrah,
Genesis 18.20, 21. Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because
their sin is very grievous; I will go down now, and see whether they have done
altogether according to the cry of it, which is come unto me: and if not, I
will hear.

Well then, publish their known Extortions, (as the said Statutes already
mentioned confesses) that the Commons did grievously complain of the Extortions
and Oppressions of the Spiritual Court: And will not this way do? Write against
them, and Print against their impudent sinning in defiance of the Statutes, the
Laws and Justice of the Realm;

And what then? Will that do?

Yes, that will do one thing, namely, undo the Author; I Will assure you (expert^
creed Roberto) I am in a fair way to it; if Actions brought by my great Bishop
in Common Law Courts, and in Ecclesiastical Courts, and Citation upon Citation,
in Arches, in Delegates; if all these, and Power into the bargain, will not
sink one Poor Man, sure then there is more than humane help, and more than a
humane hand in it.

But you may well say, Godly Bishops should not be angry and touchy, nor
enraged at, nor become an Enemy, an open Enemy against any Man, for telling the
Naked Truth, of the Vileness and Extortions of their Ministers and
Under-officers, against the known Laws of the Land, but love and cherish such;
and if they will be angry, they should vend their spleen against the said
wickednesses of their Under-officers; and correct and amend, and take shame to
themselves, and show signs of Repentance.

But I am not bound to answer this Objection; only it brings to my mind, the
temper and opinion the King and Parliament were of concerning the Bishops, and
their Visitations, (some years after the Pope's Supremacy and Prelacy was cut
down, in the beginning of the Reformation) in H. VIII's time, expressed by the
coupling together of two words in 35 H. 8.21. namely, Visit or Vex; as if they
were Synonyma's, or the one explanatory of the other; Visit or Vex? good; The
King and Parliament had a good opinion of the Bishops Visitations, in the
interim, to count them vexatious, and to make provision for the King's Churches
and Chapels to be freed and exempt from their Visitations; I shall never
forget it -- Visit or Vex; nay, I know it experimentally; a most admirable
Couple, or Conjunctive Copulative -- Visit or Vex; good, incomparable! well,
since that wise King and Parliament put them together, let them go -- Visit or
Vex.

Yet let no Man mistake me, as the Vulgar Translation does the Text in St.
Luke's Gospel, reading -- Evertit domum, instead of -- Everrit domum: (that is)
She overthrew the house, (instead of) She swept the house: No, no, I love a
Bishopric too well, to wish its ruin; the worst I wish them, is to 'mend, not
end them.

Again, You may well say, That as Great as they are, they are not Too Great,
Burly, and Overgrown for the Law, that has proved an Overmatch to the greatest
Favorites and arbitrary Judges in England in all Ages, and has brought some of
them to the Block.

I doubt it not: why then you will say, Indict them, and bring Informations in
the Crown-Office against them: Indict them? -- Sh -- them.

There are so many starting holes in the Statute, and they are Cunning, and
Rich, and do you not know that Riches can make Friends? I thought you had known
it:

I have heard of some Highway-men and Robbers in other Kingdoms, that when they
Rob a Man of a 1000 l. they will be content to be taken and tried for their
Lives, if you give them but 600 l. more: why so? what will the money do them
good, if they are hanged? true:

But they know a way worth two on it; for, for 500 l. given to Madam -- she can
procure a Reprieve.

-- But you will say, What Is all this to the purpose? or to the Men of Doctors
Commons? or do you think you tell us News? or what is this to Excommunication,
and the power of the Keys?

I answer, with a late learned Author, Why may not a Man be suffered to talk
Impertinently now and then? It Is the mode, the very Gazet-mode, and the fashion
of every weekly Pamphlet.

And yet (by your favor) though the Extortions and notorious Oppressions in
the Probate of Wills, etc. be no news; since Edward III's Reign (a very, very
old Disease, it is well if it be capable of Cure) yet treating here of the Power
of the Keys and Excommunication, I cannot be Impertinent if I show you how Vice
corrects Sin.

And as my private concern (as I said before) occasioned my search into their
Ways and Authority, so I doubt not but the Reader will be abundantly satisfied
in reading the whole Libel and Articles against me, and my Answer; Proximus
ardet -- It may be your own case e're long, or your friends; and, (if it be,)
by my Answer you will know the better how to handle them.

For, for all my whining for the loss of my said Guiney, I assure you, I fear
them not; (as I used to say) in my old Motto (like a Tortoise in his Shell)
Virtute mea me Involvo; I am safe rolled up in mine own Innocence, and in the
Integrity (I bless Almighty God) of mine unblemish't Life and Conversation;
unblemish't (I say, that would not say it, nor should not say it, but on this
occasion in mine own just defense, I say again, unblemish't) except by Lies,
and Libels, and a pack of Hireling-villains, that, (for the sake of Money and a
Fee,) be-slander me; but Nubecula est and evanescit; it is like a Vapor, or a
morning Cloud, it vanishes, and must and shall; before I have done with them,
they will know me better.

I wish I could impart my Fortitude ( in suffering, I mean,) to all that are
oppressed, they shall find I am Shot-free and Malice-proof; and for my Guiney
aforesaid, let it go at present, I Will fetch some of it again, with a vengeance
to them: and have Arrested, or ordered to be Arrested the said Vice-Register
Nucourt for it already.

I cannot endure to part with my Money, no, not upon the Road, but I must know
why and wherefore; if they tell me a Lie, they must show me a reason for it
before we part, if I be not Godfreydiz'd, or Arnoldiz'd: the World's wicked
enough.

But my Answer cannot be understood, except I give you first an account of the
Libel exhibited against me in the Arches, Thomas Doughty Gent. the Promoter;
but upon second thoughts it was deemed meet, to make Henry Bishop of London
Promoter; but their Councels being coufus'd, and the men Ruffled with my
appearance in that Heathenish Language Greek, (which I spoke not in
ostentation, but) because many of the Canons were made originally in Greek, and
the Interpreters thereof, the Doctors of the Canon Law, had need blush as Red
and Scarlet as their Gowns, of being ignorant of the Original they profess to
interpret; besides, I did it to show how well their Caps became them, whilst I
(forsooth) must stand bare before the Gallants; (a very comely sight, and a
great deal of reason:) But so pudled they were some of them, that when I came
first into Court, Thomas Doughty was the Informer and Promoter; but he not
being thought big enough, or for what other reasons I cannot tell, (nor do I
desire to be a privy Councellor amongst them) but Doughty was scor'd out by the
Bishop of London's said Vice-Register, the said Nucourt, and in his place, by
Interline, was inserted Henry Bishop of London for the Promoter; but that also
was another blunder, for in the last Article Doughty gets the honor of the
place again, and is made Promoter again against me, in this terrible Libel
following, viz.

CHAP. VI.
IN Dei Nomine Amen. Nos Robertus Wyseman Miles and Legum Doctorus Almae Curiae
Cantus de Archubus Londonus Officialis Principalis Legitime constitutus, tibi
Edmundo Hickeringill, Clerico Rectori Rectoriae and Ecclesiae Parochialis
omnium Sanctorum in villa Colcestriae Dioc. Londonus Cantque Provincus
Articulos Capitula sive Interria meram animae tuae salutem, morumque and
excessuum suorum reformationem and praesertim crimina and delicta tua
infrascriptus concernenus ex Officio nostro ad promotionem Reverendi in Christo
Patris and Domini, Domini Henrici Londonus Episcopi objicimus and Articulamur
prout sequitur, viz.

1. IMprimis, Objicimus and Articulamur, That in the Months of March, April,
May, June, July, August, September, October, November, December, January,
February and March, in the years of our Lord, 1674, 1675, 1676, 1677, 1678,
1679, 1680. and in the Months of March, April and May, 1681. You the said
Edmund Hickeringill were, and still are, Rector of the Rectory and
Parish Church of All Saints in Colchester aforesaid: And as and for the Rector
of the said Rectory and Parish Church aforesaid, you were during the time
aforesaid, and still are, commonly accounted, reputed and taken, Et Objicimus
and Articulamur conjunctim and divisim and de quolibet.

2. Item, We Article and Object, that you the said Edmund Hickeringill, to
promote differences between S^muel Bridge Clerk, Rector of Wivenhoe in the
County of Essex aforesaid, and his Parishioners, did, within the time
aforesaid, endeavor to Animate and Incense the said Parishioners, or some of
them, against their said Rector; and proffered, that if they would give or pay
you twenty pounds, you would rout the said Mr Bridge from the said Living, or
from amongst them, or to that effect. Pot. tamen de qualibet alia summa.

3. Item, We Article and Object, that you the said Edmund Hickeringill, do
know, believe, or credibly have heard, that Samuel Harris Clerk, was, and is
the lawful Vicar of the Vicaridg of Fingringhoe in the said County of Essex,
and by virtue thereof, rightly instituted to the small Tithes belonging to the
said Vicaridg; and that notwithstanding the Premises, you the said Edmund
Hickeringill, have stirred up, and forewarned several of the Parishioners of
the said Parish, not to pay their small Tithes to the said Vicar, on purpose to
stir up contentious Suits between the said Vicar and the said Parishioners. And
this was and is true, public and notorious, and so much you the said Edmund
Hickeringill have confessed and acknowledged to be true. Et Objicimus and
Articulamur ut supra.

4. Item, We Article and Object, that you the said Edmund Hickeringill, do
know, believe, or have credibly heard, that within the time aforesaid, the
Tithes, Profits and Emoluments of, and belonging to the Parish-Churches of St.
Botolphs and St. Leonards in Colchester, being both void of an Incumbent, are,
by virtue of a Sequestration for each of the said Churches, rightly and duly
committed and granted by the Right Reverend Father in God, Henry Lord Bishop of
London, to the Custody of the said Samuel Harris Clerk, and that he is rightful
and lawful Sequestrator of the same; and that by virtue of a License or
Licenses under the Seal of the said Bishop, the Cure of the Souls of the
Parishioners and Inhabitants of the said respective Parishes, are rightly and
duly committed and granted to the said Samnel Harris: And that notwithstanding
the Premises, you the said Edmund Hickeringill, have forewarned several
Parishioners of the said Parish, or one of them, not to pay any Tithes, Dues,
or Duties, to the said Mr. Harris: And more particularly, by a Note under your
Hand, bearing Date the sixth of April, 1681. Directed to the Parishioners and
Inhabitants of the said Parish of St. Botolphs, have promised to save harmless
and indempnifie all the Parishioners and Inhabitants of the said Parish in the
payment of their Tithes, Offerings, Obventions and Oblations unto you, against
all men living; And likewise by another Note under your Hand, bearing Date the
16th day of March, 1680. have promised, and engaged unto one Robert Gibson of
St. Leonards in Colchester aforesaid, Baker, to desend him and save him
harmless in the Possession of the Parsonage-House of St. Leonards aforesaid,
upon condition he pay unto you the Quarterly Rent of twelve shillings and six
pence so long as he holds the same, notwithstanding the said House belongs to
the said Mr. Harris, by virtue of the said Sequestration. And that if he be
ejected or troubled by Suits at Law, you will bear the charges of the said
Suit; and will also bear the charges of erecting an Oven there, if he be forced
out of the Possession thereof by due Course of Law before Christmas next, after
the Date of the said Note, he paying you fifty Shillings at Christmas next, if
he be in the Possession of the same Parsonage-House, and do not relinquish the
same, 'till forced thereunto by due Order of Law, or to that effect. Et
Objicimus and Articulamur ut supra.

5. Item, Objicimus and Articulamur, that notwithstanding the said Mr. Harris
is Licensed by the said Bishop to serve the said Cures of St. Botolph and St.
Leonards aforesaid, yet you the said Edmund Hickeringill, in contempt of the
Authority of the said Bishop your Ordinary, have threatened the Sextons of the
said Parishes, or one of them, that you will ruin him or them, if he or they
give notice to the said Mr. Harris of any business concerning the Ministerial
Function to be done or performed, as Christning, Marrying, Burying, or the
like, in the said Parishes, or either of them, and that you have several times,
or at least once, disturbed the said Mr. Harris in doing and performing his
Ministerial Function, in the said Parishes, or one of them, in one or more of
the Holy Offices aforesaid; to the great scandal of our Ministerial Function,
and of all good people, in and about Colchester aforesaid: And this was and is
true, public and notorious. Et Objicimus and Articulamur ut supra.

Item, Objicimus and Articulamur, that you the said Edmund Hickeringill, do
know, or have heard, that by the Canons and Constitutions of the Church of
England, in that behalf Published and Established, no Minister upon pain of
suspension, per triennium ipso facto, shall Celebrate Matrimony between any
Persons without a Faculty or License first in that behalf lawfully obtained,
except the Banes of Matrimony have been first Published three several Sundays
or Holydays in the time of Divine-Service, in the Parish Churches and Chapels
where the said Parties dwelt, according to the Book of Common Prayer: And that
every Minister who shall hereafter Celebrate Marriage betwixt any Persons,
contrary to the said Constitutions, or any one of them, under color of any
peculiar Liberty or Privilege claimed to appertain to certain Churches and
Chapels, shall be suspended, per triennium, by the Ordinary of the Place where
the offense shall be committed, as by the said Canons and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical it does more plainly appear. Et Objicimus and Articulamur ut
supra.

7. Item, Objicimus and Articulamur, that notwithstanding the Premises, you the
said Edmund Hickeringill, in contempt of the said Canons and Constitutions, did
in the Months of March, April, May, June, July, August, September, October,
November, December, January, February and March, in the Years of our Lord,
1678, 1679, 1680. And likewise in the Months of March, April and May, 1681. And
in all some of one of the said Years and Months, without any License or
Faculties in that behalf first obtained, or Banes Published and Denounced, as
is enjoined by the said Canons and Constitutions, and by the Book of
Common Prayer, by Law established in the Church of England, Solemnize, or
rather Profane several Marriages between several persons, and more especially
between James Abel of the Parish of St. Leonards in Colchester aforesaid, and
Anne Burnham of the same Parish: And also between John Shepherd of the Parish
of St. Leonards aforesaid, and Damaris Gillings, of the same Parish. And also
between Edward Hartley of the Parish of St. Botolphs in Colchester, and Mary
Groom of the Parish of St. Leonards aforesaid. And also between Daniel Steers
of the Parish of St. Mary Magdalen in Colchester aforesaid, and Ann Bloome of
the Parish of St. Leonard aforesaid. And also between Richard Potter of Aldham
in the County of Essex, and Everert of the said Parish, Widow. Et Objicimus
and Articulamur ut supra.

8. Item, Objicimus and Articulamur quod praemissa fuerunt and sunt vera
publica and notoria manifesta pariter and famosa ac de and super eisdem
laboravit and in Praesenti laborat publica vox and fama unde firma fide de jure
in hac part requisita petit pars ista proponens jus and justitiam sibi fieri
and Ministrari cum effectu, nec non prefatum Edmundum Hickeringill pro tanto
suae temeritatis excessu in delictis and criminibus suis praedictis Canonice
corrigi and puniri, and a dicta sua Rectoria omnium Sanctorum in Villa
Colcestria praedicta per triennium juxta Canones and Constitutionis praedictus
suspendi ac pro sic suspenso denunciari and declarari doctumque Edmundum
Hickeringill in expensis Legitimis ex part and per partem Thomae Doughty in
hujnsmodi causa factus and faciendum eidemque se ad omnia and singula promissa
probanda sed quatenus probaverit and in premissis catenus obtineat in petitis
officium Domini Judicantis humiliter implorando.

To which Libel (at my second appearance before them) in Doctors-Commons (of
which this is the News) November 12. 1681. I gave in, over and above the
Protestations to be seen in my first Printed News from Doctors-Commons, This
following Answer.

CHAP. VII.
ALLEGATIONS humbly propounded in the Court (vulgarly) called the Arches, held
in Doctors Commons, London, in further Protestation, Plea and Answer to certain
Articles in a Libel against Mr. Edmund Hickeringill Clerk, Defendant.

Exhibited before Sir Robert Wiseman (there) upon a Citation, at the Promotion
of Thomas Doughty Gent. (alias) at the Promotion of Henry Bishop of London.
November. 21. 1681.

THIS Defendant saving to himself all Advantages and Benefit of Exceptions
already made by Protestation against the Proceedings of this Court, by reason
of the Statute 1 Edw. 6.2. against all Process Ecclesiastical, wherein the Name
and Style, and Seal of the King is not inserted, which (with the Penalties at
the Peril of the Transgressors thereof) is now in force (as this Defendant is
informed by his Council learned in the Law) notwithstanding some Opinion given
to the contrary, during the Awe and Terror of the High-Commission-Court, now
(blessed be God) abolished.

Saving also the benefit of such other Statutes and Reasons by this Defendant
formerly alleged in the said Protestation; All which being saved to this
Defendant, he further Protests and says,

First, That under Favor of this Court, and with submission to better
Judgments, this Defendant humbly conceives, that there is a Statute made in 16
Car. 1.11. whereby not only that branch of 1 Eliz. 1. is repealed; But also, It
is further Enacted by the said Statute, That no Archbishop, Bishop, Archdeacon,
Commissary, Official, Statute print.
etc. shall inflict any Pain, Penalty, etc. for any Misdemeanors, or Contempt,
etc. in pain of One hundred pounds, and Costs and Damages to the Party grieved.

Upon which it is acknowledged by 13 Car. 2.12. that doubt did arise, whether
by 17 Car. 1. (and yet there never was any Statute made in that 17 Year) All
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was not thereby suspended ( which doubts, whether
well-grounded, this Defendant does not take upon him to determine, but rather
thinks that Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as to purely Spirituals, and purely
Spiritual Weapons, is not thereby taken away, nor should the Weapons of their
Warfare be Carnal, but Spiritual.)

But this Defendant humbly conceives, That the said Statute comes fully home to
this his present Case, (in the said Articles) and is without doubt.

The last Article of the said Libel threatening this Defendant with no small
Pain and Penalty, but no less than that of being suspended for Three Years from
his Rectory of All Saints in Colchester, in that County of Essex: And also to
pay money for Costs.

Both which are great Pains and Penalties, though not so bad as corporal
Punishment, yet they are Punishments (not Spiritual, but) Temporal Pains and
Penalties.

All which that Statute takes (right and good reason) from their Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, as well as Corporal punishments:

As ill becoming Churchmen, that never learned this of their Savior.

Nor, ( as this Defendant is informed by his Council learned in the Law) is
this Statute of 16 Car. 1.11. repealed; nor whether any reason it should be
repealed, this Defendant thinks it not proper for him to determine, but humbly
thinks that it is impossible that the repealing the 17 Car. 1. should repeal 16
Car. 1. But doubts not but it is available to him to defend him from the force
of the said Article, and to keep his said Rectory, Tithes and Profits, from the
reach of this Spiritual Court.

Besides, The said Article threatening to suspend this Defendant from his
Rectory for Three Years, (and the said Rectory being this Defendants Freehold)
the validity of this Defendants Title thereunto, ought not to be tried in any
Ecclesiastical Court, but in the Courts of our Lord the King, as in the Statute
of Provisors, 16 Rich. 2.5.

For the Plenarty of a Benefice, or whether a Benefice be full, shall not be
tried in the Ecclesiastical Court, or Court Christian, (says the Lord Cook) but
in the Kings Courts, as in the other Statute of Provisors, 25 Edw. 3. and 9
Edw. 1.2. and 18 Edw. 3.5. 16 Car. 1.11.

And in cause of disturbance (as this is) concerning the Right of Tithes
pertaining to a Rectory, when it is deraigned, then shall the Plea pass in
Court Christian, as far forth as (and no further at their peril then) it is
deraigned in the Kings Courts, as in the said 9 Edw. 1.2. and 18 Edw. 3.5. 28
Edw. 3.3.

A Jury, not an Official, or Commissary, Bishop, nor Archdeacon, shall
determine Men's Freeholds; such are all Rectories and Vicaridges.

Secondly, In the said Process or Citation, (the ground or leading Process to
the after-proceedings against this Defendant in the said Court) the said
Defendant is cited to answer certain Articles at the Promotion of Thomas
Doughty Gent.

But such Articles at the said Doughty's Promotion are not delivered to this
Defendant, nor were exhibited against him at his first appearance upon the said
Citation, as is provided by 2 Hen. 5.3. nor such Libel or Declaration
answerable to the Process charged upon this Defendant to this day; and
therefore he ought, by the said Statute, to be dismissed with Costs.

But instead thereof, another Libel was delivered to this Defendant, wherein
Henry Bishop of London is Promoter, (Richard Nucourt the Proctor, in presence
of this Defendant, blotted out (for the Ink was not dry when the Libel was
delivered) Thomas Doughty the aforesaid Promoter, and in his Room very sawcily
(and no doubt without the said Bishops privity, being absent) inserted Henry
Bishop of London as Promoter; nor will the said Bishop have very much cause to
thank him for the Place or Preferment, (it being much below the Grandeur of a
Reverend Bishop to be an Informer or Promoter.)

But the Half-crafty Proctor, the said Nucourt, was got into a Dilemma, and
knew not how well to extricate himself:

For when this Defendant urged the Statute of 23 H. 8.9. against Sir Robert
Wiseman, with the Penalty of 10 l. besides Costs and Damages, for citing this
Defendant out of the Diocese of London, where he Inhabits; to salve the
business, it was thought fit rather to let Doughty's said Promotion fall (but
then Costs should have been given this Defendant, but it was denied and refused
against the Rules of their own Courts and Methods, (as if they had the Law in
their own hands.)

And to salve the Statute of 23 H. 8, 9. and the Penalties there, Henry Bishop
of London was Inserted Promoter, though this Defendant was never Cited to
answer his Suit and Promotion.

Nay, it looks like a Wheedle, or a Trepan, to drill a Man into a Court by
Process in a feigned Suit, and then clap an Action on his Back at another Man's
Suit, and without his Privity too: but any methods to carry on the Cause, The
Cause.

Besides, according to the usual Methods of this Court, no Man is obliged to
accept a Libel except the Promoter become bound in sufficient Penalty (not only
with responsable and sufficient Sureties, but such as are capable of being
Arrested) in case of Nonsuit (or failure of proof,) to pay to the Defendant
his Costs and Damages.

But no such thing is done for this Defendant (new Lords, new Laws.) This
Defendant is like to thrive amongst you in the Interim.

CHAP. VIII.
NEvertheless this Defendant, to vindicate himself, and the integrity of his
unblemish't (he hopes he may say, without offense, in this his just and forced
defense) Life and Conversation; and to manifest that the said Protestations;
Answers and Pleas are not dilatory, and on purpose to decline a particular
Answer, or evade the discussing of the merits of the Cause and Crimes alleged
against him in the said Articles; he this Defendant (saving to himself the
benefit of his former Allegations, Pleas and Protestations) further
(Particularly) answers and says,

1. That the first Article in the said Libel (as being only in course) is true,
and all the other false, further than is hereafter declared.

2. That the 2, 3, 4, and 5th Articles are Instances and Accusations against
this Defendant as a common-mover, exciter and maintainer of Suits and Quarrels,
which is Barretry, (an offense against the Statute Law and Common Law of this
Realm) and therefore ought not to be Tried in any Ecclesiastical-Court, as
forbidden in the Statute of Provisors, 16 R. 2.5. In derogation of the Courts
of our Lord the King ( mark how the Spiritual-Courts and the Kings-Courts are
opposed,) implying necessarily, that the King and Parliament did not then look
upon the Spiritual Courts to be the Kings Courts, but the Highpriests Courts;
nor do they (to this day) hold them in the King's Name and Style, and all their
Acts under His Seal; what Policy is it at this time of day to be Independents,
(I mean) Noun-Substantives, and stand by our selves?

The said Statute too, 16 R. 2.5. is in pain of a Praemunire, and has a mighty
fetch and reach, (even over the water, as well as on this side) for the Statute
says -- The Court of Rome, or elsewhere.

3. The said Defendant, Mr. Hickeringill, had an Information brought against
him for Barretry in the Crown-Office, and at a Trial at Chelmnesford Assizes, (
March 3. 1680. for the County of Essex thereupon) amongst 24 Heads of the
charge of Barretry exhibited against him (then and there) tried, the 23d Head
was the substance of the said 2d, 3d, 4th and 5th Articles (in the Libel
aforesaid mentioned) and this Defendant (though pleading his own Cause) was
acquitted with honor of this malicious Charge, the Right Worshipful Knights
and Gentlemen of that Special Jury not stirring from the Bar, nor the least
proof of the Charge made out against him in any one Particular; nor any proof
but of the Folly as well as Malice of the Informers, Conspirators, and
Promoters then and there.

And must he now again for the same matters be tried again by the
Ecclesiastical Men, after acquittal in the Courts of our Lord the King, and by
Prosecutors that were then Accessories (at least) to the said causeless and
malicious Prosecution; and in defiance too of the said Statute of Provisors?

CHAP. IX.
4. THE Title of not only a fourth part, (which is ground enough for a
Prohibition) but all the small Tithes of St. Botolph's Parish (as in Article
4.) is in question and controversy.

For the said Promoter, Henry Bishop of London, pretends Right to dispose of
the said Tithes by Sequestration, nay, has disposed of the said Tithes, (but
shall the Defendant suffer it) to one Harris, whereas the Defendant has enjoyed
the Tithes 19 or 20 years, and yet enjoys them, (as Rector of the Rectory of
All Saints in Colchester in the said County of Essex, in Right of (and
belonging to) his said Rectory, as his Predecessors, the Rectors of All Saints
aforesaid, have done quietly; and ('till now) without disturbance, ever since
the dissolution of Monasteries, and (amongst others) the Priory of St.
Botolph's in Colchester aforesaid, granted, sold or given by King Henry VIII.
to Thomas Lord Audley, then Lord Chancellor of England; and from him, and his
Brother and Heir Thomas Audley Esquire together with his Executors (joining
together) granted unto Robert Plumton Clerk, Rector of the Rectory of
All Saints aforesaid, and to his Successors for ever (whose present lawful
Successor (and for above 19 years has been and now) is this Defendant) by Deed,
a true Copy whereof follows in these words, verbatim.

TO all Christian People to whom this present Writing shall come, Edward North
and Thomas Pope Knights, Edmund Martin Esquire and Thomas Gimblet Gentleman,
Executors of the Testament or last Will of Thomas Audley whil^st he lived
Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter, Lord Audley of Walding, and Lord
Chancellor of England, and Thomas Audley Esquire Brother to the said Lord Audley,
do send Greeting. Whereas the said Lord Audley in his Lifetime, for and in
consideration of certain Covenants, Grants and Agreements made between him, and
the Parishioners of the Parish Church of All Saints in the Town of Colchester
in the County of Essex, did give, grant, bargain, sell and confirm unto the
Rector of the said Purish-Church, and to his Successors for ever, All the
Tithes as well of Hay, Wood, and Corn, as of any other kind or sort whatsoever
to him belonging in the Town of Colchester aforesaid, by reason of the
Dissolution or Resignation of his House or Priory of St. Botolphs in the said
Town of Colchester: Know ye therefore, That we the aforenamed Edward North,
Thomas Pope, Edmund Martin, Thomas Gimblet, and Thomas Audley Esquire for the more
sure and perfect accomplishment, performance and execution of the said
Covenants, Grants, and Agreements, as also in Consideration and for the Sum of
Forty Pounds of Sterling money by Richard Aufeild and William Hutton now
Churchwardens of the aforesaid Church of All Saints, to the aforenamed Lord
Thomas Audley in his Lifetime, paid in full Purchase and Bargain of the
aforesaid Tithes to him the aforenamed Rector, and to his Successors for ever;
Have given, granted, fold and by this present Writing confirmed unto Robert
Plumton Clerk, Rector of the Parish Church of All Saints in, the Town of
Colchester aforesaid, and unto his Successors for ever, all the aforesaid
Tithes in the Town of Colchester, or elsewhere: To have enjoy, hold, and take
all and singular the aforesaid Tithes to the said Robert Plumton, and to his
Successors, Rectors of the Parish Church of All Saints in Colchester aforesaid,
for the time being, for ever. And I the said Thomas Audley Esquire and my Heirs,
All and singular the Premises above specified, against me the said Thomas
Audley Esquire and my Heirs, to the said Robert Plumton, and his Successors
aforesaid, shall and will warrant, and for ever defend by these Presents. In
witness whereof, we the said Edward North, Thomas Pope, Edmund Martin, and
Thomas Gimblet, and Thomas Audley Esquire to this our present Writing have set our
Seals: Dated May 14, in the 36 year of the Reign of the most excellent and
invincible Prince, and our Lord, Hen. VIII. by the Grace of God King of
England, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, and on Earth the Supreme
Head of the Church of England, France and Ireland.

EDWARD NORTH, THOMAS POPE, EDWARD MARTIN, THOMAS GIMBLET, THOMAS AVDLEY.
And is it not Great, first to invade a man's Rights and Freeholds, and then
Article against him as a Barretor, for defending himself and them? Oh! most
incomparable Subtlety and Policy! And if a Plenarty (for three years only)
shall be an Estoppel to the King, (as in some Cases, 18 Edw. 3.5.) much more a
Plenarty for 19 or 20 years, as in this Case; not to be stiffed nor tried,
whether by Right obtained, or by Intrusion, (though this Defendant enjoys them
by lawful Presentation from the King, and Institution and Induction thereon,
but however) this Spiritual Court extravagantly inquires after it; the Titles
of men's Freeholds and Rectories belonging only to the Courts of our Lord the
King; and a Trial by Juries, as proved by the Statutes (before mentioned)
beyond all contradiction; or fear of any thing but a Praentunire, for being
Busybodies, that would hook in all things (by hook and by crook) into the
Jurisdiction of their Courts, (as you know who does) in ordine ad spirituali^.

Fifthly, As for the Rectory of St. Leonards in Colchester aforesaid, a poor
business it is, (God knows) not is worth 7 l. per Annum, nor, that able to
repair the Dilapidations of the Parsonage-house in ten years, nay, it had been
demolished to the ground long ere this, but for care taken for the same by
Robert Sewell Gent. who was, and still is Sequestrator of the Profits of the
said Rectory, constituted and appointed under the Seal of the said Henry Bishop
of London, bearing date April 17. 1676. and in the first year of his
Translation, and confirmed by the said Bishop in all and every of his
Visitations, and the Fees paid for the same, and the same still is in force,
and unrevok'd. Besides, though the Benefice of the said Leonards is so small,
as aforesaid, yet the said Mr. Sewell provided to support the House, (which is
large) and keep it up in tolerable Repair, and provided the learned and honest
Gentleman Mr. Bridge of Alesford in Essex, to preach there once a month, and
sometimes this Defendant, (though not above once in a year sometmes.) But the
said Living being so poor and scandalous, and the Parish so lamentably
abounding with Poor, above any other Parish in Colchester, this Defendant
constantly paid to the relief of the Poor 2 s. per mensem; and also at every
Sermon that Mr. Bridge aforesaid, or this Defendant did preach there, this
Defendant also caused to be distributed Four and twenty Penny-loaves amongst
the poorest sort, but after, since the said Bishop has given the interruption,
the Poor has had the less Food for their Souls, (for the Church-doors have long
been shut against the said Mr. Bridge, and this Defendant, wonderful care of
the Cure of Souls) whereby also the Poor has been deprived of relief for their
Bodies also; That Is all the good that is, or is ever likely to be, by this
peevish stop: l. s. d. per Annum. The Profits of the Rectory 07 00 00 per
Annum. Out of which, per Annum. The Kings Tenths, Pension, Bishops Visitation,
Synodals and Procurations, about 02 00 00 per Annum. To the Poor, assessed, and
freely given 02 10 00 per Annum. For preaching 13 Sermons, to Mr. Bridge per
Annum, at 5 s. per Sermon. 03 05 00 per Annum.

But the Profits, the said Mr. Sewell does yet receive, as he hopes he lawfully
may be the Authority of the said Bishop unrevok'd to this day, and not worth
the contending for: For no man can get a Penny by it, and seldom comes a
better; but (no matter how soon) the same is revoked, that the great advantage
the poor People gets by this bustle and change may be seen: For it is a shame
that the Bishop should provide worse for them, and make a bustle, only to do
harm; and if he do provide better, then the said Promoter and Bishop must part
with money (probably) out of his own Pocket thereunto, which this Defendant
fears will not be done.

Sixthly, The Vicaridge of Fingringhoe is void by the Statute, 26 H. 8.3. by
reason the said Samuel Harris Clerk (in the third Article mentioned) (being
Instituted and Inducted in or about the month of December last past, yet) has
not paid the King's Tenths to the value (with Charges thereupon in the
Exchequer) of 30 or 40 l. now due, and refused to be paid, (or neglected by the
said Bishop to be demanded of him personally) or if demanded lawfully, then the
said Vicaridge is void, and ought to be so declared, and the Right of Patronage
or Advowson being in this Defendant, together with the great Tithes and
Impropriation of Fingringhoe aforesaid, the Custody of the Profits of the said
Vicaridge does belong (during the Vacancy) to this Defendant the Patron, (as
this Defendant humbly conceives by force of the Statutes 25 Edw. 3. and 35 Edw.
1.1.) But if disputable be this Defendants Title to the same, yet neither this
Court, nor any Ecclesiastical Court can hold Plea thereof nor of any matter
whereof the King's Courts have Right of Jurisdiction, 2 Edw. 6.13. nor can
determine the Titles and Rights of Freehold (as 25 Edw. 3.4. 28 Edw. 3.3. 17
(alias) 16 Car. 1.11.) aforesaid.

Besides, the said Harris never was Resident so much as one night in the said
Parish of Fingringhoe, since his first Induction to the said Vicaridge thereof,
but preached three or four times to the Parishioners, got half a years Tithes,
and never came in the said Parish (not once) since June last, but hired out
himself (a Curate in London) under Dr. Grove to this day; so that the
Defendants said Parish (of which he is Patron) is miserably abused, the Cure
deserted, the Flock neglected, the Fleece only expected, and neither His
Majesty's Tenths paid, nor the Vicaridge disburthen'd thereof; for the payment
of which Tenths to His Majesty, this Defendant desires this Court, to sequester
the Profits, and better provide for the Cure, both which the Bishop of London,
the said Promoter, neglects to do; so that great harm, but no good, is done by
this Interruption, and Fingringhoe has also cause to say, Seldom comes a better.

Nor is it any great additional Honor to the Pastoral Staff, (that pretends a
whole Diocese to be its Flock, Cure and Charge, even of All the Souls therein,
(a pretty great burden and weight for a single shoulder) that not satisfied to
be well paid for sitting still, must be doing and meddling, though it had much
better do nothing, than do mischief and harm.

It Is well the Archbishop is the Bishop of Bishops; and as much superior and
elevated above the common or ordinary Bishop, as a Bishop above the little
Presbyters.

And it is proper, in this Case, to let the Archbishop know (that he may take
notice and correct) the neglect of the said Promoter, the said Bishop of
London, in neglecting to collect His Majesty's Arrearages of the Tenths
(aforesaid) due from the said Harris, the said little Vicar of Fingringhoe; and
his sin of omission, in neglecting personally to demand the said great
Arrearages (of Tenths) of the said Harris, when he has (as he has frequently)
met with him; or, upon refusal, and non-payment, to have declared the said
Vicaridge, ipso facto, void of the said Incumbent, as if he was dead, as is
enjoined by and in the said Statute 23 H. 8.

That so the Patron might present a better man, and the neglect of His
Majesty's said Revenue be no longer connived and winked at: nor the Cure of
Souls in Fingringhoe aforesaid be so neglected and abandoned, and much worse
provided for by the said Bishop the Promoter, in this Case, than ever.

Whilst there is none to Administer the Holy Sacraments there, nor to Baptize
or Catechize their Children, Bury the Dead, Read Divine Service, nay, nor so
much as a Sermon read by the said Curate Harris, or rather Reader, (for he can
do nothing else but read) whilst the honest Parishioners have cause to bewail
these Contrivances, and bemoan the fruits of (this) Discord, that whilst the
said Promoter intended to strike this Defendant, he mist his blow, and hit none
but the harmless Parishioners, who (good men) pay for all, and All for nothing.

For though the said Harris has let out himself to work (a kind of
Journey-work) under the said Dr. Grove, yet he has not quite so forgot his
Parishioners, but that he has most magisterially commanded them to send him
money for half a years Tithes, or else he has threatened them that he will --
Ay, that he will --

It Is meet, that this Court of Arches, or Archbishop, (if it can do any thing)
that it should correct the faults of Bishops: We must even turn the Tables --

Nor will any Body pity those busy Medlers and Master-workmen, that cannot be
content to oversee the Laborers hard at work, and well wrought and employed,
but they must be placing and displacing stones in the Building, and set them a
tumbling and rolling, 'till they fall upon their own Pates --

Nay, -- no matter; Harm watch, Harm catch.

So that the 2, 3, 4 and 5th Articles are already answered by Statute Law, and
so shall all the rest, besides what has been already pleaded and professed,
together with another Law, (that has no Law) Necessity: Therefore

CHAP. X.
7thly, AS to the 6, 7, and 8 Articles, or last Articles, they urge a
Transgression, (in solemnizing, or rather profaning Matrimony) (well-worded,
and cunningly) but if the Register and Sir Thomas Exton had had eight shillings
for every Marriage, as they have had for many years together above 40 l. of
this Defendant upon that Score, and at that Rate; then bonas noches, and not a
word of (profaning) Matrimony without Banes or License, contrary to the Canons
and Constitutions of the Church of England.

Alas! Poor Church of England! Thou must be made a Skreen, a Pretense, and a
Color for Men's Avarice: Oh Hypocrisy!

To which this Defendant answers particularly, and says,

First, That this Charge against him is in its self null and void in Law,
Reason, Equity and Conscience, for the uncertainty, in not naming what
particular Canons and Constitutions of the Church of England are thereby
transgrest, since the Canons and Constitutions of the Church of England (that
go under that Name, Color and Title) are contrary to one another in many
Particulars, too long here to recite.

But in this particular Case of solemnizing Matrimony without Banes or License,
the Canons or Constitutions that go under the name of Queen Elizabeth, and King
James, in Print, are vastly different one from the other; Queen Elizabeth's
Canons and Injunctions ordaining for such Offense a Suspension ( ab officio
only, and so particularly expressed) only for the space of six months.

But those under the names of King James, ordain for the like Offense a
Suspension for three (long) years; a long time for a painful and laborious
Minister to live with his mouth stopped, and upon such an occasion too, that not
one word is said to it, nor any body aggrieved, if the said Registers and
Commissaries go but swips in the (pretended) License, and have a feeling in the
hand.

Which makes it more than probable, that those said Canons and Constitutions of
the Church of England are not truly Printed; nor is any man bound to take
notice of them, except they be Recorded in a Court of Record, and a true Copy
be produced in such Court, (and particularly in this Court upon this Suit, and
this occasion) and the Truth thereof sworn upon Oath of good and creaible
Witnesses, which this Defendant does hereby require in this Case and Suit,
according to the Rules and Methods of Law and Justice, Reason and Equity.

Besides, the said (pretended) Canon of King James, ordaining Suspension in
general, ought by the Rules of the Civil Law, Reason and Common Law, be taken
in the mildest sense:

For there being two kind of Suspensions, namely, 1. Ab Officio. 2. A
Beneficio. The first only damages the Flock and Parish. The second also starves
the poor Priest and all his Family; oh Cruelty! for a Peccadillo, when no man
is damnified thereby, but a greedy Register and Commissary, (they that buy must
sell) and if their mouths be but stopped with Guinees, the Minister's shall never
be stopped; the Fault's alleged against this Defendant for solemnizing, or
rather profaning Matrimony without Banes -- being only in the years 1680 and
1681. when he took but about 5 s. for the same, (the People being the gainers
thereby;) but when this Defendant married ten times more in the years 1674,
1675, 1676, 1677, 1678, and 1679. and made the People pay for a pretended
License and Marriage, about 12 s. or 13 s. of which, each the said Registers
and Commissary had 8 s. apiece: Then, (oh no!) Then; not a word to be said, nor
any Promoters heard of against him.

But after the writing the Naked Truth, that tells them roundly of their crying
Extortions and Oppressions of the King's Subjects, in illegal (Fees, or rather)
Exactions, in Probates, of Wills, Letters of Administrations, Ordinations,
Institutions, Inductions, Visitations, Synodals, Procurations,
Excommunications, and Absolutions: (in answer whereof neither they, nor one
Fullwood their Doughty-Champion, has so much as one word to say in their
Defense) Then nothing will serve but Ruin and Desolation, in Plots and
Contrivances against the Author for Barretry, and No body knows what. And now
too, have at his Rectory, and the Profits thereof, (which he holds by the Law
of the Land, and will hold, in spite of their teeth and malice.)

For if such solemnizing Matrimony were proved upon him in a lawful Court and
Judicature, and against lawful Canons and Constitutions found upon Record, and
in a Court of Record, (but this Court (if it be a Court) is no Court of Record)
and a true Copy thereof here produced and testified:

And also if it be proved that such Canons and Constitutions (so contrary to
one another) are (or which of them are) now in force in these days, that the 1
Eliz. 1. (by which they had enargie, life and power) is defeated; and also by
the said 16 Car. 1.11. and 13 Car. 2.12.

Yet, even then the malice of this Defendants Adversaries cannot reach his
Rectory and the Profits thereof (as Thomas Doughty threatens in the eighth and
last Article:) for, not only the Injunctions of Queen Elizabeth ordains
Suspension (only) ab officio, but that Suspension (in general terms) in the
pretended Canon of King James, ought to be construed (the same with that of
Queen Elizabeth, namely) Suspension ( only ab officio, or silencing, or
stopping the mouth, a mighty Privilege:) not Suspension, a beneficio, because
of the said Maxim of the Civil-Law, Common Law, Mercy, Reason, Equity and
Conscience -- namely, Poenae ( generaliter expressae) semper debent intelligi
in mitiori sensu; punishments (only) in general terms expressed, ought always to
be taken in the mildest sense.

Oh! but the said Promoter Thomas Doughty in this last Article cannot afford so
much clemency; (it is a pity therefore he should ever be called vestra
clementia, or his Grace) mercy is (an Herb) rarely found in the Fields of an
Informer or Promoter -- Solomon tells us -- The mercies of the wicked are
cruelty.

However, whatever may be proved against him in this mighty case, he doubts not
but to keep his Free-holds, Lands and Tenements, both spiritual and temporal,
which (blessed be God) are worth the gaping for; and let them gape, they may
gape long enough before they stop their mouths with them; it is to be hoped,
their mouths will be stopped with mould (first) in the grave, before they ruin a
Man and his House; a Man and his Family; a Man and his dear Wife and seven
lusty Children; ( God bless them and keep them out of harms-way, secure under
the Protection of the Law, against all Conspirators, against this Defendant, or
them, and against all Man-Catchers, little and great: we live in jolly times,
God keep us.)

Which brings to mind, Nothing of this was put in the Defendants Answer, but is
added de Nove.
the Caveats entered by Sir Matthew Hale, (that incomparable Lord Chief Justice)
against and for himself, necessary to be continually had in remembrance, by all
Judges Temporal and Spiritual, and proper enough it is here to Insert one half,
or nine of them.

1. That I never engage my self in the beginning of any Cause, but reserve my
self unprejudiced 'till the whole be heard.

2. That I be not too rigid in matters purely conscientious, where all the harm
is diversity of Judgment.

3. That I be not biased with compassion to the Poor, or favor to the Rich,
in point of Justice.

4. That Popular, or Court-Applause, or Distaste, have no Influence into any
thing I do in point of distribution of Justice.

5. Not to be solicitous what men will say or think, so long as I keep my self
exactly according to the Rules of Justice.

6. If in Criminals it be a measuring cast, (mark that) to incline to Mercy and
Acquittal.

7. In Criminals that consist merely in words, when no more harm ensues,
moderation is no Injustice.

8. To abhor all private solicitations, of what kind soever, and by
whomsoever, in matters Depending.

9. To charge my Servants, 1. Not to Interpose in any business whatsoever. 2.
Not to take more than their known Fees. 3. Not to give any undue Precedence to
Causes. 4. Not to recommend Counsel. --

Ay, Ay, here was (I had almost said) a Nonesuch, seldom comes a better; nay,
nay, seldom such another.

Again, to our present matter in hand, and the Article aforesaid, of
transgressing the Canons and Constitutions of the Church of England.

The Article does not say what Canons, whether Canons made before the
Reformation, or since; whether Canons made when the Pope was Head of the Church
of England, or Canons made since the Kings of England were declared, by Acts of
Parliament, the Heads, or Head of the Church of England.

So that, this Defendant cannot possibly know how particularly to answer the
same, or know whether to confess, traverse or deny; so that this Defendant
therefore requires that it may be explained and particularized, by the
Promoter, or Promoters, what Canons and Constitutions they mean or would be at,
and where such Canons and Constitutions of the Church of England are to be
found, and in what Court of Record, that this Defendant may give a more
positive and particular Answer thereunto; for dolus later in universalibus.

Secondly, Besides what is already said at large, as to the Uncertainty, (which
is enough to quash the said Articles at least for the present, if it were
needful.)

This Defendant further answers, and says, That he humbly denies the force,
strength and virtue of all Canons and Constitutions (vulgarly called) of the
Church of England, that are not Confirmed by King and Parliament, the only
Legislators and Lawmakers in this Realm of England:

Which, if any deny to be true, it is like he may have an answer in Parliament,
if thought fit.

But if it be true, and that no Canons and Constitutions of the Church of
England are allowed or confirmed to be obligatory Laws to an Englishman, as in
13 Car. 2.12. and 16 Car. 1.11. then there is an end of the Story, and this
Traverse is further needless.

But if this Court denies, That the King and Parliament are the only
Legislators, then this Defendant desires they would so declare and express
themselves; that so this Defendant, and all others, may know the limits of
their obedience:

For this Defendant hereby protests, That if he ever shall, or ever did
transgress the known Laws of England, or the dark and disputable Laws of
England, it was through error of his judgment, and not of his will; and
therefore he desires this Court to inform and inlighten him, and set him to
rights; if he err; or, if they can do it.

For it is not safe to say of that Act of Parliament, 13 Car. 2.12. of not
allowing or confirming the Canons of -- 40, commonly called the Lambeth Canons,
and all other Canons and Constitutions not confirmed by Act of Parliament, etc.
that they signify nothing, and are inserted idly, and for no end and purpose;

Which those seem to assert and imply, that say, those words of not confirming
the Canons, or not allowing are not disallowing, nor any remarque or neglecting
Character thereby set upon them,

For the Canons had been left in statu quo prius, (as all other things were not
mentioned in the said Act) although not one word concerning them had been
therein mentioned.

In all Grammatical Construction (then) the Not-confirming the Lambeth- Canons,
or Canons of 40, etc. That Not-allowing, is a disallowing ( as plain as the
Times (perhaps) would then bear) And all those words in the said Act signify
the distaste and neglect the King and Parliament had of all Canons not
confirmed by Act of Parliament, and then all those words concerning the same
signify something, and not, nothing.

Especially, leaving things as they were in the year 1639. when the
High Commission Court was up; and 1 Eliz. 1. in force, which is absolutely
repealed by the same Statute; And if any man thought that some had got (by that
13 Car. 2.12.) an Act for their Turn, as was endeavored, they were vilely
mistaken, or outwitted; at least, it was all that would (even then) be done
for them; which latter is most probable, because of that fatal mistake in
repealing 17 Car. 1. And there never was such an Act in the world, nor any made
in that year, that this Defendant can find; so lasting were the deep and bloody
Prints of the High Commission (even yet) in Parliament-mens heads.

And this, many took notice of long ago, if they had thought it meet and
opportune to take notice of it; it might have been amended, and may yet by an
Act of Parliament, otherwise, it is to be feared, that the mistake is fatal;
And the 16 Car. 1.11. be in force, and not possible to be repealed by the
repeal of the 17 Car. 1. Then goodnight, Nicholas, and there is an end of the
Story; and a Commissary, Official or Register's place, is not worth the buying;
no, nor that, of a poor Proctor of this Court of Arches, which use to cost
about 40 l. though the same man be a Proctor in any other Spiritual-Court; yet
he cannot practice in this Court, without laying down the Cash, (I mean) down
with their Dust, Gold Dust, or Guinees, Money, more Money.

Which (perhaps) is the reason, why the Proctors are suffered to take ten
groats for a Fee, that used to be (by the style of this Court) but and
proportinably, all other Fees abominably enhanc't; wherever the fault lies,
they that buy must sell, or else, they have a bad bargain.

The Fees of an Excommunication and Absolution used to be but but now they are
(this Defendant knows, to his cost, and by woeful experience, a Guiney) but note
by the way, This also is added, de novo.
the said Bishops Vice-Register, Nucourt, is Arrested in an
Indebitatus-assumpsit, and will also have an Indictment, or Information,
brought against him for the Extortion, at the Suit of this Defendant, who is
vilely loath to be chous't of his Money, and by a pitiful Proctor and
Vice-Register too.

So that, by this time, this Desendant is come a great way toward the final
Answer of these Articles (in this Spiritual-Court) if there were 1000 more of
them: especially in a Court that will neither show, (nor pretend to sit by a)
Commission from the King.

In whom alone, is always inhaerent all Executive-power, both Ecclesiastical
and Temporal.

But our gracious Sovereign, ( not only in his last Declaration, but always)
has declared, That he will rule us according to His Oath and the Fundamental
Laws, made by the only Legislative-power, the King and Parliament.

And the Kings of England always have been of right, and always were (except
during the Pope's Supremacy) equally Heads, or Head of the Church, as well as
of the State; ( if they be two things.)

And has right to make Laws for the regulating the Church or
State-Ecclesiastical, and as much as, for Regulating the State-Temporal.

And far be it from the modesty of this Defendant to pry into the Covered Ark,
and search into the Prerogative of His gracious Majesty, (the Kingdoms glory as
well as support, both for his Mercy and Justice, our dear and dread Sovereign,
and only Head of the Church and State) which Prerogative His Majesty, and his
Father of blessed Memory, our late Martyred Sovereign, have explained to
consist ( not only well, but) best with their Peoples Liberties and Properties;
making a sweet Harmony, and enriching both King and People; as Queen Elizabeth
found, that never had an Exchequer sooner emptied than filled, though her Wars,
and Enemies were Great and Powerful: She sometimes forgave and remitted what
was given her by her Subjects in Parliament, but never made a Speech or Motion
for Money, that proved successless.

Of which, this Defendant had ( not now and here) taken notice of, further than
to show (in this his Defense) in reference to the Church, and the pretended
Canons and Constitutions of the same, that the said Queen never made any
Canons, (neither did King James make any Canons or Constitutions for the Church
or its Regulation) until her Majesty, and consequently his Majesty King James
had (by 1 Eliz. 1. and in that Statute) given unto her, and them, her Heirs and
Successors, Power to Amend, Reform, etc.

And, no more then needed at that time, when the Clergy in Convocation
acknowledged (and surely they knew their own strength, as well and much better
than any can do at this distance) and confessed in the Statute, 1 Mar. 2. that
they had no Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and therefore not Queen Mary, but she
in Parliament, by 1 Mar. 2. restored it; (namely the old Popish Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction) until 1 Eliz. 1. Repealed it, and in its room gave Power to the
Queen to set up another; which, 16 Car. 1.11. and 13 Car. 2.12. pulled down and
Repealed.

Nay, it is evident in Cawdrey's-Case, (in Cooks Reports,) that the Jury were
forced to find the said High Commission specially (and so must other Juries do
(as well) if ever the right of the Spiritual-Courts in Sequestrations,
Suspensions, Deprivations, in meddling with men's Carnal Goods and Free-holds,
comes to be tried in the King-Courts by a Jury (if they can at this time a day)
find such a High Commission, which will be a difficult thing to persuade a Jury
unto,) except such Suspension, or Sequestration, or Deprivation be supported by
that which can only support them, viz. a Statute.

But they should not need to have found the said High Commission specially, if
Ecclesiastical-Courts then had (or consequently have) an ordinary Jurisdiction
without special Commission from the King, only and equally the Head of the
Church and State.

But no Temporal-Courts (or Judges) do or dare Act implicitly, but by special
Patents, (or Commissions under Seal: (for as for Hundred-Courts, they belong to
Proprietors; but all derived originally by Patents from the Crown, as
Sheriff-Courts and Corporation-Courts.)

And besides, from these Inferior Courts, or Common-Law-Courts, as are the
Hundred-Courts; they sit in the Hundred by Prescription; where the Bishops also
used to sit and keep their Courts together, and at the same time and place;
which if they do not now so, they cannot plead to hold Courts by Prescription,
except they (as does (to this day) the Hundred-Courts and County-Courts) keep
up, and keep to their Prescriptions, as to place and time, Canons and Laws.

Therefore away with all idle thoughts of making the Spiritual-Courts,
Ordinary, or Comnion-Law-Courts; this Court it self, (the Supreme of all the
Spiritual-Courts) cannot prescribe for sitting here in Doctors-Commons beyond
the memory of man, for it used to be kept in the Arches of Bow-Church, whence
it had its name, (but now most improperly,) except it sit by special Commission
from his Majesty, and be so styled in the Commission.

And if the Archbishop have such Patent from the King to keep Courts of
Judicature-Ecclesiastical, as have the Judges in Westminster Hall for keeping
Courts-Temporal, this Defendant desires this Court then so to Declare it, that
he may the better know how to demean himself with all humility and submission
thereunto.

But this Defendant has taken the Oath of Supremacy, and dare not own any other
Head of the Church, or Ecclesiastical Judicature, but what is derived from Him,
in whom alone is inherent all the Executive power in Church and State;

And from Him imparted and derived to the Judges under Him.

Nay, when His Majesty has derived such power to His Judges, yet they cannot
make a Deputy, if they be sick, nor an Official or Surrogate.

Indeed sometimes a Sergeant at Law is surrogated, (in the room of one of the
12 Judges, sick, dead, or otherwise avocated) and goes the Circuit; but this
must be done by Special Commission, and his Name specially inserted and
mentioned therein, no Judge can make such a Surrogate or Deputy;

Besides, it is but only pro eo vice, for that turn only.

And though an Archbishop (with his Archbishopric) and Bishop (with his
Bishopric) (if constituted according to Law) have all Privileges also annexed
anciently, and of right belonging thereunto by Prescription, or otherwise: yet
a Right by Prescription and Custom, or Common Law, is lost, when the Custom
surceases, and other new Customs innovated; for Customs ought to be certain,
uninterrupted and continual, both as to time, place, etc.

Thus a Court Leet may be lost and forfeited for want of Use, according to the
ancient Usage; and, perhaps, this is (also) part of the Case.

Thirdly, To solemnize Matrimony without Banes first published three several
Sundays or Holy Days in time of Divine Service, in the Parish or Parishes where
the Parties inhabit, is an Offense against Statute Law only, namely, the
Rubric before the Order of Matrimony in the Common Prayer Book, every Sentence
whereof is Statute Law in the Act of Uniformity,

Which if true, then this Court is no competent Interpreter nor Judge of
Statute Law, nor of the nature of the offenses against the same, nor of the
quality and degree of the punishment of such offenses.

And though all Englishmen are bound to obey the same to a Tittle, yet scarce
any Englishman, Bishop, Priest or Layman, but does offend and transgress the
same little or much, and are all Nonconformists, and accordingly are all liable
to be Indicted, and have Presentiments made against them for Nonconformity,
according to the said Statute of Uniformity, and as Sinners and Transgressors
of the same.

Yet some of the Rules (in the Rubric) and the Transgressions thereof, were
thought so small and such little Peccadillo's, that the Legislators or
Lawmakers did not think fit to annex (and assert) any Punishment to and for
the same As for Example:

It is enjoined in the Rubric to read the Communion Service at the Communion
Table, yet not One of a Thousand obeys, except in Cathedrals, etc. (and there
also the Act of Uniformity is as much, or more transgressed, than in any
Countrey-Church in England, (that this Defendant knows of) as shall be proved
infallibly by and by.

But if all Ministers obey the Act of Uniformity aforesaid, in reading the
Communion Service at the Communion Table in the Chancel, in many Churches, if
not in all Churches, not one of an hundred could possibly at that distance, and
in the hollow and obscured Chancel, hear the same, or be more edified, than if
(in Latin) was read the said Communion Service or Mass; ( for so is our
English Communion Service said to be commonly known and called (the Mass) in
the Common Prayer Book; put out by the Reformers, (who in composing and
translating the said English Common Prayer Book) are (by the Act of Parliament
in 2 Edw. 6. Reign made for the common Use and general Practice thereof
throughout the Realm) said to be inspired thereunto by the Holy Ghost.

But (here is the unsuitableness betwixt our Times, and those Times) they (like
the Primitive Christians, Acts 2.) took the blessed Sacrament (in Cathedrals)
every day; and in all Countrey-Churches, on every Sunday and Holy Day,
Wednesdays and Fridays, (on which days only the Communion Service was to be
read) nor was it wholly read, but when the Holy Sacrament was administered,
(which was usually every Sunday and Holyday, in Country Churches and in
Cathedrals every day) and then read after the Letany; and when the Letany was
read, then (and not till then) the Priest put on the Surplice, or Albe and Cope.

And though no man is enjoined by that Act of Uniformity and Common Prayer
Book, to receive the blessed Sacrament above once a year, yet the Households in
the Parish (the Rubric says) were so ordered, that one at least (as his turn
came) always communicated with the Priest, one or other, every Sunday or
Holy Day, at the Altar, where the Priest stood, whilst he read the Communion
Service in the Chancel, and might well enough be heard by the Communicants, who
all were in the Chancel.

This is to show, there is not the same reason now adays (when the Holy
Communion is so seldom celebrated, no, not in Cathedrals) as it was wont, when
the Rubric (of King Edw. 6.) enjoined the Communion Service to be read at the
Altar; for so is the Communion Table there styled, in that Book, said by
Statute Law, to be composed, translated or made by the Inspiration of the Holy
Ghost, as aforesaid.

Again, To give another Example of the constant and wilful transgression of the
Act of Uniformity, by the Bishops and Clergy especially:

Namely, In the Rubric before the order of Morning Prayer, we find these words
-- namely -- And here is to be noted, That such Ornaments of the Church and of
the Ministers thereof at all times of their Ministration, shall be retained and
be in use, (mark that) as were in this Church of England by Authority of
Parliament, in the second year of the Reign of King Edward VI.

Now the great Question will be, What Ornaments they were that were in use in
the Reign of King Edward the sixth?

A question that (I hope) few Country or City Clergymen of ordinary Rank,
know how to answer; for it is to be hoped that they sin through ignorance, and
not through stubbornness, and contempt of the Act of Uniformity; and are rather
ignorant Nonconformists, than wilful Nonconformists, in using other Rites and
Ceremonies, and other Ornaments, at all times of their Ministration, than what
were in use in the time of the 2d of Edward the sixth, enjoined by Act of
Parliament. For in the Rubric in the Communion Service made in the said 2d of
Edward the sixth, after the Title, (which is in these very words) -- The Supper
of the Lord, and the Holy Communion, commonly called the MASS.

We have this Commandment, namely, Upon the day, and at the time appointed for
the ministration of the Holy Communion, the Priest that shall execute the Holy
Ministry, shall put upon him the Vesture appointed for that Ministration, that
is to say, A white Albe plain, with a Vestment or Cope! And where there be many
Priests or Deacons, there so many shall be ready to help the Priest in the
Ministration, as shall be requisite; And shall have upon them likewise the
Vestures appointed for their Ministry, that is to say, Albes with Tunicles.

And (to make the matter plainer) in the Act for the Uniformity of
Common Prayer and Service in the Church, and Administration of the Sacraments,
1 Eliz.

It is enacted, That every manner of Parson, Vicar, or other whatsoever
Minister that ought or should sing or say Common Prayer, mentioned in the said
Book, or minister the Sacraments, etc. shall minister the same in such order
and form (mark that) as they be mentioned and set forth in the said Book.

Or shall wilfully or obstinately standing in the same (which I hope they will
not hereafter venture to do) use any other (mark that) Rite, Ceremony, Order,
Form or Celebrating the Lord's Supper, openly or privity, or Martins, Evensong,
Administration of the Sacraments, or other open Prayers, than is mentioned and
set forth in the said Book.

The Penalties for the first Offense, The profit (of the Benefice, Benefices,
and all the Spiritual Benefits and Promotions, the Offender has (for one Year
next after conviction) is thereby forfeited and gone; together with six Months
Imprisonment without Bail or Mainprise.

For the second Offense, Deprivation ipso facta of all the Spiritual
Promotions, and one whole Years Imprisonment; and that it shall be lawful for
all Patrons and Donors, etc. to present or collate to the same, as if the
Offenders were really dead.

And for the third Offense, Deprivation (as aforesaid) and Imprisonment during
Life.

And if the Offender be not beneficed or promoted, for the first Offense,
Imprisonment for one year without Bayl.

And for the second Offense, Imprisonment during Life.

So 14 Car. II, there is an Act of Uniformity, that (to the same effect)
enjoins no other Rite, Ceremony, Form or Order of Common Prayer, Ornaments, etc.

This is mentioned to humble the rigid Conformist, that he do not plume himself
and be exalted above measure over other Nonconformists, without any Mercy or
Compassion to human Nature, human Frailty, human Error and human Kind; lest he
himself by the next Grand Jury be presented, and found guilty of using other
Rites and Ceremonies, than what are enjoined in the Act of Uniformity and
Common Prayer Book of King Edward VI, or this Common Prayer Book;

And consequently, get a Prison on his back, the same Prison whereinto he has
so often endeavored to put other Nonconformists; and for the same Sin too of
Nonconformity, and Transgression of the same Act of Uniformity, that he has so
extolled and cried up.

For to bow toward the Altar, to bow at the Holy Name of Jesus, to force the
Inferior Clergy, except in Cathedrals, to were the Surplice, or to wear the
Hood, during the Ministration of Baptism, Burial, Morning-Prayer, Letany, or
Evensong, are other Rites and Ceremonies, and other Ornaments, than were
(forced on) the Clergy to use in 2 Edw. 6th, as aforesaid.

Indeed, upon the day and at the time (and only at the time) of Ministration of
the Lord's Supper, the Priest was enjoined to put on the Albe, or Surplice and
Cope.

But not till the Letany was read, and just before he began to read the
Common-Service, and administer the Communion at the Altar; for, so says the
Rubric, in the said Communion-Service in the Common Prayer Book of 2 Edw. 6th,
(just after the Prayer for fair Weather) in these Words:

And tho there be none to communicate with the Priest, yet these days (namely,
Wednesdays and Fridays, aforementioned in the said Rubric) after the Letany
ended, the Priest shall put upon him a plain Albe or Surplice, with a Cope, and
say all things at the Altar, appointed to be said at the Celebration of the
Lord's Supper, until after the Offertory.

So that all are Nonconformists, and liable to Indictments, and loss of their
Liberty, as well as loss of their Livings, that pray before or after Sermon, in
other Form or Order, than is set down in the Common Prayer Book.

And all that force the Country or City Ministers (except in Cathedrals) to
wear the Surplice during Matten^, or Morning-Prayer, Letany, Baptism, Burial,
Evensong, or Evening-Prayer.

And all that bow toward the Altar, and set great Candles thereon; and all
that bow at the Name of Jesus. And all that wear, or force Men to wear Hoods at
any time (except Sermon-time) whether Scarlet, Black, Lamb-skin, or Taffety,
according to their degree, except in Cathedrals, they may if they please; only
it is seemly so to do in Sermon time; but for that, it ought to be left to
every Man's Liberty: For so says the Rubric of the second Common Prayer Book,
which I confess seems strangely worded, in these very, Words:

In the saying or singing of Mattens and Even-song, Baptizing, and Burying, the
Ministers in Parish-Churches and Chapels annexed to the same, shall (I suppose
it should have been printed -- may) use a Surplice; and in all
Cathedral-Churches, and Colleges, the Archdeacons, Deans, Provosts, Masters,
Prebendaries, and Fellows, being Graduates, may ( here it is may, not shall)
use in the Quire, besides their Surplices, such Hoods, as pertains to their
several degrees, which they have taken in any University within this Realm. But
in all other places (mark that) every Minister shall be at Liberty to use any
Surplice, or no.

It is also seemly that Graduates when they do preach (mark that) should use
such Hoods as pertains to their several Degrees. So that to wear the Surplice
or no, is left to every Man's Liberty, (even in Cathedrals) especially, in all
other places.

Hoods according to the degree (not in time of Divine-Service, as in many
Cities and Country-places, worn, not for want of Ignorance, but) only may be
worn in preaching the Sermon, (upon the Knowledge of a Man's Degree and Quality,
may recommend the Sermon possibly, and possibly not) the Hood is commended, not
commanded to be worn, but the reason ceases in reading Divine-Service, and
Administering Sacraments, or reading of Homilies (which are the works of the
Law, not our own works) and are not (nor need to be) recommended by the Dignity
of the Reader, or Administrator; and therefore Hoods (worn at any time, except
Sermon-time) and Surplices forced upon Men's backs in reading Mattens, EvenSong,
Baptizings, or Burials, whether they will or no, and not leaving Men at
Liberty, is [enjoining] other Rites and Ceremonies than what the Law enjoins,
as well as bowing at the Name of Jesus, and bowing toward the Altar; a place,
which some Men never pass by, but they bow; they ought to lose their Spiritual
Promotions for such Superstition; and good reason, for it is either Folly, or
(worse) Popish Superstition. For, if he that bows (still) as he goes by (or
approaches) the Altar, does not fancy that there is somewhat extraordinary
there (that exacts and requires this extraordinary Reverence) above other
places, then he is a foolish Coxcomb, to beck and bow only to that place (above
all other) for no reason, or for nothing. But if he does believe there is
something placed there, that requires this Reverence (as the Papists assert)
who can excuse him from the belief of that Popish Doctrine of
Transubstantiation? Also all are Nonconformists that administer the Sacrament
without Copes on, and this makes all the Ministers in England Nonconformists:
for no body wears Copes, and most wear Surplices, tho this Defendant has not
worn one (except at Communion-times) for several Years bypast: And a Cope he
would wear at such time only of celebrating the Lord's Supper, but he cannot
get one, and necessitas vincit Legem.

And in this Instance he has been the more copious, to show how little those
Boanarges or Sons of Thunder do observe, how they thunder out their own
Sentence and Condemnation; Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee, thou wicked
Servant!

When nothing but Hell and Damnation, Goals and Excommunications, Fines and
Confiscations, Suspensions and Deprivations, will serve their turns, for every
little Breach of any Clause in the Rubric, and where no harm ensues, nor loss,
(but gain to the People) when they are perhaps married without Banes or License.

And for Men to say, that bowing at the Name of the Holy Jesus, our blessed
Redeemer, is an harmless Ceremony, aggravates the Offense.

It is the Popish Excuse for all their multiplied Ceremonies, so many that
their Religion is little else; or so miserably covered therewith, that Men can
see little else.

To bow at the Name of God, or Jehovah, the greatest of all Names, is harmless;
but it would be endless to do it; and there is no Scripture to vouch these
Bowings at the Name of JESUS, or GOD, etc. as is (hitherto unanswerably) proved
in the last page, save two, of the Naked Truth, the second Part.

To wear two or ten Surplices (especially in cold weather) together with an
Hood about the Neck, are harmless, and the Hood keeps the Neck warm in Winter,
but is too hot in all conscience in Summertime: but if it were not too hot,
nor yet too heavy; yet still they are other Rites and Ceremonies than are
enjoined in the Act for Uniformity; and therefore punishable and unlawful.

And what can or dare these Rigid Conformists answer in their own defense,
except cry Peccavi, and confess their Ignorance?

Let us pray for them in our blessed Savior's words, Father, forgive them,
they know not what they do! For certainly the Law does not forgive them, but is
clear against them; What can they say for themselves why Judgment should not be
given against them, according to their celebrated Act of Uniformity?

And to say, the Canons enjoin some of these Ceremonies, much aggravates the
Offense; to play old Canons against the King and Parliament's new Acts and
Statutes, this is petulant and unpardonable; (I had almost said) They had more
need petition for an Act of Indemnity to pardon all Non-Conformists, and to
get for themselves Remission in the Crowd.

CHAP. XI.
AGain; The said Rubric says, None shall solemnize Matrimony without Banes.
But who observes it? who obeys it?

Do not Commissaries, Officials, Archdeacons, Registers, Vice-Registers, and
all that Tribe grant Licenses and Faculties, with a non-obstante to the Statute
and Rubric? But with what Forehead, and by what Authority?

If the Archbishop of Canterbury or York should grant such Licenses, or
Indulgence, to dispense with the Statute, a little more might be said for it,
if but a little. But for these Fellows to sell Indulgences and Dispensations to
the Statute, where is the Modesty, or rather the Impudence? The very same
Rubric is in the Common Prayer Book of 2 Edw. 6. For the said Statute gives no
Privilege, no Exception, no Dispensation to any Man to solemnize Matrimony
without Banes, solemnly published three several Sundays or Holy Days, in time
of Divine Service, where there are Churches, and Divine Service said in such
Parishes where the Parties inhabit; otherwise, they cannot be married without
breach of the said Act, or Rubric; (except perhaps in that impediment) because
Necessitas vincit Legent.

And truly Matrimony (tho not a Sacrament) yet is so serious a thing, so
lasting when the Knot is once tied by a Priest, ever lasting during Life, that
the Law could not safely have been made otherwise than by commanding such a
solemn previous Publication in open Church, in the Parishes where the Parties
inhabit, three several Sundays, or Holy Days.

And then there could be no stoln-Weddings, nor Infants trepanned into Marriage
without the consent of their Parents and Governors. A Caution that even in the
times of the late Usurpation was taken care for, when the Justices of Peace did
the Jobb.

And for Registers and Surrogates, etc. to take upon them to take Bond of 100
l. is so small a Penalty, and the Bond so unwarrantable in Law, that it
signifies just nothing; but to give a Man an Oath, in the case, is altogether
illegal, and punishable. However it is contrary to Law in the said Rubric: But
what shall be the Penalty? The Judges (alone) shall determine, according to the
evil Circumstances and evil Consquences thereof.

So that if this Defendant be guilty of solemnizing Matrimony without Banes
first published, etc. he hopes he may pass Scot-free in the Throng, and amongst
the crowd of so many and great Nonconformists.

But in this case, this Defendant has more to say in his Vindication, than all
of them put together are able to say; namely,

In the next place, That this Defendant did never marry any without Consent of
Parents, or Governors, nor ever any within the prohibited degrees of Affinity,
or Consanguinity, nor any who had a Suit depending thereon, or any the like
Impediment, Inconvenience, evil Circumstance, or evil Consequence.

And moreover, To answer more particularly to the said Articles, that charge
this Defendant for solemnizing Matrimony (as in the 7th Article) betwixt James
Abel and Anne Burnham, John Shepherd and Damaris Gillings, all of the Parish of
St. Leonard in Colchester; and also Ed. Hartley, of the Parish of St. Bottolphs
aforesaid; and Mary Groom of St. Leonard's aforesaid; and also D. Steeres of
the Parish of St. Mary Magdalen in Colchester aforesaid; and An. Bloom of St.
Leonards aforesaid; and also R. Potter of Aldham in the County of Essex, and --
Everet of the same. To which this Defendant particularly answers, and says,
That all the aforesaid five Couples are poor People, that either live in
Parishes where there is no Church, (but what is demolished) as are the Churches
of St. Bottolph's, and St. Mary Magdalen aforesaid, and no Cure at all served
there, since the Siege of Colchester, or else no constant Cure served for the
space of a month and more together, as at the time when the said Potter of
Aldham, and Abel, and the rest of St. Leonard's were married, and consequently
no Banes could be published in time of Divine Service, where there is no Divine
Service: nor any Profits belonging to the Church of St. Bottolph's, or St. Mary
Magdalen aforesaid, that ever he heard of, (if the Churches were standing) and
so little to the Church of St. Leonard's as aforesaid, that they have had no
Minister sometimes for two or three Years together, nor did any body regard it
or take care of it, for two or three Years together, till Mr. Sewell aforesaid,
took some care of it; and if he desert the same, they will be just served as
formerly, Canis in Presepi.

So that the said People (who told this Defendant they had not the gift of
Continency) and therefore (Marriage being the only lawful remedy) they were
loath to come together and lie together unmarried, and Money they had none to
spare for a License, and (if they had) this Defendant had equally transgressed
the Statute, if he had married them (with any pretended License) except the
Banes had been three times published, three several Sundays, or Holy Days, in
time of Divine-Service, which was impossible, and necessitas vincit Legem, as
aforesaid.

And this Court had had this Answer sooner, but that this Defendant could not
in safety or without Affronts approach your Courts, having been there but
twice, and both times by your Clerks, Vassals and Rabble, without any regard or
Reverence to his Quality, or the Dignity of his Function, assaulted, affronted
and threatened.

And had he not accidentally, and (by good Providence) had a great number of
Substantial Citizens (thither brought perhaps through Curiosity, (especially
the first time) of his appearance, and followed him out of your Court) mischief
(much mischief) might have been done.

Yet, even then, your Creatures, (unprovoked) did with most insolent and
opprobrious Language, and Threatenings, pursue this Defendant and the said
Citizens, out of the Gates of Doctors-Commons, into the Street, and there
shamefully railed and scolded, till we were out of hearing.

There are none of his Majesty's Courts in England, but both for their own and
his Majesty's Honor, will not only keep the Peace, but a Decorum, and will
protect those especially that they summon before them, from Affronts.

Nor are the King's Subjects obliged to appear in any Courts, that will not or
cannot protect the Suitors from Jeopardy of their Lives, Limbs or Reputations.
But to cite this Defendant to Doctors-Commons, and then to suffer (if not to
countenance) your Vassals to abuse and affront-him, is no great Argument for
the upholding such a Society, but looks like a Trepan, (at least) it is most
barbarous and unanswerable.

Which if you will not amend and secure him from the Affronts of your Creatures
for the future, he does hereby protest that he does not think himself obliged
to obey your Summons or Monitions to attend this Court, though he had no other
Reason (but he has shown many more) to the contrary. Nor does he think himself
obliged to provide himself of a Lifeguard, to secure him from the Affronts of
the Men of Doctors-Commons.

Nor did he at his first appearance speak Greek to affront the Doctors, but to
show how ill it did become them to expect, that such a Man as this Defendant,
should stand bare-headed before such as they, that being Doctors of the
Canon Law, (much whereof was writ originally in Greek) they might well blush as
red as their Scarlet-Gowns, to expect and command him to stand bare-headed
before them, when the Complement is not due (from this Defendant) to their
Master, the Archbishop, by the Canon Law; which ordains that Episcopus aliquo
loco sedens Presbyterum stare non patiatur, (multo minus nudo Capite;) In
Ecclesia autem and concessu Presbyterorum sublimior sedeat; intra domum vero,
Collegam se Presbyterorum esse cognoscat. A Bishop ( for they had no
Archbishops in Africa (where the Canon was forged) in those days) sit he where
he will, he shall not suffer a Presbyter to stand before him, (much less then,
one would think, bare-headed); yet in the Church the Bishop shall have the
uppermost Seat; but in a House, he ought to know that he is but a Fellow and
Companion of the Presbyters, or Hail fellow well met.

It seems they begun to justle for Superiority and the Place in those days, in
spite of two Canon Laws more; which from a Man you do not love, you shall have
in a Language you do not love;

(...).

(...).

CHAP. XII.
IT was not therefore Pride nor Arrogance that moved this Defendant to answer
you with his Head covered: for those only are guilty of Arrogance that, like
you, from this Defendant arrogate that to your selves, which is not due to you:
But a true sense of his Duty, his Quality and yours, as well as your Master's
Quality, taught him this demeanor, which no Law makes in him a misdemeanour.

To whom this Defendant is willingly subject in licitis and honestis, (only)
and not in things unbecoming a Gentleman, a Clergyman, and an Englishman.

Lastly, One Blunder more is yet behind (which this Defendant had almost
forgot) namely, That when the said Promoter Henry Bishop of London seems to
desist, and give over the Promotion and Prosecution, in the end of the 7th
Article, as being probably weary of the Preferment, to which his Vice-Register,
the said Nucourt, so sawcily promoted him unto, without his Privity (as is
conjectured); or perhaps weary of the Prosecution, foreseeing the Answers and
Reasons already here alleged; But when this Defendant was in hopes the worst
had been past, then in the 8th Article up starts Doughty (the old Promoter)
again, and threatens; (what the said Bishop probably would have scorned to do;)
for the said Thomas Doughty recovering his place again (of which the said
Nucourt had really deprived him) takes up the Gantlet again, and threatens to
take from this Defendant his said Rectory of All Saints, a great Eyesore (it
seems) to him, and that for three long Years, besides costs of Suit.

And indeed it is a Threat that does much better become such a doughty Fellow,
than a Reverend Divine, or Bishop, who ought to endeavor that the Flock should
be fed, not starved, and to encourage the painful Laborers (that bear the
Burden and sweat of the Day) and not suspend, stop their Mouths, or Handcuff
them; but to remember that what Power he has, should be employed to the utmost
for Edification and not for Destruction, to do all the Good he can, not all the
Mischief he can.

Or if he will be punishing, Punish the Drones, the idle and ignorant
Clergymen; the Whoremasters, the Drunkards, the Swearers, and blasphemers of
God's Holy Name. Or (if that will not be) at least to begin at home, and punish
the vile Extortions and Oppressions of his Registers, Vice-Registers, etc. in
exacting illegal Fees, in Probates, Letters of Administrations, Institutions,
Inductions, Ordinations, Excommunications, Dispensations Absolutions,
Visitations, etc. to the great and groaning Oppression of his Majesty's
Subjects.

Especially, to find other Work, than suspending this Defendant from his
Rectory of All Saints in Colchester, of all Places; where the chief Men (at
least, nay, and the chief Women too) as well as the Generality of the People by
their Confluence to the said Church of All Saints, should seem to give him but
little Thanks for his great Pains therein. No more Thanks to him than to his
Court, that has kept this Defendant two Lord's-Days together, from his
Ministerial Function there, only to attend your Motions; This good you do!

If therefore the said Doughty be not Promoter in this Cause, then the said
Rectory of All Saints is not in jeopardy, and the proofs of Witnesses are not
directed, and taken in order thereunto, and consequently the eighth Article (at
least) is null and void, as being in Doughty's name, and at his Promotion, and
yet not one Witness is sworn, nor any Commission directed to swear them at his
Promotion; and consequently, if all the objected Crimes were true, and also as
proper for your cognizance, as they are (here proved all of them) to be
improper for your cognizance; and also tho your Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical was
never so legal, and founded and built upon the Law of the Land; And tho you had
known Canons, legitimated by our Sole Legislators, (in all which you are
deficient:) Yet then (even according to the style of your Court) the Promoter
Henry Bishop of London, desisting and aiming not at all at the said Suspension
and Rectory, (tho the Crimes were truly proved) yet his promoted Libel
declaring for no Penalty at his Promotion, there ought to be a nonsuit for
that Blunder, and the Defendant dismissed with costs. But if this Court, or the
said Bishop the Promoter, or the Promoter Doughty, desire to begin again, and
have (not yet) enough of so impertinent and non-sensical Articles, let them
come single, and one by one, one after another, -- ne Hercules contra duos. --
If this be fair Play, I have no Skill in Play, nor understand Trap.

But this Defendant is quite tired, (and so it is hoped by this time, is every
body else, but the Proctors); This Defendant having already been so copious and
substantial upon so idle and slender occasion.

Hereafter, if the Promoter, or Promoters, like the Place, Promotion, and
Preferment, let them bring a more solid Charge against this Defendant, that he
may muster up more, and greater Forces (than his own) to answer the Shock.

For (in this Defense) he is single and alone, without (as well as without need
of) any other Man's Assistance or Advice; but then perhaps he will get better
Heads than his own. In the Interim here is enough (without a Fee) especially
upon so slight and trivial an Occasion. For is it not subtle, for Men to puzzle
themselves in a Court about a Crime (as here for Barretry,) an Offense against
Common Law, and Statute Law, of which this Court can hold no Plea, nor take
Cognizance of? What have Spiritual Courts to do to decide or try Causes or
Cases belonging to Common Law and Statute Law, in derogation of the Courts of
our Lord the King; as in the Statute of Provisors: War-hawk, (as Fullwood says)
have a care of a Praemunire, have a care of hooking in every thing in ordine ad
Spiritualia.

And is it not subtle, to object the very same Instances of Barretry (as of
old) for which this Defendant has already (at a fair hearing) been honorably
acquit? As if they had conspired to publish, and thereby proclaim to the World,
the Integrity of the Defendant's Life and Conversation to be so great and
without Reproof, that in all this time their Invention should be so barren of
new Matter and new Accusations, whilst (at the same time) they prove the
Fertility of their Malice and Revenge. Both which are the worst Privy
Counselors, unto whose Suggestions, Dictates, and Advice, whoever hearkens, he
need no other Enemy, they alone will do his Business for him, and lead him into
such Follies, rash, and precipitate Counsels, and Designs, into which, (like as
into all other ways to Hell) the Entrance and Descent is easy, but no
Deliverance from thence, but return and timely Repentance, (which at best)
brings a Man Shame at the last.

And is it not subtle, to question this Defendant's Title to his ancient and
undoubted Rites and Freeholds, and (in a Court too) that cannot try nor decide
such Titles and Controversies, except they ^rack a Commandment, and hook it in
(as some do every thing) rebus Christi, and so bring all temporal matters to
Excommunication or the stool of Repentance; or else (like the Pope and Jesuits)
compass Sea and Land, and drive all in and under their Jurisdiction, (Kingdoms,
Titles, Freeholds, Lands, and Patrimonies, into St. Peter's Patrimony) in
ordine ad spiritualia? Will Men never take warning, nor tremble at the Statutes
of Provisors, nor leave those old (and discoverd) Gilsee-tricks?

And is it not subtle, to rip up Peccadillo's against the Act of Uniformity,
thereby giving occasion to prying Men, to search into their own Nonconformity
in illegal Rites and Ceremonies, universally and without Repentance practiced
(whereby they show their wit) even in Cathedrals, and Universities, in defiance
of the Act of Uniformity?

But no Man is too great or overgrown for the Law, to which in all Ages the
greatest Subjects and Favorites of old, have been (as well as in our days)
forced to be subject, and submit their sturdy Necks, and hated Heads unto it;
but some Men will never take warning, Lege Historiam, ne sias Historia.

And is it not subtle, to make Henry Bishop of London, Promoter against this
Defendant in the beginning of the Articles, by cashiering Thomas Doughty of the
Place; And then to prefer Doughty to his old place again, and face about again,
as you were* It is either an Affront to make the said Bishop a Promoter; or
else (if he like the place) it is an Affront to dismiss him thereof, and take
Thomas Doughty on again in Conclusion. But what Reason (the said Bishop) will
have to thank the Impudent Proctor for the Promotion or Preferment, time will
discover.

In the Interim, consider, how sawcily impudent, and mischievously saucy are
some Servants, that (if their Masters will tamely suffer the Familiarity) play
the sauce with their Masters (like Churle-cats) so long, till they scratch them.

And is it not subtle, to grant a Sequestration to Mr. Sewell, for the poor
Rectory of St. Leonard's aforesaid, and never revoke the same, nor give notice
of such Revocation, and yet send out another Sequestration, (for poor Harris)
the other to Mr. Sewell, being unrevok'd (as aforesaid) and confirmed, by
accepting the Fees at every Visitation, and in force, (if any Bishop's
Sequestration be in force, which is no sin to question, especially upon this
occasion) their Power at best being for Edification, not for Destruction, (like
the Apostles) if they be like, their Power is to do Good, not Harm, especially
to the Poor.

However, by their own Law and Method, all their Sequestrations are in force
till they be revoked, and Mr. Sewell's was never yet revoked; no matter tho how
soon, that the People may see, the difference on it, and that seldom comes a
better; in the mean while -- Metal on metal is false Heraldry.

And is it not subtle, to implead this Defendant for a breach of a Clause in
the Rubric, of marrying without Banes; when every pitiful Register,
Surrogate, Official, etc. makes no bones of it, but publicly sells such
Indulgences, Licenses, or Dispensations, in defiance of the Act of Parliament,
the Act of Uniformity, and the said Rubric (a Branch of it) that equally
forbid and prohibit all Men?

And is it not subtle, to cull out (only) five unlucky Couples, for Instance,
that inhabit in such Parishes, where it is impossible that the most of them
should ever be married according to the rigid and strict Rules of the Rubric,
there being no Divine Service constantly said in any of the said Parishes, but
in St. Leonard's (at present) not once in a quarter of a Year, and in St.
Bottolph's, and St. Mary Magdalen, not these thirty Years last past, nor any
Churches (save what are demolished) wherein to read Divine-Service, or publish
the Banes? And therefore it would have been impious in this Defendant (in this
Exigency) not to have coupled them together, and to prevent their unmarried
Concumbency, (and consequently Adultery:) Thus the Priest in a strait, gave
David some of the Shewbread, which (except in case of hunger and necessity)
was not lawful for a Layman to eat, but only for the Priests: this Defendant
also dispensing with the Rigor of a Commandment, which was impossible to be
kept, without a greater Mischief and Inconvenience, namely, Adultery: A Sin,
proper (of all other) for the Cognizance of this Court, and the Scotch-man John
Dargavel, late Vicar of Boxted in Essex, (who got two Bastards in one House,
where he boarded, much of one age, this Defendant baptized them both, calling
one by the name of Dargavell) being put into this Court, and flying from
Boxted, a Vicarage of 30 l. per annum, (a wonder in Scotland) was punished with
another Living in the West Country, of 100 l. per annum, which he enjoyes at
this day; and when his new Parishioners prosecuted him in this Court for his
old Adulteries, they had as good have thrown their Caps at him.

These are Crimes with a witness, publicly known, and scandalous; and yet in
this Court it seems, it found no Suspension for three Years, as here (in this
case) is threatened for preventing Adultery, by marrying without Banes, where
none could be had. Some Men had better steal a Horse, than others look over the
Hedge.

And lastly, (for this Paper is almost done) Is it not subtle, for Men to
search for a Mote in this Defendant's Eye, with a Beam in their own; and by the
busy officiousness, thereby give an Occasion to have their own Eyes looked
into, blear'd with illegal Fees, Extortions and Oppressions of the King's
Subjects in Probates, Letters of Administration, Ordinations, Institutions,
Inductions, Visitations, Synodals, Procurations, Excommunications, Absolutions,
Indulgences, Licenses, and Dispensations; and also in illegal Rites, and
superstitious Ceremonies, in defiance of the Statutes of this Realm?

Thus giving Irritation and Provocation, as well as Occasion, to bring their
Works of Darkness unto Light, as if they longed for Correction.

And Pity it is, great pity, that he should escape the Lash, who wantonly calls
for it, efflagitantes and sollicitescit.

Finis Respons.
CHAP. XIII.
Well may the Reader wonder, that wise Men should be so Hood-winked with
Passion or Prejudice, to make such a do about nothing; and accuse a Man for
(old acquitted) Barretry in an improper Court, or make it a Crime to defend
himself, his ancient Rights, Freehold and Tenants, from an Intruder.

But above all, it is incomparable, that Registers, Commissaries, Officials, and
such kind of Creatures, should make such a noise about marrying People without
the strict Rituals of the Church ( which they break every day, by granting
Licenses publicly in defiance of the Statute) and pronouce such Solemnization
of Matrimony a Profanation! How do they pass Sentence against themselves? as
if the Children of all that were married without Banes by their Licenses, and
Indulgences, (contrary to the Ritual and punctilio of the Statute of
Uniformity) were Bastards! Which wicked Suggestion, the Papists may possibly
(but God forbid they should ever have the Power) improve upon us all, and by
the same Argument, make all our Marriages, not Solemnizations but,
Prophanations, and our Children (conseqently Bastards, etc.) not inheritable to
our Estates, as being not born in lawful Wedlock, or Matrimony, which (say
they) can never be Legal, except made according to the Ceremonies of the Roman
Ritual.

And therefore, tho some Protestants and Papists (rashly) marry together; yet,
the Papists will be married according to the Roman Ritual, by a Popish Priest,
and then they do not much care (for they look upon it as nothing more than (of
old) to be married by a Justice of Peace) for the present Exigency and edge of
the Law, and therefore will condescend to be married again according to the
English Ritual: Which brings to my mind a Passage (here) well worth the
inserting, and mentioned in the History of the Life and Death of that Famous
Judge, Lawyer, Philosopher, and Divine, Sir Matthew Hale; In these Words, Page
83, 84, 85.

He was a devout Christian, a sincere Protestant, and a true Son of the Church
of England, ( and yet he had been one of Oliver Cromwell 's Judges of the
Common Pleas) moderate toward Dissenters, and just even to those from whom he
differed most; which appeared signally in the care he took, in a Case of the
Quakers; wherein he was very cautious (mark that) in declaring their Marriages
void, and so bastarding their Children.

But he considered Marriage and Succession as a Right of Nature, from which
none ought to be barred, what mistakes so ever they might be under in point of
revealed Religion.

And therefore in a Trial that was before him, when a Quaker was sued for some
Debts, owing by his Wife before he married her; and the Quaker's Counsel
pretended, That it was no Marriage that had past between them, since it was not
solemnized according to the Rules of the Church of England.

He declared that he was not willing, on his own Opinion, to make their
Children Bastards, and gave Directions to the Jury, to find it special, which
they did.

It was a Reflection on the whole Party, that one of them, to avoid an
Inconvenience he had fallen in, thought to have preserved himself by a Defense,
that if this Judge had absolutely determined, must have made their whole Issue
Bastards, and incapable of Succession.

And for all their pretended Friendship to one another, if the Judge had not
been more their Friend, than one of those so called, their Posterity had been
little beholden to them.

But he governed himself indeed by the Law of the Gospel, of doing to others
what he would have others do to him: Which Law vacuates and makes null and void
all Laws of Man, ipso facto, that are made to the contrary, as being against
the Law of God and the Law of Nature.

And therefore because he would have thought it a Hardship, not without a
Cruelty, if amongst Papists all Marriages were nulled, which had not been made
with all the Ceremonies of the Roman Ritual; so he applying this to the case of
the Sectaries, he thought all Marriages made according to the several
Persuasions of Men, ought to have their Effects in Law.

Here was a Man made up of Law and Reason, and had Conscience and Compassion to
human kind mingled with his Profession of Christianity, and was good as well as
wise.

He well foresaw what a Rod, a just Rod we Protestants make for our selves, and
(if ever the Papists prevail) to bastardize all our Children, if it be a
concluded Maxim of the Church and Law of England, That every omission, or want
of the established Rituals in the solemnization of Matrimony, make it null;
Marriage being a Right in Nature, and observed amongst Heathens (where I have
inhabited and dwelt) that never heard or regarded any other Religion than the
Law of Nature. And tho one Man, may (if he can manage them, or think that he
has not enough of One) if he please, and also if another Woman agree to it, he
may take her to Wife, and as many as he can, in addition: But Adultery is never
heard of amongst them, at least more rarely than in Courts Christian.

And thus I hope both I and all my Countrymen (true-hearted Englishmen and
Protestants) will have more cause to rejoice, than Court Christian, that ever
they royl'd or provoked my lazy and beloved Silence, Retiredness and Privacy,
by so silly an occasion, to publish thus my Thoughts and Meditations on greater
Matters: But such is the Policy; when I had begged of Sir Thomas Exton (my old
Friend and Acquaintance) as if it had been for an Alms, more than once, (which
they ignorantly construed to proceed from fear of them) That he would speak to
the Bishop of London to withdraw the Prosecution and Promotion, and not force
me to Answer, what I knew would (and which I was loath should) be displeasing to
them.

And it is ^sual for Men that are chiefly guided by the Maxims (only) of Self,
Self-Interest and Self-Designs, to construe all Overtures of Peace, Quietness,
Amity and Accommodation to proceed from fear of some Mischief from them, (of
doing which they are resolved, when they can, not to be over-cautious) for they
cannot imagine that such amicable Overtures proceed from Ingenuity and a study
of Peace and Quietness. But if Men (like some eager Wrestlers, that have more
mettle, than skill or strength, after many repeated Foils, Foil after Foil)
will never take warning, it is just they take what follows, Self do, self have;
Nay, no matter; who bid them be so Foolhardy? Did not Light-foot (that pretty
sweet-lips) Asahel, (all Mettle) and Hot-spur, pursue Abner, that old Captain,
and by no Persuasions could be induced to fall upon the Youngsters, or
common-men, but Abner, Abner only must be the Man he would hunt down and
conquer; Tho (2 Samuel 2.21, 22, 23.) Abner said to him, Turn thee aside to thy
right hand or to thy left, and lay hold on one of the youngmen, and take his
Armor. But Asahel would not turn aside from following him. And Abner said again
to Asahel, Turn thee aside from following me; wherefore should I smite thee to
the Ground? How then shall I hold up my face to Joab thy Brother? Howbeit, he
refused to turn aside: wherefore Abner with the hinder-end of the Spear smote
him under the fifth rib, that the Spear came out behind him, and he fell down
there, and died in the same place.

CHAP. XIV.
NOR does the Order of Matrimony (now used) much differ from that made by the
inspiration from the Holy Ghost, in 2 Edw. 6. (for there also no Indulgences
nor Perfunctory Money-Licences are allowed or winked at, nor the Avarice
countenanced) save that, instead of -- With this Ring, I thee wed, with my
Body, I thee worship, etc. is inserted -- With this Ring I thee wed, This Gold
and Silver I thee give, with my Body I thee worship, etc.

For the Bridegroom (besides the Ring) was to give the Bride other Love Tokens,
called there, Tokens of Spousage, as Gold, or Silver; and also they were to
receive the Holy Communion together, or Sacrament, without which never any
Matrimony was solemnized; a good beginning makes a good ending.

But to come to a Conclusion of this Essay: Schism or Sedition (quasi se itio)
or going by one's self, or, in a private path or way of one's own head, (out of
the King's Highway, the Act of Uniformity) is a transgression indeed of the
Law.

But if nothing will serve men, but severe Remarks must be made on such
Seditious or Schismatics, (by what has been said) you see we must all cry,
guilty, from the highest to the lowest, Clergy and Laity, that have but bowed
at the Name of Jesus, or to the Altar, or set up everlasting Candles thereon;
for the Papists light them, and burn them upon the Altar, in imitation; for
most of their Religion is only Apish Mymicry of the Primitive Times and
Christians, who were glad (because of Persecution) to meet in private
Conventicles, in Cells and Cellars, and by stealth in the Night, and
consequently did all (as the Papists now do usually at Noonday in their
chiefest Churches, they obscure the Windows with Hangings, and do all (perhaps
in fee with the Chandlers) by Candlelight, or thinking as some idle Tradesmen
do (that burn the day) that bought Light is best.

I say, the Observation of the said idle Ceremonies, of private Interpretation,
Making and Constitution, make us all Schismatics, Seditious, Seitious from
(and in defiance of) the Act of Uniformity. And we must all cry peccavi, hold
up our Hands, and cry guilty, guilty, and culprit, if we hap to be tried by God
and the Country.

Nay, where shall we get a Country or Jury, that are not equally guilty of
Nonconformity, as our selves; or that can find us guilty, without bringing in a
Verdict (also) at the same time against themselves, and their own
Nonconformity? Which shows how unpractiacable that late Doctrine is like to
prove, that none but Conformists to the Act of Uniformity shall be Jurymen: A
very fine Rod it would make everlastingly against all Protestants, if such a
new Doctrine should be established as the Law of the Land. For, (if Q. Mary's
Days should Pythagorically Circulate, and face about ( as we then were) which
for our Sins, and base servile truckling is not impossible) then we have made a
fine Lash for our own Backs, and with our own Mouths sentenced and for ever
condemned the two great Assistants of our English Liberties, Properties, and
ancient fundamental Constitutions, Safeguard and Lifeguard, namely,
Parliaments, and Juries, if ever the Popish Religion come to be the
State-Religion, and make an Act of Uniformity.

Search, and you will find, that the great Mystery of Iniquity, runs in a Blood,
among all those that set up a standing measure for all Men to mete by, and
knock out all Men's Brains (as that Giant Procrustes did) who were Longer or
Shorter than his Iron Stand-bed; or, cutting off so much of Men's Legs, as out
stretched it, or else extended and racked out all the little Dwarfs, in whom
natural Endowments were deficient.

Obj. What then? Shall not all be of one mind, and keep the Unity of the Spirit
in the bond of Peace?

Answ. What, upon Compulsion? No, if all the Inquisitions and High Commissions,
Racks, Goals, and Gibbets, were in the Confederacy, no Man can be made to do
any thing in Faith upon Compulsion; and whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin; and
it is not lawful (it is the Devil's Work) to tempt Men to sin.

You may imprison them, you may knock out their Brains, but if you would hang
them, you cannot make Faith, or make any Man believe; (that is God's
Prerogative alone) It is the Gift of God. Only use the Receipt that he
prescribes against Infidelity, Teach, Exhort, give good Examples, in Meekness,
not in Goals, instructing those that oppose themselves.

If this will not do, do not stamp, fret, and curse, and rail, nor deliver them
to Satan, by Excommunication, but pray to God for them, and their Conversion.
Thus the Apostles conquered the World to Christianity, until the Pope came,
and (in Imitation of Mahomet and Presbyterian Cruelty) made Converts with Fire
and Sword, and Desolation, confining (like the famed Conjurer) their Spirit, or
Familiar Demon to the Pummel of their Sword; thence came Fire and Faggot, (the
Inquisition-Purgatory, for an excommunicated Infidel, and Horning, Goals, and
Outlawry, in Scotland, amongst the rigid Scotch Presbyterians, for the like
Offense, and no Deliverance but the base Close-Stool of Repentance. And whilst
these Popish and Presbyterian Bigots are thus cursing, damning, killing,
destroying, a Man and his House, a Man and his Heritage; they think (or at
least) would persuade you to think, that whosoever of them destroys or
kills you, (therein) does God good Service.

CHAP. XV.
ANd who knows but God and Nature, (which seems in the wole Creation to delight
in Variety, and therefore not one Individual (Man or Beast) which are
numberless) are yet exactly in all Symetries and Proportions, Sizes, Features,
Figures, and Complexions alike) is also so offended with diversity of Thoughts,
Opinions, Fancies, or Judgments differing. For tho we are all of different
Airs, and Feature, and shapes; yet we all continue to be Men; and tho we may
differ in many Punctilio's, and some come short, and some overstretch the known
common, public and uniform Standard, (God forbid but) still we all of us may
continue to be Christians.

But we may as rationally quarrel with every Man we meet, whose Nose of his
Face is longer or shorter, lesser or bigger than our own; as to quarrel thus
endlesly and to Daggers-drawing, about different Judgments and Opinions, in Men
whose Heads and Eyes are not all of a size and accuracy, to the shameful
Disturbance of the Peace of the Kingdom, and the Peace of Christendom.

And for all this, We may thank the Avarice and Ambition of Rome and
Infallibility, that pretend to be the only Ringleaders to Heaven; and if you
will not come along with them, they will curse and damn you, and bid the Devil
take you for a Heretic and an Infidel.

Whist the Turk laughs in his Sleeve to see how the Protestant Christians are
forced to fly to him for Shelter (as now the Hungarians do (called therefore
Rebel Hungarians) that so Gog and Magog, would please to defend them and save
them from Jesus Christ's Vicar, and his Bloodhounds, the Jesuits.

A very goodly Account, and ready way to convert the Great Turk! So that for my
part, I wish we may (now) put into our Letany again, that which is (and was)
put in by the first Reformers and Martyrs, and Composers of the
Common Prayer Book and Letany in 2 Edw. 6th,) I know not by what or whose
Artifice (now) omitted: Namely, From all Sedition, and privy Conspiracy; From
the Tyrany of the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable Enormities; from all
fulse Doctrine and Heresy, from Hardness of Heart, and Contempt of thy Word and
Commandment, Good Lord deliver us.

There Is not one word of alteration in the Letany, from what it was at first,
except in this Suffrage; and sure it is now as needful and seasonable a Prayer,
as ever it was.

For is it not great Tyranny in the Bishop of Rome, and of all such as are of
like Popish Principles, to quarrel with all Men we meet upon the Road to
Heaven, because they will not go our Way? and if Words will not do, then Blows
shall, and then hale them along, and curse them and damn them, excommunicate,
and Goal them. And all (forsooth) because the Pope, and every little bigoted
Popeling and rigid Spit-fire, pretends that he is in the right Road, and in the
very infallible way to Heaven, and they that will not just come along with
them, (for which also they will make them pay Toll too) then hale them along by
Head and Shoulders, put them in Prison, and take away their Purses.

A most incomparable Christian Method! but I Will say of such (as Pope Alexander
6th, said of his wicked Son Caesar Borgias,) me commonstratore non didicit, he
never learned this of his Father: I mean the Father of Spirits, our Heavenly
Father never taught them thus to fight and quarrel upon the Road to Heaven.

Why? suppose a Man will not go our way, or think his Business rather lies
another way, a shorter cut, a nearer way and a better Road.

Must we, because we think the Man is in an Error and Mistake, draw our Weapons
(whether carnal or spiritual) upon him? where is the Reason, the Conscience, the
Christianity of it?

Does not every Man best understand his own Concern? or if he does not, it is
not our loss, but the harm is his own: We may advise him friendlily, and tell
him of the dangerous way he is in, of which yet none of us (the wisest of us)
are certainly infallible and assured.

But if he will not take our Advice, fare him well, curse him not, but pray for
him, and say, God bless him, and teach him and us the right way.

Indeed, if our Actions and Manners be against the indisputable and
unquestionable Laws of God and Nature, as Blasphemy, Adultery, Drunkenness, and
Rebellion, Treason, etc. Then take him Jailer, and let the Magistrate correct
him:

But to curse, whip, lash, slash, and Bridewel a Man for not thinking as we do,
(Opinion and Thought being free, and impossible to be compelled) is a Spanish
Inquisition, High Commission, and Romish Tyranny, and a Lunacy (to boot) beyond
that of Bedlam.

God grant us to be all of one Heart and Mind in God's Worship and Service, and
to keep the Unity of the Spirit (at least in the Bond of Peace, and
Comprehension.) But if (thus) Praying will not do; cursing, and excommunicating
and damning should not do I am sure. Which makes me think of a Gain (and I Will
not think it Battology to recite it again) namely, That admirable and
Christian-like Direction, and (only safe) Prescription of the said Incomparable
Sir Matthew Hale, amongst his said 18 Caveats, given to himself, in these Words.

That I be not too rigid in Matters purely conscientious, where all the harm is
Diversity of Judgment; and if in Criminals, it be a Measuring-cast, to incline
to Mercy and Acquittal.

This is true Piety indeed, and the only true Christianity; but the contrary,
is true Impiety, and the only true Antichristianism.

Besides, It Is true Policy too, no Man quarrels with another that is not just
of his Size, Complexion and Pitch: and why not? Because there is no Law to fine
every Man that is not of such a common Standard, Size and Pitch; if there were,
Covetousness and Tyranny would set the Uniform and common Sandard-men at work
(if it were but for the Fine sake) to hale in the Nonconformists, and
dissenting Scanltings, and then what old tugging and quarrelling, goaling and
baleing would there be, to the perpetual Disturbance of the Neighborhood, and
the Kingdom, as well as to the shameful Scandal of Christianity, that makes
Doves and Lambs indeed, but neither Wolves nor Bloody Bonners or Tigers.

Whereas now that we have a general Comprehension as to all Sizes of the Body;
and no Man is bound to grow to just such a Scantling, and no higher; we have no
quarrelling about the Matter, no more than there is in Holland (about Religion)
where, tho they have different Religions, yet every Man being left to God and
his Liberty to go to Heaven which way he please, they never curse, damn,
excommunicate, or quarrel about the matter, but leave every Man to stand and
fall to his own Master, and Creator, further than Christian Admonitions and
State-Encouragements and Preferments do invite or allure.

For they admit and courteously entertain (like Men and Christians) all
Mankind, except the said Inhospitable and An^ichristian Bloodhounds, the
Jesuits; and those, if they catch hunting, or resting in any of their
Dominions, they immediately (upon proof) boil them to death in scalding Oil.

And to this Severity they are forced and constrained through that Jesuitical
Maxim, that Dominion is founded in Grace, and consequently, All the Kingdoms
of the World, Territories, People and Dominions, ought to be subject to
Christ's only Vicar, or Vicegerent upon Earth, the Pope.

For Severity and Cruelty may make many Hypocrites, but cannot make one Saint;
it can do much Mischief, when in Power (the only thing that wicked Men mind)
but not any Good: it can surrogate to Destruction, but not to Edification; it
can (like Erostratus) get a Name and Fame for destroying the Temple and Church,
but wants the Heart of Holy David, and the wise Head of Solomon and the
Apostles, to build the Temple and Church of God.

Our Blessed Savior came neither to destroy the material or spiritual Temple;
but if Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites, destroy it, he said, he could build it
again in three days.

But some Men's Arts are like the late Bishop of London, Bonner, his Arts; they
can destroy and fire the Spiritual Temples of God in few days, more than they
will erect and build up all their Lifetime.

-- Sic facilis descensus Averni.
The way to Hell is very easy,
And down-hill all way to it, an't please ye.
And therefore away with Men's Prate and Talk, vouching their private Malice and
Revenge, with the Constitutions of the Church, The Church; if they be not
according to the Constitutions of Christ in the Gospel: for, as Cyprian says,
Sermon. 5. de Lapsis, non est Pax fed Bellum, nec Ecclesiae jungitur, qui ab
Evangelio separatur.

Then trust ye not in lying Words, Jer. 7.4. saying, The Temple of the Lord,
The Temple of the Lord, are these; Behold ye trust in lying Words that cannot
profit! Will ye steal, murder, commit Adultery, etc. and come and stand before
me in this Houses which is called by my Name, and say, We are delivered to do
all these Abominations? If this House, which is called by my Name, become a Den
of Robbers in your Eyes; Behold, even I have seen it, says the Lord.

But go ye now unto my Place, which was in Shiloh, where I set my Name at
first, and see what I did unto it, for the Wickedness of my People, etc.

Whence I note, that no People or Church (how dear soever it has been unto God)
has a Charter of Privileges to offend, rob, or murder their Brethren, under
the Title, Umbrage, and Name of the Church -- the Church, -- which Church is
not exempt -- from God's Visitation and Punishment, (if not) Extinguishment.
Which brings to my Mind, what Heylin in his Geography, says of Poland, l. 2.
150. The King (at his Coronation) takes an Oath, to confirm all the Rights and
Privileges of the Subject granted by any of his Predecessors, and also adds
this Clause; Quod si Sacramentum meum violavero, incolae Regni nulla nobis
Obedientia tenebuntur. That if I break my Oath, the Subjects are not obliged to
us in Allegiance or Obedience. A Clause, that seems to me proper only (if
proper at all) for an Elective King, as is the King of Poland, and not for a
King whose Kingdom is Hereditary, as Sweden, Denmark, England, France, and
Spain; nor can it, or ought it to be otherwise applied, than as to the matter
in hand; that (whatsoever the Pope do, yet) God gives no Indulgences, Licenses,
or Privileges, either to sin, or to sin impune.

Besides, Piety is the greatest Policy in the World, and the most easy, as well
as most safe, certain, and sure way of governing Mankind, in Mercy, Goodness,
Meekness, Compassion, Justice, in not being overruled with Popular or
Parasitical Applause, or distaste of the greatest Favorite. Especially, in
England of all the World, who are sturdy, (generally) hard to be forced or
driven, but easily drawn (like a great Ship in calm Water) with a Twine-Thred.

Besides, the Defense of the King and Kingdom consists not in impregnable
Fortresses, Forts, and Citadels, as in the Low Countries, but in the Limbs and
Hands, Heads, and Hearts, of the happy Natives. (I mean) our Main-guard (under
God) consists in Castles of Bones, and not in Castles of Stones.

CHAP. XVI.
FRiday, November. 25th, 1681, was the day appointed and agreed upon (on both
sides) to argue the said Pleas, Protestations, and Answer; and to that purpose,
Sir Philp Lloyd, (upon the 21st Instant, being their Court-day) did bid me
nominate and choose what Advocates I thought most meet to argue, and improve my
said Prostestations, Pleas, and Answer.

Advocates? (Replied I) Advocates? what? shall I ask Advice of the Fox, how to
preserve my Chickens? Advocates indeed, have the Advantage of me in Skill,
Eloquence, Pleadings, and Subtilties; but all that will be abundantly supplied
by the Advantage of the Ground on which my Innocence has placed me --. Let
Criples go on Crutches, (I told them) and that I doubted not (by God's help)
but I should stand on my own Legs, and against them all, if I might but be
allowed fair play, and the benefit of the Laws; which was fairly promised, and
honestly performed; yet on the day, time, and place appointed in
Doctors-Commons, to argue this mighty Case, before the Judge came into the Room,
I was most insolently affronted, and my Hat plucked off in great Rudeness, and
tumultuously by a Proctor's Clerk (unworthy the naming) who being reproved for
the saucy Attempt by some Citizens there present (all strangers and unknown to
me) upon the Stir, comes in Sir Philip Lloyd, and inquiring the Cause of such
Disturbance and Noise, was told by one of the Citizens, and who caused the same.

He very honestly checked and severely chid the Fellow, and bid him be gone out
of the Room, and that otherwise he might have been thought privy, or at least
to countenance such Rudeness, when Men come upon their Affairs, Citations and
Monitions (to Doctors-Commons;) but that was poor Satisfaction for so great and
public an Affront; it is well we have his Majesty's Laws and his Majesty's
Courts to vindicate and secure us from such barbarous Assaults, and probably
the Fellow has heard from me concerning it, before this time.

In the Interim, to proceed, -- Sir Philip takes a Chair and sits down, and so
did all the Advocates, and very courteously, the Judge desires me also to take a
Chair amongst them, and sit down; and great Expectation there was by the
Bystanders to hear this mighty Argument.

But when it came to Sir Thomas Exton, (of Counsel for the Promoter) instead of
arguing, admitted my Pleas, and there is an end of an old Song, except at the
next Term, the Term Probatory, further Debate, or Debait arise; so away I came,
out of their Room with the stifling Crowd after me, who were defeated of their
hopes to hear soome Proof or good Foundation for their Spiritual's Courts,
which Sir Thomas Exton said, I denied; and my Reasons for the same, you have
heard in my Answer, which was not argued, but admitted, and so the Bystanders
lost their Longing, as well as I lost my time, detained for a Nonni-no above a
Fortnight at London, from my Parish, my Family, my Cure and Charge.

But how I employed my self in that Fortnight, you have read (thus far) in this
Book, all writ at London in that time; and the next day, coming to Colchester,
weary, and tired and bemir'd, I immediately (to show my Love to Peace and
Quietness) writ by Saturday Post, this following Letter, (to Sir Thomas Exton)
not amiss, here to insert, in these very Words.

Colchester, November 26th, 1681.
Right Worshipful;
I Expected Yesterday, that you would have argued (as the Bishop's Advocate)
against my Allegations; but since you chose to admit them, I have resolved once
more, thus to persuade you rather to be a Moderator (which is in your Power) to
reconcile the Differences betwixt the Bishop of London and my Self, rather than
to espouse a Party and be a Stickler (tho for a Lord Bishop) against your old
Friend, and Vniversity-Acquaintance, of 35 Years Continuance.

If you think this motion for Peace, and Accommodation proceeds from fear, the
Impartial-Consideration of my Answer will undeceive you.

And this is the last Overture I will ever make for an Accommodation, except
you answer it and me effectually within a Week.

And by your neglect (which is probable, for Passion and Rage is deaf, and has
no Ears) I shall then think my self absolved, not only in my own Conscience and
Honor, but in the Opinion and Sentence of all good Men, if (after these
amicable Overtues rejected) Differences grow to that height, that in my just
defense I be forced to reach some unhappy Blows, that may (otherwise against
my will) hit an old Friend.

Thus (you see) how I study to be quiet, and to avoid Disputes, especially with
my Diocesan; though he cannot possibly contrive a way to make my Name and Fame
so Eminent and considerable, as by (thus) publicly entering into the Lists of
Contests with me.

Wherein, if I be foiled, no great Honor can he get by the Victory, after such
great advantage of the ground he has got to stand on above me.

But if he come off with loss, how will he have cause to blame those Counsels,
that irritated him to this unseemly Encounter?

Revenge is God's Attribute, and can no more be safely and honorably handled
by any Man, then burning-Coals, which leave at best unhandsome Scars, and
uncomely Cicatrizes, though healed never so cleaverly. But Harm watch, Harm
catch.

And if nothing else will serve, then let all our Faults be ripped up, and
exposed upon the Publick-Stage, (to make sport for the By standers) and currat
Lex; I am

Your Servant, Edm. Hickeringill.


It was (and is yet) a Canon, agreed on all hands, in the first General Council
of Nice, (which the Church of England ownes) That no Bishop shall quit a small
Bishopric for a bigger, and (therefore) better.

But who heeds the Canon, when an useful Man, a Man of great Parts, great
Improvements, great Learning, and also (which I had almost forgot) great
Relations and Friends in the Case!

It was a Canon (Council. Sardic.) that none should be made a Bishop but
gradually and passing through all the Inferior Orders, and had also continued
in them for some considerable time; there was no Bishops then made per saltum,
(as at leapfrog) skipping over 3 or 4 Heads; none vaulted into the Holy See or
Seat, nor leapt so high at one Jump; but mounted (as to the Altar and Holy of
Holies) by Stairs, Steps, and by Degrees.

Because, a Bishop should be a Presbyter or Elder, 1 Timothy 3.6. (...), not a
young Novice? And why? And why? what stops his Grace? The Apostle shows cause
for his Non-placet in the next words; lest he fall into Temptation, or the
Condemnation of the Devil, by being puffed up with Pride: (...), swelled like a
Bladder with the Windy and Fanatical Self-conceit of his own merit; when in
truth that Bigness is nothing but windy Emptiness, and being discovered or let
out, will fall and flag, as Lucifer did from Heaven.

That is the meaning of -- the Condemnation of the Devil -- namely the same Sin
of (being swelled with) Pride and Self-conceit, will have the same Punishment
that Lucifer had.

But notwithstanding all this, the Church made bold to crack a Commandment, in
the case of Nectarius, who having great Friends and Relations, was chosen
Patriarch of Constantinople, whilst he was a Soldier, a Layman, and unbaptized.

And I can tell you, the Patriarch (or Pope) of Constantinople, would have
scorned in those days to have given the Wall to the Pope of Rome.

Also stout Captain St. Ambrose (that would scorn to bend to the Emperor
Theodosius, but flatteringly cring'd to the Usur per Eugenius) was chosen
(Notwithstanding the Canon Law) to be Bishop of Milan, whilse he was a
Soldier, and Governor of the same City and Metropolis of Milan; nay, also
unbaptized (as I remember).

Thus, when the Church can nail the Canons, or crack a Commandment, for Men of
great Parts, Interest, Relations and Friends; surely, to show its Charity, it
may condescend a little from its rigorous Constitution, and reach a
helping-hand, ( themselves also being frail and tardy) and Indulgence, in this
my case, to me a poor little Man, that has neither great Friends, great
Relations, great Parts, great Learning, nor (indeed) great any thing, save a
great Adversary.

To the 2d Question, namely,

Quest. 2. If Christ or his Apostles did ordain such an Ordinance, (as
Excommunication) who were the Administrators?

Answ. The Answer is easy, namely, such as had Ability to judge and discern,
Right from Wrong, Truth from Falsehood, and an Orthodox-man from an Heretic, by
the Gift of the Holy Ghost, called, discerning of Spirits.

For we shall be in fine taking, if, upon a fair Trial and Issue, (what color
is such a Horse, white or brown,) we should place a blind Man upon the Bench or
Jury; or Men-purblind and short-sighted.

The Pope craftily foresaw this, before ever he applied that of Tit. 3.10. to
his Jurisdiction -- namely, a Heretic after the first or second Admonition,
reject --

And therefore he first made himself the Infallible Judge, that cannot be
mistaken, but always discerns Right from Wrong, Truth from Falsehood, an
Orthodox-man from an Heretic; for then (and then only) is Excommunicating a
Heretic rational, when built (and only then when built) upon Infallibility;
take that away, and down comes the lofty Fabric, or Fortress, or Citadel of
Excommunication, that has so awed, and overaw'd the whole Christian World.

For what a Blunder is it in Ratiocination, to say, the Church of Rome,
Alexandria, Antioch have erred, and the Church of England may err, and yet
these same Churches shall as stiffly decide, and positively assert, what is,
(and what is not) Truth, as if they were (not Seekers, Searchers and Viatores,
but) Infallibility men.

For supposing a Church or Churchmen may err, (as did the greatest Council of
Bishops that ever was in the World (about 700) at Ariminum, Sirmium, etc. who
were Arrians, and denied the Divinity of our Savior) the Orthodox and
Protestants had a good time of it, to be burnt by the Bishops, as Heretics for
asserting the Divinity of our Blessed Savior.

Lawn-sleeves then, nor all those Reverend Habits, and Accoutrements of the
Bishops, whether the Most Reverend, or the Right Reverend Fathers in God (we
see by many Experiments) are no infallible Marks or Signs of Truth; without all
peradventure, as if all their Placets must, must, must needs be right, whilst
they are frail like other Mortals,

And therefore (Excommunication) like Scanderbeg's Sword is but a common
Weapon, except it be wielded by Scanderbeg's Arm, Judgment and Dexterity: A
Crieple would make but bungling work with it; nay, perhaps lose it to the
Enemy, and then we shall have it turned upon us fatally. Good Crieples! sit
still, and be quiet, till you get Apostolical Arms, Judgment and Dexterity; for
fear this two-edged Sword with which you do so cut and hack, dismember and
mangle the Body of Christ, (for a Guinee a cut) be one day turned upon your
selves with the fatal Edge toward you, if the Enemy recover it, and get it in
his hand again.

The Enemy, (the common Enemy) the Papists, first, from Tit. 3.10.
Excommunicate a Heretic, that is, they deliver him over to Satan (as the
Apostles did) but finding Satan would not take the Excommunicate (as he did in
the Apostles days) then the Pope (by an Arrogance as petulant as the Sarcasme)
surrogates the Magistrate (instead of Satan) to take the Excommunicate for the
destruction of the Flesh, (and that in the most compendious way) by Fire and
Faggot, for the destruction of the Flesh, Body, and Bones in the Flames.

And though amongst us the Heretic shall not now be delivered over to the
Magistrate to be burnt, (since the Abolition of the Writ de Heretico
comburendo) yet even at this day, when holy Church (which yet confesses her
self subject to error) signifies a Man to be Excommunicate for Heresy, the
Magistrate takes him with the Writ de Excommunicato capiendo, for the
Destruction of the Flesh (not with the fierce Fire and Faggot, but) still with
a lingering death, a Goal, until he Repent and Recant that his wicked Error.

As for example, Suppose a man should not with both his eyes, (which are good
as other men's) and with which he can see as far into a Millstone as any man,
should assert, that, though it be the positive Law of the Land to Excommunicate
and Deprive men of the blessed Sacrament, yet he cannot see, (in Holy Writ)
that Christ debarred Judas, the Traitor, nor that the Apostles ever did (by
Practice or Injunction) command such a Discipline, (by some called an Ordinance
of God,) in depriving them of the Ordinances of God: as if a Physician should
command that the Patient should never take a Cordial or Sanative Medicine
because he is sick; Alas! Alas! Cordial Medicines are made for the very nonce
for the sick: (as the Sacraments for sinners) and the whole (if there be any
such) have no need of this Physic, but them that are sick; And if all sinners
must be deprived of the blessed Sacrament, and Excommunicate; I doubt, the
Bishop and his Chancellor, (that Excommunicate sinners) must be sorc't to
Communicate alone by themselves.

Well, (say some) but is it not clear, that Titus was commanded to
Excommunicate a Heretic, after the first or second Admonitions? Does not the
Learned Doctor Hammond upon the Word, Reject, (...)translate it, Excommunicate
him, or cut him off by Excommunication. So Doctor Tailor, (says) the Word
signifies to be drawn out of the City, as an outcast; (and that is rejecting
with a witness, if they will also, eject, deject, and stone him to death, as
they did St. Stephen.) And a great many more (like Horses in a Teame) Jog on
(through thick and thin) without choosing their way, following their Leaders; if
they have great and hard names.

And yet such an illiterate man (as I) can see no reason in the World that
[(...)] reject (in English) should be construed (that the Apostle meant that
Titus should) throw a Heretic out of the Church by Excommunication.

And this I will make bold to defend against all the Fierce, Bloody and
Sanguine-complexion'd Greek-Criticks in the World.

But, (in short) can any man expound the Apostles meaning (by (...)(which for
the present we will construe) Excommunicate the Heretic:) betbetter than by
the usage he makes of it himself in another place? And can any thing better
clear his meaning?

Compare then with this, 1 Timothy 5.11. (...): But the younger Widows
Excommunicate (or throw out of the Church, for what?) for when they have begun
to wax wanton against Christ, they will marry.

And thus, if men had not two measures, one to buy by, and another to sell by,
they would not (by their Interpretations and Comments, to gratify their
spleen) set all the young Widows in the Kingdom about their ears. For,

If a young Widow (brisk, healthful and buxom) according to the Guerdon and
Dictates of Nature to propagate her kind, make a slip or so, What then? then
Excommunicate her; if a Register or a Sumner smell it out, or have it in the
Wind.

But then, (you will say) let her Marry rather than Burn; Ay, but my fierce
Interpreters will still have her upon the Hip again, and Excommunicate her for
Marrying, by virtue of 1 Timothy 5.11. so impossible it is for a young Widow to
come fairly out of their clutches, if (...)signify necessarily Excommunicate.

Nay, in the whole Bible (...)or (...)never signifies Excommunication. We meet
with it, 1 Timothy 4.7. (...)etc. (...).

And there we can be content to translate it, (gently) refuse profane and vain
bablings, and exercise thy self rather unto godliness: So here,

A Heretic after the first or second admonition, refuse or avoid his company,
and rather exercise thy self with men Orthodox, or men of Godliness.

This Word (...)you meet with also in Luke 14.18, 19. and there it is
translated (as it ought) to excuse, forbear, or be excused: And then the sense
will be,

A Heretic after the first or second Admonition, excuse or forbear, or meddle
no more with him.

What a Hub-bub, What Smithfield-fires has this doubtful Word kindled in the
World? How many Goals has this fiery and fierce construction filled?

Blessed Apostle! little did thou intend by that harmless expression and
(...)that (thereby) so many Martyrs in the day of Henry 8. and Queen Mary,
should have ascended (like Elijah's to Heaven in a fiery Chariot) from famous
Smithfield, or, that the Goals, and Goalers should have been enrich't, with
(...).

Can (...) refuse, avoid, excuse, or forbear -- be a sufficient Commission
(wherewith) to Plunder, Imprison and Kill, all Christendom over, in Bloody
Massacres, Fines, Goals, Dungeons and Confiscations, 'till for shelter (like
the Hungarians) they fly for Refuge to the Turk, that (though a Grecian born,
yet) never at this sad rate learnt to Construe (...).

Known is the Story of that Arrian-Heretick, Mahomet, (afterward) the great
Prophet of the Turks, who, to inveagle his Followers and easy Mussel-men, told
them he would show them some Tricks, and by Faith remove Mountains, and make
two adjoining Hills come together, though he did not (thereby) show his Faith,
so much as his Brazen-face.

For mounting to the top of one of the Mountains, with his Disciples, he
admonish't the adjacent Mountain to come to him; but it stirred not: then he
gave it a second Admonition, but lapidi loquitur, it made (as if) it did not
hear, and budg'd not; no, not upon the third summons.

No, quoth Mahomet, Will you not budg? then if the Hill will not come to
Mahomet, Mahomet shall budg to the Hill; and so fairly marched to it.

I will not apply it, but this I will say, concerning some (called) Heretics,
that seem sixth as a Mountain to their Principles (and who but Infallible-Sirs
can tell but that after the way some men call Heresy, so Worship they the God
of their Fathers.)

If these fixed Heretics will not be removed, if we had faith like a grain of
mustard seed, we could remove these mountains without the carnal helps of
Spades, Axes, and Pick-axes; but 'till then, if the Mountains will not come to
us, nor we so supple and condescending as to march over to them, let them stand
and fall to their own Master, and Creator that there fixed them, except they
obey the first, second and third Admonition.

Their Souls are their own, they best know on whose Errand they go; we have
delivered our Souls, and done our duty, it is they must suffer, and is it not
punishment enough to lose Heaven hereafter, but we must take their Purses upon
the Highway thither, or Goal them, Sequester them, Kill and Slay, Fine and
Confiscate; and make them take Heaven by violence (in a wrong sense) vi and
armis, with Sword and Gun. Is the Church (for this) called Militant?

Beside, Heresy is not so ill-natured a Word, as fierce men make it,
Constantine the Emperor calls Christian Religion Heresy, (that is) a Sect, or
Profession, or Opinion. The Sect of the Sadduces, Acts 5.17. and Sect of the
Pharisees, Act. 15.5. (in the Greek is) of the Heresy of the Pharisees, who
believed. Non sum in eadem cum illo Heresi, (i.e.) sententia, says Cicero in
his Paradoxes.

Quest. 3. Against what Offenders and Offenses Excommunication was made use of?

Answ. 3. This requires (considering the large Premises) but a compendious
Answer; namely,

This Sword of Excommunication was never drawn (that we read of) by our Blessed
Savior at all; nor yet by his Apostles, except that St. Paul drew it twice;
once against an Incestuous Person, and then afterward against Hymenaeus and
Alexander for Blasphemy:

Not a Fornicator, nor an Adulterer Excommunicated in those days (more than in
our days) nor a Common-swearer or Blasphemer (amongst them more than amongst
us) Excommunicated, except the said Hymenaeus and Alexander, that we read of.

And these by an Apostle that neither bore the said Sword in vain, neither
mistook by nick-naming the sin or the sinner; for he had the Spirit of
Discerning, that we (poor Moles) do want: he never shot at Random, never mist,
or shot beside the right Mark; never made this Sword of the Lord to Duel or
Hack in a private Quarrel or Revenge, much less upon any false, unjust, or
illegal ground: and most of all would have abhorred to have Coined with it, or
made Money of it.

Quest. 4. How Excommunication (at this day) does agree with the Laws of God,
and the Laws of the Land?

Answ. 4. By what has been said, it does not appear to me that the Holy
Scripture makes Excommunication a standing Ordinance in the Church of the Old
or New Testament.

Or, that ever any Israelite was debarred (or ordered to be debarred) the use
of the Sacraments, for Moral Uncleanness, in Life, Manners, or Opinion, in the
Old Testament; or, any Christian, in the New.

But herein, I pretend not to be Infallible, nor do I affirm it peremptorily,
but humbly desire to be better informed of such as see more than my self, and
of my Superiors: I may be erroneous, but never will be obstinate, or a Heretic.

The Positive Laws, Human (so that they be not contrary to Gods) Law, I have
learnt to obey, not to dispute.

And I Publish this chiefly, that thereby Learned men may take occasion, to
inform and reform my Judgment herein, if it be erroneous: But I have nothing to
say against Excommunication so far as it is the Law of the Land, and not abused.

But by what Law of God or Man, the Lay-Doctors, Commissaries and Chancellors
(without so much as the presence of a Priest for formality sake) have got the
power of the Keys, and to make much Money of them for every trifle, transcends
my understanding.

Quest. 5. The fifth Query, What good or harm Excommunication has done in the
World.

Answ. 5. To which I shall briefly Answer, in the words of the Learned Mr.
Baxter, in his late Answer to Mr. Dodwell -- p. 106, 107, 108. (which I choose
(under favor) to quote, chiefly for the Authority, and also because I am quite
tired of this Theme, and will therefore wave at present my own large
Collections (which would swell this Book too much) and make them make room for
his far more compendious Argument in this following Induction.

Nothing but Ignorance or Impudence can deny that the difficulty of knowing
whose Excommunication it is that is to be dreaded as owned by God, has
encouraged professed Christians so confusedly to Excommunicate one another, as
that this Excommunication has been so far from constraining most to
repentance, that it has made Christianity a horrid scandal to Infidels and
Heathens, by setting the Christian World in the odious confusion of
Excommunicating one another. To give some instances how far Excommunication is
not coercive.

1. Who but the Devil was the gainer by Pope Victor's Excommunicating the
Asians about Easter Day? Did it compel them to Obedience?

2. When the Orthodox Excommunicated the Arrians, did it force them to obey?
When they got almost all the Bishops for them, and Excommunicated and destroyed
their Excommunicators?

3. When the Cecilians (or Orthodox) and the Donatists for so many Ages
Excommunicated one another, merely upon the difference which party had the true
Ordained Bishops, Did Excommunications force them to Obedience?

4. (To pass forty other Sects) when Rome Excommunicated, yea, and Prosecuted
the Novatians, Did it compel them to obey? And did not Atticus, Sisinnius and
Proclus win more by allowing them their own Communion, and living with them in
Love and Peace? Chrysostom since threatened the Novatian Bishop that he would
silence him; but he quickly recalled his word before they parted, and durst not
do it.

5. Did Cyril's Counsel against the Joannites win them, or harden them? Was it
not Attious and Proclus love and lenity that ended that division?

6. Did the Excommunicating of the Nestorians by Cyril, compel them to
Obedience, when so much of the East are Nestorians to this day, and requite the
Orthodox with their Excommunications?

7. Did the Excommunicating of those that rejected the Council of Calcedon,
(the Eutychians, and Acephali) compel them to Obedience, when many Emperors
took their part, and the greater number of Bishops joined with them, and they
equally damned those that received the Council for many Princes Reigns. And
when so great a part of Christians as are the Jacobites, Abassines, etc. own
Diascorus, and condemn that Council to this day?

8. Did the Excommunicating of the old Heretics, Gnostics, Basilidians,
Valentinians, Panlinists, Apollinarians, Eunomians, Aetians, Photinians,
Macedonians, Priscillians, etc. compel them to Obedience at all? or did they
regard it?

9. Did the Excommunicating of the parties that were for silence (the Acacians
as to the (...), and those that were for Zeno's Henoticon) compel them to
Obedience?

10. Did the mutual damnations of the Phantasticks, Justinian's and Gamas
party, and the Corrupticulae, force either to Obedience?

11. Did the Excommunications of the Monothelites compel them to Obedience;
when in the days of Philippicus they had a Council, says Binnius, of
Innumerable Bishops? And he says, that the General Council at Trul, called
Quinisextum, was of the same men that were in the approved sixth General
Council, and that they were Monothelites.

12. Did the several Excommunications of the Constantinopolitan Bishops by the
Roman, and of the Roman again by them, and the Alexandrian, etc. compel either
Party to Obedience?

13. Had the Pope Excommunicated the Africans in the long fraction in the days
of Aurelius and Austin, would it have compelled them to Obedience?

14. When the Pope (at last) joined with Justinians General Council against the
Tria Capitula, and condemned the refusers of it, did it compel his own
Neighbor-bishops to Obedience, when they so generally forsook him, that there
were not three Bishops to Consecrate the Pope, but he was fain to use a
Presbyter; and when they set up a Patriarch at Aquileia as their chief, and
condemned or forsook the Pope for near an hundred years?

15. Did the Popes Excommunicating of the Goths in Spain and other parts,
compel them to obey him?

16. Did Augustines rejection of the Britains, and the Britains and Scots long
refusing Communion with the Romanists, compel either Party to obey?

17. Did the Excommunicating of Leo Isaurus, Constantine, and the rest of the
Iconoclasts, compel them to obey?

Did the Excommunicating of the Albigenses and Waldenses, bring them to
Obedience? Or was it not (say some Historians) the murder of about two
Millions, that solitudinem fecit, quam vocarunt pacem?

19. Did the Excommunications of the Emperors, Frederick, Henry, etc. and their
adherents, as the Venetian Interdict, compel them to Obedience?

20. Did the Excommunicating of the German Protestants, and Queen Elizabeth,
and the English Protestants, bring them to Obedience? How many such instances
may I give you?

CHAP. XVII. Of CONFIRMATION.
COnfirmation was (at first) a good Invention of the Church, and politickly and
wisely ordained: not (in supplement to Infant Baptism, for that is sufficient
without it) but to the end, that when Children come to the years of discretion,
and have learned (in the Church-Catechism) what their Godfathers and Godmothers
vowed and promised for them (as their Sureties and Pledges) 'till they came to
Age, that they should in their own persons vow the same with their own mouth
and consent, openly before the Congregation.

But it is not a Sacrament, or necessary to Salvation, (as the Papists
insinuate) for it is certain by God's Word (as said in the Rubric of (the said
first English Common Prayer Book since the Reformation, made in the Reign of)
Edward VI. That children beeying Baptized (if they depart out of this life in
their infancye) are undoubtedly saved: And this Common Prayer Book (as is said
before) is declared to be composed by the Aid of the Holy Ghost in the Statute
2 Ed. 6.1. And there is the Church-Catechism set down, beginning (as ours) What
is your Name? And ending with these words -- And therefore I say -- Amen, so be
it: But our Catechism is much larger, and all of it ought to be learnt by all,
before they be (brought to the Bishop to be) confirmed.

And 'till they can say this Catechism, and give account of it, not (like a
Parrot) hudling it over, but sensible, and understanding what they say, shall
they be confirmed by the Bishop, who ought by himself (or such as he shall
appoint) Pose them (or Appose them) in it; nor then neither, except they also
bring with them one Godfather or Godmother, that every Child may have a Witness
of their Confirmation.

Nor then neither ought they to be confirmed, except the Curate of the Parish
where they dwell come along with them, or at least send a Certificate in
writing with his hand subscribed thereunto, the Names of all such Persons
within his Parish, as he shall think fit to be presented to the Bishop to be
confirmed.

And then, if the Bishop, upon Posing them, find them fit, they shall be
confirmed in manner as prescribed in the Common Prayer Book.

But are these things observed, or who regards them? I have been 19 or 20 years
Rector of the Rectory of All Saints in Colchester, and during that time have
had three several Bishops or Diocesans.

Gilbert Bishop of London never made any Visitation into the Country and over
his Diocese to confirm any; and yet the same Rubric says, None shall be
admitted to the Blessed Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, 'till they be confirmed
(or desire to be confirmed) which last words are not in the first Common Prayer
Book of Edw. VI.

Humphrey Bishop of London made but two Visitations, and in the latter never
came near Harwich and that Country by twenty Miles, nor near Colchester by
above eight Miles.

Henry Bishop of London has also made two Visitations, and consequently
Confirmations, and several of my Parish have been confirmed by them.

But how? I never gave a Certificate of the Names of such as I thought fit and
capable of Confirmation, the Question was never asked me, nor of any Minister
that I know of; nor Godfathers and Godmothers required (as the Rubric enjoins)
to every one that is confirmed, nor many (if any) of the children, Men or
Women, appos'd or posed by any Bishop, or other by him appointed to examine the
fitness of them for the same.

Nor, did I ever see any Bishop ever examine any; if they did, I that was
present saw it not done, and I am sure many (if not all) were confirmed without
questioning the matter, or any such said Certificate from the Curate.

Surely, Confirmation was godlily designed, but a perfunctory performance
thereof at all adventures, is quite contrary to the Institution and Act of Vn^

Nor did I ever hear this essential Question put by the Bishop, namely -- Do ye
here, in the presence of God, and of this Congregation, renew the Solemn
Promise and Vow that was made in your Name at your Baptism, (nay, some have
been confirmed to my knowledge, that were never baptized) ratifying and
confirming the same in your own persons, and acknowledging your selves bound to
believe, and to do all those things which your Godfathers and Godmothers then
undertook (and most of them, I am sure of my Parish never had any Godfathers or
Godmothers, nor their Parents could be persuaded to procure them; or if they
were willing, they were not able, by any means or persuasion to procure
Sureties to be bound, promise and vow for their Children, or undertake by Vow
that they should forsake the Devil and all his works, and obediently keep Gods
Holy Will and Commandments) for you.

Answer -- I do.

But I say, there required no Answer where the Question was not put, nor the
Answer particularly required of each of them.

For all that was required, (or, I am sure of a great many) was but to kneel
down, whilst the Bishop with a Common Prayer Book in one hand, and the other
hand upon the head of the person to be confirmed, said over each of them, these
words.

Defend (O Lord) this thy Child, (or this thy Servant, if past Infancy or
Childhood) with thy heavenly grace, that he may continue thine for ever; and
daily increase in thy holy Spirit more and more, until he come unto thy
everlasting Kingdom.

But in King Edward VI's Common Prayer Book, Confirmation was quite another
thing, and the words these.

First, The Minister signed them with the Sign of the Cross, saying --

Sign them, O Lord, and mark them to be thine for ever, by the virtue of thy
holy Cross and Passion: confirm and strengthen them with the inward Unction
of thy Holy Ghost, mercifully unto everlasting life.

Then the Bishop shall cross them in the forehead, and lay his hand upon their
head, saying,

N. or M. or any other Name.

N. I Sign thee with the Sign of the Cross, and lay my hand upon thee. In
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen. But the
Prayer preceding (is the very same with ours) observe it.

Almighty and everliving God, who have vouchesafed to regenerate these thy
Servants of water and the Holy Ghost; And have geven unto them forgevenesse of
all their sins: Send down from Heaven we beseech thee, (O Lord) upon them
thy Holy Ghost the Coumforter, with the manifold gifts of Grace, the Spirit
of wysedom and understanding: The Spirit of council and gostly strength: The
Spirit of knowledge and true godliness, and fulfill them (O Lord) with the
Spirit of thy holy fear; (but ours, add, (only) now and for ever. And then
this Collect following, is almost the same with that of King Edw. 6. I Will set
down only part of it, namely -- Almighty everliving God, which make us
both to will and to do those things that be good and acceptable unto thy
Majesty; we make our humble supplications unto thee for these Children, upon
whom (after the xample of thy holy Apostles) we have laid our hands, (mark
that, for it is the same in our Common Prayer Book) to certifye them (by this
Sign) of thy savor and gracious goodness toward them: leat thy fatherly
hand, etc.

I know, a Bishop being a great person, may (as Majesty uses to do) when he
means only his own single act, and single hand, say we, we; for so it is said
-- we have laid our hands.

But, how these words -- our hands, can be meant of the Bishop's laying on his
single hand, and but one hand, cannot be reconciled to any Grammar:

For in King Edward VI's Reign, the happy Reformers kept up -- Imposition of
hands (not hand) (as the Collect aforesaid says) after the example of the holy
Apostles, and in imitation of the Apostles; laying on of their hands upon the
Disciples, and thereby conveying to them the gifts of the Holy Ghost.

Therefore the Papists anoint, or have an Unction, in mere Mimickry or
Imitation of the Unction of the Holy Ghost; which was not sold or made of
Apothecary Drugs, (as the Papists Unction is) but purely spiritual gifts of the
Holy Ghost, the gift of Tongues, discerning of Spirits, etc.

But they that would fain be accounted Successors of the Apostles, and of St.
Peter and St. Paul, and love to be called -- the Apostolical men, would make
Confirmation to be performed, or (of right ought) to be performed by Bishops
only, (who the Papists account to be) the only Apostolical men, and
Successors of the small Prophets or Apostles, St. Matthew, Thomas, etc. and the
Pope, the only Successor of St. Peter and St. Paul.

But our first Reformers did not confine this Act of Confirmation to a Bishop
(alone) but to other his Fellow Presbyters, who signed with the Cross, and said
as many words over the head of the Child, as the Bishop himself.

Thus when John was present, Peter did not bid him stand aside, but both of
them together laid their hands upon the young Converts, and they received the
gifts of the Holy Ghost; in imitation whereof, Confirmation was brought in.

And the Rubric, makes the Curate or his Certificate a necessary
qualification; and that of (King Edw. 6.) the first Reformers, the Minister
laid his hands on, or at least, signed the Party with the sign of the Cross,
and said words over him; or; prayed over him.

And probably also (as is usual in Ordination) both laid their hands on; or
else, what English or Sense is in those words in the Collect -- Upon whom we
have laid our hands.

But now (I say) the Bishop, without the concurrence or consent of the Minister
of the Parish (who best knows the state of the Flock) alone confirms all that
come; which are very few (God knows) not one (in a hundred, or more) that are
baptized;

And those, or most of them, hand over-head, without any previous examination
of their fitness:

And therefore who can pray in Faith, or believe what he says and prays, as
aforesaid, in these words -- God, who have vouchsafed to Regenerate these thy
Servants by water, and the Holy Ghost; ( and yet for ought he knows (I am sure
of some) were never baptized so much as by water; over whom (yet) he prays, or
ought to pray, in these words, and then --) and have given unto them
forgiveness of all their sins, etc.

Be not deceived, God is not mocked, (says the Apostle:) But what extravagancy
will not men run into, that would grasp all to themselves, contrary to the
provision the Law has made for the Minister's consent and concurrence (at
least) to this same Confirmation; to his actual laying on of Hands (as well as
the Bishops) in King Edward VI's time, and signing with the Cross (as well as
the Bishop) and praying over their heads, part of that Prayer that now the
Bishop will say alone; but in King Edward VI's Common Prayer Book, the Minister
said alone, before the Bishop touched the Party to be confirmed.

So that Confirmation, without previous examination and fitness; without
Godfather or Godmother for a Witness, and without the Curate's presenting those
of his Parish to be confirmed, and certifying their fitness, is not only rash
and perfunctory, impertinent and contrary to the great design those had that
invented it, but is also illegal, and against Law, and the Act for Uniformity.

Hereafter I may, perhaps, show at large, when and by whom it was invented; but
this for the present, I am clear for the use of it according to Law, but the
abuse of it is abominable.

I write this for the observation of the Law, and that such as cry down
Nonconformists, and call for Gaols, Stocks, Fines, Excommunications,
Suspensions, Deprivations, and Confiscations, may learn Forbearance, Mercy,
Humanity and Kindness to humane kind, considering humane frailty so visible in
themselves; and may not with the same mouth opened against other
Nonconformists, at the same time, pronounce their own doom, and deprivation of
their spiritual Promotions, that are worth the keeping and tugging for.

And may learn to be quiet, and bless Almighty God, that they are so well on it
themselves, and never Vex themselves to vex others, breathing out nothing but
mischief and ruin, to such as are loath to unman themselves by servile
Baseness, Flattery and Sycophantry.

For my part, I would much rather cease to be a Clergyman, than cease to be an
Honest man, an Englishman, and a Gentleman:

Which never a Flattering Pimp and Sycophant in England can possibly be.

In short, Confirmation is either good for something, or good for nothing;
either good, fit and expedient, or not expedient.

If it be not expedient, Why is it put into the Common Prayer Book, or so much
as (once) perfunctorily practiced?

If it be good for something (which I readily grant) then why is it not used,
but abused?

1. Why is it ever used by a Bishop, rashly, hand over-head,
Hickletee-Pickletee, to all that kneel down, whether baptized, or unbaptiz'd;
whether they can, or cannot say their Catechism; whether they have Godfathers
and Godmothers, along with them, or though they never had any such Godfathers
or Sureties, but tell Stories, when they say -- They did promise and vow three
things in my name, etc. as in the Catechism: And not one word of all the three
is true, or was ever promised or vowed by any body, no, not by their own
Parents, who, one would think, ought to be most concerned both in the Vow and
Performance?

2. Why does not the Bishop require the Significavit from the Parish-Minister,
of the Truth of the Premises, and the fitness of those that are to be
confirmed; but this it is to do all alone, what is impossible to be well done by
any one man.

3. Why does not the Bishop go to all the Parishes in his Diocese, to confirm
the Souls that are therein? It is his work, and he is well paid for the same.
And why only, at a great Town, two or three, where there is a great Inn, and
good Accommodation? I am confident St. Paul never sent his Harbinger before him,
(when he went to visit the Brethren, and see how they did; and by Preaching,
confirmed or strengthened the Souls of the young Converts;) or, when his
Harbinger returned with sad News of cold comfort and accommodation, stopped his
Coach, and faced about to the next good Town.

4. Is not the Souls of Villagers and Countrey-Folk, as dear to God, and (ought
to be as dear) to a Bishop, as those of the Citizens and Towns of good Trade
and Accommodation?

5. If Confirmation be only a Bishop's work, and also a needful work, (as the
Common Prayer Book seems to say) then why is not Confirmation the Bishop's
daily work, if the People want such daily bread?

And the Unconfirmed Persons and Children (in London, Westminster, and Lines of
Communication) cannot possibly by one Bishop be confirmed in Twenty Years,
(though he do nothing else, every day in the week, without resting the Sabbath)
although he confirmed Forty every day; which are as many as he can well
examine, (as the Law and Reason admonishes they ought to be examined) though
both his Chaplains were his Assistants in so solemn and grand Inquest, on which
the receiving of the blessed Sacrament of the Lord's Supper does depend; and to
which such serious and previous Precaution is so necessarily requisite.

And by that time the Bishop and his Chaplains have spent twenty years in so
good a work, they had need begin their Circuit again, for in those 20 years, a
new Generation will arise, that will need their helping hand as much as the
former, and so for ever would the Bishop of London be employed in London only;
and then what would become of three Counties more, Essex, Middlesex, and
Hertfordshire? How should we in the Country make shift without Visitations,
Procurations, Confirmations, Institutions, Inductions, Consecrations and
Ordinations; for which the Bishop could spare no time, if he have his hands
full of Little London only? Wherein are more Professors of Christianity, than
were in a thousand Bishoprics in the Primitive Times?

6. If Confirmation, and the said previous examination and capacity be
requisite, (as the Rubric asserts and enjoins) then will not greater
Inconveniences necessarily follow? Namely, either making Diocesses less, and
after the Primitive Mode, and like the Primitive Christians, (when no Bishop
had above one Altar, nor more of his Diocese than his Chancel and Church would
well hold:) as is sufficiently and undeniably proved by Mr. Baxter, in his
Treatise of Episcopacy: a Parish and a Diocese signifying one and the same
thing, and some (one) of our Parishes (as Stepney, St. Martins, St. Gyles's,
St. Andrews Holborn, etc. the least whereof) would make an Hundred Primitive
Diocesses; nay, it is well if an Hundred Bishops could look well after one of
them Parishes, as they ought to be looked after. Four hundred years after
Christ, in Augustine's time, at a Conference Provincial, there were 286
Bishops, and 120 absent, and 60 Sees vacant, 486 Bishops in one Province. Or
else, if the Diocesses continue so vast, then Suffragan-Bishops, and
Chorepiscopi must necessarily come into Play again, or else Confirmation (must
either not be done, or not done as it ought, and as is required by the Statute
to be done;) impossible to be done throughout a whole Diocese by any one man or
Bishop, in such manner as the Law enacts.

So that necessarily either the Diocesses must be made less, or my Lords the
Bishops (by Bishop-Suffragans) augmented in Number, or else Confirmation taken
out of the Common Prayer Book, or at least altered.

It Is a Fable to say, That Atlas (alone) bore up the Heavenly Globe on his
single Shoulders, it is a Burden too great for any individual mortal man; and so
is the Office of a Diocesan-Bishop at this day, except his work be made less,
or his Helps in Government more and greater.

By Helps in Government, I do not mean Excommunicating Helps in Government,
Lay-Chancellors, Doctors, Proctors, Registers, Vice-Registers, etc.

But Saving Helps, and Confirming Helps, Chorepiscopi, Suffragan-Bishops; a
word no (Nuisance, nor a) stranger to our English Language.

But will that old Remedy of Suffragan-Bishops be ever listened unto? What
Bishop alive will be guilty of so much -- Self-denial, (as conscious of his own
Inability, or rather Impossibility, for the discharge of so great a Cure and
work) as to take in Partners and Comrades to so high a Chair, where (some
think) there is room little enough in all Conscience for one Corpse.

I confess it would show great Zeal in my Lords the Bishops, and Obedience to
the celebrated Act of Vniformitn, if to show their Conformity thereunto, and
their Love to Episcopal Confirmation, they should Surrogate many Suffragan
Bishops, as Coadjutors in so blessed a work; and would chronicle them, and
renown them to all Posterity, and entitule them to the great Honor of being
Conformists in AfterAges.

But some men do not love Honor so well, as to purchase it at so dear a Rate:
For in all Conscience the Suffragan-Bishops that share in the Pains, might
honestly put in their Spoons for a Meals-meat, and share in the Gains.

For that very Trick therefore, I do not expect to live to see such a Primitive
Face of the Church in this Iron Age, nor so much Tenderness and
Conscientiousness in the discharge of Duty and Self-denial in any Bishop; but I
wish I could see it. In the Interim, as I hap to meet with them, I will see if
I can persuade them to it, because the Harvest is so great, and the Laborers
too few, no wonder, so much good Corn is lost, (amongst the Nonconformists and
Quakers) and shakes in the Field, for want of more hands to the work, the
mighty work of Confirmation.

Nothing can be more apposite and seasonable to conclude this Essay, (than His
Most Gracious Majesty's Declaration ( page 11.) published Anno Domini 1660.) to
vindicate it from all appearance of Novelty; in these words: Because the
Diocesses, especially some of them, are thought to be of too large Extent, We
will appoint such a Number of Suffragan Bishops, in every Diocese, as shall be
sufficient for the due performance of their work.

3. No Bishop shall ordain or exercise any part of Jurisdiction which
appertains to the Censures of the Church, without the advice and assistance
of the Presbyters: And no Chancellors, Commissaries or Officials, as such,
shall exercise any Act of Spiritual Jurisdiction, in these Cases, viz.
Excommunication, Absolution, etc.

As to Excommunication, Our Will and Pleasure is, That no Chancellor,
Commissary or Official, Decree any Sentence of Excommunication or Absolution (
Yet I my self was Absolved by Dr. Pinfold, and Dr. Stearnes, two L^y-Doctors,
in the Delegates, no Presbyter being present; Quaere, Whether the Statute
aforesaid, 25 H. 8.19. which alone constitutes the Delegates, gives such
Delegates power to Excommunicate and Absolve? how come they by the Power of the
Keys?)

Nor shall the Archdeacon exercise any Jurisdiction without the Advice of Six
Ministers of his Archdeaconry, whereof Three to be nominated by the Bishop, and
Three by the Election of the Major part of the Presbyters within the
Archdeaconry.

4. To the End the Dean and Chapters may the better be fitted to afford Counsel
and Assistance to the Bishops both in Ordination, and other Offices mentioned
before, etc. Moreover, an equal Number to those of the Chapter of the most
learned, pious, and discreet Presbyters of the same Diocese, annually Chosen by
the Major Vote of all the Presbyters of that Diocese present at the Election,
shall be always advising and assisting together with those of the Chapter in
all Ordinations, and every part of Jurisdiction which appertains to the Censure
of the Church; and at all other solemn and important Actions, in the Exercise
of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, wherein any of the Ministry are concerned.

-- And Our Will is, That the great work of Ordination be constantly and
solemnly performed by the Bishop, and his aforesaid Presbytery. --

5. We will take Care that Confirmation be rightly and solemnly performed, by
the Information and with the Consent of the Minister of the place -- who shall
admit none to the Lord's Supper, 'till they have made a credible Profession of
their Faith, and promised Obedience, etc.



This was the Judgment of His Majesty, in that Declaration, (which see at
large) to which the Parliament, that made the Act of Uniformity, gave so much
Deference and Reverence, That they Publicly gave His Majesty Thanks for the
same.

And as to the matter in hand, concerning Confirmation, they Enacted it almost
to a Tittle, which see in the Rubric, foregoing that Sacred Office: But who is
Conformable thereunto, and who are the Nonconformists now? And who makes a
pause in the work, 'till first be obtained the Information and Consent of the
Minister of the place, without which (in the Judgment of His Gracious Majesty)
Confirmation could not be rightly and solemnly performed?

It has been proved, that if a Diocesan-Bishop had no other work, besides
Confirmation only, it is impossible that all the Bishops in England should
confirm those that want Confirmation in this one only Diocese of London, though
they did nothing else, and left their own Sees vacant, if they observe the
Rubric and Act of Uniformity, and not do it (as is too frequent)
perfunctorily, and shamefully, but with such previous caution, scrutiny,
examination and circumspection, and with Certificates thereof, and Godfathers
and Godmothers, as the Common Prayer Book enjoins.

Grant Confirmation to be a good and needful work, yet the Law enjoins
Impossibilities, if no one man can possibly be sufficient for these things,
though he shake off all worldly Affairs and Counsels.

Again, If a Diocesan-Bishop had no other work but only to teach and exhort his
Flock, (publicly, and from House to House, as Ignatius tells us, all Bishops
did in his time, in the second Century, before ever any Diocesan-Bishops were
heard of; for Bishops then were to enquire after every one by name, even
Man-servants and Maidservants) even this necessary feeding-work of a good
Shepherd would be fully employed in a single Parish: and in such a Parish as
Saint Andrews-Holborn, London, there would be work enough for the Bishop and
his Dean, though the Lecturer and Reader came in to help.

For no Bishop in the Primitive-times, nor 'till Pope Silvester I. had more
than one Flock, one Altar, one Church, nor then neither, except only in Rome
and Alexandria: Indeed, the Apostles that had the Gift of Tongues traveled all
Nations, and were Itinerant Preachers for the most part, but I speak of settled,
standing Officers of the Church, called Bishops, or, which is all one, (in
Scripture Language, as Dr. Hammond, Jo. Gerson, Grotius, and most learned men
generally agree to be all one with) Presbyters; for a Sub-Presbyter (such as
Parish Priests are made in England) is not to be found in the Holy-Scripture of
the New Testament, nor the Prime-Primitive-times.

How then? and when did Diocesan-Bishops come into the World? and wherefore?
may some say.

To which I will answer, but not before somebody answer me this Question,

How, when and wherefore, Hell and Devils came into the Word? for from the
beginning Hell and Devils were not.

Some say, it was Pride and Ambition that made Angels of Darkness of those that
were first Angels of Light; Lucifer would be like his Maker, ambitious for Rule
and Domineering, and, like God, to be Omnipresent and Ubiquitary: Therefore,
Down Lucifer, Down to Hell, and be condemned (said the Almighty) to Everlasting
Chains of Darkness to the Judgment of the Great Day.

History (Ecclesiastical) tells us that the Chorepiscopi, or Country-Bishops,
(just like the Rectors of the Parishes, saving the Name; nay, even the Name too
of Prelates (and Hierarchici) was given to Parish-Presbyters, (though Parishes
are no ancient Invention) Presbyteri qui praesunt Ecclesiis, etc. Council.
Aquisgr. and the Learned Filesacus, p. 576, 577. proves it abundantly, that
Presbyters were called Prelates, as well as Bishops; Episcoporum instar suam
habebant plebem regendam;) I say, the Chorepiscopi were dismissed of their
Authority by the rich adjoining City-Bishops, -- ne vilescat nomen Episcopi --
poor Country-Bishops, that have no Lordly Equipage, will make the name of
Bishop cheap, and vile, and vulgar.

Ay, Ay, so it will; What? Can a Lord-Bishop found like a Lordly Name, when
poor fellows, such as St. Paul the Tent-maker, and St. Peter the Fisherman, and
poor Country, Rural, Beggarly Bishops, pretend to the same Power and Authority
in Name and Thing?

Can the name of a Bishop found Lordly and Domineering over the rest of the
Brethren of the Clergy, if it be common to every beggarly Minister of Christ,
and Steward of the Mysteries?

Therefore make Room, and enlarge the Boundaries, the Archbishopric of York
was glad to swallow seven little Bishoprics at one gulp to make it swell but
to the bigness it is now of, yet lopt and cropped.

Can the Tithes of a single Parish maintaian six Lackqueys, six Grooms, and as
many idle Gentlemen: or, (as the Dutch style them) idle men? Can lean
Easter-Offerings buy a guilt Coach? Come -- tell me that; Or can a single Acre
of melancholy and solitary Glebe-land make fat six Flanders-Jades, or
Coach-Horses? No -- you must say, No -- why then read the Learned History of
the Council of Trent, composed by Father Paulus, a Papist, but as great an
Enemy of proud Prelacy, as any Protestant; he will tell you, in Page 330, 331,
332, 333. How Grandieur, Grandieur -- And make Room there -- Sirrah, for my
Lord Bishop -- (after the Emperors became Christian, crept gradually, and stole
into the Church, unknown to the Primitive and New Testament sanctity.)

I owe the Pope one touch more of my Pen, if it be but for bringing in,
maintaining, abetting, and promoting Prelatical and Ecclesiastical Lordliness
and Domineering, in spite of his (vaunted) Predecessor St. Peter, and in
spite of our Blessed Savior; 1 Pet. 5.3. Luke 22.
to both which he vaunts himself to be the Vicar or Vicegerent.

Luther's single Pen gave his Holiness such a crock or scratch; the wretch has
looked ugly and deformed ever since, to all Christendom, that have but eyes of
Reason or Religion, or any heart of a man in them, to see (with pity) the
Butcheries of that cruel man of sin, surrounded and upheld by Curses,
Excommunications, Absolutions, Inquisitions, Writs and Goals.

St. Peter indeed was put into a Goal, but he got out without paying any Fee,
and never helped any man to a Goal by cursing him, or helped the Jailer to his
Fees, much less, Gregory.

Of old, the Heathens Persecuted the Christians, now Christians ( in name, I
mean) Persecute Christians more cruelly than those under Mahomet and the Great
Turk.

Oh the Impudence, as well as the Villainy and Bloody Hypocrisy of such
Religion; 'twas this Blood-red Religion -- that made the Indian Heaven to
forswear, because he heard the Spaniards were there. Gore-blood Religion thus
Confounds
The Naked Truth with Blood and Wounds.
Conniving at known Whores and Whoremasters, Atheists, Infidels, Debauchees,
Drunkards, Cursers, Swearers and Blasphemers; I wonder who ever saw a Whore, or
Whoremaster, called to Doctors-Commons, or other Court-Ecclesiastical, and do
Penance in a White-Sheet, since the Restoration of his Gracious Majesty? I
never did, they find fairer Quarter, Spiritual-Courts are no Bawdy-Courts, I
would have you know. But does any man speak against their Fees? or bring down
the Fee of a Marriage from 15 s. to poor 5 s. or dare speak against Illegal
Ceremonies, bowing, and ducking, and cringing to the East, to the Altar,
toward the lighted Candles? --

Where is the Villain? stop his Mouth, Gagg him, Pillory him, Crop him, Curse
him, Excommunicate him, Gaol him; nay, Man-catch him, Indict him, Sue him, Vex
him, Plague the Tom-Tell-Truth: nay, hang him, if possible.

What should he do in a Church, where a Tory-Teague, newly Converted thereunto,
Fait and Trot, Joy, shall have fairer Quarter?

But is there any Christianity, Law, Equity, Reason or Conscience for such
Methods? or to damn a man by Proxy or Deputy, Gaol a man by Proxy, feed the
Flock by Proxy; well, let men do to themselves what they do to others, and feed
themselves (too) only by Proxy and Deputy, and see if, in a little while, they
do not look as lean and cadaverous, as the poor starved Flock that is fed by
Proxy, and ruled by Proxy and Deputies, and under Officers, Chancellors,
Officials, Surrogates, Registers and Apparitors.

Shall Wolves in Sheeps-cloathing (that have Nayls, and Teeth, and Fangs)
(behold the Print) govern the Sheep of Christ, (that neither knows them, nor
are known by them) jealous and zealous far more for the breach of a Ceremony;
Human Laws, their own profit and honor at ten thousand times more, than
Adulterers, Blasphemers, etc. breaker of Laws Divine, and dishonourers of the
Almighty God; oh the abominable Hypocrisy of such Religion!

Worms-meat (Acts 12.23.) shall know that God will not be mocked.

The CONCLUSION.
THus you see (my gentle Readers) what an Example the Ecclesiastical-men have
made of me; in plaguing me in their Spiritual-Courts as you have heard, and at
the Assizes and Ctown-Office (and in the name of our Good and Gracious King
too) for Barretry, Barretry --

And will not this be a terror to all Englishmen (for the future) for ever
writing or speaking any more Naked-Truths against them, and their Extortions,
and Illegal and unconscionable Fees in the Courts of Conscience, or
Courts-Christian, in Probates of Wills, Letters of Administrations,
Ordinations, Institutions, Inductions and Sequestrations; Licenses, Indulgences
and Dispensations; Absolutions, Suspensions and Excommunications; Synodals,
Procurations and Visitations, etc.

There were more old Naked-Truths to the same purpose made against them, for
the like Crimes; namely, the said Statutes, as 31 Edw. 3.5. -- 3 Hen. 5.1. --
and 21 Hen. 8.5, etc. And why did they not fret and gnash their Teeth, (as well
also) against those Naked-Truths?

They durst not, but they dare and do (to this day) live in defiance of the
said Naked-Truths and Statutes, (the more bold and overbold they, you will say)
but they cannot for fear of a Praemunire) call a Statute and Parliament Men to
account before them, and coram nobis, as formerly into the Star Chamber and
High-Commission-Court; no, not now.

Dat Deus immiti cornua curti bovi.
Cursed Cows have short Horns, says the Proverb.
But foenum in cornu still: I had need be shie of them.

For besides the said Promotion of the said Henry Bishop of London against me
in the Arches, and Barretry in the King's Bench (in both which they have
hitherto no cause to glory or rejoice, praised be Almighty God for his help and
assistance.)

There is (Still) another Vexation and Lawsuit brought against me, and in the
King's Bench too, and at the Suit of the said Henry Bishop of London, upon the
Statute -- Scandalum Magnatum, 2 Rich. 2.5.

Help me still (good God!) when shall we have done?

Burden upon Burden, Suit upon Suit, Vexation upon Vexations, Canons upon
Canons, Burdens and Canons, enough (one would think) almost to sink a stout
Frigate, or Bluffe Man of War.

Indeed that Statute was made, when Popish Prelacy was in its Splendour and
Meridian, (they even made what Laws they lift) yet the House of Commons have
attempted at it, more than once; and our blessed Savior absolutely condemns
all Clergy-Domineering one over another, that whatever the Princes of the
Gentiles do, in exercising Lordship and Dominion over one another, yet his
Clergy should not do so; it is a shame (especially) for Apostolical men, and
such as pretend to be the Successors of the Apostles, that they should not be
as ambitious also to succeed them in their Christian humility, and Brotherly
kindness.

And I have read somewhere, (I think in Cook's Institutes) That all Laws of men
are ipso facto null and void, if contrary to the Laws of Christ.

And this Scandal (forsooth) must be sworn too by the said little Vicar Harris,
an incomparable person, that not being able to defeat me of my ancient Rights
and Profits of my said Parish of St. Buttolphs in Colchester, (which have been
enjoyed by me above 20 years, and by my Predecessors, Rectors of All Saints,
about Sixscore years before, even since the dissolution of Monasteries, yet)
the said Henry Bishop of London granted the said Harris a Sequestration of
them, but in vain; yet some hope it is not in vain to bring the said Action of
Scandalum Magnatum against me, and the said Harris has sworn it already, and
the said Bishop has declared against me accordingly, That I should say, the
said Bishop was ignorant and impudent, and had a hand in the Plot (and that I
thereby meant) that the said Bishop had a hand in the Popish Plot, or to that
effect.

I have heard that the said Bishop has (of all Bishops) been accounted (without
reflection) the Protestant Bishop with an Emphasis.

But that (ever) any Man should imagine that he was Popishly affected, much
less, that ever he had a hand in the Popish Plot, (many People say also there
is no such Plot) never, never sure yet came into any Man's Noddle (how
extravagant soever) to conceive.

And if I had happened to have such a senseless Thought, that I should be so
Bedlam-mad, to make the said Harris my Privy-Councellor, (that came to eat the
Bread out of my mouth, and (I thank God) never frequented such Men's Companies,
much less Familiarity) is no more possible for any reasonable and unprejudiced
Men to credit or believe, than that I should impart and communicate such fond
Scandals to some Irish Tories.

Man-catching will, in time, be out of Fashion surely; and I live in hopes,
that Honesty and Christianity will never be so much decry'd in England, as it
is, at this day in Italy, where, (when they would express Emphatically, that a
Man is an Errant-Fool) they describe him with this opprobrious Paraphrase,
saying -- The Man is a Christian; meaning thereby, he is so much a Coxcomb,
that he ought to be begged for a Fool.

It Is a mighty pretty Age we live in, to be Recorded and Chronicled to
Posterity; new and monstrous Diseases, require new and sharper Remedies.

And I wish there were a Law, a severe Law made against Suborners and
Man-catchers, that they might fall into the same Pit that they dig for others;
or, as Perillis, might hansel their own Brazen-Bull; or, like Adonibezek,
undergo the same Punishment cruelly invented for others; And that (like him)
they might have cause to say, Judges 11.7. As I have done, (or endeavored to
do, for here (as in Treasons) we must take the Will for the Deed) so God has
requited me. -- Nec Lex est Justior ulla
Quam necis Artifices art perire sua.
It Is fit, Death's Engineers handsel and try
Their own Inventions of Mortality.


Or thus: It Is fit, Men witty to destroy, should try
Their own Machines of Death, and by them die.


And then, from the least of us, even to the greatest of us, we might well
tremble to do to others what we should be loath to be done to us, to the hazard
or loss, not only of Life, Liberty, but Estate and Family, Honors and
Inheritance, in urging, moving, stimulating, persuading and tempting with
Money, Lands, Preferment, Preferment, (for there are two sorts of Preferment
belike) and sometimes with Menaces and Threatenings to enforce men to damn their
own Souls, to murder the Innocent, by form of Law.

Jezabel nick't it in Politics, when (by the plausible assistance of False
Swearers and Man-catchers by her, and her Ministers suborned (thereunto) she
made the Law, the righteous Law contribute and club to the knocking out
Naboth's brains, in hopes and prospect of the pleasant Vineyard.

Heaven be praised in England for a Prince made up of Mercy and Goodness,
admitting no Impressions to gratify sinister Ends and Designs, or, Revenge,
Revenge:

Which to a polluted Palate and Gusto, ( out of taste, and contaminated with
malice and wickedness) relishes and smach's more sweet (as he said) than
Muscadine and Eggs:

Yet it leaves a cursed Farewell; Will it not be bitterness in the latter end?

It Is an unhappy time, and miserable, when, in a Christian Realm, it happens to
prove dangerous, or fatal to a man to speak Truth.

Tacitus tells us, That it was the happiness of the glorious Reign of Nerva;
that every man might think what he pleased, and speak what he thought: nor was
it to be feared, that any man should speak against Nerva's Government, wherein
no good man could possibly live uneasy.

But now, since our late unhappy Confusions, it has been thought meet, and
(without all Controversy) upon legal and substantial Reasons, to alter that
old English Maxim -- That words may make an Heretic, but not a Traitor;

Who, if I might have my wish, should not live a moment.

For Treason, as it is the blackest of Crimes on this side Hell, so it is
attended (and most justly) with the most dismal punishments, and everlasting;
reaching not only to the loss of the Traytor's Life, Honor and Estate, but
extending for ever to his Posterity.

And therefore the Law of England (that is so tender of the Life of a Man, that
a Butcher (used to Blood, though but of Bullocks and Beasts) is not permitted
to be empanel'd upon a Jury of Life and Death, as I have heard) is much more
tender of the Life and Livelihood of a whole Family and Posterity.

And therefore it does well, to require that such a Crime as Treason should be
well proved by honest and legal men, such as fear God and an Oath, not such
vile Shacks as will swear an hundred Oaths for Nothing, or a Whisker for
Something.

Nay, by the Civil Law, (which is the Municipal Law of most Nations in
Christendom) a poor beggarly Rascal is not admitted to be a Witness in any
case; Personae vili non facile creditur.

For Poverty is a temptation to Perjury, with very very easy Subornation, and
therefore Suborners do usually (as Jaundice-People do for Lice) search the,
Gaols for such kind of Cattle, and for Men in Necessity.

Wisely (for this cause) does Agur pray to God against Poverty, lest he should
take the Name of God in vain; (that is) lest he should through Poverty be the
more easily tempted to Perjury, or to forswear himself, Prove. 30.9.

And God forbid that Villainy should ever be more prosperous than Innocence; or
that the Devil should Reign so powerfully in Men's Hearts and Consciences, that
Truth should not dare to walk Naked in Christendom; but be forced never to
appear in Public, but (like a Champion in the Lists) armed Cap-a-pee for fear
of the Enemy.

God forbid, That England should have the Plague again, and waste and consume
with so mortal a Malady without a Remedy; or that the righteous Law, (the best
Remedy) should so be abused, as to make the Remedy worse than the Disease, or
exasperating the Humors confederate with the Disease.

That High Priest was a Devil Incarnate, that (under color of his Sacred Robe
and Function) poisoned his Adversary with the Consecrated Host or Sacrament,
making the Bread of Life his Bane.

And hard is the hap of those Patients, that are left to the sad choice, either
to dye by their Disease, or by the Remedy, the hand of the Physician; -- hang
such choice.

Thus Statesmen that consider not the design of God, and the order of Nature,
in such infinite variety of Faces, Features and Complexions, in defiance and
despite thereof, will not follow those best and surest Guides, but by
excentrick motions of their own, to make all men alike and uniform, (which is
impossible) sometimes deform all things: The Church is not the less, but the
more beautiful for its precious stones, although they be of different and
diverse colors; and this is promised, Isa. 54.11. Nor is it to be done, what
some People contrive to make all men, or all Christians alike and uniform,
except by putting out all men's Eyes, and cutting off their Noses; which is a
bloody, bungling, ugly, monstrous, misshapen, unnatural massacring, horrid and
cruel method, and yet then, even then, there will be some Nonconformity; Alas!
alas! the old Garment of the Church was not of one color, but wrought about
with diverse colors. St. Peter of one judgment, and St. Paul of another. The
Samaritans would not receive Jesus Christ, whereupon James and John were
clearly for an Inquisition, Fire (and Faggot) to consume them, Luke 9.54, 55,
56. But the Lord of life rebuked them, and told them, They knew not what manner
of spirit they were of, for the Son of man came not to destroy Men's Lives, but
to save them. What Is worse, then for Nursing Fathers to become Saturns, and
devour their own Offspring? Let Magistrates rather imitate God, that sends his
Rain upon the just and unjust; the Sun shines on Dunghils, as well as Gardens.
Yet some Men are so hardened to Folly herein, that they will not be taught, no,
not by their own Mistress, Experience, woeful Experience, the Mistress of Fools.

Did not the Spaniard lose the United Provinces of Holland, etc. by forcing Men
to Popish Uniformity with Fines, Jayles, Confiscations, or the Inquisition?
Eating up God's People, as they eat Bread; and making God's House (that should
be an House of Prayer) a Den of Thieves.

And are not the said United Provinces by the contrary Arts and Politics (of
Latitude and Comprehension) become the great Arcenal of Arts and Arms; and the
great Mart, not only of Europe, but of the whole world?

And the Blood and Ruin (that those Draco's Laws writ in blood by the
High Commission Court, Jayles and Pillories caused in England) is too fresh in
most Men's memories to need repeating: Thus the Spaniard converts the Americans,
forcing them to Heaven upon pain of death.

Nor could all the Art of Man or Rome to this day find any medium, or middle
way betwixt Freedom and Force; betwixt Liberty of Conscience, and an
Inquisition in Spain: For Force is force, though severer in some places more
than other; and is but the Inquisition in Characters, or Shorthand; they are
of the same Nature, begot and made of the same Principles, and malus Cervus,
malum Ovum; a good Bird cannot come of an ill Egg.

But Solomon says, Bray a Fool in a Mortar, yet will not his Folly depart from
him; as if he should say, Fools must be beaten to it (like the Wives of Moscovy)
before they be good.

Go, Wisemen go -- go make the Stars of Heaven all alike, uniform, and of
equal bigness, light and influence, with your Projects for Uniformity; or play
the Tailors, and cut out a Coat of uniform shape daily, to fit the Moon from
day to day.

But let fierce and fiery Persecutors (of all that are not uniform like their
Infallibilities) hug themselves, and hug one another, in the laudable
employment of an Executioner, undaunted with the fatal success of Nero's,
Dioclesians, Julian's the Apostates, and all such, in all Ages, none whereof (
so sure is Divine Vengeance entailed upon them without so much as one Exception
in the Horrid Rubric) ever escaped dismal Exit's; whilst every honest Man
amongst us, will no more fear to act than to suffer, with a Courage that
becomes a Christian, and an Englishman. Read a Prophecy of the nature and
downfall of the High-Commission-Court, Inquisition or Persecution, in Luke
12.45, 46. Time was, when Athanasius himself was cried down for an Heretic:
For Truth can subsist comfortably amongst Christians, in the absence and want
of outward Peace.

But neither outward nor inward Peace can subsist long amongst Christians in
the absence and want of Truth.

Of old, Englishmen could praise God, some secundum usum Sarum, some secundum
usum Bangor, (as every one liked best) and no quarrel about the matter.

The Cope then and Surplice (we see) should still, by the Act of Uniformity, be
retained amongst us; but, only at the Celebration of the Holy Communion (in
King Edw. VI. time) commonly called the Mass, and are the very garments the
Popish Priests wear at this day whilst they say Mass.

But you do not hear me say, (as one rashly did) That the English should the
Pope out of Doors so hastily, that he had not time to take his Garments with
him.

Nor yet with the Brainsick Bishop of London, bloody Bonner, jearing (when he
heard that we had retained some of the Romish Ceremonies and Weeds) said; So,
so, they have begun to taste of our Broth, and in time they will eat of our Beef.

(But it is so fat, larded and luscious, that he must have an Ostrich-stomack, a
raving Boulimy, or the Canine-appetite and hungry Fever, than can swallow all
that comes (as most people do) without chewing.)

God bless us, from such London Bishops, for they have been ominous sometimes.

Thus have I, at mine own peril, without faith or hope in any man's assistance
(for there are few men of Truth, or friends to Truth, or true friends in this
World of Flattery and Hypocrisy) but only by the assistance and infused
courage from God alone, have I made this bold Adventure, to tell bold Truths;
such as no man else either did, or durst, to charge all the cringing Clergy
with Nonconformity, that use to be so washpish, stinging and stingy, against
Non-Conformists.

For now they will be sensible that at the same time that they roar out Anathema's
against all Non-Conformists, and egg on every little Jury-man and Churchwarden
to Present them, they do with the same outstretched jaws and open mouth
publish their own Doom, and Sentence themselves amongst the rest.

And is it not just, that quarrelsome men that love to be dealing Blows amongst
the quiet Neighborhood, should meet with some rugged Counter-Buffes, when the
old man is too much provoked?

We see it is some Privilege to sin in good Company, in the Company of
Singing-boys, Singing-men, Bishops, Canons, Prebends, petty Canons, and
Cathedral-men, especially when they are not only great, but cruel and fierce to
mark what is done amiss; nay, and to strike too, if it were not for fear of
hitting themselves.

Gramercy Charity -- or rather self-love: which last I usually looked upon as a
Weed (and so it is) but I see it is good for something; nay, more medicinal,
and has more virtue in it (we see) than some men's charities.

Then, Charity, (Hussy!) stand off, keep your 'loof and your distance, all you
could do for Dissenting-Judgments (hitherto) has come to nothing, what
prevailing Rhetoric can there be in cold Charity, especially this Frosty
Weather?

And come hither my dear -- my dear self-love -- Gramercy self-love, for thy
sake alone Non-Conformists shall be hereafter more connived, winked at, and
embraced: The mercies of the wicked are cruelty, but the self-love of the
wicked is their only charity, and the only remedy against their cruelty.

Blessed be God ( for I have found it true by frequent, repeated and multiplied
experience) that the more opposition and rage I have been exposed to, by the
malice and cruelty of wicked and revengeful men, the more extraordinary
assistance I have had from God in some remarkable, unexpected and strange
Providence.

No man of my Quality having been more opposed, and no man of my Quality m^e
Blessed and Protected; depressa resurgo, says the Palm Tree; more weight, more
^ght; like Israel, the more they were afflicted, the more they grew.

God give a blessing to my poor endeavors to do much good, if (at least) they
have but so much virtue as Common Ink, to allay the spreading venom of such
Ring^ms, whose fingers itch to be at it, in the Portugal, and Spanish-mode of
Inquisition and Persecution; which has made a Desolation, Rebellion, Poverty,
want of Trade, and Depopulation in those Countries, rather than any great
Conversion (how Hypocritical soever) to the Roman Faith.

But, ye fools, when will ye be wise, says holy David, Psalm. 94.8. as if he
should say, Will you -- never be good? 'till you're beaten to it with your own
rods?

Go to -- and let men of little and narrow Souls (incapable of any love or
regard to the public good, and their Countries welfare) smile at the
Improvidence of such as (like Lamps and Torches) waste, scorch, and consume
themselves to enlighten others.

And if the Cathedral Highflyers, or any Bishops be offended that I have thus
publicly rebuk't before all their public transgressions, and defiance of the
Act of Uniformity, in the said Illegal Rites and Ceremonies, they may (in part)
thank the peevishness and frowardness of some that occasioned it; irritated
perhaps thereunto by that old inveterate and everlasting piece of malice and
hatred, S. J. S. who has always (though always, in conclusion, to his own shame
and loss) endeavored to set men upon me, by getting false Calumnies and
Slanders invented in his hollow and cankered Breast, to which one-ear'd men
giving credit, and therewith also prejudic't and pre-possest, and (knowing my
Spirit and Temper, not over-patient to bear Affronts) he knew there would be
(what he labored for) a Quarrel: I know it is a Devilish thing, and the very
daily work of the Devil, to devise wicked imaginations, and with a proud look,
lying tongue; hands ready to shed innocent Blood, and feet that be swift in
running to mischief, to be a false witness that speaks lies, only to sow
discord amongst Brethren:

And are the six, or rather seven things that are abomination to the Almighty,
Prove. 6.16, 17, 18, 19.

Yet, he that created Light out of Darkness, and life preservation to Israel
ought of the malice of Joseph 's Brethren in selling him to the Gypsies, and
unity and amity to his people by men's Differences and Dissentions, can (and I
hope will) create beauty and order out of our Confusions, Chaos, Disorders and
Discords, and out of the eater bring forth meat, and out of the strong
sweetness, and Truth and Light from the Collisions, Interferings, and mutual
strikings of the hardest and blackest Flints.

Thus the contentions of Paul and Barnabas tended (by their Parting and
Dissentions) to the more nimble Propagation of the Naked Truth.

Therefore be not all of a flame, like that fiery-fac'd bloody Bishop Bonner,
against all Dissenters and Non-conformists, Bandying and Ecchoing the word,
Heretic, Heretic, at one another, and to and again.

For the servant of the Lord should not strive, should not be a Jupiter
Altitonans, a Boanerges, all for consuming and destroying with fire from
Heaven, or Earth; (ye know not what manner of spirits ye are of.)

A Bishop should not be a striker, (...), (that is) no Persecutor, no striking
(at second hand) signifying and giving aim to the Magistrate, where, and whom,
and when to strike, as well as no Gladiator, (...), not a litigious Informer
former nor Promoter, but a stranger to Lawsuits and Contentions, (as Plaintiff
especially) either through covetousness, in hopes thereby to enrich themselves
by beggaring their Brethren, like the said old Bonner, that seemed to be in Fee
with the Gaolers and the Hangman.

But bid farewell to the plumed Troops and the big Wars, that make Revenge
virtue; but in patience forbearance, temperance, and in meekness instructing
those that oppose themselves, or are Non-Conformists; concluding (as I will)
with wise Gamaliel, that even for your own sakes, ye ought to take heed to your
selves, what ye intend to do as touching these men, Act. 5.35, 38, 39, 40. And
now I say unto you, Refrain from these men and let them alone;

For if this counsel or work be of men, it will come to naught, But if it be of
God, ye cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye be found even to fight against God.

And to him they agreed.

Discite Justinian moniti and non temnere Divos.
Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse pium?
Take warning, whilst you may, and dread Heavens Rod:
Do not, with Gyant-Force, brave the Great God.
Shall he that checks sin have, for Tears, more Cause,
Than those Suborning Pimps that break the Laws?
In Dangers, Cowards; Bold at Heaven to strike:
Are these true Englishmen? Tories more like.
A True Table of all such FEES as are Due, or can be Claimed in any
Bishops-Courts, in all Cases; As they were Given in to the Commissioners of His
Majesty King Charles I. Nov. 1630. By the Commissaries, Registers, Proctors,
etc. under their own Hands in the Star Chamber. Necessary to be known by all
Persons liable to be Concerned in the said Bishops-Courts.
IT IS no part of the Scope of the ensuing Table, to debate the Legality,
Expediency, or Inconveniency of those Courts and Jurisdictions, commonly called
Spiritual or Ecclesiastic, as they are now managed: Nor whether the Persons
that hold them, and grant forth Citations in their own Names and Styles, and
not in the KINGS, do not thereby Incur the Penalty of a Praemunure; But its
Business is, to Present you with an Exact Copy of their FEES, as they were
stated by themselves to certain Commissioners appointed by King Charles I. to
Inspect them, Nov. 1630. which Table being long since stifled as much as in
them lies, it is thought fit to Re-print the same from the Original first
Printed Anno Dom. 1631.

In cases of Instance, that is, between Party and Party. To the Comissary. To
the Register. To the Apparitor. - s. - d. - s. - d. - d. IMprimis, For
Decreeing the Original Citation, and for Sealing of it 00 06 00 06 00 Item, For
Decreeing the Original Citation in a Matrimonial Cause with an Inhibition, and
for Sealing of it 01 00 01 00 00 Item, For the Decree of every Party principal
00 09 00 09 00 Item, For every Decree V^is and Modis 00 09 00 09 00 Item, Only
at the Release.
For every Excommunication or Suspension in Writing 00 09 00 09 04 Item, For
every Absolution from an Excommunication or Suspension 00 09 00 09 04 Item, For
Letters Testimonial to be made upon a Search, or any other Cause 06 08 06 08 00
Item, For the Oath of every Witness upon any matter 00 00 00 00 02 Item, For
Examination of every First Witness upon any matter 00 09 00 09 00 Item, For
Examination of every other Witness 00 4 00 4 00 Item, For the Examination of
Witnesses upon Interrogatories 00 09 00 09 00 Item, For the Examination of
every Party principal 00 09 00 09 00 Item, For the Oath of every Party
principal 00 00 00 00 02 Item, For the Copy of every Witness upon any matter
produced and examined 00 00 00 08 00 Item, For the Copy of the Parties
principal Answer 00 00 01 00 00 Item, For every Commission for the Examination
of a Party principal or Witnesses, or for the Prizing of Goods of a Deceased,
or to take the Oath of a Party upon an Inventory, or Accounts, or any other
matter 05 00 05 00 00 Item, For the Constitution of a Proctor 00 00 00 04 00
Item, For Exhibition of every Proxy in Writing 00 00 00 02 00 Item, For every
Act 00 00 00 04 00 Item, For every Act upon the opening or recovering of a
Prohibition, Consultation, or any others of the King's Writs 15 00 15 00 00
Item, For a Delay.
For every Definitive Sentence and Interlocutory Decree 05 00 05 00 12 Item,
For every Significavit to the Chancery, for the Taking and Imprisoning of an
Excommunicate Person in any Cause, as well of Instance as Office 05 00 05 00 00
Item, For every Significavit to the Chancery, for the Freedom and Enlargement
of an Excommunicate Person in any Cause, as well Instance as Office 05 00 05 00
00 Item, To see it Executed.
For the Copy of every Order of Penance 06 00 06 00 12 Item, For Transmitting
every Process, Judicis a quo ad Judicem ad quem, to the Register, according to
the Taxation of the Judge ad quem, or according to Composition between the
Register and the Party Appellant 00 00 13 00 00 Item, For the Seal of the Judge
a quo, set to the Process Transmitted 06 08 00 00 00 Item, For all Letters of
Guardianship under Seal 06 08 06 08 00 In Causes of Office, that is, where the
Court proceeds of its own Accord, and it is not between Party and Party. To the
Comissary. To the Register. To the Apparitor. - s. - d. - s. - d. - d.
IMprimis, For every Original Citation and Appearance of every Party 00 06 00 06
04 Item, For every Decree Viis and Modis 00 06 00 06 04 Item, For every
Excommunication or Suspension under Seal 00 09 00 09 04 Item, For every
Absolution from an Excommunication or Suspension 00 09 00 09 00 Item, For
Letters Testimonial to be made upon any Cause, and for writing them, if the
Cause require it 06 08 06 08 00 Item, For the Examination of every Party
principal 00 09 00 09 00 Item, For the Copy of every Parties principal Answer
00 00 01 00 00 Item, For the Oath of every Party principal 00 00 00 00 02 Item,
For drawing of Proxy for Appearance at all Visitations and Synods 00 00 02 06
00 Item, For the Exhibition and Consignation of every Proxy in writing at the
Visitations and Synods only 00 00 00 04 00 Item, For warning of them,
For Registring the Names of the Churchwardens and Sidemen of every Parish 00
00 00 04 04 Item, For every Certificate made to the Bishop by the Commissary,
for the Commutation of any Penance 06 08 06 08 12 Item, When any Penance is
Commuted by the Bishop, and the Commutation extended to the Commissary 10 00 10
00 00 Item, For the writing of any Bond taken for the Indemnity of the Judge,
or his Commissary, upon any Cause 00 00 01 00 00 Item, For every Act passed in
Court 00 00 00 04 00 Item, For every Faculty that grants License, except for
Teaching 05 00 05 00 00 Item, For Exhibiting every Bill of Presentiments at the
Visitation only 00 00 00 04 00 Item, For the Purgation of every Person to whom
Purgation is assigned, and for his own hand 00 09 00 09 04 Item, For every
Compurgator first sworn, and for his hand 00 09 00 09 02 Item, For every other
Compurgator 00 06 00 06 02 Item, For every Intimation sent out for all those
that will object against a Purgation of any Man and his Compurgators 01 03 01
03 04 Item, For a Dismission of every Man out of the Court for any Cause
whatever 00 06 00 06 04 Item, For any Search made by the Register for any Act
of Court, or any other Instrument, after a Cause is ended 00 00 01 00 00 Item,
For every Sequestration of the Fruit of a Benefice, and Publication of the same
under Seal 05 00 05 00 12 Item, For Letters Commendatory for a Curate going out
of the Jurisdiction 03 04 03 04 00 Item, For every Caveat entered 00 00 01 00
00 Item, For the Copy of every Order of Penance 00 06 00 06 12 To see it
Executed. Item, For Transmitting a Process, Judice a quo, to Register according
to the Taxation of the Judge ad quem, if there be no Composition made betwixt
the Register and Party Appellant 00 00 13 00 00 Item, For the Seal of the Judge
to the same Process 06 08 00 00 00 Item, For the drawing of Articles against
any Man Convented of Office, for lawful Proof made of the truth of them 01 08
01 08 00 Item, For every Act upon the withdrawing of a Caution out of the
Registry 00 00 00 11 00 Item, For every Dispensation for Exhibiting of an
Inventory into Court 06 08 06 08 00 Item, According to Statute.
For an Administration of the Goods of a Deceased, not extending to the Sum of
Five Pounds 00 00 00 06 04 Item, In defiance of the Statute.
For the Administration of the Goods of a Deceased, amounting above the Value
of Five Pounds, and under Forty 02 06 02 06 10 Item, In defiance of Statute.
For the Administration of the Goods of a Deceased, amounting to Forty Pounds
and upwards, let it be as many Thousands as it will, is 06 08 06 08 11 Item,
According to Statute.
For the Probat of a Will, where the Value does not exceed the Sum of Five
Pounds ^ 00 00 06 04 Item, According to Statute.
For the Probat of a Will, where the Goods exceed Five Pounds, and not above
Forty Pounds 02 06 01 00 10 Item, According to Statute.
For the Probat of a Will, where the Goods do exceed the Value of Forty Pounds
and upwards, let it be as much as it will 02 06 02 06 10 For every Skin Item,
In defiance of the Statute.
For the Engrossing of every Will, according to the length thereof, not
exceeding eight Skins, for every large Skin of Parchment 00 00 08 00 00 Item,
In defiance of the Statute.
For Engrossing every Inventory and Accounts, according to the length thereof,
not exceeding Two shillings for every Press of Parchment 00 00 02 00 00 Item,
In defiance of the Statute.
For Exhibiting of every Inventory, and for subscribing of the same 00 06 00 06
00 Item, For the Copy of every Act extracted out of the Registry under the
Register's hand 00 00 01 00 00 Item, For the Copy of every Inventory,
Testament, Libel, Matter, Allegations, or Articles whatsoever, extracted out of
the Register under the Register's hand 00 00 According to the length. 00 Item,
For Letters of Request made to another Ordinary, to Cite one dwelling out of
the Judges Jurisdiction 01 08 01 08 00 Item, For every Renunciation of an
Administration of the Goods of a Deceased, or an Executor of a Will Admitted
and Enacted 00 06 00 06 00 Item, For every Decree made upon the distribution of
Goods amongst the next of Kin, and for Registring the same 06 08 06 08 00 Item,
The Fee of a Proctor every Court-day, in which he is Retained upon any Cause
whatsoever, is 01 00 00 00 00

And no more; Therefore they Abuse you, when they take Ten Groats.

And indeed there is scarce one of all these Particulars, but the Officers
belonging to these Courts, do now Demand, Take and Extort most Unjustly Greater
Fees than are here set down, which yet are all that themselves had the
Confidence to ask or pretend due, in the Time of King Charles I. since which
Time, they have not any Color of Law, Reason or Authority, to have them
increased. Therefore if any of them shall for the future Demand, or Take any
Fees, Duties, or Sums of Money more or greater, than are here set down, let the
Party grieved forthwith Indict them for Extortion; the only way to Curb the
Avarice and Oppression of greedy devouring Locusts, who, like the Sons of the
Horse-Leech, always Cry, Give! Give! till with tedious Vexations they undo
those they can get into their Birdlime-Clutches.

POSTSCRIPT.
I WILL add but one Argument more, and it is the slenderest in all the Artillery
of Logic, but for Home-thrusts, (like a Vipers tongue, it is slender indeed,
but) most Mortal and Irresistible; it is called, Argumentum ad Huminem, like
Romans 2.22. Thou that say a man should not commit adultery, Do thou commit
adultery? so say I;

Thou Adulterer! Art not thou a transgressor of the Law, and Acts for
Uniformity? Is not Adultery against the Common Prayer Book? Is not an Illegal
Ceremony-monger a Nonconformist? Is not an Adulterer a Nonconformist? Is not
a Noddy, (I should say) Nodder to the Altar, to the East, a Nonconformist? Is
he so?

Why, then thou old formality! thou whip and spur! Will no pace serve thee but
a Gallop and Tantivy, Foot and Horse, Companies and Troops, Trot and Gallop? On
what Service? What Expedition? To root a Conventicle? Have a care man, and fly,
fly, get out of harms way, for fear they face about and root thee for a
Nonconformist, and take from thee (thy pride and joy of thy heart) thy 2, 3,
4, 5. Spiritual Promotions. Ha?

Non-Conformists? Is that the Word? one would think, thou should (for thine
own sake) hereafter be good to Non-Conformists, thou dull Coyner and Forger of
Ceremonies, (thy chief Religion) in defiance of the Holy Acts for Uniformity!

You, that would have all Non-Conformists undone, Body, Soul and Estate, you
that are all for Cursing and Imprisoning; all for filling Hell and the Gaol,
come on, How do you like this deprivation for Nonconformity? How does this
Stone-doublet fit you? you that breathe nothing but Gaols, Fines,
Confiscations, Suspensions, Hell and Excommunications, and Writs in the Rear of
it.

Thou wicked and unjust Judge! do thou Sentence, or Excommunicate some
Non-Conformists, and not all Non-Conformists? and do thou partially spare
thine own Nodding, Superstitious, silly self? James 2.1. My Brethren, have not
the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, (nor the Laws of God and the King) the Lord
of glory, with respect of persons.

Either, all being guilty, let all suffer; (but where shall we get
Executioners?) or else being guilty, (As in general Mutiny) none suffer:
Otherwise, James 2.3. Are ye not then partial in your selves, and are become
judges of evil thoughts?

Then do not bespeak Grand-Jury-men, to make fish of one, and flesh of another;
but either spare all Non-Conformists, or spare no Non-Conformists, small nor
great, Layman nor Clergyman, Bishop nor Archbishop, Dean nor Chapter,
Singing-men nor Singing-boys, Register nor Sumner; no, nor Justices, nor your
selves, Grand-Jury-men, spare all or spare none, from the greatest to the
least; from the Bench to the Bar.

Do thou say no Non-Conformists ought to be sworn of a Jury? Ha? let me hear
this again, Is this Law? That no transgressors of the Law shall be either Judge
or Jury-man? turn thine eyes inward, look into thine own Breast, and then tell
me, Is this Law?

What? Shall no transgressor of a Statute be a Judge or a Jury-man? not one
Whoremaster, Drunkard, Extortioner, nor Blasphemer, Curser nor Swearer? Or, is
the transgression of the Statutes for Uniformity the greatest transgression?

There Is no reason for that, but we will admit it, rather than spoil good
discourse: and then tell me, thou silly Superstitious deviser and observer of
Illegal Ceremonies, thou Cloud that would overcast all Religion, Do thou
think to escape the Inquisition by the works of Darkness, Mists and Clouds of
thine own making? Art not thou also a Non-Gonformist?

The Millenaries have long expected Christ's Personal Reign upon Earth, when the
Saints shall judge the World: but all in vain, for now one Nonconformist
condemns another, a Non-Con -- on the Bench, a Non-Con -- at the Bar; pretty, I
protest -- Vice corrects Sin: Fait and Trot, and by St. Patrick, it is well a
fine, Joy.

If ever Popery come to be the State-Religion, as it was for hundreds of years,
in England, then those that assert it for good Law, That no Nonconformist
shall he a Jury-man, has cut all our Throats, defeated all our Estates,
Liberties and Properties, with that one Breath, Pestilential Breath?

For where are our Lives, our Liberties, our Properties, our All by the Law, if
it be Law, to have none but Conformists Jurymen if ever we live to see none
but Papists -- Conformists, which is not impossible? This it is to wyre-draw
the Law only to serve a trick, or a turn, or a present occasion; this furnishes
the Papists with a fine lash to slash us, and by Law too, our own Law.

Judges and officers (says God, Deuteronomy. 16.18, 19.) shall thou make thee in all
thy gates, which the Lord thy God gives thee, throughout thy Tribes,

And they shall judge the people with just judgment:

Thou shall not wrest judgment, thou shall not respect persons, neither take a
gift: for a gift does blind the eyes of the wife, and pervert the words of the
righteous: (that is) such as would be wise and righteous, if it were not for
the Gift or Reward.

But, woe, woe, Woe be to them, (says the Prophet) that decree unrigteous
decrees, Isa. 10.1, 2, 3. and that write grievousness which they have
prescribed;

To turn aside the needy from judgment, and to take away the right from the
poor of my people, that widows may be their prey, and that they may rob the
fatherless.

And what will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the desolation which
shall come from far? to whom will ye flee for help? and where will ye leave
your glory?

Loath, very loath, will such men be, that such measure as they meet, it shall be
measured unto them again: then will they curse the keeping of false weights,
and false measures, one to buy by, and another to sell by, except they (indeed)
intend to be Weathercocks, (that is) true Conformists (yet never true, nor
stable, but only true) to every Wind that blows strongest.

But this is the wisdom, the honesty, and the policy, mean while; men might
blush, if they had any blush or grace in them; this is a kind of blind
Devotion, or Implicit Faith.

Thus have I known a willing Court, yare and ready at an Execution, right or
wrong, upon a Bishop's significavit, send a man to Gaol, when the Bishop (to my
knowledge) granted that significavit, (of one Excommunicate) and knew no more of
the matter, or whether just, or the merit of the cause; (more than the Man in
the Moon) but by Implicit Faith in the Register, or his Echo; I mean, Mr.
Formality, called a Surrogate, or Official.

Sinner, you ought to be Excommunicate, Suspended, (says Register, or
Vice-Register:) Excommunicetur, Suspendatur, quoth Eccho-Surrogate. Wonderful
Ecclesiastical-Policy, and Kirk-Discipline!

Is there any Wit or Grace, Law, Reason, Conscience or Equity in these
Proceedings?

What? Curse men, Damn them, Gaol them, and all by Implicit Faith in a Silly,
Covetous, Wretched, Extorting, Lack-Latin Register? Sir, How came you by the
Keys of the Church? These Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven and Earth? These Keys
that let in and out to Hell and the Gaol? Did you come honestly by them? --
speak man -- How came you, Sir, to say, First, Take him, Devil? -- Secondly,
and consequently -- Take him Magistrate? -- Thirdly and lastly, Take him
Jailer? -- And in Gaol he must there lie and die without Bayl or Mainprize, by
3 Edw. 1.15. How long?

Until he first please, (that is, pay) this same extorting Register, 'till, 1.
He be pleased, and as much he pleases, at the will of this Lord, (or, rather
Tyrant of Souls and Purses.) 2. He must swear to obey the Ordinary, and
(staremandatis Ecclesiae) commandments of Holy-Church. 3. He shall then be
Absolved, and have a Certificavit thereof to the Bishop, who then (in course)
grants a Significavit, and then by Writ to the Sheriff, the poor Excommunicate
gets out of Hell, and the other Hell, the Gaol.

So that the Register, the Vice-Register, with Formality-Eccho, have all the
Keys at their Devotion; for what the Bishop does by Significavit of
Excommunication or Absolution, delivering to and fro the Devil and the Gaol;
and all that the King's-Courts consequently do thereupon, are all by blind
Implicite-Faith in the Register and Echo, all, in course only.

For these little Sell-souls do the feat, vulnus opemque tulit, the same hand
again; -- they Wounded you and they cure you; the Bishop's Significavit, and
the Writ de Excommunicato capiendo, are but necessary Consequents, and things
in Course.

So, that I say again, it is safer, 1000 times safer to anger the Great Turk,
or Great Mogull, than a sneaking, rascally, covetous, extorting Register, or
Vice-Register, that buys, or hires the Sell-soul-place, (to my knowledge) and if
he buys the Devil, he must sell him.

Thus, I think, we English men are at a fine pass, when our Souls, our Bodies,
our Properties and Liberties lie at this loose lock, whilst a Register or
Sumner keeps (really and truly) the Keys of all.

To see an old Formality-Priest sit in the Court of Arches, behind Noon, as if
(forsooth) they could do nothing without the Keys, (for fashion-sake) which Mr.
Necessity-Priest has at his Girdle, hanging, and represents the Archbishop,
(who is absent, about greater matters, than Markets of Souls) and looks just
like the Divinity-man (amongst the Civil Lawyers in Trinity-Hall in Cambridg,
called) Mr. Necessity, because he has no Law, but they are troubled with him,
(poor man!) because they cannot pray without him.

Quite contrary in Doctors-Commons, they must, they must upon necessity be
troubled with this Hackney-Journey-man-Divinity-driver, because (the mischief
is) the Doctors (good Souls, are willing enough but (alas!) they) cannot Curse
and Deliver to the Devil without him, nor Absolve without him, although the
Money for Absolution be not only agreed upon, but they have the Livery and
Seizin thereof in their Pocket: Why? What must be done then? give the Word for
Mr. Necessity, (the Archbishops Representative, or (in inferior Coutts) the
Bishops Representative, or the Archdeacons Representative) Come hither -- Mr.
Necessity -- nay, hold up your head, and look like a Man -- sit down -- put on
your Hat --

Mr. Necessity -- you must Subscribe this Curse, or Anathema; yea, quoth
Necessity, give me my Spectacles, and Pen and Ink.

This fellow makes no more Bones of a Soul, than if it had not a Bone in it;
nor knows wherefore it is delivered to Satan, or, more of the matter, or merit
of the Cause, than the most Reverend Archbishop, Lord-Bishop, or Mr.
Archdeacon; that are miles off, and absent, I Will depose for Mr. Necessity, he
knows no Law, Civil-Law, nor Uncivil-Law; all he minds, or knows, or enquires,
is only -- Where Is my Gray-Groat for subscribing the Anathema, or Curse? Is it a
good Groat? I take no Brumiughams, no Brumingham, I.

Then if ever the Soul be Absolved, then Mr. Necessity has a Groat more for the
Absolution-Oath; he cares not how many are delivered to Satan, so many Souls,
so many Groats in his Pocket, ready Money: but, his virtue is, he Prays as hard
for their Absolution, for every Soul Absolved is as good as a Groat in his
Pocket.

Mr. Necessity to Curse takes pains,
But Registers and Doctors get the gains.
Copyhold at the will of the Lord is the basest Tenure, but that is regulated
and bounded by custom, and kept within the limits of reason: But, in this case,
upon the good will, pleasure or displensure of these Ecclesiastical-fellows,
depends all we have, all our Liberties and Properties, of Noblemen, Gentlemen,
Yeomen; all, all are held at the will of these Spiritual Lords, or rather
Holy-Tyrants, I mean, Summers and Registers, and such bran, such Sell-souls; we
none of us can be assured of any thing we have, if they be not curbed in their
career, we cannot say our Souls are our own: Are we not at a fine pass?

The thoughts hereof did so perplex the King and Parliament, says the Lord
Cook, (Inst. 1. Sect. 201.) that though in ancient time every Official or
Commissary might testify Excommengement (that is, make a S^gnicavit of
Excommunication) into the Kings Court (Note by the way, that Spiritual-Courts
were not esteemed the Kings-Courts, they must be the then Pope's Courts, or no
bodies Courts, except they themselves be Sovereigns) and for mischief that
ensued thereupon (Ay, Ay, that work was worthy a Parliament, if they knew but
how to 'mend a r^tten Spiritual-Fabrick that has no foundation in the Word of
God) it was ordained by Parliament (for Remedy, But was not the Remedy still
the same with the Disease?) that none should certify Excommengement but the
Bishop only -- (there they hit it.)

Did no body ever hear of a Gentleman (he shall be nameless for me) that would
needs have a Hat buttoned up of the right side; but happening to put it on the
wrong way, stamped and star'd (like mad) at the Haberdasher, Sirrah, quoth he,
did not I speak for a Hat that buttoned up on the right side yea? quoth the
Haberdasher, but that will cost ten shillings more; cost what it will cost,
quoth Gallant, (that had more Money than Wit) I Will have it: so he was glad to
go home and bring him the same Hat again, and putting it on right, all parties
were pleased.

Or, him that bespoke a Picture of a Horse lying (tauveing) upon his Back, and
the Painter brought it, and set it before him en passant; at which
disappointment the Gallant raved, 'till going home (and for more Money) he
brought him the same Picture turned topsie-turvy, and so the fool was pleased.

Was fault found with the Significavits of Officials, Commissaries, etc. Oh,
then let the Bishop (for the future) send them to the Kings-Courts. Ay, well,
it is done; And what are you better? when Bishops signify, just as Officials
certifies, Hixius -- doxius, -- Face about, as you were; now the Cap (I hope)
is Buttoned upon the right side; Are you now pleased, Gentlemen? Surely you are
well helped up now.

When, God knows, the Bishop is not ubiquitary, Can he be here, and there, and
everywhere? he is but a man, What would you have? Can he signify of his own
knowledge the merit of the Cause? Or, who ought, or ought not to be
Excommunicate, when he judges, merely by hearsay, and 20 Miles of, and by
Implicit Faith, in his Proxies, and of his own knowledge knows nothing whether
he does well or ill, right or wrong, a mere Lottery for Souls?

And if (as Cook, Inst. 1. Sect. 201.) a Certificate upon another Bishop's
report is not sufficient: much more a Certificate upon a Register, Surrogate or
Officials report is illegal and insufficient.

An error in the first concoction (Physicians say) can never be amended in the
second and third; so here if the Official miss the mark, the Bishop never mends
it, but shoots at random, lets sly at all in Course, and after him; in Course
too, the Writ follows in Course; Course-doings to be sure, though the
Sell-souls think it is very sine.

It makes them sine, that is certain, that is all the good is got by this great
mischief to the Kings Liege-people; this it is to be wiser than God, and to set
up an Ecclesiastical Discipline unknown to Holy Scripture and the Primitive
times.

For what should a blind man do in the Gun-room? he may Fire a Canon, and kill
a Friend as like as an Enemy: or, fight against God, with Gods own Sword, by
Coring his Servants, this is to kick against the pricks; to bind and loose,
before Christ has breathed on us, and given us the Gift of the Holy Ghost, the
Gift of Dis^rning of Spirits, or Spirit of Discerning: take the Sword out of
the Madmans hand, or the Blind-mans hand, he is more like to do mischief with it
than good.

Except it were lawful to have an Ecclesiastical Discipline, that (like an
Essex^ Jury) hang half, and save half; or, like drawing of Cuts for Souls, long
Cut or short Cut; or, like David's Revenge upon Moab, making them all lie down
in a Field, Men, Women and Children, then stretching a Line through the middle
of them, on one side to put to death, and with one full Line to keep alive, 2 Samuel 8.2. A most nimble dispatch, and compendious way of Execution.

There Is some hopes yet for a true man to escape, by this Lottery, but we are
worse; Is there any Whores, Whoremasters, Swearers, Blasphemers? etc. let them
live and 'mend; what Ecclesiastical Discipline did ever correct a Debauchee?
But is there ever a true man, or one that dares speak truth in a Province?
S^ner -- search him out, Cite him to Court -- Come -- hither -- Sirrah --
Vallain, you Rogue? you speak truth in an Age of Sycophantry, Pimping and
Pandering -- make an example of him, Indict him, Sue him, Article against him,
Swear against him, get Witnesses to swear that he spoke scandalous Words
against the great Lord Bishop; Ha, Sirrah? Have we got you within the swing of
a Statute of Scandalum Magnatum? -- we'll swinge him with a Vengeance.

Ay, Ay, it is even so, you are in the right on it, Who dare deny? you have got
the whipping hand of him, be sure you keep it; it shall go hard else, if power
can but be persuaded to make curt'sie to Revenge.

Yea, yea, Did you never see the Character of a keen overgrown Churchman,
Drawn (by a Pen, not a Pencil) in all his Bloody and Bloaty Features? 'twould
make a man Spew to look at him in that trim, with his two Appendixes, Hell and
the Gaol, attending his Beck.

In good time. I have it at their Service, so Drawn to the Life, that he that
runs may read his Name in Characters, and digito monstrarier and dicier, hic
est; I Will let you see your own Faces in my Mirror, the Successors of (the
cruelty of) Bloody Bonner!

Men born to ruin will never take warning, yet History will tell them, that a
Bloody Joab never came to the Grave in Peace; and the Persecuters were choked
with the Blood they spilt, or drowned in the tears of the Widows and Orphans
that they made.

For Heaven has ears, and there is a secret Nemesis, a Divine Vengeance that
pursues him and finds him out, Lurk he behind what power he will, to hide his
hated Head from God's Justice.

Hodg, like a Horse-leech, still for Blood does thirst;
By Blood the Villain lived, by Blood he burst.
Come, strike then, and feel how hard it is to kick against the pricks, you will
find, that striking the Naked Truth is striking a naked Weapon with a naked
Hand, the harder you strike, the deeper you are gasht; try as soon, and as
often as you will.

Iniquity and Cruelty will in time meet with its match, in this World; at
least, truth shall Conquer, (as Christianity got ground) in the World by
suffering, when the Blood of the Martyrs were the seed of the Church.

Therefore let false men strike and spare not; show as much Plodding-Policy,
(after Revenge) Craft and Cruelty, as the Devil can teach them, when they lay
their Heads together, yet, with all this Aid, it is impossible to prevail
against God and his Truth.

Did you never see a Greyhound stare when he had lost a Hare in an unhappy
Bush, that stood by the way, just when he was, at the very clique, and gaping,
to mouth her? even so, have I seen a cunning Politician stare, as if out of his
Wits, or, at least at his Wits end, when some sudden cross Providence (by him
called strange acciden) has given his Devilship the go-by: then, then, to see
him stare and stamp, fret and curse, rave and roar (like a Lion in a Grate)
that would be mouthing, but for the Barriers.

Go, then, you subtle Persecutors! fret, and be molt in your own fat, and live
(like the Green-land Bears in Winter) upon your own Grease, as long as it
lasts, whilst, Truth, like Muscovy-Wives, and the Walnut-Tree,
The more they are beaten (still) the better they be.


Well, this I Will say for the Pope, and a fig for him, (but we ought to give the
Devil his due, much more the Archbishop of all Bishops) the Pope, I say, give
him his due, builds the Fabric of his Ecclesiastical Policy rationally, if his
Foundation were true: But Protestants do not, that consess themselves and their
Churches fallible and frail, as does the Church of England in her 19th Article
of the 39.

For what nonsense is it for any Man or Church to Curse and Damn a Man for a
Heretic, when we confess our selves that we are fallible, and consequently may
err in our Judgment of the Man or his Faith? Shall blind men shoot a Crow? I
hate this Hitty-missy.

Whereas the Pope, grant him this Theoreme, (that he and his Church is
infallible) is in the right on it, let him Curse who he will, and from Morning
to Night, for ever and aye; for, if he be infallible, he only can draw this
Sword of the Lord (Excommunication) and yet be secure that he fights not
against God, which Protestants (that confess they may err even in matters of
faith) can never be sure of.

'Till the Church then can get eyes to see and discern right from wrong
infallibly, and a Sinner from a Saint, and a Believer from an Infidel, and
Truth from Falsehood (indisputably and not fallibly and uncertainly) let them
down on their knees and pray for the Conversion of one whom they judge an
Infidel, and then leave him, to his Maker, to stand and fall, and pray to God
to tie up their hands to the good Behavior, to Charity, Meekness and Humility
(wherein they can never err) which would well become them, better than all this
Ecclesiastical-Artillery, (which has ruined Christendom) and rather let them
break, than uphold this Money-Trade, and Merchandise of Souls, especially in
this her weak and Militant State.

How have the Churches, the Councils, the Fathers, the Canons Clash't and
Thwarted, Cursed and Condemned one another to the Pit of Hell? it would make a
man's heart ache to read Ecclesiastical Histories; and to hear the pious Bishops
complain that they never knew any good come of any Convocation of Bishops,
Councils, nor Synod-men: and one Guelt himself, to make himself Canonically
incapable of Lawn-Sleeves.

How did the whole Christian World (who were all Arrians, and denied the
Divinity of our Blessed Savior) Curse that poor single Nonconformist
Athanasius, (Nick-naming him) Sathanasius? Banished him, and Suborned false
Witnesses against him, and tried him for his Life for Murder? whilst on the
contrary, our Church of England declares that no man can be saved that does not
believe all the Creed of Athanasius; and the Comment (in words of his own, not
in Scripture-words) of the Holy and Sacred Trinity, made by him. Though a man
does believe the Holy Trinity declared in Scripture, yet, if he will be saved,
he must believe all the Athanasian-Creed. I do not know any man that does not
believe it.

But, all the Common-Prayer-Books in the World, and all the Acts for
Uniformity, nor all the Kings and Parliaments in the World, can never make any
thing true that is really false; nor make any thing false, which the Holy
Scriptures plainly says to be true.

As, for example, suppose there be some mistakes in the Common Prayer Book, by
false Printing, or, in the Table to find Easter for ever, yet it is Statute Law.

But that cannot make a thing true, which is Mathematically false; nor can any
Statute make a Child of God a Child of the Devil, though Anathematized for a
Heretic.

And how good Bishops have bewailed the Diocesan-frame in our days, see pious
Bishop Hall's Confession of the Corruptions in Church Governors and Government
(I am not singular) in his Modest Offer and Peacemaker: See the Incomparably
Learned Bishop Usher's Model: See Mr. Alesbury's Confession, especially, p. 21,
24, 28, 104, 169. See Mr. Baxter of Episcopacy, or (in short) the Postscript
thereof. See Dr. Stillingfleet's Irenicon, (how does self-interest hoodwink the
wise?) writ before he became a Dignitary-Ecclesiastical. Or, see Bishop
Ganden's Hiera Epist. particularly, p. 263, and 287. with which I Will conclude
--

I neither approve or excuse the Personal faults of any particular Bishops, as
to their exercise of their Power and Authority; which ought not in weighty
matters to be managed without the Presence, Counsel, and Suffrages of the
Presbyters, such as are fit for that Assistance.

The want of this St. Ambrose, St. Hierome, and all sober men (mark that)
justly reprove, as unsafe for the Bishops, and Presbyters, and the whole
Church.

Now I have done, at the long run, with my Naked Truth, exposed to the World,
without Power, without Friends, without Worldly Interest to support it. It is
usually thus, those that worst may, are often put to hold the Candle to their
betters; yet, like Link-boys, many times get not of the Gallants, but a kick
for their pains.

But, I Will shift the better, having a King to Friend, a Glorious King (to
Patronize me, and vouch against all Bloody Religions) Charles I. Eik. Basil.
Advice to his Son, our Gracious Sovereign, Charles II. (in these words.)

In point of true conscientious tenderness, I have often declared how little I
desired my Laws and Scepter should entrench on God's Sovereignty, who is the
only King of Consciences.

My Counsel and Charge to you, is, that you seriously consider the former real
or objected miscarriages, which might occasion my Troubles, that you might
avoid them.

Will nothing but Sanguinary Counsels (yet) please? Are we no further (yet)
from Rome? Not yet?

Do thou not feel me, Rome? Not yet? Is Night
So heavy on thee, or, my weight so light?
(May Church of England say,) Have we so long
Been quitting Rome, yet not quite from among?
Christ and his Church by Blood are glorious grown,
But not by others Blood, but by their own:
Whilst Antichrist and's Church are Monstrous grown
By shedding others Blood, but not their own.
Bless us! the Monster Yawns and Glares! (don't start,)
In nomine Domini; stand, speak, say -- What art?
A Bishop? say? the Devil thou art, more like,
Or, Munster's Bishop, made to hew and strike:
Black mouth to damn, and Bloody Arms to fight;
When Hand-cuff't, good; we'll do the Devil right;)
Of Flaming-Comet (long since) have you heard,
With Tail hung down to Earth, and grisly Beard?
I Am skilled in the Language of the Stars, and know
That horrid Meteor, what it meant; 'twas thou:
Thou Bonner! (London's Bishop! seemed to be
Armed, (with this Hellish Black-Guard) Cap-a-pee.
Ordained (it seems) and good for naught, but harms;
Like the French Bishop Odo, clad in Arms:
That Coat of Mail ill suits that Coat so Gay,
Filii tui Haeccine Tunica?
Satan (once) came, like a Py'd-Piper, now
This was a Fiend in Jest, in Earnest Thou:
By the Black-Regiment Martyrs chose to die,
That Naked Truth might live; and so will I.
After the French Religion must we Dance,
Now, Persecution's A la mode de France?
Or, shall the French find fairer Quarter here,
Than we to one another make appear?
A Bishop? say? Thou lie: Him, Cornet, call
Of the Black Regiment that Gaols us all.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
THE Introduction, Page 4. Line 30. for every word in that weeks, Read, most
words in the two Weeks. p. 42. l. 14. for efflagitantes and sollicitescit, read
efflagitates and sollicites it. with several other escapes (by reason of the
Author's absence from the Press) but not many.

NEWS FROM Doctor's Commons: Or, A True NARRATIVE OF Mr. HICKERINGILL'S
Appearance there, June 8. 1681. Upon a Citation for Marrying People without
Bannes or License. WITH A PROTESTATION AGAINST THEIR SPIRITUAL COURT. To which
is Added, An ESSAY Concerning the Virtue of SEQUESTRATIONS.
IT is too notorious and vulgarly known, that the Waspish Swarms in Doctors
Commons, have been as stinging as stingy against Mr. Hickeringill; and the
little Infects as full of malice as venom against him as their hearts could
hold, ever since the Publication of the Naked Truth, the Second Part.

And yet, poor Hearts, they had better have been quiet and let him alone, for
they always meddle with him to their hurt, as well as shame and confusion, and
come home by weeping-cross.

But some men will never take warning: Quos Deus intendit perdere de mentat
Prius, was once accounted truth, though spoke by a Stoic.

Men doomed to Ruin when their Facts are bad,
Do blindly run upon their Death like mad.
We will begin (as the Men of Doctors Commons did begin with Mr* Hickeringill,
namely) with the Citation, in these words following.

RObertus Wiseman, Miles and Legum Doctor, Almae Curiae Cant. de Archubus,
London, Officialis Principalis legitime constitutus, Vniversis and singulis
Clericis and Literatis quibuscunque in and per rotam Provinciam Cant. ubilibet
constitut. salutem. Vobis conjunctim and divisim committimus, ac firmiter
injungendo mandamus, quatenus (ratione literarum requisitorialium ab Ordinario
loci obtent.) Citetis, seu citari faciatis peremptory Edmundum Hickeringill,
Clericum, Rectorem Rectoriae and Ecclesiae Parochialis omnium Sanctorum in
Villa Col^striae in Com. Essex, Diaec. Land. Cantiaeque Provinc. quod compareat
coram nobis, rostrove Secretario, aut alio Judice in hac part competen.
quocunque in Aula publica infra Hospitium Dominorum Advocatorum London, locoque
judiciali ibidem sexto die post Citationem hujusmodi ei in hac part factam si
Juridicus fuerit, alioquin proximo die Juridico ex hinc sequen^ haris causarum
ibidem ad jura reddenda consuet. certis Articulis, Capitulis, sive
Interrogatoriis meram animae suae, salutem, morumque and excessuum suorum
reformationem, and praesertim ejus solemnizationem, seu potius prophanationem
Matrimonii inter diversas personas clandestine absque eorum Bannis in Ecclesiis
suis Parochialibus trina vice publicatis, vel Licentiis sive facultatibus in ea
part legitime obtent juxta Canones and Constitutiones Ecclesiae Anglicanae in
ea part editas and provisas, aliaque crimina and delicta concernen. ei cum
venerit ex officio nostro ad promotionem Thomae Doughty, Generosi objiciend.
and ministrand. de Justitia sive juramento responsur. ulteriusque factur. and
receptur. quod justum fuerit in hac part: and quid in praemissis feceritis,
Nos nostrumve surrogatum aut alium Judicem in hac part competen. quemcunque
debite certificetis una cum presentibus. Dat. Tricesimo May, 1681.

WE live in an Age wherein some men are grown Libertines; and since the
Dissolution of the Parliament at Oxford, some are grown so wonderful light and
wanton, that they kick up their Heels at all Correction; and defy a Parliament
with as much courage as they defy God and the Day of Judgment, when they cry
God-damn-me.

These are very merry days, if they would but last.

When Mr. Hickeringill came into the Hall at Doctors Commons, June 8. 1681. He
went up to the Doctors, Habited in their Formalities, and with their Caps on,
and he also put on his Hat; which Sir Robert Wiseman no sooner espied, but he
bid Mr. Hickeringill be uncovered: But Mr. Hickeringill replied to him in
Greek, and to all Sir Robert's Repartees; and discoursed for a considerable
time: Mr. Hickeringill discoursed still in Greek; at length Sir Robert's
patience being spent, (and none of the Doctors would find any more Greek to
answer Mr. Hickeringil than Sir Robert did), it was ordered, that this
appearance, and Answer in Greek, only should be Registered as a Nonappearance:
Wherefore then Mr. Hickeringill did Repeat in English that he had said in
Greek; telling Sir Robert, that he first demanded to see or hear their
Commission and Authority for citing him thus from his Family and Home, and out
of the Diocese where he dwells, contrary to 23 H. 8.9. And that till it did
appear to him that this was his Majesty's Court Ecclesiastical, he would pay no
respect to it, nor be uncovered before men that were all (except Sir Robert)
his Juniors at the University, and most of them very much his Inferiors in many
other respects, not suitable to his modesty there to particularize; Degrees (so
easily purchased) and empty Titles being admired by none but Women and Fools.
Whereupon, instead of showing a Commission, Sir Robert again bid him be
uncovered, which still he refused: Then Sir Robert made signs to an old Fellow,
a kind of Sumner, to come behind Mr. Hickeringill and snatch his Hat off, which
he did; but Mr. Hickeringill forthwith snatched his Hat from the said Fellow,
and clapped it fast upon his Head. and there kept it during his stay there;
throwing amongst them a Protestation (which was read in Court) and to this
effect.

The Protestation of Mr. Edmund Hickeringill, Rector of the Rectory of
All Saints in Colchester, in the County of Essex, Delivered to Sir Robert
Wiseman, at the Hall at Doctors Commons, June 8. 1681.
I. I Protest against all your Proceedings as contrary to his Majesty's Laws
and Prerogative, since you will show no Commission derived from his Majesty for
such Proceedings, and whereby you claim Jurisdiction over me, and that by the
sight of which Commission, or hearing the same read, I might know whether it
were requisite in my case and circumstances to appeal from the same, or make
exceptions to the same, if it do not give you cognizance of the Crime, or
pretended Crime, objected against me; and whether it be not counterfeit, or not
Sealed with the Kings Great Seal of England: The old Ecclesiastical Popish
Jurisdiction being (as their Divine-Service and Mass) Foreign, and in a Foreign
Language, and exploded by 1 Eliz. 1. by the name of Foreign Jurisdictions, and
the High Commission Court (by the same Statute, 1 Eliz. 1.) set up in the room
thereof, being also exploded by 13 Carol. 2.12. wherein his present Majesty
obliges himself to grant no more Commissions Ecclesiastical, which makes me
believe you have no Commission at all, nor Authority to cite me thus before
you: And therefore it is that I will not be uncovered before you, until it
appear that you are his Majesty's Court Ecclesiastical, by Commission derived
from him.

II. I protest against your Proceedings, because in the Citation of me (hither)
there is no mention of the Kings Name, nor the Kings Arms in the Seal thereof,
but only the name of Robert Wiseman, Knight, and Doctor of Law, and to appear
before him or his Surrogate, whereas he is neither Archbishop of Canterbury,
nor so much as Dean of the Arches; and therefore he being (at best) but a
Surrogate or Deputy, he cannot have nor constitute a Surrogate or Deputy under
him.

III. I protest against your Proceedings, because I am cited out of the Diocese
where I dwell, contrary to the 23. H. 8.9.

IV. I protest against your Proceedings, because there is no certain day nor
time mentioned in your Citation, to limit and direct my appearance at a time
certain.

V. I protest against your Proceedings, because there is no certain and
particular penal Crime (mentioned in particular in the Citation) to which and
for which I am bound to make answer: For it is a duty, not a crime, for a
Presbyter (as I am) to join People together in holy Matrimony; nor any
Profanation, though the Register get not unmerciful and unjust Fees for a
formal License; nor any penalty for marrying People without Bannes or License;
nor any thing more customary or more universally practiced among the Ministers
in the Country, where I live, than to marry without Bannes or License: Nor do I
acknowledge that the sixty second Canon (pretended to be confirmed by King
James) is a Law of England, nor any other Canons or things that are not enacted
and confirmed by King and Parliament; the naked truth whereof none dare deny,
without incurring a Praemunire; the King and Parliament together, having in
England the only Legistative power. Besides, the Canons clash one against
another; for those made in Queen Elizabeth's time order, That such as marry
without Bannes or License, shall be suspended ab officio, for six months only:
But the sixty second of King James's Canons decrees Suspension for three years;
whereby it seems, the Synod-men, the longer they lasted, the more they grew and
improved (not in goodness and mercy) but in rigor and severity. God bless us,
and all Englishmen from such Legislators; and the bottom of the Plot, and
design of that Canon and Prosecution upon the same, seems to be calculated to
get money for Licenses, for the benefit of Registers, Commissaries, Officials,
and such like motly-Crew and Lay Elders, those Ecclesiastical Fellows, whilst
the Ministers and Clergy do the drudgery, and truckle under them, and truckle
for them: And is it not a Soul-saving and wholesome Canon, that stops a
Ministers mouth, and silences him from Preaching the Gospel for three years
together, because a couple are honestly married for Five Shillings, without
giving the Commissaries, Officials, and Registers (those Poscinummia and
Crumine mulgae) eleven shillings and four pence more for a License?

VI. I protest against your Proceedings, Argumento ad Hominem, because
according to your own (not my) Canons, no Sentence ought to pass upon a
Presbyter, but by a Bishop; and here is no Bishop to hear the Proceedings, and
therefore if afterward any Bishop do pass Sentence, Re in audita in propria
persona, He must do it by a blind implicit faith, in the reports of other men,
which (I suppose) no Bishop will be so rash as to venture upon.

Edmund Hickeringill.

Mr. Hickeringill told Sir Robert, the penalty and danger incurred by the said
Statute of 23 Hen. 8, 9. for thus vexatiously citing him out of the Diocese;
and threatened Sir Robert, that he would sue him, and prosecute him according to
that Statute.

But Sir Robert replied, That he would stop proceedings. Mr. Hickeringill (not
content with that) replied, Who shall pay me for the vexatious Citation, and
unwarrantable trouble and charge you have put me to?

But Sir Robert said nothing to that, nor to the Protestation; it might as well
have been Greek, for it non-plust all reply.

Nor are all the Sir Roberts (or) Wisemen in England able to answer that
Protestation; for who can patch up an old rotten foundation that (at first and
at best) was but a Popish invention, not warranted in the Holy Scripture, for a
Bishop to vex and domineer, and pill and poll, and plague his Brethren, Clergy
and Laity, biting and devouring (what even birds of prey will not do) their own
Kind, in spite of the Law of Christ, Luke 22.25, 26.) by illegal Fees,
Extortions, Exactions, Citations, Excommunications, Absolutions, Dispensations,
Commutations, Procurations, Visitations, Sequestrations, etc.

Which last is an art so dark and unintelligible, and as little known, as
seldom or never insisted upon, of all other the mysteries of Iniquity: which
makes me subjoin this following Essay.

But some will say, if Bishops Courts be dissolved (as seems to be undeniably
proved in the Naked-Truth, and in a Book (so styled) lately published; then
what are Bishops good for? And what shall they do? To which I answer, Let them
sit in Parliament, and other Councils, when his Majesty shall think fit to call
them; let them say their Prayers, Preach, give Alms, Baptize and Catechize, and
do the work of their Ministry; and if that be not work enough for one man,
(which was a great deal more than the Apostles ever did, who never were
Parliament Men nor Privy-Councellors) then let them persuade the King and
Parliament (if they can) to set up their High Commission Court again, and give
them power (as formerly) to be mischievous.

Bless us, (good God!) what would Ambition and Covetousness, Rage and folly be
at, if it could speak?

Is not stately Lordships and Manors, City and Country-houses, vase Revenues,
and great and manifold Preferments, enough to satisfy men, but they must rob
the Spittle, and be uneasy, except they have power to be mischievous? Well,
God forgive them, and give them repentance, (that is the worst I wish them) and
send them more money, and (when they have got more wit and more grace, then
also, and not 'till then) more Power.

An Essay concerning Sequestrations, by Edm. Hickeringill.
IF ever any Rags of Popery remain in a Protestant Constitution and Government,
(some think) that old Popish Invention called Sequestration, will still stand
up and plead for its self.

Sequestration is a term of Art well known in the late Times, namely, when
Lands in controversy or dispute, or in Abeyance, or in nubibus, are put into
the hands of an indifferent person or persons to retain the rents and profits,
or take them into custody, till the controversy be decided, and till there be
a lawful Incumbent (by Institution and Induction); or, if a Donative, until the
Patron do bestow the same upon a Clergyman.

Sequestration is a Roman word, and honest enough, if it had not been so often
abused; and where Arbitrary Government (as in the late times) comes in fashion,
it is of use, of wicked use.

For Silent leges inter arma, we must not talk of Laws, of the ancient and
fundamental Laws of England, when either War, Force, Popery (or its Twin)
Arbitrary Government, comes into play, and is on the winning-hand.

The Pope had a Trick of old, when any Bishopric or good Living became vacant,
it should go hard but he would have a snip out of it, before he put in a new
Incumbent; and this taking the Benefits into his own hand, he called
Sequestration, (that is) keeping the profits in an indifferent hand, to be
ready for the next lawful Incumbent, having some respect in the interim, in
making some provision for the Cure, answerable to the profits of the vacant
Benefice.

The Kings of England, and the Pope, have (of old) had many a shroud and weary
Tugg for the Profits in the Vacancies of Bishoprics, etc. But King Hen. 8. and
his own Daughter Qu. Eliz. (that set the Pope at Defiance) made bold to keep
the Profits of the vacant Bishoprics in their own hands; (right and good
reason), for by 35 Edw. 1.1. the Kings of England are declared the sole and
only founders of Bishoprics, and Archbishopricks, etc. as other great men of
the Realm, and Lords of Manors, etc. endowed the Parish-Churches; and
therefore the custody of the Profits of the Benefice (in the Vacation) belongs
to the Patrons, and of the vacant Bishoprics to the King (and not to the
Bishops) by 25 Edw. 3. Anno Dom. 1350, and by the Statute of Carlisle 35 Edw.
1.1.

How comes the Pope then, and Bishops, to be so busy in sending out
Sequestrations in every Vacancy? why, some men love to be doing, if it be but
at small games (they will play) rather than stick out; and send out
Sequestrations, if but for the fee sake; come, come, something has some savor.
For some men dare in defiance of the said Statute, take upon them to Sequester
the Profits of vacant Benefices, which the said Statutes do aver to belong to
the Patrons, in these very words 25 Edw. 3. Kings, Earls, Barons, and other
Nobles, as Lords and Advowees, have had and ought to have the custody of such
voidances. Besides, men that love to be dabling, and have an Oar in every Boat,
they think there is some sport in casting the Net, though it does not always
bring store of Fish in it.

But a main reason certainly is, That they cannot endure to hear that
Ecclesiastical Profits should come into (though they came out of) Lay-fingers.

And therefore a heavy-do they kept (the Bishops) with Q. Eliz for keeping the
Bishopric of Ely so long vacant, and sequestring all the stately Manors,
Rents, Revenues (one of the best in England at that time) and putting the
moneys thereof, (as at this day) into (a place that often needs the same) the
Exchequer.

Putting off the fretting-Bishops with a Complement, namely that she kept the
said stately and rich Bishopric vacant so long (as only) till she could find a
man fit for it. And the man that fitted her pretensions (that is) would be
content to part with the said rich Lordships, Rents and Revenues, and in lieu
thereof take a Pension, was the man for her purpose, resigning all to the
Crown, (from whence they came, and that changed the rich Abbey of Ely into a
Bishops-See, in the reign of Hen. 1.) and in exchange, contented with a yearly
Pension out of the said Exchequer in ready money when he gets it.

Thus Hen. 1. kept the Archbishopric of Canterbury by Sequestration, from the
death of Anselm (five years) till Rodolph (a man for his turn) succeeded; that
Rodolph that would not consecrate Thurstan Archbishop of York, except he would
swear obedience to him in the Sea of Canterbury: Thurstan scorned the motion,
and the Pope took part with Thurstan, and bid him not yield an inch; but
Rodolph endeavored to be above him, and the King took part with Rodolph, but
to no purpose; for the King was glad (at length) to connive and submit.

Nay, that I Will say for the Clergy in Popish times, and foppish times, they
shall justle for the place, and bustle for profit (where there is any to be got)
as well as the best carnal Layman of them all.

And the true reason (in Law) why the King, Nobles, Patrons, etc. ought to have
this Privilege (which the Pope and Bishops have long usurpt), is (says my Lord
Cook) because the King is sole founder of Bishoprics, Instit. 1 Part, p. 344.
and Patron of Benefices; and at this day, all Donatives (which the King
creates) shall (for this reason) be visited by the Chancellor (not the Bishop
nor Archdeacon.) And if the King license a subject to erect and found a Church
or Chapel, it is to be visited by the founder only, not by the Bishops; And by
parity of reason, the Churches and Chapels of dissolved Monasteries are to be
visited by the owners only, that bought and paid for them. And for like reason
Kings of England (before the Pope's Usurpation) (as sole owners and founders of
Bishoprics) did deliver to the Bishop-Elect the Crosier or Pastoral staff, and
the Ring, whereby there was a wedding made betwixt him and his
Church-Cathedral, or Mother Church. And K. Hen. 1. Bak. Chron.
(being requested by the Bishop of Rome to make the Bishoprics Elective)
refused; but King John was glad to part with this choice flower of the Crown to
preserve the Crown its self; of which otherwise that Bishop had made bold to
deprive him.

It Is true, at this day the Bishops are (in effect) the Kings creatures, I mean
of his creation only, and the Election (by the Chapter, etc.) is but mere form;
but still the Chapter (at this day) does not part with this shadow; as neither
with their grants of Sequestrations, Licenses to Preach, Ecclesiastical
Court-keeping, demand of Synodals, Procurations, exacting Fees and Oaths from
Churchwardens, (unconscionable Oaths like the etc. Oaths, and impossible to be
kept) all, all shadows that still they dote on, how illegal soever, and
ridiculous to all unbiast and knowing men.

One would think the Pope might be satisfied with St. Peter's Patrimony (as big
and rich as all England) in Italy, at least with those many happy obventions
for Indulgences, Jubilees, Miracles, Canonizations, Annates, Installations,
Pensions, Consecrations, etc. and not (as he does) claim and get the
first fruits also, and Tenths of every Benefice in Popedom.

And one would think that the magnificent and extravagant charity and
benevolence of those that founded and endowed the Bishoprics in England with
such large Immunities, Profits, Honors, Privileges, Manors, Palaces, Country
and City-houses, etc. might content the greediest Bishop in Christendom,
without snipping some part of the fleece of every flock.

Surely they do esteem themselves of another make, another temper, other
metal, and of another mould than other Priests; or, at least, that the Bishop
is the man, and the Rectors and Vicars, but his Journey-men, or Curates; (for
so it seems to be intimated by that passage, Send down upon our Bishops and
Curates); and as if the Rectors and Curates in England had not as undoubted a
right and Freehold in their Benefices, as a Bishop in his Bishopric; which (as
they certainly have) so they cannot be deprived or lose the same, but by twelve
men of their Peers, according to those Statutes (that one would wonder at the
impudence of such as dare invade them), namely, 9 Hen. 3.29. -- 25.25 Edw. 3.4.
-- 28 Edw. 3.3. -- 36 Edw. 3.15. 17 Car. 1.10. And they will certainly come
within the danger of those Statutes whenever they are so venturous as to trust
to their Sequestrations as a Title in Law, Cook. Instit. part 1.344. a.
or think it sufficient whereupon to ground an Ejectment, or dispossess any man
of his Possessions; whether his Title to that Possession be good or bad, it is
not of spiritual cognizance; for a Benefice, whether void or not void, shall be
tried by the Common Law. And God keep us all and our Freeholds from
Arbitrary-sway, and out of the hands (shall I say?) clutches and paws of greedy
dogs that can never have enough, I mean unreasonable and wicked men, who show
their abilities in nothing more than being able to crush; the more's the pity,
(I say again) that they should have more power than wit or grace.

Thus in the days of Popery, if there happened to be in any part of the Land, a
supereminent piece of good land, fat Meadows, pleasant and stately timber'd
woods, a serene air, a rich soil, and a convenient situation and habitation,
then the Church-mens fingers itcht to be at it, and then -- Hey -- for St.
Clare, St. Katharine, or St. Bennet. The good land was soon converted to Popery
and Superstition, and became -- the Holy land, and Church-land, belonging to an
Abbey, Priory or Nunnery of the Benedictines, Franciscans, Dominicans,
Carthusians, etc.

And though this Spiritual Jingo Janutus is clear enough discovered in England,
yet still the same itch sticks to some men's fingers; and they are still in
defiance of Statutes, (men's Proprieties, Advowsons, and Lay-fees), scratching
and clawing, fingering, and playing their tricks and their pranks with the
Leiger-demain of a Sequestration; playing their Canons and Proclamations (as of
old most Arbitrarily) against the Sacred and fundamental Statutes of the Realm;
and is it not high time then that they should be looked after, what were the men
that occasioned (by evil counsel) the Veterane mischiefs?

And if at this time of day they be so daring and bold, when their Jurisdiction
is so cripled, what would they do, nay, what would they not do, if they again
retreive (as some men hope) their High Commission Court? without which, what
(ever did, or ever) can their inferior Courts signify, more than a May Game,
or to be laughed at? But, if the Inquisition be set up again, then have at the
Naked Truth with fire and faggot, Bell, Book and Candle, and with a vengeance:
But, Dat Deus immiti cornuacurta. --

London, Printed for R. Janeway in Queens Head-Alley in Paternoster Row, 1681.


