Peake, Mayor.
Martis septimo die Decembris, 1686. Annoque Regni Regis Jacobi Secundi,
Angliae, etc. secundo.
THIS Court does desire Dr. Hickman to print his Sermon preached at the
Guild Hall Chapel, on Sunday, the 21st of November, last, before the Lord Mayor
and Aldermen.

Wagstaffe.

IMPRIMATUR,

Jan. 13. 1686. Hen. Maurice, Reverendissimo in Christo P. D. Wilhelmo Archiep.
Cant. a Sacris.

A SERMON Preached before The Right Honorable THE Lord Mayor And COURT of
ALDERMEN, AT The Guild Hall Chapel, Nov. 21. 1686.

By Charles Hickman, D. D. Stud. of Christ-Church, Oxon. and Chaplain to the
Right Honorable Laurence, Earl of Rochester.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for Charles Brom, at the Gun at the West End
of Saint Paul's. 1687.

TO The Right Honorable Sir John Peake, LORD MAYOR, AND THE COURT of ALDERMEN
OF The CITY of LONDON.
My Lord,
I Must neither question your Lordship's judgment, nor dispute your commands;
and that is the only apology I can make for publishing this Discourse: but how
far it may avail me, depends purely upon the good nature of my Readers, who
may, I confess, easily return that blame upon my self, which I here endeavor
to transfer upon your Lordship. For the pretended Modesty of Good Writers has
so anticipated all pleas which can be offered by the Bad, to palliate their
imperfections, that we have not so much as a Fig-leaf left to cover our real
shame, but what they, by unnecessary and frequent using, have rendered
transparent and ineffectual. And therefore this Sermon, rude and misshapen as
it is, had been sent out naked into the World, without any other Covert but
your Lordship's Order, did not the respect I bear to your Court oblige me, in
this Dedication, to beg your pardon for the slightness of the performance,
instead of making an insignificant excuse for the publication of it. I confess
my Presumption in giving so plain, though hearty an entertainment, to so solemn
and judicious an Assembly, was a fault, which I hope my obedience now may
partly expiate; whereby I have given a public testimony, how entirely I submit
my own judgment and reputation too to your Lordship's commands, and have,
though with regret, made this dangerous essay to show my self,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most Obedient and most Humble Servant, Charles
Hickman.

PROVE. XXX. 8, 9. Remove far from me vanity and lies, give me neither poverty
nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me:

Lest I be full and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? or, lest I be poor and
steal, and take the Name of my God in vain.


SINCE the Love of Riches has so universally overspread the world, that neither
Law nor Reason can restrain it, but like a deluge it bears down all bounds of
Justice and Religion too: since covetous desires are so fatally rooted in the
minds of men, that they will prefer a Possession upon Earth before a Reversion
in Heaven; and value both themselves and others, not for the accomplishments of
Virtue, and perfections of the Soul, but according to the extent of their
Lands, and the plenty of their Stores; it will not be unseasonable, and perhaps
not unprofitable, to give some directions how to behave our selves in the
purchase and enjoyment of these Goods, as we find them laid down in the words
of my Text. Where we may observe,

I. That both Poverty and Riches are the Gift of God; otherwise the Wiseman
needed not to have prayed, Give me neither poverty nor riches, if it had been
in his own power to make the choice.

II. That neither Poverty nor Riches are such Gifts for which a wise man would
pray; because each of these conditions have their dangers and inconveniences
annexed to them; as,

1. Lest I be full and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? which is the common
effect of Riches; or,

2. Lest I be poor and steal, and take the name of my God in vain, which is too
often the effect of Want.

III. That the way to remove these inconveniences, is to remove far from us
vanity and lies, and then we may so moderate our selves in each of these
estates, as to be humble before God in the midst of our abundance, and
thankful to him in our distress.

IV. That notwithstanding this, yet the safest, and consequently the most
desirable course of life, is a middle state between Poverty and Riches; and
that it is for the interest as well as for the ease of man, that God would
neither let us want nor abound, but only feed us with food convenient for us.

And first, That both Poverty and Riches are the Gift of God. Whosoever
rationally conceives the being of a God, must needs believe that our beings are
dependent upon him, and from him alone we must expect rewards and punishments:
and since there is a sort of men whom the expectations of another life cannot
affect, therefore it was necessary, that for the restraining of their lusts,
and securing the government of the world. God should reserve to himself the
sole disposal of these earthly goods, wherein they place their only happiness.

And this is a truth so manifest, that it is confessed in the practice and
experience of the worst of men; for which of them would not grow rich, if it
were in the power of man to bring his own designs to pass; or would content
himself with a mean contemptible Estate if humane means could prevent it* Thus
whilst they blaspheme the Providence of God, they confess his power; and when
the impatient Wife of Job bad him in the midst of his poverty, curse God and
die, she gave as great a demonstration, that both our good and evil things
proceed from him, as Job himself could do in saying, the Lord gives and the
Lord takes away. This Proposition therefore being supposed in my Text, and
confessed by the greatest enemies of Religion, I shall take it for fully
granted; and proceed to the

Second thing proposed, that though both Poverty and Riches are the Gift of
God, and he often orders both for our good, yet neither of them are such
gifts for which a wise man would pray: For the true happiness of the Soul
consists in a state of rest, but both these conditions are equally subject to
dangers and troubles. Riches incline a man to Pride, and Poverty to Malice;
Riches make us the Subject of men's Envy, and Poverty of their Contempt:
Abundance often begets Presumption, and Want is the Mother of Despair; Plenty
produces Forgetfulness, and Extremity leads us to Discontent. Riches create a
confidence in us, and hurry us into a restless Ocean of trouble, where we are
exposed to the fury of the Winds, and tossed by every Wave; whilst Poverty
casts us back again to the Shore, and puts us in danger of being split upon the
Coast. Thus when Israel sojourned in the Wilderness, they murmured against the
Lord and his servant Moses, and yet when they fed upon the plenty of Milk and
Honey, then Jesurun waxed fat and kicked. Unhappy Man! that no estate or
condition can reconcile us to our present Fortunes, but the want of our desires
breeds murmurings in us, and the very enjoyment of them yields us no
satisfaction. We have learnt, just contrary to St. Paul, in whatsoever state we
are therewith to be discontent; we neither know how to be abased nor how to
abound, but when we are hungry we repine at God, and when we are full we are a
burden to our selves.

It Is strange, that the minds of Men should so servilely depend upon this
World, as not to maintain a steady course for one moment, but be biased by
every petty chance, and changed by every turn of Fortune. This is too evident a
sign, that our Souls have no communication with Heaven, where all things
continue fixed and settled; no dependence upon God, who is one and the same for
ever; since we put such confidence in these outward worldly goods, that with
them our minds are so exalted, and without them so much debased.

And yet we find by sad experience, that few men can bear up against the
strokes of fortune, though they are inflicted by the hand of God: But when
Poverty comes upon them, they think themselves oppressed: as if they were to
prescribe to the Almighty in the dispensation of his blessings, and their own
desires were the only measures of their right: without considering their own
sins, as the cause of their calamities; or their own amendment, as the end
thereof; they wrongfully accuse both God and Man, as the Authors and
Instruments of that unhappiness which they owe chiefly to themselves. Sometimes
they look upon their Neighbor's plenty as the occasion of their distress; and
so steal from them, to supply their own wants: thus starving their Conscience
to relieve their Carcass, and sacrificing their Religion to the Belly, their
God. Sometimes they imagine the superfluity of another's fortune is a reproach
to the penury of theirs; with envy they behold the affluence and ease of the
rich; and not content with the emptiness of their bodies, they put leanness
withal into their Souls. Thus to an evil eye all Objects are offensive, and
even the goodness of God it self increases the offense. Then they repine at
Heaven for the unequal distribution of its gifts, curse the Lord in their
hearts, though they die for it; and do even worse than take the name of their
God in vain.

With very good reason therefore did the Wiseman in my Text pray, give me not
poverty. And certainly every wise man alive will join prayers with him, lest
shame, contempt and want, the only attendents of that uncomfortable state,
should tempt us to mistrust the assistence of our God, and so betray us,
through the frailty of our flesh, to relieve our selves by wicked means.

And therefore no prudent, no religious man, can make real poverty his choice.
For though it is possible he may stem the tide of adversity, and bear up
gloriously against all its waves; yet it is possible too that he may be carried
away with the stream, and saint under the temptation and the conflict. Though,
as the Devil truly said, a man may fall from the pinnacle of a Temple without
dashing his foot against a stone; yet the wisest man that ever lived, thought
this no warrant for him to try the experiment: he is happy that outlives the
fall, but he that is wise avoids the danger. It Is sufficient for us that God
does not lead us into temptation; why then should we voluntarily tempt the Lord
our God?

And the same reason holds also in the other extreme. For riches too have their
precipices, as well as poverty, and therefore are equally to be avoided.
Prosperity has its dangerous trials, and is exposed to manifold temptations,
and it is ill trusting to our own virtue, when we have put our selves into the
midst of all the opportunities of vice.

On one hand the temptations of the world beset us: and if that smiles upon us,
we are too apt to be flattered and pleased our selves. It Is natural for a man
to rejoice in the works of his own hands; and when he has dedicated his youth
to worldly cares, and courted Mammon in his riper years, he will adore it in
his old age, and at length it will become his God. Here he places all his
confidence: and to convince us that covetousness is truly idolatry, like the
Heathen Idolater, he bows down to an image of his own making, he worships it,
and prays to it, and says, deliver me, for thou art my God.

On the other hand our riches expose us to the assaults of the Flesh, which
always gains ground upon us when we are full. And therefore the Apostle exhorts
us not to make provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. It Is this
plenty that nourishes us in our vice, and feeds us in our lusts; it adds fuel
to the flame within us; and whilst we yield a constant supply to our greedy
desires, the fire never goes out. Fullness inclines us to ease and luxury,
luxury begets sin, and sin brings us to death. Thus we multiply our
transgressions together with our stores; and he that, with Solomon, will take
occasion from his riches, to prove the mirth, the pleasures and follies of
sense, like him also will find his wisdom overborn by his vice, and so come at
last to deny his God.

For when the vanities of the World, and the lusts of the Flesh have taken
possession of the heart of man, then comes the Devil and finds an easy
conquest. He that denies the providence of God, by trusting in his own
strength, and denies the power of God, by following his own devices; has no way
left to vindicate his honor, and quiet his conscience, but by denying the very
being of God, and saying with Pharaoh, Who is the Lord that I should obey his
voice? Thus proceeding by degrees from mistrust to disobedience, and from
disobedience to infidelity, the foolish man delivers himself up to the power of
Satan, and renounces the living God. Then he disclaims the benefit of his
creation; and rather than acknowledge a power above him, will absurdly impute
his being to chance. He denies the goodness of God in his constant
preservation; and rather than give God the glory and thanks, ascribes all his
happiness to the works of his own hands. He denies the justice of God in his
judgments; afflictions, diseases and death, he looks upon as the necessities of
his nature, and not the punishment of his sins. So perverse is he in all his
ways, that Moses and the Prophets cannot reclaim him; nothing but one from the
dead is a demonstration that can please a riotous sinner, and even that cannot
convince him.

And yet can his riches redeem him from death, or from the terrors after
death? though in the hardness of his heart he denied the power of God whilst he
lived, yet at length he must feel his vengeance, and the fury of the Lord will
convince his error. Oh Death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man
that lives at rest in his possessions, and has prosperity in all things! how
will he lament the fatal change of his estate, when his jollity shall be turned
into mourning, and his pleasure into gnashing of teeth! When instead of purple,
he shall be clothed with ashes; and all the delicacies which he riotously
devoured in his life, he would now exchange for one drop of water to cool his
tongue. When the voice of Music, which used to charm his ears, shall be put to
silence for ever in the grave, and the howlings of accursed Spirits shall
supply their place. The Flatterers, which partook of his good things, and
basely extolled his folly, shall now partake of his misery too, and without any
dissimulation, lament his and their own iniquity. And because they made a mock
of sin, and laughed at the obedience of the righteous, God also will laugh at
their calamity, and mock when their fear comes. Therefore give us not riches,
lest we be full and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? lest the Lord also
should deny us in the day of our trouble; and say, depart from me ye workers of
wickedness, I know you not.

I would not here be thought to inveigh against the Rich, but only to reprove
the folly and danger of those who put their trust in riches. For since it is the
goodness of God that gives us all things plenteously to enjoy; he can sanctify
his gifts, and by his grace can, notwithstanding these inconveniences, turn
them to our advantage. Which was the

Third thing proposed, that if we remove far from us vanity and lies, all false
opinions and vain conceits of the things of this World, we may then so moderate
our selves in either of the extremes of fortune, as to be humble before God in
the midst of our abundance, and thankful even in our distress.

It Is the ignorance of our understandings that depraves our wills, and a false
estimate of things that makes us first choose amiss, and then abuse our choice.
Had we but so much Christian philosophy, as to discern the true nature and
import of earthly things, and to distinguish rightly between good and evil, we
could not be so fatally betrayed by specious shows, to forsake our real and
substantial happiness. How absurd is it to pass a judgment upon a man only by
his outside, and value him according to the stamp which his garments, and
trifles set upon him? is not the body more than raiment, says our Savior? and
yet the Body it self is but the covering of the man, the meanest, and basest
part of his nature; and he is no more to be valued by the health, strength or
splendor thereof, than a Jewel is by the Cabinet that contains it, or Gold by
the Chest wherein it is hid. And if the Body it self be of so little esteem, in
comparison of the Mind, and those divine excellencies therein, which entitle it
to the image of God; how much more inconsiderable are riches, which serve only
for ornaments of the Body, and to cloth that part which covers us?

Yet such is the folly and vanity of man, that he makes this part his chief
business and delight: for this it is that he rises up early, and so late takes
rest, and eats the bread of carefulness, that his riches may be seen of men,
and dazzle the eyes of ignorant people: in a most gross absurdity he neglects
his Soul, to take care for his Body; and then neglects his Body too, and
impairs the health thereof, to provide the unnecessary ornaments of its
outside. Thus with exquisite industry and diligence he clothes a Carcass: and
if he can but paint and adorn his Sepulcher, he cares not though all be stench
and rottenness within. And who can choose but condemn his conduct, who resolves
to beautify his Chamber, though he starves his Guest?

Therefore to restore us to a right understanding, and to remove this vanity,
which depraves our judgment, corrupts our nature, and spoils us of our Religion
too, let us consider

1. The uncertainty of riches, and the folly of those who build their happiness
upon so sandy a foundation. Though the whole World be an Exchange, and nothing
there continues in one stay, yet of all that we see and admire therein, nothing
is so uncertain as our Riches: here the moth and rust do corrupt; and what
these accidents of nature spare, the thieves break through and steal. And
though our care and vigilance may protect and guard us from the violence of an
open enemy, yet there is no fence against the treachery of a false familiar
friend. He that can unlock our bosom, and dive into the treasures of our
heart; will find an easy access to our coffers, and prevail more by the
flattering insinuations of his craft, than the Robber can do by open force. The
Laws themselves, which were designed for our defense, by the contrivance of
evil men often prove our destruction, and we meet with a dagger where we
expected to find a shield. How often have we seen the hand of God, in a raging
flame, reduce whole Families from the height of pride to the extremity of want;
and in one minute bury the labors of diverse ages? The Earth it self sometimes
opens her womb, and swallows up the fruits of the Field: and the waves of the
Sea, when they arise, sweep away the treasures of the Earth: Sometimes God arms
the Air it self with poison, and blasts the hopes of a promising Spring.

Thus all the Elements in their courses fight against us; and what they spare,
the more unmercifull sword of Man cuts off, and lays waste our dwelling place.
And is it for this that we forget God? shall we forsake the Lord our strength,
our rock of defense and mighty deliverer, to put our trust in such fading
transitory hopes? shall we commit our ease and quietness to the Seas and Winds,
and entrust our dearest treasures with the Flatterer and the Thief? We must
indeed submit to the power of God; and whenever he pleases, he can bring
distress and anguish upon us: but must we put our happiness also into the hands
of wicked and deceitful Man; shall we place all our glory in that which Moths
and Caterpillars devour, and make our selves subject to the mean, contemptible
vermin of the Earth? surely God designed some nobler, and more solid delights,
to entertain our thoughts withal; and did not bestow a divine nature upon us,
to be thrown away upon the sordid dregs of the Earth, and be made the sport of
every Creature.

But, 2. though this uncertainty of riches were removed, and our possessions
were established unto us for ever; yet we must consider, how unprofitable they
are of themselves, and how little they advance either the honor or the
happiness of Man: the wisest and richest of Kings assures us, that riches
profit not in the day of wrath. Whole mines of treasures cannot defend us from
the torments of a disease; nor the multitude of Attendents affright from us the
terrors of death: they only serve to soften and effeminate our hearts against
the day of adversity, and make us unable to bear those afflictions which they
themselves bring upon us. The aching of the Head may be caused, but cannot be
cured by all the Balms and Spices of the East, nor the rottenness of Bones be
removed with millions of Gold and Silver: but the Richest must die as well as
the Poor and Needy, and their dear Possessions can neither preserve them in
this World, nor follow them into the next.

Nay, they not only die, but live like other men. Of all the perplexities that
attend humane Life, they have their share, and perhaps the greatest too: though
all the World should applaud their Happiness, and flatter their Prosperity, yet
they cannot flatter themselves out of those Troubles, that interrupt their
Enjoyments, and disturb their very Rest. He that increases Riches increases
Sorrow, and whosoever thinks to establish his Happiness upon the Honors of the
World, and the multitude of Dependents, will find at last, just contrary to his
expectations, that they are become his Idol, and he is their Prey.

And what is all this to the Happiness of the Mind, which requires a fixed and
substantial good, that depends not upon the accidental Crosses of this World,
nor the Humors of a giddy People: a Happiness, which, like the Soul it self,
is always active and divine, full and satisfactory, though it be never seen.

The Soul, which can enjoy all happiness and pleasure within its own bounds,
and needs no witnesses of its greatness, but only God and it self, disdains to
submit to the Dunghill for its delight, and to appeal to the ignorant multitude
for its applause; it fixes it self upon everlasting pleasures, and places its
habitation upon that only Rock which can never be removed; Virtue and
Goodness, Justice and Truth are the Pillars that support it, and Mercy and
Peace are its eternal Ornaments; no Storms nor Tempests can shake its
Foundation, and no malignant Blasts can deface its Beauty, but it is all solid
and strong without, and all glorious within.

Thus the Wiseman desires nothing but what the Grace of God has put into his
own power to accomplish; and look whatsoever this Man does it shall prosper.
He numbers his Treasures by his Good-works, which no man can take from him; and
the Virtues and Excellencies of his Mind are above Gold and precious Stones.
These are his Heavenly Possessions, which daily employ his thoughts, and
improve his Piety, to the honor of God, and the comfort of his Soul. As for
all other goods, he looks upon them as unnecessary ornaments of his Life,
bestowed upon him not so much for his own sake, as for the sake of others. He
considers thereby that God has made him his Steward, to minister unto the Poor,
and therefore what God with a bountiful hand has dealt to him, he bountifully
deals abroad; and having provided for the Necessaries of his Life and State, he
knows no other use of the Superfluities, but to dispense them unto those that
want. Thus with a generous Mind he promotes a public Good, and like God
himself rejoices in that joy which he creates in others.

And when he has gained this conquest of the World, and removed the vanity
thereof far from him, then is he fit to be entrusted with Riches, without
danger of mis-employing them to encourage Vice, or concealing them to defraud
his Virtue. If he finds any real profit or advantage by being Rich, he
considers that it is the goodness of God to make him so, and therefore he
behaves himself thankfully toward the Giver of his good Gifts, and provokes
him not to Anger by abusing of his Mercy. He is so far from denying God in his
Prosperity, that he makes this very thing an argument for his Religion, and a
help to his Devotion.

The Devil himself could say, does Job serve God for naught? have thou not made
a hedge about him, and about his house? thou have blessed the works of his
hands, and his substance is increased in the Land. And if God has been
bountiful unto us, cannot we remember whose Hand it is that guards us, whose
Blessing it is that makes rich? The Earth it self will upbraid our
ingratitude, for she in return for the Shours and Dews of Heaven, sends forth
the Fruits of the Field for Sacrifice, and answers the Labors and the Toils of
the Husbandman by a plentiful increase; and can we be more senseless than the
Earth it self, or more unrighteous than the Devil? Shall we therefore be
unmindfull of God, because he remembers us? Surely if we grow rich, we will not
behave our selves frowardly in thy sight: if we be full, we will not deny thee,
and say, Who is the Lord? but rather we will magnify thy Name, and say, Lord,
what is man, that thou art mindful of him, or the son of man that thou have
such respect unto him?

And now it must be confessed that it is truly an argument of a noble Spirit to
be above the frowns of Fortune, but it is much more difficult and more glorious
too to be above its smiles; to be exalted above the alluring pleasures of
Earth, and to despise that very affluence which we enjoy; and what the
Philosopher said of a valiant Man in his sufferings, is much more applicable to
the virtuous Man in his enjoyments, that a Soul thus qualified and thus
endowed, is a spectacle on which God himself may look with pleasure. Here we
may see and admire in Man the most lively image and representation of his great
Creator. This is truly to command the World, without being commanded or swayed
by any Creature; to possess and enjoy the Blessings of Heaven and Earth, with
clean Hands and an untainted Heart, is to be like Adam in his Paradise,
invested at once with innocence and glory.

But, 2. Having learnt to demean our selves with Humility and Moderation in a
plentiful Estate, we shall with ease overcome the Temptations of Poverty, and
learn Patience and Thankfulness in the time of need. Why should we repine for
want of a thing of naught, and disquiet our selves for that which is lighter
than vanity it self? Why should we murmur at that state which God judges
fittest for us? If it had seemed good unto him, he could have enlarged our
Possessions, and given us plenty with the overflowing of our Cup; for Riches
are his Gifts, and his Bounty like the Wind blows where it lists: there is
no restraint unto the Lord, but he can raise the humble from the Dust, and set
him among the Princes of the People. Therefore despair not, neither be thou
afraid though one be made rich, and though the glory of his house be increased;
for the same God disposes of both him and thee; in his good time he can
promote thee also to a state of plenty, or deliver thee from distress, by
bringing thee to the place of rest; where there shall be no distinction between
the Dust of the Rich and Poor, neither his Pomp shall attend him, nor thy
Poverty haunt thee to the Grave. O Death, how acceptable is thy sentence unto
the needy, when all our cares shall be laid aside in the dust, and the
remembrance of our sorrows shall be blotted out. This is the birthday of joy
and pleasure unto those that mourn, and it is not the least advantage of
Poverty, that it puts us in mind of out latter end; and makes us in love with
that state which must of necessity happen to us,

And as for the Burden of Want it self, how easy is it to a Man that has
removed far from him vanity and lies? it is the disappointment that makes it
troublesome to the vain designing Man, who promised himself great and glorious
advantages of his Wealth; but to the humble it is welcome, as being the Message
of Heaven, and he makes no reply, but I am thy servant, be it unto me according
to thy will, O God! Therefore he studies to conform himself to the pleasure of
the Almighty, and if he cannot raise his Fortunes up to his Mind, yet he will
certainly level his Mind to his present Fortune. If God has not allowed him so
large a Field, wherein to exercise his Gifts; he will make the best use of his
narrow confined estate, and by the prudent management of his single Talent, he
shall receive his reward with those on whom ten Talents were bestowed. For God
has given every one the means to grow happy, though not the opportunity of
growing rich. The Honesty and Industry, the Patience and Contentment of the
poor Man, are as acceptable Virtues unto God, as the Bounty and Charity, the
Humility and Thankfulness of Kings and Princes.

And now, Who shall separate the poor Man from the love of God? shall
Tribulation and Anguish? No certainly, for this is the Gift of God unto him for
good, to exercise his Patience and recommend his Virtues. Shall Poverty and
Distress? this is a Gospel-promise, and not to be rejected by any that profess
an esteem for the Doctrine of Christ, and the example which he has set before
us. Shall shame and contempt? this indeed is the greatest burden of Poverty,
and all but this a prudent Heathen boasted that he could endure; but even this
does not exceed a Christians strength; for either we have, or should have
learnt, from St. Paul, to approve our selves in all things as the servants of
God, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, by honor and dishonor, by
good report and evil report.

And if neither the Anguish, Distress nor Shame of Poverty, can make this
condition unsupportable to an humble, faithful Believer, he will never fly to
unlawful means for his redress, but rather perish in his necessities than
steal, or take the name of his God in vain. Death comes alike both to the rich
Man and the poor; and since it is appointed for all men once to die, what matter
is it to the Body, whether it be by Hunger or a Surfeit? but for our Souls
sake, it is not only more meritorious, but more glorious too, to depart this
Life for want of the necessary supports thereof, than either to cram our selves
to Death by the superfluities of Riches, or to prolong our Life, and advance
our Fortunes by impious and dishonorable means.

If we can bear our Poverty with content, and freely enjoy the exercise of our
Virtue and Religion; what greater advantages can we desire by being rich? Who
would exchange an honest and virtuous, though mean Estate, for a turbulent,
dangerous and unprofitable greatness? Who would not rather choose to be a
doorkeeper in the house of God than to dwell in the Tents, or feast in the
Palaces of ungodliness. And if we can frame our Minds to this virtuous
compliance with our Fortunes, then is Poverty truly the Gift of God, and a real
Blessing. But if we find our selves uneasy and groaning under the burden of
our Want, if we murmur against God, and repine at the Plenty of others; then
indeed is Poverty a Curse, but it is a Curse of our own making. It Is the
punishment of our sins, and the hand of God upon us for our Reformation.
Therefore we must still give him thanks, for he is still the help of our
countenance, and our God. He brings Good out of this Evil, and though the
Clouds of Adversity should seem to shut us out from his presence, yet he visits
us when we are in the darkest Regions of despair. If we down into Hell, he is
there also; he still retains a peculiar title to our gratitude; and in the
Wiseman's words, though I should be poor, yet still he is my God, and I will
not take the name of my God in vain.

But lastly, Though it be possible to escape the temptations of Riches, and
overcome the perplexities of Want: yet still the safest and most desirable
course of life, is a middle state between Poverty and Riches. Give me neither
poverty nor riches, says the Wiseman, but feed me with food convenient for me.
He would not willingly either bring a burden upon himself, by multiplying
Riches to provide for other men; nor be himself a burden unto others by
seeking a support from their hands. He would neither have his thoughts racked
and distracted for want of necessary food; nor yet slackened and dulled for
want of a convenient employment: but he would choose such a condition of life,
as should qualify him for the performance of his duty both toward God and Man;
and divide his time between the cares of this World and the next. Such an
Estate as should oblige him to work with his hands the things for his good; and
yet afford him time and opportunity to pay his duty unto God, and beg his
blessing upon the works of his hands: that the favor and countenance of God
may encourage him in his Calling, and a faithful diligence in his Calling may
enliven his Devotion, and increase the sense of his gratitude unto God.

Thus while some labor under the burden of Riches and Honors, and scarce
enjoy the fruits of either; whilst others are oppressed with want, and with
difficulty bear up and maintain their virtue against the tide of adversity: he
alone enjoys himself in a peaceful calm. And as God has placed him above the
contempt of the Rich, and below the envy of the poor; so he neither envies the
Riches of the one, nor contemns the Poverty of the other. Having food and
raiment he is therewith content; and there is nothing in the World which he
wants, because there is nothing more which he desires. As he places not his
happiness in the possession of Riches, so neither does he disquiet himself for
their loss: but with cheerfulness he submits to the will of God; and undergoes
the change of his Estate, with the same indifference as he does the changing of
his Garment: though the new at present be not altogether so fit and suitable to
his Body, yet a little use and industry will make it so.

In all things, and at all times, he is thankful and content; and therefore
manages no secret plots, no treacherous designs to advance his Fortune with the
disturbing of his ease, impairing of his health, wrecking of his conscience,
and denying of his God. No murmurings are heard in his Tent, and no
disappointments break his rest; for virtue is his security, God his defense,
and under the shadow of his wings, he lays him down in peace, and rises up with
comfort.

So many and so great are the advantages of his private retired condition; so
sweet and refreshing are his enjoyments; so easy and comfortable is his
business; so sincere is his piety, and so exalted his devotion; that it is for
the interest as well as for the ease of every man to frame his mind according
to this standard, and say with the Wiseman in my Text; Give me neither poverty
nor riches, but feed me with food convenient for me.

THE END.

