SOME DISCOURSES UPON Dr. Burnet and Dr. Tillotson; Occasioned by the Late
FUNERAL SERMON OF THE Former upon the Later.

Remember how severely he that was Meekness it self treated the Scribes and
Pharisees; and he having charged his Followers to beware of their Leaven, It is
Obedience to his Command to search out that Leaven, that it may leaven us no
more. And when any of a Party are so Exalted in their own Conceit, as to
despise and disparage all others, the Love the Ministers of the Gospel owe the
Souls of their Flocks, obliges them to Unmask them.

Dr. Burnet in his Vindication of the Authority, Constitution, and Laws, of the
Church of Scotland, p. 4. Si quis est, qui dictum in se inclementius
Existimavit esse, sic Existimet;
Responsum non dictum esse quia laesit prior,
-- desinat lacessere:
Habeo alia multa, quae nunc condonabitur;
Quae proferentur post, si perget laedere.
Terent. in Prolog. ante Eunuchum. LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCXCV.

THE PREFACE.
IF it surprise the Reader to see so large a Book written against Dr. B. and
Dr. T. it will surprise him more to tell him, That I could more easily have
made it larger, than have confined it within this Compass. For those Two
Gentlemen are not barren Subjects, but furnish Matter in choice and plenty for
History against themselves; and though these Discourses which I have made upon
them are not an History, yet the Reader will find they are in part Historical;
and may, in some respects, serve to inform and entertain inquisitive Searchers
after Truth, till it may be convenient to publish a complete History of the
Things, which some Men have done since the late Revolution, in Church and State.

But besides the many Passages of Story, which the Reader will meet with in the
following Treatise, he will also find I have had occasions to make several
incidental Discourses; some Theological, some Moral, and some of a Political
Nature, to confute or expose the loose Doctrines, or Expressions of those Men;
against whom, as I have been provoked to draw up Two several Charges, or
Informations, which somewhat blemish their Honor; so I hope I have proved them
in every Part by very good Evidence. And as some Trials are longer than others,
according to the Number and Length of Depositions; so if this Book of mine,
which contains as it were so many Depositions against them, has proved longer
than I would have had it, that is none of my Fault.

I know very well it will be called a Libel, and a Defamatory Libel, but I care
not for that; since many excellent Books were so miscalled in the Times of
former Usurpations, which detected the ill Men of those Times, and their
Hypocrisies and Iniquities to the World. And besides, to speak properly and
justly of the Nature of a Libel, all Books ought not to be so called, which
expose Men's Reputations; but such only as expose them falsely, injuriously,
and out of pure malice: But this Book, though in some Things it blemishes the
Fame and Reputation of these Men, yet it does it truly, justly, and deservedly;
and so far am I from bearing the Person of the one, or the Memory of the other
any Malice, That had I been acted by that evil Passion, I could have written
against them both much sooner, and have been better provided to write against
them now. Men that do ill Things openly, and with an high Hand, though under
never so splendid Pretenses, ought to hear of them; especially when they go
about to make Saints and Heroes of one another, with a Design to cover their
own Iniquities, and deceive the People. When this happens to be the Case,
Charity to the Peoples Souls, and the Love of the Public, obliges all Lovers
of Truth and Righteousness to unvizard such Men, and expose them in their true
Appearance before their credulous and deluded Admirers. And as I have
endeavored in the following Discourses to do so, by these two popular Divines;
so I assu^e the Reader I have done it purely upon these generous Motives,
wishing, with all my Heart, That neither of them had given so many and public
Provocations to undeceive any part of the World, by writing such severe Truths.

I foresee very well what Sorts of Men will set themselves to inveigh against
it, and how it will ruffle our Funeral Orator, and raise a Storm among the Men
of his Latitude; but I am not solicitous about the Entertainment it will meet
with among them, in hopes it will do good among some that are misled by them,
if they are not too far gone, and hinder others, both now and hereafter, from
being misled by that Sort of Men. For I have written it not only for the Times
present, but for Posterity, and future Times; when I doubt not but Books, which
do less good now, shall then do much more; when Libels so miscalled shall be
curiously sought after, and reprinted in greater Numbers; and then inform the
penitent World, not only what unrighteous Things have then been lately acted
among us, but by what unrighteous Men, and upon what unrighteous Principles
they also have been done.

The Remarks on the late Funeral Sermons, etc. The Letter to the Author of the
Funeral Sermon at Westminster Abbey: These Discourses, not to mention others
long since Printed, will let Posterity see what kind of Men our Preacher, and
his Hero, and his Hero's Successor, not to mention others, were; and what
pernicious Doctrines were vented by them all, and so help to convert the Lovers
of Truth, as those called Libels in former Times converted many, and helped to
bring the Nation to its Wits; and the exiled King back to his Throne.

I could name several of my Acquaintance who were converted by the Libels so
called in the Long Usurpation; one more particularly, who, by God's Blessing,
happened to be converted by the accidental Reading of one of the meanest of
them, and Bishop Hall's Answer to Smectymnuus, which was reckoned a dangerous
Libel: And if these Discourses of mine happen, by God's good Providence, now or
hereafter to disabuse but one mistaken Soul, and occasion his Conversion, I
shall think all the unwilling Pains I have taken in Writing of them very well
bestowed. I find Mr. Altham, in his late Recantation for Licensing Mr. Hill's
Book, sorrowfully confessing, That Dr. Burnet's Honor and Function were much
Blackened by it; but if this Book of mine has also Blackened his Honor, it
has Blackened it with Matters of Truth; and he must blame himself for it, who
has given so many just Occasions and Provocations to all Sorts of Men to
Blacken him in all Places See the Character M. L. G. has given of him in the
Advertisement before his Letter to Mons. Thavenot, and afterward, p. 87, 88.
both at home and abroad. But for his Sacred Function, for which I have much
more veneration than he has himself, that cannot suffer by what I have said of
him, because it will remain Sacred and Venerable, whatever I have proved him to
be, nor lose any more of the respect which is due to it, because he is a
Bishop, than human Nature can lose of the Honor and Dignity which is due to
it, because he is a Man. Though Bishops turn Rebels, and make Rebels and
Outlaws Bishops, yet I must reverence the Function, by reason I think it of
Divine Institution: But notwithstanding all my Reverence for it, I think it
ought not to be a Cover and Protection for ill Men, who pervert whole Nations,
and Churches; especially for insolent and cruel Men, who persecute their
Brethren, for no other Reason but because they profess and practice the same
Doctrines which they themselves formerly taught the People; and because they
have endeavored to convince the World, by their Books, That these Men are
Apostates, and have done both our Church and Religion much more harm than they
can do it good. These are the Traitors to that very Order which some of them
have Usurped, and seem ready to give up the uninterrupted Succession upon which
the Priesthood depends, if they may but by gaining one Sort of Dissenters
better secure their Baronies, and Revenues, which they mind more than the
Honor of their Order, or the Catholic Rights of the Church. What else means
their Courting at such a fulsom Rate those in one Kingdom, who have destroyed
it in another? Why else are they so ready to treat it away under a Pretense of
Union with Dissenters, and in Complement to Foreign Churches? Why, contrary to
former Times, do they suffer some French Ministers, who have not had Episcopal
Ordination, to Preach and Administer the Sacraments at the Church in the Savoy,
and its Dependences, which by the Act of Uniformity is a Member of the Church
of England? What means this new Discovery of Comprehension in so many of the
late Funeral Sermons, which the Convocation rejected? Why do they exhort
Laymen to support, and Clergymen to comply with Presbytery in Scotland, as I
have showed our Preacher, and his Hero did? Or lastly, What means the new
Hypothesis of See the Book of the Revelation paraphrased, with Annotations on
each Chapter. Land. printed by Rich. Wellington at the Lute in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1694.
Witnessing Churches, That because the Churches in Savoy and France, which have
no Bishops, have born their Testimony against Popery, therefore Bishops by
uninterrupted Succession, and Priests of Episcopal Ordination, (which have been
the signal Blessing of the Church of England) are not necessary to the Church?
At the Rate that Annotator writes, in very many Places of his Book and Preface,
we must blend our pure Orders and Priesthood, not only with Ministers who
derive their Mission from Presbyters, but with Ministers who derive them
ultimately from mere Laymen, as many of the first Reformers both in France and
Savoy were. Nay, at this rate of talking, I know not what is necessary to
Christianity, either as a Sect professing Doctrines, or a Society which
Antiquity, so much undervalued by him, called the Catholic Church. For
Anabaptists, Quakers and Socinians, have born their Testimony against Popery,
and will bear it; and therefore in his wild way of Writing not only Bishops but
Priests, nor Episcopal Orders only, but all Orders, with Infant Baptism, and
the Lord's Supper, may be parted with, as Temporary Ordinances for
comprehension of all Sects that pretend to be Christian, and witnesses against
the Church of Rome. Nay, this dangerous Hypothesis of the witnessing Churches
may, for any Thing I see to the contrary, be improved to the Advantage of the
Jews, to prove them to be the Church of God: For they have born, and will bear
their Testimony against Popery; and great Numbers of them have died Martyrs
against it in the Inquisition. I need but mention the Mahumetans, who abhor
Popery for its Image Worship, and the Invocation of Saints, as much as the
Witnessing Churches: And therefore it is a mad way of arguing to cure us of our
Fondness (as he is pleased to call it) for our uninterrupted Episcopal
Succession, because the Witnessing Churches have the Misfortune to want it.
This is the Argument of the Fox in the Fable, who had lost his Tail; and had
Men argued in this manner in the Primitive Times, they might have laid aside
both the Sacraments in the Church, because great Numbers of Catechumens died
Martyrs, or Witnesses, against the Idolatry of Rome Pagan; which,
notwithstanding all the Comments and Annotations of some Men, I believe was
much more Abominable than that of the modern Papal Rome.

This Annotator I take to be one of those Men who drive on for Comprehension;
and with those Latitudinarians it was, and more particularly Dr. Tillotson,
that Dr. Sherlock Temple Sermon. upon the Death of the Queen, p. 16, 17.
says, Their Majesty's, and more particularly the Queen, who had more leisure
for such Thoughts, were inspired with great and pious Designs to serve the
Church of England, whatever some Men might suspect, though it may be not
perfectly in their own way. But why does he not tell us what this way was? And
whether it was consistent with his Queries, his Book of Union and Communion,
and his Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet's unreasonableness of Separation from the
Church of England? Dr. Bates the Nonconformist tells us; Sermon upon the Death
of the Queen, p. 20.
It was to unite Christians in Things essential to Christianity; but he does
not tell us what those Essential Things were, or whether they were Things
Essential to Christianity, as a Society, as well as a Sect. But I desire
plainly to know what those Things were which they thought Essential to
Christianity, and in which they were to be United: For I am afraid they had a
Design to form an Union against the Catholic Church; and in order to it, give
up some Things as not Essential, which many as learned and good Men as Dr. T.
and these Doctors, would have thought Essential to Christianity; and that their
parting with them would have involved in it a parting with the Lord's Day, and
Infant Baptism, nay, all Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, with the Doctrine of
the Holy Trinity; and have done no good Office to the Power of the Keys, nor to
the Divine Authority of the holy Scriptures, which depends so much upon
Tradition, That they themselves alone are not alone sufficient to prove it
without the Testimony of the Church.

It was my Design in writing these Discourses to aim at all the Men of this
broad Way of Union, as well as against those Two whom I have detected, and
thereby to warn the rest of the Clergy against them. For, God be thanked, the
main Body of our Clergy are Men of quite different Spirits; they do not
persecute their old Brethren for their strict Doctrines, but pity and help to
support them. They know by Experience how hard it was for Conscience to
overcome the Difficulties of the new Oath, and therefore they Among the worthy
Men I here describe may justly be reckoned the late learned Mr. Wharton, who
put out Archbishop Laud's Works. Dr. Dove, who, as all the World knows, took
the new Oath with so much reluctance; and once turned Dr. B. out of his House,
for arguing as he thought too warmly for the Government. And more particularly
Dr. Scot, of worthy Memory, who first refused the Bishopric of Chester,
because he could not take the Oath of Homage, and afterward anotther
Bishopric, the Deanery of Worcester, and a Prebendary of the Church of Windsor,
because they all were Places of deprived Men; and therefore Dr. Isham, in his
Funeral Sermon, did improperly make them attendants upon the Obsequies of the
late blessed Queen, as he is pleased to say. To these may be added the learned
Dr. Busby. I dare not name the Living.
retain vey tender Compassions for those who could not overcome them, and
honor them in their Hearts, as Men of Principles, who are most Faithful to the
English Monarchy, Zealous for the Honor and Prosperity of the Royal Family,
and the Catholic Doctrines, and Rights of the Church. Nay, I have Reason to
hope, that they wait for the Times of healing and refreshing, when they may
come again to Communion with them under the Rightful Bishops, who never did
betray their Order, or act in contradiction to the Doctrines of the Church. I
know in some measure what I say to be true; and if any Man doubt of it, let him
consider what Inclinations the Convocation discovered at its first Sitting down.

But these Two Men, and the rest, against whom these Discourses are intended,
are to be considered as Men of quite another Spirit: For they revile and
persecute their old Brethren, and say all manner of Evil falsely against them,
for their Principles sake, and for their adhering to them. If they are to
preach before a great Audience, especially upon a solemn Occasion, then they
will be sure to inveigh against them, and as they think expose them for their
Paucity, or want of Reason, or Peevishness, or, which is very strange, for
being dangerous to the Government, which it is impossible for so small a Number
of Men to be, unless they have Truth on their side. I have showed, in several
Instances, how this persecuting Spirit discovered it self in these Two Men,
upon whom I have discoursed; and how it possesses another of them may be seen
in his P. 18.
Funeral Sermon at the Abbey before the Lords and Commons; in which he tells
them of a domestic Discontent which Reigns in those whose Resentments are
stronger than their Reasons.

Might he not as well have said, My Lords and Gentlemen, we are now engaged in
a Foreign War, and it concerns you to provide new Laws against our domestic
Male contents, whose Malice against the Government is of more dangerous
Consequence to it than their Arguments, and their Resentments stronger than
their Reasons. And I pray you let them know, This was the Message which Hugh
Peter's brought from Cromwell, and the Army, to the London Ministers, before the
Trial of Charles the First.
That if they are for Suffering, they shall have Suffering enough.

I would not have my Reader think that I put this Gloss upon his Words without
Cause; for he has been a Persecutor of his old Brethren, both by Word and
Deed, ever since they were deprived. It was he that egged on Justice Tully,
when Vicar of St. Martins, to drive a Meeting of Sufferers out of his Parish. I
could name the Gentleman that read his Letter to that purpose, over the
Justice's Shoulder, as he stood reading it in the Street, and this Spirit of
Persecution in him proceeds from a Spirit of Latitude, which makes him he
cannot endure the Men of strict Suffering Principles; beccause they, and their
Reasonings, which he seems to undervalue so much, but really stands in awe of,
are contrary to him in all his Designs. I say, he stands in awe of their
Reasonings, and therefore has taken more Pains than any one Man among them to
suppress them, by hunting out the private Presses, and getting their Books
seized.

I have Reprinted a Paper in the N. IX.
Appendix, first published by the Messenger of the Press, That Posterity may
see from an Authentic Testimony, what a severe Inquisition has been made
against their Books, and how many of them have been destroyed. No Man knew this
better than himself; and therefore it was equal Insolence and Disingenuity in
him, to disparage their Reasons, when he was so conscious to himself of the
Endeavors he and others had used to stifle them in the Birth. Certainly there
must be something formidable in their Books, and some Reasonings in them, which
these Men of Latitude cannot well Answer, that they use so much diligence to
suppress them, at a time when Atheists, Heretics, and Republicans, print and
publish what they please, with little or no molestation. Why all this ado to
suppress their Books more than others, if their Reasonings are not strong? But
because he says, That their Resentments are stronger than their Reasons, I
have concluded my Appendix with a N.X.
Catalogue of their Books which lie unanswered, and he may try his strength to
answer any one of them when he will. Some of his Brethren have published their
Reasons, and been soundly baffled by the Men of Resentment, as he calls them;
but he never thought fit to give them Opportunity of answering any of his,
which makes it intolerable in him to Censure their Reasons in public, but
especially in such an august Assembly, before he had published his own, or
answered those Things which some years since have been In a Book entitled, A
Vindication of some among our selves, against the false Principles of Dr.
Sherlock.
objected to him out of his own Writings.

I have taken this Method in the following Discourses of objecting many Things
against Dr. Burnet, and his Hero, out of their own Writings, particularly
about the Nature of the Christian Religion; and to that which I have produced
out of the former Reflections upon Varillas concerning Religion, I desire this
may be added out of the first Dialogue of his modest and free Conference,
printed 1669. In that Dialogue he thus answers the fol^owing Objection. N. The
Law of Nature teaches us to defend our selves, and so there is no need of
Scripture for it. C. This is marvelous Dealing; in other Things you always flee
from Reason as a carnal Principle to Scripture, but here you quit Scripture,
and appeal to it. But it seems you are yet a Stranger to the very Design of
Religion, which is to tame and mortify Nature and it is not a natural Thing,
but supernatural. Therefore the Rules of defending and advancing of it, must
not be borrowed from Nature, but Grace. The Scriptures are also strangely
contrived, since they ever tell us of suffering Persecution without giving your
Exception, that we may resist when we are in a Capacity. And I appeal to your
Conscience, whether it be a likelier way to advance Religion by Fighting, or
Suffering; since a carnal Man can do the one, and not the other.

This is a further Proof of that part of the Charge I have drawn up against
him, in the beginning of the first Chapter, of his being a Man of
Contradictions to himself; and I will beg the Reader's leave to prove it with a
later Testimony. In his Funeral Sermon on Dr. Tillotson, he censures the
deprived Bishops, but as I have showed very unjustly, for leaving their
Authority with their Chancellors, and tendering Oaths by them, which they
thought unlawful. One would think he should not do that himself, which he had
so publicly objected to them; yet having lately declared to a Clergyman I
could name, That his Hand should rot off before he gave him Institution; at
last, to prevent an Inconvenience which otherwise must have come upon him, he
left his Authority with his Chancellor to do it, and by him gave him that
Institution which he had said with a solemn Imprecation he would never do. This
Story also shows him to be a Man of great Passions, which often hinder him from
Writing as well as Speaking cooly; and this unhappy Temper of his, which is
another part of my Charge against him, will appear from what he said in a
Conference he had with that Clergyman, of whom I here declare I think no worse,
because he thought so ill of him.

He began with telling him that he was a Church-robber, and that he came over
the Wall, and not in at the Door. Then he proceeded to call him Villain, and
said he had been guilty of a base and villainous Action, worse by much than
robbing on the Highway, and that he would use his utmost endeavor to keep him
out of the Church. He further called him Simonaical and Sacrilegious Rascal;
and said, he knew he must give Money to the Bishop of London's Servants to
obtain his Orders. Then he proceeded to Reflections on the Bishop of London,
and fell very foully on the Doctors Commons; saying, he had procured a Faculty
of those Rogues. To which, when the Gentleman replied, That he obtained it from
the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury, he passionately answered, It was the same
Thing, for that they only granted it for the sake of Money. He further told
him, It should be his continual Business to expose him as long as he lived to
his Clergy; and that he would render him as black as he was in his Gown and
Cassock, and take all Opportunities to do it.

Yet after all this Storm of Fury against him, as the worst of Men in his
Esteem, he gave him Institution by his Chancellor; when, if he was convinced of
his Mistake, he ought to have condemned himself for his rash Imprecation, and
made the Gentleman an honorary Satisfaction for the Injury he had done him, by
giving him Institution himself. But if he persisted in his ill Opinion of him,
then, by his own Rule, he ought not to have devolved his Authority upon his
Chancellor, who did that in his Name, and by his Commission and Order, which he
thought a Sin to do himself.

The Account the learned Mr. Hill has given of his Printing his Discourse on
the Divinity and Death of Christ much changed, and otherwise than he spoke it
before his Clergy, proves another part of my Charge of his playing Tricks with
his own Writings. The like I have been assured he did with a Sermon which he
preached somewhere in London, in which he gave the People an Account what the
Convocation was to do. And were it not to make a Book of my Preface, I could
further show his partial and biassed way of Writing, and his proness to write
his own Inventions for Truth, from some Observations upon his Book of Travels,
which I have heard a Gentleman of great Reputation, lately come from
Traveling, make upon several Passages in it. And when I consider how apt he is
to write Lives, and to write his own Imaginations and Opinions in them, I could
not but bewail the Fate of the late honorable Mr. Boil, after that of Bishop
Bedel, should he also write his Life, as Report says he Designs to do. And I
cannot but wish, for the Honor of that great Man's Memory, that his honorable
Relations would oblige some Person of unblemished Reputation to write it, whom
the World has no reason to suspect, even when he writes Truth.

Having mentioned Bishop Bedel's Life, in which I think it is plain our Author
had but too great a Part, I am obliged to let the World know, That I had the
remarkable Observations upon it, which I have put in my following Discourses,
out of a M. S. entitled, OBSERVATIONS UPON BISHOP BEDEL'S LIFE. The first
Ground of which were some Observations formerly made upon it, by the late
learned Mr. Fulman; who, as I am informed, sent them to Dr. Burnet, though he
was never pleased to take Notice of them, and the Reason I think is pretty
plain, why he did not* I must also acknowledge, That I had that Account of his
foul Dealing with a M. S. in Bennet College from a Learned hand, who compared
the Printed Copy, and the Original together. And in truth when one considers
what Mons^le Grand, Antony Harmar, Mr. Fulman, and others, have animadverted
upon our Author's Historical Works, one need not wonder, That he who must needs
be Conscious to himself of their Discoveries, and it may be of more such,
should speak so much in derogation of History, as he lately did to a young
Student, who has since given the World Noticia Monastica.
an excellent Proof of his mighty Genius for Historical Studies and Antiquity.
Indeed if all Men had written Histories as Dr. Burnet knows he has done, he
might well speak against the Study of it, as a Thing which is in it self so
uncertain, and not to be depended upon. If he measured other Historians by
himself, he might well think that all Histories are full of the same Vices that
his are; and all Historians as little to be trusted upon their own bare
Authority, as he really is. But to pass from his greater to his lesser Works; I
cannot but here call to mind the Speech which he made for my Lord Russel. When
he was examined about it, as I remember, at Council Board, he confessed he gave
his Lordship the Minutes of it; but one is bound in Charity, and Respect to his
Lordship's Memory, to believe that the Doctor made it all, and that his
Lordship never considered it; because it is so like the Doctor in the whole
Texture of it, having in it something very impertinent, something questionable
as to the Truth of it, and something which looks very like contradicting
himself. I refer the Reader for what I say, to the Entitled, the Lord Russel's
Speech vindicated London printed for W. Crook, 1683.
Paper mentioned in the Margent; and to say no more of it, the Doctor so
trinketed in that Affair with his Lordship, That Dr. Tillotson was obliged to
write that Famous Letter to him a little before his Death, and afterward
carried it to the Secretary of State, and my Lord Hallifax, then the Favorite
Minister for his Vindication; and so offended he pretended to be at him for
something he did to my Lord, that he said to a Person of great Reputation of my
Acquaintance, He would never trust a Scotch-man more for his sake. I know no
Reason he had to reflect upon his Country, which has been so fruitful in brave
Men, and Persons of the greatest Honor; but however he trusted him after that
Resolution, and not only trusted him, but let himself be too much influenced by
him since the Revolution.

To my Account of this Speech, I may add his most unjust exaggerating Character
of the Prosecution of the Dissenters in London, at the later end of Charles
II's Reign. He describes it in Terms big enough for the Decian or Dioclesian
Persecution: At the later end of his Pref. to Lactantius.
For he says, it was reasonable to think it contributed not a little to fill
up the Measures of the Sins of the Church, and to bring down severe Strokes
upon the Members of it. -- that they let themselves loose to all the Rages of a
mad Persecution -- to gratify their own Revenges -- And that they ought
seriously to profess their Repentance of this their Fury, in Instances that
might be as visible as their Rage has been public and destructive.

Hear O ye furious, mad, raging, revengeful Archdeacons, Commissaries,
Officials, Churchwardens, and Parish Priests, within the Liberties of London*
Give an Account of the Blood you have shed, and the Families you have ruined.
But who can believe a Writer of Story at a greater distance, that to gratify
Passions and serve Turns will misrepresent such late Transactions, and at such
an impudent Rate as this? I have showed out of his Reflections on Varillas,
that he counts it but a small and venial Fault in an Historian, if he departs
from the exact Laws of History in setting out the best Side of his own Party,
and the worst of his Adversary, and in slightly touching the Failures of the
one and severely aggravating those of the other. This he has done throughout
his Funeral Sermon of Dr. Tillotson and given me occasion to undeceive the
World in the Heroic Character he has given of him, by noting some of his
Failings, which bring him down to the mediocrity of other Men. Had he been a
more private Person, or acted in a more private Sphere, I should not have
called his Canonization of him into question, nor taken the Glory from the
Picture which he drew of him in his Sermon, and sent in numerous Copies about
the World. But being a Person of great and dangerous Example, both to present
Times and Posterity, and having acted such a Part as he has had the Misfo^tune
to do, both in Church and State; I thought I should do the Christian World good
Service in observing some of his Errors, Weaknesses; and Misdoings; lest Men
now, or hereafter, taking of him indeed for a Man of unblemished and heroic
Piety, should think him imitable in every Thing, and follow his dangerous
Example where he did ill, as well as where he did well.

One thing I have taken notice of, was the unfortunate Part he had in
slandering and wronging the Two Kings; and since I have concluded my Book, I
have heard, that after the Revolution, he did again revive the Report of the
Legitimacy of the Duke of Monmouth; which being false, whatever Opinion he had
of it, is one of the greatest Slanders to the Memory of one of the Royal
Brothers, and Injuries to the other, that a Man could be guilty of. It is well
known among the Clergy, that one of his most intimate Acquaintance was very
zealous, after the Revolution, in going about to Bishops, and other Churchmen,
to try if he could make them believe this old Story to be true; and thence to
persuade them to take the Oath of Allegiance to King W. because King J. never
had any Right to the Crown. I know the idle Hear-says he told them, to create
belief in them of this Stale Fiction, and am able to disprove them all; and I
would here tell them, and disprove them, but that the great Honor and Respect
I have for that Duke's illustrious Family, will not let me say some Things in
Confutation of them, which I think would be unacceptable to them to hear. But
if that second Self of Dr. Tillotson will publish his Hearsay Stories, which I
always suspected he had from him, I will undertake to show the falseness of
them, provided he will do it quickly, while my Witnesses are alive.

Another Thing in which Dr. Tillotson fell short of his own Doctrine, and was
wont to act contrary to it, was in noting, like many of his Brethren, the small
Number of the non-complying Clergy upon all Occasions, and despising of them
and their Cause, for that they were so few. I thought to have observed this in
its proper Place in my second Chapter; but having forgot it, I will here show
in his own Words, what a vain and unmanly Thing it is to argue for or against
any Church, or Cause, from Number; and I am the more willing to set them down,
That neither his Funeral Orator, nor any other of his side hereafter, may boast
of their Numbers, or despise any Suffering Cause, especially because it is
embraced but by a Few. The Protestant Religion vindicated from the Charge of
Singularity and Novelty, in a Sermon preached before the King at Whitehall, Ap.
2. 1680.
But we will not stand upon this Advantage with them. Suppose we were by much
the Fewer: So has the Church of God often been, without any the least
Prejudice to the Truth of their Religion. What think we of the Church in
Abraham's Time, which for ought we know was consined to one Family, and one
small Kingdom, that of Melchisedeck King of Salem? What think we of it in
Moses's Time, when it was confined to one People wandering in a Wildnerness?
What of it in Elijah's Time, when besides the Two Tribes that worshipped at
Jerusalem, there were in the other Ten but Seven thousand that had not bowed
the Knee to Baal? What in our Savior's Time, when the whole Christian Church
consisted of Twelve Apostles, and Seventy Disciples, and some few Followers
beside? How would Bellarmin have despised this little Flock, because it wanted
one or two of his goodliest Marks of the true Church, Universality and
Splendour? And what think we of the Christian Church in the Height of Arianism,
and Pelagianism, when a great part of Christendom was overrun with these
Errors, and the Number of the Orthodox was inconsiderable in comparison of
Heretics? But what need I urge these Instances? As if the truth of Religion
were to be estimated and carried by the major Vote; which as it can be an
Argument to none but Fools, so I dare say no honest and wise Man ever made use
of it for the solid Proof of the Truth and Goodness of any Church or Religion.
If Multitude be an Argument that Men are in the Right, in vain then has the
Scripture said, Thou shall not follow a Multitude to do Evil; for if this
Argument be of any force, the greater Number never go wrong.

I have cited this, as I have done all other Passages, faithfully out of the
Works of these two Authors, in the following Discourses; and whether the
Reflections and Applications I have made upon them be just and right, and the
Consequences I have drawn from them upon themselves be true, must be left to
the Reader to judge betwixt me and them.

THE INTRODUCTION.
AS nothing of late has more Entertained the World than Funeral Sermons: So
none of them has had a more General Reception among Men of all Sorts, than
that preached at the Funeral of the late Dean of Canterbury, whom the Preacher
styles, By Divine Providence Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and
Metropolitan of all England. It was sent abroad with its Fiocco by the R. R.
Father in God Gilbert Lord Bishop of Sarum; and Men were curious to see what he
would say upon an Occasion so inviting to a Fruitful Invention, while his
Censors of the House were a Sitting.

I happened to make a Visit to a Place, where I found one Gentleman reading of it
to three more, who were very attentive to it; I came in almost at the
Beginning, and having only begged the Favor of the Text, made no other
Interruption. But though I said nothing upon hearing the Words, I marvelled at
his Choice of them, That he should pitch upon a Place so emphatical for
Suffering at the Funeral of a Man who never Suffered, nor loved Sufferings; but
who, on the contrary, was of a Temper and Constitution that loved Ease and
Indolency; of which the Apostle enjoyed little or nothing in the whole Course
of his Apostleship: But as he taught so was he always practicing the
Evangelical Doctrine of Sufferings, of which he has left us several short
Accounts in his Epistles, and sam'd them all up, In fighting the good fight of
Faith, a little before his final Martyrdom, when he was ready to be offered,
and the time of his Passion was at hand.

At the End of this private Lecture, the Gentleman who read, first began to
Censure. Says he, The little Knowledge I had of Dr. Tillotson makes it not
proper for me to judge, whether or no he deserved so great a Character as this
Panegyrist has given him; but if he did, it was very unfortunate for his
Memory that he should have Bishop Burnet for his Funeral Orator: A Man, that
how much soever he may think himself possessed of the Esteem of the World, is
very much lost in it both at Home and Abroad; and upon whose Authority very few
Men will believe Things that are true to be so, without other very good proof:
Says another, I am well acquainted with the Writings of Dr. Tillotson, and am
not a perfect Stranger to his Conversation, and I am sure the Character this
Bishop has given him is much above his Merit: Fie, Fie, That Men of this Order
should so flatter in the Pulpit, where Flattering is so abominable. He was not
Sermon. p. 2.28.
an Example of Heroic Piety and Virtue, his Life was not free from Blemishes,
and some great ones too, and this the Panegyrist knows very well. A third then
began to argue against some particular Passages in his Sermon, particularly
against the Truth of what he P. 22.
says of some of our Suffering Bishops, and the Authority that displaced them,
which I shall hereafter recite: And then the fourth, after a little Silence
said, with a Critical Authority, That his Sermon was a Boyish Piece of
Rhetoric, more becoming a Declamer than a Preacher, and fitter for a
Sophister's Desk than a Bishops Pulpit, having too much the Air of a young
Student's Declamation, and also seemed in some parts of it to have too much of
Common Place in it, and in others too much Art to be true. Nay, says he, his
own P. 10. 11. 60.
Reflections on Varillas are here true upon himself. His Sermon has too much
the Air of a Romance; it is too Fine to be true: He seems to write his own
Inventions, and sets abundance of Whipped Cream before his Reader. And then he
told us a Story of a b^ind Gentleman, but a good natural Critic, whose Custom
was to repair very early to St. Martin's Church, and to ask who preached? Says
he, he happened once to ask me the Question, and when I told him Dr. Burnet was
to preach, then in truth, says he, we shall have a Whipped Sillibub: And I
think, said he Smiling, Dr. Burnet's whipped Sillibub is as far from the Nature
of strong and manly Meat, as Monsieur Varillas's whipped Cream. A Preacher,
especially at Funerals, ought to avoid Strains; and when he speaks of the
Defunct, to speak more like an Historian than an Orator: But this Man's
Eloquence, to use his own Words of Pref. to Lactantius.
Lactantius, carries him often into Strains that become a young Orator better
than an Historian, for he has a heat of Style that ought not to be imitated by
one that would write truth; but it may be, says he, Smiling again in his Words
of Lactantius, He designed his Sermon for a mixed sort of Writing between a
Declamation and a Funeral Sermon, and so may think that the Figures which agree
not to the one may be allowed in the other. P. 1.
WHILE NATURE FEELS SO GREAT A LOSS, AND SINKS UNDER IT. This, and some more,
are the Figures of a young Declamer, and the Super sublime of our Lawn-sleeve
Orator, who should not have been transported with the Heats of a vicious
Rhetoric: Send him to School to Longinus and Rapine, to learn the Rules of
true and manly Eloquence: They will both tell him, That what is not Just is not
true Eloquence; and that a Style not fit for the Occasion, or the Subject in
hand, always argues defect of Judgment; and that no Speech, or Treatise, which
sticks not with the Hearers after it is read, though it tickle never so much in
Reading, can be a Piece of true Eloquence. And speak Gentlemen, says he, you
have all heard this Panegyric; very many fine Things and Generals are said in
it, but after all, I can scarce tell for what he commends his Metropolitan: All
his pompous Figures have raised in me no great Idea of the Man; for after all
my Attention, I find very little Sticks behind; nor do I think this Performance
will do his Memory much Service, or transmit it with Advantage to Posterity.

CHAP. I.
THis is the Short of what passed in this little Court of Censure upon this
Bishop's Funeral Sermon; and I shall proceed to discourse upon it in the same
Order, and begin with that which he will think the severest Part of it, which
is to show, That though what he said of the late Dean of Canterbury were true,
yet no Man ought, as I believe few will, believe it upon his Authority; because
he has so contradicted himself, and the most serious Parts of his own
Writings; and is so apt to write his own Fancys and Inventions for truth, and
to write with Biass and Partiality to serve a Turn; to prevaricate and play
Tricks with his own and other Men's Work; to let himself be transported with
Passion, which hinders him from writing in cool Blood; and is not a whit also
behind Varillas in that bold Quality, Reflections on Varillas, p. 15.
which he tells him he loves not to set down by its proper Name.

To prove this Charge, which I have drawn up against him, I must now and then
mention Things which are not commonly known of him, beginning with that
Circular Letter which he sent to all the Bishops of Scotland above 20 Years
ago. In this Letter he boldly reflected upon them, and the Clergy, for
frequenting the Court, and great Men's Houses; for keeping of Coaches, though
the Primate was the only Person that kept a Coach among them, and for
converting the Money of their Ecclesiastical Revenues to their own proper Uses.
The several Copies of this Letter were all, or most of them, written in his own
hand writing; that which I saw was left in England by the worthy Primate of his
Name, when he was Archbishop of Glascow, and among others it was read by Dr.
Stillingfleet, Dr. Fowler, and Dr. Hascard who pretended to lose it; and I
appeal to them not only for the Truth of these few Reflections, which I remember
in it at this distance, but for the Impudence of the whole Letter, which I
heard one of them say he could not have believed, unless he had seen. Not long
after the Writing of this Letter he came to London, where the Reflections
abovementioned, and others, were the common Topics of his Discourses upon the
Clergy. Dr. Outram once told me that he entertained him, as I remember, at the
first Visit which he gave him, upon the subject of Clergy-mens haunting of
Courts, and Noble-mens Houses, but the next day the good Doctor happening to take
the Air in St. James's Park saw his young Reformer in the Mall walking and
stalking with Two or Three Foreign Ministers; and this, with some other
Observations which he and some others made of his Plying at Court, particularly
at St. James's, and being seen, above all Divines about the Town, in Noble-mens
Houses, and in their Coaches, made him lose his respect for him, and presage
Things of him in some ominous Expressions, which have since come to pass. The
World knows very well how contrary the whole Course of his Life has been, and
still is, to these Self denying Pretensions, and particularly as to the Levying
and Taking Fines for Church Lands, and Converting them to his own, and not to
the Churches use, which he condemns in his P. 80.
History of the Rights of Princes. It must needs lessen the Credit of any
Writer thus to be at Variance with himself, and to practice contrary to what he
would impose upon others. One cannot but suspect such a Man for a Pharisee, who
is for tying Burdens upon other Men, which he will not bear himself; and so
much Enthusiasm, and Hypocrisy, as must go to make a Clergyman discern Motes
in his Brethrens Eyes, and not see the Beam in his own, will easily incline him
to write for a Party, to side with Interest against Truth, to set up Heroes and
Heroic Examples for his own Cause, and to flatter their Memories as indecently
as the French Clergy, in his Opinion, did the French King; who he Pref. to the
History of the Rights of Princes p. 96.
tells us, Considered more what were the Highest Things that could be said of
him, than what was either true in it self, or suitable to the Gravity and
Sincerity of their Profession. It must needs astonish a Man to read so many
Passages in this Book, I mean his History of the Rights of Princes, which have
now a very scurvy Aspect upon him; and show how disagreable the Practices of
the Bishop are to the Precepts and Censures of the Doctor; and how the one do
thwart and contradict the other. But because the large Field of Matter I have
in view against him will not let me insist upon them, I desire my Reader at his
leisure to cast his Eyes upon the P 7 11. 14. 30 32. 34 48. 73. 80. 88. 97.
117. 118. 138. 161. 203. 226. 293. 320.
Pages cited in the Margent, and thereupon to make a little Reflection, and then
I am confident he will be apt to think, That as little Credit is due to him, as
he P. 8. of the History of the Rights of Princes.
says is to the Greek Writers, who when they like a Bishop praise him so
unreasonably, and reproach others so incredibly, that it is hard to tell what
we ought to believe. But, God be thanked, that is not our Case yet; for let
him, or others like him, praise some or reproach others of our Bishops as they
please, we know both them, and what to believe, and will take care to transmit
Truth unto Posterity.

From that I fear now invisible Manuscript, and the History of the Rights of
Princes, let us proced to his modest and free Conference between a Conformist
and a Nonconformist, Printed at Glascow in Seven Dialogues, 1669. In the
Seventh Dialogue he tells the Noncon, That the first Precedent in History for
Subjects fighting upon the Account of Religion was Pope Gregory the Seventh,
who armed the Subjects of Germany against the Emperor Henry the Fourth; and
that the latest is the Holy League of France, from which our whole Matter
(says he) seems transcribed; and then asks Noncon, If he was not ashamed in a
Matter of such importance to symbolize with the worst Gang of the Roman Church;
for, says he, the better Sort condemn it. And I think we have much more
Reason, after the Writing of this, to ask him the same Question; and if he had
any Conscience or Shame, one would think he should be ashamed to symbolize with
them, and to see himself, and the greater part of the Church of England (if
they can now be said to be of the Church of England) follow the Example of the
worst part of the Church of Rome. Methinks he should blush now at this just
Reflection, if Something, as bad as he thinks the Order, Pref. to the History of
the Rights of Princes p. 39.
did not set him above the Modesty of Blushing, and make that of Pasquin as
true of himself, as he says it is of the Archbishop of Paris, Ibid p. 41.
Pudebit, sed non Erubescet. But if he will not be ashamed, I know no reason
why any Man, that would not be deceived, should take Things upon Trust from
such a shameless Writer, whom an impenitent Conscience has hardened against
the Confusion of Remorse and Blushing; and made one of the greatest Examples of
Impudence that ever dishonored the Lawn Sleeves. I hope it is a just
Indignation that forces this Reflection from me; but if it seems too severe, I
beg the Reader's Patience till I lay before him another of this unhappy Man's
Books, entitled, A Vindication of the Authority, etc. of the Church and State
of Scotland, Printed 1673. This Book is full of very many Doctrins, Rules and
Precepts, to which the Author's Life, and all his Books since the beginning of
the Revolution, have been an open Contradiction. In the Entrance of his Preface
to the Reader, says he, How sad, but how full a Commentary does the Age we
live in give of those Words of our Lord; I am come to send Fire on Earth,
Suppose you that I am come to give Peace upon Earth, I tell you nay, but rather
Division. Do we not see the Father divided against the Son, and the Son against
the Father; and engaging into such angry Heats, and mortal Feuds, upon Colors
of Religion, as if the Seed of the Word of God, like Cadmus Teeth, had spawned
a Generation of Cruel and Blood thirsty Men: But how surprising is the Wonder
when Religion becomes the Pretense. And after this; Among all the Heresies this
Age has spawned, there is not one more contrary to the whole Design of
Religion, and more destructive of Mankind, than is that bloody Opinion of
defending Religion by Arms, and of forceable Resistance upon the Color of
preserving Religion. The Wisdom of this Policy is Earthly, Sensual, and
Devilish; savouring of a carnal, unmortified, and unpatient Mind, that cannot
bear the Cross, nor trust to the Providence of God. Religion then as well as
since was the Civil Property of these Kingdoms, but at the time of the
Revolution In his Enquiry into the Measures of Submission to the Supreme
Authority.
he distinguished the Christian Religion from it self as Religion, and as it
was one of the principal Rights and Properties of the Subject; and though as
Religion it ought not to be defended by Arms, yet he affirmed, That as a Civil
Right and Property it might. Would any Man but such a Bishop have had the
Confidence to say, That it was Lawful to sight for Religion, as a Civil Right
and Property, who had published the Book abovementioned, and I know not how
many after it, to prove it Unlawful for Subjects to take up Arms in defense, or
under pretense of defending any Right or Property whatsoever? Let such a Man
say of Things or Persons, or of Persons Dead or Living, what he pleases; he
shall never be believed by me, farther than he brings Proof.

The Passages of his forecited Book, which now stare him in the Face, are very
many, and very Emphatical; and there is scarce a Page in it which is not a
Record against him: I must take notice of some, and recommend P. 8. to p. 18. p
35. 39. 40. 41. 42. 46. 47.
those in the Margent to the curious Reader's perusal at his leisure, that he
may make the same use of them that I am going to do of those that follow. In
the 68th Page of that Book, he makes it of more dangerous Consequence to place
the Deposing Power in the People, than in the Pope, Less Disorder, says he,
may be apprehended from the Pretensions of the Roman Bishops, than from those
Maxims that put the Power of Judging and Controuling the Magistrate in the
Peoples hands, which opens a Door to endless Confusion, and sets every private
Person in the Throne. These Consequences of placing the Deposing Power in the
People, we have seen verified by Experience, and still shall be more convinced
of the Truth of them; but yet his Enquiry into the Measures of Submission and
Obedience; which he owns among his 18 Papers, and the Enquiry into the present
State of Affairs, which is his, though he does not own it, were both written
upon the Principles of the Resisting and Deposing Power. For in the one, he
Exhorts the People to resist the King, as having fallen from his Authority; and
in the other, to take upon them the Power and Authority of Deposing of him: And
to encourage them the more to it, he does affirm, That the Power of the People
of Judging the King in Parliament is a part of the Law of England; and goes
about to prove it from the Sentence of Deposition against King Edward the
Second, and Richard the Second; which, contrary to the Truth of History, and I
am confident of his own Knowledge, he says, were never annulled by any
subsequent Parliaments, and therefore remain part of our Law. Such an impudent
Assertion, contrary to so many Acts of Parliament printed in the Statute Books,
and In Pryn's Jurisdiction of the Lords.
elsewhere, would, as Monsieur le Grand says of him upon another Occasion,
J'avoue qu'en faisant ces remarqu^s, je suis dans une veritable Contrainte de
ne pas appeller M. Burnet de tous les Noms quile merit. Lettre de M. Burnet a
M. Thavenot avec les remarques de MLG. p. 33.
Provoke a Man to call him by all the Names that he deserves. But I pass on to
the second Thing I intended to note in that Book, and it is his own Answer to
the Arguments for Resistance, which, in the first Conference, he puts in the
Mouth of Isotimus, the Presbyterian, to justify taking up Arms against our
Lawful Governors; from the Example of the Maccabees rising up in Arms against
Antiochus; and of the Christians, who under Constantine the Great made no
difficulty of fighting against the other Emperor his Colleague Licinius. These
Arguments he there pursues as far as they will go in the Mouth of Isotimus, and
then Answers them fully in the Person of Basilius the Royalist, by whom he
represents himself; yet he lately made use of the very same Arguments to
persuade his Clergy of the Lawfulness of taking up Arms against the King, to
bring about the Revolution, and of the Obligations they were under to submit to
it, and support it, without either retracting the Answer which he had made to
those Arguments (and which he might suppose some of them had read) or replying
to them, or so much as mentioning of them; but tells them in his Preface to his
four Discourses, That they had heard him urge them with seeming Satisfaction,
which I suppose was one sort of Satisfaction, and Admiration too in many of
them, which I had rather hint than Name.

The third great Instance of that Book, in which he has contradicted himself
is his Arguing for the Duty of Nonresistance from the Example of the Thebean
Legion, (p. 58.) which I cannot forbear to repeat in his own Words. Says he,
There is no Piece of Story which I read with such Pleasure as the Accounts
given of the Martyrs; for methinks they leave a Fervor upon my Mind, which I
meet with in no Study, that of the Scriptures excepted. Say not then, They were
not able to have stood to their Defense, when it appears how great their
Numbers were, or shall I here tell you the known Story of the Thebean Legion
which Consisted of 6666. etc. In the Year 1673. the Stories of the Primitive
Martyrs, and this in particular, left a Fervor upon his Mind, which he never
felt in his usual Studies; but in 1687, the Year before the Revolution, he
stages it for a copious and incredible Legend in his Preface before Lactantius,
without so much as telling the World, that he had been in that common Error of
the Learned, and thought the Fable true.

The Arguments with which he Assaults it are all Negative, and such as one
would think he could not believe himself. First, he argues against it from the
Silence of Eusebius, though Hist. Eccl. l. 8. c. 13.
Eusebius in his History of the Dioclesian Persecution professes to omit many
of the Conflicts of those who suffered in diverse Parts of the Empire, leaving
them to be described by those that were Eye witnesses to them. Secondly, from
the Silence of Sulpitius Severus, who mentions not one single Fact of that
Persecution; saying no more of it, than that it continued X Years, in which
time the whole World was Dyed with the Blood of the Martyrs: The Christians
then striving for Martyrdom, which, he says, was more sought for among them
than Bishoprics by the ambitious Clergy of his time; from whence it came to
pass, That the World was never so much wasted by any War that stands upon
Record in History, as by that Persecution successively for X Years, in which
the Christians had so many Triumphs. (The Famous Martyrdoms of that time are
yet extant, which I shall not set down here, because I would keep within the
small Compass of this little Work.) This is the short Account of that
Persecution in Sulpitius; and if the Christians of the Empire then strove for
Martyrdom upon the stupid Principle of Non-resistance, why might not a
Christian Legion, under the Conduct of a Non-resisting Leader, grow as stupid
as other Christians? And if all the World (which is the Phrase for all the
Empire) was Dyed with Christian Blood, why might not Agaunum have as deep a
Tincture, as any other Place? But Agaunum was in Gaul, and Lactantius, says he,
excepts the Gauls from Persecution: But the Thebean Legion were Strangers, and
not Gauls; and though Constantius might protect the Gauls, he had no Right to
protect them; or if he had, he could not prevent what happened to them; their
Execution being not a State of Persecution, but a Casual unforeseen Days-work
of Military Discipline on the Edge of Gaul, where Constantius was not present
to countermand or oppose it. But if he had been present, he could have had no
Authority to have hindered it, because it was done by the Command of Maximian,
who was Augustus; and as Augustus had Authority over Constantius, who was then
but Caesar, and so by the Dioclesian Constitution of the Empire was subject to
his Authority. But he, says Lanctantius, must needs have heard of so
remarkable a Transaction as the Passion of this Legion, if it were true. Here
is the Negative Argument again; but I say it might be true, and he yet not hear
of it: For it was but a few hours work of military Discipline in an obscure
Corner of the Alps, and Lactantius was at that time in Africa, where, to use
his own Argument upon another Occasion, A Relation of a Conference had about
Religion by Edward Stillingfleet, and Gilbert Burnet, p. 119.
there was neither Printing, nor Stages for Pacquets, nor Publishing of
Mercuries, Gazettes, and Journals; and Men were not wont to amuse themselves at
what was doing in the World.

I could tell him of a Mornings Work, in the High-lands of his own Country, not
much unlike this in Cruelty, and done about Three years ago, which half of this
Nation, and of the Clergy themselves, have not yet heard of; and of those that
have, if they were to write an History of the Revolution, few of them would
mention it; not excepting our Funeral Orator, who I have Reason to think would
be content to pass it over in Silence, though I do believe Tradition from
Father to Son will preserve an Account of it in the Valley of Glancow, as it
did that of the Thebean Legion till the time of Euch^ius, who was the first
that committed it to Writing. But in one Word, the Silence of Lactantius is no
Argument against the Truth of it, who in his History passed over whole
Persecutions, which, one would think, he must needs have heard of; and who in
the Reign of Dioclesian describing only the Decennial Persecution, which began
at Nicomedia, could not by the terms of his Account mention the Massacre of the
Thebean Legion, which was done so many Years before. No Man would reasonably
expect an Account of the fatal and bloody Fight at Edge Hill, from an Historian
that commences his History from the Trial of Charles the First, or the
Restoration of his Son; and therefore if our Panegyrist has no better
Arguments against the truth of that Story of the Thebean Legion, he may read it
still with his old wonted Fervor; or if he thinks it worth his pains, he may
proceed to find out new Arguments against it, which such learned Men as Grotius
and Usher have not yet found out; but though I have a great Deference for their
Authority, and that Story upon the Account of it, yet I am unconcerned whether
it be Truth or a Fiction, and will only put him in Mind that the very Fiction
of it proves that the Doctrine of Nonresistance, however now exploded by him,
was the general Belief and Practice of the Ancient Christians, and a Badg of
their Profession in Times of Persecution, as much as Baptism it self, or any
Article in their Creed. They called it the Doctrine of the Cross, and he once
pretended to be all Primitive, and all Christian for it: It used to create a
Fervor in his Blood, but now he is turned Apostate from it, and from the
Church of England, although he pretends to be a Bishop of it according to his
own Words, Sermon on the 30 of January 1672. p. 36.
This Doctrine we justly Glory in; and if any, who have had their Baptism and
Education in our Church, have turned RENEGADOS from it, They proved no less
Enemies to the Church herself, than to the Civil Authority; So that their
APOSTASY leaves no Blame upon our Church. No indeed! His Apostasy leaves no
Blame on it; but however it is such a Blot upon himself, that if I were one of
those, as I profess I am not, who thought Dr. Tillotson deserved the Praises he
has given him, I should be sorry that an Apostate, and an Apostate by his own
Confession, should be his Encomiast, and transmit his Memory to Posterity. For
Divines that contradict themselves, and their most serious Doctrines, which
they pressed upon the Consciences of Men, as he has done, are always to be
Suspected; and as for himself, he, above all others, has brought upon himself
the Fate of Cassandra, and is not to be believed when he speaks Truth upon his
own Authority: And if what I have hitherto said will not justify the Severity
of this Censure, I hope what I am going to write will.

In his first Letter to my Lord Middleton, bearing Date the 27th of May, 1687.
he tells his Lordship, That few have preached more than himself against all
sorts of Treasonable Doctrines and Practices, and particularly against the
Lawfulness of rising in Arms upon account of Religion. -- I have preached a
whole Sermon at the Hague, says he, against all Treasonable Doctrines and
Practices, and in particular against the Lawfulness of Subjects rising in Arms
against their Sovereigns upon the account of Religion, and I have maintained
this both in Public and Private; so that I could, if I thought it convenient,
give Proofs of it, that would make all my Enemies ashamed. -- As often as I
have talked with Sir John Cochran -- I took occasion to repeat my Opinion of
the Duty of Subjects to submit and bear all the ill Administration that might
be in the Government, but never to rise in Arms upon that Account. And in his
third Letter to his Lordship, bearing Date Hague 27. June, 1687. he concludes
with these Words; But to the last Moment of my Life I will pay all Duty and
Fidelity to his Majesty. And yet before the Date of these Letters, wherein he
makes such high and solemn Professions of his Principles of Loyalty, and of his
Duty to the King, he was engaged in one of the Deepest and most Heinous
Treasons that Subject was ever engaged in against his Sovereign; I mean, in
persuading the Princess of Orange to Consent to the unnatural Invasion of her
Father's Kingdom by the Prince, which then was resolved upon, and with him to
take his Crown, if the Invasion should succeed. This he thought so meritorious
and honorable a Piece of Service, that soon after he came to London, he could
not deny himself the Satisfaction of telling some Friends, That he was the Man
pitched upon to break the Design of deposing the King her Father to her Royal
Highness Two Years before the Revolution; and that he gained her Consent, upon
Condition that the Prince might assume the Royal Power with her, and be Crowned
before her.

He told it to this purpose in the Deanry-house of St. Paul's, and for the Truth
of it I appeal to the then Dean of that Church Dr. Stillingfleet, and to the
worthy Bishop of Peterborough, I mean Dr. White, who was present when he spoke
to that Effect; and I make bold to mention his good Name, because he has
spoken of it in many Places; and to this Authority I could add that of a Right
honorable Person of great Esteem, in whose Hearing he spoke in another Place
to the same purpose. Let this be written upon his Monument, and embalm his
Memory to Posterity, That he was the Man who persuaded the yet innocent
Daughter, Absalon like, to conspire the Destruction of her Father, and to seize
his Throne. This he did against a King, who, according to his own Expression of
the King his Father, was, by a Sermon. on the 30 of January, 1674. p. 7.
Tract of undisputed Succession, what Saul was by immediate Revelation, God's
Anointed: And after he had done it, he again promised Fidelity to him to the
last Moment of his Life; and after that again invaded his Kingdom, and used him
the worst of all his Enemies. I have been told that he was a Year in overcoming
that unhappy Princess into this unnatural Resolution; and if any one desire to
know what Arguments, and of what Sort he used to pervert her, I am of Opinion
he may find them in a French Book, called, Le Salut de la France; which was
written by Mounsieur Jurieu, a French Minister, to persuade the Dauphin of
France, to whom it is addressed, to dethrone his Father. They were both great
Acquaintance one with the other, both lived together in Holland, both great
Enthusiasts, both acted with the utmost Revenge against their respective
Sovereigns, both engaged in the Interests of the Confederacy, and it would be
very strange if two such Wits and Incendiaries, so agreeing in their Temper,
Design, and their way of Writing, should not jump in their Arguments on this
Subject. At the same time he was at work with the Princess he wrote many
Seditious Libels to disaffect the People of these Kingdoms against the King;
contrary not only to his professed Fidelity, but to the Respect he had before
pretended was due to Crowned Heads. In his P. 6.
Reflections on Varillas he pretends, That the sublime Character of a Crowned
Head laid a restraint on those Groans, which he would otherwise vent in behalf
of the French Refugees. And in his Letter to Mounsieur Thavenot, he is very
severe upon M. le Grand for speaking hardly of our Henry VIII. telling him,
That there is a Reverence due to the Ashes of Kings, which ought to make us
speak of their Faults in the safest Words, and avoid such reproachful ones, as
Lying and Imposture. To which M. le Grand cries out in his Note upon that
Passage, Behold this Man who fills England and France with the most Seditious
and Outrageous Libels, that were ever made against any Prince, speaking at this
rate. And I say, behold this Man, with all his Fidelity to his own King, and
all the Respect he had professed to Crowned Heads, treating his own Sovereign
as if he had not been anointed with Oil. At Exeter he would not let them say
the Morning and Evening Prayer for the King's Majesty; at Salisbury he sat down
when it was said; and at another Place in their March, when a Noble Lord, out
of Respect to his Master's Crowned and Hoary Head, asked him this Question with
disdain, What then must we do with the King? He presently answered, He must be
deposed, He must be deposed. At St. James's he took upon him to require Mr.
West, whom I ought to mention with Honor, to leave off praying for him, and
the Prince of Wales; See Tempora Mutantur, p. 5.
for whom though he had often prayed by Name in the Chapel Royal at the Hague,
yet in his Measures of Submission and Obedience he calls him a base Imposture;
for which if Men do not, God, in his appointed time, will call him unto
Judgment. In his P. 167.
History of the Rights of Princes, he calls the War which the Children of King
Lewis began against their Father, and afterward continued against one another,
an unnatural War; and yet he has since been a Firebrand to kindle a War in his
own Country, so much the more unnatural, as it is upon the Score of Religion;
of which he says, in P. 194.
his Reffections on Varillas, That it were better for Mankind that there were
no revealed Religion at all, and that human Nature should be left to its self,
than that there were such a Sort of revealed Religion received, that overthrows
all the Principles of Morality. I suppose he did not argue at this rate to the
Princess of Orange, when he persuaded her to consent to the unnatural Invasion
of her Father's Kingdom, upon the Account of Religion. No, this is the true
Character of Religion which he gives in opposition to that of Reflections, p.
39.
M. Varillas, who, as he tells us, says, That in Matters of Religion,
Conscience does so entirely conquer all the Powers of the Soul, and reduces
them to such a Slavery, that it forces a Man to write that which it dictates,
without troubling himself whether it be true or false. And it is evident from
what I have said, That he has had many such Fits of Religion; and that he was
in a great and long Fit of it all the while he supplied Satan's Place, and did
the Office of a Tempter to the Princess of Orange, till he overcame her into a
Consent to dishonor her Father more than Cham did his, and after all to take
Possession of his Crown. Without such Religious Fits of writing Things, whether
true or false, he could never arrive to such Perfection of writing
Contradictions to serve turns. In his Sermon before the Prince of O. at St.
James's, he tells us his Royal Highness came abhorring Conquest. In his
Pastoral Letter he advances his imaginary Conquest of us into an Argument for
Allegiance to him; and afterward in his P. 12.
Funeral Sermon upon Mr. Boil, The true Names for Conquest were Robbery, and
Murder, and it was nothing but a specious Color for the worst Things that
human Nature is capable of, Injustice and Cruelty. Thus is he troubled with the
same Fits with which he so often reproaches Varillas; and, I fear, I shall make
it appear he was in one of them, when he wrote his Funeral Sermon upon Dr.
Tillotson, though I heartily wish he had been free.

But to go on, to show how Unfortunate he has been in weakening his own
Authority; in the first Volume of his History of the Reformation, he P. 108.
When Hen. IV. had treasonably Usurpt the Crown.
speaks of Hen. IV. as of a Traitor, and Usurper, and yet, as I observed
before, contrary to all the Acts of Parliament which declare him, and his Son,
and Grandson Usurpers; and which it is a Disparagement to his Character, as an
Historian to suppose him ignorant of, in his Enquiry into the present State of
Affairs, he asserts, That the Deposition of Ric. II. was never condemned by any
subsequent Acts of Parliament. Surely when he wrote this, his Conscience was in
a great Fit, neither considering what he had written before, nor whether he
wrote true or false.

The next Place in which I must set him to be viewed in opposition to himself,
is his Preface to Lactantius; where I must compare what he has written of
Persecution, Persecutors, and the Persecuted, with what he has done against
the present Sufferers, against whom he has been a very Bonner to the utmost of
his Power, and thirsted after their Destruction. Shortly after the Revolution,
asking an honorable Gentleman, if he would not come into the Government? And
he answering, He could not; then, says he, we will drive you out of the
Kingdom, or you shall drive us. On Sept. 4. 1690. he told See Paper 1. in the
Appendix.
Dr. Beach, whom I mention with that great Esteem which is due to his Piety and
Learning, that he hoped by the next Christmas not to see one deprived
Clergyman left in the Kingdom; saying, that they were worse than Papists, and
that he would show more Mercy to a Popish Priest than to any one of them. And
when the Doctor replied, I hope we shall find Justice, if not Mercy: He
answered, I will show you neither; I will prosecute you to the utmost
Extremity. And I believe the Doctor has found that he was as good as his Word.
This Righteous and Gentle Temper of his, in obstructing Justice, as well as
Mercy, from the suffering Remnant, appeared the last Year in the House of
Lords; where he spoke not against the Cause, but the Person of an honorable
and most worthy Gentleman, against whom, because he had been Kind and
Hospitable to his Fellow Sufferers, he harangued it in a manner altogether
unbecoming his Character, both as a Bishop, and a Judge. Had he argued against
the Justice or Equity of his Cause, he had spoken as became his Place; but
having nothing to say against that, he spoke against him, as a Person
disaffected to the Government, who made his House a common Harbor to the
Enemies of it. This might have looked proper had the Gentleman sued to the
House for a Favor; but being a Suitor for Justice, and before the last Resort,
he spoke not like a Judge but an Enemy, and a Persecutor, who regards Men more
than Causes; and indeed like one who has neither Bowels of Mercy, nor
Conscience of Justice, for those unfortunate Persons, whose greatest Fault is
(to use his Preface to Lactantius.
own Words) That they cannot think of some Things as he does, nor submit their
Reasons to his. In like manner he inveighed bitterly against a most pious and
learned Gentleman to his Father, for keeping Company with, and entertaining
some of the Non-swearing Clergy, whom in his Preface to his four Discourses he
calls false Brethren, who pretend to be of the Church of England, but are not,
and are of the Synagogue of Satan. This evil Spirit of Persecution showed it
self in a Zeal for an Oath of Abjuration, when speaking like himself in the
House, he said to this Effect; Let him die the Death of a Dog, and be buried
with the Burial of an Ass, that wishes or hopes for the return of K James. It
has also showed its cloven Foot in his Funeral Sermon; and it would be endless
to recite the intemperate Speeches which, upon the least Occasion, he is apt to
vent against a Company of Suffering Men; who, to use the Words of his own Plea
for the Persecuted, Ibid.
have no other Fault, but that they cannot shake off the Principles of their
Education, which, says he, stick so fast to the worst sort of Men, that
Atheists themselves cannot shake them off so entirely, but that they will be
apt to return upon them.

Thus he that pretended to be so far from Persecuting Men of any Persuasion,
that he apologiz'd even for Atheists, is now all Fury and Persecution against
those, who, as the late Bishop of St. Asaph frankly observed to Archbishop
Sancroft, are the Men that preserve the Nation from Atheism. Nay, he apologizes
even for Idolaters, and argues in the following manner for Toleration, and
Forbearance. Ibid.
That a Man is scarce the Master of his own Thoughts, and Constitution; that he
cannot see Things in another Light, than that to which he has been accustomed
to view them; That he can no more change his Notions of Things, because a set
of new Opinions would accommodate him better, than change the Relish of his
Senses; and that the forcing a Man to say or do otherwise than he thinks by
Threatenings, the Execution whereof is above his Force to endure, is only the
delivering up such a Person to the Rack of his own Conscience here, and the
Portion of Hypocrites hereafter. These, and many more Things, he then wrote to
serve a Turn in behalf of the Persecuted against Persecution; but now the Scene
is shifted he acts a contrary part to what he acted before: Not considering how
his former Writings reproach his present Practices, and with what an ill Grace
he persecutes now. Of Persecution he says, Ibid.
That it arises from an imperious Temper of Mind, and a Spirit impatient of
Contradiction; that it has most effect on base minded Men, and works quite
contrary on generous Minds, and awakened Understandings; that it vitiates the
Morals of Persecutors; that Persecutors do naturally engage themselves into the
Intrigues of Courts; that though they triumph for a while with the Spoils of
their Enemies, yet they will soon feel how it sinks their Credit among
indifferent Spectators, and good natured Men; and abundance more to this
purpose. And yet forgeting all he has said with such a Copia on this Subject,
he has signalized himself in the Persecution of those he calls Jacobites,
though their Books and Apologies lie unanswered; and particularly those Two
that were written against his Enquiry into the Measures of Submission etc. and
his Phoenix Pastoral Letter, in which, as he says of Varillas, His Fallacies
and Prevarications are laid open in a manner capable of making any Man blush
besides himself; but he has neither had the Conscience to confess his Errors,
nor the Sense of Honor to justify himself.

The next Thing which stands in contradiction to him, and to his whole Practice
in complying with the present Government, but most of all with his persecuting
Zeal for it, is a Passage in his Reflections on Parliamentum Pacificum in the
following Words: The Instance which is proposed to the Imitation of the Nation,
is that Parliament which called in the late King, and yet that cannot so much
as be called a Parliament, unless it be upon a commonwealth Principle; that
the Sovereign Power is radically in the People; for it being chosen without the
King's Writ was such an ESSENTIAL NULLITY that no subsequent Ratification could
take it away. Methinks this Passage, if he had a Mind to remember it, should
oblige him to treat the Non-swearers, if not with Respect, yet with Gentleness:
For if it is not a sufficient Justification of them against the Government, yet
while it stands unretracted, it is an unanswerable Vindication of them against
him and confutes every Thing he has written against them; and especially that
impudent Thanksgigiving Sermon. before the K and Q. p. 19.
Passage, in which he asserts, That K. W. was raised up to the Throne by a
Title that let ungrateful Men say what they will, has more both from God and
Man in it, than any the World has seen for many Ages.

I shall now proceed to Things of something a different Nature; but which will
show no less what little Credit is to be given to him, and how unsafe it is to
rely upon his Authority. He dedicated his Vindication of the Authority, etc. of
the Laws of Scotland to the Duke of Lauderdale, then High Commissioner of
Scotland: In that Dedication he tells the Duke, How worthily he bore that noble
Character, with the more lasting and noble Characters of a Princely mind; and
praises him for the long uninterrupted Tranquillity that Kingdom had enjoyed
under his wise and happy Conduct; and says, That he was a Prince greater in
his Mind than Fortune; and that there was something inward to him, which
commanded all the Respect that could be paid by all such that had the Honor to
know him, as well as he did. He acknowledges also the particular Engagement by
which he was obliged to him; and says, That it was not fit for him to express
the Sense he had of them, and of the vast Endowments of his mind, for fear he
should seem to flatter him. Then he instances in the profoundness of his
Understanding, and well-ballanced Judgment; for which he might deservedly pass
for a Master in all Learning. And, in the Conclusion, tells him, That from him
they expected an happy Settlement, and wished that Success and Blessings might
attend his Endeavors.

Not long after the Printing this Book at Glascow he brought a great part of
the Impression to London, where he sold it to Mr. Moses Pit; and not long
after that again, he came to him to desire him with great Earnestness to sell
the Copies of it without the Dedication: For by this time the Duke had fallen
out with him, and discarded him for some Arts and Qualities he had observed in
him, which I need not name. Mr. Pit gave him very good Reasons why he ought
not to do so; and particularly told him, he could not honestly sell an
imperfect for a perfect Copy: Upon which he was angry, and threatened him with
the Loss of all the Favors he intended to do him in his Trade. This Mr. Pit
can testify, if he is Living; but if he is not, it can be attested by an
honorable Person, who heard him solicit Mr. Pit to this base unworthy
Practice. But though Mr. Pit would not consent to sell the Books without the
Dedication, yet he was consent to let him have them again; and then they came
abroad without it. And so hard it was 'till it was privately Reprinted to get
one single Copy with it, that I profess I could never get such a one, 'till a
Gentleman presented me with one out of his private Study. And when he dilated
his Patron to the House of Commons, Sir A. Ferrester, his Grace's Secretary,
told me, That after the utmost Diligence he could get but one single Copy with
the Dedication, though he would have purchased more at any Rate, to show the
Gentlemen of the honorable House what kind of Man his Evidencer was, that
would publish such Things in the Commendation of the Duke, after he knew, See
his Vindication in his XVIII Papers.
as he pretended, he had a Design of bringing in an Army out of Scotland for
the spoiling and subduing of England. This Discovery of the Dedication, and his
Suppressing of it, coming to be known, made all the House curious to see it;
and he foreseeing what use would be made of it against him, was willing to
decline his Noble Undertaking: But the House, by the Interest of the Duke's
Friends, who increased much upon that Discovery, made him testify what, he
since says, created Horror in him; and how much Reputation he got by it I
need not now tell the World. I am sure many of the Duke's greatest Enemies
looked upon it as an horrible Lie; not thinking the Design, or the Discovery of
it if he had designed it, consistent with so much Wisdom as he was Master of,
above most great Men of his time.

The next Thing of this Nature which I shall relate, concerns his Memoirs of
the Dukes of Hamilton; he had prepared that Book for the Press before the
Breach which happened betwixt him and the Duke of Lauderdale, and intended to
dedicate it also to him; and accordingly when he had finished his first
Original of it he gave the Duke a fair Copy, which he desired his Grace to
peruse in order to the Printing thereof. In this Copy several remarkable Things
are related for the Honor of the Duke, with very great Characters of him: But
before his Grace had leisure to read this Copy, the Difference broke out
between them, and then the Memoirs were published without them; as may be seen
in the Copy which is still extant (though I fear his Circular Letter, and Case
of Barrenness hereafter mentioned, are not) and one day, I hope, will be
published; and then the World will see, and, I believe, say more of him than I
desire to say now.

The next Thing concerns a marginal Note against Resistance, in the 446 Page of
Bishop Bedel's Life; where under a Passage in one of the Bishop's Letters, that
seems to favor Resistance, he has put these Words. This Passage above is to
be considered as a Relation, and not as the Author's Opinion. But yet for fear
of taking it by the wrong handle, the Reader is desired to take Notice, That a
Subject's resisting his Prince, in any Court whatsoever, is unlawful and
impious. This Note of his being remembered by some after the Revolution, and
coming very much to be talked of, many curious Persons were desirous to see it;
but when they came to the Booksellers to consult the Place (for the Book was
never but once Printed) they found it altered thus. This Passage above is to be
considered as a Relation, and not as the Author's Opinion, lest it should
mislead the Reader into a dangerous Mistake: And it is observable at first
Sight, That that single Leaf had been Reprinted for the sake of the Alteration,
and Pasted into all the Copies where it is found. One may presume that his
Bookseller durst not make this Alteration without some order from him; and
those who are so curious as to compute when it began to be sold without it,
found it was a little time after the Revolution.

The Case of Barrenness abovementioned was drawn up by him at the time when
the talk was that Queen Catherine was to be divorced from Charles the II. Every
Body knows that this was a Project of my Lord Shaftsbury, and his Party, to put
by the Duke of York from succeeding to the Crown. And as for this Case which
looked that way, I had the Honor, with several others, to have it shown me by
a Right honorable Person, and many more of both Kingdoms have seen it besides.
I cannot now give so particular an Account of the State of the Case, as others
who have seen it perhaps may: But thus much in the general I remember, That
after urging the Inconveniences that Barrenness brings upon Families, and
Successions, he determines in the affirmative, That it is a just Cause of
Divorce. At the least this is very dangerous and loose Casuistry, and contrary
to the Determinations of the whole Stream of Canonists, Civilians, and Divines.
It would have helped to have divorced more Queens and Princesses than
Catherine, and God and his own Conscience know best at whose Motion, and for
what Design, he wrote it; and I leave him, as well as my Readers, especially of
the Female Sex, to reflect upon what I say.

The next Instance of his Ingenuity is to be found in his Pastoral Letter;
where, contrary to his own Sight and Knowledge, he makes King John's Charter to
be the Measure of our English Government, in a most prevaricating manner. If
any Man besides himself thinks me too rash or severe in this Censure, let him
but compare that part he has published of it, with the whole Charter in Dr.
Brady's History of King John, and consult what Mr. L -- has said upon it, in
his excellent Answer to his Pastoral Letter, and then if he continues to think
so, I will retract my Censure.

The next Instance of his Sincerity, is to be found in the 105 Page of the
second Part of his History of the Reformation; and I think it a greater Blemish
to him, and his History, than has been yet noted: But if he pleases he may lay
the Blame of it too upon the late Bishop of St. Asaph. There he tells us of a
Project to reconcile the Lutherans and Zuinglians, in the Point of the
Sacrament, by a middle Opinion, in which, he says, Luther was willing to have
the Difference composed. This he pretends to prove from an original M. S. of
Luther, in C. C. C's Library in Cambridge, which he pretends to exemplify in
his Collection, P. 166. N. 34. but very imperfectly and falsely, as may be seen
by a true and perfect Copy of the Original in the N. 11.
Appendix hereunto annexed. The Reader by comparing them together will find the
many Prevarications which he has used to set up this Pattern of Comprehension.
For first, after CONTRARII he leaves out SACRAMENTO, and instead of Nihil minus
he puts Nihilominus, and after Utile leaves out Quam. A little after, for
Orientur he puts Orientium, leaving a Gap for a Word which he says is wanting,
and guesses to be OCCLUDENDI; whereas there is not the least Sign of a void
Space in the Original, and by consequence no occasion for Criticism or
Conjecture. After Pro futuris, he leaves out all the Arguments by which Luther
pertinatiously defends his Opinion; and then for Conscientiae bona capti sunt
in Alteram Sententiam, he puts Conscientia bona sunt in Altera S^enpia; and
after Accedere he leaves out a great deal in the Conclusion, wherein Luther
declares he could bear with them in hopes of future Communion; but that he
could not be of their Belief and Opinion, but he could allow of Civil Concord
or Communion with them, as of Marrying, or Trading with one another. After
which again, he expresses how strict he was for his own Doctrine, and by
consequence far from a middle trimming Opinion, which might unite them into one
Communion. He seems here, as he says of In his Reflections on Varillas.
Monsieur Maimbourg, to have broken loose from the common Measures of Honesty
and Shame, and to pay his Reader in false Coin, which he truly tells Varillas
is more Criminal in History than in other Matters; and the least I can say of
this pretended Willingness of Luther to make up the Difference between those of
Ausbourg, and them of the Helvetian Confession, by a middle Opinion, is what he
says of Varillas, That it is all Vision, his own Invention, and composed out
of his own Imagination, to serve the popular Design of Comprehension; which Dr.
Sherlock bemoaned before he took the Oaths, That it was still carried on by our
Latitudinarians, to the indangering of every Thing that has been received for
Catholic and Fundamental in Christianity in the purest Ages of the Church.
Indeed Comprehension, and in order thereunto an universal, unlimited
Toleration, was for many Years the great Diana of our Funeral Preacher; and
those who doubt of this may soon satisfy themselves in his old Acquaintance Mr.
Papin's P. 410. 414. 419. 420. 421. 422.
Book, entitled, La tolerance des Protestants, etc. in which he vindicates what
he had written for Toleration in a former Book, entitled, La Foi reduite a ses
justes bornes, and a great part of his Vindication of it consists in Copies of
Dr. Burnet's Letters, wherein he highly commends the 'foresaid Book, and
another more extravagant in Latin, on the same Subject, written by Strimesius.
But the horror Papin had of this boundless Latitude, which our Church of
England Universalist Approved, and which, as he observes, ends in absolute
Skepticism, gave him a Pretense of turning Romanist, to take Sanctuary in the
Authority of the Church.

And now I am upon the Subject of Latitude, I will beg leave of the Reader to
tell him a Story of Toleration, or Comprehension, (for the Difference sometimes
is not great between them) which in the end will touch a little on our
Preacher; of whom I must observe once for all, That it is his Opinion that
Reflections on the History of Varillas, p. 7, 8.
an Historian who favors his own Side is to be forgiven, though he puts a
little too much Life in his Colors when he sets out the best Side of his
Party, and the worst of those from whom he differs; and if he but slightly
touches the Failures of his Friends, and severely aggravates those of the other
Side, though in this he departs from the Laws of an exact Historian, yet this
Biass is so Natural, that if it lessens the Credit of the Writer, yet it does
not blacken him. This shows how apt he is to favor his own Friends, and his
own Party, beyond what is just and true; and being a known Latitudinarian, by
his own Rule we can never safely trust him when he commends or defends any of
his Friends of that Side. And it was upon the Score of Latitudinariism, and
mystical Devotion, that he loved to extol Dr. Layton, though by some Canons he
has cited in his History of the Rights of Princes, he was an Usurper of the Sea of Glascow, as Dr. Tillotson was esteemed to be in a more offensive Degree
of the Sea of Canterbury. But to return to his admired Dr. Layton, he was so
great a Libertine in Comprehension, that he freely offered to receive the
ejected Presbyterian Ministers without Episcopal Ordination, if they would come
in, and to transact all Things in the Government of the Church with his
Presbyters by plurality of Suffrages, strictly speaking as if he were no more
than a Presbyter among them. Archbishop Burnet, into whose Chair he intruded,
told Dr. Gunning Bishop of Ely this Story of his Intruder; and he wondering
that any Bishop should give up that Power without which he could not act as
Bishop, asked Dr. Burnet of the truth of it, which he positively denied. This
denial of his obliged the good Archbishop for his Vindication to refer Bishop
Gunning to a Book which he had left with a Friend, for the truth of what he had
told him of the comprehensive Latitude of Dr. Layton. I saw the Book, and
remember it was printed at Glascow, and it so fully satisfied the Bishop, that
he took it home with him; but before he went made some Reflections on the want
of Ingenuity in Dr. Burnet, and concluded his Animadversions upon him with a
Trick he showed himself: It relates to a Book called Naked Truth, which the
Bishop intended to answer. Dr. Burnet, among others, hearing of it, come to
wait upon him; and when that Discourse arose between them, he asked the Bishop
upon what Scheme he intended to make his Answer. He, who was one of the most
frank and communicative Men in the World, told him how he would answer it from
Part to Part; which the Doctor observing with Design, carried every Thing away,
and being a swift and ready Writer, printed his Answer to it, before the other
had finished his.

I said before that he was also an Admirer of I suppose he is the Angelical Man
of whom he speaks such hyperbolical Things in the plural Number, and promises a
particular Account of him in his Pref. before Bedel's Life.
Dr. Layton upon the Account of mystical Devotion; for he was an Enthusiast of
the first magnitude, and it was a great Mischance, that this Preacher preached
not his Funeral Sermon. And as upon that Account he admired him, so was he
wonderfully taken with Labbades Writings, and would have persuaded the Duke of
Lauderdale to send for him into Scotland. One of his greatest London Friends
has also cold me what Pains he, and some others, formerly took to correct the
Enthusiasm of his Temper, and keep him from plunging himself into mystical
Divinity: And when he was Professor at Glascow, he was got so far into a Fit of
it, that he set up for an Ascetick; and once, being in the Archbishop's House,
and discoursing with his Daughter upon some common Subject, all on a sudden he
leaped out of his Chair, and with a Tone, Look and Gesture, all Extatick and
Enthusiastical, said Words to this Effect: Now am I sure of my Salvation, now
am I sure, that if the Earth should open and swallow me up this moment, my Soul
would go to Heaven. I had this Story from the good Archbishop, and I mention it
because I have observed, in very many Instances, how Enthusiasm with its
Religious Heats makes those in whom it is prevalent do the same ill Things,
that Atheism in the same degree makes others do. They are indeed Depravations
of the Mind very different in their Nature and Theory, but they agree in the
same unrighteous Practices, and have a tendency to act the same Evils. For if
the Atheist does Evil because he believes not; the Enthusiast will upon a
thousand Occasions believe he may do any Evil. If the one sticks at no Means,
though never so wicked, the other thinks the Goodness of the End will sanctify
the most wicked Means. In a word, They both make a Cloak of Religion for
Covetousness, Ambition, and Cruelty: They will both Lie, Murder, Rob, and
Rebel for holy Church, and Religion; and there never yet was any Holy League,
Covenant or Association, to begin or carry on Rebellion, under the holy
Pretense of Religion, wherein the Ringleaders were not Atheists, or
Enthusiasts; and of the Two it is hard to tell which has done most Mischief in
any Kingdom, and especially in ours. But the Enthusiast makes the more
plausible and taking Hypocrite of the Two; he can sooner melt into Tears, and
more naturally counterfeit the Spiritual Man among the People, and transform
himself with a better Grace into an Angel of Light. And one cannot but suppose
that he had a great Dose of Enthusiasm in him, when he undertook to persuade
the late unhappy Princess to invade her Father's Kingdom, against the Light of
Nature, and the Principles of her Education; and that he seasoned his
Perswasives with the Salt of Pharisaical Tears, pretended to be shed in
Commiseration of the Church of England: For it is well known that he has Tears
at Command, as Enthusiasts of all Religions have. He wept like any Crocodile at
Mr. Napleton's Relation of the barbarous Usage which the King met with at
Feversham: And pray Mr. Napleton, said he, still wiping his Eyes, carry my Duty
to the King, and let him know my Concern for him. Which puts me in mind of a
Story that I have heard of that Master-Enthusiast Cromwell, who when a Gentleman
came to entreat his Excellency, That he would give leave that he might have a
Lock of the Beheaded King's Hair for an honorable Lady. Ah! no, Sir, says he,
bursting into Tears, that must not be; for I swore to him, when he was Living,
that not an Hair of his Head should Perish.

I beg my Reader's Pardon for this Digression of Enthusiasm, though I hope it
is not altogether impertinent to my Undertaking, and now return to show by
other Examples how apt our Preacher, or Historian, (call him which you please)
is to write his Phansies and Inventions for true History; and that he is very
little, if any Thing at all, behind Varillas in this Fault, which a Man of
Letters, especially a Divine, that desires to have a lasting Reputation, ought
to avoid, as much as a Tradesman that values his Credit ought to take care not
to sell Counterfeit or Sophisticated Goods. In his first Volume of his History
of the Reformation, p. 209. he tells us of Two original Letters, the one in
Italian, and the other in English, which the Lady Elizabeth not yet Four years
of Age wrote to Queen Jane Seymour, when she was with Child of King Edward; and
that they were both writ in the same hand that she wrote all the rest of her
Life. These are Two strange and incredible Things: First, That a Child not yet
Four years old should have learned a foreign Language, to such a Degree of
Perfection, as to be able to write Letters in it; and Secondly, That she should
write then so well, as never to mend or alter her hand after. And to these Two,
I may add those pretty waggish Conceits in the English Letter, which he has
there set down with this marginal Note, Her Letter to the Queen not yet Four
years of Age. In this Letter she Compliments her Highness upon the Pain it was
to her to write, her Grace being with Child; and then after many other Passages
which could not be the first Blossoms of a Child, as he thinks, these Words
follow; I cannot reprove my Lord for not doing your Commendations in his
Letter, for he did it; and although he had not, yet I will not complain on him,
for that he shall be diligent to give me knowledge from time to time, how his
busy Child does; for if I were at his Birth, no doubt I would see him beaten
for the trouble he has put you to. Now I appeal to any considering Man,
whether those look like the Conceits of a Child not yet Four years old? And
none certainly but an Historian so rash and phanciful in his Writings, as he
is, would for this Reason have thought that this Letter was written to the
Queen: And had he taken time enough to reflect, and considered his Q. Eliz. was
born Sep. 7. 1533. Cath. Par died in Childbed of her Daughter in the beginning
of Sep. 1548.
Record better, he would have found that her Highness was not the Queen, but
Catherine Par; and my Lord not the King, but the Lord Admiral, to whom she was
married; and, by consequence, that the Lady Elizabeth was then Fifteen years of
Age. How many Lashes must poor Varillas have had without mercy, if he had been
guilty of such a Blunder; I know, says he, in his P. 29.
Reflections upon him, There are a Sort of Men that are much more ashamed when
their Ignorance is discovered, than when their other Vices are laid open; since
degenerate Minds are more jealous of the Reputation of their Understandings,
than of their I suppose he means Sincerity.
Honor. And whether this Discovery touches the Reputation of his
Understanding, or his Honor most, I leave him to judge.

From hence I pass to Bishop Bedel's Life; of which he says in the Preface,
That his Part in it was so small, that he can scarce assume any Thing to
himself, but the Copying out of what was put into his Hands by Mr. Clogy. And
in the P. 175.
Book he says again, That Mr. Clogy is much more the Author of it than he is.
For this we have only his own Word, which I profess signifies little with me.
But to know what was his, and what Mr. Clogy's, he has left us to Conjecture;
though, I think, few that know his way of Writing will so much as doubt that
the Romantic Passages, which I am going to cite out of it, and which are
obtruded upon the World for true History, are his own Inventions, and not Mr.
Clogy's: But however, though they were Mr. Clogy's, he is answerable for them
for letting them pass unobserved, and unchastised into the World. But if they
are his own, as I am confident they are, then let Men of the greatest Candor
judge what Censure is fit for a Man that would write his own Imaginations for
truth; though he had declared in the Preface, That Lives were to be written
with the Strictness of a severe Historian, and not helped up with Invention;
and that those who do otherwise, dress up Legends, and make Lives rather than
write them. To deceive, and at the same time to declare against deceiving, is
double Imposture and Imposition in an Historian. But Bishop Bedel it seems was
worthy for whom our Historian should dispense with the Laws of History, as he
13 Eli. 12.
did with an Act of Parliament upon a certain Occasion for reading the 39
Articles. It is manifest from the Bishops Letters, That he was a Latitudinarian
in some Opinions, and from his Life, if it be true written, that he disliked
the use of Organs in Divine Service, bowing at the Name of Jesus, the use of
the Common Prayer in his private Family; and these, and some other pretended
Antipathies to some innocent common Practices, tempted our Historian, contrary
to the Duty which he owed Truth, and his Readers, to dress up his Life into a
Romance: And to give him an heroic Fame, to say many Things for his Honor
which he knew were not true, or at least was uncertain whether they were, or
no. Thus (p. 4) he says, That his Reputation was so great, and so well
established, both in the University and in Suffolk, that when King James sent
Sir H. Wootton to be his Ambassador at Venice, at the time of the Interdict, he
was recommended as the fittest Man to go Chaplain in so critical a Conjuncture.
This sounds well for his Hero's Honor, had it been reconcilable to Truth; but
it neither agrees with the Date of Sir H. Wootton's Credentials, nor the Time
of his being in Venice, nor of the Interdict, all which shows that it was his
own Invention, and not matter of Fact: For the Credentials of Sir H. bare date
in June, 1604. after which, in all probability, they got to Venice by
Michaelmas after; whereas Pope Paul the V. who had that Quarrel with the
Venetians, and put them under the Interdict, was not Pope till May, 1605. and
he did not begin to Threaten and Thunder at them till September after, when Sir
Henry and his Chaplain had been there about a Year. And Father Paul's History
of the Interdict, translated into Latin by Mr. Bedel, gives so particular an
Account of the Time of this Difference, that our Historian can have no
tolerable Excuse, for saying he was thought the fittest Man to go Chaplain in
so critical a Conjuncture.

In Page 10. he says, That during his stay at Venice, Ant. de Dominis,
Archbishop of Spalato, came to Venice, and having received a just Character of
Mr. Bedel he discovered his Secret to him, etc. But for God's sake what Secret?
Was it the Secret Design of leaving not only his own Country, but all the Papal
Dominions, which he so often In his Consilium profect.
tells us he had thoughts of, for Ten years and upwards, before his putting it
in Execution? Or was it the Secret Design he had of changing his Religion, to
which the other Design was but subordinate? But how does the Discovery of these
Secrets agree with what he says Consil profect. Sect. 3. That the Call he had
was Divine not Human, and with calling God and his own Conscience to witness,
that no Persuasions or Invitations, of what sort soever, had ever reached his
Ears, and that he had used no Man's Council, nor consulted with any Mortal in
that Business? The improbability of this Passage, be it his, or be it Clogy's,
makes me suspect the truth of what follows; viz. That the Archbishop showed
Bedel his Ten Books de Rep. Ecclesiastica, which he afterward, says he,
printed at London; and that Bedel corrected many ill Applications of Texts of
Scripture, and Quotations of Fathers in them, all which the Archbishop took in
good part, and used to say he could do nothing without him. Page 10, 11, he
says, That a Passage fell out during the Interdict* that made greater Noise
than the Importance of it could perhaps amount to, but it was suited to the
Italian Genius. There came a Jesuit to Venice, Thomas Maria Caraffa, who
Printed a Thousand Theses of Philosophy and Divinity, which he Dedicated to the
Pope with this extravagant Inscription, PAULO V. VICE DEO, etc. This seems very
strange, That a Jesuit should come to Venice, and do such bold and provoking
Things in the time of the Interdict, when the whole Order had quitted the
Venetian Dominions; and the State was so severe as to shut the Door upon them,
and to keep them out at the Time of the Reconciliation, though great Endeavors
were used to the contrary. This I say seems very strange; but to put the whole
Matter out of all Dispute, First, This fell not out during the Interdict, but
in 1608. whereas the Interdict was at an end in the beginning of 1607. as
appears from the History of it. Secondly, Thomas Maria Caraffa was not a
Jesuit, but a Dominican. Thirdly, He came not to Venice, but Printed his Theses
at Naples, and at Rome; and Copies of them were sent as Novels from Rome, and
did the more amuse the Venetians, because of the Controversy that State had
with the Pope a little before. All this he might have seen in Bedel's Letters
to Waddesworth, p. 365, 366, 367. And whereas he also writes in the forecited
Place of his Life, That Mr. Bedel observing the numeral Letters of the Words,
PAULO V. VICE DEO to make 666. the Number of the Beast in the Revelation,
communicated his Observation to P. Paulo, and the Seven Divines, and that they
carried it to the Duke, and Senate, who entertained it, as if it had come from
Heaven. He himself, in the forecited Place of his Letters to Mr. Waddesworth,
says no such Thing; but only that the New Title Vice Deo, and that of
Omnipotency, gave matter of Wonder; and that the next day it was noised about
the City, that the Picture of the Pope, under which it was written, was the
Picture of Antichrist; for that the Inscription, Paulo V. Vice Deo, contained
exactly in the numeral Letters the Number of the Beast in the Revelation, 666.
But to prevent the Amusement which might otherwise arise in the Mind of the
Reader, about this impersonal way of Mr. Bedel's telling the Story of that
ingenious Observation, he tells, he was too modest a Man to claim the Discovery
of it. But Sir H. Wootton assured King James, that he first observed it: But
how shall we be assured that Sir Henry told the King so? I profess his wilful
Mistakes about Caraffa, and his Theses by which he contradicts both the History
of the Interdict, and Mr. Bedel's own Account of the Fact, makes me
notwithstanding doubt of this Particular, and here Query, having as yet no
other Authority for it, Whether it be true, or no?

Pages 12, 13, 14, 15, he is so impudent as to build up the Fame and Reputation
of Mr. Bedel upon the Infamy of Sir Henry Wootton his Patron, contrary to
Truth, and the Justice that is due to the Memory of that great and good Man.
Here, says he, I must add a Passage, concerning which I am in doubt, whether
it reflected more on the Sincerity, or on the Understanding of the English
Ambassador. The Breach between the Pope and the Republic was brought very near
a Crisis; so that it was expected a total Separation not only from the Court,
but the Church of Rome, was likely to follow it. It was set on by Pope This is
but a slight Mistake; but because it is so often repeated; it should be taken
notice of: For P. Paulo was himself one of the Seven, there being but Six
employed by the Senate besides.
Paulo, and the Seven Divines, with much Zeal, and was very prudently conducted
by them. In order to the advancing of it, King James ordered his Ambassador to
offer all possible Assistance, and to accuse the Pope, and the Papacy, as the
chief Authors of all the Mischiefs of Christendom. -- P. Paulo, and the Seven
Divines, pressed Mr. Bedel to move the Ambassador to present King James's
PREMONITION TO ALL CHRISTIAN PRINCES AND STATES, then put in Latin to the
Senate, and they were confident it would produce a great Effect. But the
Ambassador could not be prevailed with to do it at that Time, and pretended
that since St. James's day was not far off, it would be more proper to do it on
that day. If this was only for the sake of a Speech that he had made on the
Conceit of St. James's Day, and King James's Book, with which he had pretended
to present it, it was a Weakness never to be excused: But if this was only a
Pretense, and that there was a Design under it, it was a Crime never to be
forgiven. All that Bedel could say or do, to persuade him not to put off a
Thing of such Importance, was in vain; and indeed I can hardly think that
Wootton was so weak a Man as to have acted Sincerely in this Matter. Before St.
James's Day came -- the Difference was made up, and the happy Opportunity was
lost; so that when he had his Audience on that Day, in which he presented the
Book, all the Answer he could get was, That they thanked the King of England
for his good Will, but they were now reconciled to the Pope. It may be easily
imagined what a Wound this was to his Chaplain.

Behold here a Story as false, as formal; and great pity it is that Sir H.
Wootton's Heir, if any such be alive now to represent him, should not have the
Benefit of an Action against our Historian, to repair the Honor of his
Ancestor, which is so deeply wounded by him. For if this Story were punctually
true, it would not bear the severe Reflections which he has made upon Sir H.
for it; because he might not think fit to follow his Chaplain's Advice without
order from the King his Master, which he might hope to receive before St.
James's Day; and yet for private Reasons not think sit to tell his Chaplain the
Reason of his Delay. But the Story must needs be false; because the King's
Book, of which he makes mention, was not then extant. For the Pope and the
Venetians were reconciled in Bed. Hist. of the Ven. Interd. p. 218.
April, 1607. and the King's Premonition came not out till 1609. Nor will it
help him to say, That this was only a Mistake of the Premonition for the
Apology, which was Reprinted with it, and to which, in the King's own Phrase,
it was a Preamble. For the first Edition of the Apology was as little extant
before the Reconciliation mentioned, as the Premonition. For that which
occasioned the King's Writing the Apology, as himself tells us, was the Two
Breves sent over by the Pope, and Cardinal Bellarmin's Letter; and the later of
the Breves bears date from Rome but in August 23, 1607. and the Letter
September 28, following: By which it appears that the Reconciliation* was made
several Months before either of these were written, and longer before they
could come to the King's hand, longer yet before he could finish the Apology in
English, and again longer before it could be put into Latin. From whence it
appears, That this fine told Story, which so dishonours the Memory of Sir H.
Wootton to Honor that of his Chaplain, is a pure Fiction, and as much the
Birth of some Bodies Brain, as ever any Thing the Vanity of Varillas wrote was
his.

But to go on with the Inventions of our Historian, p. 17. he says, That P.
Paulo might never be forgot by Bedel he gave him his Picture -- the invaluable
Manuscript of the History of the Council of Trent, together with the History of
the Interdict, and of the Inquisition. No Body doubts of Father Paul's,
Kindness to Mr. Bedel, but it will appear that these Tokens of it are more than
questionable from what follows: First, as to his Picture, he that reads his
Life will scarce believe he was so forward to give his Picture, or that he had
it to give. Life of Father Paul. Land. p. 76.
For he would never let his Picture be drawn from the Natural, notwithstanding
it were desired by Kings, and great Princes. And although many of his Pictures
go abroad for Originals, yet they are all but Copies of one which is said to be
in the Gallery of a great King, which was taken against his Will, and by a
Stratagem. But for himself this may give Assurance, that he did not endure to
have his Picture drawn; because in the last Years of his Life, being entreated
by the most illustrious and excellent Dominico Molin, and likewise by his
Confident Fra. Fulgentio being set on to beseech him, yet it could not be
obtained so much as to give a famous Painter leave to take his Picture, though
he was promised he should not sit above an Hour. Whosoever considers this
Account, and more to the same purpose in the same Place, must needs think that
the Father had no Picture of himself to give Mr. Bedel. Indeed there is mention
of an Original Picture of the Fathers sent by Bedel's Life, p. 255.
Sir H. Wootton to Dr. Collins; but by the Account I have given out of the
Father's Life, which was written by a great Friend of his, it must have been
that which he says was in the Gallery of a great King, or one taken by the
like Stratagem. Secondly, as to the History of the Council of Trent, it was not
extant when Mr. Bedel left Venice, as may be gathered from a Letter of Reliq.
Wootton, p. 493.
Sir H. Wootton's, written in 1619. or perhaps 1618. wherein it is mentioned as
a work then in hand, or but newly finished, whereas Bedel left Venice in 1610.
Thirdly, as to the History of the Interdict, it was indeed lent by the Father
at Venice to Mr. Bedel, but with this Condition, as he himself tells us, in the
Epistle prefixed to the Translation, that he should not transcribe it; and if he
had given it to him when he parted with him, there is no doubt but Bedel would
also have mentioned that. Lastly, for the History of the Inquisition, there are
some Passages in it which show plainly, That it was not then in Being: For
there is mention made in it, not only of Things which happened in 1610. just
upon the return of Mr. Bedel, but also 1607. which appears not to be a Mistake
in the Print by a Character there added, that it was 48 Years after 1569. which
makes the Year 1610. Page 18. he says, When Bedel came over he brought along
with him the Archbishop of Spalata, and one Despoline a Physician, who could no
longer bear with the Corruptions of the Roman Church, etc. It was in the Year
1610. that Mr. Bedel returned with Sir. H. Wootton into England, and the
bringing them over should in all Reason and Decency have been ascribed to the
Ambassador, rather than his Chaplain; but having set him up for a Man that had
his own Dislikes to bowing at the Name of Jesus, the alternative Reading and
Singing of Psalms, bowing toward the Altar, instrumental Music in Churches,
and the use of the Common Prayer in private Families, he was resolved to paint
him with a Glory, and transmit his Memory to after Ages by Fictions as well as
true Stories, and even rob his Patron of his due Praises to extol him. Both
these are evident from what he says of Bedel's bringing over Spalatensis and
Despoline; for as for the former, it is evident from his Consilium
Profectionis, That he did not come over with Bedel, it bearing date at Venice
1616, near 6 Years after Mr. Bedel's return from that Place, and accordingly
Dr. Heylin says in the P. 102.
Life of Laud, that Antonius de Dominis betook himself for Sanctuary to the
Church of England, An. 1616. And as for the latter, Sir H. Wootton claims to
himself the Credit of bringing him over, as appears by his Letters. In Reliq.
Wootton, p. 400.
one to Sir Edm. Bacon he writes thus; There comes to you with him an Italian
Doctor of Physic, by Name Gasper Despolini. -- I was glad to be the Conductor
of him where his Conscience may be free. In another to my dear Ibid. p. 349.
Nic. he says, more than a voluntary Motion does now carry me toward Suffolk,
especially that I may confer by the way with an Excellent Physician at B --
whom I brought my self from Venice.

I could produce more Instances out of Bedel's Life to show how apt our Author
of it is to write his own Inventions for true History, and thereby impose upon
the World; but I believe I have brought enough for that purpose, and hope I
have thereby Convinced all Lovers of Truth more than of Men's Persons, how
unsafe it is to take Things upon trust from him. Mr. Bedel was really a Man of
great Merit for his Learning, Life, and Christian Temper, which endeared him to
Father Paul, who took him into his very Soul, and See Sir Henry Wootton's Life
by Mr. Walton.
c^mmunicated his most inward Thoughts to him. He was also upon a strict
Principle of Duty very Exemplary in Conformity to the Rites of the Church. He
kept all Ember weeks, and observed all the Canonical Hours of Prayer very
conscientiously, and all the Feasts and Fasts of the Church. But Dr. Burnet, by
writing so many Things to his Honor which are not true, has very much
dishonored his Memory, and given those, who are come to the knowledge of him
only by his Life, occasion to suspect every Thing he has said of him, and that
he has described him not as he was, but as he would have the World believe him
to have been. But to apply all to the Purpose of my own Writing; if he has
taken such Poetical Liberties where he promised to write with the Severity of a
strict Historian, and to give only a bare and simple Relation of Things; I say,
if he has taken such Liberties, and made so bold with Truth, in the Life of
one Bishop, contrary to his own Promises, I think we cannot be too cautious how
we believe him in his Funeral Sermon upon the other; although he professes to
speak of him with Plainess and Simplicity, with great Reserves, and with a
Modesty of Style through his whole Discourse. But I think I have showed how
little Professions of this Nature signify, when they come from him; and will
only add, That our blessed Savior's Advice of taking heed whom and what we
hear, is very strictly to be observed then when we hear or read him, who is so
apt to Romance, and to speak of Things and Persons as he would have them to be,
rather than as they are: And that he has so spoken in many Respects of Dr.
Tillotson, and praised him above his Merits, and more than his Memory deserves,
is according to the Method of the mentioned Conference which I proposed to
follow, to be the Subject of the ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. II.
AMong the many worthy Men of our Church, whose Memories have been transmitted
to Posterity, we read of some who have forbidden Sermons to be preached at
their Funerals; of others, who have forbidden that any mention should be made
of them in their Funeral Sermons; and others again have taken care to nominate
Persons to preach at their Funerals, in whose great Prudence and Judgment they
had an entire Confidence, that they would speak more to the Living than of the
Dead; and that what they spoke of them would be Just, Modest, and Genuin; and
such as they might have said of themselves without Arrogance had they been
Living, or heard others say of them without Confusion. Had Dr. Tillotson been
so careful as to follow any one of these Examples, or his Friends so well
advised as to follow them for him, he would have had more rest in his Grave,
and perhaps not had his Name so soon, and so strictly called into question: But
having had the Misfortune after his Death to have his Funeral Sermon preached
by a Man who has showed so little Temper and Justice in his Character, but
raised his Fame to an undue Pitch upon the Defamation of others more worthy
than he; I thought I should do a Work acceptable to all Lovers of Truth, and of
the true Church of England, if I showed in some Instances how undeserving he
was of that Character; and by noting some of his defects, which ought to be
noted, prevent the Danger which unwary Readers, and Hearers of his Funeral
Sermon, might otherwise fall into, of following him upon the implicit Belief of
this Character, in the Wrong as well as in the Right, and walk after him as
securely in the devious paths of Error, as in the strait way of Truth. For who
would not choose to follow the Example of a Man, P. 28.
whose Life was free from Blemishes, and shined in all the Parts of it; and P.
2.
who was an Example of all sublime and heroical Piety and Virtue and a Pattern
both to Church and State? And who more especially of our Religion, would not
follow a Churchman who will be such a lasting Honor to it, and who P. 30.
kept the sacred Trust of the Christian Faith and Doctrine, and maintained it
pure and undefiled to his dying Day? This is the lofty Character which our
Preacher has given us of Dr. T. but falsely, and so much above his Merit, That
he has had the deplorable Infelicity to do many Things contrary to every part
of it, as I shall show in some signal Instances; which were blemishes in his
Life, and will remain such Blots upon his Memory, as no Apology will ever be
able to wash out

My first Instance shall be in his Apostasy from his own avowed Principle and
Doctrine of the Church of England, the once venerable Doctrine of
Non-Resistance, or Passive Obedience; in which our Church has taught her
Children how they should behave themselves toward Men, and approve themselves
toward God, if she and they should come to be persecuted for the Trial of
their Faith, as the purest Churches and best Christians have been in former
Ages. He did not only In his Subscription to the Book of Homilies.
subscribe to the Truth of this Doctrine, and in the Profession of the Truth of
it, declare it unlawful to take up Arms against the King upon any Pretense
whatsoever; but pressed it upon the Consciences of Living and Dying Men: And
when he preached against Popery, he asserted it not only in the most serious
manner that good Divines use to do the most important matters of Christiany,
but with that Strength and Clearness, which, our Preacher says, is his
peculiar Talent.

In his Letter to my Lord Russel in N^wgate, which the Reader will find in the
N. 3.
Appendix, he told his Lordship, who did not believe that Doctrine, what a
great and dangerous Mistake he was in, and that his disbelief of it, which was
but a Sin of ignorance before he was Convinced of the Truth of it, became a Sin
of a more heinous Nature after his Conviction, and called for a more deep and
particular Repentance; and that if he dyed in a disbelief of it, he was like to
leave the World in a Delusion and false Peace; and pursuant to this, in his
last Prayer with his Lordship on the Scaffold, he said, Grant, Lord, that all
we who survive, by this and other Instances of thy Providence, may learn our
Duty to God and the King. What could a Man have said more in behalf of any
Doctrine of the Christian Religion? Or what could he have done more, to
convince the World he was in good Earnest, than to publish it after he said it?
And yet in his Thanksgiving Sermon Jan. 31. 1688.
preached at Lincolns Inn, he tells us, That our Deliverance (then the Phrase
of the Revolution) was the Lord's doing, although it was brought about by the
utter Violation of that Doctrine, and the whole Duty of Subjects, which results
from it; and then reciting the Strange means by which it was brought about. We
must not, says he, here forget the many Worthies of our Nation, who did so
generously run all hazards of Life and Fortune, for the Preservation of our
Religion, and the Asserting our Ancient Laws and Liberties. Behold the Preacher
at Lincolns Inn, and the Confessor in Lincolns Inn Fields, contradicting one
another. The Confessor told my Lord Russell, That the Christian Religion
plainly forbids the Resistance of Authority, and that the same Law which
established our Religion* declares it not lawful to take up Arms upon any
Pretense whatsoever. But the Preacher, now turned Apostate from the Confessor,
commends the many Worthies, as he calls the Traitors and Rebels of our Country,
for soliciting a Foreign Prince, and the Creature of another State, to invade
their own Sovereign's Dominions, and assisting of him in the Undertaking, till
they had driven him out of his Kingdoms. He says, It was generously done of
them to run all hazards of Life and Fortune, and he might have added of their
Salvation too, for the Preservation of our Religion and Liberties; although he
had told the World before, that our Laws forbid the Preservation of them by
those means; nay, that the Laws of Nature, and the Rules of Scripture, had not
left us at Liberty to use them; which was in effect to say, That neither our
Laws would have our Religion, nor our Religion have it self preserved, by the
Means those Worthies used for its Preservation. The Belief of the Lawfulness of
Resisting, when our Rights and Liberties should be invaded, was a Sin of a
dangerous and heinous Nature in my Lord Russel; but the Practice of it was
laudable in I know not how many Lords and Gentlemen more, for preserving our
Religion, Laws, and Liberties by it; and if any of them since are gone out of
the World in a Delusion and false Peace, he is one of those Divines who more
especially must Answer to God for it. For it was after a close Consult with
him, and one or two more, that a Motion was made in the House of Lords for
Appointing a Day of Thanksgiving to God for having made his Highness P. O. the
glorious Instrument of delivering this Kingdom from Popery and Arbitrary Power:
And then it was that our English Worthies, as well as the Hero under whom they
acted, were applauded in the Pulpits for the Success of that Glorious
Enterprise, which to think or speak of in a slighting manner, was, in his
Opinion, to be guilty of the foulest and blackest Ingratitude both to God, and
them.

One would wonder how any Christ^an Man, but more especially how a Christian
Preacher, should so plainly contradict himself, and his most serious Doctrines;
and yet have the Confidence since to Reprint them, as if he had never said, nor
done any Thing inconsistent with them. Hear therefore what he says of
Religion, our dear and holy Religion, which the Worthies of our Nation run such
an Hazard to preserve. Sermon. preached on the Fifth of Nov. 1678. and Reprinted
1691.
As for Religion, the very Heathens always spoke of it as the great Band of
human Society, and the Foundation of Truth, and Fidelity, and Justice, among
Men. But when Religion once comes to supplant moral Righteousness, and to teach
Men the absurdest Things in the World, to Lie for the Truth, and to Kill Men
for God's sake; when it serves to no other Purpose, but to be a Bond of
Conspiracy to inflame the Tempers of Men to a greater Fierceness, and to set a
keener Edge upon their Spirits, and to make them ten times more the Children of
Wrath and Cruelty than they were by Nature; then surely it loses its Nature,
and ceases to be Religion: For let any Man say worse of Atheism and Infidelity
if he can. And for God's sake what is Religion good for, but to reform the
Manners and Dispositions of Men, to restrain human Nature from Violence and
Cruelty, from Falsehood and Treachery, from Sedition and Rebellion? Better it
were there were no revealed Religion; and that human Nature were left to the
Conduct of its own Principles and Inclinations -- then to be acted by a
Religion which inspires Men with so wild a Fury, and prompts them to commit
such Outrages, and is continually supplanting Government, and undermining the
Welfare of Mankind. In short, such a Religion that teaches Men to propagate and
advance (and he might have added, preserve) its self by means so evidently
contrary to the very Nature and End of Religion.

This is Dr. Tillotson's famed Character of Religion; and not to descant in
long Applications upon it, I desire my Reader to consider, if it is not as
applicable to the New as to the Old Fifth of November, and the Worthies of the
Protestants, as well as the Popish Religion, who conspired against James the
Second, as these did against James the First. Tell me, O ye Worthies of the
Church of England, who have hazarded your Lives and Fortunes to preserve our
Religion, Is it more lawful to Plot and Rebel for holy Church of England, than
for holy Church of Rome? And is it not as much Priestcraft in our Divines to
applaud you as Worthies for so doing, as it was in the Pope to compare the Duke
of Guise, and his Partisans, to those Jewish Worthies, Jephtha, Gideon, and the
Maccabees, and do you not despise them for their sordid Flattery of you in open
Contradiction to their own Doctrines, and the Principles of that Religion which
they pretend still to profess; May I not say with Dr. Till. against himself,
Sermon. Vol. 3. p. 77.
That a Miracle is not enough to give Credit to a Man who teaches Things so
contrary to the Nature of Religion, and that P. 20.
the Heathen Philosophers are better Casuists than he. This he said of the
Jesuists, and the Casuists of the Church of Rome, for maintaining the
Lawfulness of deposing Kings, and subverting Government, and yet without
Blushing he maintained the Lawfulness of this in commending you.

But this is but one Instance of acting in contradiction to his own Doctrine,
when the appointed time of trial came; there are many more so well known, that
I need not mention them: For indeed his whole Practice since the Revolution
has been one Series of Apostasy, and by which he has not only dishonored his
Memory, and made all his other Good be evil spoken of, but been a Scandal to
our holy Church and Religion, to which our Preacher says, he was such an
Honor; given the Enemies of them great occasion to Triumph, their best and
most steadfast Friends great occasion of Grief and Shame: And lastly, tempted
loose and unprincipled Men to turn Atheists, and ridicule our Priesthood and
Religion; and this he has been told of in such different manners, that I do
not wonder Fun. Sermon. p. 27.
it sank deep into him, and had such influence upon his Health.

I cannot imagine but that one Letter which was sent to his Lady for him,
superscribed for Dr. Tillotson, must needs disquiet him very much, if he
received it, and read it. It is written throughout with a serious Air, and
every Line of it speaks to his Conscience; and because I know the worthy
Gentleman who wrote it, and that it is a full and clear Proof of what I have
said, I present my Reader, but more especially the Preacher of his Funeral
Sermon, with a few Paragraphs of it, if he will have the Patience to read them.
It begins thus, Letter p. 2.
Sir, I shall preface what I am about to say with an Assurance, That I have
formerly had the greatest Veneration for you, as well for your Piety as good
Sense and Learning; that my Notions of Government are so large, that the first
Thing I ever doubtfully Examined, that had your Name affixed to it, was your
Letter to my Lord Russel: But your Actions since do less quadrate with that
Opinion, and seriously make me address my self to you to know how you reconcile
your present Actings to the Principles either of Natural or Revealed Religion;
especially how you reconcile them with the Positions and Intentions of that
Letter, and consequently whether you have a Belief of God, and the World to
come. -- P. 5.
But to come to your more particular Case; I beseech you to publish some
Discourse (if you can clear Things) to demonstrate either your Repentance of
what you wrote to my Lord Russel, or the Reasons that make that, and what you
now do, consistent; and that you, with the usual Solidity with which you treat
upon other Subjects, justify the Proceedings, and explain the Title of K. W. I
know no Body has a stronger and clearer Head, and, if you have Truth on your
Side, you can write unanswerably. God's Glory, and the Reputation of the
Protestant Religion, is at Stake. Your own good Name calls for it, and more
especially because you have accepted a most Reverend and Devout Man's
Archbishopric. A Man who has given Evidence how unalterably he is a
Protestant. A Sufferer formerly for the Laws, and Church of England; and a
Sufferer for those very Principles upon which that Letter to my Lord was
written, for those very Principles which you disputed for, when he had so short
a time to Live: Nay, which you remembered him of even upon the Scaffold, with
the dreadful Commination of eternal Woe. Really, Sir, if there be any Truth, if
there be any Virtue, if there be any Religion, what shall we say to these
Things? What will you say to them? You must be at the Pains to clear this
matter, that we may not believe the Boundaries of Right and Wrong, the Measures
of Violence and Justice, quite taken away; that we may not be tempted to P. 7.
speculative, and from thence to practical Atheism. This Change has made many
sober Men skeptical, and gone further toward the eradicating all the Notions
of a Deity, than all the Labors of Hobs; and your part in it has, I confess,
more staggered me, than any one Thing else. I have been ready to suspect, That
Religion it self was a Cheat, and that it was a Defect in my UnUnderstanding
that I could not look through it: For I think if I can know my Right Hand from
my Left, our present Government stands upon Foundations that contradict all
those Discourses which you, as well as others, have lent to Passive Obedience.
The excessive Value I have for you, for your Knowledge, your Judgment, your
largeness of Spirit, your Moderation, and many other great Qualities, that have
signalized your Name, once made you one of the greatest Ornaments of the
Christian Church. -- Apostasy from what you preached, and wrote, pretended to
believe, and would have others believe, shake me so violently in the first
Credenda of Religion, That I beseech you, if you think it necessary upon no
other Account, that you will publish such a Discourse at least for the
Satisfaction of mine, and other Men's Consciences, who I can assure you of my
own Knowledge lie under the same Scruples with my self; have the same Scruples
in relaion to the Government, and the same Temptations to question Religion it
self upon your Account. -- P. 8.
I beg of God Almighty to lay an happy constraint upon me ^o do what may be
most for his Glory, and the Good of these Nations; and I earnestly supplicate
him, that he will enable me to suffer whatever may be necessary for those great
Ends* and that he will incline you to publish your Reasons, or Repentance.

The Gentleman who wrote this Letter to Dr. T. is a Person of great Candor and
Integrity, and was once a great Admirer of him; and from his Example we may see
what a mighty Scandal the Doctor's Apostasy has been to the very Notion of all
Religion, as well as that professed in the Church of England: And I have heard
him say, since Dr. Tillotson's Death, that he thinks he was an Atheist, as much
as a Man could be, though the gravest, said he, certainly that ever was; and
this Opinion, which this Gentleman, and many others have of him is owing to
that great and scandalous Blemish of his Life, his Apostasy from his own
Doctrines about Non-resistance, and the Nature of Religion; and this foul
Blemish which has tempted that serious and worthy Gentleman, and others, to
question Religion it self upon his Account, is like to be an everlasting Blot
upon his Memory, unless his Funeral Preacher, or Dr. Sherlock, or Dr. Pain, who
have mentioned him in their Sermons with so much Respect, will please to write
a Discourse on purpose to reconcile the Contradiction between his late
Practice, and former Principles and Precepts, which he himself, though called
on in so solemn a manner, had not the Hardiness to do. I beg Mr. Manningham's,
who is one of his Doctors, Pardon, for not mentioning of him among the others;
for he perhaps has found out a way to reconcile them, because he Sainted him
in his Prayer before the Sermon, which he preached to the Sons of the
Clergymen at Bow: But if he is pleased to undertake a Discourse of that
Nature, he must take care not to forget himself; who in a Sermon at the Rolls,
while the Convention was a sitting, said, That a Convention of English Subjects
could no more make a King, than a Convention of Atoms make the World.

That which gave the great Offense to the Gentleman, whose Letter I have cited,
was the Inconsistency of the Doctor's Practices with his Principles since the
Revolution; to which I must further add, That his Practices long before it were
not well reconcilable with them, nor they with his Practices: And of this I
will give one Instance, and that was his great Intimacy with the late Lord
Shaftsbury; and particularly about that time when he preached on the Fifth of
November, 1678. and his Acting in consort with him then in upholding the
Pretensions of the Duke of Monmouth to be the King's Legitimate Son, and giving
credit to those innumerable Lies which were invented at Thanet House to support
the Credit of the Popish Plot. I question very much whether more Lies and
Calumnies against the King and the Government were then dispersed from his, or
my Lord Shaftsbury's House: I have particular Reason for what I say; for I was
then well acquainted with a Person who was very intimate with one of his
Favorite Acquaintance, to whom he used to go very often, in great kindness to
disabuse his Credulity, and confute those Stories which he used to hear in Amen
Corner often to his disturbance. He was pleased to call that Gentleman his
Sive, because he was wont to separate the Tares from the Wheat, and the Bran
from the Flour of his Stories; and by conversing with him, I came to know more
of the great Intercourse and Correspondency there was between my Lord
Shaftsbury, and the Dean of Canterbury, than was commonly known. The Dean used
to go in those Days Three or Four times a Week to my Lord's House, but very
privately; and there often met among others one of his Relations, a great Lord
of the Court, whom I think not fit to Name. My Lord D. who was then committed
to the Tower, by the Malice of his Enemies, knew well how much the Dean was in
their Interests, and particularly the great Esteem he was in among those who
were the Confidents at Thanet House. This obliged his Lordship to write to him
to entreat him to do him all the good Offices he could among that Party: The
Dean upon this went to wait upon his Lordship in the Tower; but how far he
engaged in that Negotiation for my Lord's Service, I cannot now remember, but
the Event showed that there was little Effect of it.

Remembering these Stories, and the many slanderous Reports that had come from
his House, and used to be told upon his Authority against the King and
Government, I was curious to see his Sermon against Evil Speaking, upon Tit.
3.2. which was occasioned by some ill Reports and Reflections that went abroad
of himself, and this Government more especially, in the unlicensed Prints of
the Times. There I was very much pleased to find him condemning Evil Speaking,
as a detestable Vice; whether it were by being the first Authors of ill
Reports, or by relating them from others; by speaking before a Man's Face, or
behind his Back, directly or obscurely, by way of Insinuation, by downright
Reproach, or with a Preface of Commendation, etc. More especially was I
pleased, and astonished withal, to find him setting forth the heinous Nature of
reviling those whom God has placed in Authority, and to slander the Footsteps
of the Lord's Anointed. I could not but admire the Power of Conscience, and of
Divine Truth, to extort this from a Man who had been so guilty of it, as you
shall find by the following Story.

King Charles the Second taking Notice of the false and scandalous Report of
his Marriage with the Duke of Monmouth's Mother, made a Declaration on the
Sixth of January, 1679. written with his own Hand, in these Words following. --
I do here declare, in the Presence of Almighty God, that I never was Married,
nor gave any Contract to any Woman whatsoever, but to my Wife Queen Catherine,
to whom I am now Married. This Declaration was made in the Presence of W. Cant.
H. Finch, C. H. Coventry, J. Williamson. In March following his Majesty made a
more public Declaration in the Privy Council, to strengthen the former, in
these Words. -- For the avoiding any Dispute which may happen in time to come,
concerning the Succession to the Crown, I do here declare, in the Presence of
Almighty God, that I never made, nor gave any Contract of Marriage, nor was
Married to any Woman whatsoever, but to my present Wife Queen Catherine now
Living. Whitehall the Third of March, 1679. This Declaration, attested by
Sixteen Privy Counselors; was entered in the Council Book, and Copies of it
quickly got abroad; and as it came to Dr. Tillotson's Hands sooner we may be
sure than most Men's; so he had the Ingenuity to note it for an Equivocal
Declaration: As if the King, contrary to the Punctation of it, and the common
Usage of English Speech, had meant it in this Sense; I do here declare, in the
Presence of Almighty God, that I never made, nor gave any Contract of Marriage,
nor was Married to any Woman whatsoever NOW LIVING, but to my present Wife
Queen Catherine. I had this Story from one whom I shall Name if called upon for
it, to whom he made this Observation; and though I never mentioned it to any
Person till very lately, yet the Observation was whispered about, and coming to
the King's Ears, with other additional Rumors concerning his Marriage with the
Duke of Monmouth's Mother; he set out a Declaration June the 8. 1680. in which,
after a Land. Gazette, N. 1519.
Recital of his two former Declarations, are these Words: And we do again call
God Almighty to Witness, and declare upon the Faith of a Christian, and the
Word of a King, That there was never any Marriage, or Contract of Marriage, had
or made between us, and the said Mrs. Walters, alias Barlow, the Duke of
Monmouth 's Mother, nor between us and any Woman whatsoever, our Royal Consort
Queen Catherine that now is only excepted. This last Declaration put an end to
this Calumny, which I think was slandering the Lord's Anointed, and backbiting
him with a Witness; as I think also what he says of the French King, in his
Thanksgiving Sermon for the late Victory at Sea, may justly be esteemed. There
he compares him to Lucifer, and taxes him of Pride, Presumption, sottish
Ignorance; of Tyranny, Oppression, Injustice, and of Cruelty; more barbarous
than ever the most barbarous Nations did commit; and all this in manifest
repugnance and contradiction to the Sermon he had preached against Evil
Speaking, in which he taxes all Parties that love to blast the Reputation of
their Adversaries, and especially those that are of a different Religion. But
all this of King Lewis, whom his own Subjects style the Just, and the Great, is
nothing in comparison to the most unchristian Slanders with which he has
loaded his own Sovereign, both before and since the Revolution. Although he,
among the rest of the London Clergy in their App. N. 4.
Address to his Majesty, did not only bless God for his Accession to the Crown,
but promise all faithful and dutiful Allegiance to him, and also prayed for his
long and happy Reign. After this a Man of heroic Honor, much more of heroic
Piety, would have scorned and abhorred to represent his Prince as one of the
greatest Villains; it is his Majesty's own Phrase for himself, upon the Supposal
that he could be so unnatural to his own Daughters, and Subjects, as to
conspire, with his most virtuous Consort, to forge a Son and Heir to the Crown.
All Casuists and Divines teach us, That it is as great a Sin to slander any
innocent Person with a Crime of any Sort, as it would have been for him to
commit it; and this, according to his own Sermon against Evil Speaking, (...) a
greater Sin when a Inst. Lib. 4. de Injuriis. A^rox injuria aestimatur ex
persona veluti si Magistratus injuriam passus fuerit, vel si Senatori ab humili
persona injuria facta sit, aut Parenti, Patronov. fiat a Liberis vel Libertis.
Subject slanders his own Sovereign, and God's Anointed: And yet he had the
Misfortune to be a private Defamer of their Majesty's with that pretended
unnatural Imposture; and the Authority of his Whispers and Suspicions, added
much Credit all over the Town to the wretched Report. I am not able to express
the Atrocity of this complex Injury to the King, the Queen, and the Prince of
Wales, and the Mischiefs that have thereupon ensued to the Three Kingdoms: And
this Heroic and Unblemished Man of Piety, for any Thing we know to the
contrary, went out of the World without any Remorse for it; at least without
such a penitential Remorse, as brought him to make what Satisfaction he was
able to God and the King for it: And let our Preacher say what he pleases now,
or hereafter, when he brings forth his Reserves, this is such a Stain and
Blemish in his Life, as he with all his Arts and Artifices will never be able
to get out. He tells us, He had no Burden on his Conscience on his Death Bed:
No more had his Uncle Cromwell; and I protest considering these Things, and his
Intrusion into the Archbishop's Throne, and that long train of Sins that
followed thereupon, one would almost be tempted to fear that he died in
Delusion and false Peace of Conscience, or that his Belief of his own Doctrine
of Hell Torments gave his Mind ease.

This brings me to another Blemish of his Life, and that is, his Sermon of the
Eternity of Hell Torments, upon Matthew. 25.46. which the Reader may find in the
Fourth Volume of his Sermons. In this Sermon, as he openly and directly writes
against the Eternity of Hell Torments; so covertly he undermines the Doctrine
of Christ's Satisfaction, by asserting, P. 163.
That what Proportion soever there is between, and Punishment, the Justice of
God is not concerned in it. And then as for the Torments of Hell, he says,
They are so terribly Severe, that P. 175.
we can hardly tell how to reconcile them with the Justice and Goodness of God:
And that P. 165.
God keeps the Right of Punishing in his own hand, and is not, obliged to
execute what he threatens, any further than the Reasons and End of Government
require; and that he may remit and abate as much as he pleases of the
Punishment that he has threatened. P. 173.
We are all bound to preach, and you to believe, the Terrors of the Lord,
says he, ye not so as sawcily to determine and pronounce what God must do in
this Case; for after all, he may do what he will. And in another Place yet more
emphatically; The Sentence of Judgment at the last Day, Depart ye Cursed into
everlasting Fire, and likewise this Declaration in my Text, that the Wicked
shall go into everlasting Punishment, do not restrain God from doing what he
pleases. This he has said of Hell Torments, which God has not only threatened
as a Judge, and solemnly enacted and decreed as a Lawgiver, but our Savior
taught, as the great Doctor and Prophet of his Church; and yet notwithstanding
these Considerations, and the constant uniform Belief of all Christians, and
all Churches and Sects of Christians, of the Severity and eternal Duration of
Hell Torments, P. 166.
he makes God, notwithstanding his Sanction and Threatenings, and our Savior,
after all his and his Apostles Doctrines concerning these Punishments, as free
not to execute them as he was not to destroy Nineveh, after his Prophet Jonas
(whom he decently calls his peevish Prophet) had denounced the Destruction
thereof. Nay, he counts it Sawciness to believe and assert this Catholic
Doctrine; and his Example of Nineveh also implies, that there is room for
Repentance in the next World, which is a most presumptuous, dangerous, and
heretical Insinuation. And all this was preached at Court: And is it not sweet
and delicious Doctrine 1 Timothy 1.9, 10.
for the Lawless and Disobedient, for the Ungodly and for Sinners, for the
Unholy and Profane, for Voces Graecae eos significare possunt qui citra necem
parents percusserunt, idemque valent quod (...), and (...), ut notant Suidas,
Hesych. Eustath. Polisynops. in locum.
Murderers of Fathers, and Murderers of Mothers, for Man-slayers, for
Whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with Mankind, for Man-stealers,
for Liars, for perjured Persons, or any other Things that is contrary to sound
Doctrine? And accordingly when it was first Published, the Atheists, and
Deists, and Socinians of the Town, carried it about them to show it in all
Places, glorying every where in the Doctrines of it, and extolling the Author
for a Man who durst speak Truth, and set Mankind free from the Slavish Notion
of eternal Torments; and saying they believed most of our Clergymen were of
the same Opinion, if they durst speak out. I tell this the rather to provoke
the Convocation to purge themselves of the Scandal this Sermon has raised upon
them, by a public Censure of it; their own Honor, and the Honor of the
Church, and the Care they have of Peoples Souls, obliges them to do it. Nay,
the People have a Right to demand and require it in God's Name of them; and the
not doing of it, I think in my Conscience, will be such an heinous Sin of
omission, as may justly provoke God to forsake the Church of England, as he
forsook the Seven Asian Churches, and make it as desolate as them. Nay,
furthermore I dare be bold to say, That had this Man lived in that Age when the
Bishops rose up and deposed Paulus Samosatenus for his Blasphemies, they would
have deposed him for his. For to apply the Words of the Apostle upon another
Occasion, If Christ, the great Doctor and Legislator of his Church, and Judge of
all Men at the last Day, after all his Doctrines and Threatenings concerning
Hell Torments, is not obliged to execute them accordingly, then is your
Preaching, O ye Clergy vain, and our Faith vain; yea, and you are found false
Witnesses of God, because you have testified that he will inflict eternal
Torments, although he is free to do what he will, and may please whether he
will inflict them, or no. This is the natural Reflection which every Clown will
make upon the Clergy upon this Man's Doctrine of Hell Torments; and therefore
it is to be hoped they will make haste to Anathematize it, and that there is
more than ordinary Cause for them to do so, will appear from this following
Story, which I had from a Learned Clergyman of great Sincerity, concerning the
Secret of this damnable Opinion. The first Author of it among us was an old
Sceptick of Norwich, who wrote a Book of the Subject, which he used to put into
the hands of others to proselyte them to his Opinion. When he put it into the
hands of this Clergyman, upon whose Authority I tell this Story, he protested
to him, That he had Converted Dr. Tillotson, and Five or Six Divines more, most
of which are now in great Places of the Church. I wish I could have seen that
Treatise of his, to compare it with this Sermon of Hell Torments; and then I
should have seen whether the Author of it borrowed it thence, as some of his
Friends have assured me he borrowed his Rule of Faith, in answer to Mr.
Serjeant's Sure Foooing, from the Discourses of the Learned Dr. Cradock, who
designed to answer that Book.

I have said a great deal on the Occasion of this wretched Sermon; but one
Thing more I must Remark, and it is this: P. 156.
He tells us, That if God intended his Threatenings of Hell Torments should have
their Effects to deter Men from Sinning, it cannot be imagined that in the same
Revelation, which declares these Threatenings, any intimation should be given of
the Abatement or Non-execution of them. But for God's sake, what need God be so
careful not to intimate that which this Man could find out? Or why would it
weaken his Laws more, or take off the Edge and Terror of his Threatenings, for
him to intimate this Abatement, than for his Ministers to do it? And therefore
to turn his own Conclusion in his own Phrases upon himself; Was it not a very
impious Design in him, and a betraying Men into misery, not only to intimate
this Abatement, but to teach it, and by Arguments in a set Discourse to go
about to persuade Men into a Belief of it? Had he lived in the Days of that
Great and Apostolic Archbishop, whose Works he has Licensed to be published
with the just and glorious Title of Martyr, he and his Sermon had not passed so
free from Censure. Oh may that English Cyprian's Primitive Apostolical Spirit
of Orthodoxy and Discipline fall upon our English Clergy, that God may bless
them, and delight to do them and the Church good; and make them as much the
Veneration and Glory, as latitude in Projects and Opinions, looseness in
Discipline, and departing in Practice from their Principles, have made them the
Scorn and Contempt of the World.

From his Sermon on Hell Torments, I pass to that preached at Whitehall in
April 1680. upon Joshua 24.15. In which the following Passage, though levelled
at the Papists, gave great Offense to very many both of the Church and
Dissenting Communions. I cannot think till I be better informed (which I am
always ready to be) that any Pretense of Conscience warrants any Man, that is
not extraordinarily Commissioned, as the Apostles and first Publishers of the
Gospel were, and cannot justify that Commission by Miracles, as they did to
affront the Established Religion of a Nation, although it be false, and openly
draw Men off from the Profession of it, in contempt of the Magistrate and the
Laws. All that Persons of a different Religion can in such a Case reasonably
pretend to, is to enjoy the private Liberty and Exercise of their own
Consciences and Religion, for which they ought to be very thankful; and to
forbear the open making of Proselytes to their own Religion (though they be
never so sure they are in the Right) till they have either an extraordinary
Commission from God to that purpose, or the Providence of God make way for it,
by the Commission or Connivance of the Magistrate. This is downright Hobbism;
and a witty Lord standing at the King's Elbow when he spoke it, said, Sir, Sir,
do you hear Mr Hobs in the Pulpit? In truth, according to this Doctrine,
there is no stemming the Torrent of any Error, or Irreligion; no not of
Idolatry it self, when it happens to be Regnant, and get the Civil Sanction:
And it severely reflects not only upon the Honor of the Orthodox Bishops and
Clergy in the Arian Reigns, but on the Memory of the most celebrated Reformers
in most Countries. And should God permit Popery to get but one Act of
Parliament, how Bribed and Pensionary soever in this Nation, our Clergy by this
Doctrine would have nothing to do, but to pray at home, and deliver up their
Flocks to the Wolves. Dr. Gunning, the good and learned Bishop of Ely, was so
sensible of this consequence, that he complained loudly of it in the House of
Lords, as a Doctrine that would serve the Turn of Popery; and so inconsistent
is it with, and destructive of the Rights of the Church, as a Society distinct
from the State, and independent of it, especially in Times of Persecution, when
it must stand upon its own Rights, That it occasioned Dr. Lowth of the Subject
of Church Power, in whom it resides, its force, extent, and execution. Printed
for B. Took, 1685.
a very Orthodox and Learned Divine to write an excellent Book against it, to
which it is hoped he will put his last hand, and give another Edition. And what
Dr. Patrick then thought of this easy, but treacherous Doctrine, may be seen in
what he wrote to Dr. Parker then Archdeacon of Canterbury, in the following
Words. A Passage, I assure you, which I and some of our common Acquaintance
read not without a great deal of Trouble, when we first saw it. -- They think
it would be well to admonish him in a Letter of this Error, and to represent
the Consequences of it to him, Exposing his Opinion. -- It is plain, by another
Passage in that Sermon, that he was not Awake, nor had his Wits about him, as
he used to have at other Times, when he wrote it. The Place I mean is Page 9.
There the very Existence of a God may be thought to be called into question by
him, and to be in his account but a Politic Invention: For thus he writes,
pressing Religion as the strongest Band of human Society; God is so necessary
to the Happiness and Welfare of Mankind, as if the Being of God himself had
been purposely designed and contrived for the Benefit and Advantage of Men. In
which his meaning is so untowardly expressed, that you cannot but think he was
indisposed, when he wrote so untowardly. He has altered this Passage I hear in
the The Reader is desired here to observe, That though he printed this Sermon a
Second time, yet the Second Edition is not noted in the Title Page.
Second Edition, but so it is as I have recited it in that which he sent me at
its first coming out; and indeed that very Parenthesis in the first part of the
Sermon (till I better informed) shows he was in too great haste at least when
he composed it, else he would never have adventured to deliver his Opinion in a
matter of such Moment, till he had been better informed of its Truth. -- I do
not write this out of any Change there is in my mind concerning Persons or
Things, having the very same Thoughts I had when you and I conversed more
frequently together, but the lamentable Case of Things. -- I cannot but have a
love to Dr. Tillotson's Person, though I have none for his Opinion; I therefore
would gladly have him well treated, though he be never so sharply reproved.
This with more will be produced under Dr. Patrick's Hand, if there be Occasion;
and he afterward confirmed it all to Dr. Parker when they met at London, and
said that he ought to give Satisfaction by a Retractation, or else be exposed.
-- If he will not be reduced he ought to have no mercy, but to be hunted out of
the Christian Church, when he will not own it.

And then as for the Dissenters to whom this Passage was no less offensive, as
our Preacher says, That P. 11.
he had a just Value, and due Tenderness for them: So he must give me leave to
add on this Occasion, That his Tenderness for them was much greater than for
those of the Church; for he made them Satisfaction for the Scandal this Passage
gave them, but would never do any Thing to remove the Offense which he gave his
Brethren of the Church. I came to know this Secret by an honorable Person of
my Acquaintance, who happening to give Dr. Cox a Visit, presently after Dr.
Stillingfleet had published his Sermon of the Mischief of Separation, found Mr.
Baxter at his House vehemently inveighing both against it, and him. This gave
occasion to that Gentleman to ask him, why he was so severe upon that Sermon,
and the Author of it; and yet took no notice of another which was newly come
out, and which he thought had given the Men of his Party as muh offense as it
did to those of the Church of England? What Sermon is that? said Mr. Baxter. It
is the Dean of Canterbury's Court Sermon, says he; wherein he tells you, That
you must not affront the Established Religion, nor openly draw Men off from the
Profession of it. Oh! replied Mr. Baxter, he gave us great Offense indeed, but
he has cried Peccavi; and made us Satisfaction; but your other Dean is a proud
haughty Man, that will retract nothing. The Gentleman having finished his
Visit, took leave of the Doctor, and Mr. Baxter; and the same day called upon
the Dean of Paul's, to give him an Account of what had passed betwixt him and
Mr. Baxter, and finding the Dean of Canterbury with him; told the Story to them
both. Upon which the Dean of Paul's asked the Dean of Canterbury, And did you
in good earnest cry Peccavi to Mr. Baxter? Pish, replied he, will you mind what
Mr. Baxter says? But the Dean of Paul's not being satisfied with that evasive
Answer pressed him to a categorical Answer; upon which, his Countenance
altering, he went away in disorder without any Reply. I tell this Story on
purpose to show our Reverend Clergy of the Convocation what great Reason they
have to Censure this Passage; because he would never make the Church
Satisfaction for it, nor do any Thing that looked like Satisfaction; but on the
contrary has lately Reprinted it in the Third Volume of his Sermons. And I
hope Dr. Patrick; who was formerly so justly offended at it, will; now he has
taken an higher Character upon him, promote and propose the Censure of it in
Convocation. The duty the Clergy owe the Church, and the honor of their own
Order, requires them to Censure it; especially since it is so contrary to the
Purport of their Ordination, and their Duty prescribed in it, both as Priests
and Bishops. There they are told, That they are Messengers, Stewards, and Watch
men of the Lord; that they are not to leave the Sheep when the Wolf comes; and
that they are to be ready, with all faithful Diligence, to drive away and
banish all strange Doctrines contrary to God's Word, as need and occasion shall
require. More especially in the Consecration of Bishops, St. Paul is proposed
as an Example to them, who are indeed the Successors of the Apostles, in the
Epistle to be read on that Occasion. There he says, That he counted not his
Life dear unto him, so that he might finish his Ministry; but this Man's
Doctrine, who was his own Pattern of Preaching, teaches the Shepherds to fly
when the Wolf comes, and to stop the Course of their Ministry, when the
Exercise of it without a Miracle will cost them their Lives. It is only in the
Case of a Divine Commission, and Miracles to prove it, that according to him a
Priest or Bishop is to abide all Hazards, or to expect extraordinary
Assistance, and supernatural Supports in their Sufferings; contrary to the
common Doctrine of Christianity, and that in particular of the Church of
England, which teaches us that God in suffering Times will give his faithful
People suffering Spirits: And likewise to the Histories of all Persecutions
since Miracles ceased; and more especially to our own Martyrology in Queen
Mary's Reign.

His Encomiast P. 13.
tells us, That he was little disposed to follow the Paterns of Preaching which
former Times set, but that he set a Pattern to himself. And from these Instances
I have brought, we may see the Truth of what he says: For the Hookers, the
Sandersons, and Hamonds, and Pearsons, before him, never set such Paterns of
Preaching, as he set himself; but such a one it is, That I hope it will neither
be long, nor much followed, though his Funeral Orator hopes it will.

I have exemplified above how contrary the Practice of this unblemished Hero
has been to his Principles and Doctrine, and more particularly to his genuin
and orthodox Notion of the Nature of Religion; and I now proceed to show that
he has not followed the generous and laudable Example of another Person, in
the very Case in which he has proposed it for Imitation. It cannot be denied,
nor am I much concerned to dissemble it (says he in his Funeral Sermon on Dr.
Whitchcot) that here he possessed another Man's Place, who by the Iniquity of
the Times was wrongfully ejected: I mean Dr. Collins, the famous and learned
Divinity Professor of that University; during whose Life (and he lived many
Years after) by the free Consent of the College, there were two Shares out of
the common Dividend allotted to the Provost one whereof was constantly paid to
Dr. Collins, as if he had been still Provost. To this Dr. Whitchcot did not
only give his Consent (without which the Thing could not have been done) but
was very forward in the doing of it; though hereby he did not only considerably
lessen his own Profit, but likewise incur no small Censure and Hazard, as Times
then were. And lest this had not been Kindness enough to that worthy Person,
whose Place he possessed, in his last Will he left to his Son, Sir John Collins
a Legacy of an hundred Pounds.

One would think that such an heroic Virtue should have followed such a
generous Example of his own proposing; but as Dr. Whitchcot had Dr. Collins's
Place, so he had Dr. Gunning's Fellowship at the same Time, and never allowed
him one Farthing; though he was as wrongfully ejected as Dr. Collins, and stood
in more need of an Allowance than the Doctor did. But there is one Thing more
to be said for the Honor of Dr. Witchcot which he took no notice of, and it is
this, That he had Dr. Collins's Consent to take his Place, which he himself had
not from Dr Gunning to take his; and yet he was very angry at him for resuming
his Fellowship from him at the Restoration. This would pass for a Blemish in
any other Man's Life, but Dr. Tillotson's; or if it would not, methinks his
taking the Archbishop's Place, not only without but against his Consent, should
pass for a Blemish in his Life: He having not only got him extruded by Force
out of it, but thereby made himself the Author and Architect of a most
scandalous and outrageous Schism; which will not only be an everlasting Blot
upon his Memory, but if not healed an everlasting Blemish upon the Church.
Methinks he might have so far followed Dr. Whitchcot's Example, and to have
made him an offer of some Allowance, though he had refused it, as I am sure he
would have done: But far from doing that, he behaved himself toward him with
the greatest Inhumanity; as appeared from expressing his Joy unawares to Dr.
Beveridge for the glorious Device of the Writ of Intrusion, thinking the Doctor
had come to talk with him as one that had excepted the Bishopric of Wells; but
when he found that he came to excuse himself from the Acceptance of it, he
turned Pale upon reflecting he had discovered too much. He also suffered his
Grace's Steward and Nephew, Mr. Sancroft, who kept Possession at Lambeth for
his Uncle, to be Imprisoned and Fined, though he might have prevented both if
he would; and yet lest him not a Legacy for reparation of his great Fine, as
Dr. Whitchcot did to Sir John Collins, though he had all the Fruits and Profits
of the Archbishopric, from the time of the Deprivation to the time that he
took Possession thereof. And it is further observable, That as he enjoyed the
Place of of one, who was deprived by those who had usurped the Authority of
Charles the First, and that of another, but of vaster Consequence, who was
deprived by the Power of those who had first deprived K. James the Second; so
he took the Place of a third, a Minister in Suffolk; who was Legally ejected by
the Bartholomew Act, upon the Return of Charles the Second: Which shows, That
he was a Man of all Times, and all Governments, Right or Wrong; and which in
truth makes him look more like a Vicar of Bray, than an Hero in Virtue, and
will in most Men's Opinion take him down from that tall Character into an
ordinary Man. But to return again to Dr. Whitchcot's Funeral Sermon; there is
another Passage in it, which all the Men I ever spoke with, that heard or read
it, took for a Reflection upon the Church of England, in the following Words:
He disclaimed Popery, and, as Things of near affinity with it, Superstition and
Usurpation upon the Consciences of Men. I know one Clergyman who had a fair
Respect for him before, that from this time would never defend his Reputation:
And the most learned Mr. Dodwel, who indeed is a great Example of heroic Piety
and Virtue, was much offended with this Passage, and went on purpose to him to
let him know what just Offense he had given by it; but notwithstanding he
printed it again in his Third Volume of Sermons, with the Reflection in the
Italick Character; which further proves what I said before, That how tender
soever he was to the Dissenters, and extensive in his Charity to them, he had
not such tenderness for true Churchmen, nor such a Loathness to offend these
as those.

I now come to the Character of Orthodoxy which our Preacher gives of him, in
telling us of the P. 2.
convincing Arguments by which he so clearly proved the Truth and Excellency of
our holy Faith; and in the P. 7.
Character of St. Paul, whom he makes his Exemplar, he insinuates his great
Concern for the Truth and Honor of the Christian Religion, and more
particularly that he asserted the great P. 31.
Mystery of the Trinity, when he was desired by some, and provoked by others to
do it, with that Strength and Clearness which was peculiar to him. As to the
first, I thought the Torments of Hell, as well as the Joys of Heaven, had been
part of our holy Faith; and taught as plainly by Christ, the great Doctor of
his Church; and also as much implied in the Doctrine of the Resurrection, and
the last Judgment: But how convincingly he has proved the Truth of them
appears from what I have said above. And as to his great Concern for the Truth
and Honor for the Christian Religion, that appears in the same manner, by his
Apostasy in his Practice from that true and honorable Character he gave of it
in his Fifth of November Sermon; and as for the Strength and Clearness with
which he has proved the Mystery of the Trinity, I refer the Reader to the
Book, in the Entitled, The Charge of Socinianism against Dr. Tillotson
considered, in Examination of some Sermons he has lately published to clear
himself from that Imputation, by way of Dialogue. To which are added some
Reflections upon the Second of Dr. Burnet's Discourses delivered to the Clergy
of Sarum, concerning the Divinity and Death of Christ, with a Supplement.
Margent, which I hope will see the Light before these Discourses of mine.
There he will find that his Vindication of himself is but a shuffling
Vindication, which has much of Arian Cunning and Reserve in it: And that he
never departed from his Moderation in this point, as our Author says he did
not in another.

To this I shall add in the next place what he has said of the heinousness of
the Sin of Perjury, in his Assize Sermon upon Heb. 6.16. But I shall not insist
upon the Application of it, as of some former Passages, because it will apply
it self; nor make some severe and dangerous Reflections upon his heroical
Piety, because they are so obvious, that the Reader may make them himself.
There, he says, that all departure from the Simplicity of an Oath is Perjury,
and that a Man is never a whit the less forsworn, because his Perjury is a
little finer, and more artificial than ordinary. That he is guilty of Perjury,
who having a real Intention when he swears to perform what he promises, yet
afterward neglects to do it; not for want of Power, but for want of Will, and
due Regard to his Oath. That the primary and sole Intention of the Third
Commandment, is to forbid the great Sin of Perjury; and that it is observable;
That there is no Threatening added to any other Commandment; but to this and the
Second; which intimates to us, that next to Idolatry, and the Worship of a
false God, Perjury is one of the greatest Affronts that can be offered to the
Divine Majesty. -- This is one of those Sins that cries aloud to Heaven, and
quickens the pace of God's Judgments. -- This Sin, by the Secret Judgment of
God, undermines Estates and Families, to the utter ruin of them; and among the
Heathens it was always reckoned one of the greatest Crimes, and which they did
believe God did not only punish upon the guilty Person himself, but many times
upon whole Nations, as the Prophet also tells us, That because of Oaths the
Land mourns. I need not use many Words to aggravate this Sin; It is certainly a
Crime of the highest Nature, deliberate Perjury being directly against a Man's
knowledge; so that no Man can commit it without staring his Conscience in the
Face, which is one of the greatest Aggravations of any Crime; and it is equally
a Sin against both Tables, being the highest Affront to God, and of most
injurious Consequence to Men. -- In respect of Men, it is not only a Wrong to
this or that particular Person, who suffers by it; but Treason to human
Society, subverting at once the Foundations of public. Peace and Justice.

This is just what our suffering Clergy and People say of Perjury, and in
consequence of it for their own Vindication. Indeed they suffer like Men of
heroic Piety, because they could not outstare their Consciences, as some other
Men did; and in their Opinion, which they have so nobly defended, commit
Treason against Mankind, and the King. Dr. Sherlock told the Bishop of
Killmore, He would be sacrificed before he took the new Oath of Allegiance: And
Dr. Dove said, He would give a Thousand Pound that he might not take it; such
Struglings they had to overcome the Dictates of their own Consciences, which
preached unto them the heinous Nature of Perjury: And if those, who took that
Oath with so much Difficulty, would but remember their own Case, they would
have more Compassion for those who could not take it at all; more especially
had that Tenderness which our Preacher says his Hero of Piety had for the
Dissenters been genuin, and the undesign'd Effect of his tender and extensive
Charity, he would have been as tender and compassionate to the Dissenters in
this Reign, as to those of the two former. It was fear of Perjury, the most
heinous Sin of Perjury, against which he preached so well, that made them stand
out; and if they are under a Mistake, he ought to have pitied and sympathiz'd
with them more than other Men. Nay, upon reading this excellent Passage against
Perjury, one would think he should have had more Tenderness and Pity for them
than for the dissenting Parties; but instead of that, he was an early and
vigorous Persecutor of them, and so continued to his last Stroke; though they
had defended their Cause much better than the Dissenters were, or ever will be,
able to defend theirs. The Sunday after the First of February, the day of
Deprivation, some of the Non-swearing Clergy preached in their Churches, as I
remember Dr. Sherlock was one; and on Monday Morning following one of my
Acquaintance going to this Man about some Business, he inveighed severely
against their Presumption, and said, Government was not to be so affronted. At
St. Laurence, where he lies buried, he preached often against them; twice more
especially, at the beginning of Two several Sessions of Parliament, and by
degrees forgetting what he had preached against the heinous Sin of Perjury. He
thought Prisons, and all the hard Usages of them, which in former Reigns he was
wont to call unchristian and inhuman Methods of converting Men, not too bad for
the best of them. When others sometimes would pity them for being deprived, and
also dragoon'd by the new way of double Taxing, he would say, They brought
their Sufferings upon themselves; and which was yet more inhuman, he
endeavored to rob them of the Glory of their suffering for Conscience, and to
bring yet more Sufferings upon them: As if indeed they had been what Mr. Dolben
called them at the Sessions in Northampton, The Vermin of the Nation which
ought to be destroyed. Yet our Preacher says, That P. 26. 27.
he had a Sweetness and Gentleness in his Nature that leaned to Excess, and
that he he never did an ill Office, or hard Thing, to any Person; whereas in
his Thanksgiving Sermon at Whitehall for the Victory at Sea, he represents his
old suffering Brethren only as Pretenders to Conscience, and in his sly way
insinuates, that the most likely and effectual way to reduce them, was to load
them yet with more Sufferings. Says he, As bad an Argument as Success is of a
good Cause, I am sorry to say it, but am afraid it is true; it is like in the
Conclusion to prove the best Argument of all others to convince those; who have
so long pretended Conscience against submission to the present Government. One
such Intimation at Court against the Dissenters, and such a Character of them,
in the former Reigns, would have been said to have proceeded from an
unchristian Spirit of Persecution; but for fear one Insinuation should not have
been enough against our present Sufferers, in the next Paragraph he says it
over again in other Words to the same purpose. Mere Success is certainly one of
the worst Arguments in the World of a good Cause, and the most improper to
satisfy Conscience; and yet we find by Experience that in the Issue it is the
most successful of all other Arguments, and does in a very odd, but effectual
way, satisfy the Consciences of a great many Men, by showing them their
Interests; which is the true Purport, Intent, and English of that Latin
Sentence of his dear Friend the Master of the Charter house, whom he made Clerk
of the Closet in the Dedication of his Archaeologia to K. W. Ne quid detrimenti
Respublica capiat ex nimia Caesar^s Clementia Oramus supplices.

From hence I proceed to make some Animadversions upon some Sayings of our
Preacher, concerning his Hero, which lie scattered about his Funeral Sermon:
P. 29.
He tells us he never affected pompous Severities, by which we know very well
he means the Austerities of Fasting and Abstinence, which the Church not only
recommends but enjoins, and that P. 21.
he complied with the ill Practice of having Pluralities in the former Reigns,
because it was common; and P. 27.
intimates also plain enough, That the ill Usage he met with by those
Reflections which he describes as Calumnies and Reproaches, help to break his
Heart. But now, for God's sake, how does the Character of heroic Piety agree
to a Man that practiced no Austerities, and that complied for his Advantage
with the corrupt Customs of the Times? For heroic is always severe Piety, and
full of Self-denial, and addicted to observe the wholesome Rules and Doctrines
of Mortification, especially those that are prescribed by the Wisdom of the
Church; and it never complies with, but resists the prevailing Corruptions of
the Times, like Abraham in Chaldea, Lot in Sodom, or Daniel in Babylon. And
with what Congruity did he set him forth for an Example of heroic Virtue, who
had so little Christian Courage, or support from his own Innocence, as to sink
under the Calumnies of Men, which Cato, and Socrates, and a Thousand brave
Heathen Heroes, would have despised? Certainly this Character of heroic Piety
and Virtue agrees much better with the deprived Clergy, who are Men generally
speaking of more austere Lives; and bear not only Calumnies, and Reproaches,
and cruel Mockings, but the Loss of all they had with exemplary Patience,
Courage, and Resignation to the Will of God, by which they are conformed in
their Sufferings to those Worthies which the Apostle proposes for our Imitation
in the 11th Chapter of his Epistle to the Hebrews; and deserve now to be
reverenced by all good Christians as Confessors, who dare be Honest and Poor;
and prefer the Truth and Honor of their Religion, before the Lands and
Revenues of the Church. More particularly it agrees much better with the late
Archbishop Dr. Sancroft, upon whom our Preacher thinks he neatly couched a
Reflection, when he told us that his Hero who intruded upon him did not affect
pompous Austerities. Indeed he practiced them, but without Pomp, or
Ostentation. And as for his Sufferings of all Sorts, both in these and former
Times, he bore them with exemplary Courage and Cheerfulness: They had no
influence on his Health, but quite contrary. He blessed God for them; and told
my Lord N. when his Lordship went to Lambeth to try his Constancy, That he had
rather suffer any Persecution under a Lawful Prince than be preferred under an
Usurper.

He tells us again, P. 28.
That few Men observed human Nature better than his Hero, or could make larger
Allowance for the Frailty of Mankind than he did: And so it appears from the
Character he gave his Master, in his Thanksgiving Sermon for the Victory at
Sea. There he says, That he was a Prince who has made it the great Study and
Endeavor of his Life to imitate the Divine Perfections, as far as the
Imperfection of human Nature in this mortal State would admit. Before I make
any other Reflection upon this Passage, I must here tell the World, That in the
former Reigns no Man could less endure any Thing spoken in the Pulpit, though
never so modestly and correctly in the Praises of our Kings. It was his common
Practice to censure it in others on all Occasions, and to say, That Flattery
was so mean and despicable a Thing in it self, and savored so strong of
Interest and Design in the Pulpit, that Clergymen ought to avoid all
appearance of it: And yet behold how shamefully he flatters his King here, and
I doubt not See the Remarks upon some late Sermons.
but it is owing to the ill Example he set the Clergy in this, and some former
Sermons, that we have had of late so many fulsom and despicable Sermons of
Flattery, as no Age ever saw, or will I hope see again. But this of his
Prince's imitating the Divine Perfections, is the highest Strain of all; and
shows with a Witness what large Allowances he made for the Frailties and
Imperfections of Men. For at this rate Abolishing and Abjuring of Episcopacy,
making War in the most Hosts hi sunt qui Nobis, aut quibus nos public Bellum
Decrevimus. Caeteri Latro^es, aut praedones sunt F. de v. s.
thievish and predonical Manner, without first demanding Reparation; slandering
and robbing of Parents, massacring in cold Blood, Adultery, or if there be any
Thing worse than these may pass among Divines for human Frailties, and the
worst of Sinners with those Allowances for the best sort of Saints.

He tells us P. 19, 20.
of the great Concourse of the Clergymen to his Lecture, which made People
consider him as the Head of that Learned Body. But the Concourse of the Clergy
to that Lecture has continued since, and yet no Man looks on the ingenious
Person that succeeds him, as the Head of them: And how far he was considered
from being the Head of the Clergy, did appear in the Convocation, where, to his
great Disappointment, and the Astonishment of our Preacher, another was chosen
Prolocutor, who for Learning and Orthodoxy was much fitter for the Chair than
he.

He tells us also, P. 18.
That he turned the greatest Part of this vast City to an hearty Love of the
Church: So that all the rest of the London Clergy turned not half so many to
the Love of the Church as he alone did. But I could name some of them who
turned Two for his One to an hearty Love of it; and to such an hearty Love of
it, as they endured Persecution for adhering to it: But as for his Converts to
the Church they were, generally speaking, but imperfect Conformists to the
Church; such as did not live in the full or sole Communion of it, and such as
rather bore with it than loved it; because he preached and persuaded them to it
as a tolerable, but not as a laudable and excellent Constitution. And hence it
came to pass that so many of them did not love the Worship of it, with a Love
of Delight and Complacency, which is the Love of the Heart; but were content to
use it for want of better, as the common Proverb says of nice and curious
Palats, That they can make a Shift with brown Bread, till they can get white. I
have known many of his constant Followers, and have found by Experience what I
say to be true, and I appeal to the Clergy of London, if they have not made the
same Observation; and particularly I knew one venerable Clergyman, now with
God, to whom one of his and our Preacher's Admirers too, I mean my Lord Russel,
made no difficulty to acknowledge, That he took not such Delight in the Common
Prayers, as others; and had rather have had others in his Chapel, if he might,
than those.

He also tells us, That he had a superior Judgment to most Men: But how does
that appear from one whole Sermon, and some Passages out of others, which I
have observed? Had he not been so unhappy as to set himself his own Pattern, but
followed some Paterns of former Times, particularly the Judicious Sanderson's,
he had never preached so many dangerous, false, and inconsiderate Things; nor
given Dr. Sherlock when he preached against his Sermon of Hell Torments at St.
Dunstan's occasion to say, That he had no cause to think himself a greater
Master of Reason than other Men, or that he had more of it than they. And that
he was not always attended with this superior Judgment even in his most
deliberate Composures, appears from a Passage in his P. 103.
Third Sermon of Education, where he says, That the Duty of nursing Children,
being a natural Duty of Women, is of more necessary and indispensible
Obligation, than any positive Precept of Religion. Good God! Is it of more
necessary and indispensible Obligation than to believe in Christ, which is but
a positive Duty* Or is the Neglect of it in a Mother, that has no Excuse for
neglecting of it, a more crying Sin than to live in the constant Neglect of the
Sacrament, or Profanation of the Lord's Day, or utter Contempt of the
Ministry, or to run into wilful Heresy and Schism? Our Preacher also P. 14.
tell us, That we shall have more Essays of his Preaching, but I hope we shall
have no more such Essays of his superior Judgment; but unless some Judgment
superior to his review them after him, I fear we shall have more: Although we
are told, That P. 25.
he was reviewing them at his Minutes of leisure, and given them his last
Touches.

He tells, P. 22.
That he rejoiced in our happy Deliverance, and observed the amazing Steps of
Providence in it. So did his Uncle Cromwell too; and will you hear him speak
upon this Subject of Providence in his Declaration, which he put forth in his
own, and his Council of Officers Names, after they had turned the Commons out
of Doors, the 23 of April, 1653. -- Flagellum, or the Life of O. Cromwell,
Printed for L. R. 1663. p. 138.
Nor to mind in this Declaration the various Dispensations through which Divine
Providence has led us, or the witness the Lord has born, and the many signal
Testimonies of Acceptance which he has given to the sincere Endeavors of his
most unworthy Servants. -- After it had pleased God not only to reduce Ireland,
and give in Scotland, but so marvelously to appear for the People at Worcester
-- but on the contrary, there more and more appeared among them [ the
Parliament so called] an Aversion to the Things themselves, with much
bitterness and opposition to the People of God, and his Spirit working in them.
-- Lest this Cause, which the Lord has so greatly blessed, and bore witness
to, should languish under our hands. -- It seems to be a Duty incumbent upon
us, who had seen so much of the Power and Presence of God going along with us
-- That as we have been led by Necessity and Providence to act as we have done,
even beyond and above our own Thoughts and Desires; so we shall, and do, in
that of this great Work which is behind, put our selves wholly upon the Lord for
a Blessing. -- That all Men, as they would not provoke the Lord to their own
Destruction, would wait for such an Issue as he shall bring forth. -- And to
know that the late great and glorious Dispensations, wherein the Lord has so
wonderfully appeared in bringing forth these Things, by the Travel and Blood of
his Children, ought to oblige them. -- We see by this Extract out of Cromwell's
Declaration, how great and stupendous Steps of Providence went along with him
in all his Enterprises; and what a Series of Successes attended him in his most
execrable Undertakings. And therefore I hope we shall hear no more of the
amazing Steps of Providence, which were observable in the late Revolution,
since that Usurper says, he was led by Providence to act beyond and above his
Thoughts and Desires. And all this shows, That as Divines say we must try
Miracles by Doctrines, as well as Doctrines by Miracles; so if we would not be
led into fatal Mistakes, we must consider the Justice of any Cause, as well as
the miraculous Providence that attend it: Since God, for our Trial, suffers
Providence and Successes equally stupendous to attend Causes, Good and Bad,
as he makes the Sun to shine upon the Just and Unjust.

He says, That their Majesty's P. 23.
made choice of him for the Archbishopric, as the fittest Person; and I agree
with him, That he was as fit a Person for that Turn, as they could have pitched
upon. And further he tells us, That though he was unwilling to accept it, yet
their persisting in their Intentions made him think it was the Call and Voice
of God, and so he submitted. To which I shall say no more, but that in judging
of a Call, we are to consider not only who Calls us, but to what we are Called;
and that Kings may call, and tempt, and importune us to commit deadly Sins, as
well as other Men. Furthermore, by the Example of the Lord Protector Cromwell,
we may see that when Kings call us, we are to consider well what kind of Kings
they are; or else we may sometimes be in danger to mistake the Temptations of
the Devil, and our own wicked Hearts, for the Call of God.

He tell us also, P. 3.
That he would speak with great Reserves of him, and so he has. For how often
was he wont to declare his Resolution, that he would never be a Bishop? I have
often heard him admired upon the Account of that self-denying Resolution, and
also observed how venerable his Refusal of some Bishoprics would render his
Name to Posterity. But when Men make such Resolutions, they make them it seems
with a tacit Reserve to the persisting Call of a King. For I can name two
Persons, now in the Places of deprived Bishops, and one of them to my certain
knowledge, who vehemently declared against taking of the Places of any of the
deprived Bishops: But I suppose their Majesty's made choice of them too, as the
fittest Persons, and that they looked upon their persisting in their Intentions
as the Call and Voice of God, dispensing not only with their former most
deliberate Resolutions, but also with all the Fundamental Laws of
Ecclesiastical Unity to the contrary, the Examples of the best and purest Ages,
and the Canons of the Church.

He also tells us, P. 10, 11.
That his first Education was among the Puritans, but of the best Sort; and
that he was soon freed from his first Impressions and Prejudices, or rather
that he was never mastered with them: But I have reason to think that they were
not the best sort of Puritans, under whom he had his first Education. First,
Because his Father very early turned Anabaptist, which gave some Occasion to
call his Baptism into question: And Secondly, Because the best sort of
Puritans, as has been often showed, were far from the Principles of Resistance
and Rebellion; but under whomsoever he had his first Education, he came
seasoned to the University of Cambridge with those Principles. For not long
after he came thither, King Charles the First was brought by Cambridge to
Hampton Court, and Lodging at Sir John Cuts his House at Childerly near that
University, the Scholars went thither to kiss his Hand: But he, and some few
more, had so signalized themselves for those they then called Roundheads, that
they were not admitted to that Honor with the rest of the Scholars. Within a
Year or two after he went out Midsummer-Batchelor of Arts; by which, having
locally qualified himself for a Fellowship, he got the Rump's Mandamus for Dr.
Gunning's, (which I think one of his own Gang enjoyed a little before him) as a
Reward for his good affection to the Cause. From that time to his
discontinuance he governed the College; the Senior Fellows not daring to oppose
him, because of the Interest he had with his great Masters: And so zealous was
he for them, That the Corner of the College, which he and his Pupils took up in
the new Building, was called the Roundhead Corner. And when King Charles the
Second was beaten at Worcester, he sent for the Tables in which the College
Grace was written, and after the Passage of Thanksgiving for their Benefactors,
Te Laudamus pro Benefactoribus nostris, etc. he added with his own Hand, and of
his own Head, Praesertim pro nupera Victoria contra Carolum Stuartum in Agro
Wigorniensi reportata, or to that effect. In the Year 1656. or the Beginning of
1657. he discontinued from the College, being invited by Prideaux, Cromwell's
Attorney General, to teach his Son, and do the Office of a Chaplain in his
Family; and the Reader may please to take notice, That his Son was the same Mr.
Prideaux who was in the Duke of Monmouth's Rebellion. I have related all this
upon very good Authority, to show that Dr. Tillotson had not his first
Education under the best Puritans, and that he was not so soon freed from the
Prejudices and Impressions of it; but that hitherto he was perfectly mastered
by them: And whether or no they had not some influence over him all his Life
long, I leave the Reader, from what I have said of him in this Chapter, to
judge.

He tell us again, P. 11.
That though ha was soon freed from the first Prejudices of his Puritanical
Education, yet he stuck to the Strictness of Life to which he was bred under
them. This is one of our Preacher's side-wind Reflections upon the true Sons
and Daughters of the Church of England; as if they were not wont to breed up
their Children in as strict an Exercise of true Piety and Virtue, as the
Puritans did.

He also says, P. 20.
That his extraordinary Worth forced some, who had no Kindness for him, to
advance him: THE SOME he means is only King Charles the Second, who plainly
perceived that he was not quite freed from the Prejudices of his first
Education; for when he officiated in the Closet, instead of Bowing at the Name
of Jesus, or rather to Jesus at the mentioning of his saving Name, that he
might seem to do something, and yet not do the thing it self, he used to step
and bend backwards, casting up his Eyes to Heaven; which the King observing,
said, He Bowed the wrong way, as the Quakers do when they salute their Friends.
And yet though his Majesty, who was a great Discerner of Men, perfectly knew
him, he preferred him to gratify the Heads of a Party. And may all Princes, who
for Politic Ends prefer those for whom they have no Kindness, and who have not
true Kindness for them, be requited as he was.

He tells us, P. 13.
That he studied all the Ancient Philosophers, and Books of Morality. But bate
me an Ace of that, quoth Bolton; for I will be bold to say, He was so far from
Reading them all, that he scarce Saw them all, or had the curiosity to read
them, especially those in the Greek Language. Then he tells us, That among the
Fathers, St. Basil, and St. Chrysostom, were those he chiefly read. But how
came he, who had such a superior Judgment, to read so many Philosophers, and so
few Fathers, and to take up with Two of Five more which our Preacher says See
his Pref. before Bedel's Life.
were the Beauties of the Silver Age of the Church? Methinks one that desired
to be a consummat Divine should have been as willing to read the great
Athanasius, the Gregorys, St. Jerome, St. Ambrose, and St. Augustine; but more
especially one that desired to be an Orthodox Divine should methinks have well
studied the Clements, the Ignatius's, the Polycarps, the Irenaeus's, the
Tertullians, and the Cyprians, who Ibid.
he says, were the Glories of the Golden Age of the Church. He had better by
much have studied all them, than all the Ancient Philosophers; and had he went
into all the best Things of those Fathers, as it seems he did into all the best
Things of Bishop Wilkins, I need not fear to say, he had been a much surer
Guide, as well as a more learned and profound Divine; and had not been so ready
at all times to treat away those Things with Dissenters, which give such an
Advantage to the Church of England above all the Reformed, and more
particularly enable her to answer that unhappy Question of our common
Adversaries, Where is your Mission? The not being able to answer which, as we
can do, has contributed more to the Ruin of the French Reformed Church, than
all the late Persecution. For he would have learned in those Fathers, who lived
nearest to the Times of the Apostles, that Bishops were their Successors, and
next under Christ the Heads of their particular Dioceses: From whom the
Presbyters derived their Powers, and to whom they, and the People, were to be
subject for Christ's sake. Had he thoroughly learned and imbibed this Doctrine,
which is best learned from those Fathers, he would in all likelihood have been
as loath to part from it, as those the Latitudinarian Projectors are apt to call
narrow and angry Men; because they are not for Treaties of Comprehension with
Dissenters upon such Terms, as are not consistent with the Catholic and
Apostolic Tradition concerning Episcopacy, and Episcopal Ordinations; and
which, if yielded to, would be of more dangerous Consequence to the Religion we
profess, than all our Dissenters are, or can be.

Notwithstanding all this, our Preacher cannot but tell us P. 17.
of his tender Method of treating with Dissenters, and of his Endeavors to
extinguish that Fire, and to unite us among our selves: But he does not tell us
what were the Principles and Terms of Union upon which we were to be united,
nor how many of the Dissenters were to be taken in. I can tell one Project
which will take them all in, and Roman Catholics with them; and that is, to
comprehend all who will subscribe to the Divine Authority of the Scriptures,
and all the Doctrines contained therein: And if he shall say, That such a
Comprehension is too wide, and such an Union more than all Divisions; I am
afraid when we shall know what this Man's tender Method of Union, or pious
Designs, as Temp. Chapter Sermon. preached Dec. 30. 1694 p. 17.
Dr. Sherlock calls them, were, there will be Reason to say the same Thing of
it, and them. For I make no difficulty to confess to the Reverend Doctor, That
I am one of those many Thousands who suspect his admirable Primates pious
Designs of serving the Church his own way: For he was always for blending of
Orders under Pretense of Union, and since he commenced admirable Primate, he
was wont to advise the Scottish Episcopal Clergymen to submit to their
Presbyterians, and do all Acts of Compliance to their pretended Authority;
which was in effect to advise them not only to commit the highest Act of
Disobedience and Schism against their own Bishops, but to abjure Episcopacy
with those who detest and abjure it as an Antichristian Usurpation over the
Church of God. The good Lord of his Mercy deliver his Church from such
admirable Primates and Bishops, as are Traitors to their own Order; and from
such tender Methods of Union, and pious Designs of serving the Church, as they
may without breach of Charity be supposed to have. Our Preacher, as well as his
Hero, may be numbered among those pious Designers for going to wait upon the
Duke of Hamilton, when he was last in London, some days before he went for
Scotland: He took upon him to tell his Grace, That he would ruin his Interest,
if he did not stick fast to the Presbyterian Cause; for they began to fear that
he was not for it to them. And thereupon he advised him, as he regarded his own
Standing, and the Kings Favor, to be sure to promote the Presbyterian
Interest. This the Duke told to a Person of Honor before he left the Town. And
now hear, O ye See the Pref. before Bedel's Life.
Clements, Ignatius's, Polycarps, Deny's, Irenaeus's, and Cyprians, of the
Golden Age of the Church, was not this Apostolical Council in a Man that bears
your holy Character? Could he do any Thing more unworthy of it, than to advise
a Prince of his Country to support those, and stick to these, who have declared
your Holy Order to be Antichristian, and abolished it as an Usurpation, and
deprived your Successors, as much as in them lies, for Usurpers over the Church
of God. Nay, let all Men that read this Story consider it a little in its just
Consequences, and Reflections upon this wretched Man, as he is a Bishop, and a
Bishop who formerly asserted the Office of a Bishop to be an Apostolical
Institution. Read what he has wrote for it in his Preface to Bishop Bedel's
Life. It is not possible to think that a Government can be Criminal, under
which the World received the Christian Religion and that in a Course of many
Ages; in which, as all the Corners of the Christian Church, so all the Parts of
it the Sound as well as the Unsound, that is, the Orthodox, as well as the
Heretics and Schismatics, agreed. The Persecutions that then lay so heavy
upon the Church, made it no desirable Thing for a Man to be exposed to their
first Fury, which was always the Bishops Portion: And that in a Course of many
Centuries; in which there was nothing but Poverty and Labor to be got by the
Employment. There being no Princes to set it on, as an Engine of Government; and
no Synods of Clergy men gathered to assume that Authority to themselves, by
joint Designs and Endeavors. And can it be imagined that in all that glorious
Cloud of Witnesses to the Truth of the Christian Religion, -- there should not
so much as one single Person be found, on whom either a Love of Truth, or an
Envy of the Advancement of others, prevailed so far as to declare against such
an early and universal Corruption, if it is to be esteemed one? When all this
is complicated together, it is really of so great Authority, that I love not to
give the proper Name to that Temper that can withstand so plain a
Demonstration. For what can a Man even herited with all the Force of
Imagination, and possessed with all the Sharpness of Prejudice, except to the
Inference made from these Premises, That a Form so soon introduced; and so
wonderfully blessed, could not be contrary to the Rules of the Gospel, and cannot
be ascribed to any other Original, but that the Apostles every where
established it as a Fence about the Gospel which they planted; so that our
Religion and Government are to be reckoned Twins, born at the same Time, and
both derived from the same Fathers? -- Therefore it will perhaps be necessary,
in order to the giving a fuller and amiabler Prospect of that Apostolical
Constitution, etc. And if it is an Apostolical Constitution, with what Face or
Conscience could he solicit the Duke of Hamilton to adhere to those who declare
it to be a Diabolical and Antichristian Usurpation? But if it is not, and by
consequence not an Institution of unalterable Right, Why do we continue it? Why
is the Church troubled with two Orders of Priesthood when one would serve? It
has cost this Nation much Blood and Treasure to support it. The Earl of
Strafford might have had his Life, if he would have bought it at so dear a
Hate, as to persuade King Charles the First to consent to the Abolishing of it:
That blessed Prince died a Martyr for it: And our Primate of everlasting
Memory, Archbishop Laud, was sacrificed for it. And yet, alas! it is now
abolished in one Kingdom, and disgraced and polluted with Schism in the other
two: And the very Foundation of it has been and is still an undermining under
the popular Pretenses of tender Methods and pious Designs. Let the Observation
of the Lord's Day, Infant Baptism, the Two Sacraments, the Doctine of the Holy
Trinity, which stand upon the same bottom, be all treated away with it. To
dispense with those, as well as with this, will make the Union yet more
Glorious and Comprehensive, and more worthy of the pious Undertakers. For I
know no Reason why the Anabaptists, Quakers, and Socinians, should not also be
taken in: But as to my own particular, I must here declare, That I am for pure
Catholic and unmixt Communion; and if after this designed Comprehension of the
Sects, there is to be found but One such Church of Two or Three, in what corner
of the Land soever, I will join my self to that.

CHAP. III.
HAVING showed in the first Chapter, that although the Character which Dr.
Burnet has given of Dr. Tillotson were true, yet it is not to be believed upon
his Authority; and having also showed, by many Instances in the second, that it
was not a true and just Character of him, but much above his Merits: I now
proceed in this, according to the Method mentioned in the Introduction, to
animadvert upon several other Passages in his Funeral Sermon, which I think my
Undertaking obliges me not to pass over without some Remarks. I shall begin
with that strange Expression which he uses of the Apostle, who P. 7.
he says had large Thoughts concerning the Idol Feasts, and Meats offered to
Idols. As this is a crude and indecent way of Speaking of an Apostle, so it is
groundless and false; he having stated the Case of Idol Feasts, and of Eating
of Meats, and Drinking of Drinks, that have been offered up in Sacrifice to
Idols, with all the Strictness that the Nature of them required. For first, as
to the Idol Feasts, or of Eating and Drinking at the Feasts in the Heathen
Temples, which were joined to the Sacrifices offered unto Idols, he determines
it to be unlawful in a two fold Respect. First, with respect to the Substance
of the Action, as it as it was 1 Cor. 10.20, 21.
Demonolatry, or worshipping of Devils, and holding Communion with them; which
therefore provoked the Lord to Jealousy, when those who drank his Cup, would
drink the Cup of Devils; and partakers of his Table, would also partake of the
Tables of Devils. Secondly, he determines it to be unlawful with respect to the
circumstance, or consequence of the action, because those pretenders to
knowledge among the Christians, who frequented Idol-Feasts, did not only
confirm the Gentiles in their Idolatry, and harden the Jews in their unblief,
but 1 Cor. VIII. v. 9, 10, 11, 12.
also by their contagious Examples drew the weaker Christians to pollute
themselves with Demonolatry, or Communion with Devils, and so were answerable
to God, for causing their Brethren to perish, for whom Christ died. And now let
any serious man consider this determination of the Apostle against Christians
going to Idol Temples to eat at Idol Feasts, either with respect to the
substance, or Circumstance of the thing, and then let him tell me if it is not
as strict, and free from latitude, or largeness of thought, as the Doctrine of
worshipping the one true God, and having no other Gods but him.

The like strictness we shall also find in determining the case of Christians
eating of meats, which had been offered unto Idols at their own, or at their
unbelieving Friends Houses: For it seems part of the Sacrifices which had been
offered unto Idols were often sold to the Butchers by the Idol-Priests; from
which arose two questions among the Christians of these times, one whereof was,
whether they ought to eat what was bought in the Shambles at their own Houses?
Because what they eat might perhaps have been such portions of the Sacrifices
as the Idol Priests had sold to the Butchers; and the other was whether they
ought to eat at their unconverted Friends, or Relations Houses of every thing
that was set before them without asking if it had been any part of those
Sacrifices which had been offered unto Idols? The particular reason of this
later question was, as I conceive, because the Gentiles esteemed those portions
of Idol Sacrifices, as more holy, than common flesh, and would be sure to buy
them for their Feasts and Entertainment if they could get them. To these two
questions the Apostle answers in general, that it was lawful for them to enjoy
any of God's Creatures, none of them being in their own nature impure, and that
therefore they might safely eat whatsoever was sold in the Market without
thinking themselves bound in conscience to enquire whether any thing they met
with in the Shambles, or were to eat at their own, or their Friends Houses,
were portions of Idol Sacrifices, or no? But then if any man told them, that
such, and such meats had been offered unto Idols, then they were neither to buy
them in the Market, nor eat of them at their own, or at their Friends Houses
for fear of giving 1 Cor. X v. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32.
offense to others, whether Believers or Unbelievers. First to Believers
especially of the weaker sort, who seeing them buy, or eat, what they had been
told was offered unto Idols might from the former relation those portions had
unto the Idol, think they worshipped the Idol, and so be encouraged to eat
against their Consciences, and perhaps proceed further to eat at the Idol
Feasts, which was downright Idolatry. Secondly, To Unbelievers, Jews or
Gentiles; the former whereof coming to know that Christians bought, or eat what
had been offered unto Idols, would be scandalized thereby against Christianity;
and the later in like manner seeing them do so, would be encouraged to persist
in their Demonolatry, because they might presume that the Christians buying, or
eating wittingly, and willingly what had been offered up in Sacrifice to their
Gods, did so out of respect to them, as they themselves did. I think this was
very strict Divinity to forbid Christians the use, and enjoyment of those
things, which otherwise they were free to use, and enjoy both at home, and
abroad, purely upon the account of other men's Consciences, because they were to
give no offense neither to the unbelieving Jew, nor to the Idolatrous Gentiles,
nor to the weaker Members of the Church of God. Had our Preacher lived in those
days, I am afraid he would have censured the Apostle, as a man of narrow
thoughts, who was too much influenced by Jewish notions, and superstition in
these severe determinations, but because he was to make a Parallel between the
Apostle, and his Latitudinarian Hero, therefore right, or wrong he was to take
some occasion to let us know, that the Apostle had his large thoughts too.

Another of his Phrases, which he chose rather to use improperly, than to omit,
is that of the p. 9.
just freedoms of Human Nature, where he tells us, that his Heroic Primate
asserted the great Truths of Religion, when he saw them struck at, with an
authority, and zeal proportioned to the importance of them, while in lesser
matters he left men to the just freedoms of Human Nature -- but he should have
said, had he spoke properly, to their Christian Liberty, for the freedoms of
Human Nature relate to men, as they are considered in a civil, or in their
natural state, if there ever had been, or were any such. But this being one of
the golden Phrases of the Latitudinarians, he was resolved to tip his Tongue,
and gild one Period with it, for that sort of men, have their Jargon, and Cant,
as well as others, and particularly affect to talk of the Rights, Liberties, or
Freedoms of Mankind, or of the Rights, Liberties, or Freedoms of Human Nature,
although every man in the World only has such Rights, and such Liberties as the
Laws and Customs of the Country, where he is born, or whither he betake himself
give him, and no more. Hence the Inst. Lib. 1. de jure pers^narum.
Roman Law defines Liberty to be a Natural Power, or Faculty, which every man
has to do what he pleases, as far, as he is not hindered by law or force.
This definition shows, that men's natural liberty is restrained more or less,
according to the civil constitutions of different Countries, and this is so
true, that in some places, the greatest part of Mankind have almost no
Liberties; and Slaves which were the greatest part of Mankind in the Roman
Empire, as now in some of our Plantations, had none at all. Yet notwithstanding
this is so plain, and obvious a Notion, our Latitudinarians, when it serves
their turn (as it did in former Reigns) love to talk of the Rights, and
Liberties of Mankind, or Human Nature, because they are splendid Phrases, which
by seeming to have something great in them, are apt to gull unthinking men,
though they signify nothing at all. Tell them of Passive Obedience, or the
unlawfulness of Resistance, they will tell you again, that it is a Doctrine
against the Rights and Freedoms of Mankind. I knew a Gentleman, to whom an
unfortunate Lord of our Preachers acquaintance said so, and we may without
making a bold inference guess from whom he had the deceitful insignificant
Phrase, which to serve ill purposes may be used against Laws and Constitutions,
that restrain men's Liberties in civil Societies, in any other respect, as well
as in not resisting the Supreme Power, and would help to justify insurrections
not only of Slaves, but of Subjects, and more especially of the common People
all the World over. So the Dispensing Power under King James's Administration
was against the just freedoms of Human Nature, and the French Government was,
and is against the Rights, and Liberties of Human Nature, though some
Governments harder than it, and the exercise of them is not so in other places,
where Protestants, as Conscientious, and at least as Orthodox as those of
France are ruined, and undone for Conscience sake, and as effectually Dragoon'd
without Dragoons by Deprivation and double Taxes, of which I am confident our
Preacher would say, if he suffered such Penalties, that they were against the
Rights of Human Nature, and the Liberties of Mankind. But for my own part, as I
always suspected such specious Phrases, and those, who used them: so I know not
to what purpose they serve, but to beget false notions in the minds of men, and
incite them to subvert States, and Kingdoms, and level all Orders of Men in
them, and I have always observed that those who used them, set up for
Demagogues, and were most forward when it was in their power to invade other
men's Rights, and abridge other men's Liberties, especially those of their lawful
Kings, and their Loyal Fellow Subjects without any regard to the Laws of
Nature, the Laws of God, or the Laws of the Land.

In the same place he tells us, that while the Defunct asserted the great
Truths of Religion, he left men in lesser matters to be governed by those great
measures of Discretion, and Charity, a care to avoid Scandal, and to promote
Edification, and Peace, and Decency, and Order. This in an Author so given to
subtle, and malicious insinuations, looks like one upon the generality of the
Clergy, as if they did not so, but were more zealous for the lesser, than the
greater matters of our Religion. But not to mention the Great men among our
present Clergy, did not our Hookers, Sandersons, and Hammonds, as well as
those, who have followed their example, assert the great Truths of Religion, as
zealously, as his Hero did, and though they defended both the Authority, and
Wisdom of the Church in enjoining Ceremonies, and things in themselves
indifferent to be observed (which he means by lesser matters) and also took
care to inform the Consciences of the People; what a great, and weighty Duty
Obedience, and Submissions to the Orders of the Church was, and that morally
considered, it was none of the lesser matters of Christianity: yet in their
just freedoms they left them to be governed, as he says his Archbishop did, by
the measures of Discretion and Charity, and a care to avoid Scandal, and to
promote Edification, and Peace, and Decency, and Order. But in Truth this
Character of leaving men to their Freedoms, as Christians, was so very true of
Doctor Tillotson, that he left them to their Freedoms, where neither he nor
they were free, and to govern themselves by their own private Consciences and
discretion, when they neither promoted Charity, nor Edification, nor Peace,
Decency, or Order, but gave scandal in both Senses, as it signifies grieving
our fellow Christians, and by our Example occasioning others to sin. I will
instance in his giving the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper to those, who would
receive it in no posture, but that irreverent one of sitting. This was his
Practice at Lincoln's Inn Chapel, whither a great Lady of Dr. Owen's
Congregation, and one of his Hearers too, would sometimes resort to receive the
Sacrament, because, as she told a Noble Lord of my acquaintance, she could
receive it the^e sitting. And his Practice, as a devout Gentlewoman, who lived
in that Neighborhood, assured me, was first to walk about with the Elements to
those in the Pews, where the Sitters were, and give it them first, but in the
last place to those who kneeled at the Rail, within which he would not go, as
decency would have directed another Man, but coming behind them, he gave it
them in the Letter of the Proverb, over the left Shouldier. So the late Bishop
of St. Asaph at Dr. Kidder's Church not long after the Revolution gave Dr.
Bates, and some others the Sacrament in the same irreverent posture, to the
great offense of some part of the Congregation, that saw it; and for ought he
knew, to the endangering of others to despise the Orders of the Church. I could
give other instances of this nature in the other Sacrament of Baptism, wherein
the defunct Hero, has acted without excuse against the Churches Orders, to the
great scandal of others who came to know it, and violating the prescribed Rules
of Decency, and Edification, which I suppose come under our Preacher's lesser
Matters, and when I consider how notoriously He, and his Hero have acted in
other instances against Justice, Mercy, Faith, and Charity, I cannot tell what
he esteems the great Truths and Duties of Christianity, or the weightier
Matters of the Law.

But he p. 15.
tells us however that his UNBLEMISHED HERO saw with a deep regret the fatal
Corruptions of this Age, while the Hypocrisies and Extravagancies of former
times disposed many to Atheism, and Impiety. But methinks he should have said
nothing of the Hypocrisies, and Extravagancies of former Times, since they
cannot but put men in mind of the Hypocrisies and Extravagancies of these,
which for kind have been the same, and for degree, or Atrocity, as great as
those, and have also as much disposed men to Atheism, and Impiety. Was it not
rebelling under the Holy pretense of Religion? Was it not for taking God's Holy
Name in vain in Fasts, and Thanksgivings to break his Holy Laws, and Judgments
with a Popular show of Sanctimony, that he means by the Hypocrisy of former
Times, and have not the same things been done over again in these? And then as
for the Extravagancies of those former Times, does he not mean by them the
proceeding so far under those hypocritical Pretenses, as first to rise up in
Arms against Charles the I. then to abdicate him in the Vote of Non addresses,
then to murder him before his own Palace, and last of all, to defend those
Extravagancies under the same hypocritical Pretenses, and magnify those, who
did them, as our Deliverers, to whom we owed the conservation of our Religion,
Lives, and Liberties? And if this be his meaning, as in appearance it must,
then I pray him to compare Times with Times, Facts with Facts, and Pretenses
with Pretenses, and then to tell me, if as great Extravagancies have not been
done in our days? And lastly, as to disposing men to Atheism, and Impiety, I
appeal to the Consciences of all serious observing men, if what has been done,
in, by, and since the Revolution, call it by what name you please, has not
disposed many more to Atheism, and Impiety, than what he calls the Hypocrisies
and Extravagancies of former Times.

I have heard that in one of his Visitation Speeches to the Clergy of
Wiltshire, he complained of the deluge of Atheism and Impiety that overflowed
this Nation, and would to God he would lay his hand upon his heart, and
consider whether He, and his Hero, and his Hero's Successor, have not among
some others helped to set open the Floudgates to that overflowing Deludge, by
what they have done under the irreligious Pretense of serving, and preserving
our Religion, by acting not only against the plainest Precepts of it, but the
common notions of Justice, Truth, and Honesty, and their own former Doctrines,
which now bear witness against them, and will hereafter without Repentance,
rise up in Judgment against them, and condemn them, when our Lord shall say
unto them, and every one that has acted like them, out of thy Mouth, out of
thy Writings, will I condemn thee, thou wicked Servant. In that day this will
be the aggravation of their condemnation above the Marshalls, the Calamies, the
Owens, and the Goodwins of former Times, that they acted the same Iniquities
against their own avowed Doctrins, and Principles, and Subscriptions, whereby
they had most publicly, frequently, and solemnly Anathematized the Practices
of those men, and I will take upon me to say, that for any one Athiest He, or
his Hero converted before the Revolution, they have made ten since, and that if
those men slew their thousands these have slain their ten thousands, and I pray
God, He and some others, who have time of Repentance yet left them, may
consider what I say before it is too late.

It is scarce worth my pains to examine what he has said in the same page of
the Design, that was laid (he means in the Reign of King Charles the II.) to
make us first Athiests, that we might more easily be made Papists, this seems
to be an odd design, at least an odd way of expressing it, to make men
Athiests, that they may more easily be made Papists, that is, first to bring
them to believe no Religion, that they may believe the Popish, and teach them
to laugh at the three Creeds that they might believe all the Articles of Pope
Pius the IV. with all the supernumerary Traditions of the Roman Church. King
Charles the II. indeed was not so careful as he should have been in the great
Concern of Religion, but that was to be imputed also to the Hypocrisies, and
Extravagancies of former Times, which did with his Father, as these have done
with his Brother, but to suggest that he laid a Design to make men Papists, by
first making of them Athiests, is as ridiculous as to say it now, when Atheism
abounds much more than it did in his Reign. One may as reasonably say, that he
laid a design to make us first Papists, that he might more easily make us
Rebels, or Socinians, as our Preacher has been long made. But if by making us
Papists, he means outward Professors of Popery, I must tell him that King
Charles the II. was too wise a Prince to think, that Athiests could ever be
brought to that in such a Nation and Government as this, where no inquisition,
or force sufficient to bring that about could be set up. For nothing less than
a mighty force could make our Athiests submit to Popery, no, as they despise
the special Doctrines of it, as much as any other men: So the liberties to
which they are inured make them abhor, and detest it for the severity of its
Discipline, which they know will not allow them to practice their lewdness so
openly, to curse, damn, and blaspheme, to call the Priesthood Priestcraft, and
to ridicule every thing that belongs to Religion, as they do now, and more than
ever in the Houses of our King; therefore we saw them not long ago as averse to
Popery, as other men, and associating under the common pretense of preserving
our Religion with Enthusiasts, Hypocrites, and Apostates, nay with foreign
mercenary Papists to drive a Sovereign Prince of that Communion, whose Title to
the Crown depended not upon his Religion, out of all his Realms.

I now proceed to examine the Libel he has so maliciously made upon our
suffering Clergy, and more especially upon our ejected Bishops, where his want
of Generosity, and Charity appears in every Article of it, though but six lines
before he pretends to write every thing in his Sermon with an Air free from
Resentment, but as I have showed he writes many Falsehoods where he pretends to
write strict Truths: So where he pretends to write generously with candor, and
without resentment I always suspect there is something to follow of a quite
different nature, and here I found, I was not disappointed, I could tell him of
some of his Hearers, and those friends to the present Government who that no
man of Honor would have so treated men in affliction, as he did, and given
such an unreasonable Testimony of an unmortified Temper in a Funeral Sermon,
but let the Sermon be what it will, and let him pretend to write with never so
much humanity, and sweetness, I will lay of Natures side against him, because
his passions are so hard for him, that he cannot but show his Nature, and mix
his Choler with his Ink, when he should write without resentment as he has
done in this Libell with all the ill nature imaginable against the late
Archbishop of venerable Memory, and the most worthy Bishop of Ely, whereof the
former made him Doctor, when he could not make himself one, and the other as is
still remembered in Cambridge, most generously entertained him in his Lodging;
at St. John's College, while he resided in that University to inspect Records
especially at C. C. C. although at that time, he was in disgrace at Court, and
almost every where else. And it is a further aggravation of his ill nature,
that because he had not, he took an occasion of making this Libel against them,
and their suffering Brethren; for after he had told his Hearers that the
Defunct rejoiced in the happy deliverance of these Nations, then without any
necessity, or connection he tells us, that many of those, who had longed for it,
and wished well to it, did of a sudden start back. It is plain here that by his
many, he means many of the deprived Clergy, but if by his happy deliverance he
means, as I have showed he must, our pretended deliverance by the Revolution, I
challenge him to name one of them, who longed for it, or wished well to it, for
as many of those, who have complied, abhorred the thoughts of it: So of those,
who have not complied, I know not one, but did, nor he neither I dare say. But
then let us suppose that many of them longed for the Prince of Orange's coming,
and wished as well to it, as he himself did, might they not afterward, nay
were they not in Conscience bound, when they saw their error, and his design,
to start back? What does he mean by this Objection against: them? Must men go
on in what they think iniquity, and as one of the Bishops, who certainly longed
for the Revolution, said, Over Shoes, over Boots. Is this too a Maxim of our
Preacher, would he have men proceed from longing for a thing they thought good,
to favoring and upholding it, when they found it ill, and from wishing well to
it under one persuasion, to acting for it under another? I believe he will make
no difficulty to say that Dr. Sherlock was in a great error for two years
together after the Revolution in refusing so long to close with it, and yet if
he did well in closing at last with it, he ought not to be reproached for
having stood out so long against it; although he said to some Persons of great
honor, who consulted him for his Opinion about taking the New Oath, That
whoever took it would without repentance, as certainly burn in Hellfire, as
that fire, says he, pointing to the Chimney, burns there, or to that effect.
But besides him who stood out so long, it would be easy to name many more, who
neither longed for it, nor wished well to it, that yet at last complied with
it, and I hope he will not blame them for starting from their first Resolves,
and coming in at the last hour of the day. For men are to be allowed the
benefit of second Thoughts, and of Repentance, which often times is the blessed
effect of long and serious Consideration; and when they turn Penitents by the
Laws of Honor, as well as Christian Charity, their former faults are to be
buried in Oblivion, and never to be mentioned with reproach. Has the great
Historian of our Reformation forgotten what the first Archbishop of it did
through Human Frailty, and afterward repenting, died a Martyr, and put his
right hand first in the Flames, because that part of his Body should be first
punished, which was first in fault.

But to give other instances of starting back nearer a kin to the matter in
hand: In the Tragical Reign of Stephen, whom the Historians represent as a
perjured Usurper, Robert the great Earl of Gloucester through fear, and
surprise took the Oath of Homage with the other Nobles to King Stephen, but not
long after with some other Lords took an opportunity to renounce it, and let
the Usurper know by Word and Deed that he was ashamed, and repented of the
Homage he had done unto him contrary to his Allegiance to Queen Maud; and the
Historians of those Times Were so far from reproaching him with his first
compliances, that they have celebrated his Memory upon the score of his
Repentance, and his constant Allegiance ever after to the Queen. In the Reign
of Lovis of France, whom the Barons set up in the room of King John, many Lords
began to relent before he died, and many more after he was dead revolted from
Lovis their own Idol, crowned the young Prince Henry the III. and soon made the
Usurper glad to compound for a safe conduct out of the Realm. In the Reign of
Henry the IV. who, our Preacher says in his History of the Reformation,
traitorously Usurped the Crown, Archbishop Scroop, and many other Lords, who
perhaps had longed for it, and for a while wished well to it, afterward saw
their error and repented, and being resolved to undo, as much as they could,
what they had most unjustly done, they rose up against Henry under the Title of
Lord Henry Derby, and put out a most remarkable Remonstrance against his
Usurpation, and an Excommunication against him, which may be seen in Foxe's
Acts, and Monuments of that Reign; and of which because it is so scarce to be
had, I have put an abridgment in the N. VI.
Appendix: and in the Reign of his Grandson Henry the VI. The whole Peerage
then assembled in a Parliament of that Prince's own calling, being made
sensible of their error, and the injustice of their Ancestors in deposing
Richard the II. and setting up Henry the IV. declared upon Richard Duke of
York's Claim by Birthright, and proximity of Blood, that his Title could not
be defeated, but that the Crown of Right belonged to him: this with all that
was done thereupon may be seen in Roll. Parl. 39. Henry VI. N. 10. as it is in
Cotton's Abridgement put out by Mr. Pryn, or rather in the Record at large, as
it is Printed in the 31 page of the An Enquiry into the remarkable instances of
History and Parliament Records used by the Author of the Unreasonableness of a
new Separation, whether they are faithfully cited and applied.
Book mentioned in the Margent, and I mention it, because I think it, as well
as the Book in which it is Printed, worthy to be read of all men. And what
another Parliament 1 Edw. IV. declared against the Usurpation of the three
Henry's as against God's Law, Man's Allegiance, and unnatural in its self. I
need not recite here, because it is to be seen in the Printed Statutes of that
Reign. And in our Preachers former times of Hypocrisy, the Times of the great
Rebellion, which began in 41: many Persons of Honor and Quality in both
Kingdoms, who were concerned in the Prologue, or first Scenes, or Acts of that
bloody Tragedy, being afterward convinced of their Errors, not only started
back, and repented, but brought forth Fruits meet for such Repentance, and I
need but name the Great Montrose, his Patron the Duke of Lauderdale, and Mr.
Henderson of his own Country as Examples of what I say; and the two Heroic
Penitents the Lords Hepton and Capell both of Immortal Memory in ours. The
former of these Lords, as Report says, went with a Rope about his Neck as a
Token of his Repentance, to throw himself at the King's Feet, and how they both
after repentance signalized themselves in his service, and the Lord Capell in
his Son's, is known so well, that I need not relate it. So William Pryn, not to
mention all the Commissioners, who were sent to treat with the King at
Holmby-House started back also, though it is to be wished they had done it
sooner, and how severely he censured his old Actions, and endeavored to undo
what he had done, may be seen from what he has written in his Plea for the
Lords, his Concordia Discors, and a Paragraph or two, in his Preface to
Cotton's Abridgment which I have also put in the N. VI.
Appendix. Nay the Members of that very Convention which called home Charles
the II. were the men that began and carried on the Rebellion against his
Father, and yet by God's Grace they started so far back, as to declare point
blank against their former Practice, that by the undoubted, and fundamental
Laws of this Kingdom; neither the Peers of this Realm, nor the Commons, nor
both together, nor the People collectively, nor representatively, nor any other
Persons whatsoever ever had, have, or ought to have any Coercive Power over the
Persons of the Kings of this Realm. And sometime before that, when the King was
in his return, the Lords and Commons of that Convention, together with the Lord
Mayor, Common Council-men, and Freemen of London, in a Appen. N. VII.
Proclamation did declare, That His Majesty's Rights, and Titles to his
Kingdoms were, every way complete by the death of his Royal Father without the
Ceremony or Solemnity of a Proclamation, and that the Imperial Crown of this
Realm did by inherent Birth right descend to him, as next lineal, and rightful
Heir of the Blood Royal. Here are sta^ters back with a witness, and I hope
their starting back from a Cause in which they were so long engaged, was
neither a reproach to them, nor an argument for the goodness, but the
intolerable illness thereof. And so if any of our suffering Clergy did, as he
affirms, long for the Revolution, and wish well to it, their starting back
shows no more than that they were mislead in the Crowd, and afterward thought
otherwise of it, than they did at the first. Therefore God is to be praised,
and they commended that they started back so soon, and proceeded no further
with relucting consciences, as many others unhappily did. I could tell of one
now in the highest place of the Church, who said sometime after the Revolution,
said to this effect, That it was one entire piece of iniquity, and after that
again in the plural Phrase, That we, and by consequence he had gone too far,
and yet he goes on still, and I fear will not start back. Others I could name
to their honor, who proceeded so far, as to take the Oath, and to comply for
sometime after, but since, God be praised, have started back, and offered like
true Penitents, to do penance, and begged Absolution for what they thought so
grievous a sin, and now I have told it, let our Preacher make what he can of
their starting back, but when Dr. Sherlock started from the other side, to
which these men went back, I never heard that he had the least remorse for
continuing so long in his great error, as he must acknowledge it to have been,
much less that he was willing to do penance for it (besides the penance he
did in Print) or desired the Absolution of the Church.

After this he proceeds to tell us, that some in high Stations (that is some
Bishops) of the Church would neither openly declare for it, nor against it
according to the authority of their Characters: one of which certainly they
ought to have done: if they did then judge it so unlawful, as they would now
represent it, they ought to have thundered both with their Sermons, and
Censures against it, especially in the first Fermentation, when a vigorous
opposition might have had considerable effects, and would have made them look
like Confessors indeed, to which they afterward pretended. Here our Preacher
reflects upon our suffering Fathers for not having declared, and acted against
the Revolution betimes, and thunders against them for not having thundered with
their Sermons and Censures against, in the first Fermentation, i. e. when the
Mob were Masters in all places, and would have tore them in pieces for it, as
some of them were threatened, and that indeed would have been a considerable
effect. This puts me in mind of the Question he so often asked Mr. Napleton of
Feversham, Why did you not let the King go? To which Mr. Napleton made answer
the first time to this purpose, Sir, We could not govern the Rabble, and if the
King had offered to go, they would have torn him in pieces. After some time the
good Dr. asked Mr. Napleton again, Why did you not let the King go? I told you
Sir, replied Mr. Napleton, because the Rabble would have torn him in pieces, if
he had offered to go. And after that again, a third time, Why did you not let
the King go? Sir, replied Mr. Napleton, with some emotion, I have told you
twice, because if he had offered to go, the Rabble would have murdered him;
Eigh, but Mr. Napleton, says he again, You should have let him go, i. e. as
Mr. Napleton apprehended, and all others must, you should have let him been
murdered by the People: This account I had from a Gentleman in whose hearing
Mr. Napleton told the Story; and so here in like manner, he says, they should
have thundered with their Sermons, and Censures against the Revolution in the
first Fermentation, when the Mob were the fermenting Particles, that they might
have been torn in pieces, or knocked in the head. The Non complying Bishops are
as it were so many living Records against him, and how glad would he have been,
that they had been martyred in the first Fermentation, that might not have been
Confessors now, and now alive to reproach him with their Testimony and
Sufferings. They did it not, says he, and God, and they be thanked, say I,
that they did it not out of Season; for there is a time to suffer, and a time
to decline Suffering, a time to speak as Confessors, and a time to keep
silence, a time to die Martyrs, and a time to fly from Martyrdom; and our
Spiritual Guides and Pastors were Judges of the Season, God having left much to
their prudence to act and suffer, or to forbear acting in some times and
places, that they may not suffer, as to them shall seem expedient most for
God's Glory, and the preservation of his Church. For it is in the spiritual, as
it is in the secular Warfare, sometimes the Soldiers of Christ, but especially
the Leaders must Husband their Lives more than at other times, and sometimes
Spiritual Prudence directs them to be as it were prodigal, and sometimes to be
sparing of their Blood. Would it have been wisdom in Athanasius, when there
were so few faithful Bishops, to have thundered with his Sermons against the
Arrian Heresy before the Arrian Mob of Alexandria, when it was much fitter for
him to fly from their rage, that he might reserve himself for better times, and
in the interim direct, and encourage the faithful, and live to settle the
Church in its former State. Let us hear what he says in his own vindication,
for not acting according to the Authority of his Character, and not thundering
with Sermons, and Censures in his Province, when he might have made a vigorous
opposition, but fled to save his Life. When they charge us with fear, says he,
they consider not that this reflects upon themselves, who gave occasion for it;
for if it be a fault to fly, it is a much greater to persecute -- If they
reproach us for hiding our selves from those, who seek to take away our Lives,
and for flying from the Persecutors, what will they say to Jacob, who fled from
his Brother Esau, or to Moses, who departed into the Land of Madian for fear of
Pharaoh, or to David who fled from Saul? What would they say to the Great
Elias, who hid himself because of Ahab, and fled because of Jezabell 's
Threatenings, as the Sons of the Prophets were also by Fifties in Caves. The
Disciples of our Lord hid themselves for fear of the Jews, and Paul at Damascus
being sought for by the Governor, was let down from the Wall in a Basket, and
so escaped his hands. The Law appointed Cities of refuge to flee unto for the
safety of those who were sought for to be put to death, but in these last Times
that Word of the Father who spoke before to Moses, gave Commandment, that, when
his Disciples were persecuted in one City, they should flee unto another. --
This the Saints knew, and managed themselves accordingly -- And this is the
Rule for men to attain perfection, namely to do what God commands. Hence the
Word himself, who became incarnate for us, when he was sought for, thought it
not amiss to hide himself, as we do, or to fly from Persecution. When he was a
Child he warned Joseph by an Angel to arise, and take the young Child, and his
Mother, and fly into Egypt. And after Herod 's death he went aside into
Nazareth, because of Archelaus. When he had cured the withered hand, and the
Pharasees took counsel to kill him, he departed thence, and when he had raised
Lazarus from the dead, and was in danger by it, he walked no more openly among
the Jews, but departed thence into the Wilderness. And when the Jews took up
Stones to cast at him for affirming himself to have been before Abraham, he hid
himself, and went out of the Temple, and passing through the midst of them,
made his escape. When John had suffered Martyrdom, and his Disciples had buried
his Body, Jesus hearing of it withdrew himself, took Ship, and went privately
into a Desert place: What therefore is thus written of our Savior, is written
for the common benefit of Mankind. He would not permit himself to be
apprehended before his time came, nor would any longer hide himself, when once
it was come, but discovered himself to those, who came to take him -- Being
persecuted they fled, and saved themselves by lying close, but if they happened
to be discovered, they were ready to suffer Martyrdom for the Faith.

Thus far the Great Athanasius by way of Apology for his flying, and
absconding, and it is, every word of it, as good a justification of our
suffering Fathers, for not openly declaring, and acting, and for not preaching,
and thundering in the first Fermentation, when the Mob, not to name other
Persons, were more terrible than Esau, or Pharaoh, or Ahab, or Jezabel, or
Herod, or the Jews, to which they were so like in every respect. Wherefore in
all appearance, if our Fathers had declared and acted then, we had not had the
comfort, and benefit of them now, but had been left like Sheep without a
Shepherd. And though to have died, and departed in Martyrdom would have been
gain, and advantage to them, and really far better than to live in such
wretched times, yet their abiding in the flesh, was, and is more needful for
us, and for the succession, and preservation of the Church.

But then suppose that we should admit, which we have no reason to do, that
they were defective in their duty through fear, and surprise, or other human
frailties, in the first, sudden, and fearful Fermentation, which so small a
number could not stand against: Is not this a common and venial Infirmity? Did
not Peter in a surprise of fear deny his Master; and the rest fly? And yet he,
and all of them lived Confessors, and died Martyrs after. Have not many of the
most celebrated Confessors and Martyrs, been at some time overcome with this
human infirmity, especially upon sudden Revolutions, and violent Fermentations,
when the Faithful could scarce know their Brethren, and who would be true, and
who false? And therefore if this had indeed been the case of our suffering
Fathers, it is so common, not only to Human Nature, but sometimes to the best
men of it, that I would not reverence them, or their Memory after them, one jot
the less upon that account. No man pretends to reverence the Memory of Father
Paul more than our Preacher does in his Life of Bedell, and in his Travells,
although the Father was so timorous, that he durst not make one public step
toward a Reformation, or do one Heroic act in order to it. He would indeed
often commend the Scriptures in his Sermons to the People, and once holding a
Greek Testament in one hand, while he clapped it with the other, This, this,
says he, is the Book, of Life, with more to that purpose. This occasioned a
Gentleman to go to him, and expostulate with him upon his Sermon, how he could
so recommend that Book, and yet act so contrary to it every day, but especially
in his solemn Masses, to which he replied bursting out into tears, Deus non
mihi dedit Spiritum Lutheri. God has not given me the Spirit of Luther. And I
question not, but if God had seen it fit that our suffering Fathers should have
thundered in the first Fermentation, he would have poured out the Spirit of
might upon them, and given them a thundering courage from above, which all
their Adversaries, and all their Captains of Fifties, and Hundreds had not been
able to resist. But this I say again was not their case, because they acted
according to the standing Rules of Spiritual Wisdom, and the liberty that God
has allowed in all Persecutions, where he is not pleased to interpose by
inspired courage, and thereby overruled the Spirits of Men. Wherefore it was
not a Season for them then to thunder, especially with Censures: To have done
so against Foreigners, would have been to no purpose, because they were of
other Communions, and to have thundered against our own People, would have been
to excommunicate the Multitude, which is against the Rules, and directions of
the Canon Law.

But to proceed, he says, They left their authority entirely with their
Chancellors, who acting in their name, and by their Commission, were the same
persons in Law with themselves, and that Oaths, which they thought unlawful,
were tendered to others, and taken by them in their name. This Expression of
leaving their authority with their Chancellors is ambiguous, either signifying,
that they gave special Orders, and Commission upon that occasion to give
Institution, and to Administer the Oath, or that the Chancellors having those
Powers in their Patents before, as most Chancellors had, gave Institutions, and
Administered the Oaths by their Patent Power, when those Bishops would not. If
the former be meant by him, then I confess, if any of them did so, they did
amiss, and what they cannot, nor I believe, will undertake to justify, but
meekly acknowledge their Error, which their haughty Censour is not apt to do.
But upon the best inquiry, I have had the opportunity to make, I cannot find,
that one of them did so, and if our Preacher knows of any one that did, he may
name him, when he pleases. But if the later be only meant by him, then they are
not to be blamed for what they could not hinder their Chancellors from doing,
who indeed are but too much one Person in Law with them, as Dr. Duck,
Chancellor of Wells, showed Dr. Pierce the Bishop of that Diocese many years
ago. How could they hinder their Chancellors from Administering the Oaths, who
were more officious to the Government then them, and who having not the
conscience, nor courage to suffer with them, were willing to signalize their
good Intentions to it, whether they would or no? It is very well known how the
first Thanksgiving Books, and all the Fast, and Thanksgiving Offices
afterward, were sent to their Chancellors, Officialls, or Registers to be
distributed about their Diocesses without them, and for this reason he might as
well have said that Fasts, and Thanksgivings were observed by their order, and
direction, although they thought them unlawful.

Then it follows, That though they thought the Oaths unlawful, yet they would
scarce say so much in confidence to any of their Clergy, that asked their
opinions about it, both concealing their Principles, and withdrawing from the
Public Worship, and yet not daring to act, or speak against it. At what a rate
does he juggle here: They would scarcely say so much, but it seems they did say
it, and they would scarcely say so much in confidence, when the Persons that
asked them their Opinions of the Oaths were it may be in their Opinions,
Persons not be confided in. Indeed they had need be upon their guard at that
time, but more especially the Archbishop, the Person whom he means, had reason
to suspect that some of the Clergy, and others came to entrap him, as the
Pharisees did our Savior. I have heard him complain of it, and therefore his
common answer to some, whom he suspected, or knew not, was to this effect: What
need you come to me to ask my Opinion, the World knows it, and my Practice
declares it, and you knew it before you came; and if it be my reasons, that you
would ask me, then let this one suffice, I cannot take contrary Oaths. But
where he had confidence in Persons, no man spoke more or better upon the
Subject, as many are ready to attest. And I would ask our Preacher, how could
the notoriety of his Practice, and particularly his withdrawing from Public
Worship, be consistent with concealing his Principles; which not only the
Learned, but the unlearned knew; Captain Tom's Regiment, and the Watermen knew
them, as well as the Bishops and the Clergy, and those, who forsooth went to
him, to ask his opinion about the Oath, might as well have asked him what
Religion he was of, for the one was as well known as the other.

Then he tells, That they hoped at this rate to have held their Sees, and
enjoyed their Revenues, while in a silent, but fearful manner, they still
adhered to an Interest, which, as one of them wrote, they could no more part
with, than with their Interest in Heaven. The very reverend, and worthy
Prelate, who said that, did neither in a silent, or fearful manner adhere to
that Interest, for it is very well known with what boldness, and danger too, he
preached up our duty as Subjects at Cambridge, and other Places of his Diocese
immediately before the first Fermentation, not to mention the Interest he
espoused in the Convention. But I believe he more especially means the
Archbishop, who never came to speak his mind there; but nothing can be more
absurd than to ascribe it to a design of holding his Revenues: first because no
man ever despised them more, especially in comparison of his Duty; and
secondly, because he must needs know, that coming, or not coming to the
Convention, he could not hold his See long, if a new Government were set up.
The Reasons will one day be told, why he would not come thither; it was not
fear, but conscience, and a real persuasion, that his appearance there would do
no good, which made him decline coming to a Meeting, which he thought was so
illegally, and unauthoritatively called.

Then it follows, Thus did they abandon the Government of the Church, and I
will say just as the King abandoned, and relinquished the Kingdom, or as a man
abandons his House, that is driven from it by force of Arms. Is not this a
modest way of representing matter of fact, and does it not excellently well
become an Ecclesiastical Historian to call suspending and ejecting, Abandoning?
The word might perhaps have passed in the next Age, but no man besides our
Preacher would have called it so now, that is not Abandoned by Modesty, and the
love of Truth.

Then it follows, We were in such a Posture by their means, that neither our
Laws, nor our Princes could bear it long. What our Princes would, or could have
born in that Affair, I cannot determine, but it is well known, how they were
importuned after the Victor's return from the Boyn, by our Preacher and others
of his Robe, to put other Bishops into the places of the deprived, or perhaps
it might have been longer before the Schism had been commenced. The writ of
Intrusion was also devised, and prepared in order to this good Work, and the
pleasure his Hero took in the Invention of that Expedient shows, that he was
not so incapable, as he p. 29.
makes him of craft, or violence, and that there was something in the p. 27.
World he thought worth much art, and great management, namely to get
Possession of an Archbishopric worth five thousand pounds a year. But then as
for our Laws they would have born with it, as long as our Princes pleased, for
it is a Maxim in our Constitution, which our Preacher (if he knew) forgot, or
dissembled, that nullum tempus occurrit Regi, and whether it had not been more
for the honor of our Church, and the reputation of our Religion to have
deferred filling up the Sees of our suffering Fathers, till their deaths had
really made them vacant, I leave any indifferent Person to judge. I am sure
Diocesses have been longer kept vacant, than that in probability would have
been, in the best Reigns, and for less important Reasons, and if the like
forbearance had been practiced now, this Schism, this horrible and unnatural
Schism had been prevented, nor had we lost the unvaluable advantage we had
before over our Adversaries, by now having, as they have had, Bishop against
Bishop, and Pope against Pope.

And then to conclude all, says he, most triumphantly: Therefore the same
authority made their Sees void, that had displaced the Non-conformists in 61.
and the Popish Bishops in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth 's Reign. That it
was the same authority, which displaced the Popish Bishops in Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, and the Non-conformists in 61. every true Englishman will confess; but
that that Authority, and this, which deprived our suffering Fathers is the
same, a great part of the Nation, who are as well versed in our Antiquities,
Histories, Records, and Laws, as any other men, and have studied our
Constitution to inform their Consciences, as every one knows, utterly deny; so
that our Preacher's asserting that Authority and this to be the same, without
proving it, is precarious and signifies just nothing at all. I will not take
upon me to be a Judge in this Controversy, for it is above my Sphere, but only
set down some Observations; which I have made in reading Books on both sides.
First then as to the Authority of our Hereditary Kings, I observe, first, that
those who in former Reigns have maintained the Cause of our Non Hereditary
Princes, never had the confidence to deny it, but the other side have always
taken upon them to deny their Power to be Authority, because in their opinion
it wanted Right. Secondly, I have observed, that the Arguments, or rather
Argument for the Authority of our Hereditary Kings is in all Writers of all
Reigns, and Ages one, and the same, but in other Writers various, different and
inconsistent one with another, and as for this Government, our Preacher
advanced one Argument for it in his Pastoral Letter, for which the House of
Commons damned the whole Book to the Flames, where all the other Arguments for
taking the Oath, but Dr. Sherlock's Providential Right were burnt together with
Conquest by the hand of the common Hangman. Thirdly, I have observed, that many
Usurpers of this Kingdom, have notwithstanding all their other patched Titles,
pretended also to Birthright, as the best of all, and I appeal to the best
Friends of the present Government, if they would not most willingly exchange
all their other Titles for that, as the Fox in the Fable, who when he was hotly
pursued by the Hounds would have given all his shifts, which he proudly
reckoned up but a little before, for that single one of the Cat. And how much
it once prevailed above all the rest, upon the most solemn hearing, that ever
was on both sides in any Kingdom, may be seen in Roll. Par. 39 Hen. VI. n. 10.
which I cited before, and once more recommend to the Reader, and to our
Preacher too. But which soever of the two is the best side of the Controversy,
it did not become him of all men in the Kingdom, to affirm those Authorities to
be the same, who had declared Henry IV. to be an Usurper, and the meeting of a
Convention without the King's Writ to be an Essential Nullity; and who likewise
in his third Discourse, delivered to his Clergy concerning the infallibility,
and authority of the Church, declares that in all Constitutions among men, the
most evident thing, is this, where the supreme Authority rests, that there
should be no danger of mistaking, and where, and in whom it evidently rests by
our constitutions, those who have read the many recognition Acts in our Statute
Book, and the Oath of Supremacy may easily tell.

But then in the second place, let us suppose those Authorities to be the same,
yet it does not follow, that the Cases of the Deprivations are the same too.
For the same lawful Authority may in one Reign deprive justly, and in another
unjustly; sometimes it may make good, and sometimes it may enact wicked Laws;
sometimes punish evildoers, and sometimes punish well-doers, and banish,
deprive, or praemunire Men, or put them to death for keeping as well as for
breaking the Commandments of God, and for adhereing to Truth, Justice, and
common Honesty, which are the Ligaments of all Human Communions, as well as for
acting against them, and the plain Maxims of Right and Wrong, which are
engraven upon the Consciences of Men. Our Preacher therefore should not only
have asserted the Authorities depriving to be the same, but the Causes, and
Reasons of the Deprivations to have been the same too; but this he has not had
assurance enough to do, and therefore for any thing he has written to the
contrary, the Deprivation of our suffering Bishops and Clergy may be unjust,
and wicked, and a direful persecution, and they as much Confessors, for
Righteousness, Truth, and common Probity, as he says, they now pretend to be:
There are such Apologies, and Defenses written for them, that I protest, if I
were their most implacable Enemy, as I fear our Preacher is, I could not tell
how to answer them, and till they are answered, they, and those, who hold
Communion with them, and wish well to them, will presume the Truth to be on
their side. This I say upon supposition, that the Authority which deprived them
is as lawful, as our Preacher can wish it, but if it should be otherwise, as it
may be for any thing he has said to the contrary, then upon this supposition,
I believe he will not deny, but that as Christians they suffer Persecution, and
tyrannical Oppression as Freeborn Subjects of this Realm.

Further, there is something more in this matter, which the deprived insist
upon with great force of Reason, and that is the want of Validity in any Civil
Authority whatsoever to deprive Bishops, a point which Dr. Hody the chief
Vindicator of the present Deprivations has not yet ventured upon, though he
has See his Preface to the Case of the Sees vacant stated, etc.
promised a particular Treatise of it, and he is earnestly desired to reserve
it no longer, that the most Learned and Pious Vindication of the deprived
Bishops, who has long expected it, may return an answer to both.

Having now ended my third Chapter, I should proceed in a fourth, to censure
the Style of our Preacher with the same freedom, that he has taken upon him to
censure that of so many other Writers, and most of them greater men, than
himself. The Style of Dr. Lowth, who is a much greater Divine, is in his
account rough, and shaggy; his Author Lactantius wrote not in a style becoming
an Historian; Varillas his Periods, though they had their Beauties, yet were
but whipped Cream; Maimbourgh's Writings smelt of Champaigne, and Mounsieur Le
Grand, whose learning is answerable to his name, wrote like an Si Monsieur
Burnet avoit vu les deux conclusions qui sont a la fin de la Defense de
Sanderus, and de la resutation des deux premiers Livres de la Reformation, il
auroit raison de dire, qu'en ces endroits la, le Style de Monsieur Le Grand,
est le Style dun Avocat, and d'un Avocat vehement, qui gourmande furieusement
sa party. Et on peut assurer que cet Avocat appelle icy de la sentence de
Monsieur Burnet, comme de juge incompetent. Lettres de Monsieur Burnet avec les
remarques de M. L. G. p. 13.
Advocate, and Pleader of Causes, and if Sir George Mackensie had lived, his
would have smelt so too. No Style of any sort of Writers, plain or polished,
course or fine, can please him in any Language; be they English or Foreigners,
Protestants or Papists, Divines or Lawyers if they are his Adversaries, they
cannot escape his insolent Censure. But if they are friends, or partisans, and
men of his Feather, then their Funeral Sermon. p. 13.14.
Style is exact, neither sinking nor swelling, plain, distinct, short, clear,
all of one piece, without superfluity of Words, superficial Strains, false
Thoughts, or bold Flights; all solid, yet lively, and grave, as well as free.
The Wilkinses and Tillotsons, that are for the Liberties of Mankind, and have
large Thoughts of things, those who are their own Patterns, and above the
Examples of former Times, they shall all have the highest Characters; they are
all Patterns for the World to follow; but the men of strict Principles, the
narrow, the hot, the warm, the angry, and the peevish men, are unaccurate, and
little Writers, that understand true Eloquence as little, as the just freedoms
of Human Nature. Nor have they any thing of Propriety, Beauty, or Strength of
Style, when they happen to write against him. But notwithstanding all the
provocations he has given to examine the Style of his Funeral Sermon, and show
how incongruous it is to the Occasion* and boyish in affectation of Words; and
Phrases, I will not spend my time, and Paper in an undertaking so unsuitable to
my Genius, but leave it to the Wits, and Critics of the Town, and particularly
to the fourth Person of the Conference mentioned in the Introduction, who will
not act against the Rules of Honor, if they call him, and other haughty
Writers to the test of Eloquence, and by the severity of a strict Censure
expose their Writings, as much as it is their common practice to expose other
men's. For my own part, as I am sensible of many defects in my own Style, so I
seldom censure other men's, always minding more what is written, than the manner
of writing of it, and the truth, weight, and congruity of things in Sermons,
and all other Tracts, more than the Style in which the Author sets them before
his Reader; and where there is no exception against the former, or none just or
matterial, I always conceal the defects I think there may be in the later.

The END.
No. 1. AN Appendix of Papers:
The Dialogue. Sep. 4th. 1690.

b. I Desire your Lordships excuse for coming thus late to wait upon your
Lordship. I was coming in the Afternoon, but then you had taken Coach and was
going abroad, and the hard Rain this evening has occasioned this late waiting
on your Lordship.


B. You may come to me at any time.


b. My business to your Lordship is this: There is a Presentation entered upon
me, and I have entered a Caveat, and I desire I may have a fair legal
Proceeding and Trial.


B. Tell me presently your reason, or else i will give Institution without any
more ado.


b. The place is full, there is a plenarty already.


B. Have you taken the Oaths? tell me.


b. My Circumstances and Obligations are such, that I cannot discover it: I
desire your Lordship not to press me thereto; I desire a fair publik hearing.


B. I have consulted the Judges in this Case! I expect your present answer! if
you will not tell me or bring a Certificate that you have taken the Oaths, I Will
give Institution.


b. As yet my Lord there is no Conviction, for what I should be deprived.


B. You have lived these last six Months in opposition to the present
Government: I hope not to see one of you left in the Kingdom by Christmas.


b. That is a hard saying, my Lord.


B. I tell you, not one of you shall be permitted to tarry in the Kingdom; I
will show more mercy to a Popish Priest than to one of you; you are the
Disturbers of the Government, and Enemies to the Settlement; ye are worse than
the very Papists.


b. If not Mercy, my Lord, yet I hope, we shall find Justice.


B. I Will show you neither, I Will Prosecute you to the utmost extremity, I Will
give Institution presently.


b. There is a Caveat entered my Lord, I hope I shall be heard.


B. I Will over rule it.


b. If you will not hear my Plea, according to the legal course, there lies an
Action against your Lordship.


B. I don't value that: If an Action be brought I Will cover my self with my
Privilege.


b. The taking the Oath now (if I have not taken it already) will do me no good as
to my Parsonage; and I humbly conceive your Lordship has no power to tender me
the Oath.


B. Yes I have; I can tender it any Person that walks in the Streets.


b. But not to a Clergyman, I appeal to your very Act; I can show you (let me
have the Act) where we are exempted.


B. I command you on your Canonical Obedience to tell me, whether you have
taken the Oaths; and you are Perjured if you don't tell me.


b. That is no part of the Canon, or of my Canonical Obedience.


B. You are an insolent haughty Man; you may remember how insolent you was the
last time you was here. No Man was ever so insolent to me as you have been, you
have been put on by the party to be a Thorn in my Side. The Bishop of B. and W.
has been at your House to put you on to oppose me, and you are an Agent for
the Party.


b. If I was to appear presently at the great Judgment, he did not.


B. I wont believe one word you say.


b. I cant help that.


B. You are an insolent Man; you bid defiance to the Government, you don't keep
the Fast, nor pray for the K. and Q.


b. Good words my Lord I beseech you, insolent is an hard Name, consider my
Character: my Lord, I am a Priest of the Church of England.


B. I believe you have taken the Oaths already, you are a double Man.


b. If you do believe that I have sworn, why do you then trouble me?


B. You are put on to oppose me; I Will prosecute you to the utmost extremity.
I Will Excommunicate you, I Will make you an example, you shall not tarry any
longer where you are.


b. I am prepared for the worst; I hope God will give me patience to bear it,
and as yet I must tarry longer in my Parsonage.


B. You shall not much longer.


b. I hope your Lordship will not turn me out by an armed Violence.


B. You may be gone.


b. I beg your pardon for this trouble, I only desire Justice, and so bid your
Lordship good Night.


May, 29th. The First Meeting was disputative between B. and b. about the
Oaths. The Fourth Discourse was as above.

Aug. 89. Second Discourse was more temperate and civil.

The Third Discourse was Feb. 21th. 89. and was as follows,

B. By what authority do you Preach at O?


b. As I am Rector of O.


B. Have you taken the Oaths?


b. I desire to be excused from answering that question.


B. I must know; I am concerned how the Law is observed.


b. Show me the Law or the Canon that impowers you to ask that question, and
that I am obliged to answer to it, and then I will give you my answer.


B. If you wont tell me you must be summoned into the Consistory, and I will
acquaint the Lord chief Justice with it, who will force you to answer at the
Assizes,


b. You may do what you please, but I Will neither tell you nor him as yet; I am
neither ashamed nor afraid to appear any where. Have I affronted you? or what
Law or Canon is it, that I have transgressed for which I am now Summoned?


B. I am informed also that you don't pray for the K. and Q. by name.


b. Let that be proved.


B. Tell me whether you do or not. And I Will believe you.


b. There is a Rule in the Court, Nemo tenetur accusare seipsum.


B. If you will not tell me now, you shall tell me in the Consistory.


b. I cannot tell that; When I am Cited, I intend to appear by Gods Blessing, to
consider what answer to make for my Defense.


B. I Will take care you shall be prosecuted.


b. I am as regular a Man as any in the Diocese, and you have contrived to
Ruin me.


B. I have not contrived to Ruin you.


b. Your practice declares as much; you will not permit me to enjoy my quiet,
and my retired Life: The first time you came to S -- was on a Saturday, and the
next Monday Night you consulted to trouble me, and now you have not been here a
fortnight but you have Summoned me and now threaten me; you have Cited me
twice, and will not show me Law nor Canon for it.


B. Well! well! you shall be Summoned into the Court.


b. I fear it not. Exit. B. at one Door, and b. at the opposite Door.


Sept. 27. 91. at O.

B. I wonder you began Prayers before I came* (he had appointed another to read
Prayers but b. would not permit him to read Prayers.)


b. And I wonder that you gave me no notice of your coming; for since you gave
no notice, I was bound to take no notice of it.


B. Well, next Tuesday seven night you shall be Summoned into the Court.


b. And I Will take care to defend my self; But for what will you Sommon me?


B. You shall then know.


b. Then it seems it is not yet known: if honest Naiboth must lose his Life and
his Vineyard, then honest Naiboth must be contented.

To which not one word more of reply.


No. II. Cogitatones meae sunt.
1. UT nullo modo concedamus de nobis dici, quod neutri neutros antea
intellexerint: Nam isto pharmaco non medebimur tanto vulneri, cum nec ipsi
credamus utrumque verum hoc esse, and alii putabunt a nobis hoc fingi; and ita
magis suspectam reddemus causam, vel potius per totum dubiam faciemus, cum sit
communis omnium, and in tantis animorum turbis scrupulis non expedit hoc nomine
addere offendiculum.

2. Cum hactenus dissenserimus, quod Illi signum, Nos Corpus Christi
asseruerimus, plane contrarii in Sacramento; nihil minus mihi videtur utile,
quam ut mediam and novam sententiam statuamus, qua and illi concedant Corpus
Christi addesse vere, and nos concedamus panem solum manducari; ut enim
conscientiam taceam, considerandum est certe quantam hic fenestram aperiemus in
re omnibus communi cogitandi, and orientur hic fontes questionum and opinionum:
ut tutius multo sit illos simpliciter manner in suo signo; Cum nec ipsi suam,
nec nos nostram partem, multo minus utrique totum orbem pertrahemus in eam
sententiam, sed potius irritabimus ad varias Cogitationes. Ideo vellem potius
ut sopitum maneret dissidium in duabus istis Sententiis, quam ut occasio
davetur infinitis quaestionibus ad Epicurisinum profuturis.

3. Cum stent hic pro nostra sententia (1.) textus ipse apertissimus Evangelii,
qui non sine causa movet omnes homines, non solum pios; (2.) Patrum decta
quamplurima, quae non tam facile possunt solvi, nec tuta conscientia aliter
quam sonat intelligi, cum bona Grammatica textui fortiter consentiant: (3.)
Quia periculosum est statuere Ecclesiam tot annos per totum orbem caruisse vero
sensu Sacramenti, cum nos fateamur omnes mansisse Sacramenta, and verbum, etsi
obruta multis abominationibus.

4. Dicta S. Aug. de signo, quae contraria nostrae sententiae videntur, non
sunt firma satis contra ista jam tria dicta, maxim cum ex Aug. scriptis clare
possit ostendi, and convinci, Eum loqui de signo praesentis Corporis: Vt illud
contra Adamantum, Non dubitavit Dominus appellare Corpus suum, cum daret signum
Corporis sui; vel de signo corporis mystici in quo valde multus est praesertim
in Johanne, ubi copiose docet Manducare carnem Christi esse in corpore mystico,
seu, ut ipse dicit, in societate, unitate, charitate Ecclesiae, istis enim
verbis utitur.

5. Ominium est fortissimum Augustinus quod dicit, Non hoc Corpus quod videtis
Manducaturi estis, etc. Et tamen conscientia memor apertorum verborum Christi
(Hoc est Corpus meum) hoc dictum S. Aug. facile sic exponit quod de visibili
corpore loquatur Aug. sicut sonant verba (quod videtis) Ita nihil pugnat Aug.
cum claris verbis Christi; and Aug. infirmior est quam ut hoc uno dicto, and
tam incerto, imo satis consono nos moveat in contrarium Sensum.

6. Ego S. Aug. non intelligo aliter (sic and ipse Patres ante se sort
intellexerit) quam quod contra Judaeos and Gentes docendum fuit, apud
Christianos non comedi Corpus Christi visibiliter, and more Corporali, hac
ratione fidem Sacramenti defenderunt. Rursus contra Hypocritas Christianorum
docendum fuit, quod Sacramentum non esset salutare accipientibus, nisi
spiritualiter manducarent, i. e. Ecclesiae essent uniti, and incorporati; and
hac ratione Charitatem in Sacramento exegerunt, ut ex Aug. clare accipi potest,
qui absque dubio ex prioribus Patribus, and sui saeculi usu ista accepit.

7. Istis salvis nihil est quod a me peti possit: Nam and ego hoc dissidium
vellem (testis est mihi Christus meus) redemptum non uno Corpore, and sanguine
meo, Sed quid faciam? Ipsi forte conscientia bona capti sunt in alteram
sententiam. Feramus igitur eos. Si sinceri sunt liberabit eos Christus Dominus.
Ego contra captus sum bona certe conscientia (nisi ipse mihi sim ignotus) in
meamsententiam, ferant and me, si non possint mihi accedere.

Si vero illi sententiam suam, sc. de praesentia Corporis Christi cum pane
tenere velint, and petierint Nos invicem tamen tolerari, ego plane tolerabo, in
spe futurae communionis; nam interim communicare Illis in fide and sensu non
possum.

Deinde si politica concordia quaeritur, ea non impeditur diversitate
Religionis; sicut novimus posse conjugia, commercia, aliaque politica constare
inter diversae religionis homines, (1 Cor. 7.) Christus faciat ut perfect
conteratur Satan sub nostris pedibus. Amen.

Nostra autem sententia est, Corpus ita cum pane, seu in pane esse, ut revera
cum pane manducetur, and quemcunque motum, vel actionem panis habet, eandem and
Corpus Christi: ut Corpus Christi vere dicatur ferri, dari, accipi, manducari,
quando panis fertur, datur, accipitur, manducatur. Id est, Hoc est Corpus meum.

No. III. A LETTER written to my Lord Russel in Newgate, the Twentieth of July,
1683.
My Lord.
I Was heartily glad to see your Lordship this Morning in that calm and devout
temper at the Receiving of the Blessed Sacrament; but Peace of mind, unless it
be well-grounded, will avail little: And because transient Discourse many times
has little effect for want of time to weigh and consider it, therefore in
tender compassion of your Lordships Case, and from all the good will that one
Man can bear to another, I do humbly offer to your Lordships deliberate
thoughts these following Considerations concerning the points of Resistance, If
our Religion and Rights should be invaded, as your Lordship puts the Case,
concerning which I understand by Dr. B. that your Lordship had once received
Satisfaction, and am sorry to find a change.

First, That the Christian Religion does plainly forbid the Resistance of
Authority.

Secondly, That though our Religion be Established by Law, (which your Lordship
urges as a difference between our Case, and that of the Primitive Christians)
yet in the same Law which Establishes our Religion it is declared. That it is
not Lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take up Arms, etc. Besides that
there is a particular Law declaring the Power of the Militia to be solely in
the King. And that ties the hands of Subjects, though the Law of Nature and the
General Rules of Scripture had left us at liberty; which I believe they do not,
because the Government and Peace of Humane Society could not well subsist upon
these Terms.

Thirdly, Your Lordships opinion is contrary to the declared Doctrine of all
Protestant Churches; and though some particular Persons have taught otherwise,
yet they have been contradicted herein and condemned for it by the Generality
of Protestants, And I beg your Lordship to consider how it will agree with an
avowed asserting of the Protestant Religion, to go contrary to the General
Doctrine of Protestants. My end in this is to convince your Lordship that you
are in a very Great and Dangerous Mistake, and being so convinced that which
before was a Sin of Ignorance, will appear of much more heinous Nature, as in
Truth it is, and call for a very particular and deep Repentance; which if your
Lordship sincerely exercise upon the sight of your Error, by a Penitent
Acknowledgment of it to God and Men, you will not only obtain Forgiveness of
God, but prevent a mighty Scandal to the Reformed Religion. I am very loath to
give your Lordship any disquiet in the Distress you are in, which I commiserate
from my heart, but am much more concerned that you do not leave the World in a
Delusion and false Peace, to the hindrance of your Eternal Happiness. I
heartily Pray for you, and beseech your Lordship to believe that I am with the
greatest Sincerity and Compassion in the World,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Faithful and Afflicted Servant, J. Tillotson.


Printed for R. Baldwin, 1683.

No. IV. To the KING'S most Excellent Majesty James the Second, etc.
The Humble Address of the Bishops and Clergy of the City of London.
WE your Majesty's most humble and Dutiful Subjects do heartily condole your
Majesty's loss of so dear a Brother, of Blessed Memory

And do thankfully adore that Divine Providence which has so Peaceably settled
your Majesty, our Rightful Sovereign Lord, upon the Throne of your Ancestors,
to the joy of all your Majesty's good Subjects.

And as the Principles of our Church have taught us our Duty to our Prince, so
we most humbly thank your Majesty for making our Duty so Easy and pleasant by
your gracious assurance to defend our Religion, established by Law, which is
dearer to us than our Lives. In a deep sense whereof, we acknowledge our selves
for ever bound, not only in Duty but gratitude, to contribute all we can by our
Prayers, our Doctrine, and Example, to your Majesty's happy and prosperous
Reign.

And with our most sincere promises of all Faith and Allegiance, do humbly
implore the Divine goodness to preserve your Majesty's Person, and to establish
your Throne in this World, and when he shall be pleased to Translate you hence,
to bestow on you an Eternal Crown of Life and Glory.

No. V.
IN the Name of God, Amen. Before the Lord Jesus Christ Judge of the Quick and
Dead, We long since became bound by Oath upon the sacred Evangelical Book unto
our Sovereign Lord Richard, late King of England, That we as long as we lived
shall bear true Allegiance, and fidelity toward him and his Heirs succeeding
him in the Kingdom by just Title, Right, and Line according to the Statutes and
Custom of this Realm; have here taken unto us certain Articles subscribed in
form following, to be proponed, heard, and tried before the just Judge, Christ
Jesus, and the whole World. But if (which God forbid) by force, Fear, or
violence of wicked Persons, we shall be cast in Prison, or by violent Death be
prevented, so as in this world we shall not be able to prove the said Articles
as we wish; Then we do appeal to the high Celestial Judge, that he may judge
and discern the same in the day of his supreme Judgment. First, we depose, say,
and except, and intend to prove against Henry Darby, commonly called King of
England, (himself pretending the same, but without all Right and Title
thereunto) and against his adherents, fautors, Accomplices, that they have ever
been, are, and will be Traitors, Invaders, and Destroyers of God's Church, and
of our Sovereign Lord Richard, late King of England, his heirs, his Kingdom,
and Commonwealth, as shall hereafter manifestly appear -- In the Second
Article they declare him Forsworn, Prejured, and Excommunicate, for that he
conspired against his Sovereign Lord King Richard. In the Fourth they recite by
what wrong, illegal, and false means he exalted himself into the Throne of of
the Kingdom; and then describing the miserable State of the Nation, which
followed after his Usurpation, they again pronounce him Perjured and
Excommunicate. In the Fifth Article they set forth in what a Barbarous and
inhuman manner. Henry and his Accomplices Imprisoned and Murdered K. Richard,
and then cry out, wherefore O England! arise, stand up and avenge the Cause,
the Death and injury of thy King and Prince: If thou do not, take this for
certain that the Righteous God will Destroy thee by strange Invasions, and
foreign Power, and avenge himself on thee for this so horrible an Act. In The
Seventh they depose against him for putting to Death not only Lords Spiritual,
and other Religious Men, but also diverse of the Lords Temporal there Named; for
which they pronounce him Excommunicate. In the Ninth they say, and depose, that
the Realm of England never Flourished, nor Prospered after he Tyrannically took
upon him the Government of it. And in the Last they Depose and protest for
themselves, and K. Richard and his Heirs, the Clergy, and Commonwealth of the
whole Realm, that they intended neither in word nor deed, to offend any State
of men in the Realm, but to prevent the approaching Destruction of it, and
beseeching all men to favor them and their designs, whereof the First was, to
Exalt to the Kingdom the true and lawful Heir, and him to Crown in Kingly
Throne with the Diadem of England.

No. VI.
THat all Parliaments and Ambitious self seekers in them, who under pretense
of public Reformation, Liberty, the Peoples ease or welfare, have by indirect
Surmise, Policies, Practices, Force and new Devices, most Usurped upon the
Prerogatives of their Kings, or the Persons, Lives, Offices, or Estates of such
Nobles, great Officers, and other Persons of a contrary Party, whom they most
dreaded, maligned, and which have imposed new Oaths upon the Members to secure,
perpetuate, and make irrevocable their own Acts, Judgments, and unrighteous
Proceedings, have always proved most abortive, successless, pernicious to
themselves, and the activest Instruments in them: The Parliaments themselves
being commonly totally repealed, nulled, and the Grandees in them suppressed,
impeached, condemned, destroyed as Traitors and Enemies to the Public, in the
very next succeeding Parliaments, or not very long after. That Kings Created,
and set up merely by Parliaments, and their own Power in them, without any true
Hereditary Title, have seldom answered the Lords and Commons Expectations in
the Preservation of their just Laws, Liberties and Answers to their Petitions,
yea, themselves at last branded for Tyrants, Traitors, Murderers, Usurpers;
Their Posterities impeached of High Treason, and disinherited of the Crown by
succeeding Kings and Parliaments of, etc. From these Three last Observations we
may learn, that as Parliaments are the best of all Courts, and Councils, when
duly Summoned, Convened, Constituted, Ordered, and kept within their Legal
Bounds: So they become the greatest Mischiefs and Grievances to the Kingdom,
when like the Ocean they overflow their banks, or degenerate and become through
Sedition, Malice, Fear, or Infatuation by Divine Justice, promoters of corrupt
sinister Ends, or Accomplishers of the private Designs and ambitious Interests
of particular Persons, under the disguise of Public Reformation, Liberty,
Safety and Settlement.

No. VII.
Although it can no way be doubted, but that His Majesty's Right and Title to
these Crowns and Kingdoms, is and was every way Complete by the Death of His
most Royal Father of Glorious Memory, without the Ceremony and Solemnity of a
Proclamation: Yet since Proclamations in such Cases have been always used, to
the end that all good Subjects might upon this Occasion testify their Duty and
Respect. And since the Armed Violence and other the Calamities of many Years
last past, have hitherto deprived us of any opportunity, wherein we might
express our Loyalty and Allegiance to His Majesty. We therefore the Lords and
Commons now Assembled in Parliament, together with the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and
Common-Council-Men of the City of London, and other Freemen of this Kingdom
now present, do according to our Duty and Allegiance, heartily, joyfully, and
unanimously acknowledge and proclaim, that immediately upon the Decease of our
late Sovereign King Charles I. the Imperial Crown of the Realm of England, and
of all the Kingdoms, Dominions and Rights belonging to the same, did by
inherent Birthright, and lawful undoubted Succession, descend and come to His
most Excellent Majesty King Charles II as being lineally, justly and lawfully
next of the Blood Royal of this Realm, and that by the Goodness and Providence
of Almighty God, He is of England, Scotland and Ireland, the most Potent,
Mighty, and Undoubted King. And thereunto We most humbly and faithfully do
submit, and oblige our selves, our Heirs and Posterities for ever.

No. VIII. An Account of several Considerable Services that have been done to
the Government by virtue of the Powers given by the Act for Printing, since the
last Continuation thereof, Feb. 13. 1692, showing. That there have been Five
Private Presses, and many Treasonable Pamphlets and Libels discovered and
seized within less than Two Years, viz.
OCtober 29. 1692. Discovered and Seized a Private Press with a Libel, near the
Greek Church by So-Ho; The Persons employed made their Escape.

May 2. 1693. Discovered and Seized another Private Press, in S. James's-
street, with 34 several Treasonable Pamphlets and Libels, the Titles of which
are as follow: An Historical Romance of the War. The Jacobites Principles
vindicated. A Vindication of the deprived Bishops. Two Letters to the Author of
Solomon and Abiathar. A Vindication of some among our selves. Eucharisticon, or
a Comment upon the Fast. The Humble petition of the Common People of England to
the Parliament. The Auction, or Catalogue of Books. A Letter to Mr. Samuel
Johnson. His Majesty's Speech with Reflections. The Resolution of a Case of
Conscience. The People of England's Grievances. A Specimen of the State of the
Nation. New Court-Contrivances, or more Sham-plots. A Bob for the Seamen. An
Answer to Dr. King 's Book. A Dialogue between Sophronius and Philo-Belgius. A
Letter to Dr. Tillotson. A French Conquest neither desirable nor practicable.
Lex Ignea, or the Justice of the House of Commons for advancing a Title to the
Crown by Conquest. A second Letter to the Lord Bishop of Litchfield and
Coventry, occasioned by a Letter to him from the Bishop of Sarum. A New Song
with Musical Notes. The Sea-Martyrs. A New Scotch Whim. A List of Ships lost or
damaged since 1688. His Majesty's Speech, November the 4th, with Explications.
The Bell-man of Piccadilly to the Princess of Denmark. The Earl of Pembroke 's
Speech about the Lords in the Tower. Some Paradoxes presented for a
New-Years-Gift from the Old Orthodox to the New, serving for an Index to the
Revolution. Remarks upon the present Confederacy. King William 's Speech to the
Cabinet-Council, Considerations upon the second Canon.


June, 1693. Another Private Press seized in Westminster, with the late King
James's Declaration and several other Libels.

About the same time another Private Press seized in Long-Acre.

Jan. 17, 1695. Discovered and Seized another Private Press in Peticoat-Lane in
Spittle-Fields, with the several Seditious and Treasonable Pamphlets following,
viz.

A Ballad, entitled, The Belgic Boor. A Parallel between O. P. and P. O.
Reflections on a Letter from S. Germains. The humble Address to both Houses of
Parliament. Remarks on a Paper to restore the late King James. Happy be Lucky,
or a Catalogue of Books, etc. Delenda Carthago, or the true Interest of
England, etc. A Dialogue between A. and B. two plain Country Gentlemen
concerning the Times. A Petition of the Prisoners in the Savoy, showing them to
be neither Traitors nor Pirates A Persuasive to Consideration: and one Form of
a Letter to Sir John Trenchard.
All which were found in the Custody of one James Dover, a Printer, committed
to Newgate for the same.

Besides the above-recited Libels against the State, many Heretical and
Socinian Books have been seized and stopped; particularly one Entitled, A brief
and clear Confutation of the Trinity, which was publicly burnt, by Order of
both Houses of Parliament, and the Author prosecuted. And one other is lately
taken with its Author, called, A designed End to the Socinian Controversy, or
a Rational and plain Discourse to prove, That no other Person but the Father of
Christ is God most High.

There have been Three Persons found guilty of High Treason, that were the
Printers at some of the Private Presses abovementioned, one of which named
William Anderton, was Condemned and Executed.

There are Three Presses at least, known to be lately removed from Public
Printing-Houses in London into Private; One from the House of one Bonny;
another from from one Astwood; and another from one Andrew Soul, all Printers.

If the Design of these Persons who manage these Presses were to do Lawful
Work, they may do that openly at home, without Hazard or Disturbance; It must
therefore be concluded that they are gone into Private to Libel the Government.

Now, Considering how absolutely necessary this Act for Printing has been, and
is, for the Security of the Common Peace and Good of the Nation, It is hoped,
That this Honorable House will continue the same, till they shall have leisure
to take into their Consideration the Reasonableness of the Objections that may
be made against the present Act, or any Clause therein contained. For should
this be discontinu'd, and the Press be but for a while without Restraint, His
Majesty's Government would be left Defenseless against His Secret Adversaries
at Home, whilst he is hazarding His Royal Person Abroad against the Common
Enemy; the Consequences of which may prove so Fatal, as not to admit of a
Future Remedy.

No. IX. A Catalogue of Books not yet Answered.
VIndiciae Juris Regii: Being an Answer to the Enquiry into the Measures of
Submission and Obedience, etc. A Discourse of the Sense of the Word Allegiance.
A Defense of the Vindication of the Lord Bishop of Chichester's Declaration. An
Answer to the Bishop of Sarum's Pastoral Letter, which was burnt by the hands
of the common Hangman. An Answer to the Letter to a Bishop. An Answer to the
Historical Part of the Unreasonableness of a New-Separation. Christianity a
Doctrine of the Cross. An Answer to Dr. Sharp's Funeral Sermon at S. Giles's. A
Vindication of some among our selves. etc. The Loyal Martyr Vindicated. An
Answer to Dr. King's Book. An Answer to a late Pamphlet, Entitled, Obedience
and Submission to the present GoGovernment, demonstrated from Bishop Overal 's
Convocation-Book, with a Postscript. An Answer to Dr. Sherlock's Vindication of
Allegiance due to Sovereign Princes. An Answer to a Letter to Dr. Sherlock,
written in Vindication of that part of Josephus his History, which gives the
Account of Jaddus's Submission to Alexander, against An Answer to the
Vindication of the Divines of the Church of England, who have taken the Oaths
from the charge of Rebellion and Pruerjy. An Answer to a Piece, Entitled,
Obedience and Submission to the present Government. The Title of an Usurper
after a thorough Settlement examined; In Answer to Dr. Sherlock's Case of
Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers. The Duty of Allegiance settled upon its true
Grounds, according to Scripture, Reason, and the Opinion of the Church: In
Answer to a late Book of Dr. William Sherlock, Entitled, The Case of Allegiance
due to Sovereign Powers, etc. Written by Mr. Kettlewel. Dr. Sherlock's Case of
Allegiance considered, with some Remarks on his Vindication. An Examination of
the Arguments drawn from Scripture and Reason, in Dr. Sherlock's Case of
Allegiance, and his Vindication of it.
ERRATA.
In the Preface.
PAge 2. l. 15. r. those l. 17. r. such public, l. 31. d. then. p. 3. l. 3.
from the bottom after up r w^h, p. 6. l. 3. d. alone, l. 14. r. very, in marg.
r. another, and for Prebendary, r. Prebend,

In the Book.
PAge 4. l. 5. r. works, l. 28. after others r. contained in this Letter, l.
34. for stalking, r. talking, p. 5. l. 36. for them, r. whom, p. 8. marg. b.
for qu'ile r. qu'ils, p. 12. l. 2. r. the account p. 13. marg. a. r. 1674/5 l.
32. for safest, r. softest p. 19. l. 8. r. delated, p. 20. l. 9. for Court, r.
Cause, p. 21. l. 26. r. IN SACRAMENTO, p. 22. l. 9. before of, r. often, l. 10.
before his, r. all, p. 23. l. 15. put the comma after speaking, l. 24. after.
and r. as I, l. 30. r. came, p. 26. l. 3. from the bottom, before Men r. even,
p. 27. l. 10. r. truly, l. 27. r. bear, p. 29. l. 31. for Pope, r. Paidre, p.
31. l. 25. r. Molini, p. 35. l. 4. from the bottom, for of the, r. for the, p.
38. l. 13. d. and, p. 39. l. 9. before justify r. would, p. 44 l. 32. after
asserting, r. in effect, l. 33. after between, r. Sin, p. 52. l. 18. for and,
r. as l. 23. r. accepted, p. 53. l. 5. from the bottom, instead of for, r. of,
p. 54. l. 14. after insist, r. so much, p. 55. l. 13. for sacrificed, r.
crucified, p. 57. l. 17. r. helped, p. 58 l. 5. r. allowances, p. 59. l. 19.
after it, r. only, p. 60. l. 25. r. giving, p. 65. l. 20. after many, r. sects,
l. 24. for more r. worse, p. 66. l. 6. after designers make a full stop, l. 10.
instead of for it, r. fi^m, l. 20. after to, r. those p. 67. l. 28. for hate r.
rate, l. 35. d. an, p. 69. l. 23 r. those p. 71. l. 11. r, betakes, p, 73. l,
5. from the bottom, after Religion, r, was it not for making it a cloak for
Ambition, Avarice, Robbery and Murder? p. 75, l, 14. after as, r. some
suspect, p. 77. marg, r. N. V. p. 81. marg. Socrat. Hist. Eccl. lib. 3. cap. 8.
l. 15. after also, r. hid, p. 79. l. 20. after Revolution r. in words, l. 21.
d. said p. 83. l. 37. for them r. they p. 84. l. 10. r. they had all ^d to be,
l. 28. r. tells us. p. 86. l. 17. r. the other, p. 87 l. 36. r. vindicator.


