A DISCOURSE TO PROVE That the strongest Temptations are Conquerable BY
CHRISTIANS: OR, A Sober defense of NATURE and GRACE, Against the Cavils, and
Excuses of loose incosiderate Men.

IN A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR of London, and
Court of ALDERMEN, The 14th of January, 1676/7.

By GEORGE HICKES, B. D. Chaplain to his Grace the Lord Duke of Lauderdale, And
Fellow of Linc. Coll. Oxon.

I can do all things through Christ, that strengthens me.

Phil. 4.13. Ye are of God little Childaen, and have overcome them, because
greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world.

1 John 4.4. LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid, and are to be sold by Moses Pit, at
the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1677.

DAVIES MAYOR.
Martis xxiij. die Januarii, 1676. Annoque Regni Regis CAROLI secundi, Anglie,
etc. xxviij.
THis Court does desire Mr. Hicks to Print his Sermon lately Preached at the
Guild Hall Chapel, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this City.

Wagstaffe.

IMPRIMATUR,

Guil. Jane, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a
Feb. 16. 1676/7.
To the Right Honorable Sir THOMAS DAVIES, Lord Mayor of LONDON, AND The Court
of ALDERMEN.
My Lord,
I Have a singular veneration for your Lordship, and the Court, which makes me
submit my Judgment to yours, and publish this Discourse, to comply with your
joint request, which I think as obliging as any Command. Your Authority, more
than all the interest I have in it, will recommend it to the World, and if it
be but read with as much satisfaction, as your Honors heard it, it will answer
the ends of its Publication, and prove as useful, as it is suitable to the
necessities of the age. It Is a sad thing to consider, that there should be an
occasion for such a Discourse as this, and nothing reflects more dishonor upon
the Gospel, or more grieves and disheartens the Ministers thereof, then to see
themselves constrained by Men's extravagant Opinions, to Preach up those Truths,
they ought to presuppose. But so, my Lord, it is, that Men's Errors and Vices
give us subjects for Sermons, as the sometimes give our Lawgivers matter for
their Laws, and particularly Scepticisme, which is nothing but Infidelity in
several dresses and degrees, so possesses the Minds of Men, that instead of
Preaching up Practical Divinity, we are often constrained to insist upon
Doctrinal Points. Instead of persuading Men to the Love of God, we are fain now
and then to prove that he is, instead of urging them to have a care of their
Souls, we are forced to prove, that their Souls are beings worthy of their
care, and instead of pressing them to resist all manner of Temptations, and
Pray for the Grace of God, we sometimes find it needful, first to convince
then, that they have power to resist them, and that his Grace is a real thing.
This bitter root of unbelief is the Reason, why the Gospel has no better
success in the World, and one of the true causes, why so many Men have a secret
ill will for the Ministers of it, because they are an Order of Men set aside to
maintain the everlasting Truths of God, and oppose themselves to those impious
Opinions, by which they are willing to Damn their Souls. But were other Men, my
Lord, as Orthodox, and understood their Religion as well as you, there would be
no occasions for such Discourses as this, but we should wholly set our selves
to press home upon Men's Consciences the practical Duties of Religion, and by
that means make the Preaching part of Divinity more delightful to our selves,
and much more profitable to the Church of God. We should not then complain so
much of the unsuccessfulness of our labors, but see more of the travel of our
Souls, when the work of our Lord did prosper in our hands.

But whether we Preach Practically, or whether we Preach about Speculative
Truths, we do the Work of him that sent us; by the former, we reform Men's
Vices, by the latter, we confute their Errors, by both we keep their
Consciences awake, and make it impossible for them to live without remorse, or
dye in their Sins without fear. So that the Ministerial Function, were it
merely Humane, must needs be confessed to be an excellent Institution, and its
greatest Enemies cannot but acknowledge, that the Pulpit conduces as much as
the Bench, to preserve Civil Order, and restrain the exorbitant Passions of
Men. In particular, my Lord, were it not for us, this populous City, which is
now so happy in your Government, would be far more Wicked than it is, and both
your Honor, and all other Ministers of Criminal Justice, would have much more
Employment for their Axes and Rods. As for you, my Lord, your Honor, by your
diligent and impartial Administration of Justice has testified to the World,
that you bear not the Sword in vain. For ever since it was put into your hands,
you have severely Punished Vice, and reformed more disorders, and disorderly
Persons, than I have opportunity here to relate. The World sees, and the City
feels the effects of your good Government: Good Men Honor you, bad Men Fear
you, God will Bless you, and Posterity will mention your Name with Praise. In
particular, none Honors your more for your private and political Virtues, than,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servant,

1 Cor. 10.13. There has no Temptation taken you, but such as is common to
man: but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye
are able; but will with the Temptation also make a way to escape, that you may
be able to bear it.


ALthough the Substance of that Baptismal Oath of Allegiance, which every
Christian takes at his entrance into Covenant with God, be, to renounce the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil; and although this solemn obligation be laid by
God and the Church upon the Conscience of every Christian, to make him more
vigilant and resolute in resisting the Temptations which the World without, the
Flesh within, or the Devil both ways can present unto him: Yet to the scandal
both of our Nature and Religion, there have often been, and now are in the
Church of God, a sort of licentious perjured Christians, who taking a pride to
aggravate the weakness of Humane Nature, and undervalue the power of Gods
assisting Grace, represent it as impossible for sinful Flesh and Blood to
overcome the Pleasures of some, and the Terrors of other Temptations; and so
make Religion it self, which is nothing, but the practice of resisting Pain and
Pleasure out of love to God, an idle Romantic notion, and in effect, renounce
their Baptismal Vow.

But to the lewd Pretensions, and authority of these most insolent Men, my Text
is an apparent contradiction, and reproof; wherein the Apostle assures the
suffering Corinthians, that, as among all the sharp Trials and Persecutions
they had undergone for Religion, none had happened to them, but such as were
(...), proportionable to the Nature of Man, or such as others before them had
endured: So for the future he likewise assures them, that God, who was faithful
to his Promises, would not suffer them to be tempted above their Strength; but
upon the due exercise of their patience and courage in resisting, would make a
way for them to escape in all their Trials, and give them sufficient supplies
of his Grace to support and overcome the violence thereof.

There has no Tempation taken you, (says he) but such as is moderate or
common to man, for God is faithful, who will not, etc.

This is the true and obvious meaning of these words; and therefore by good
analogy both of Faith and Reason, we may counclude, that God, who is acquainted
with the infirmities of our Nature, takes the same care of us in all other
Trials and Temptations, as the Apostle here assures us he does in persecutions;
which are in this and many other places of the Gospel emphatically called
Temptations, because that of all the Trials which men can undergo for the sake
of God and Religion, those terrible pains and sufferings wherein persecutions
consist, are by far most difficult to be withstood by feeble Flesh and Blood.

But what need is there of proving so great a Truth by consequence and analogy,
when the promise of the Spirit, (that assistant form of Christians,) is the
most general promise of the Gospel, and one of the principal terms upon which
we are encouraged to enter into Covenant with God? For we bind our selves by
our Sacramental Oaths, to resist such Temptations as unassisted Humane Nature
is not able to resist, because we are assured from the beginning to the end of
the New Testament; That God will give his Spirit to them that sincerely ask it,
that the Graces of it are sufficient for us, that he will perfect his Strength
in Human Weakness, and that he will make us more than conquerours in all
Temptations, and find out a way by which we shall escape. A considerable part
of the Gospel consists in such like promises of receiving sufficient assistance
from God; and indeed in had been inconsistent with his Wisdom and Goodness, as
he is the Author of the Covenant of Grace, to require us to swear resistance
against such Temptations as depraved Human Nature is not able to withstand,
unless withal ne would have given us concurrent supplys of supernatural
Strength, sufficient of support us in them, and enable us to perform what he
does exact.

This then being certain, that God stands bound in his Gospel to take special
care to assist us in all Temptations, and grant us sufficient supplys of his
Grace, I proceed to prove the Apostles consequnce, That no Temptations how
violent soever, are irresistible by Christians, or that no Temptation or Trial
has or ever shall happen by Gods permission unto any Person in Covenant with
him, but such as is suitable to the Powers of Human Nature strengthened by
Grace, and such as a reasonable considerate Man that duly uses and improves the
present assistance of God, may not easily conquer and subdue.

This assertion I shall prove two ways; First, by authority or precedent; and
Secondly, by reason.

First, by authority, taken from the practice and examples of wise and sober
Men in all Ages, who have resisted the strongest, and overcome the most
difficult Temptations for the sake of God; and therefore those Traitorous
ungodly Christians, who love to represent the cause of Virtue and Religion as
desperate and indefensible, contradict the experiences of Ages, and belie the
Records both of God and Man.

I shall but instance in three or four of the most violent assured Temptations,
which the Devils and their cursed Agents use as the strongest battery to subdue
the souls of the bravest Men.

The first whereof, is the fear of Death, which Bildad in Job, calls (...) the
King of Consternations, or Terrors; and yet as terrible as are the approaches
of this King of Terrors, the brave adventures of those gallant Heathens, who
have met him with all his train of Terrors, without astonishment and fear, and
sacrificed their lives for their Country and Friends: These generous souls, I
say, who could scarce dye for higher ends, infallibly show, that it is so far
from being impossible, that it is neither strange, nor difficult for Reason
without Grace, or unassisted Humane Nature, to overcome the fear of Death.

But then if we consult the Records of the Church, we shall find the supreme
motives of Religion to have made Cowards, and common People valiant, and the
Spirit of God, which the Jewish Writers call the Spirit of Might, so to have
fortified the Courage of Women and Children; as to make them dye with more
Resolution, than the Worthies of Greece and Rome.

The time would fail, as the Author to the Hebrews speaks, in telling of those
that were stoned, sawn asunder, Vid. imadversios honorabilis doctis. Nort.
natchbulli, u. aur. in Ep.! Hebr. c. 11.7.
empaled, and slain with the Sword. And the Jewish and Christian Martyrologies;
the bloody Calendars of the Greek and Latin Churches; the Histories of the
Persecutions of the Jews by the Heathens, of the Christians by them both, and
of the former and latter Reformers by the Papal See, from the time of the
Waldenses, to this last Age, are so many standing Acts and Monuments to prove,
that no trials can happen to Men, but what Humane Nature is able to bear, and
particularly that Death in all his array of Terrors is no such insuperable
consideration, when it stands in competition with our Duty to God.

The Spanish Christians in the time of Trajan, behaved themselves with such
resolution, and assurance at the Heathen Tribunals, that his Procurator and
their Judge Pliny mistook their constancy and perseverance for stubbernness of
Opinion, or a certain Superstitious obstination of Mind. And afterward in the
tenth Persecution, they so little regarded their Lives, that they threw them
away, and offered unnecessary affronts to the Heathen Gods, that so they might
be sure to dye Martyrs in the Fact, and have the honor to Seal the Truth with
their Blood. Insomuch that the Wise Council of Ex. Consil. Elib, annv. 305.
siquas idola for gerit, and ibidem fuerit occisus placuit numerum eun nonre ipi
Matyrum.
Eliberis was fain to make a Decree to correct such unwarrantable riotous Zeal,
and make them less prodigal of their Blood. But both they, and the more
Primitive Christians of other Countries would have died, had it been possible a
thousand times, rather than drop a grain of Incense, bow before an Idol, or do
any other significant Action, which Custom had made a sign of denying Christ.

And since the corruption of the Latin Church, the noble Army of reformed
Martyrs in these Western parts of the World, have chosen to meet the King of
Terrors in his most terrible appearance, I mean in the dreadful Inquisition,
and endure the most painful sorts of death, rather than Worship a Cake of
Bread, Invoke their Fellow Creatures, admit any Advocate in Heaven but Jesus,
or make the Gospel depend upon the dictates of the Pope, how illiterate and
wicked soever he may be. But were there no other Histories extant but the
Bible, the number of the Saints recorded there, that have embraced the most
bitter Ignominious Deaths, and despised the Torments and Shame thereof, are
more than enough to prove, that there is no Temptation so dreadful, but what
may be born by Man, and that it is neither impossible, nor so exceeding
difficult for Christians to conquer the fear of Death, as the profane and
sensual part of the World, to the dishonor of our Religion, pretend it to be.

The second instance, under which I shall bring examples to prove, that no
Temptation is irresistible, shall be taken from the Sin of Uncleanness, or
fornication, a Sin which the World is so apt to excuse, and pretend a kind of
necessity to commit, because it is so natural to Flesh and Blood. And yet as
natural and hereditary as the Advocates of Uncleanness represent in to be it is
so far from being an irresistible Temptation, that Joseph resisted the frequent
importunities of his own Lady or Mistress, although besides the quality of her
Person, and the danger of denying, his own Youth, and all other circumstances
concurred to make him consent and Yield. And were the dread of the Majesty of
the Pure and Holy God, impressed upon the heart of the most lustsul Satyr, but
half as deep, as it was upon his, that Grace alone would be sufficient to check
his sinful propensions, and make him cry out as he did in the critical moment
of Trial, How shall I do this damnable act, and sin against my God.

But lest you should object that Joseph was an extraordinary person, and had
more than common assistance from God; let us suppose the most ordinary
unexperienced Christian surrounded with the strongest Temptations imaginable,
to commit this natural, and therefore concluded unconquerable Sin; Let us
suppose him to have the most charming Beauty to entice him, together with
opportunity, and all other Circumstances to heighten the Temptation, and make
it as outrageous as it can be imagined to be; yet for all this, if this Man
should say that he were not able to rosist this violent Temptation, he would
lie against his Conscience, and contradict the universal experience of the
World. For if at that instant God should say unto him, as unto the Rich Man in
the Gospel, Thou Fool, this night thy Soul shall be required of thee; That
dreadful Summons to appear so soon in the next World, would make this mighty
Temptation become none at all, and presently drive out that unclean Spirit of
Lust which possessed his Soul before. But much more, if at the same time should
come forth the Fingers of a Man's hand, and write upon the Wall, Mean, Mean,
Tekel Upharzin, Do this, and thou shall be immediately damned; I desire any one
of you to Answer in his heart for this Man, what you think he would do: You
cannot but confess, that his Amorous intentions and Countenance would be
changed, his jovial Thoughts troubled, his Joints loosed, and his Knees like
King Belshazzar's, knock one against another. Or lastly, let us suppose at the
same instant, that an unexpected Message should come from his Prince,
threatening the Gibbet, or the Ax, if he proceeded to gratify his sinful
Desires; such a terrible Message would undoubtedly be sufficient to extinguish
his present Flames, and restrain him from the Sin he intended to commit. Or not
to take the advantage of such frightful Enemies to his Pleasure, as Damnation
or Death, let us rather suppose, That a little Child, much more a Grave and
Reverend Person, should unexpectedly come into the Room before he proceeded to
execute his filthy Lust; certainly instead of finding it impossible to resist
the Damnable Sin, he would find it impossible for him to commit it in their
prefence, unless he had made an utter shipwreck both of his Conscience and
Honor, and were become as shameless as a Beast. Or, let us suppose that a
mighty reward, imagine a Kingdom, or some vast Sum of Money were offered him
upon condition he would resist this pretended irresistible Temptation, what do
you think would find Strength and Resolution enough to overcome the
unconquerable Temptation upon these terms, and be glad to be hired by such a
Reward, to abstain from his Damnable Lust. And therefore, if all this be true,
Why should not the remembrance of our own Mortality as effectually Mortify our
Lusts, and keep us from daring to commit a presumptuous Sin, as if God himself
should tell us we should shortly dye? Why should not the consideration of
Eternal Torments threatened in the Gospel, be as persuasive against Sin, as the
consideration of them written by a Spirit upon a Wall? Or why should not the
Message of Eternal Death which we deliver from God, prevail as much upon Men,
as the Message of temporal Death from a King? Lastly, why should not the
presence of the Omnipresent God overawe Men more than the presence of a Man?
Or, why should not the Infallible Promise of Heaven and Infinite Happiness, be
a more powerful motive to Self-denial, than the Promise of a Kingdom, or
Treasure here below?

The shameful inconsideration, stupidity, and carnality of Men's hearts, is the
cause why Temporal expectations and proposals have more force upon their Souls,
than the hopes of Eternal Glory; and that present or approaching sensible Pain
or Loss, fills their earthy Minds with more dreadful apprehensions, than the
prospect of Infinite Misery to come.

But to conclude this Instance with a more familiar Argument; If the
Temptations to this Sin be so very difficult to be resisted, as Debauched Men
pretend it is, how comes it to pass, that careful and Religious Parents suffer
their Children to Sojorn in Mesech, and dwell in the Tents of Kedar, I mean to
go abroad and converse in this wicked World? How dare they expose their Souls,
which they tender next to their own, to such certain dangers in an Adulterous
Generation, if to deny ones self, and resist the Temptations of the Flesh be
either impossible, or next to impossible, as the injurious Discourses of the
unclean Spirits of this licencious Age upon all occasions represent it to be?

My third Instance to prove how capable the nature of Man, by Gods Grace, is to
resist or overcome the most dangerous Temptations, shall be taken from a
Temptation to commit some Sin upon a certain proposal of gaining or loosing a
Crown. Among all the Trials or Temptations the World, the Devil, or our own
Hearts can present unto us, none can be more powerful or unconquetable than
this: For a Crown is the highest secular Interest, the possession of it is both
Government and Riches, and by consequence, the hopes of getting, or fear of
loosing that supreme degree of Temporal Happiness, which consists in the
enjoyment of it, must at least to covetous, or ambitious Souls, be the
strongest inducement that can be to Sin. And yet as powerful as this motive is,
Moses, who might have passed for the Son of Pharaohs Daughter, and by
consequence, have been Heir presumptive to his Crown, when he came to Years,
(as the Author to the Hebrews writes) rather than renounce the Covenant, which
his Ancestors made with God, Excommunicate himself from his visible Church, and
forfake his Brethren, though the persecuted People of God, refused to be
called, that is, to be the Son of that August Princess, and expect the most
glorious Kingdom of the World. And not to ransack foreign Histories, or
multiply Examples in this short Discourse, our late Sovereign Charles the
Martyr, whom God was pleased to make perfect through sufferings, and reserve
for these latter times, as the most glorious Monument of Christian Courage that
ever was in the World. That incomparable Prince and Christian, rather than Rob
God, Prostitute his Royal Honor, justify Sacrilege and Rebellion by Law, and
Perjure his Righteous Soul, by accepting those Sinful Conditions the Rebels
proposed; after many other unparalleled sufferings, chose to Sacrifice his
Blood to his Conscience, and secure his Innocence by the loss of his Triple
Crown.

My last Instance to prove how capable Humane Nature in a Christian is to
resist Temptations, shall be taken from the natural desire of Revenge, which of
all other sinful affections, but Pride and Self-love, from whence it proceeds,
discovers it self early in Man: For with how much impatience and eagerness will
even little Children strive to be revenged? How quickly will they resent, and
how long remember injuries; and how will Malice, as it were, possess their
little Souls; and Anger, the actual exercise of that Malice, swell their Hearts
and Eyes? And how natural this Sin is to the corrupt constitution of Man, and
how proper it is to some particular complexions and tempers; the Brawls,
Curses, Duels, Factions, Slanders, Libels, Murders, Schisms, and Rebellions,
which happen in all Societies of Men, are most sad deplorable proofs. And yet
if any Man deny that it is possible to mortify this damnable passion of
Revenge, wherein the Image of the Devil so much consists, he Libels the
Christian Religion, and injures the Reputation and Authority of the Gospel,
which teaches Men to forgive and love their enemies, to bless them that curse
us, and to do good to them that hate us and despite fully use us. This Doctrine
is proper to the Christian above all the Religions in the World; God has made
it the very condition upon which he will accept our Oblations, and grant us Pardon
for our Sins; and therefore if thou bring by gift before the Altar, and there
remembrest that thy Brother has ought against thee, leave thy Gift there, and
go thy way, thou must first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then return, and
offer thy gift. And unless we can prevail with our selves to forgive men their
trespasses, the Oracle of our Religion has assured us, it is in vain to Pray
for the Pardon of our own. Therefore if it be impossible to resist Temptations
to this devilish Sin of Revenge; or which is all one, to Forgive the Enemy that
strike the first stroke, it is impossible to be Saved, or else all the Precepts
of mutual forbearance and forgiving one another must pass for Gospel-gallantry,
or only for the Romantic and Ornamental part of the Christian Religion, which
it concerns us not at all to practice or believe. But alas, it is as easy to
conquer this damnable Passion of Revenge, as to become Meek, and Humble, and
Charitable; for the mutual exercise of which most excellent Graces, the
Primitive Christians, as Marcellinus has observed, were famous among the
Heathens, when Slanders, Quarrels, Bloodshed, and all other Tragical effects of
Revenge, were scarce ever heard of in the Church of God.

But besides the Examples I have taken out of the Bible, and other Sacred
Histories to prove under these four Instances, that no Temptations are too
strong to be overcome, let me add some examples out of Heathen and Mahumetan
Historians for the further confirmation of this fundamental Truth.

Under my first Instance I might have produced a thousand illustrious Examples,
as of Socrates, Regulus, Curtius; all which chose to dye very cruel Deaths: The
first, rather than deny God; The second, rather than perjure his Soul; And the
third, to deliver his Country from a Plague.

My second Instance I might have adorned with the memorable examples of Scipio
Numantinus, and Mahumet the Great; whereof the first abhorred to look upon that
charming Beauty which his Captains presented unto him, as his prize: And the
latter, after an humble remonstrance of his Lords, how much it was beneath the
Majesty of the Ottoman Emperor to enslave it self to the Weaker Sex,
immediately sacrificed his dearest Mistress Irene to his Honor, with his own
victorious Hands. The Action was Barbarous, but the Self-denial was great, and
may justly serve to upbraid those slothful cowardly Christians, who have not
only lost all sense of Honor, but all sense and consideration of infinite
future Rewards, and so harden their hearts, that they will not attend to the
dictates of their own Reason, and thereby dispose their Souls to hearken to the
secret Directions and Inspirations of God. They could be content to have him
for their Champion, but not for their Second; for they hate to assist him, or
which is all one, to let him assist them against the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil; but because they cannot do all, therefore they will do nothing, nor
contribute that little they have left as men, to secure themselves from Sin. To
conclude, they will not, like Cornelius, prepare themselves by Morality for
Grace, but would have God entirely force their Nature, and influence their
Souls by the irresistible motions of his Spirit; being unwilling to do so much
in Spiritual Matters, as is requisite to denominate good Actions their own.

Under the third Instance I might have added the great Examples of Abdolominus,
Dioclesian, and Otho; the first of which was unwilling to change a private Life
for a Crown; The second changed, a Crown, I cannot say, but the Empire of Rome,
which had Crowned heads for Subjects, for a private Life; And the third, though
he was elected Emperor by his conquering Legions, refused to ratify the
Election by his Sword, but Killed himself, on purpose to leave the Imperial
Seat to his Rival, and save the expense of his faithful Soldiers Blood.

The fourth Instance I might have confirmed with the Testimony of the Greek and
Latin Moralists, all which determine with one Voice, that Revenge is a Passion
violent in none, but weak and cowardly Souls; and that Revenge an injury, as
the Greek word (...) imports, is according to the Doctrine of Maximus Tyrius, to
offer one again; so that he that Returns is as much to be condemned by the
Verdict of right Reason, as he that gives an Affront.

And therefore since it is plain by these Examples, that bare Reason and Moral
Gallantry of Spirit, have sometimes enabled Heathens and Mahumet ans to resist
those Pains, and Pleasures, and Interests, which, as all men grant, are the
strongest Temptations to Sin; is it not shameful Nonsense, and horrid Impiety
for Christians, whom God, without a just provocation, never fails to support
and assist with his Grace, to magnify the weakness of Humane Nature, and the
strength of these and the like Temptations, with a Malicious design, nor only
to justify themselves and excuse others, but to Debauch Mankind to the utmost
of their power, and render the Christian the most grievous intolerable
Religion that ever was in the World?

From whence I proceed to prove by Reason that no Trial or Temptation can
happen to Men, but such as is suitable to Humane Nature, aided with Grace, and
such as any Christian that is true to his own endeavors, and faithfully uses
the restraining and assisting helps of God, my not easily conquer and subdue.

My first Reason shall be taken from the consideration of the nature of Virtue
and Grace, which are nothing, but an habitual power, and ability in the
Rational Soul of Man, to bear all sensible Pain and Loss, and forbear all
sensible Pleasure and Profit, out of love to Reason and the Righteous Laws of
God. This excellent spiritual power and ability of the Soul, as far as it is
Natural, or acquired by our own Acts and Endeavors, is of Moral consideration,
but as it is supernaturally wrought in the Soul, or infused into it by the
Spirit of God, so far it is of Theological consideration, and belongs not to
Moralists, but Divines. But because Grace, as all Men grant, is the perfection
of Nature, and acquired Virtue is consistent with infused; I have put them both
together in one Definition, in which Divines and Philosophers both agree. But
were it impossible, or so exceeding difficult as some Men make it, to resist
Temptations; this definition of Grace or Virtue would be but an useless
fictitious notion, and Divines and Philosophers from the beginning of the World
would have been either Knaves or Fools. All the excellent Sermons the former
have made with so much eloquence and authority concerning Mortification,
Selfdenial, and Perseverance, and all the brave Discourses the latter have
penned with such admirable Reason and Rhetoric, concerning Fortitude,
Temperance, and Patience, are idle unprofitable Harangues, and as insignificant
to the impotent Race and Nature of Man, as the practical Rules of Dancing to a
Cripple, or a Lecture in Geometry to a natural Fool. In particular, St. Paul,
who Magnifies the Grace of God so much in his Epistles, and protests he took
pleasure in bearing Reproaches, Persecutions, and Distresses for Christ's sake.
This great Doctor and Saint, who declared upon his own experience, that he was
always most strong, when he was most weak, and that he could do and suffer all
things through the strength he received from Christ, must pass for a Cheat, or
Enthusiast, if Men by the promised supports and assistance of Gods Grace be not
able to resist Temptations unto Sin.

There was never yet in the Church of God a more apt Example to confirm this
Doctrine I now maintain, than this Apostle was; for when the Jews and Gnostics
persecuted his righteous Soul with so much rage and violence as to make him
call them the Messengers of Satan, and compare the sharpness of the
Persecution, which they raised against him, to a thorn in the flesh; like a
true Soldier of Christ, he still resisted and held out; but yet suspecting his
own perseverance, and fearing lest his Faith and Patience might at last fail,
he Prayed God thrice to remove the sharp Trials from him: But God, who knew
whereof he was made, better than he himself, still continued them, assuring the
suffering Apostle, that his concurrent Grace was sufficient for him, and that
his strength was made perfect in his weakness.

This relation the Apostle makes of himself, is either true or false: If false,
then he was either an Impostor, or a Madman: If he was Mad, as the Festuses of
this Age represent him to be, how came he to speak the words of Truth and
Soberness? Hw came he to write such learned and profound Epistles, and make
such admirable defenses for himself and the Christian Religion, before so many
Procurators, and the Emperor himself at Rome? How came he to be so very Wise
upon occasion, as to plead the Privilege of a Roman Citizen, and divide the
Sadducees against the Pharisees, when they had both conspired to take away his
Life? How came he to baffle the Jews out of their own Traditions and
Prophecies, to convert the greatest Cities of the World to the Christian
Religion, and acquire such a particular Veneration and Authority, not only
among the common People, but among the Philosophers both of Greece and Rome? To
conclude, how came the Church Universal to Canonize his Writings; and how came
they particularly to be adored by such gallant Men as Justin, Origin,
Tertullian, and Clemens of Alexandria, who were all as great Wits and
Philosophers as ever the World could show.

An Impostor likewise he could not be; for then he must have acted for Glory,
or Gain. For Glory he did not; because he has so often acknowledged his own
Sinfulness, Unworthiness, and Insufficiency, representing himself as the least
of the Apostles, and freely confessing that he was what he was by the Grace and
designation of God. And for Gain or secular Interest he could not act, for in
this Life, he was of all Men most miserable; his Apostolical Office rendering
his whole Life but a continual Tragedy or Catalogue of Miseries; as you may
read, 2 Cor. 11. from the 23. to the end of the Chapter. This Story, then, I
cited out of his Writings must be infallibly true; and if it be, then Virtue
and Grace are real notions; and by consequence, no Tempation can happen to any
Man, but what Humane Nature is able to bear. And lest you should think that God
had a more particular care for this Apostle than other Christians, and supplied
him with more particular aids, than the rest of the Church, you may find him
exhorting the whole Church of Ephesus to be strong in the Lord and the power of
his might; you may find him charging Timothy to be strong in the grace that is
in Christ; and exhorting the whole City of the Philippians, to work out their
Salvation with care and solicitude, because God, by his preventing and
assisting Grace was working in their hearts both to Will and to Do.
Perseverance or the working out of Salvation, consists in nothing but in
constantly resisting Temptations to Sin; and there can be no sense in that, nor
any other such like Exhortations, unless God (as the Psalmist speaks) be a
present help in time of trouble, and his assisting Grace concur to the aid and
relief of all those that need, and sincerely desire it; and, like the good and
faithful Servant in the Gospel, improve it as fast as it is bestowed.

To all which let me add the Precepts of Mortification, Patience, and
Self-denial; the Exhortations to keep our selves Pure, Temperate, Sober, Chaste,
to be steadfast and unmovable, to be steadfast to the end, to resist the Devil,
to resist him unto Blood: Of all which and the like Exhortations, if we
consider God as the Original Author, it must needs follow, that Men in Covenant
with him, have ordinarily power to resist the World, the Flesh, and the Devil,
nay to resist them all to Martyrdom, and to Blood. And therefore none but Fools
and Atheists can be so absurd and impious as to imagine that God (with Reverence
be it spoken) can so transgress the Rules of common sense, as to advise his
Creatures to the practice of those Duties, which he knew bofore were impossible
to be done. Nay this damnable assertion of the Libertines of this Age, (who,
like that filthy Goat Nero, think all the World as lascivious as themselves,)
robs God of his Goodness, by imagining he can delude his reasonable Creatures
so far, as to put them upon the Practice of those Duties, which he knew were
impracticable and above their Power to do. But God, that is better acquainted
with our Nature than we our selves, can put us upon nothing, but what he knows
is either absolutely in our power, or at least, as to conquer Temptations is,
within the power of our Nature, assisted by Grace to perform. For this very
reason it is, that God and the Church bind every Christian at his first
admission into Covenant by such a solemn Oath to resist Temptations, as I
mentioned in the beginning of this Discourse: the substance of which solemn
obligation amounts to thus much; I do here in the presence of God, my Savior,
and all the Heavenly Host devote my self to the service of God; I call Heaven,
and Earth, the Church Militant and Triumphant to bear witness that I renounce
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; and that I Will resist their Temptations to
my last breath. This I avow to be my resolution; and upon this condition, and
this alone, I now desire to enter into Covenant with my God, and be admitted
into his Church; and I call my Conscience to Record this day, that I will never
repent of this Promise, nor revoke it, but continue Christ's faithful Soldier
to the end of my Life: So help me, O my God. It Is impossible for the Conscience
of Man, or Angel to be bound by a stronger Obligation than this; but unless the
Matter of it be practicable, it is a solemn piece of Nonsense and Delusion; and
God and his Church for above 1600 Years have mocked and abused the World.

The second Reason, by which I undertake to prove my Assertion, shall be taken
from the consideration of the nature of Repentance; which consists in an
unfeigned sorrow for our Sins past, and a sincere Resolution by Gods assistance
to lead an Holy Life for the time to come. But if Men be conscious to
themselves, that the Sins they committed they could by no means resist, why
should they sorrow and repent for what is past, or so contradict themselves,
and mock God, as to promise amendment for the time to come? Why instead of
confessing their Sins to him, do they not rather expostulate with him, and say,
It Is true, O Lord, I have done many things which Men that pretend to be thy
Ministers, and trouble the World by thy Authority, declare to be grievous Sins;
but if they be, I protest I could not help it; Thou know I could not resist
them; and if Thou would have me do better for the time to come, thou must
give me more Grace than hitherto I have had. Which horrible Expostulation shows
how inconsistent this damnable Doctrine I oppose, is to the Duty of Repentance;
how ridiculous it renders Confession and Contrition for Sin; nay how it makes
the greatest Sins we are tempted to commit no Sins at all: And many more such
dreadful consequences flow from it, as may justly make the Blades or licentious
Wits, that talk it about the Town, if they have any Sense or Conscience left,
to abhor it, and recant.

My third Reason is taken from the consideration of the Nature of Laws; which
commonly, besides the things they command, or forbid, contain either general or
special Threatenings and Promises, as most proper and suitable motives to engage
us to perform the Duties we ought to do, and abstain from the Sins we ought not
to commit: But if the free and rational Nature of Man, neither simply in it
self, nor with the assistance of God; if Reason with, no more than without
Grace, have power to overcome Temptations to wilful Sin, it would be
transcendent Folly and Cruelty for Princes, and States to make Temporal Laws
for their Subjects; and much more for God to make Spiritual Laws for his
Church. He might with as much Wisdom and Justice have charged Men not to be
Hungry, or Sick; not to be Hot, or Cold; as not to commit Adultery, not to
Steal, not to Murder, not to bear False Witness, etc. unless by some means or
other it be in their power to resist the strongest Temptations that the Wit of
Men or Devils can invent, to induce them to commit the foresaid Sins.

My fourth Reason I ground on the 10th of St. Matthew, v. 33. where our Savior
declares that Whosoever shall deny him before Men, that him will he deny before
his Father whith is in Heaven: But were any Suffering so intolerably sharp,
were any persecutions so dismal and grievous, that it were impossible for
supported Humane Nature to bear them; were all the Torments of a Roman
Inquisition, and all the Artifices of Cruelty, which Wit and Malice could
invent, above the Courage and Resolution of a Christian, and insuperable by
Reason, strengthened with Grace: The Blessed Jesus, who took our Infirmities
upon him, and knew by experience what Humane Nature was: He, I say, that was
made like unto his Brethren, that he might be a Merciful and Faithful
High Priest, would never deny any Man a share in his Atonement, for doing that,
which extremity of Torment must force him to commit.

To conclude with such another Reason: You may remember that our Savior, in
the Description he gives of Hell, in the 9th of St. Mark, has this ingenious
Hebrew Phrase, Where their Worm dies not; which Worm, according to the sense
both of the Jewish and Christian Church, signifies nothing here; and in the
66th of Isaiah, but that Stinging remorse of Conscience, or continual Fret, or
Vexation of Soul in Damned Spirits, caused by the remembrance, and
consideration of the wilful. Treachery and Baseness of their own Hearts, in
committing those Sins, and yielding to those Temptations, which they knew they
had power sufficient to resist. But were the Damned Souls in Hell of this
opinion, that it were impossible, or next to impossible, for Men to resist
Temptations; were they conscious to themselves that they were overcome by all
Temptations to which they yielded, because they wanted power sufficient to
conquer them; what outward Tortures soever they may endure, they must needs be
free from inward Pangs and Torments, from that intolerable horror and remorse
of Conscience which our Savior calls the Worm, because, like a Moth or Worm,
it constantly frets and gnaws upon the tenderest part of the Soul that breeds
it, and increases the Torments of Hell more, than all the Rivers of Fire and
Brimstone that constantly flow therein.

And thus, I hope, I have said enough to confirm and illustrate this great
Truth, having proved it both by Authority and Reason; and charged the contrary
error (or Blaspemy shall I say) with such absurd and damnable Consequences, as
may justly make any Man, that is not desperate, both ashamed and afraid to
assert it in the presence of God, and reasonable Men. But we live ( God knows)
in a Nation and Age, wherein Sin and Nonsense are Presumptuous, and wherein
it is long since become fashionable and gentile to question Principles, and deny
all those fundamental Truths of natural and revealed Divinity, which neither
Heathens nor Christians ever Questioned before. This is the reason, why
Divines, whom God has set for the service and defense of the Gospel, have of
late been fain to lay the Foundations again, and Preach up such Doctrins as
sober Men, not acquainted enough with the iniquity of the Time, have judged at
first hearing, to need no proof: Such as the being and providence of God, the
immortality of the Soul, and the necessity of good works; to which I may add
the Subject of this Discourse, which has been to prove, that no Temptations
which God suffers to fall upon Christians are irresistible, or that no
thinking, circumspect, vigilant Man, that is true to his own Reason, and careful
to make use of the promised assistance of God, can be over-matched by any
Trial, though never so sharp, nor meet with any Temptation too strong to be
withstood, how delightful or charming soever it be.

And this Doctrine being proved by so many undeniable experiments, and reasons,
I hope may be sufficient to demonstrate the Folly, and chastise the Insolence
and Impiety of those Profane Men, who, because they have enslaved themselves
to their own Passions, affect to make Man like a Beast, (that is, like
themselves) all Sense and Appetite, and represent him as determined in all his
actions by outward objects, and unable to moderate his Lusts, and Fears. But
had these Men but common Reverence for God, or man, they would not so Libel the
Nature of the latter, which is the workmanship of the former; they would be
more modest and civil, than to define Humane Nature by their own Corruptions,
or pretend to judge of the Thoughts, Actions, and Inclinations of all other Men
by their own; they would be more considerate and reserved, and not take a Pride
to maintain and propagate an Opinion which is chargeable with such foul and
absurd conclusions, and which shows them to be an inconsiderate sort of Men,
that Think little, and Talk much, and makes them obnoxious to that dreadful
curse pronounced by the Prophet against those, that call good evil, and evil
good; that put light for darkness, and darkness for light; that put bitter for
sweet, and sweet for bitter.

'Twould be very seasonable for these Licentious Times, that such Blasphemers
Tongues were restrained by severe Laws, that they might only discourse these,
and their other pernicious Doctrins in their own Cabals, and not dare to
divulge them, and corrupt and trouble the company of civil, and sober Men, which
such damnable confident talk. But since these Men's Tongues are their own, and
in this great defect of Civil and Ecclesiastical Censures, they take the
liberty to speak of God and Man as they please, it is more necessary that they
should be rebuked, and their horrid Opinions exposed and confuted in the
Pulpit, lest their Devilish Doctrine should spread, and corrupt the World like a
Canker, while the Ministers of the Gospel hold their Peace.

As for this Opinion, it devests Man, as you have heard, of his better part,
viz. his free and rational Nature, wherein the Image of God consists; it proves
all Laws and Orders of Societies to be useless, insignificant, and unnatural
Institutions; and so makes the Legislative Power, whether invested in God, or
the King, to be Tyranny and Violence; and Men that live under Government to be
worse Slaves, than the Children of Israel in Egypt, where they were commanded
to make Brick, when they had no Straw. It contradicts the Doctrinal and
Historical parts of Scripture, and with unparalled Impudence, gives the Lie
to the Martyrologies both of the Jewish and Christian Church. It contradicts
the Definition of Virtue and Grace; in particular, it makes Fortitude,
Temperance, Self-denial, Patience, Sobriety, Chastity, and all other infused
and acquired Habits of resisting Sin, to be idle Fictitious notions; and so
makes all the Divines and Philosophers that have ever been, to have been
Impostors or Fools. Furthermore, it is inconsistent with the Doctrine of
Repentance, and destroys the Goodness and Wisdom of God, who, upon the
supposition that the Scriptures are true, has exhorted his People to the
practice of such Duties, which he knew before, they could not do. To conclude,
it overthrows the Catholic Hypothesis of assisting Grace, dissolves the
Obligation of our Sacramental Vows, disarms Hell of the most exquisit part of
its Torments, and confounds the notion of Good and Evil, by making it Lawful,
in supposing it sometimes necessary for Men to commit the most heinous Sins.
All which absurd and detestable Consequences, I hope, you now hear with
Christian Indignation, and will remember hereafter with horror and disdain,
when ever you shall hear these sensual Men, like those that were sent to spy
out the Holy Land, represent themselves and their Brethren, as Grasshoppers; but
their Spiritual Adversaries, the Temptors and Temptations with which they ought
to conflict, as insuperable Anakims, as enemies of a prodigious stature,
greater, and taller, and stronger than themselves. But these are usually Men,
that have turned the grace of God into lasciviousness, whose glory is their
shame, whose God is their belly, who mind earthly things. And because they have
debauched themselves into Brute Beasts, or at least have a mind to do so,
therefore (as St. Jude Speaks) they foam out their shame and infidelity in
slandering the rational nature of Man, exploding the Doctrine of assisting
Grace, Drolling upon Godly Men, and discrediting, as much as they can, the
Authority of the Gospel, because it thwarts their Lusts, and disturbs their
sensual repose, by Teaching, that Men by the grace of God have power to
overcome the World, resist the Devil, and deny all ungodliness and wordly
Lusts; and because it exhorts Men in Gods name to be patient, vigilant, and
steadfast; to be sober, temperate, and chaste; to fight the good fight; to finish
the course; and persevere unto the end. Lastly, because it assures us that God
assists us in all our Spiritual Combats, supports us in all our Trials, and
will make us more than Conquerours through Christ that loves us; nay, that
Christ himself, who has suffered and been tempted, is able to succor them
that are tempted; and that no Temptation has taken us, but such as is moderate
and common to Man; because God is faithful to his Promises, and will not suffer
us to be Tempted above our strength, but will with the Temptation make a
gracious way to escape, that we may be able to bear it.

A Letter to a Deist, in Answer to several Objections against the Truth and
Authority of the Scriptures; Sold by Moses Pit, at the Angel in St. Paul's
ChurchYard.

FINIS.

