The most Humble CONFESSION, AND RECANTATION OF Edmund Hickeringil, Clerk,
Publicly Made, Read, Signed and Sealed in the COURT of ARCHES; Held before the
Right Worshipful, Sir Richard Lloyd, Knight, and Doctor of Laws, in the absence
of the Right Worshipful Sir Robert Wiseman, Knight, and Doctor of Laws,
Principal Official of the said Court; in the Common Hall of Doctors Commons,
London, on Friday the 27th day of June, in the Year of our Lord, 1684,
WHEREAS I Edmund Hickeringil Clerk, Rector of the Parish Church of All Saints
in Colchester, in the Diocese of London, and Province of Canterbury, have, at
the Promotion of the Right Reverend Father in God, Henry, by Divine Permission,
Lord Bishop of London, my Reverend Diocesan, been rightly and duly proceeded
against in this Court, for Solemnizing, or rather Profaning of Marriages,
between several Persons in my said Parish Church, Clandestinely, without their
Matrimonial Bannes being in their respective Parish-Churches first published,
and denounced, or any License from Ecclesiastical Authority, being first had
and obtained (though I made each Couple pay 5 s. for such License) in Contempt
of the Law, and Canons, and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, in that behalf
provided, and upon Legal proof thereof made, have been, by Sentence in this
Court, justly decreed (amongst other things) to be suspended for the same, for
three years, according to the said Canons; and was by the said Sentence
actually suspended accordingly, under which Sentence of Suspention I still
continue, the said three years being not yet expired. And whereas during the
dependence of the said Suit, I appeared several times in the said Court, and
there demeaned my self with great Impudence, denying the Jurisdiction thereof,
to the great Affront of his Grace, the most Reverend Father in God, the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan (whose
Court it is) refusing to be uncovered, and to give that Respect and Reverence,
which is justly due to the same, endeavoring by my insolent and unmannerly
Carriage and Behavior there, to put all the Affronts, and the highest
Contempts that I could, upon the said Court, and to expose it to the Scorn of
the Rabble that attended me there. And moreover, whereas I have lately, in
several Libellous Books and Pamphlets, by me Written and Published, and
particularly in these Books and Pamphlets, Entitled as follows, viz. The
Second Part of Naked Truth: The Vindication of Naked Truth: News from Doctors
Commons: Scandalum Magnatum: Trial at Chelmsford: The Mushroom: The Black
Nonconformist: The Man-Catcher, and the History of Whiggism, Published and
Printed several Scandalous, Erroneous, and Seditious Principles, against His
most Sacred Majesty, and Government Ecclesiastical, to the Violation of my
Duty, as a Subject, and a Priest, in Contempt of the Holy Church, and in
Derogation of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and the Authority of the Bishops,
and Ecclesiastical Judges; by which means I have fomented and incited the
Factious and Phanatical Party to Contemn the Government of the Church, as by
Law Established, and to persist in their Errors and Sedition, to the great
disturbance of the Peace of this Church and Kingdom.

Now I, the said Edmund Hickeringil, being truly, and deeply sensible, of the
Heighnousness of my Crimes, and Offenses herein, and being truly, and heartily
sorry for the same. And taking shame to my self, for having so highly offended
Almighty God, the Kings most Sacred Majesty, the Holy Church; and been so
Scandalous to my Sacred Function, as a Priest, in particular, and as a
Christian, to all Good People in general, do here openly, and in the Face of
this Court, voluntarily, freely, and humbly acknowledge, and Confess, the
Heynousness of my said Crimes and Offenses, as also, that the said Court, has
most justly Proceeded against me for the same. And I do also here publicly in
the Face of this Court, Voluntarily and freely Recant, and Retract all, and
every of those Scandalous, Erroneous, and Seditious Principles, which I have
published, and Printed, in my beforementioned Libellous Books, and Pamphlets,
or in any of them. And I do here earnestly, and heartily, beg forgiveness, of
all my abovementioned Crimes, and Offenses against God Almighty, the Kings
most Sacred Majesty, the Holy Church, the Reverend Bishops, and Ecclesiastical
Judges, and more particularly against my most Reverend Metropolitan, and my
right Reverend Diocesan, and against this Court, against the Venerable Clergy
of this Land, and against all Good Christian People. And do here solemnly, and
Seriously Promise, that (by Gods assistance) I will never for the Future,
offend in the like nature again. And that all People may be satisfied of the
truth, and sincerity of my Repentance, for these my Crimes and Offenses, I do
now make it my humble request, to this Court, that this my Confession, and
Recantation, may be forthwith Printed and Published. In witness whereof I have
hereunto set my Hand and Seal this 27th, day of June, in the year our Lord,
1684.

Edmund Hickeringil.
THIS Confession and Recantation, was Read, Signed, and Sealed by the said
Edmund Hickeringill in the Court, etc. as aforesaid.

Ita Testor Thomas Tyllot Actuarius Deput.



FINIS.
I Do appoint Benjamin Took to Print the Recantation of Edmund Hickeringill.

Richard Lloyd.

London Printed for Benj. Took, at the Ship in St Paul's Churchyard. 1684.


