A LETTER TO THE AUTHOR Of a late Paper, Entitled, A Vindication of the
DIVINES of the Church of ENGLAND, etc.

In DEFENSE of the HISTORY OF Passive Obedience.

Printed in the Year, 1689.

Books Printed for Jos. Hindmarsh in Cornhill.
A Memorial to his Highness the Prince of Orange, in Relation to the Affairs of
Scotland; together with the Address of the Presbyterian Party in that Kingdom,
to his Highness, and some observations on that Address by two Persons of
Quality.

Prerogative of Primogeniture, showing that the Right of an Hereditary Crown,
depends not upon Grace, Religion, amp;c. but only upon Birthright and
Primogeniture, by David Jenner.

A Discourse of Monarchy, more particularly of the Imperial Crowns of England,
Scotland, and Ireland.

Majestas Intermerata, or the Immortality of the King.

A LETTER To the Author of a late Paper, Entitled, A Vindication of the
Divines of the Church of Eng. etc.
In Defense of the History of PASSIVE OBEDIENCE.
SIR,
IT is the good fortuned of some Books to meet with such trivial Answers, as
mightily advance the esteem of them, and I assure you Yours to the History of
Passive Obedience, is so very trifling, that were it not for the real, and it
may be particular concern you show in it, on would think, the Author of the
History, or some of his friends had written it on purpose to set off his Book.

You pass a severe Censure upon it in your first Paragraph, but in the second
you say, you should not have so Censured it, had it come abroad some
considerable time before the first of August, but since it came out so late,
you think it was the principal design of it to expose those Divines who have
taken the Oath. But Sir, if it be so easy a Task, as you make it in the third
Paragraph to show, that the New Oath of Allegiance, is no whit repugnant with
the Doctrine of the most absolute Passive Obedience: Why should you think so
learned an Author should have so foolish a design? I cannot believe he could be
so silly, as to think his History could make the world believe, that the
generality of our Divines are fallen under the guilt of Apostasy, and Perjury,
if indeed it be so easy to prove, that even those who have Skrew'd up the
doctrine of Non-resistance to the very highest peg, Page 5. Page 55.
may lawfully take the Oath, and transfer their Allegiance.

But to let that pass, Sir, how does it appear, that this was the Author's
design? It is hard to judge of men's Intentions beyond what they delare
themselves; and when the Author says expressly, he wrote the History for other
reasons, it was somewhat rash and uncharitable in a Divine to say, that this
was his apparent and principal design. He tells you plainly enought in his
Preface, he wrote his History against four sorts of men. First against those,
who ridiculed the doctrine of Passive Obedience: Secondly, against those who
affirmed it was a doctrine no older than Archbishop Laud: Thirdly against
those, who averr that the Church, and her Divines have taught it for their own
Interests: and Fourthly against those, who of late reject that Doctrine upon
Popish Principles, that Power is originally in the People, and that the
Foundation of all Government is laid in Compact, etc. To all which he opposes
the authority of the Church, and the concurrent judgment of her D^vines from
the beginning of the Reformation; hoping to persuade the world that so many
pious and learned Men could not so unanimously agree in a Error; or Preach, and
Write in so many Reigns merely to flatter their Princes, and gratify their own
Ambition.

This is the apparent design of that work, and I hope it might become a
Christian, Page. 4.
and Protestant, and member of our Church; and to make you believe that it was
as piously, and charitably intended, as you say you would have hoped, had it
come out before first of August: I assure you that it was designed by the
Author to come out long before, and that the difficulty of getting of it
Printed was the cause, why it came abroad so late. As such a Book cannot be
written in a day: so you must needs know it cannot be Printed, when and where
the Author pleases; and you did very ill to put that conceit of Exposing, etc.
in peoples heads, who had it not been for you Vindication, would more generally
have concluded from the History; not that you were guilty of Apostasy or
Perjury, Page 4.
but that you had taken the New Oath in some Sense, or upon some Principles
which in your own Consciences you did believe consistent with the doctrine of
Non-resistance, and your former Oaths.

This Inference will more naturally occur to the thoughts of those, who read
the History, than the other, and if you had well thought of it, you might have
spared the pains of your Vindication: Or if you had thought fit to give the
world an account upon what Principle you had taken the Oath, you ought to have
forborne such unjustifiable reflections, as you have made upon that Author in
the Plural Number; and not have set forth him, and I know not how many more, as
meant that were content to Sacrifice the names of all, but an inconsiderable
number of their Brethren to their own reputation, Page 4.
that they may be thought the stanch men, and steady to their Principles.

I think the writing of the History does no more tend to the Sacrificing your
names to their reputation, than the writing of many Books for the taking the
Oath does Sacrifice them to yours. Your Books tempt some men to think they
stand off out of Pride and sullenness, and this, it may be, makes some think,
that you have acted contrary to your Principles; but these opinions of men,
which cannot be prevented, ought not to make you fall our, and treat one
another, as you do. But as to those Principles, to which you tauntingly say,
they would be thought stanch, they are Church of England Principles, or they
are not? if you could have proved they were not, then you had Written to
purpose against the History; but if they are, then I know not why this
inconsiderable number may not have a very good Title to the honorable
character of stanch and steady Men, who choose to suffer rather than take an
Oath; which after reading all, that you have published to persuade Men to take
it, they yet think repugoant to that doctrine, which you would not be thought
to have deserted.

But, good Sir, why inconsiderable number? may not the men be considerable,
though the number is not; or are we to judge of the cause by the number, or of
the number by the cause? you forget that your Metropolitan is one of this
inconsiderable number, you forget the men of parts, learning and probity that
are in it also; nay you forget, who was the inconsiderable number in the reigns
of Constantius, and Valens in the Empire, and of Queen Mary in England, You
cannot deny but the greater number were Apostates then, and therefore the
greatness of the number cannot secure you, but that they may be so now.

But you say the Author of the History has blackned those of the Clergy, who
have taken the Oaths, and some of them by name with deserting that Principle,
which they have formerly published to the World. But Sir, it seems-to me he
has blackned none of them, unless they have blackned themselves. He has only
produced a Cloud of Witnesses for Passive Obedience, whereof many have, and
some have not taken the Oath; and if there is a repugnance between that
doctrine, and taking of it, as your Vindication makes men suspect, then the
Blackning, and Apostasy, about which you have made so much pother, ought not to
be imputed to the History, or its Author, but to the nature of the things.

The great endeavors the Clergy, and their Friends used to prevent the
imposing of the Oath, the great joy they expressed, at the alteration of the
Bill in the House of Lords, and the visible reluctance with which many good,
and learned Men have since taken it, are sufficient proofs that there is at
least a great seeming disagreement between the doctrine and the Oath, and yet
for all that it does not follow that they who have taken the Oath have deserted
the doctrine, which as I hinted before, is your own rash, invidious
consequence; but that they have either deserted it, or found a way of taking
the Oath, which they judge consistent with it, and that this latter is the case
of most that have taken it, I will now show.

First, Then some learned men, who stood out very long, at last took it,
because they were persuaded, that the Government allowed them to take it in
such a limited and qualified sense, as was not inconsistent with the doctrine,
or their former Oaths, and these men are no deserters.

Some of these again for the greater ease of their Consciences, and preventing
scandal, as they think, have taken the Oath with declarations, which abundantly
secures them from all suspicion of leaving their former Principles.

But others, who have taken the Oath in the highest, and most unlimited sense,
as I perceive you have done, have generally taken it upon such Principles, as
leave the doctrine of Passive Obedience, and all its concomitant doctrines
secure. Those Principles are chiefly three, Possession, Abdication and
Conquest, though the two last seem plainly inconsistent to some Men's
understandings: for if the King, as you assert, was conquered, then he had good
reason to fly, and by consequence did not abdicate his Kingdom. Some, I
confess, make a mixed Hypothesis of two, or all these together, but whatever
these men's Hypotheses be, simple or mixed, if they be true, they will reconcile
the taking of the new Oath with the old doctrines, and so they are secure from
the scandal of Apostasy, whihc your Vindication more than the History has
fixed upon them.

There are others again, who justify the taking of the Oath upon such
Principles, as seem indeed to overthrow the Doctine of Non-resistance, and the
Author of the History I confess is very angry at them, for embracing the
doctrine of Hobbs, Milton, and Parsons, and if he blackens any in his Book with
the imputation of Apostasy, it is only these few men. They assert that power is
originally in the people, that the foundation of all Government is in compact,
that the Crown of England is as conditional, as that of Poland; that a King
falls from the Government when he endeavors to subvert the Constitution of it,
and these are the sanguine Casuists, which boldly cut the Knot, which others of
you find so difficult to unloose. It seems they find enough in the Monastic
Historians to satisfy their Consciences, and to absolve them from the Laws of
the Kingdom, and the doctrine of the Church, for they make King John's reign
the standard of our Government, and that which has always been accounted the
Popery of the Kingdom the very constitution of it, and though these men's
Principles, if they be true, will bravely acquit them of Perjury, yet,
Inconfess, I cannot acquit them from revolting from that doctrine, which some
of them with a witness have preached, and published to the World.

Conquest of the Kings without a Conquest of the Kindom is the bottom, upon
which you have undertaken to reconcile that doctrine with taking the Oath. This
is a nice subject for me to discuss, but however I hope I may ask you two or
three Questions upon it, without danger or offense.

I. Whether in all the Casuistical Writers about Conquest you have ever read,
that such a Revolution, as ours was brought, as an instance of Conquest? It is
nothing like the usual Examples of Alexander's Conquest over the Persians, the
Conquest of the Israelites over the Canaanites, and that of the Romans over
their Provinces.

II. Whether they allow a King to be conquered, when his Kingdom is not
conquered? and if they do, whether they allow a King so conquered can loose his
rights to the Crown and the allegiance of his People: King John of France did
not loose his right to the Crown, and his Peoples allegiance, when he was so
conquered by the black Prince, and brought captive into England; nor Francis,
when he was conquered so by Charles the Fifth

III. Whether they allow subjects voluntarily to give away their allegiance,
when they are not conquered? for what subjects give up to a foreign Prince
without Conquest is freely Given.

IV. Whether they determine a King to be conquered, as long as he is in a
condition to prosecute his Right by War? for Conscience will be apt to think
that he is not yet conquered enough, who is in a Condition to resist.

V. Whether allegiance can be due to a foreign Prince by virtue of Conquest,
who never pretended to be a Conqueror, but disclaims the Rights of Conquest?

VI. How far they extend the right of Conquest, and allow the Conqueror to make
use of it?

These, and some other Questions, which I could ask you, must be clearly
discussed, and stated, before you can pin the taking of the new Oath upon the
Highest Peg of Non-resistance, according to your Hypothesis of Conquest.

From the several accounts, which I have here set down, of Men's taking the new
Oath, and particularly from the insufficiency of your own, you may see it is
not so easy a task, as you would make it, to reconcile the taking of it with
the old doctrine of the rights of sovereign Princes, and the duties of
Non-resistance. If it were so very easy, those who take the Oath, could not
take it in so many senses, and upon so many different Principles, and since you
are not satisfied with one another senses, and Principles, you ought to have a
great tenderness for those who cannot take it in any of your disagreeing
senses, nor upon any principle at all.

You do not seem to have considered this by your TEXT upon your Title Page.
Luke 17.^. It is impossible but that offenses will come, but woe unto him through
whom they come.
Let us therefore a little consider the doctrines in the History, concerning
the rights of sovereign Princes, and the duties of Non-resistance. As to the
first, we read enough to this purpose, that the rights of a Sovereign are, that
he is accountable to none but God, that he cannot be judged, deposed, or
deprived by his Subjects, nor forfeit his Government to them, that they have no
power over him, nor any right to take the Sword without Commission from him,
and therefore when he is once King, he must continue to be so, till he dies, or
freely and voluntarily resigns. From hence it follows, that the Subject of such
a Sovereign Prince cannot dispose of his Crown, nor renounce his Right to reign
over them, nor transferr their natural and sworn Allegiance from him without
his consent.

All these Duties are so plainly involved in the Doctrine of Non-resistance,
that I assure you there is no need of Atheistical and debauched Persons to make
the peoble discern them, and if any of them chance to be scandalized at the
taking of the New Oath upon reading the History, neither the Author nor the
Doctrine of it are answerable for that, but only the Takers; to whom some will
be provoked to think that Text more justly applicable, till you can prove, that
the taking of the Oath is no whit repugnant to the doctrine of Non-resistance,
which for all your confidence you have not yet done, though, I would to God you
had done it with success.

I hear there is an Apology a writing by way of Answer to the History for
taking of the Oath, and I protest to you, I heartily wish it all the success
that any Apology ever had. It is evident the History if self has made it
needful; for the Author of the view of Dr. M's Sermon says plainly, that your
later Discourses and Practices notoriously contradict your former Doctrines,
and it has also put common Readers upon enquiry, how the Authors of such
Doctrines can consistently with their old principles take the new Oath?

I tell you this, because you are so warm against your unfortunate Brethren,
who think themselves not yet acquitted from their former Oaths. You do not
stick to say they make Idols of their Kings: but I beseech you to tell me, did
they make an Idol of K. F. in all his Majesty and Glory? Did they not withstand
his Arbitrary power by such means as the Law allows? Were they not Closeted,
Suspended, and Imprisoned, as well as others, and did they not boldly preach
and write against his Idol Popery: and in short, did they Ido lize him more
than your self? But once more, why make Idols of their Kings? The Doctrines to
which they certainly adhere, oblige them to all Sovereigns, as well as Kings.
It is not Kings, as single persons, but as Supreme, that they give that
Veneration to, which you miscal Idolizing; and in other Governments they would
Idolize Senates and Conventions, with the same immutable Fiath and Allegiance,
that they here Idolize Kings. I know none of them that Idolize the King more
than the Law of the Kingdom does. But however, Sir, I thank you for the Phrase,
I never read it before, but in Hugh Peter's Trial, who made the people his
Idol, and said the office of a King was dangerous, and useless, which I am
afraid many men still say in their hearts.

Nay, you say, the world is chiefly beholden to them for arbitrary and
tyrannical Kings, and if I had a mind to return upon you, I could as well say,
that the world has been beholden to others, for so many Covenants,
Associations and Rebellions. But, Sir, why must they be blamed for the Tyranny
of Kings? Blame the Doctrine, if you please, and the Church which has taught
it, but let the men go free. If Kings sin because the grace of God abounds
toward them, as his Vicegerents; the blame is to be laid, neither indeed on
the Doctrine, nor those who teach it, but on their own wicked hearts; and you
would do well to consider, whether we have not had, as many gracious Kings,
under the preaching of it since the Reformation, as in any other Kingdom, where
it is neither taught nor believed. The Fr. King was not made a Tyrant by it,
for that is no Popish doctrine: and in like manner, it was King James' zeal for
Popery, and not this doctrine which was the cause of his mis doings.

You also tell them with great civility, that they are inconsiderative to
amazement of the Prior Obligation they are under to their Religion, and the
Community of which they are Members. But Sir, in saying so, you seem
inconsiderate to amazement your self. Methinks the History, if you never talked
with any of them, might have convinced you, that they are not unmindful of the
Obligation they are under to their Religion, since it is the sense of that, and
I believe that alone, which keeps them from Swearing. They believe there are
some means and methods by which Religion will not be preserved, and they think
it a very dishonorable, and preposterous way to preserve it by Practices
contrary to its Precepts: and if in this they are inconsiderative to amazement;
the Primitive Christians in the decennial Persecution were so too.

As to the Community of which they are Members, they wish it, as well as you
do, and understand the true interest of it, and are willing to promote it by
all just and Legal ways; but then they believe that the Community neither
diffusive, nor representative has any right by Law, or Gospel to distress the
King by Arms, or transfer his Crown, and their own Allegiance without his
consent. They are also persuaded that it tends more to the safety of the
Community to bear a Tyrannical King, than to resist his Tyranny, and unhinge
the Government by force; and whether their Opinion, or the contrary is truest,
they think Time, and Experience have sufficiently shown. You are forced to
acknowledge, that Salus Populi has been abused to most wicked purposes, and I
believe, you will also acknowledge that it has been more abused in This
Kingdom by the Subjects, than Non-resistance by the Kings: and if you had
understood it in Bishop Sanderson's sense (who sure was not inconsiderate to
amazement) that Salus Populi, the wesfare of the people principally includes
the preservation of the Head, and his Rights: You would have been ashamed to
assert, that that Maxim devests K. J. of his Crown, and dissolves our
Obligation to him.

By these and some other passages you make me suspect, that you do not believe
the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, as the Church of England has taught it, but
that your Passive Obedience is such an one as is consistent with resisting of
Sovereign Authority. What you also mean by the highest peg of it, I cannot
guess; for Non-resistances is Non resistance all over, and presupposes
Injustice, Oppression, and Persecution in all degrees; and I desire you to
consider, whether under a limited Monarchy, there can be any occasion for it,
till Kings break their Oaths, and violate their Laws and exercise Arbitrary
power. They must first invade the rights of the People, before they can be
called to the exercise of this Self-denying Doctrine. We can never suffer till
our Kings begin to rule in a way subversive of the Government; nor ever suffer
to any trying degree of Persecution, till they set up illegal Courts or govern
by the Sword.

But perhaps you will say, that single persons, or families ought to suffer but
not the Community. To which I answer, that the Community is made up of single
persons, and families, and when one person, or family, or Corporation suffers
Illegally in a common Cause, the whole Community suffers with it, and therefore
to what purpose has this Doctrine been so carefully taught by our Church and
her Divines, and You among the rest, unless we are to submit to our Kings when
they turn Tyrants, and subvert the Laws.

Our Church and her Clergy, has all along taught the doctrine of Suffering,
with a particular eye to this very case, if God to punish us for our sins
should suffer our Kings to turn Tyrants, therefore we must either absolutely
disclaim it, which you are unwilling to do, or else suffer patiently against
Law, when there is no other remedy but Arms, which neither our Religion, nor
the Law, which makes it our Porperty, allow.

In the 9 and 10. page you upbraid the Compilers of the History, as you call a
single Author, with not assisting K. James, and scoffingly ask them, Why they
did not at least mind the People of their duty, and excite them to it. Pray
Sir, did you do so, or no? If you did not, the same reason that will justify,
or excuse you, will also justify or excuse them. Your Conscience tells you,
that neither you nor they then thought, that the King couid have lost his
Kingdoms, and I must further tell you, because you seem to pinch them with your
question, that several of them did at their great hazard remind their People of
the duty of Non resistance, and particularly, the Author of this Book; For though
you are pleased to tell them, that hazard ought not to discourage Ministers
from a Necessary duty, yet I must tell you, that perhaps an Apostle is not
bound to run the danger of such hazard, and to so little purpose. You cannot
have forgot the rage and madness of the Rabble all over the Kingdom at that
time, and when the Papists shall equally upbraid both sides, as you upbraid one
with silently looking on, then I believe, you will think your common
confidence, that the King would not suffer by your silence, and the terror of
the Mob, good topics of excuse.

I find you p. 13. reviving the old distinction betwixt the Kings political
capacity, and his personal interest, or person, and thereby implying, as the
Spencers did in Edward the Second's time, that it is lawful for the People to
separate his Person from his Power, and govern in default of him, when he does
not govern according to Law. But then I must tell you, that this Doctrine was
solemnly condemned by two Parliaments, one in Edward the Second, and the other
in Edward the Third's time. It was also revived 50. Years ago, and as solemnly
condemened, though not expressly, yet in effect by two or three Acts of Parliament
since the Restoration, and I pray you to tell me, as a Divine, is it not the
King's person his natural person, that is anointed, and which we are bound to
honor, and over which the Law tells us we have no coercive power, and whose
death it makes High Treason to compass, or imagine, as also to take up Arms
against him, and which, in short, was deposed in Richard the Second, and
murdered in Charles the First. Give me leave also to tell you, that you run
from your Argument of Conquest, in the attempt you have made to absolve us from
our old Oath of Allegiance, with this distinction, and the welfare of the
People, which is called the highest Law. If Conquest will do, what need of this
Theory, and if this will do, what need of that? but you do wisely in having two
Strings for your Bow.

You amaze me with your amazing providence, page 14. Major General Harrison
argued at his Trial just so, and truly that way of arguing, though now again in
fashion, becomes a Turk better than a Christian, and a Fifth-Monarchy man much
better than a Church of England Divine. Had a Novice in Divinity argued so, it
might have been excusable, but there is no excuse for such as you, who it may
be saw the amazing providence 50. Years ago, and who must needs know, that God
permits many amazing things, which he does not approve: For as he lets his Sun
shine on the Good and on the Evil: So he gives amazing successes to bad Princes
and Causes (witness the According to that of the French Poet. Vna dies B -- os.
Burgundos hebdomas una.
Vna Lotharigos Luna. Quid annus eris?

French victories) as well as to the Good.

I should remark some other Passages in your Book, but that to use your own
phrase, there may be hazard in touching of them. In answer to one of them, I
could refer you to an excellent saying, in Dr. B.'s answer to Parl. Pac. and
whereas you suppose in your last Paragraph, that all, who have taken the New
Oath, have transferred their Allegiance, as you have done, I must tell you, if
you know it not before, that they do not think so. And I beseech you to
consider, that the reason why so many good Men stand out, is not that they are
fond of K. James, or expect more than you from him, but because they cannot
transfer their Allegiance with a quiet Conscience, but when God shall take away
that which lets, then they will readily transfer it, and become as good
Liege-Subjects, as you can desire them to be.

In the mean time, Sir, I hope you, and all good Men will pity the
inconsiderable number, whose Consciences direct them against their interests,
and inclinations. Two of them, Learned, and Holy Bishops, have declared on
their Deathbeds, that if Death had been the Penalty of not taking the Oath,
they must have offered their Lives to redeem their Consciences. They were good
Men, and good reasoners too, and I hope their declarations, if they were made
public, would satisfy honest Men of all Persuasions, that it is neither
pride, nor peevishness, nor any other evil passion, nor yet any worldly hopes,
or expectations, but a full persuasion, or just fear of Perjury that keeps
others also from taking the Oath.

I also hope it will be considered of what Church they are Ministers, what an
Ornament many of them in their respective Relations have been unto it, how
constant they were to their Profession in the late time of trial, and how
stoutly they stood with their Brethren in the breach. These things, and the
hardness of their Case, seem to call for pity from all good Churchmen, both
among the Clergy, Mr. B^^^un in a late piece entitled, the Doctrine of
Non-resistance, etc. p. 24.
who pretends to be a good Churchman, says, he hopes they will not meet with
much compassion, that is in his figure, with none at all. He hopes it, because
they are blind, and wilful men, but if he indeed be the Churchman he pretends
to be, I hope he will repent before his next offering, both of the rashness of
his judgment, and the uncharitableness of his wish. By what principle of the
Church of England will he justify himself for sitting in judgment upon his
Teachers, and passing sentence of wilful blindness upon them, to make them
odious to the People? Is this consistent with the reverence which the Church
teaches to be due to the Fathers and Pastors of it? Is it consistent with
Christian Chrity to treat them as the Pagans treated their Predecessors, the
Apostles, and Presbyters, when they dressed them up in the Skins of Beasts, and
exposed them as the filth, and off scourings of the World? What have they done
contrary to the Chruches Doctrine, or the Example of their Predecessors, or
their own Principles to deserve this usage? How comes he, who not long since
thought many of them so venerable for their Candor, Learning, and Judgment, now
to proclaim them blind, and wilful, and to wish so much evil to them, to whom
he much good? If they are in an error, it would have much better become his
character, and pretensions, to have excused it, and apologized for them, and
instead of making their Friends their Enemies, to have made their Enemies their
Friends. Their punishment is like to be grievous enought without any accession,
he needed not have added affliction to the miserable, but they trust in God,
who is able to do them more good, than he can do them hurt, and since he has
so frankly tole the World, he has no bowels for them, he may be sure none of
these blind men will ask Break at his Door. But as blind as he thinks them,
they can look unto Jesus the Author, and finisher of their faith, and according
to his Precepts, and Example, pray for those, that despitefully use them, and
for him in particular, that God may have more compassion for him, than it seems
he has, or is willing others should have for them. All the ground of his
displeasure against them is, that they are afraid of Perjury, a Sin, which he
himself sets forth, as most detestable and dreadful, in the IX. Section of his
Justice of Peace, whither I refer him, and the Readers, especially those with
whom he is so angry for not taking the Oath.

FINIS.

