THE TEST OR TRIAL OF THE Goodness and VALUE OF Spiritual-Courts, IN TWO
QUERIES: I. Whether the Statute of 1 Edw. 6. 2. be in Force (against them) at
this day, Obliging them to Summon and cite the Kings Subjects ( not in their
own Names and Styles, as now they do, but) in the Name and Style of the Kings
Majesty (as in the Kings Courts Temporal) and under the Seal of the Kings Arms?
II. Whether any of the Cannon-Law, or how much of the Cannon-Law is (at this
day) the Law of England, in Courts Christian?

Highly necessary to be Perused by all Those that have been, or may be Cited to
Appear at Doctors Commons.

By EDM. HICKERINGILL.

The Second Edition, Corrected.

LONDON: Printed by George Larkin, for the Assigns of the Author, and are to be
Sold by most Booksellers. 1683.

Suavi Devinctissimo Sodalitate Amico meo, A. B. Utriusque Juris Professori.
AEGre jam Quaestionum istarum, quas floccitatis meae Disquisitioni (Desiderii
tui in me non acuminis Indicium) tanta voluptate subjici gestivisti Jugiter,
Tandem, non sine Ingratae Invidiae Subsequentis Intuitu, Luce (ut omnium
Provocet) examen gaudet Impetratum.

Quod cum Ecclesiae pace Profertur nostrae Indigenae, bonorumque Auspiciis,
Bono Publico Pacisque Communi consulere, Dominationi saltem vestrae (ne dicam)
omnibus (quorum non sunt aures veritati clausae) Conamen nullus dubito
pergratum.

Palamque in otio meo and sollicitudine (quam non languere patior) omnium
Intuli oculis, ne versutior and callidior and hoc tanto*Invisior and suspectior
(nec interea temporis mihi, Patriae, aut Ecclesiae defuisse) videar.

Praesagienti verum animo, non sum nescius quam diversa sunt hominum studia,
meque in tempore non magis opportuno quam difficili haec disserere (Haud enim
is sum qui definiam) Impedito quidem (quid mirum?) scribendi stylo non tam prae
literarum impotentiam solummodo, quam prae glissentem Indies Invidiam and
lascivientem in hominem, umbra and recessu abditum and Turbarum
Contumeliarumque nuperarum non Insolentem; sed an majori Justitia an
Procacitate apud Posteros Judicium esto.

Obganniant interea loci and pro consuetudine detrectent perfrictae frontis
rabulae: Tales etenim, ut malitia convitiisque. coram vel clanculum desistant,
ambire vanum habeo.

Nec tot adversis Impar gravate processus eorum Renuo; nec hanc Perperam, sed
Fide (uti Spero) spectata Capessui Provinciam

Hic tamen seqvor Eminus (nec inhonesta cautela) Vetatem, in Tramite verum (uti
par est) licet non ad Calcem (quod aiunt) Temeratam.

Hic namque Veritas non tum limatur quam ad gustum Communem accommodatur Oration.

Ideoque Disputator non tam Subtilis quam pro re Nata dulcis parumque Vehemens
(quanti quanti sit Veritas vendicanda) Pacis Colendae causa haberi videar
uteunque.

Londini Tertio Iduum Januarii Anno Salutis. 1682/3. Reverentiae Vestrae
Addictissimus, EDM. HICKERINGILL.

The TEST: OR, TRIAL of the VALUE and GOODNESS OF SPIRITUAL COURTS Querying I.
Whether the Statute Anno I Edw. 6. 2. be in Force, against their Ecclesiastical
Proceedings at this day.
CHAP. I.
THis has been an old Question (and never, as yet, Judicially determined) and
therefore cannot be accounted a bold Question: much less is it moved
unseasonably.

Men that pass quietly by, making no noise, but, covered with darkness and the
Night, and creeping on their way, as it were by stealth, may possibly pass the
Guards, without the trouble of being challenged by the watchful Sentinels, or
of being forced to stand and tell who they are, whence they came, or whither
away; But if they make a bustle, and a disturbance, It Alarm's Examination to
pry into their ways, and to enquire whether they have a Lawful Passport from
God, and the King, or from one of them.

Time was, when Ecclesiastical men did their business, and carried on the Money
Business (not very unsuccessfully) but without noise, hanging down their heads
when the Register went to Church accompanied only with (his two drudges) The
Surrogate and the Summer; then calling a Court in haste, and with a greater
haste adjourned, before the naughty boys and rabble had notice, or could rouse
themselves to Hiss at them, getting as safely as secretly to their Lodgings,
where picking up a few groats amongst easy Churchwardens, nibling it
Procuration money, and Visitation money amongst the Parsons, (that for fear of
a worse turn, delivered their purse) which with some Driblets for Licenses of
Matrimony, and Administration-Money, paid Riding Charges and the Reckoning well
enough, and somewhat to spare, the Register (departing well lined in Body and
Pocket) marched away as cheerfully as secretly, making as tittle noise as
possibly he could.

But when the Pastoral staff began to play at quarter staff, driving whole
Flocks before it (by flocks) to Pound, and seeming to make a blow at the spirit
and Soul (which no mortal blow can hit, being situated too high and out of
reach). The smart was felt upon the Flesh, and the strokes sell heavy upon the
outward man, depriving men of Privileges and Temporal Liberties, Birthrights,
and Franchyses as Englishmen; of Votes, Elections, and Benefits, as Citizens,
Free-Demzons, and Freeholders; of their debts, and all benefit of the Law, as
Creditors, Witnesses and Jurymen; and of disposing of their Estates, by Will
and Testament, as Testetors; no wonder if it rowzed Examination, to enquire
whether the Lightning be composed of culinary fire and Kitchen-stuff, rather
then of Heavenly Rays; because Celestial Lightning melts the Sword without
singing the Scabbard, and strikes at the Life and Soul, mortifying it, without
leaving any Impression upon the Body and outward man.

Nay further, when the Cry, because of Ecclesiastical Oppressions and
Extortions (in illegal Fees for Probate of Will's, Administrations, etc.
contrary to and in Defyance of the Statutes of this Realm) grew so loud, and
notorious, that it sounded and rung all the Kingdom over, most men were the
more willing to pry into their Constitution, and examine their Groundsell,
whether all be sound and right at the bottom, when such Ruins and
Dilapidations appear above ground, Ay, and to bring Indictments against many of
them, which undid several of them, for their Extortions; and most justly did
they suffer, and none to pity them.

For men give Law to Hares and Deer, but they catch the Ravenous and Rapacious
(the Poll-Cat, that sucks the Eggs and spoils the young Brood; The Badger (too)
that worrys the poor Lambs) when they can, How they can, and As soon as they
can; And who so poor as not to contribute his penny, or so ungrateful, as not
to be Civil, (at least) and a Well-wisher to the Foxcatcher, and that he may
prosper, praying for his good success in hunting down the noxious Game, an
Employment, not more pleasant and Gentile, then useful and serviceable to the
Commonwealth and public good:

Even so, The wise Statesmen have made such excellent Laws against Oppressors,
Extortioners, Promoters, Suborners, Common Informers, and the like Animals
(that rend and tear the Kings poor Subjects and Lambs) that Encouragement is
given by the same Laws to every right Englishman and true Protestant (that will
put the same in Execution against them) he shall not only benefit the public
but himself also; and deserve well of his King and Country.

For who can, without great Regret and check of Conscience, connive at, much
less Countenance such public Scandals, Oppressions, Grievances, Offenses and
Delinquency's?

Did our blessed Savior or his holy Apostles curse them that refused to pray
with them, or refused to hear them preach? and yet they were infallibly in the
right.

Some of the more furious Zealots amongst his Disciples ( once, and but once)
called for fire from heaven to consume those that rejected them, (as Elias
did:) but our Redeemer presently Rebuk't the evil Spirit, and cast it out of
them, saying, see know not what manner of Spirit ye are of

Did the Apostles drive men to Pound, or the Jayl, with any or all their
Ecclesiastical rods, and then replevy them, and redeem them, but never without
Money in the case?

Did Christ or his Apostles (whose Poverty and Self-denial, (taking up the
Cross) was a qualification as absolutely necessary for a Follower of Christ and
Successor of the Apostles, as was Faith, Hope and Charity) did they by any
Ecclesiastical Engine feel their Pockets, get dominion, or wreak their malice
and revenge, or truckle to Politicians to make their Spiritual Weapons Tools of
State, wherewith to do a State Jobb?

Did they either make money of Souls or of Sins? Did they call to the Jaylors,
Hang-men or Bumbaylies to come and help them; and lend them a hand to carry on
the Gospel? Did they either force or fright men to Heaven? or scare them out of
their Wits, or out of their Consciences, or out of their Purses, or out of
their Freedoms, Liberties, Estates, Birthrights or Temporal Inheritances?
which, (he confessed himself) were exempt from his Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
not hooking it in, as the Pope and others, do, with the old Popish Cheat -- in
ordine Spiritualia: taking away their Temporalities in order to their Souls
health: Our Blessed Savior taught us not this cunning; nor these medendi
methodos, new ways of Cure; and Arts Empyrical.

Men never sooner cry out then when pincht of their Liberties, or pincht by the
Pocket, especially if Spiritual-men be active in it, they are apt to cry -- By
what Authority do you these things, and who gave you this Authority?

The old Prelates (in King James his Reign) calling themselves the Church of
England in their Articuli Cleri presented to the King and Council (against all
the Judges) confessed judiciously, where their great ( Sampsons) strength lies as
to their Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, not in the least mentioning God, nor
Christ therein, neither the Prophets, Apostles, nor the Gospel for it (their
modesty is Comm endable, because no such Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, Spiritual
nor Temporal, is found in the Holy Bible.)

But, very plainly and open heartedly they avow, without dissembling the matter
in the least, That the chiefest Temporal Strength of their
Ecclesiasti-Jurisdiction, is Imprisonment upon the Writ de Excommunicato
Capiendo.

Implying that, if their Sampson's-Locks were cut, they would become weak as
other men; And if this Royal Statute I Edw. 6. 2. be in force, all their
Processes Ecclesiastical, Significavits, Certificavits, in their own name and
not in the Kings name, must all be illegal, and consequently all Capiesses and
Imprisonments thereupon, Illegal, and ill grounded; Therefore no wonder if men
concerned do stand up stoutly to keep this Law down, (For if it rise up in
Judgment against us, what will become of us) or if all the standing in the
world cannot bind it down: (For the Law at long run is too hard for any man
alive) I profess, The old Prelates knew how it concerned them to hush it down,
when it seemed to rise up to fright them by being unloosned primo Jacobi,
having long been fettered and bound down primo Mariae.

And it was honestly done of them to confess that their strength did lie in the
Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo; why should men ly for the matter? especially in
a case so plain and palpable? We are all agreed that Commissaries, Officials,
Proctors, Registers, Sumners, and all that drive that Sell-Soul Trade, are not
found in Gods Word.

If therefore it shall appear (before we have done) that they are not of the
King neither, prithee tell me, (if thou can) who they are of?

This Province (I know) would be best managed by a Lawyer; yet it is not his
Peculiar, nor Exempt from the proper Cognizance of a Divine, especially in
Reference to such Statutes, (as this of 1 Edw. 6.2.) which relates only to
Divines and their Surrogates; (especially to such Divines as I am, (to wit) a
Bencher, and Judge Ecclesrastical.)

It Is true, I only state the Case; for it is the Kings Judges that (only)
ought to determine its Validity; And well are they called in Law his Locum
Tenentes, because by Partiality, Timidity, Corruption, or Injustice, they have
not only been charged with breaking the King's Oath, (thereby) as well as their
own; put have had their Necks broke at the Gallows, for their p^i^s Nor since
this question was first started, 4 Jacobi, did any of them ( I will ^^ say they
durst not) decide this Quere Judicially: For the Judges may declare the Law,
but never a man in England can either make or Repeal a Statute, (out of
Parliament) it is Fatal to him, if he attempt it.

And, I Will speak a bold word, I believe the Ingenious Reader will conclude
(before I have done,) that all the th^n in England are not able to speak one
reasonable word against the Validity of this Royal Statute, thought so
necessary for the Preservation of the King's Supremacy and Royal Prerogative,
(after the Pope's Head was decollated) that it was the first Statute that ever
was made (except that concerning the blessed Sacrament to be taken in both
kinds) after the Reformation, In the Reign of Edw. 6. For his Father Reformed
indeed the Monasteries into his Pocket, but lived and died a Zealous Papist.

CHAP. II.
ANd if in handling this Serious and Solid Argument, The Reader happen to meet
with an Angery expression sometimes, which he deems too light, for the Gravity
of the matter in hand, let him know there is not a word here writ, till well
pondered, and of Set-purpose

For which mixtures, I have the Oracle of the Law, the most incomparable (
Cook) for my Warrant as well as Copy and President; recommending the plain down
Right Arguments of Law ( in his Institutes) by Interlacing them with Poetry and
vivid Humanity, therefore rendering them more Am^a^le and acceptable,

Or, (if you please) He Damask's and Waters his best and strongest Stuff; And I
(to speak in his own Phrase, I mean, the Cooks Phrase) will Lard my discourse,
where I list. And though I have not the skill to do it Cook-like, I hope, not
S^ovenly, Though it is but to make it go the more merrily down.

Not that I take either Care, or bestow any pains upon Emblemishments to please
any man's Gusto, but, if they readyly and naturally come to hand, and but please
my own Palate; be they salt, bitter, or Tart; no matter, though they disrelish
a dull Phlegmatic or Insi^id Taste; I have no ware to sell, nor other design,
In this Treat, but the discovery of Truth and Law; And what is that to any man
how I Cook my own Diet? wherefore I will State the Case* Impartially, not
omitting any thing that the Lord Cook says against the Validity of this
Statute, but will Improve all he says, to the utmost; If I do not, set any man
make more of them; when I have done.

Some honest Lawyer might have been so good as to do this ungrateful Work to
my hand (but the Drug and slowest Sailer of the whole Fleet usually carrys the
Light) most of the Learnedest of them declare ( boldly) in their Chambers, for
the Validity of that famous Statute. 1 Edw. 6. 2. as well as for the
Reasonableness of such a Law; for if the Ecclesiastical Courts be the Kings
Courts, as well as are the Temporal, why should not the Original or Judicial
Writs and Processes run in his name, in the Ecclesiastical Courts, as well as
in the Temporal?

But, though this (and a great deal more to this effect) be true, yet men are
so Timorous and wary, that though they thereby get only Polephemus his Mercy*
to be one of the last that shall suffer, staying only to see their fellows
executed, yet they are ^oth to come into the Lists to try the Adversaries
strength, wanting that which is one of the four Cardinal Virtues, For^^^^^;
without which no man can be a good Christian.

A Coward may be a G^^stick, or Summer Christian, namely a Professor of Truth
Till the Storm of Persecation come, but ^he^, the Fox keeps in his hole,
resolved, as long as he can, to sleep in a whole Skin. Faint hearts! they are
Well-Willers to the Mathematics, they can look on, (as they pass by,) and see
the Cudgel^p^y* and with Favor, to that side they like, can applaud and cry --
Euge* well struck! In troth That was a home-thrust; That was well-followed;
That was a Down-blow, at them again! my Heart! But, they dare as we eat their
Ears as come into Ring and take up the Cudgels; though the Lub^ers have more
Strength then they that play the prize, only they want a go^d heart.

Pope Sixt^^ 4. was first a Gray-Fryar of St. Francis, And from the Cloister
mounte^ into the Holy-Chair; To whom, amongst others, came to visit him an old
C^^rade of his, a Franciscan Friar of the same house, in his old Cordelier's
Treasure of times.
habit* which the Pope liad newly thrown off.

Glad was the Pope to see his old Comrog -- not so much for the Friars sake as
his own; That his Quondam Brother might behold his Glory, and the Splendour of
his Equipage in all his Pontisicalibus:

To which purpose, the Pope concealed nothing of his stately Pride and Pomp,
but showed the poor Friar all his Precious stones, Chambers of State, Thr^nes,
Miters, Jewels, and Robes, not omitting the Golden Slippers that En^^ri^'d his
sweaty Toes and Corns; at last, showed him his vast Treasures, a vast Mass of
Gold and Silver heaped up together: (as who should say) Brother that was! The
Game is altered since I wore a Circingle with you in the Fryary; for (quoth the
Pope) I cannot now say (as Peter did) Silver and Gold I have none.

No, (Replied the Friar) Nor can you say (as he did) to the sick of the Palsy,
(Lame and Impotent People) Arise and Walk.

This bold Answer lost the poor Friar a Cardinals Cap, and a pair of Lawn
Sleeves, which the Pope had laid out and designed for his old acquaintance, in
remembrance of many a Waggish- prank they had played together in the Monastery;
but this Plain Truth spoiled all, and the Friar sent home, as poor as he came,
and as a fellow not fit for his purpose, not having the wit (or Gift) of
cogging, lying, flattering and dissembling, nor meet for a Courtier: And as
glad was the Friar that his Holiness did not jayl him, for so much Honesty and
naked Truth.

Though the Wise and Wary* The Time-serving Tantivees and the Timorous; will
join together to condemn the poor Friar for a fool, that had so little wit as
to loose his Preferment for the sake of a little Truth and Gospel, and telling
his Popeship his own.

Just such another Fool am I, in their opinion that know nothing but Worldly
Wisdom, which is enmity with God; why? Do you think I did not foresee all this
Storm that has tossed me, ( not wrackt me) long before it came; And let it
bluster, Gods Will be done, I thank God for this Grace, The Ecclesiastical-men
cannot plague me with so much courage and comfort for exposing their
oppressions, extortions, and vexations of the Kings Subjects, in defyance of
the Laws, as I can cheerfully and patiently suffer, for the sake of Truth and
the Laws.

Yet, will I not break one Law, whilst I vindicate another; nor did I ever
write any thing which is not justifyable by Law.

For I could find in my heart to deliver my self into their hands, if it be but
for an experiment to try how much Ecclesiastical Clemency is improved in
Christianity and Humanity since the blessed days of their Predecessor Bishop
Bonn^r.

Not but that I am well and warm, which I speak not in vapor, (far be the
Imputation of such vanity from me) but to the praise of Almighty God's
Protection, which I know he will continue, and I shall certainly overlive their
rage except God see it more for his, Glory, and for the Promulgation of Truth,
that I should seal it, with suffering for(...)* (...) of which I am so
Indifferent, that I know not which is best, nor would I be mine own Carver,
Gods Will be done: they always hitherto have (and always will) hurt
themselves more than me, let then be as cunning and cruel as best like, or as
God will permit.

And this I say (the rather) for the encouragement of (...) that suffer for
Truth and a good Conscience, (whatever other Stratagems they have for the
pretense of their rage) let no man's heart therefore fail because of me; for I
was never better in my life.

And indeed, if this Statute of Edw. 6. be in force, no name is bad enough for
Ecclesiasticals, but we seem the most Impudent Conventicle ^f Insolent men that
ever did bid defyance to the Law, or vexed the Kings Sub^^^^s in our own names
by vexations, Citations and oppressions, Excommunication^ Significations and
Imprisonments; for which no Punishment seems satisfactory in this World, so it
do but spare our Lives; we are in misericordia Regis, and have forfeited all
but our Lives, if that Branch of that Statute be in force. In the Interim, God
keep me out of the enemies clutches though, For I think, I know sufficiently
what Ecclesiastical Clemency is, if they get a man at their mercy; women and
timorous men are said to be most cruel, when they get a man down, they never
think themselves safe, till he be made sure for ever rising up again; but, if
they had not run to Westminster Hall, cried out there for help, against me, I
could have dealt well enough with them till they had been Tired, nay, They knew
it as well. But no more of that at present, for their business was never so
fully and completely done as now. Take my word for it.

CHAP. III.
THe Branch of the said Statute, 1 Edw. 6. 2. now to be considered, is this,
verbatim.

BE it therefore further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Summons
and Citations, or other Process Ecclesiastical, in all Suits and Causes of
Instance, vetwixt Party and Party, and all Causes of Correction, and all Causes
of Bastardy or Bigamy or Inquiry de Jure Patronatus, Probates of Testaments,
and Commissions of Administrations of Persons deceased, and all Acquitcances of
and upon, accounts made by the Erecutors Administrators, or Collectors of Goods
of any dead person, be from the first day of July next following, made in the
name and with the style of the King, as it is in Writs Original or Judicial, at
the Common Law; And that the Test thereof be in the name of the Archbishop or
Bishop, or other having Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, who has the commission
and grant of the Authority Ecclesiastical immediately from the Kings Highness;
And that his Commissary, Official, or Substitute exercising Jurisdiction under
him, shall put his name in the Citation or Process after the Test.

Furthermore, be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all manner of
Person or Persons* who have the exercise of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
shall have from the first day of July before expressed, in the Seals of Office,
The Kings Highness Arms decently set, with certain characters under the Arms
for the knowedge of the Diocese, and shall use no other Seal of Jurisdiction,
(...) wherein his Ma^esties Arms be ing^^^en, upon pain that if any person
shall use Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction (after the day before expressed) in this
Realm of England, Wales, ^^ other his Dominions or Territories, And not send or
make out the citation or process in the Kings name, or use any Seal of
Jurisdiction, other than before Limited* That every such Offender shall in^^^^
and run in the Kings Majesty's Displeasure and Indignation and suffer
Imprisonment at his Highnesses will and pleasure.

Now, what is there in all this that should make a man loath to act in the Name
and Style and Seal of the Kings Majesty? (and not in the old method, when a
Priest was the head of the Church) if there were not something in the hollow of
his Heart?

They do not pretend (as aforesaid) that their Spiritual-Courts are named in
God's Word, if therefore they be the Kings-Courts, what, in the name of
goodness, makes them unwilling that their Processes, Citations, and Summons
Ecclesiastical should not (as other Writs Original or Judicial, in the Kings
Common Law Courts) run in the Name and Style and Arms of the Kings Majesty?

Edward 6. was the first Protestant-King since the Reformation; For though King
Henry 8 (as I said) Reformed the lustful Monasteries, yet he neither reformed
his own life thereby, nor his Popish opinions. But his Son was likely to be a
happy Instrument of good to this Nation; Whatever Doctor Heylin (the darling
Advocate of some Bishops) have had the Confidence to Print to the contrary, who
in the Epistle before his (pretended) History of the Reformation, expressly
affirms -- That he cannot reckon the death, of King Edward the Sixth, for an
Infelicity to the Church of England; How Sir! was it not an Infelicity to the
Church to lose such a King? To have the hopes of a glorious Reformation ^^pt in
the very Bud? To have a fearful deluge of Blood and Idolatry rush in upon us by
a Popish Successor? But what will not the Craftsmen of Ephesus say, when they
fancy their Shrines in hazard? And how ready, alas! are such as think
Lordships, and vast Revenues, and dominering power the Churches, only
Felicit^^s) to Reproach and Scandalize (even in Sacred Princes) the clearest
Innocence, and the most solid Piety, and the brightest Zeal? But God he thanked
this Censure of Noble King Edward of Blessed Memory, is but one Doctor's
opinion, and I know not an other honest Protestant at home or abroad that will
subscribe to it.

The very first Statute that the Parliament made (as I said before) in this
good Kings Reign, was this that we are now considering, (except one only
concerning the Blessed Sacrament, and receiving it in both kinds, with which
they as piously begun, and their next work was this Regulation of
Spiritual-Courts*)

For it seems very absurd that if the Ecclesiastical-Courts be the Kings-Courts
and not the Prelates-Courts (which they dare not in plain words deny) That the
Writs thence Issuing should not be in the name and style of the King, the
Ecclesiastical-head as well as the Temporal.

Nevertheless, never since King Edwards Reign, could the Prelates be persuaded
to act in the Kings-Name, but in their own:

Every thing would gladly be Independent, and Noun Substantives, And, like
reeling ^^unkards, scorn to be held up* though they cannot stand by themselves*

And though this Statute was Rep^^^^d in the next Reign by a Popish Successor,
yet King James in his first Parliament (In the first year of his Reign)*
revived this Statute, by making void the Force of that Statute, 1 Mar. 2. whi^^
had long held it under Restraint and made it Motion-less. But those band* being
Loosned (by Repeal of 1 Mary 2. in and by virtue of the Statute prim Jacobi
cap. 25.) It was thought to be revived by the two Lord Chief Justices; at the
first; in the fourth year of King James. But, when the Lord Chief Baron and
other Judges had considered the Prejudice that might redound to the Kings
Subjects if some Diocesses had no Lawful Bishop* and consequently all the
Priests ordained by such Bishops (at least) as were made since the first of the
King, namely, the three last years, must be Illegal Priests, and Illegal
Bishops.

And many other Inconveniences must ensue, if the 1 Edw. 6. 2. should be deemed
to be in force, to the great Scandal and Impeachment of his Majesty's Justice,
which, together with the great Influence the Bishops had at Court (In the three
last reigns,) together with the Terror of the High Commission Court, The
business was Hush't up, pretending that it was repealed and bound down with a
three fold Cord, (as Coke is pleased to phrase it, 2 Instit. fol. 685.) or
three after Statutes, viz. 1. first, by 1 Mar. 2. Secondly, by 1 and 2 Phil.
and Mary 8. Thirdly, By 1 Eliz. 1.

And if any one of these do but hold, the Statute of 1 Edw. 6. 2. must stand
Repealed; But as drowning men lay hold of any Root, or knubs (though under
water, and does but help to drowned them) so men that are plunged into a
Necessity to hold the Conclusion, they are very willing to gain it, upon any
Premises, how sophistical soever.

Nalson in his late Collection of affairs of State* ^o. 763. undertakes
torecite this Consult of the Judges. 4 Jacobi, as (he says) he finds it in the
Paper Office, and tells us, That the being of this Stat. 1 Edw. 6. 2. in force
was Long stuck upon, but AT LAST an Answer was found -- So that it seems there
was much longing and abundance of seeking for an Answer, that is to say, for
any plausible pretense to avoid this Statute, and at last and with much ado,
something (as good as nothing) was found; for he furnishes us but with two of
the very same too weak Cords which Coke mentions.

For some thought they were hard put to it for Arguments against the force of
that famous Statute, when they fly for help to the two last Cords or Ligaments
to bind down that Statute, which they Trembled to think might be of terrible
Consequence, (if it happen to be in force) notwithstanding the Strength of the
said Cords and Ligaments, none of which seemed to have any the least Power
Imaginable to do the feat, if men were not very willing to believe it, except
the first Cord, namely 1 Mar. 2. for that does expressly and by name repeal 1
Edw. 6. 2.

And indeed if it had not expressly and by Name repealed it, It could never have
been repealed, if, (what Lawyers say) be true; That no Statute can be Repealed
but by another Statute, and that expressly and by Name; or be contrary to the
former Statute.

For if Wyre-drawn Consequences and Inferences might Repeal a Statute, the
Subjects would never know when a Statute is in Force.

For let but a crafty Lawyer with an oily glib tongue use his skill, and he may
with Strains of wit, and stretches and Inferences and far-fetcht Consequences
and oblique Reflections, make such a Clash among the Statutes one against
another, that none should seem of force, that a cunning* Consequence, driver
had any picque against.

But, our Kings and Parliaments have always been more tender of the Validity of
their Laws, then to leave them* To^tering thus at the me^^^ of every
Inference-maker,

Especially, when they draw (...) Inferences and Consequences as could not
possibly enter so much as into the minds and Cogitations of the Lawmakers,
when they enacted and made a Statute.

And this is so clear a Truth, and evident to every man that has but common
sense, that more needs not be said to it.

For it would be of most dreadful Consequence that the Statutes should be so
flexible as to be made a Nose of Wax of, to stand this way one day, and that
way another, just as Mr. Consequence-maker is feed to set them.

The Dissenters (for their money) might find cunning Lawyers enough (perhaps)
to defeat the Act of Uniformity, and Repeal it, if Far-fetcht Inferences and
Consequences would do the feat.

But, God forbid, that the Laws of England should have nothing to stand firm
upon, but such slippery ground, made such by an oily Mouth.

If we cannot find 1 Edw. 6. 2. repealed but by Consequences and Oblique
Inferences, we shall make base Tinkerly work on it, and to patch up one hole of
evil Consequences, make two of Consequence twenty times more dreadful and
pernicious.

Therefore the best Cord, and that which seems most strongly to make void and
of none effect the said Statute of 1 Edw. 6. 2. is indeed that which can never
be denied, namely, that the same is expressly and by name repealed by 1 Mary 2.
There let it stand or lie bound for ever, except we can find its Ligaments and
Shackles taken off, and again set in its pristine Liberty, Vigor, and Splendour.

But, as to those two latter Cords that they pretend bind it down for ever by
Repealing it, they are thought (by wise men) so trivial, that they are not
worthy any considera^^^^^ and that they were surely sore put to it for shifts,
that made them of such over-(...) (...).

CHAP. IV.
FOr how (in the name of Prudence) could it enter into the thoughts of wise
Legislators, to kill a dead Horse? Could the Parliament intend by the 1 and 2
Phil. and Mar. 8. to repeal 1 Edw. 6. which was repealed already, and made void
but the very year before, namely, by 1 Mar. 2. They could not forget it, it was
so lately done; nor can they be accounted so silly as Actum agere, and make
Laws against Non Entityes. The Learned Judge Hobert uses Hobart in Case
Sheffield verse. Ratcliff.
a like Argument to prove that the King shall have (not only the Estates ( In
Fee) of Traitors, (Estates in Tail being not by the Statutes (31 Hen. 8. and 33
Hen. 8.) by name given to the King, yet) also Estates in Tail why? because
there being but two sorts of Estates of Inheritance (namely in Fee, and in
Tail) and the Estates in Fee of Traitors being forfeit and given to the King by
the Common Law, Those Statutes shall not be presumed Actum agere, but shall
reach, the other Estates in Tail, which the Common Law did not reach.

And by like reason, since 1 Edw. 6. 2. is not so much as mentioned or named in
1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 8. except by Inferences and Fetches, deduced from the
Style and Latitude of those words. -- All Statutes made against the Sea of Rome
Repealed; There is Life in a Mussle. For the said Statute did not think
sufficient for their Repeal by General Words, but do therefore name
particularly and Expressly what Statutes they mean to Repeal namely, 25 Hen. 8.
9. and 24 Hen. 8 12. with almost a score more, (amongst which, my dear Statute
of 1 Edw. 6 2 is not Named) a(...)fore can never be repealed thereby, nor could
be intended to be (...) thereby.

But, some have said, that there are (in 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 8. express
words that do Repeal by Consequence the Statute of 1 Edw. 6. 2. namely these
words,

ANd the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the Arch bishops, Bishops and Ordinarye
to be in the same state for process of Suits, punishment of Crimes, and
Execution of Censures of the Church, with knowledge of causes belonging to the
same, and as large in those points as the said Jurisdiction was in Anno 20 Hen.
8. To which it is readily answered, That the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was
thereby made Valid and Powerful as it was in Condition and State, as to Process
of Suits, Censures, etc. In the 20 of Hen. 8. And yet the manner of their
Processes as to the Name and Style might well enough differ.

For no man can rationally say that the Process of Suits, punishment of Crimes,
and execution of Censures of the Church are not in the same State all over
London; yet the Processes of Suits run not in the same name and Style, but
sometimes in the name of the Bishop, sometimes in the name of his Archdeacon,
sometimes in the name of the Vicar General, sometimes in the name of the
Official, etc.

Therefore this far fech't Inference (strained and stretched) is too short to
reach a Blow, or so much as to touch that part of the Statute of 1 Edw. 6. 2.
concerning the use of the name, style, and Arms, in the Citations and Processes
Ecclesiastical.

Nay more, It is evident (also) that the Popes (...), Supremacy, and
re-establishment might well enough (...)ith the use of the King's Name and
Style, in Processes (...), as well as with Exton's name, or Pinfold's name; or
any (...)ay-Commissary's name in the Time of Popery.

If you sa(...)ut the name of the King's Majesty in a Writ or Process (...)an
Avow or Tacit Recognition that the Courts-Ecclesiasti(...) the King's-Courts;
I readily grant it, and therefore, it argues the more strongly for the
reasonableness and great Expediency of that Statute, that well enjoins His
Majesty's Name, Style and Arms in Courts Ecclesiastical, If they be the
Kings-Courts Ecclesiastical, and His Majesty Head of the Church, as he is of
the State.

This Statute then of 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 8. does not so much as by
Consequence repeal 1 Edw. 6. 2. Yet I well know what my Lord Coke says to it,
and do better know that he durst say no other then he did, so terrible then
were the Prelates, looking bigg and formidable in their High-Commission-Court
and Starr-Chamber.

Otherwise, a man of his sense and acute reason could not have talked (as Coke
Mag. Chart. p. 68^.
he does) of the dreadful Consequences; if that Statute of 1 Edw. 6. 2. be in
force, to the Infinite Prejudice of His Majesty's Subjects in cases of great
Importance, and to the Scandal and Impeachment of His Majestics Justice, etc.

For ^le secure the Scandal and all the dreadful Consequences, before the
Reader has turned over many more Leaves of this little Tract; if the Oracle of
the Law, the Learned Coke be not mistaken. And if the Bishops (in 4 Jacobi) had
not had somewhat else at the bottom (which I ^are not to name) we should have
had and still have as good Bishops and Priests as ever we had, if that be all
the Objection, that the Statute of 1 Edw. 6. 2 (as to the use of the name and
style of the King in Processes Ecclesiastical) will make us loose our Priests
and Bishops (God bless us, we are not so lost and undone as yet; if (...) Coke
be not out of his Law; in this particular; the Learned are affi(...) warps.

But a Statute may by express words, in after-Statutes, be repealed in part and
in a Branch, and not always in the whole; as is easy to instance in many
Crowding Presidents.

And, Coke says, the Archbishops and Bishops would all be illegal if they were
made according to our Celebrated Act of 1 Edw. 6. Because (...) p. 686.


Thought it be not repealed, yet the 1 Eliz. 1. reviving the Act of 25. Hen. 8.
20. is thought to vacate so much of it as concerns the making and constituting
Bishops.

And therefore King James his Bishops should not have needed to have been so
scared and affrighted (as if the Sky had fallen) when the 1 Edw. 6. 2. was
revived by King James his repealing 1 Ma. 2. if the Lord Coke say true.

For Queen Elizabeth had secured his and her Bishops by reviving her Fathers
Act concerning Bishop-making, in these words;

And at every Avoydance of any Archbishopric, Bishopric, The King His Heirs
and Snccessors may grant to the Prior and Covent (we have got none now) or to
the Dea^ and a Chapter a License under the great Seal, etc. containing the Name
of the person which they shall Elect and choose, etc. A pretty kind of
Election! for they shall neither will, nor choose, nor dare to refuse him that*
is nominated in the Letters missive; yet it is called an Election though,
although it be whether they will or no.

Bishops then (...) need (if Coke be not mistaken) to fear, but they are well
enough made, (...) I wish (with all my heart) that some of them were made
better, for their ow(...) and for my own sake There Is no harm nor scandal in
this Prayer, I (...)

But still, what is all this to the contempt (...)ute of 1 Edw. 6. 2 as to the
use of the name, style, etc. of the King in(...)mmons Ecclesiastical, if that
Clause (in 1 Edw. 6. 2. be unrepealed?

Why? it is repealed in effect (says the Lord Coke) by this (...) that Statute
of 25. Hen 8. 20. as aforesaid, by 1 Eliz. 1. revived, namely, in (...). Chart.
p, 686.
these words.

And further it is Enacted, that every person chosen, Elected. Iuvested and
consecrated Archbishop, or Bishop, according to the Form and Effect of this
Act etc. shall do and execute iu every thing and things touching the same, as
any Archbishop or Bishop of this Realm, etc. might at any time heretofore do.
Thus the Lord Coke recites that Branch of the Statute, with greater
prevarication then became a man of his Ingenuity, which herein far surpast his
Integrity.

The Truth is, a great Lawyer, (and the higher he is staged) had need to be, of
all others, a good man, like Roscius, of whom Cicero gives this Character,
Orat* pro R^sci^ef^rente augusteno, de consensu ^vaugle^* cap. 23. T. 4*
-- Roscium it a peritum dixit ut solus esset dignus qui in Scenam deberet
intrare, ita virum bonum ut solus esset dignus, qui eo non debeat accedere:
Roscius was such a skilful Actor, that he (of all others) did best become the
stage; but so good a man withal, that it was a Pity he should ever have come
there.

As the Learned Coke does quote the Statute, Archbishops and Bishops may, nay,
they ought to say Mass, baptize our Bells, spit in our Childrens mouths when
they baptize them, and a thousand idle ^opperies more they ought to do, if they
ought to do in every thing, as any Popish Archbishop or Bishop might at any
time heretofore do.

To the great Dishonor and Disparagement of the Prudence and Wisdom of Queen
Elizabeth and her first Parliament, nay, and of all Parliaments since that time.

By Cooks Citation of the Statute to serve his purpose against the said clause
of the Statute of 1 Edw. 6. 2. he opens a gap to let in Popery, or to let out
the Bishops thither, if they please; if they must do and execute in every thing
and things, as any Archbishop or Bishop of this Realm might at any time do,
before the time of Hen. 8.

Story says that Aesculapius was struck by a Thunderbolt for taking Immoderate
Fees for a Cure: and some men think, that it was either Covetousness of a great
Huge banking Fee, or Fear of loosing some Place or Office by displeasing the
Bishops, that Cook did not fully and honestly recite the said Statute; For the
true words are,

As any Archbishop or Bishop of this Realm, without offending the Prerogative
Royal of the Crown and the Laws and Customs of this, Realm, might at any time
heretofore do. Which clause (by Cook) wilfully or weakly omitted and left out,
quite alters the Case, and gives the Archbishops and Bishops no power to act,
do, execute, or Issue out any Processes Ecclesiastical, ( as Popish Bishops
used to do) in their own Names and Styles, sealed with their own Arms, and not
the Kings Arms, because it is contrary to the Law and Statute of 1 Edw. 6. 2
And those Arms are usually Papa in Cathedra^* as (...) of my Court in the
Soken of Essex, is the Mitred Pope sitting (...) Chair; so that (still I say)
The Kings Arms engraven in all Cour^ (...)^, would be a good Recognition that
all the Ecclesiastical Co(...) His; and He Head of the Church; as the Popes
Picture (of old)* ^ Court-Seales, (with the two Cross-keys in his hand,) did
seem (...) Popes Supremacy and Authority as chief head of their old (...)
Ecclesiastical Courts.

(...) the second and third Ligaments, or Cords said to bind the force of this
Act, (namely 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 8. and 1 Eliz. 1.) does not so much as
touch upon 1 Edw. 6. 2. no not obliquely, much less do they repeal it expressly
and by name; and least of all could it be any ways possible that the
Legislators had the least thoughts to strike it dead by 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar.
8. or 1 Eliz. 1. when they knew it was dead and buried before by 1 Mar. 2.

CHAP. V.
THis Beloved Statute then is got loose from the pretended shackles that
Phillip and Mary or Queen Elizabeth, are said to design against it; alas they
could not possibly be so weak as to plant their Artillery against a thing that
the Queen had struck dead whilst she was a maid, a year before; they had not
the least thought of it, I dare say for them.

Much less had Queen Elizabeth the least thoughts of destroying this Statute by
any thing in 1 Eliz. 1. when they very well knew that it was dead or repealed
by 1 Mar. 2.

And though 1 Eliz. 1, does obliquely glance at it, by making the old fashion
of making Bishops Legal, in a Protestant Church; yet she does not empower (by a
revival of 25. Hen. 8. 20.) any Archbishop or Bishop to transgress any Statute
already in force, much less any Statute that should come to be in force after
Queen Elizabeth was dead and buried.

Which is the very case here; For had Queen Elizabeth, as Queen Mary, (or any
other King or Queen) by name (expressly.) Repealed this Statute; (with which
Cords Learned Coke makes such a Pother to no purpose) yet, by his own Arguments
all his Pother is an idle Pother, and nothing that King Phillip and Mary, nor
Queen Mary alone, nor Queen Elizabeth alone, nor all of them united, can do, is
able to repeal 1. Edw. 6. 2. for ever.

For if an after-King and Parliament do but repeal their Repeal, the Statute
Repealed gets New Life, and is born again; as Coke infallibly proves and
affirms, in his discourse upon the Revival of this very Statute: Coke 2d.
Instit. p. 685, 686.


For he says that by the Repealing of a Repeal, the first Act is Revived; which
is most true, for remoto Impedimento reviviscit Statutum.

And therefore the Force of this Statute, about which Coke does so puzzle
himself with this Threefold Cord, easily appears and Breaks loose; from any
Tie that 1 Mar. or 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. or Q. Eliz. could possibly shackle it
and fetter it with; which Shackles shall bind no longer then till they or some
of the succeeding Kings and Parliament do unbind and take them off.

All which was soon done in the first of King James, in his first Parliament,
Repealing by Name 1 Mar. 2. that by Name had Repealed this Royal Statute (so
advantageous to the Kings Supremacy and Prerogative Royal) and also thereby (
through its Revival) Virtually Repealing all Precedent Statutes, whether of
Phil. and Mar. or Mary, or Queen Elizabeth, that went before it, if contrary to
it; or in tanto. For in Statute Law (contrary to the Laws of Heraldry) The
Junior always takes place of the Senior.

But the Archbishops or Bishops ought to have used their own names, Styles,
etc. in their Processes, whilst 1 Edw. 6. 2. stood repealed, during the Reigns
of the two Sisters, Mary and Elizabeth, and no longer (it seems) then till
Primo Jacobi It was revived.

The only difficulty that ever I could find that seemed to question the force
of this Statute of 1 Edw. 6. 2. Is its Repeal by 1 Mar. 2. which though its
self be Repealed by 1 Jacobi, yet the 1 Edw. 6. 2 being not revived by Name,
therefore some doubt its vigor, though the Force it lay under, be quite taken
away. Because (say they) It is not revived in express words by 1 Jacobi. But
the Lord Coke makes no difficulty at all of that, for he has these Words on
this very occasion, namely, --

It was strongly urged and enforced, etc. that all their (the Bishops) Process
and Proceedings being in their own Names, Styles, and Seals, (where by the said
Act they ought to have been in the Kings Name) and under the Kings Seal were
all unlawful and void. (Ay!)

And to prove that the said Act of Anno 1 Edw* 6. was n^w in force, They
alleged that this Act of 1 Edw. 6. was Repealed by the said Act of 1 Mar.
above mentioned, which Act of Repeal being Repealed by the said branch of Primo
Regis Jacobi, ^^nsequently the said Act of 1 Edw. 6. was thereby revived.

For when an Act of Repeal is Repealed, The first Act that was Repealed is
Revived -- A plain Case) Remo^o Impedimento Reviviscit Statutum, And herewith
agrees the Book- Case in 15 Edw. 3. Tit. Petition Placit 2. And this is true,
and cannot be denied. Thus far Coke.

Why is it so? Then truly I think it is no great sin to be of my Lord Chief
Justice Pembertons Opinion, (I mean) whilst he was at the Bar, urging the force
and Validity of this Statute, in Mr. Wealds Case of Much-Waltham in Essex,
moving with Mr. Rotheram for a Prohibition against the proceedings of the
Ecclesiastical men's Process against Mr. Wealds, because their Process against
him run in their own Names, and sealed with their own Seals, and not the
Kings-Arms. But, because Sir William Scrogs nestled, and nestled, and Scracht
his Head, Sir Francis Pemberton (it seems) easily perceived his Disease, and
therefore seemed to Compassionate the Lord Chief Justice Scrogs, by saying, My
Lord, I have urged the Statute of 1 Edw. 6. but I will not be warm upon it,
because I perceive your Lordship is not prepared at this time to give it an
Answer; or, he used words to the like effect, in Presence of above an hundred
Witnesses.

The Truth is, the time Sir Francis Pemberton urged this Statute, was
Parliament-time; no very seasonable time for a Judge to declare a Statute to be
null and void, that never any Judge as yet did upon the Bench take upon him to
do; since 1 Jacobi revived it, by Repealing its Repealer 1 Mar. 2.

And truly whilst Ecclesiastical-Courts did little else but prove Wills, and
now and then get a few cracked Groats from a poor fearful Churchwarden,
(rather than contend with them) and some such little business, most men past
them by through contempt: As not daigning to trouble themselves with meddling
with them; though in that little they did, They oppressed (and still do oppress)
His Majesty's Subjects most impudently, by extorting excessive Fees, in
despite and defyance of the Statutes to the cont^^y; Impudent Registers!

But there is this to be said for them, by way of Apology, That when they give
some hundreds of Pounds for the Sell-Souls-place, they must make their money of
Sins and Souls; which yet is contrary to their own Canons.

I profess, I have many times long together been puzling my self by studying
Ly^^ood L. v. Tit. 2. cap. preterea.
what those Ecclesiastical-Fellows in their Ecclesiastical-Courts are good for,
or what one good thing they do; every Creature of God is good for something;
but, now I think on it, they do not pretend to be purely of Gods making,
(there is nothing in holy Scripture that is alike to their Constitution;) nor
(by what has been here said) will any man that I know venture to say they are
purely of the King's making Legally, if they live in defyance of the Kings
Laws, and refuse to use the Kings Name, Style, and Seal, in their Processes
Ecclesiastical, enjoined by the Statute: I have been in Popish Countries, and
there I have seen a Crew in many things like them.

But, ( God knows) we Protestants do unanimously declare against Implicit
Faith, and yet, the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, from the first Citation to the
end, namely to Excommunication and the Jayl, is much carried on by Implicit
Faith.

For the Judges believe the Bishops Significavit, and Archbishops
Signifieavits, whilst they, ( good men) signify a man Excommunicated, and yet
never heard one word of the merit of the cause; but the Judges believes the
Bishops Significavit, and the Bishop believes the Registers Certificavit; which
unavoidable comes, if you do not stop the Registers hand with money, to his
content: Oh sad estate of Christianity! Christianity?

God bless the King, and Parliament (when it sits, I mean) and by all Tokens it
is probable, that they will soon resolve these Riddles; and (also) not admit
palpable Symony and Hypocrisy, to Provoke Gods Wrath and Judgments upon the
Nation, by making holy Ordinances and Ordinations vendible, and Gospel-Keys (
of binding and loosing) (once another Gift of God) a money-business, or
Political Engine, to take away men's Franchises and Votes, when there is no
other way to deprive them thereof.

I cannot think that Christ entrusted Anathemas to his Disciples to play them
so frankly at a bold Rate fast and loose; He that eats and drinks unworthily,
that is (to a Politic, Carnal End) eats and drinks his own Damnation; and he
that opens and shuts Heaven and Hell-Gates, binding and loosing, using the
Holy-Keys unworthily (that is) for low, politic, Carnal-Ends) uses them to his
own Damnation; God will not be mocked.

CHAP. VI.
I Doubt not but all that Read this, must say, that in this Tract I have done
their business already, to all intents and purposes.

A Law may sleep, a Statute may lie Dormant, as did the Act of Uniformity
whilst the King's Act of Indulgence (according to his Royal Word, and Promise
from Breda, facilitating his Return) did last; but though, Laws may be hushed
and lulled asleep, awhile, nay, a long time, yet, (if they be not quite dead)
woe be to him that tramples on them; for the Laws of England are so sacred that
(it has been observed) they have been too hard for any man, at long run, that
durst oppose them, withstand them, or stand in their way, the Laws are (called)
the Subjects best Inheritance.

I remember part of Sir Harbottle Grimston's speech (in Parliament Anno 1640.
concerning Spiritual-Courts) was to take notice of an Insolence Coke 2d.
Instit. p63.
of theirs much alike to what has been heard of in other cases; namely, under a
Religious Pretext to meddle with men's Franchyses, Charters, and Privileges, as
Englishmen; for, says that Loyal Gentleman and true Englishman, speaking of
the Lambeth Canons of 40. and the Synod then there --

`That the Synod called together upon pretense of Religion, took upon them `the
boldness out of Parliament to grant Subsidies and meddle with men's Free Holds.

Oh! How dishonorable is it to any Religion to palliate so much venom as
under a notion of a Gospel Ordinance of Excommunication or the like, to design
to make men incapable of a Vote, or Freedoms, Franchises, and Charters, Mr
Grimstonsspeach in Parlia*
especially if they seem to be afraid of nothing so much as that some should
conform, and consequently be capable of as many Privileges as the Debauchee,
or profane Libertine.

Christianity do you call it? more like Ely's Sons, or Simon-Magus, Oh God! may
not such well dread thy Vengeance? Christianity do you call it?

The wisest of all the ten Persecuting Emperors was Dioclesian, whose
Conscience so tormented his Breast, for Persecuting the Christians, that he
threw the Diadem from his hated head, and hid it in a Garden, in the obscurest
Py-corner of the World.

But, the Horror of Nero's Visage is by Suetonius rendered so tremendous Suet.
Nero.
to behold (after he vented his Cruelty upon the Christians) that it would make
a man's Hair stand on end, to view him, extantibus vigentibusque oculis usque ad
horrorem visentium, with ghastly Looks and frightful Eyes strikeing Horror in
all that saw him; such was the Fate of this Persecuting Atheist, Religionem
usque quaque Aspernator, as Suetonius calls him; a Contemner of every thing
that looked like Religion.

And such are the brood of Simon Magus, that make use of Religion (which is
intended for the Salvation of men's Souls) only to the destruction of their
Bodies, and Estates.

Simon? (quoth he) no Simon Magus was not thus Impudent, he did his business
(indeed) namely, the money business, and to be adored and Reverenc't (forsooth)
But, he did it, by juggle and sleight of hand; but, the Son's of Eli and
Symonists, (like Ghosts long enured to walk) appeared at Noonday did take
purses before men's faces, Swagger, Curse, Anathematize, Damn, and bluster; In
good time they were charmed down? In Nomine Domini? Amen.

If ever you were in Spain or Portugal, (as I have been) tell me what Monkey or
Baboon is more contemtible, than a sneaking, perjured, Hypocritical,
Ecclesiastical Property of State.

What more Ridicule, then a fawning Spiritual Sycophant in Antick-Dress,
cringing with his Pin-Buttocks and hallow-smiles, upon a Whore Atheist or
Renegade, that do but scoff at his ghastly Habilements of uncouth Guize and
Shape, Portentous and Prodigious? Risum teneat is Amic^? could ye have held
from Laughing at the Holy Mymick. Or could ye forbear smiling to see a bigoted
Fop ( old or young) throng and crowd to kneel for the benediction of an empty
Palm, or Lecherous and Simoniacal Clutches.

Whilst the gaudy Hypocrite smiles in his Py-bald Sleeves (The Trophies
(possibly) of Smock-Simony, Pandarisme, Flattery, or Bribery.)

CHAP. VII.
OH! what a frightful, Heathenish, (nay more,) Popish and Barbarous Cambdens
Eliz. lib. 4 Anno 1602 45. Eliz.
sight it is to see a Bishop lie like Eugenius O-Hegan, Bishop of Rosse, who
(siding with the Tories) was slain by Captain Taffe, and in a most Ghastly and
un-Bishop-like Posture found Dead with a Breviary (his Common Prayer Book) in
one hand and a Sword in the other! like to the Bishop of London, that Fox. Acts
and Monuments.
Lecherous Bonner, who was a fool to boot.

For, if he had had any Brains in his Skull, considering (more especially) the
crazy foundation he stood upon, and the slippery Hold, that hung only on the
slender Thread of the Quens life, he would not have disobliged the generality
of Mankind by the cruel methods of himself, and his Imps, delivering men to the
Devil, Jayl, and Torments, by Shoals, and in gross, and releasing them as fast
for money.

For Pluto loves Riches, yet he never teaches his Servants any Wit, but only so
much as he teaches Witches; just enough to do mischief when God permits them
the power a while in their hands, that the malice (which lies in their Devilish
hearts) may be the better known, and so bring them the sooner to their End.

For Witches and Persecutors never had Wit enough (since the World was) to be
wise for themselves.

For if Bonner had not been a fool, he would never have been the Devils
Prime-Tool, and the Jaylors best Friend, and thereby (also) the Queens greatest
Enemy, and the best Friend that her Protestant Successor found.

For there was never a poor Soul that Bonner delivered to the Devil and the
Jail, but lost the Queen a Thousand hearts; all which her Protestant Successor
found ready Pressed for her Service.

For a Prince that, by ungrateful methods, has lost the hearts of the
Generality of his subjects, has lost his best Lifeguard and strongest Fort.

So much the greater loss, because Irrecoverable: for Oppressors, and
Faith-breakers, and Promise-breakers, can play no after-games; because (like
broken Merchants) their credit once cracked, no body will trust them.

This was too evident to Queen Mary, who contrary to her own natural
Tenderness, was push't on to harsh and ungrateful Methods by the Instigation of
the furious Priests, who seldom prove fortunate Counselors to a Prince.

For, thus, by their Tantivec-leasings, (only to uphold their
Spiritual-Tyranny, Pride and Pomp) she, by loosing her Peoples hearts, broke
her own, more than did the loss of Calice, or the coldness of King Philips
affection toward her.

All this wrought well for her Protestant Successor, whom the major part loved
and longed for, wishing only for an occasion to show their devotion.

Nor does the All-seeing Providence long adjourn such occasions, as here fell
out, by the Queens sudden and unexpected death; Oh Monstrous! To see how Bonner
looked then, and all the little gang of Politicians! The Queen's death breaking
the heart of Cardinal Pool, who dyed three hours after he heard the news;
though some think that sorrow alone, (without some other drug) could not have
dispatched him so suddenly; Thus the poor Levitt (Aspiring W^olsey) also is said
to hasten his own death by a Mastertess-Purge, when his Tottering-state (which
is nothing but vicissio) turned.

But, to return to my other Ecclesiastical-man Bonner, who had never a Friend
in Heaven nor on Earth:

Such a thrifty True is Persecution of men's Consciences, whereof God alone (as
King Charles the si^^ says) is the King.

Nor will ari(...)nan be of the Persecuting Trade, but he that is more fool
than Knave; for, as it br^^e the Spanyard by loosing him the Low Countries, so
it breaks every man that (as yet) ever followed the Trade; whatsoever
Politick-Roger does observe to the contrary.

Besides, it is a Trade as uneasy as accursed, for it is hard kicking against
the Pricks, or fighting against the King of Consciences: Let Atheist go on, as
Bonner did; there was no persuading him to the contrary: he would go on; What
should a Body talk? Go, Bray a Fool in a Mortar, yet will not his Folly depart
from him.

That very Fool was, the Bishop of Loudon, the said Bonner, for, if he would
have hanged himself, he could not have done the Martyrs more good, than by his
Hellish Methods, sending them the sooner to Heaven, and himself (without
Repentance) the sooner to the Devil, by his Cursed Work of Excommunicating,
Jayling, and Halling men to Torment, sometimes of one kind, sometimes another;
nay, the unclean Wretclt took pleasure in whipping Pretty Boys Buttocks,
fumbling at them with his Episcopal Palms.

It Is true, Queen Mary could not have got (seek England through) a Metter
Engine for Persecution; for he was so much a Fool that he had only Wit enough
to be A cursed, Cruel, implacable Knave, and the State's-Fool.

For which employment he was the fitter, because he had been at Rome, (perhaps
for the very nonce) to be the more accomplished Persecutor.

He being not only the Queens Puppet, but the Queens Aprodigius Canon so
called.
Pocket-Pistol; for he was the Roaring-Megg of mischief, thundering out his
Anathema's and Excommunications, Damm'em he cried, or else, take them Devil! If
they were Dissenters from Popish Superstitions and happened to be cited to his
Spiritual-Courts, and yet he looked as demurely as sillily (for I have his
Picture) and he looks so like an Innocent, and yet like a Holy-cheat, or
Religious Ape, being indeed the Pia-fraus of malice and wickedness.

In short, if I knew where this quondam Bishop of London's Tomb is, I would
draw his Picture upon his Sepulcher, and expose his Loathsome Features to
Posterity, by writing his Epitaph upon his Grave: ( I have it ready.)

For he was the very Picture of ill-luck, as ever had the hap to be London's
Bishop;

The States great Puppet, a Tool that Knaves do work with, called a Fool; being
a mere property of State; and the very Compound of Malice and Nonsense, ana.

CHAP. VIII.
LEt no Ingenuous Reader blame my style, as if it were too sharp and pungent on
this occasion; He that considers the Vexations, Torments and Crueltics
inflicted by that Bishop of London, will not wonder if they whet my Pen even to
Exasperatien; when I drew Bonners Picture in the foregoing Chapter.

You may see the Bishops Picture, in Fox his Book of Martyrs (if you think it
resembles him so well as this that I have (as aforesaid) drawn for him.)

Did you ever see any Body like him?

For Bonner was more Brute than man.

Yet more may be said in Excuse for Bonner, then for some others, that shall
follow his Traae; (to wit) that Bonner had the Letter of the Law to justify his
Persecution; and yet that Letter of the Law could not justify him, nor keep the
Wretch from being undone soon after; For Cruelty and Persecution are all short
lived.

But, I am sure, some Ecclesiastical-men have not so much as the Letter of the
Law to justify their Sell-Soul-Trade, Oppressions, Illegal Fees, Vexations,
Symony, and Extortions; wherein they are far less justifyable than vile Bonner.

Oh! Does our Bibles teach us Symony, or to take money for the Gifts of God
that are not to be sold nor purchased with money?

Does Christ or his Apostles teach us to exercise Dominion (like the Princes of
the Gentiles) and to Lord it over Gods Heritage?

Simon Magus attempted it, but to cheapen and ask the Price of the Gift of God,
but did not actually sell it.

However we do not read that he intended to be twice paid: But it is contrary
to our Canonical-Oath and your own Canons, to take or give money for Letters of
Orders, Sacraments Institutions, B^ptings, Marriages, Burials, etc. and
contrary to our Oath against Symony? or selling or purchating Gods Gifts! How
are we (...)? What Oath have we sworn to keep?

There is yet one, (even most thumping) Objection behind and unanswered, which
the Lord Coke seems to lay the greatest Stress upon, and did most prevail with
the Lord chief-Baron and others to get it hush't down and laid, after the ^wo
Lord Chief-Jus^^^^^, could not deny but it begun to be revived and walk again,
since 1 Jacobi, To the great T^^rour of the ruling Priests, Commissaries,
Officials, Jaylors, Registers and Summers; for (...) Trade seemed to begin to
fail, but for one main Argument, or Cord that seemed to bind it down again, viz.

Object. It would be great Scandal to the Kings Justice ( yea verily) if there
had been no Legal Priests and Bishops made for three long years together, with
other Inconveniences (to boot) if the Statute of 1 Edw. 6. 2. should be in
force, and therefore it must not, it shall not, it cannot be in force.

Answ. This Objection is like the Rancounter of a ^^ayl, there is no ward (they
think) no fence against it; and it is really so, if the Law of England be
Club-Law.

Object. Was it a Scandal to have no Legal Bishops nor Legal Priests
constituted for three long years, how great then would the Scandal be for 70
long years? say they.

Answ. But, (My friends!) a Consumption or Gangrene is never the better but the
worse, more Inveterate, more noisome, more Dangerous, and more difficulty
cured, by Continuance.

Did ever any man plead for the Expediency of an Ulcer because it was an old
sore? Is not the Continuance thereof the ready way to bring it to a Gangrene?
to the hazard of mortifying the part, and threatening (most formidably) the
Hazard of the Vitals, and noble parts? Never did Illegality or a Disease plead
Seniority rationally for its Justification. Is it a Scandal, and attended with
great Inconveniences? It Is granted, and it is too true: What then? What is to
be done with it? that is the next question, and most necessary to be decided:
Is it a Scandal? the more need there is of a speedy Removal of the Scandal,
such an old Scandal: (...) (or Scandalum,) is a Greek word, and it properly
signifies a Threshold or stumbling block, and (Metaphorically) all things that
offend (or lie in our way) are called Scandals?

Now what shall we do with his block or Threshold, or Scandal? The Answer is
most Easy; Lay the block or the Threshold at the right Door whereto it belongs
and appertains.

CHAP. IX.
DOes the Revival of this Statute put us again into the true Protestant dress?
does it take away the Conge Deslires, and Elections thereupon, which 1 Edw. 6.
2. says, are in very deed no Elections, but (mere) Colors, Shadows, and
Pretenses of Elections, serving nevertheless to no Purpose, and seeming also
Derogatory and Prejudicial to the Kings Prerogative Royal, etc.

Is the Kings Supremacy and Authority Ecclesiastical best asserted and avowed
by his Name, Style, and Arms, in all Writs, Original or Judicial, in
Ecclesiastical-Courts, as well as they are in Temporal-Courts?

Then why should not Prelates and their Ecclesiastical Courts, conform
themselves, and be as tender of the Kings Prerogative, Supremacy and Authority
in Ecclesiastical as well as Temporal Causes and Courts, if they have not some
Secret Reserve in the hollow of their Breasts? why should they not be for the
King as well in things that thwart as well as in things that make for their
Interest, if they be so Loyal in things that serve their own turns, Interest,
Power, Grandeur and Dominion?

Is it a Scandal? Remove it, lay it at the doors it properly belongs unto.

If they be not Legally Constituted, what then? why, then let them be Legally
Constituted; and if there be the more Vacancyes, there will be the more
first fruits and Fees for Letters Patents; They may the better afford it, if
they have had such stately Revenues ( so long) illegally; And what harm of all
this?

Oh! (say some) A very great harm, this would be a Confession of Guilt, and a
Confession of Sin, and error; an old Sin, an old Error:

What then? This is the first time that ever I heard that Confession of Sin was
a Crime; Oh, but it argues such an Vniverssal Error? why, whoever said the
Prelates are insallible in Spirituals, much less Temporals? we read of great
Mischiess that have enshed by their buzzing at C^^^^ong ago, and busying
themselves with Politics, It had been much better for them, (...) for Princes
too, that Bishops had kept themselves to their Bibles; And neither (...) the
World would have been so plagued with their Heats, which (like fire out of the
Hearth,) (...) has sometimes Consumed then Warmed; having done Mischief
unspeakable, but what good? (...) this (only) my own Observation, I learnt it
from no worse man than a Bishop, nay an (...)* I mean Matt. Parker Archbishop
of Canterbury, (in good Queen Elizabeth's days,) who in his (...) Entitled
Autiquitates Britannicae, (speaking of the times of K. R. 1 and the Pranks of
Hubere (...) Archbishop of Canterbury) has these words -- Neque enim si verum
Judicarc Volumus, in Republica Christiana quicquam sani, atque Integri Saculum
illud tulit. Fictaque et Adusnbrata Religionis specie Proposita, totus Clerus
in Sceleribus Muneribus, honoribus et Rapinis, Neglecto penitus Verbo, impune
Volutabat, Hujus mali Origo ab hoc Prosluxit, quod contra Orthodoxorum Patrum
Decreta, Clerus Nimium Mundanis se Negotiis Immiscuit. Nor was there, if we
will Judge aright, in that Age anything left sound, or as it ought to be, in
the Christian Commonwealth, for the whole Clergy under a feigned and outside
form of Religion, did with Impunity Wallow (like Swine) in Wickedness,
Briberies, Honors and R^pines, altogether neglecting the Word of God. The
Original of all which Mischiefs was this, becauss the Clergy, contrary to the
Decrees of the Orthodox Fathers, would needs be thrusting themselves into, and
intermedling with Worldly Affairs;

Then he goes on to show a fearful Example of Gods Vengeance upon one of them
who had Clambered up to a very high Office in the State, and closes that
Relation thus -- Cujus Generis Exemplaid circo proferenda sunt ut deterreatur a
Vectigalibus Regiis, et Civilibus, publicisque Occupationibus Clerus, et
Evangelio Propagando precipue student a^ Incumbat. Examples of this kind ought
to be Recorded that the Clergy may be deterred from hankering after
Court-Preserments, and busling in Civil and public Offices, and mainly Study
and devote themselves entirely to the Propagation of the Gospel.

You are in the Right, Reverend! much in the Right --

They are Spiritual men, or should be; they are Divines, or should be; they are
(like a Fish out of the Water) out of their Element when they meddle with
Politics, out of their Sphere, Inconsistent with their Office, and perhaps
their Education, nor has God blessed them in such Undertakings; Away with them to
their Bibles, and Common Prayer Book, Those are sitter and more becoming Tools,
then Writs, Capiasses, ^ibels, Declarations, Informations, Citations,
Vexations, and Promotions.

It was Augustine the Monk (that first and worst Archbishop of Canterbury)
that first brought the Plague into England from Rome; The Plague-Ecclesiastical
of Avarice,: Pride, Dominion, pomp and Popish Prelacy.

If ever Antichrist appeared in a Single Person, none could ever show a better
Title to him then this proud Parker antique Britan p. 47.
Monk, Nor that ever did defile the Church of England with more Romish Filth
and Rubbish, then he; would it were clean swept, if any Noisome Corruptions
which he brought over with him be not taken away; and how beautifully it looks
then? But the great Infection of his Plagues had not spread, but that he had
such an Influence upon King Eichelbert and his Parliament. Anno 601. 13. E. 1.
1. 18 E. 3. 7.


He first got the Conusans of Tithes into his Ecclesiastical-Courts, as appears
by the Statutes 13. Edw. 1. 1. and 18. Edw. 3. 7. at the Request of the Prelates
(says the Statute) And that it use to be otherwise before, as the first words
of the said Statute specifyes; and Inter leges Edw. Regis cap. 8. fol. 128.
which speaks of Tithes, It is said Hec Predicavit Augustinus et Concessa sunt
Rege, Baronibus et Popule, etc. The King, Lords and Commons gave the
Ecclesiastical men the Conusans of Tithes upon Augustin's preacbing Bract. lib.
5. fol. 401.
to them to that Purpose. For till the Statute of Circumspecte agatis, no
Person could demand Tithes in Court Christian. Decimae sunt Spiritualitats
Annexa, says Braction.

They got the probate of Wills, and the granting Commissions of Administration
by Statute, nay, they Linwood Tit. de consuet. verb. nullus. Lin. de foro.
Compet. lib. 7.
could not make a Will (by the Common Law) of their own Goods and Chattels,
much less could they dispose of other men's Goods; so Linwood confesses too (who
wrote in the Reign of H. 6. Beneficia^us non potest Testari de Communi Jure
(sed de Consuctudine) in Anglia.

Linwood Confesses the same concerning probates of Wills, they got them granted
to them.

I name these things before I come for ever to overthrow this Last Thumping
Objection, to let the Reader know that if it were not for probate of Wills,
Tithes, and Administrations, (which by their horrible Corruptions and
Extortions they have most Injuriously Administered, if not forfeited) there
needs not any Statute, no not this 1 Edw. 6. 2. to correct the Ecclestastical
Courts; and Ecclesiastical Fellows, for (some think) they must (then) either
starve, or beg, or take a better Trade.

And therefore though the Statute of 1 Edw. 6. 2. should prove to be in force,
what then? Why then they would keep no Courts at all, rather then keep them in
the Kings Name, and not their own?

And what then? where is the Inconvenience, if the Kings Temporal-Courts again
get the Conusans of Tithes, Probate of Wills, Administrations, etc. (the great
Business (besides vexing Souls and Churchwardens, and poor Parsons, and the
Money Business) all which Vexations may well be spared) And then the Saddle
will but be set again upon the right Horse, where it was handsomely set, Till
the Government was Priest-ridden by Augustine that Covetous Supercilious and
insolent Monk.

Object. Ay, but will some say, Cognizance of Tyths, Fornication, Adultery,
Defamation. etc. are purely Spiritual things, and more concern the Soul.
Hobarts Cases. Next to Swan and Hollams Case.


Answ. But I say it is false; Tithes, Fornication, Defamation, do no more
concern the Soul, then do other Injuries, and Sins, Murder, Felony, or Treason;
no, nor so much.

Nay, Even as to Bastardy, in an action upon the Case, for calling one Bastard,
if the Desendant Justify, It shall be tried per Pais, and not by the
Certificate of the Ordinary.

CHAP. X.
WEll ( but will some say) you promised, in this Treatise before, that the first
Branch of the Statute of 1. Edw. 6. 2. concerning the Bishop-making, might be
saved by 1. Eliz. 1. reviving the 25. Hen. 8. 20.

And then if we can but keep our Bishops, and prove them to be Legal, they will
dispense (no doubt) at length with the old Romish way of Summons in their own
name (as did the Bishops in the Reign of Edw. 6. for most of them were Popish
Bishops in Hen. 8 Reign: Protestant Bishops in Edw. 6. Reign; And again
Popish-Bishops in Queen Mary's days; And if they conform so far to the Statute
of 1 Edw. 6. 2. as to vouchsafe to use the Kings Name, Style and Seals in their
Ecclesiastical-Courts, you promised that the First Branch of 1 Edw. 6. 2. was
vacated by 1. Eliz. 1. And they (consequently) Legal Bishops.

Answ. I answer, that I never promised any such thing in my life, though the
esteem I have for Prelates, together with my natural ^ropensity to Lordliness,
Ay, and my own Interest too, (being a Judge of an Ecclesiastical-Court, and
sending Processes Ecclesiastical (all) in my own name hitherto (though if God
and the King do but forgive my Sins past, herein, I will never do so any more;
It is Imprisonmen tduring the Kings Pleasure, I confess, and to be in
miserecordia Regis for what all of us have done) might be persuasive motives
thereunto.

But, alas! I can do no more (than I can) for our Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
I must not dare (whatever others do) to Impeach the validity of a Statute,
seeming so long injured and looking so evidently in force, for fear of
After-Claps. I said, indeed, that if Oracle Coke did not mistake himself and
the Law, Coke in S^at. 32. H. 8. cap. 38. p. 686, 2 d. Inst it.
The Bishops and Archbishops were Legally made after the old Fashion of Conge
Deslire and Elections, (as in 25. H. 8. 20. Revived by 1. Eliz. 1.)

And he (also) says that if they were made according to the Act of 1. Edw. 6.
they were unlawful.

But, I never said any such thing, whatever I might wish or think: But Quere,
whether the 8. Eliz. 1. does not do us a Courtesy is the King please; yet the 1
Edw. 6. revived after 8. Eliz. 1. Quere, whether it do not vacate it, as to
Elections, or wherein it is contrary to it? Also 14. Car. 2. 14, conscrate us.

Nay, The Learned Coke seems to give an impregnable reason for that opinion of
his; namely that all after and subsequent Statutes do vacate and make null and
void all precedent Statutes that are contrary to them. And though the 25. H. 8.
20. be a precedent Statute to 1 Edw. 6. 2, and consequently was by the same
defeat ed yet 1. M (...). 2. Repealing the 1. Edw. 6. 2. and 1, Eliz. 1.
reviving 25. Hen. 8, 20. The Life of 25. H. 8. 20. Shall bear date only from
the Date of its Reviver, (1 Eliz. 1.) which gave it its life and vigor, only
by that Second Birth: and consequently is a Junior Statute, and takes place, of
1. Edw. 6. 2. otherwise the effect would be senior to its cause, but cause est
prior causato; the Son can no more possibly be Elder than the Father, then 25.
H. 8. 2. can be Elder than 1. Eliz. 1. which alone, gives it life, and is the
cause of its being aad motion: Therefore 1. Eliz. 1. reviving 25. H, 8. makes
25. H. 8. 20. an After-Act to 1, Edw. 6. 2. And nulls it so far as it is
contrary to it; This is the Learned Coke's reasoning; and it is pretty well.

But if the Oracle had not warpt sometimes (as that at Delos by Demostehenes is
said to Phillipi^^ through the underhand-dealing with the Priests) so wise a
man could not so Inconsiderately have over-shot himself.

For he needs no other Argument than his own to confound his said opinion; he
S^abs himself with his own Keen Weapon; which otherwise is irresistible;
through rashness, Precipitancy, haste prejudice, or I know what.

For it is irresistably true, that 1. Eliz. 1. reviving 25. H. 8. 20. makes it
a Junior-Act, and consequently to take place (contrary to the Laws as aforesaid
of Heraldry) of its senior, 1 Edw. 6. 2.

Even as, in a Feoffment made of Land holden in chief to the use of such Person
or Estate as the Donor Hobart's Cases Sheffield verse, Ratcliff.
shall give or dispose in his Will. Here the uses shall not opperate by way of
Feoffment, but only as a Testamentary Device; which cannot bear Date nor Life
from the Feoffment, but from the Will (post obitum Testatoris, nam viventis non
est Testamentum) And yet the Feoffmene is good (but only in Embrio, and
without Life or motion) till the Will operate and give it life) And therefore
in construction of Law (notwithstanding the Feoffment, which the Donor made in
his life time, yet) he shall dye seized, and his Wife shall have Dower; because
the Feoffment (notwithstanding its Date and delivery in the life of the Donor,
shall be motion-less and life-less, till The Will gives it life and vigor.

So also, though it be said and truly too) That the First-Feoffment in Law
defeats the second, and all After Feoffments; yet, if a man (seized in demesue
as of Fee) make Feoffment, as aforesaid, to such Person and Estate as shall be
given and declared in his last Will and Testament and then afterward make a
Second Feoffment to A. B. and his Heirs; and then make his Will and dye, giving
the same to C. D. Here C. D. that had the Second Feoffment shall have the Land;
Because, in Intendment of Law, The Second Feoffment is the First Feoffment that
has life and motion, whatever be the Date thereof. But (my Masters) Coke also
says in the same Page, ( and says true) that by Repealing a Repeal, the first
Act is revived; The Truth whereof he undoabtedly confirms in the next foregoing
Page p. 687. And this Stabbs and confounds his own opinion:

For 1. Jacobi reviving 1 Edw. 6. 2. the life and date of 1. Edw. 6. 2. shall
be accounted only from the Date of 1. Jacobi the author of its Being, and the
Father that gave it life and motion, knocking the Shackles off, wherewith Queen
Mary had bound it ^ and consequently 1 Edw. 6. 2. being as young, fresh and
youthful as Primo Jacobi, It shall vacate 1. Eliz. 1. 1. Mar. 1. and 2. Phil.
Mar. 8. 25. H. 8. 20. And all other Statutes made before I Jacobi, if they be
contrary to it I wonder what all my ^retl^^^ Prelate^ in England can ^ry in
answer to this: For the ^ Jacobi ^^ust be repealed before the 1 Edw. 6. 2.
(which take its life and vigor from Primo Jacobi) can be vacated.

And if the Lord Coke had suffered himself to weigh this Argument by bit own
Sc^ales, he would not have busyed himself with the three fold Cord, (he talks
of) which is so easily broken, by the strength of his own. Max^nes of Law; Sie
sum Facili rumpitnr triple^ Fasciculus:

For 25. H. 8. 20. is yet in force, but that the 1 Edw. 6. 2. made it null and
void by establishing a Junior and Fresher Constitution in the Room of that old
Frame by Conge D^slie^^ and Elections thereon, which 1 Edw. 6. 2. calls,
Pretenses, Colors and Shadows only; and derogatory and Prejudicial to the
Kings Prerogative-Royal.

Which Prerogative-Royal (by clearing up the the vigor of this Statute that
has long lain clouded and obscured by strange Arts) If I have surely
vindicated, I hope no man will deny but I have deserved well of my King and
Country. And upon the whole, if Cursed Cows happen tohave short Horns, what
Harm? Where Is the Scandal? or Inconvenience.

CHAP. XI.
Obj. OH! But still (say some) It must not be admitted that the ^ Edw. 6. 2. be
in fore: Why? Because the Judges have been of another opinion.

Answ. I answer, it does nor appear that ever they judicially declared
themselves to be of another opinion; some Judges have given their opinion,
against it, extrajudicially; and so also some Judges (ten of the twelve) gave
their opinions for the Legallity of Ship Money to King Charles 1. And the same
King in Parliament condemned the said opinion by Statute, as contrary to Magna
C^arta, The Petition of Right, and many other good Laws; Judges have been frail
to their Ruin.

If Judges therefore will warp and give opinions against known Statutes,
against their Oaths, their Consciences, thereby breaking their own (as they
have been said to break) the Kings Oath. They are the vilest of men, and do
merit the worst of Punishments.

But, on the contrary, This is no, novel opinion; The choice Lawyers of this
Land have declared themselves that this Royal Statute is in force, and not
only so, but that there is all the reason in the World that it should be in
force, and that in acknowledgment of the Kings Supremacy in all causes and over
all Persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil; There is all the reason in the
World that Writs and Processes should run in the Kings Name in
Ecclesiastical-Courts, if they be (indeed) his Courts, as are the
Temporal-Courts, and kept in his name; and not in the name of a Commissary,
Official, or I know not who; If (I say) they be the Kings-Courts, and he the
Supreme Head Ecclesiastical, however the Pope has formerly usurped.

What a fine thing it is to have the Kings Subjects run and ride forty or fifty
miles from their Houses, their Trades and their Families, upon the Summons of a
Commissary, in his own name, which is none of the best names neither,
(sometimes) however some names (abstracted from the quality of some that may
happen to wear them) may by accident become Scandalous and Odious.

Ravilliack Murdered His Majesty's great Grandfather Hen. 4. the French-King,
And in detestation or that villainous, treacherous, King-killing Fact, the
Loyalty, Wisdom, Justice and Piety of France, enacted that the House wherein
the Villian was born should be made a Dunghill, never to be rebuilt, but (as
^ocursed ground) laid waste; his Father and Mother for ever banished, and all of
the name of Ravilliack to change that King-killing name for some other, and a
better: So sacred are the persons of Kings, that they are not to be touched in
bloody earnest, without an eternal stigmatize and brand set upon the Profane A
tempt to all Posterity; Nay, Jolm Scotus lost himself because he would not
loose his Jest, when the French King sitting on the one side of the Table; and
Du^^ Scotus on the other) the King asked him merrily what was the difference
between a Scot and a So^? Scotus bluntly answered, The Table. If it be
dangerous to play at ^^yles with Princes, it is eternally mortal to play at
Sharp's. And therefore I wish with all my heart too, that His Majesty's Royal
Ancestor the stout King Richard the second, had not been basely, cowardly, and
treacherously Murdered with a Back-stroke by an Exton; And if it had been in
France, I doubt not but the Loyalty, Piety and Prudence of the Frenchmen would
have exterminated (not all the men that were called Exton) But in horror and
detestation of King-killing namely they would have so abbominated that
King-killing name (as they did Rabilliacks) that they would have oblitterated
it to all Posterity, and have made all the Exton^ in the Kingdom. change that
King-killing Name for a better; that the loathed-name might (like a hateful
S^uff) be put out and extinct to all Posterity:

But, if in contempt of that Royal Statute, of 1 Edw. 6. 2. and in defyance of
the reason of that Statute, The Kings Subjects should happen to be cited in any
such untoward King-killing name, and then be prosecuted, till they have
satisfied and paid, the onsequence cannot but be the more ungrateful, for that
( once deservedly odious) name, especially since the 1 Edw. 6. 2 commands all
Processes Ecclesiastical to be (all the reason in the World) in the King name,
the Ecclesiastical-Head as well as the Temporal-Head.

And if the Prelates, and Ecclesiastical-men should not as industriously
endeavor all manner of Legal ways to advance and a^^w the Kings Prerogative
Royal as much as Laymen, then they are very ungrateful, and ill deserve the
Bounty so Gracious a King has conferred so liberally upon them.

If this Statute has been long (I know not by what Arts, and yet I do tooknow
in part why it has be^n hushed asleep, and Scandal and Inconveniences may ensue,
by its awakened virtue and force; the mo^re shame for them that have been the
true causes and Authors of so grand a Scandal and Inconveniences: lay the
Scandal at the right door; Scandals and Offenses will come (says our Savior)
but woe be to them by whom they come. Now is there any Scandal or Inconveniences
so great but the King and Parliament can readily avoid them, or compound them;
and remedy them.

CHAP. XII.
YEt can I not deny but that all Parliaments (since the Reformation) have been
so Jealous of the Exor^itant Power of Churchmen (finding by woeful Experience
in the late High-Commission-Court granted by 1. Eliz. 1. what Ruefull Work was
made) that they fetched it down (with as much Celerity as they could) and by the
same Statute (that repealed it) have branded it to Posterity; saving 17 Car. 1.
11* That it ^e^ded to the great wrong (mark that) and Oppression of the Kings
Subjects etc. And though some men never had greater Hopes of Regaining that
unhappy Power or somewhat alike it, then by the long Parliament (fais^ called)
The Pentioner^ Parliament (for though there might be Judasses amongst them, yet
as to the Major part of them never were there Wiser nor Truer Englishmen) All
that they could gain (by 13 Car. 2. 12.) was only to place their
Ecclesiastical Courts in Statu quo, just as they were in 1639. without the
Addition of any new power or any new Confirmation of them, but left their
foundation as Tottering as they found it, before the troubles commen^'t.

And truly they were, (with the frustration) so dejected, that no People were
more scorned and neglected, and Indicted for their Extortions and Oppressions;
And yet, for many years, the Registers with a little Cipher at his Elbow or
over his head called a Surrogate, scrap't up a poor untoward living sometimes,
catching what they could, with as Little Noise as they could:

But, now, with Contrary Politics (how wisely? let them look to it) they have
grown so busy with the Kings Subjects, torturing their Souls, Purses,
Liberties, and Estates, by their Citations in their own names, Certificavits,
and Significavits, in their own Names, which ought (by the 1 Edw. 6. 2.) to
have been under the Seal and in the Name of the Kings-Majesty, and then upon
such Significavits (not sealed with the Kings Seal) have got the Writ de
Excommunicato Capiendo, and then what Grateful Works they made for the
Jaylors, and Bum-bayliffes, is so notorious, that no man can wonder that men
are deservedly rowzed to Examine their Frame and Constitutions, and pry whether
all be right within, when such ghastly ruins appear abroad, that who can
Imagine that the good God ever gave them Commission to make havoc of men's
Souls, Liberties, and Estates; The Keys of Excommunication seldom opening any
thing so soon as a Jayl-Door, whence by the other Cross-Key of Absolution they
were never delivered, without Money, money.

Nor is it for Churchmen to Vapor long with Gospel Ordinances, when instead
of using them for Spiritual-ends, they abuse them to vile, base, and Sordid
Designs, to fill their Pockets, and wreak their Malice. This Rapine in the Sons
of Eli proved the Ruin of his house, for those alone that Honor God he will
Honor, but those that despise, him shall be lightly esteemed.

And how truly this threathing has been verifyed upon the Ecclesiasticals, let
any man speak his Conscience, and say, whether any sort of People in the
Kingdom have been so contemned and lightly esteemed as they.

Not, but that, Contempt may happen to good men, and the Scorner^ be in the
fault; but when the light Esteem is grounded upon the Avarice, Pride, Idleness,
Extortion, Malice, and Oppression of Churchmen, it looks certainly like
Digi^us Dei, the just Judgment of Almighty God.

But if both King and some Houses of Parliament (once) did not like the Act for
Uniformity, what Wisdom is it for men to be so fierce for the Letter of the
Law? which yet I wish all men did obey, (as well as my self) whilst it is a
Law; yet is it pleasing either to God or man, to knock men's brains out because
they are blind or pur-blind, and will not go to Heaven along with us in our way?

A thousand ways there are to Church and to Heaven, as there are a Thousand
lines from the Circumference to the Center; and a thousand ways to London: I
wish all men went my way, because it is the nearest Way I know, but if they
will not, let them go their own, in Gods Name, way should we quarrel about the
matter? If God and Nature would have had us Uniform, We had all been made
alike, of one Stature, Size, and Complexion; but God and Nature seems so to
delight in Variety, that there are scarcely any two things in the World
Uniform: Nay, we Prelates our selves are neither Uniform amongst our selves, nor
Uniform according to the Act, as I have sufficiently proved in -- The Black
Non-con-formsts; setting up and Observing Ceremonies that God never made, nor
(yet) our so Celebrated Act for Uniformity: where is the Justice and Honesty to
punish one Non-Con-Formist, and let another Escape Scot-free? One Prelate sets
Candles upon the Altar, another sets none; one Prelate bows to the very ground
where and when another, stands up, as right as a dart; one Church Celebrates
with all sorts of Music, another with none at all. One Church Sings their
Prayers, another reads them; one reads the Communion Service in the Desk,
another at the Altar; one Prays before Sermon, another only bids men pray; one
Reads his own Notes, another reads a Homely, another has it Memorit^r; one
wears a Surplice only, another a Surplice and Hood, another neither of them;
and 40 more such Instances. Now when these men dissent so from the Act of
Uniformity, and are Dissenters also one from another, Are ye not Partial in
your selves to prefer one Dissenter, and Jayl the other? Woe be to them that
keep false Measures and Scales, and Ballancies of deceitful weight, one to buy
by, and another to sell by. The Prelates indeed have gained the Ascendant upon
the Affections of the three last Kings (which no man envyes, if they make good
use of it, and Legal use) Their Influence too has not boen confined to
White Hall, but has reached Westminster Hall (I know it, God knows) but yet,
their Influence seldom reach ^^o effectually ( Further West) in the two Houses,
as to gain over much of them there, in my Remembrance, or if they did,
Chronicles are silent therein.

How therefore they now (of late) or why In Nomine Domini, or with what Policy
they grow so violent, I cannot Imagine; for if the 1 Edw. 6. 2. be in Force (of
which to me there seems not the least doubt) I think we are in a fine Pickle,
liable to every man's Action whom we have Illegally vexed, and damnified, and
Imprisoned, through our Significavits in our own Nemes; nay, indeed, as I said,
what Punishment can equal the Merit of such Mischiefs? such Epidemical and
national Mischiefs? Though I doubt not but this little react will so clip our
nails, that we shall scarce venture to scratch terribly hereafter.

And truly I think, and I would say it too (but that it is Immodesty to commend
my own Modesty) that I have handled them here as Tenderly and Gingerly as if I
had gone about to draw the great aching Tooth of the Nation.

ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 27. for Summer Read Sumner. p. ^. 1. 8. for Spiritualia. R. ad
Spiritualia. p. 3 L. 17. for judiciously R. ingenuously -- p. ^. l. 51. for-By
Partially, Timidity, R. They declare the Kings-Laws; by p. 4. L. 14. for
Angeryr. R. Ayery. p. 4. l. 2^. for Emblemishments. R. Embellishment. With many
other.

PART II. Query 21. Whether any of the Canon Law or How much of the Canon Law
is in force at this day?
CHAP. XIII.
To which I answer briefly that it is undenyably true;

1. THat All Laws of England must either be made or Confirmed by the
Legislative-power; and if they be not so made (as are the Statutes) or
Confirmed (as is part (and but part) of the Common Law and Canon Law) by
Statutes made by the Legislative-power, they are not Laws of England, and then
cannot oblige the Subjects to Obedience.

For our King is our Liege (or Legal) Lord, and we are his liege (or Loyal
(that is) legal Subjects) because the Laws direct his Precepts, and our
Obedience and Duty.

2. All the Canon-laws and Constitutions, whether Synodical or Provincial are
now Statute Law (by 25 H. 8. 19.) so that they be not contrary to the Laws of
the Land.

Hence it follows, that all Canons made since 25 H. 8. 19. and not made nor
Confirmed by Parliament are not by this rule the Laws of England, and
consequently require not our Obedience thereunto for that reason, whatever
other reason there may be.

For the Executive-power of the Laws is in the King alone, but it has been
accounted Treason against the fundamental Laws of our Kingdom and
Commonwealth, to assert that the Legislative-power is in the King alone.

If it were, he needs no Parliaments when he has a mind to any Money, nor needs
a Parliament to repeal a Statute, if he could do it without them.

But his Will, Goodness, Justice, and Oath, and Declarations do promise us the
continuance of his Rule and Reign according to Law: And when by the King's
Declaration of Indulgence he suspended the Statute, we were in a most uncertain
Condition, not knowing what to trust to, having (according to his Royal word
from Breda) liberty of Conscience (and by the Indulgence) one day, and lost the
next; when the Act took place again, I say again; Then,

In nomine Domini then, how come we Ecclesiasticals to Command and exact of our
Inferiors Canonical Obedience to Canons neither made nor confirmed by the
Legislative-power? but none were (since 25 H. 8.) so made nor confirmed. By
what Law can we exact of the Clergy, then, an Oath of Canonical Obedience to
those Canons that are not Leges Angliae, the Laws of the Land? and command
likewise and admonish the Layety to Subscribe the three Canons (that vouches
their Hierarchy and Dominion by Archbishops, Deans, Archdeacons, etc.) to be
consonant to the Word of God, when the Word of God has not such a Word in it,
(as Archbishops, Archdeacons, Commissaries, etc.) not a word on it; and this
under pain of Excommunication, and a worse turn (as some think) the Gaol; these
are brave doings the while.

When poor Clergymen must Swear Canonical Obedience, else we will not
Institute them to a Living, and then they must Starve and Dye; for Thrash they
may not, Farm and Trade they may not, being Spiritual-persons, if they Beg
they will be Whipped, if they Steal they will be Hanged, (for all the benefit of their
Clergy,) and if they take a blind Oath of Canonical Obedience, and yet do not
know what is Canonical Obedience, they must be Forsworn; as much as when they
Swear the Oath against Symony, and Obedience to the Canons in force, and yet
exact Money for Baptizings, Burials, Marriages, etc. all which are contrary to
the Canons whereunto they Swear Obedience, ( Poor-hearts!) but few of them
(surely) know those Canons, or know what they Swear to, for if they did, they
durst not (surely) break their Oaths every day.

Canonica Obedientia (says Linwood) est Obedientia secundum exigentiam
Canonum; Canonical Obedience is Obedience according to the Canons, (meaning)
the Canons in force.

Those that are not made nor confirmed by Act of Parliament are not Laws, nor
are we Sworn to Obedience to them; but those made before 25 H. 8. we must obey,
(if they be not contrary to the Laws of the Land,) or be Forsworn, let me tell
you, ( friends mine!)

Now, it is not contrary to the Laws of the Land, though a Bishop take no Money
for Letters of Orders, Institutions, etc. or if Ministers Marry, Baptize, or
Bury People without exacting Money, but on the contrary very pleasing to the
Law, which has provided Glebes, Tithes and Offerings for the nonce to pay us
once for all.

Oh! What a Cage of unclean Birds are we, from top to bottom? unclean,
Lindwood. Provinc. l. 5. Tit. 2. de Simonia.
unclean! Firmiter Inhibemus, ne cuiquam pro aliqua pecunia denegetur,
Sepultura, vel Baptismus, vel aliquod Sacramentum Ecclesiasticum, vel etiam
Matrimonium contrahendum Impediatur; we firmly enjoin, that neither Burial,
Baptism, Matrimony, nor any Ecclesiastical holy Duty, or Sacrament, be denied
to any man, though he will not give a farthing for them.

And Lyndwood says, upon the Text and Gloss, nothing ought to be demanded
Lynd. ibid. verb. sepultura.
or required for Burial in holy ground, whether in the Church or Churchyard,
neither for the Ground, nor for reading the Office of Burial, the Benefice
being enjoyed therefore by the Incumbent; for the Tythefleece is given to the
Shepherd for his hire, in full. And, if the Priest refuse to Baptize any
Infant, or one of Age, except he give Money, the Sin be upon him, but the Party
desiring it, though he dye Unbaptized, shall Lynd. ibid. verb. Baptismus.
have the benefit of the Baptism of the Spirit, though he want Water Baptism;
Nullo modo deberet pro Baptismo pretium dare, sed potius absque Baptismo
Fluminis decedere; suppleretur enim ei ex Baptsmo Flaminis quod ex Sacramento
Council. Pau. Anglicum, Anno 1236. Tit. 4.
deesset; men ought rather to want Water-baptisme than give so much as a penny
for it, because it is Symony (says Lyndwood) both in the Buyer and in the
Seller; how thriving a Trade does this Law spoil? except men will persist in
Perjury, breaking their Oath of Canonical Obedience, in exacting Money for
Baptsm, Burials, or Marriages, of which last, (Matrimony) Lyndw. ibid. verb.
impediatur.
the Ecclesiastical fellows drive a very subtle Trade; Oaths are but Oaths they
think surely.

Dare vel recipere aliquod temporale pro spirituali Symoniacum est; sive detur
pro Sacramento, sive pro Officio, sive pro Oratione, secundum quod ly pro notat
Apprecationem. Lyndwood. Provinc. l. 5. Tit. 2. cap. Praeterea venalitatem.
Verb. Triennalibus.


It is Symony either to give or receive any temporal Commodity for a spiritual
commodity; whether for the Sacrament, or for the Office, or for the Prayers, by
way of contract, bargain and sale.

It is Symony to exact Money for Sins; nam Deus Omnipotens, cujus omnia sunt,
pretium quodlibet pro delicto non accipit; for Almighty God takes not any Money
for Pardon of Sins; nec pecunia recipiatur a subditis pro Crimine vel delicto
notorio; let no man dare to receive Money of their Inferiors for Crimes or
Offenses, be they never so notorious.

It is Symony for a Bishop to take above Six pence for Ordination, (which
Constitut. extrava. Londini. Oct. 10. Anno Dom. 1342. Joh. Stratford. Archi.
Cant.
Six pence goes to the Secretary or Register for Wax, Parchment,) or to take
above Twelve pence for Institution, Induction, Certificates and all; and
against the Oath of Canonical Obedience; Lord forgive us, what will become of
us?

For, sicut non decet Episcopum manus Impositionem vendere, ita nec notarium,
nec ministrum eorundem, nec calamum, nec ministrium venundare; says the Canon,
as a Bishop should not sell Letters of Orders, so neither should his Secretary,
Registers, or Servants sell Quills, or Parchments, Pens, Ink or Wax.

Nam ordinarii suis tenentur ministris stipendia constituere, quibus debent
merito contentari; pro sigillatione literarum, aut mareschallis pro Introitu,
seu Janitoribus, Hostiariis, vel barbito useribus, etc.

For the Ordinaries ought to pay their Servants their Wages to their content,
and not make poor Priests (when they come to their Bishop for Ordination, or to
other Prelates, like my self for Institution, Collation, Induction,) pay the
Porter to let them in, and pay the Porter before they get out; neither (also)
to pay the Bishops Grooms, Butlers, Barbers, etc.

It is against the Oath of Canonical Obedience to remove from a poor Can.
Council. Nicen. general.
Vicaridge to a rich Rectory, or a poor Bishopric to a bigger and better,
(that is) a richer. (God forgive us!)

It is against the Canons in force, if Bishops and Priests have not Shaven
Crowns, as the Popish Bishops and Priests have; for the Canons that enjoin it
are in force, because not contrary to the Laws of the Land, though a Bishop or
Priest be shaved as bald as the back of my hand; nay, it is suspension ab
Officio for six Months to wear long Hair, or a long Beard, or Council. Londini
in Eccles. Sanct. Pauli. Anno 1342. Constitut. Council. Londin. pau-Anglicum.
Ann^ 1236. Titui. 13. and
Pendules at the Ears, or not having a Shaven crown, or Rings on their Fingers,
etc. and if they persist in such uncanonical Deportment, they ought to lose
their Benefices 'till they repent, and then not to be absolved 'till they have
given the sixth part of the Profits of them to the Poor.

It is against the Canons for a Priest to marry a Widow, or being a Widdower
to marry a second Wife, and against the Law of God too, if bigamus sound as
much as the Husband of more than one Wife; and also the Wife of more than one
Husband: And such ought to be degraded and deprived by the Canon Law that have
Married a Widow, there are Council. Anglic. Land. 52. Hen. 3. Anno 1268. Tit.
5. Conc. Pau. Anglic. 1236 Tit. Coke in Articul. Cler. cap. 9.
Maids enough, what need have Priests to be bigamus?

It is against the Canons for one Priest to take another Priests Goods or Money
from him, of which even our Statute Law is so tender, that it is not lawful for
a Sheriff or Bailiff to take or Distrain a Clergy-man's Goods out of his
Parsonage-house for Debt, in other places he may, but not in the ancient
Ecclesiastical Indowments.

Thus careful has the Laws been, that Clergymen should not be (like Pikes and
Sharkes) the greater swallowing up the lesser Fry; little things would live,
though they be not great, nor fat, nor overgrown, and as careful also to keep
the Layity from their Covetous gripes, in not being forced to pay twice, and
besides Tithes, to pay also for Marriages, Baptizings, Lectures, Burials, ( a
very subtle Trade) no more I hope (though) to be followed for the Oaths sake,
the Oaths against Symony, and the Oaths of Canonical Obedience; and I hope all
Bishops also will take warning and look after their Potters, Barbers,
Secretaries, and Gehazies.

If they do not, they shall hear further from me, I Will promise them; are not
Laws and Oaths something? Ha! let me hear no more on it, no, not at a
Visitation, I would wish them for their own sakes, and for Conscience Sake, and
for the sake of the Oaths of Canonical Obedience, and that small Oath against
Symony, and also if they please (I Will add) for their own Souls sake, and for
the Shame of the World and Speech of People; that are apt enough to make or
find holes in a Canonical Coat; they shall not need to make any, I have shown
enough in all Conscience; and the Mischief is, it is true too, no body can deny
it; blessed be God that his Mercy is infinite, or else what would become of us
Clergymen above all others? whether poor Clergy or rich Clergy; whether those
that are liable to a Gaol, or those that are above a Gaol, liable to an
Excommunication, or amici curiae, and above it; whether such as may be
Anathematized, Gaol'd and Cursed; or such as do Anathematize others; all of us
have need to beg absolution of God and the People, so much offended and abused
by us, contrary to our Oaths, our Consciences, and our own dear Canon-laws,
with which we Benchers do so thunder upon the Laity, and the small, poor,
pitiful and inferior Clergymen, Vicars, Curates, Journey-men, and
Day-labourers.

If the World be suffered to go on at this rate, they will not know how to
distinguish and know the difference, betwixt a rich Prelate, and a
Small-day-labouring Journey-man; is it not a general Scandal. Magnat --? a very
great Scandal certainly. -- I wish with all my heart the Poll had gone on,
(which the Bishops set a foot --) that every Clergyman should certify the
Cons and the Non-cons in every Parish: The Non-cons are Shrubs and pitiful
fellows, and but few to us; we think besides, the Prelates say that they have
the Gift of God by laying on of hands to Ordain, Institute, etc. be it so. And
Ministers pretend, that they (by Ordination) have got the Gift of God, the Gift
of Praying, Preaching, Baptizing, and administering the other Sacrament, etc. Be
it so too.

And both Prelates and Ministers we (all) Swear and take the Oath against
Symony, and Oath of Canonical Obedience.

The merciful God forgive us all? what will become of us that should be Guides?

It Is Symony to give Money for a Living; it is Smock-symony to truckle to a
known Whore, pimping for her favor, to give a man a lift into the -- I charge
no man with these kinds of Symony.

But the sin of Simon Magus is to make a Money-business of the Gifts of God, in
Letters of Orders, Institutions, Prayers, Reading, Lecturing, Baptizing, etc.

Baptize my Child; quantum mihi dabitis? says Judas, then what will you give
me, says the Symonist? Ordain me; yea, but pay my Secretary, my Register, my
Porter, and the Groom of my Chamber; give me my Letters of Orders again at a
Visitation, I have paid for them once, Mr. Simon, quantum dabitis? pay the
Secretary and take them.

Give us a Sermon, Parson; quantum dabitis? says Simon, what will you give me
and I Will be your Lecturer?

Read Prayers for me, little Curate; (says the Scarlet Doctor,) quantum dabis?
says Simon, what will you give me to do your Drudgery? come Doctor, you may
afford it; for you are better paid for sleeping than I for Praying, and would
you have a man Pray for nothing, whilst you get so much, for Praying but little
or not at all! quantum dabis? shall I work and Pray by the day, by the week, or
by the Year? yet we all Swear the Oath against Symony, God forgive us, What
will become of us?

Church of England do we call our selves? if we that call our selves Church,
and yet Crack Oaths like Nuts, and are so wicked, surely then the Layity are
sad Souls.

CHAP. XIV.
AND yet as wretched as we are, and at what loose lock soever we Lie or Swear,
hand over head, no Parliament (since 25 H. 8.) ever heeded our Canons so much
as to reform them.

The 25 H. 8. 19. seems to be designed for a temporary Act only and a
Probationer, to last only till 32 persons had selected the choice Canons out of
the great heap of Rubbish; but in such a confused, fusty, frivolous and
self-confounding Lump, the Commissioners were at a loss where to make their
choice, or else thought none of them worth choosing, and so threw all aside.

Nor has any English Parliament regarded our loose condition, so much as to
take the Canons into consideration, containing such a Gallowmawfrey.

Yet, we must Swear, and Swear Canonical Obedience, and never a man in England
(scarcely can or dares affirm what Canons we Swear Obedience to; or which
(alone) are in force: Oh feeble and frail condition of Churchmen! the poor
Churchmen! for the rich there is no Praying for them, I mean, No need of
Praying for them but by the Common Prayer Book; you may trust them, they will
shift well enough in this World, I Will warrant you, let them alone to secure
themselves, and enrich themselves too; yet I cannot deny but Poverty and
Self-denial, Humility and taking up the Cross, was as necessary an
accomplishment and qualification of a Disciple of Christ, and Successor of the
Apostles; as was any other Grace; and if it be (as indeed it is) a
qualification, somebody takes as ready a course as can be to qualify me.

But what do you tell us of Poverty? it is as displeasing to us, as is the
Statute of 1 Edw. 6. 2.

Nor, do not you tell us of Symony neither, nor of taking Money for
Ordinations, Institutions, etc.

Of which the Price is risen in some Diocesses, since I was Instituted almost
half in half, it cost me not above eight or ten pounds to be Instituted,
Inducted, and Ordained into the bargain; but now the Price they say is almost
doubled, the Gift of God gives twice as much, not to the Bishop himself, no,
for his Servants, Secretary, Groom, Varlet de Chamber, Register, Porter, etc.
takes the Money.

The Lord keeper Bacon was Condemned for Bribery, and most justly was turned
out of his place, and the Broad Seal taken from him, yet the neither loved
Money, (no, he loved it not so much as he ought, his great Soul was so far
above it, that he took no care for necessary Provision, dying in a Garret,
chiefly for want) nor did he ever take a Bribe in his life.

But his Servants did, and he connived; even so, etc. Away with it, for shame!
thy Money perish with thee, (said Simon Peter to Simon Magus) for thou art in
the gall of Bitterness and bond of Iniquity, and have neither part nor lot in
this matter, for thine heart is not right in the sight of God.

But, besides the Symony, what can be said to the frequent breach of the Oath
of Canonical Obedience, which also is daily broke by extorting Money, and
selling Prayers, Ordinations, Institutions, Lectures, Sermons, Baptizings, etc.
Here Is rottenness all over.

Besides also many Inhumanities, Vexations, Extortions, Imprisonments,
Grievances and Oppressions that have (within these thousand years) been used in
Spiritual Courts, are against the Law of Nature, and not the least color of
them in the Law of God, and some point blanck against the law of the Land.

Was there ever the like known, that men should not fear to trample the Sacred
Laws under their foot, if they make against them, and at the same time hale in
each Tittle of the letter of the Law against Dissenters, when there is so much
Dissension amongst themselves, so little Congruity or conformity either to one
another, or to the Act of Uniformity.

But the sin is greater when Holy Ordinances and Holy Keys become Snares to
catch away men's Liberties in civil matters, and will be an addition heaped up
and running over, that a man would wonder how it is possible for so much
rottenness and corruption ( when it happens) should subsist.

A Bulwark against Popery some men talk of; go make a Bulwark of nothing but
rottenness, and tell me what it is good for, especially if the rottenness and
corruption is of the same nature with that Popish filth that was brought from
Rome by Augustine, that vilest of Monks, as aforesaid.

CHAP. XV.
A Bulwark (quoth he) and Court-christian. Coke in circumsp. agatis Inst. l. 2.
p. 488.
Court-christian was so called (says Coke) because That as in the secular
Courts the Kings Laws do sway and decide Causes, so in Ecclesiastical Courts
the Laws of Christ should (should, that was well put in) rule and direct; for
which cause the Judges in those Courts are Divines, (Ay, we are fine Divines,)
as Archbishops, Commissaries, Deans, Archdeacons, etc. ( A very special
Christian Regiment, of which not one such name is found in the holy Muster-roll
of Scripture) Linwood says, Curia christianitis in qua servantur Leges
Christi; Court-christian so called, because in it is observed the Laws of
Christ, whereas in the Kings Courts are observed the Laws of the World: (Optime
opponis Domine!) the Kings Laws, the Kings Courts set in distinction, and
diametrically opposite to the Laws of Christ, and Court-christian; I profess
the King and his Courts are strangely beholden to us: Laws of the World, (quoth
he) yea, but Laws Ecclesiastical they call the Laws of Christ, our Courts-
Christian, forsooth!) in distinction from the Kings Courts; our selves Divines,
in distinction from earthly Laymen that mind the World and worldly things; our
selves Spiritual persons in distinction from the carnal Layety; and our Courts
Spiritual Courts in distinction from the worldly Kings Courts.

Well, I commend them for giving themselves and us a good name, and a good
word, becoming our own Trumpets to commend our selves; for if we did not, who
strives to do it? the Papists (indeed) were barbarously Inhumane Soul-sellers,
Cruel, Revengeful, Mischievous, constant Friends to the Devil and the Gaol, but
had the Law of the Land on their side for their black deeds: But some men
Oppress, Extort Money for Gods Gifts, Illegal Fees, in high and open Contempt
of the known Laws of the Land, and in defiance of their own Oaths against
Symony, and their Oaths of Canonical Obedience.

And moreover, if the 1 Edw. 6. 2. (being the last Statute that ever was
revived concerning Bishop-making and Ecclesiastical- Court-keeping) be in
force, (as I doubt not in the least that any body will deny) then to all
wickedness is added the greatest Insolence, Scandal, and daring Triumph over
the Laws, that ever any Chronicle does mention or record.

CHAP. XVI.
AND Blessed be God that has in his Providence so ordered it, that out of the
Eater is come forth Meat, and out of the Strong sweetness to me, through the
Strength, Interest, Malice and Power of my Adversary.

A Power, that by bereaving me of my capacity of being a States minister, or
receiving the States pay, has thereby not only given me leisure and occasion, (
Oh deep Politicians!) not only to pry into their Constitution, and observe
their Motions, but also has thereby emancipated my Judgment, and knocked off
those Shackles wherewith it might happen to be feterr'd, byas't, warpt or
bended the wrong way, through Self Ends or private Respects; Interest too
frequently Bribing, and consequently Blindfolding the Judgment, that it cannot
discern light from darkness; nor can I deny but that in composing this little
Treatise, I have had more than ordinary help and assistance Divine, to discern
further (and yet undeniably true) into the Validity and force of this so
needful Statute, (so long despised) by men that talk much of the Kings
Prerogative, when it serves their own ends.

To which also (I cannot say but) they might the rather be inclined by the Lord
Coke; but whether they wrought him to it, or he them, it is not a pin matter:
Ignorantia crassa non excusat.

For, As it is most certain, that an after-Statute vacates and makes void all
precedent Statutes that are contrary thereunto:

And as it is also as certain as that every child is younger than its father
the author of its life, and every effect junior to its cause, so (also) certain
it is that this Revived Statute must date its life and force from 1 Jacob. and
therefore vacates 1 Eliz. 1. 25 H. 8. 20. 1 Mar. 2. and 1 and 2 Phil. Mar. 8.
and all other Statutes that make Bishops of any other fashion, or send Writs
and Processes in any other name, than that Statute does direct and enjoin.

And though this Argument alone unfetters it from Coke's threefold Cord
wherewith he endeavors to bind it down; yet it is ex abundanti; and more than
needs.

For his second Cord is untyed and loosed by saying ( as aforesaid) that It is
Impossible any Law should aim at the doing any thing which is Impossible to be
the aim and mind of the Legislators:

But it is Impossible that the repeal of 1 Edw. 6. 2. could be the mind of the
Legislators; because there was no such Statute in being, to offend them, or to
need their repeal. And besides the 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. 2. is not contrary to
1 Edw. 6. 2.

For though they may be diverse, they are not contrary, but may very well
subsist together; For the Pope may keep his Supremacy though Processes
Ecclesiastical did run in the Kings Name; As well as the King may keep his
Supremacy though Processes Ecclesiastical run in Doctor Exton's name, or
Pinfolds name.

Therefore it was below the Ingenuity of the learned Coke to mention such a
frivolous Cord that is so easily broken.

The third Cord seems the strongest as to the repeal of the first branch of 1.
Edw. 6. 2. though it is very idle and insignificant as to the other branch of
the Statute, concerning keeping Ecclesiastical Courts in the Kings name:

For 25 H. 8. 20 only allows Processes Ecclesiastical as heretofore used. etc.
so that they be not contrary to the Laws of the Land: Wherefore here is
apparently Petitio principii, and the Learned Coke first prevaricates in
reciting the Statute, and yet leaves out the material words that limit it; well
knowing that otherwise this fallacy would be discerned in begging the Question.

For he would prove Processes Ecclesiastical (used as in Popish times) to be
legal by 25 H. 8. 20. so that such Processes be not contrary to the Law of the
Land: Taking it for granted that 1 Edw. c. 2. is not the Law of the Land; quod
restat probandum: He clearly begs the Question, taking that for granted, which
is the point in controversy, and which he ought to prove by other mediums than
what is in 25 H. 8. 20. because that Statute authorizes no Processes but what
are according to Law, and therefore much less can it make any Law void, or be a
cord to bind that wherewith its self is limited, bound and confined.

I know he sets up the 1 Eliz. 1. (like a Shrove-tide Top) only that he may
play at it and throw it down; but we need not fly to 1 Eliz. 1. there is no
occasion for its repeal of 1 and 2 Phil. and Marry 8. (as to this particular)
yet it does repeal it.

The first and strongest and only Cord that he confesses did bind it, was but,
only temporary, during its own force, and whilst it had strength; for how
could it bind any thing (any) longer than its own power and vigor lasted? But
1 Edw. 6. 2. reviving as he confesses by 1 Jacob. (except it have been repealed
since primo Jacobi,) It seems without further question or controversy to be in
force.

And above all, (which accurate Lord Coke never mentions, and would not ( at
least did not) think of) he needs no other arguments to defeat his own three
cords, but his own arguments only turning the points of them against himself:
For if an after-Act shall vacate all former Acts that are contrary to it; and
if the Life of 25 H. 8. 20. shall be accounted an after-Act to 1 Edw. 6. 2.
(though its first life was before it) bearing date only from 1 Eliz. 1. the
author and cause of its present life and motion, which is (also) as true as
that causa est prior effectu.

So also, by the same reason must 1 Edw. 6. 2. be an after-Act to 1 Eliz. 1. 1
and 2 Phil. and Mar. 8. 1 Mar. 2. and 25 H. 8. 20. bearing date primo Jacobi,
the Author and cause of its present life and motion; and therefore must make
them null and void in every thing that is contrary to 1 Edw. 6. 2. revived 1
Jacob.

And if this can be answered by all the men in England, I will for ever
hereafter throw away my Pen, and forfeit my Reason to the Master of New
Bethlehem: And (indeed) that is the fittest place for me, if the force of this
(so long-abused) Statute be not here made evident to all rational men.

But on the contrary, Bedlam is the fittest place for them that have insolently
contemned and trampled on this Royal Statute, and thereby brought such a
horrible Scandal and Inconvenience, if it be in force.

For if that Statute be in force, how many lawful Bishops, lawful Priests, or
lawful Ecclesiastical Courts have we in England? But let the great Scandal lie
at the right door whereto it belongs, and let them that have been guilty of the
sin, bear also the Shame and the blame, and be accountable for so great a
Scandal, and punished accordingly; look to it, the Laws are too hard for all
Opponents, whoever they be in conclusion, and at the upshot; therefore it
concerns some people to fence with all their force and might, and all to no
purpose, but their own Confusion; How can a corrupt Tree bring forth good fruit?

CHAP. XVII.
AND now I have done my business, and also I have done the business of some
Ecclesiastical men to all intents and purposes, some will say, and have shown
what sad fellows they are, though I confess some of them are my fellows, yet I
blush for them, and should blush more to be seen in some of their Companies,
yet I care not how soon (now) I come into their clutches, if their Nails were
paired so short, so short.

He that values any thing more than Christ (Christ says) is not worthy of him,
much more unworthy of him are those that value their Malice and Revenge more
than the Propagation of the Gospel.

It Is well that God is (and must) be just, and therefore there must be another
day of Reckoning in another World, where Truth shall not stand at the Bar and
be Arraigned, whilst Hypocrisy, Symony, Atheism, Debauchery, Cruelty and
Dissimulation sits on the Bench.

But Gods Will be done, on Earth as it is in Heaven; he best knows what is best
for us in this Life; nor would I eat of some men's dainties to have their
Bosoms, Cares, Terrors and Distractions here, though I might be excused from
paying their Reckoning in another Life.

It Is true, God hates Hypocrisy, and it will never do a man good in another
Life; But in this Life, It is as good as true Religion to such kind of
Statesmen and Machiavilians as make no other use of Religion, but in Policy,
and to amuze the vulgar.

A Horse painted in cloth (which is not perspicuous) is as good as a
living-stalking-horse, to catch Woodcocks that cannot see through it.

Hypocrisy (then) is good for something, it will serve to catch Woodcocks in a
State, if it be so Substantial that the Woodcocks do not see through it, but if
it be apparently and visibly Transparent, it is useless and good for nothing in
the World, it will not serve so much as to cheat withal, no more than false
dice, after they are discovered apparently, where and how; even so, any Church
(though it be not true,) yet if it retain but the face of Religion, and look
like Piety to see to, it will serve well enough in States-policy, where they
are indifferent and careless for any more than to set a good face upon the
matter, as at Rome.

But that Church that retains not so much as the face of Piety, but that it is
a step to Preferment but to pretend to Piety, or look soberly and demurely,
when the very outside Hypocritical-mask and Vizard of Religion is quite thrown
off and cast aside, through palpable and apparent Symony, extorting Money for
Gods Gifts, for Ordinations, and for all Gospel Ordinances, to the daily and
constant and apparent breach of their Oaths against Symony, and their Oaths of
Canonical Obedience, and also through their Avarice, Malice and
Worldly-mindedness, above all other People; Pride, Insolence and Cruelty above
all other People; Formality, Dullness and coldness in Devotions above all other
People; Looseness of Conversation, Oppressions and Extortions above all other
People; fighting against their Adversaries to wreak their Malice, serve a turn
or State-job, and mischief men's earthly Liberties with the Keys of the Church
thrown at them, my Friends, in such a Case, the very face of Religion and
Vizard-mask of Religion is thereby thrown off, so that it is neither useful for
Heaven nor Earth, neither for God nor the State; it will not serve so much as
to catch Woodcocks.

Hard is their hap that are forced to follow erroneous Guides and illegal
ways, or upon refusal to be Anathematized, Gaobd, and then their Liberties,
Franchises and Purses taken from them, and without, or against Law too.

Nay and worse, namely, be Anathematized and Cursed by them that have no more
Law, no more Commission, no more Power or Authority, neither from God nor man,
to Curse, than had (the false Prophet) wicked Balaam to Curse the People of God.

Sad choice, to be forced to lose Heaven, or else Earth, or else both.

Good God! that ever men (whose Ancestors baffled the whole Power of France,
Scotland, and the Pope united, bringing the French King, and the Scotch King
and the Pope captive and Prisoners at the same time) should be such a
degenerate Brood as to be frighted out of their Wits with Shadows, and out of
their Rights, and out of their Consciences and their Liberties with Illegal
Curses.

Oh! unhappy ( of all other) is their fate, that are overwhelmed with filth,
over run with Diseases and old spreading Ulcers that grow worse and worse, and
run down with Rottenness, and Pierced, Hackled, Tortured and Mangled with dull
Tools that are rusty and corrupted all over.

Let no Catchpole (here) lie at lurch, (for I shall have abundance of Readers
that deserve that Name) setting themselves to read this little Book, with no
other design but (only) to find somewhat therein which they can so far stretch
with their Scurvy-teeth as to wire-draw it so, as to serve their turn to make a
Snare of to catch me or my Bookseller, (such Ingenious Reception do all
Attempts toward Truth receive amongst base minds) hoping to beat mine own
Weapons about mine own Ears.

But let them let fall their edgless Swords, despair and dye, though I doubt
not but they will lie at catch, and perhaps apply my Metaphors to themselves,
(as the Pharisees did those of our blessed Savior) when cut to the Heart with
his keen Parables, they perceived he spoke the Parable concerning them, but
knew not how to help themselves: But I, (in all this Metaphorical-discourse)
mean not any Religion in particular, nor any Church (by name) whatsoever,
except that thin Religion and that ruiuous Church that was huddled up in have
and built upon Crutches, and the foolish Inhabitants had rather it should fall
upon their Heads than they will confess themselves Weak-builders, (such is that
Pride and pretense to Divinity, that ( Lucifer-like) would gladly attempt to be
like God, Infallible, as if it were already) divested of Humanity, and not
subject to Errors.

Yet, (I say) I mean no Religion, no Church (hereby) but that thredbare
(overworn) Religion, and that ghastly Church (wheresoever it stands in the wide
World) whose rotten groundsels, crazy Foundation, apparent Dilapidations, and
transparent guilt Accuses and Condemns its self, and is obvious to every
Passenger that does but view it, and cast his eyes (or a serious look) upon it.

For my Pen (how keen and sharp soever some busy Censurers have judged it to
be) shall never cut mine own throat, in hopes to scratch an Enemy; though (I
confess) a dull blunt Pen is useless, and good for nothing, because unfit to
write with, serving only to blur paper, as good do nothing; yet the acuter any
Pen is, the greater dexterity is required in the management and guidance
thereof.

It is with Pens, as with other weapons; And Penmen like Swordmen, they are
best that give the most woundly-smart blows, and thrust it home upon the
adverse Party, and make their Hearts ache again, so they do it cleaverly,
fairly, and upon the Square.

The only skill lies in breaking the Adversaries head so finely and neatly
that at the same time the nimble Fencer (also) guards his own; otherwise he
loses the reward as well as the Honor of the Prize he plays: ( Miles Christi
securus interimit, securior interit, says Bernard.)

Yet I know also, That there is no fence against a flail; and that the greatest
skill (more is the pity) may be over-powred with a dull strong fool, by mere
force, power and main strength.

But that is no Disparagement to Art, nor to the Gentle-craft of fencing, which
usually sends the strong Clowns away with shame and loss; And, for all their
great strength marches the Great Blockheads off with a broken Pate; sending
them home (at length) by weeping-cross. Great things are done many times by
small means, if we consider that single Shammah (one of David's Worthyes)
withstood the whole Body of the Philistines. Truth and the Laws may be oppressed
and suppressed a while, but never quite subdued; for at length they will be
strongest, and too hard for any man alive.

The face of things do alter, and do become of another Complexion at
low-water-mark, when the dry Land appears, in comparison of what they seemed
when the Tide run strongly and high; when the flood comes rolling and Tumbling
in; the comfort is, it is subject to vicissitude and change, and to ebb as
well as flow.

For there are three things -- namely, The Sun, The Truth, and the Laws, (all
of them of so heavenly a nature) that they always shine bright in their own
Firmament, even when they are most beclouded (as sometimes they are) and
Eclyps'd from mortal view:

But ( the Best on it is) They are always in motion toward their former
brightness, (as also are the Interposing clouds, they are fugitive (too) and
upon the go.) So that though for a time they may seem dim and obscured to
earthly (and only to earthly) and sublunary Eyes, yet when the mists vanish,
they regain and resume their wonted splendor, nay, look more lovely and
beautiful after they have been maskt with a cloud.

The Profession of a Clergyman is the best Profession; the Calling most
Honorable, the Reward greatest; But a corrupt or evil Clergy man is the vilest
of Mankind; Corruption of the best is worst of all: For as no man is more
honored, reverenced, or beloved, than a humble, painful Minister of Christ,
that seeks not his own advancement, but the propagation of Truth, and universal
good to Mankind; so, what Creature more odious than a Clergyman corrupted with
Pride, mischief, cruelty, malice, revenge, avarice, yea, an insatiable
greediness after the world, worldly Honors, worldly Pleasures, worldly
Employments and gain not to be restrained by the fear of daily Perjury; or
taking Gods Name in vain.

As they do, that do not only live in perpetual Perjury against their Oaths,
but also in Perpetual contradiction to their calling, their Profession, their
Preaching, and the Name of God or Religion. Thou that Preachest against pride,
avarice, perjury; worldly-mindedness, Cruelty, Malice and Revenge, ( hold up
thy hand!) Art thou Guilty? Well! God send thee good deliverance; for thou art
in evil handling, and the Devil has got a strong hold of thee; therefore beware
all ye that are Ministers of Christ: beware Prelates! Note (by the way) that by
Prelates, I mean (what our Canon-Laws mean generally by Prelates; namely) all
Clergymen that have cure of Souls: For which cause I have here sometimes put
my self into the number, calling my self -- ( we Prelates) in good time, as if
I was proud of the Title -- to be Cock of three; (for not more than three
Parishes (if I would be mischievous) are under my Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical)
and therefore no man in his Wits can think that I have so little Wit as to be
proud of that I have all along exposed, and care not one farthing for; much
less do I call my self Prelate, in hopes to beggar any man that may hap to
Scandalize my Hogen-mogen-Ecclesiasticalship; but I call my self Prelate, (as
the Canon Law calls me,) namely, Benefic't-Clergyman, for all such are Prelates
by Law; not for Prelating (or being preferred) one above another, (so much
condemned and sorbid by our blessed Savior to all his Disciples) but because
they are Preferred over the Flock, in the Care, Cure and Charge thereof; and is
a name of Burden more than Pride.

So the Canon de Sacramentis Iterandis, vel non -- Sacramenta, quorum Lyndwood.
Provinc. l. 1. Tit. 7. cap. ignorantia Sacerdotum. ver. Praelati Ecclesiae.
Dispensatores sunt Prelati Ecclesiae: Sacraments, the Dispensers or
Administrators whereof are the Prelates of the Church: (that is) all Presbyters
with cure: so says the Gloss -- Praelati Ecclesiae. Hic vocantur Praelati
nedum superiores ut Episcopi, sed etiam inferiores, ut Archidiaconi, Presoyteri
Plebani and Rectores Ecclesiarum; (and postea) quilibet qui praeest curae
animarum dicitur esse Praelatus, etc.

Prelates, (here called) are not only the high flown, as Bishops, but the
Inferiour-Clergy, as Archdeacons, Countrey-priests and Rectors of Churches, and
indeed all that have cure of Souls.

And, if these lights be darkness, how great is that darkness? if these be
corrupt, what a nasty lump it is? how Nauseous? how Pestiferous? how
Infectious? how Mischievous? how contrary to the very letter and design of the
third Commandment, if the Name of God in their Profession, Caliing, Preaching
and Prayers, is Blasphemed by them, daily, by taking it in Vain, through
palpable Symony, Perjury, Pride, Avarice, Cruelty, Malice and Revenge?

Therefore the Gloss upon the Canon Law, de Officio Archipresbyteri,
concerning Lyndwood. Provinc. l. 1. Tit. 11. cap. Presbyterorum ver. canes
menti.
the duty of an Archpriest, does not only call wicked Prelates, greedy Dogs
that can never have enough, but ravening Wolves, malus Praelatus aliquando
dicitur Lupus rapiens Praedam. (83 di. nihil.) An evil Prelate is sometimes
called a Wolf, snatching and devouring his Prey; Quandoque Canis Impudicus; (2
q. 7. qui nec.) sometimes a nasty Cur, or unclean Dog; Item Corvus; (2 q. 7.
non omnis) a mere Rook; Item sal infatuatum ad nihilem proficiens, (2 q. 7. non
omnis) also Salt that has lost its savor, and good for nothing in the World
but the Dunghill; meaning perhaps that as in their Lives they seem only to be
born ( fruges consumere nati) to make Victuals dear, (by eating them up) so
they are useful for nothing but to make muck of, to manure the Land with such
filth, and so (like Hoggs) they will be good for something when dead, though good
for nothing (but to eat, devour and do Mischief) whilst they live; therefore an
evil Prelate is called a Hog, Porcus, (43 di. in mandat.) Nay, (35 di.
Ecclesiae Principes.) an evil Prelate is called a Capon, Capo, quia sicut capo
non cantat, sic nec malus Praelatus; item non generat nec pugnat pro subditis,
item sicut Capo non vocat Gallinas, sic malus Praelatus non vocat pauperes;
item, sicut Capo se impinguat, sic malus Praelatus, and ideo cum quaerat epulis
and deliciis abundare, ejicietur in ignem inferni: (that is) As a Capon crows
not, so neither does an evil Prelate lift up his Voice like a Trumpet; neither
does he increase and multiply the Brood, nor yet fight for them, but (
Craven-like) possibly fight with those that are under his charge; also as a
Capon calls not the Hens about him ( chocking them) to feed, so neither does an
evil Prelate call the Poor. Also as a Capon sats himself, so does an evil
Prelate; and therefore when he thinks of nothing but cramming himself with his
dainty Morsels, he shall be thrown into Hell Fire; and then (for all his
Flutter) he makes but a sad and miserable Exit.

For all Mischief (like Cruelty and Persecution) makes a Rod for its own back,
and becomes its own Executioner, as well as its own Scourge.

Had not hard-hearted Pharaoh (think you) been a wiser man, as well as a better
man, if he had been less mischievous? for by losing the Bowels of humane
Compassion, he lost himself, and his Party; all that sided with him, were not
only partakers of his Sins, but of his Plagues also; perishing in the same
woeful end,

If I can do my Brethren a Courtesy, you may be sure I will; What? not a Legal
Bishop, nor Legal Priest in England! God forbid; that must never be admitted;
and therefore, though the Lord Coke's reason for 25 H. 8. 20. seems of no force
at all, yet 8 Eliz. 1. seems to cure us all, if his Majesty please? I hope we
are all safe still; the Judges only ought to determine it. But what is all this
to justify the Contempt of that Branch of the Statute (1 Edw. 6. 2.) that
enjoins the use of the Kings Name, Style, and Seal, in all our Processes
Ecclesiastical, Certificavit's and Significavit's ^^sor neither 1 Eliz. nor 8
Eliz. touches that; or if it did, (as it does not) Quere, Whether the Revival
of 1 Edv. 6. 2. by 1 Jacob. shall not obviate it? But to admit the other Branch
of the Statute to be in force, would be a horrible wide Scandal; yet not so
great a Scandal, but many greater have been let into the Romish Church, when
the Heads happened to be (like the wooden Heads in a Carvers Shop) Brainless.

Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, are lawfully Consecrated by 8 Eliz. 1. at least
by 14 Car. 2. 14. but whether they be legally elected to this or that Cure, or
Title, is a Point of which I will not give any Opinion, nor meddle with it: one
said well, they are Legales ad Officium, quales quales sint ad Titulum.

Was not the holy Chair well lined against Error, when that Monster Baron.
Annal. Ann. 1033.
of men, and Opprobry of the Church, (as Cardinal Baronius calls Benedict. 9.)
was made Pope at twelve years of Age, by means of his Fathers Interest and
Subtilty, the Marquess of Tuscia? That Pope being skilled in Fascicul. ad Ann.
1033.
nothing but the Black-art, being found dead and strangled in the Woods by
Devils, as Cardinal Benno affirms: Platina calls him the wickedest and most
mischievous of all the Popes, but he that reads the sad Character he gives of
other Popes, as dull Sabinianus, Boniface 3. that red Dragon, (as Cardinal
Baronius calls him) Profane Formosus, Ann. 891. wretched Pope Stephen 7. Ann.
895. (of whom Baronius says) He entered Platina de (...). pontis.
like a Wolf, and died in a Halter like a Dog. Debaucht Romanus, Ann. 897.
Seditious Theodore 2. Ann. 897. and next to him Vile Jo. 10. Ann. 897. ( three
Popes in one year) one after another) or these three next succeeding Popes,
Benedict. 4 Leo. 5. ( Terrae Filii, as Platina calls them;) and this latter
Ann. 903. after one months Possession of the Holy Chair, ejected by
Christophorus, so obscure a fellow, that no man could find out his Country, or
Surname; only that the name he was known by before he was Pope, was
Christopher.

And these few ( amongst many more) I recite, that men need not wonder if great
Scandals come in a Church, if the Heads (at Rome) happen to be like the Wooden
Heads aforesaid, (namely) brainless.

Like Pope John 12. that Spit-fire, full of his Anathema's, excommunicating the
whole Council of Lateran, for Articling against him to the Emperor Otho the
Great, for drinking a Health to the Devil; for ordaining Boys L^itprand. l. ^.
c. 7.
Bishops at ten years old, and Deacons in a Stable; for invocating the Devil to
help him (at Dice) to a lucky Cast; for lying with Stephana his Fathers
Concubine; And for turning his Holynesses Palace to a common Stews or Brothel
house.

But in his Answer to his Charge, he curses them all to the Devil of Hell by
Excommunication; and they in Requital, toss back his Bruta Fulmina and
Anathema's, by excommunicating the Pope, saying, -- You write by the Suggestion
of as silly Counselors as your self, Childish Threats; but we despise your
Excommunication, and throw it back upon you: Judas the Traitor bound nothing
with his Halter but his own wretched Neck. So ridiculous did they make that
Ecclesiastical Tool, or Sword of Excommunication, growing dull by using it so
often on every whissling occasion, to Curse whom they hated in mere revenge,
'till no wise man heeded them: therefore at last they wheedled in the
Magistrate to grant them the Writ de Excommunicato capiendo.

Blessed be God that there is a day of Judgment hereafter, and of all Miracles,
I most wonder that any man (in his wits) can be an Atheist, to doubt it; for it
is impossible but that the Sun, Moon, Stars, Earth, (and all we see) had a
first Cause, that made and preserves them; and it is impossible but that that
first Cause must be infinitely good and just; and consequently impossible but
that there must be a day of Judgment and Justice in another World.

For in this World, the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong,
Eccles. 9. 11.
nor Favor men of Skill, nor Bread to the Wise, nor yet Riches to men of
Understanding; but Honesty and Truth stands at the Bar (sometimes) when
Hypocrisy, Cruelty, Atheism, and Apostasy sits on the Bench; therefore it is
impossible but that there should be another day of Judgment; when it shall be
well with them that fear God, which fear before him; but it shall not be well
with the Wicked, neither shall he prolong his days, which Eccles. 8. 12, 13.
are as a shadow, because he fears not before God.

But if Bishops ( angry Bishops or angered Bishops) would be content to Scold it
out, as St. Hierom at St. Ambrose, calling him Corvus and Cornicula, Rook and
Raven; and his Commentaries on St. Luke -- Nugas -- ( Trifles) (though I like
not the sport, yet I confess (of the two) such Duels are most proper for Women,
or men of the Gown) but I hate playing at Sharps, especially with men that will
not play upon the square, and fairly with Equal Weapons and Equal Seconds, but
to fly to the Magistrates long Sword (upon every Ecclesiastical Skirmish of
Pen) I will not, I dare not say that it is foul Play; but I Will say, it is not an
even Match. The Learned Bishop of Canterbury, Doctor Laud, (when Fisher
published his Book of Popery) did not run to the King and Council, crying out
-- Help O King; nor did the Council trouble themselves with such Velitations,
or Pen-pickeerings, but Laud answered a Scholar like a Scholar, with his
learned Pen to his lasting Honor, not borrowing the Magistrates Pike to his
Dishonor.

No man does well approve of the Bastinado, though given him by never so smooth
a Cudgel, but the Cudgells do so ill become the hands that should bless us,
that any man would take the Lamb-basting from a Hangman, with much more
Patience and Alacrity than from a Prelate; it being so incongruous to his holy
Office to turn Executioner (so much as) by Proxy.

Nor do I know in all these Contests, how it is possible to follow better
advice than that happy and great Statesman gave Queen Elizabeth, in reference
to the Papist and the Puritan, (neither of them did he well like;) yet lest the
Queen should take him for a Puritan (a sort of People to whom she never gave
much Countenance, nor much Discountenance) much less cut them down with
Sham-laves made against Papists, sharpened on purpose because of the late
Spanish Invasion, the danger whereof was no sooner quite over; but if she did
not quite sheath that two edged Sword, yet she never drew it against Papists,
no nor against Popish Priests, (except Treason against the State aggravated the
virulency of that corrupt Religion*) Lord Treasurer Burleigh's Letter to Q.
Eliz. in Bacon's ^elicity of Q. Eliz.
the Statesman I mean, was the Lord Treasurer Burleigh, who in a Letter to that
Queen,

Protesting first that he was not given over, no, nor so much as addicted to
the ( Puritan) Preciseness; thus advises her Majesty Queen Elizabeth: 'Till I
think that you think otherwise, I am bold to think that the Bishops in these
dangerous times, take a very ill and unadvised course ( so pious Bishops were
in those days) in driving them from their Cures, and this I think for two
Causes.

1. Because it does discredit the reputation and estimation of your power, when
the Princes shall perceive and know, that even in your Protestant Subjects (in
whom consists (mark that) all your Force, Strength and Power) there is so
great and heart-burning a Division; and how much reputation swayeth in these
and all other worldly Actions, there is none so simple as to be ignorant; and
the Papists themselves (though there be most manifest and apparent discord
between the Franciscans and Dominicans, the Jesuits and other Orders or
Religious Persons, especially the Benedictines,) yet will they shake off none
of them, (mark that, but some are wise and some are otherwise) because in the
main point of Popery ( and Protestantisme) they all agree and hold together,
and so far ( and so may all Protestants also) freely bragg and vaunt of their
Unity.

The other reason is, because in truth, (in their Opinions) though they are
over-squeamish and nice, and more scrupulous than they need, yet with their
careful Catechizing and diligent Preaching, they bring forth that fruit which
your most Excellent Majesty is ( mark that) to desire and wish, namely, the
lessening and diminishing the Papistical Numbers; and therefore in this time
your Majesty has especial Cause to employ them, if it were but as the Emperor
Frederick the Second employed the Saracens against the Pope, because he was
well assured that they (only) would not spare his Sanctity.

The CONCLUSION.
THerefore (certainly) Solomon knew what he said, when he said, That the Throne
is established by Righteousness and Justice.

For Justice, or (which is all one) the Law is the (only) sure foundation of
the Throne; which William (Surnamed) the Conqueror so well understood, that he
post-pon'd or waved his Title to England, as Conqueror, (and a long Sword)
deriving it (against Earl Harold that Usurpt his Crown,) from King Edward the
Confessor, (his immediate Predecessor) as his next Heir by nature.

It Is true, Coke calls him William Bastardus, and the Common Law says Coke in
Proem. 2d. Institut.
(at least) to all Subjects, Bastardus non haereditabit, a Bastard shall not
Inherit; but whether King William had any reason, or rather was mistaken to
think it too low to reach the Laws of the Crown; though afterward Illegitimacy
upon another score (so declared by Acts of Parliament) proved not a sufficient
Bar to seclude either Queen Mary or Queen Elizabeth from the Imperial Crown of
this Realm) or whether it was but King Williams* mere fancy, or that he had
some other Title by the Will of King ^dward, concerns not us at this distance,
so much as to enquire, further than to say, (what all History agrees in)
negatively, he did not claim his Right to the Crown by his Sword, or by laying
his Hand upon his Hilt; but gently, like other Successive Kings of England;
took the Coronation Oath, and vowed observance of and Obedience to the Laws.

For the Throne of England is more stately, magnificent, and well-grounded,
than to stand upon so Ticklish a point as the Point of a Sword, be it never so
long a Sword; much less should it stand upon so tottering a Lottery, as to come
to measuring of Swords, or the long Cut carry it.

Especially, since the Law of God and Nature teaches the vanquished to put by
the longest Sword (as far as they can) from their Breasts and Throats, except
the Sword be Commissionated and Legitimated from the Law of the Land.

And since the Law of the Land is the only, sure, true, infallible and
impartial ^mpire in all Causes, and over all Persons as well Ecclestastical as
Temporal to decide all differences and contests that may or can possibly arise
betwixt Arbitrary Lust, Rage, Will and force (on the one hand) and Disobedience
and Rebellion, (on the other hand) and since it has proved so fatal (hitherto)
to any man that has dared to refuse to stand to the Umpirage and Award of the
Law; then ( tell me) who will, nay Indeed, who may or can withstand or gainsay
the Law that is irresistible?

And if, (by the Premises) it be undeniably true, that -- by the repealing Cok^
2d. Instit. 688.
of a Repeal, the first Act is revived; and (also) that an after-Statute makes
void all its Predecessors that are contrary to it; and (also) if the effect
must be after its Cause, then so certain it is, that this Royal Statute (1 Edw.
6. 2.) bearing date of its Life from its Cause (prim. Jacob.) that revived it,
must undoubtedly take place of (1 Eliz. 1. 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. and 1 Mar.
and) all (other) Statutes that are its Seniors in every thing where they thwart
it.

But, (alas) 1 Eliz. 1. and 1 Phil. and Mar. 8. were not contrary to it, much
less could it come into the hearts and minds of those Legislators to repeal it,
more than to offer to kill a dead Horse; for it was (as dead) (by 1 Mar. 2.)
'till King James Revived it, since which time who can deny but it has had Life,
by what Arts soever, or for what hidden Cause soever, or by whomsoever it has
seemed to be smothered; though so advantageous and suitable to the Kings
Prerogative Royal.

Also, if all the Canon Law made before 25 H 8. (and no other) be in force, (in
Tanto) for so much of them as are not contrary to the Laws of the Realm, nor to
the Kings Prerogative Royal; (which the Law (also) does in every thing support,
direct, declare and advance,) and if Symony in contracting or purchasing,
selling, buying or bargaining for Divine Gifts, Functions and Offices, be
odious to God and man, and to the Laws both of God and man; then (tell me) who
will or dare, nay, indeed who may or can, give or take, require or exact Money
for Baptizings, Buryals and Marriages; for Sins, Sacraments and Lectures; for
Letters of Orders, Institutions, Inductions, Collations or the like? much less
chop and change Bishoprics or Benefices for lucre, (filthy Lucre) in defiance
of the Oaths against Symony, in defiance of the Oaths of Canonical Obedience,
taken and sworn (God forgive us!) by every Benefic't Priest and Bishop, in
defiance of the Law of God and man, and ( which is worst of all) to the
apparent hazard of our Immortal Souls, and all this for a little ungodly gain.

Who will believe us or our Preaching? or can any Imagine that we believe what
we Preach, whilst without repentance we live in such Symonical Crimes, to the
universal scandal and contempt of the Clergy?

Which seems not more Catholic and general than Just, if by our known Symony
and Avarice, Pride and Cruelty, Persecuting-spirit and Woldly-mindedness (above
all others) we taint our Holy Functions, and be spot and stain our Surplices
with so much filth, making our selves (thereby) the common Scandal, as well as
common Odium: what need have we (above all others) to ask forgiveness both of
God and man?

And such may as lawfully be resisted, as an honest Woman may resise a Goat or
a Ravisher.

Howbeit, It is so far from Purgation, that it aggravates any Villains Crimes,
when he thinks to expiate his Abominations (as Manasseh did) by Humane
Victimes, sacrificing Men to his Wrath, by encouraging inhumane Cruelties and
Vexations against such who happen to have straiter Consciences, and not so wide
a swallow as himself.

How many Hearts were ever won by vexing them? or, how can men (in Justice or
Law) be compelled to that Church (by the Act of Uniformity) which is not
conformable to the Act, but coyns or keep up new Ceremonies, in unlighted
Candles on the Altars, cringing and bowing to them, Organs and Music, with
many such Innovations punishable by the Act of Uniformity.

If men must obey the established Religion, let us have no other but what is
established; and if Dissenters must be punished, let all Dissenters be punished,
and not make fish of one and flesh of another; since Dissenters have this
unanswerable excuse for not coming to Church, and to the established Religion,
if there be another or more Religion, (or rather) Superstition there, than what
is established by the Act for Uniformity.

For I ( and all good Subjects) ought equally to abhor all Faction; and all
Innovation, all new Religions, or new Superstitions and Ceremonies to Periwig
the old.

Both of them are Dissenters, and if any be Fined and Punished* Fine them and
Punish them both alike; but first Fine those Dissenters that make Dissenters by
new Ceremonies contrary to the Act.

Though ( I confess) I am not for knocking men down and taking their Purses,
because their eyes are not so good as mine, for fear that the next man I meet
(who may happen to out-see me as well as oyt-stare me) should ( by mine own
rule and law) serve me with the same sauce; and ( more especially) because
Almighty God (the only King of Consciences, has always Plagued Persecutors of
men's Consciences, (although) erroneous Consciences) in all Ages; and I am apt
to think that the Merit of Informers will scarcely persuade Almighty God to
abate his usual Indignation against all manner of Persecution and Cruelty: How
much foever the Persecuting strain be applauded and admired by subtle Roger,
and such needy Varlets that are greedy to swallow any bait, (they are so
hungry) though it will certainly choke them.

His Gracious Majesty (whom God long Preserve) having so often declared (as
also his Parliaments) against the severity-part of the Act, and so also King
Charles 1. that tells his Son how dangerous it is to Vsurp the Jurisdiction of
the King of Consciences, or to kick against the pricks: And I have heard that
(therefore) he would never Pardon a Murderer, saying, Who am I? to contradict
God that says, -- He that s^iddeth man's Blood, by man shall his Blood be shed?
and shall I say No, it shall not be shed?

But, if in this, or in any other word or clause in this discourse, any thing
have escaped my Pen, through Precipitancy or want of Skill, (for who (except
the Pope) is Insallible) or derogatory to the Holy Catholic Church, Faith or
good Manners, I wish it were obliterated, with all my heart.

For nothing do I covet in this World so much as the Propagation of the true
established Religion, Peace, Mercy and Goodness to humane Nature and all
Mankind; against any of which if I have in the least transgrest herein, I hope
the Ingenuous Readers will the rather heartily Pardon me, in Complacence to the
Honesty of this my Attempt, which may (at least) Atone for my Errors and humane
frailties which are many, very many; against which (though) none can possibly
be more enraged than I am, when they are discovered to me.

But, why should men be in love with their Sins or their Sores? if they were my
Sores, I would not kick a Dog that Ofter'd to lick them whole.

And was not apparent Symony, Avarice, Spiritual Dominion, and Encroachment
upon Temporal-Courts and intrusion into temporal Employments, together with
Persecution, Cruelty, Spitting-fire, Curses and Anathema's, Extortions, Gaoles
and Fines, new Ceremonies and Superstitions, Antic Dresses and Antic Cringes,
etc. ( all which are some men's darling sins,) but were they not at first
brought over from Rome by Augustine, Archbishop of Canterbury (as aforesaid)
that same wretched Monk?

I know not what such Romish Dreggs are good for, except (as the Dressed
Cowcumbers I once Cookt) for the Dunghill.

Or, how in the name of goodness can any man abett them, or so far Countenance
them, as to Discountenance me (as hitherto) for Impeaching them?

Nevertheless, if any bodies Palate be so out of taste, as to love and long for
such Romish Dreggs, let them send for the old, tainted and fusty Bottles again.

For nothing else is fit to hold them, nor can retain them long; for the Gospel
is compared Mark 2. 20.
to new Wine, which no man (that is, no wise man) puts into old Bottles, else
the new Wine does burst the bottles, and the wine is spilled and the bottles
will be marred, but Mat. 9. 17.
new wine must be put into new bottles, and both are preserved.

Not, but that I have been as filly a Zealot for Persecution, as zealous Roger
himself; 'till by searching, I could find no president for it in the Bible, nor
any good luck that attended any that Persecuted men for Conscience-fake, though
an erroneous Conscience; and especially in our Soil, where that weed never
thrived long; witness Queen Mary's Methods* and the German Emperor to the
Protestant Hungarians, 'till for shelter they fled to the (more merciful) Turk,
a Piece of Jesuitisme as unpolitick as Impious, whoever lives to see the upshot.

I confess, in the Old Testament Joshua had such a Commission to kill, slay and
plunder all Dissenters, so that it ( possibly) might be true, what Procopius
(says he) saw, engraven on a Pillar near Tangis, (now called Tangier, our
Garrison in Asrick) erected by the Phoenicians or Philistines that fled (so
far) from the Valor of the Lords Captain, Joshua, to eternize their flight,
(and except they had fled into the Sea, they could not well have fled further,)
in these words -- Nesfugimus a facie Joshua, Praedonis filii Nave; We fly from
the face of that great Thief, Joshua the Son of Nun.

But, he had no Commission to plunder his fellow Jews; what feat was a Province
peculiar to the wicked, and mischievous Priests, (only) those ravenous Sons of
Eli.

Whose Symonical Rapine dragged from me these heavy Verses.

The Priests of Bell were glad to Frogg for meat,
Feeding their Wives and Brats by holy Cheat;
But (High Priest) Eli's Sons, without remorse,
Cry -- Give, ( ye Slaves!) or else we'ls take it by force.
Ay -- These were rampant, Hector, rend and tear,
And will be twice paid, Curse, Arrest, and Swear;
Their frothy ware the Layety must buy it,
(Just as they set the Price) who dare deny it?
Come to the Temple -- Simon -- buy Gods Word;
If not, then take him Jailer, Ax or Sword.
Religion dressed in Buffe? with Gun, Sword, Pike?
Religion say? the D -- it is more like.
Religion is an Earthly Paradise
( Not an Artillery-Garden) to the wise:
Religion's goodness and its Truth (alone)
An Infinite of Souls to Heaven has won*
But can we give our God greater Dishonor,
Than think -- He needs the Black-Art of old Bonner?
The Pastoral-staff brought home Christ's Sheep to Folds;
Never called (for Help) to Qnarter-staff, of old;
If Heaven allure not, no, nor Gold to boot,
Not all Earths Magazines nor Hells can do it.
For Souls may well to God be drawn, not driven;
Did ever Gunpowder blow Souls to Heaven?
Lastly, over and above all this the 15 Car. 1. 11. does inflict the penalty of
a hundred pounds on all Ecclesiastical-Couriers that take upon them to inflict,
award or inflict, award or impost any Pays, Penalty, etc. upon any the Kings
Subjects, etc, -- Add I do not remember that they did Act till by 13 Car. 2.
12. some deemed a branch thereof to be repealed by 13 Car. 2. 12.

But that 13 Car. 2. 12. repealing only a branch of a Stature made in 17 Car.
1. Qu^rz whether that can repeal 16 Car, 1. Possibly it might be a mistake, but
Quarz, Whether any but a Parliament can regulate or amend that mistake?

For, It is most certain, that all Acts of Parliament shall bear date from the
Beginning of every Parliament or from the beginning of the several Session of
Parliament, as it is resolved 3 H. 8. B. Parliament 86. in Fartridge Hobart in
the Case of Anne Wheeler, versus Bishop of Winchester.
and Croker's Case, Plowd. 79. And never did any Parliament or Session of
Parliament begin in 17 Car. 1. and therefore the 13 Car. 2. 12 seems to affect
the 16 Car. 1. no more than the 26 Car. 1. or any other Statute.

Does some ill fate attend our Ecclesiastical-Genius of Spiritual Courts, that
even the Statutes made in our favor, prove unsuccessful? What Is worse than ill
Luck?

I profess, I cannot but apprehend the just Judgment and Justice of God upon
me, (whatever evil Instruments he made his Red of) for my apparent Symony in
giving forty Shillings to be made a Priest, and eight pounds for Institution to
the Work, and then 20 s. for Induction; and then 30* shillings to have Licenses
to use the Priestly Office of preaching, etc. but they would not do it cheaper,
to the apparent breach of our Canonical-Oaths, and Oaths against-Simony; And
yet I paid all (only) as forced Fees.

And is it not also just with God to make us clash, and break us on^ upon
mother, and one by, with (and against) another, for such abominable breach of
Oaths, Extortions and Symonical oppressions in exacting money for Buryals,
Marriages, Lectures, Baptizings, etc. What? Sell holy Sacraments and holy
Offices! Fie for shame!

But, I repent, heartily, heartily, and thus publicly take shanie to my Self,
standing (thus) in a white-sheet for it* And if ever I do so any more, then,
let my Heavenly Father whip me again with the ^^d of the Wicked to my dying
day* But blessed be his Name, that letting me hereby see my Sin, I may probably
(...) Instrumental to convert See Arch^^* Parker, de Antiq. Eccles. Britan. p.
47. How. Austin. i^cited King Ethelbers to kill the Monks of Bangor, that were
not Conformists to his Romish Drivel and Ceremonies! bloody Monk! Anno 60^.
my Brethren from such horrid Symony, Avarice and dangerous Oaths, that so God
may avert his Judgments, and the Universal contempt of the Clergy, under which
we gr^an unpitied.

But, no work (at present*) however of these matters.

Whatsoever is not founded, neither upon Gods Law, nor the Law of England,
cannot long subsist, with what frail props soever vain man endeavors to Shore
it up: -- Stand clear there -- I Would wish you; As you love your selves, your
Families and Posterities, come not too near such a c^asi^ frame* stand where it
will.

For, what cannot stand must fall, That Is all.

(...) (...) and (...) are all (...) (...) and would it not be a kind of
Miracle, to see over the ^^^^s of (...) (...) (now so plenish't (...) --) many
Ages hence (I mean) a Paper (Pasted over the Gates thereof) Importing -- This
House is to be Let?

Is it not just, that they should for ever b(...) Neck and H^^^^, and ^^^ter'd
to ^^^ Posterity, that to the loss of their Honor as well as Honesty and
Gr(...) do must ^^^^^shly ^^^rle, and most c^^r^^shly snap at thos^ ^^^^^ble
^^ngers that would (...) (...) Cords?

Then, there let them lie, with their Posterities, bound down and crippl'd with
those bands, where(...) poor Bigots first were Priest-rid by Austin the Monk*


