AN APOLOGY FOR THE New Separation: In a LETTER to Dr. John Sharp, Archbishop
of YORK; OCCASIONED By his Farewell-Sermon, preached on the 28th of June, at
St. Giles's in the Fields.

MALACHI 11.7, 8, 9. The Priest's Lips should keep Knowledge, and they should
seek the Law at his Mouth; for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts.

But ye have departed out of the Way, ye have caused many to stumble at the
Law, ye have corrupted the Covenant of Levi, says the Lord of Hosts.

Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base before all the People,
according at ye have not kept my ways, but have been partial in the Law.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCXCI.

To the Gentlemen of the Vestry of St. Giles's in the Fields.
SIRS,
I Here present you with some Reflections upon the Archbishop of York's
Farewel-Sermon, which his Grace tells us he Published at your Request: They are
written in form of Letter to him; and as I present them to you with as much
Respect, and in as much Christian Charity, as he, I believe, presented the
Sermon; so I hope you will read them with as much Candor, and examine
impartially, without any bias to Persons or Causes, which is in the Right, and
whether the Things which you took upon his Grace's Authority, be so or no. I
must do him the Justice to acknowledge, That he is an eminent Person in his
Profession, as well as in that station which he now holds in the Church, and
that he deserves that Esteem and Veneration which you have for him: But then I
must tell you, That the Authority of no single Man, or number of Men, how
eminent or great soever, ought to signify any thing with Church of England
Men, against the Authority of the Church. I have seen her Articles and Homilies
in many of the London-Vestries; and if they be in yours, I desire you to make
them the Test of my Lord's Sermon, and this Answer to it, which I desire may be
approved, or rejected by you, as it happens to prove by that Test.

See, I pray you, Gentlemen, if you can find any thing in them to countenance
transferring Allegiance from a living and claiming Legal King, or daily Praying
for his destruction: See if you can find any thing in them that will justify
his Graces Exposition of 1 Timothy 11.1, 2. or of Submitting, or Praying for the
Powers in being, without distinction or regard to Titles, which he says, Is the
very Doctrine of the Church of England. Page 3.
If it be, you may surely easily find it; but if you cannot find it, or any
thing like it, then you may be sure it is not the the Doctrine of the Church,
though it may be the Doctrine Preached of late in the Churches, and then you
will have occasion to follow the Apostle's advice, which is, not to have the
Persons of Men in Admiration, and to remember what our Lord often inculcated to
his Disciples, to beware whom, and how they heard. There are some times in
which his advice is more needful than others; and this, I think, is such a
time, when our Churchmen are divided in their Practice, and about some
practical Points; and whether the greater or smaller number is in the Right,
you will never be able judge, though it concerns your Souls to judge aright,
unless you will hear what both say.

There are Men of equal Eminence and Learning on both sides, and if one side
can pretend the Advantage Numbers, the other can urge against it the interest
of saving, and getting more, to depretiate the Number and Authority of their
Examples, together with a multiform variety of most different Opinions, and
Principles among them; one of them complying in one sense, and upon one
Principle, and another upon another.

This Book of mine is a short and summary Apology for the little suffering
Number, against the Arguments and Accusations of the Archbishop, who is now at
the head of the other Party; and if it can prevail with you to look more
narrowly into the Controversy, in which you have engaged his Grace, I shall
think my self sufficiently recompensed for my little Pains in Writing of it;
and in Hopes that you, or some of you, who have most leisure and ingenuity,
will do so, I Subscribe in all Sincerity,

Gentlemen, Your most Faithful, and Humble Servant.

AN APOLOGY FOR THE New Separation.
MY LORD,
I Once had the Happiness to hear you preach an excellent Sermon in which you
spoke many excellent things that were true and just, with all that serious Air
and Authority that could become a sincere Preacher, I often had occasion since
to wish it had been put in Print; it was preached at St. Margaret's
Westminster, on the 30th of January was two years, before the Gentlemen of the
Convention, and remembering the excellent Discourse you then made, and pressed
upon the Consciences of the Conventioners, I had a great Desire and Curiosity
to read your late farewell Sermon, to see if you stood firm in these times of
Defection to your former Principles: But to be plain and serious with you, I
find you so altered, like many of your Brethren, from your self, that though
Dr. Sharp is still the same Person, yet I do not find that the Dead of Norwich
and the Archbishop are the same Man: For then, my Lord, you preached with great
appearance of Zeal and Sincerity against the resisting and deposing Doctrines;
for which you had the Honor to be censured by many of the House; but now in
the very Phrase and Language of those Authors who have taught the World those
damnable Doctrines, Page 30:
you tell us that we must be more concerned for our Country and Nation, than
the Interest of any single Man in it; A Saying certainly in the sense you must
needs mean it, fitter for a Bishop of the Romish than the English Church,
which, conformably to our Laws, and the eternal Reasons of them, teaches her
Children, That the Interest of the People is wrapped up with the Safety and
Interest of the Prince, and that they can never be happy without him. This our
Ancestors have often felt, and confessed upon Experience, particularly Mr.
Pryn, in his Preface to Cotton's Abridgment, to whose Words I refer you: But
you, my Lord, contrary to all Law, Reason, and Experience, have taught the
People in this Sermon to set up a separate and distinct Interest against that
of the Prince, and by consequence to resist or depose him, to turn or keep him
out of his Kingdom, be he who he will, even the present, as well as any of our
former Kings.

You cannot but know that there are a party of Men among us, who are more
concerned for another Interest than the Interest of the King, I mean the Comman
wealthsmen, and they thinking that Interest; which I assure you is a growing
Interest, the Interest of their Country; they may upon your Principles do as
much for his Majesty as the Pretenders of Public Good in former Ages have done
by some of his Royal Ancestors, if they can but once persuade the People, who
are easily deceived, or a considerable number of them, that it is not for the
Interest of the Nation that he should longer reign over them. The least the
People so persuaded would probaly say of their Majesty's in a time of general
defection would be in the Words of Dr. Sherlock, Let them go, if they cannot
defend-themselves; and when they were gone, (which all their faithful Subjects
pray God to forbid,) they would think it their Duty to shut the door after
them; for you, and such as you, would presently exhort them to study to be
quiet, and do their own business; and to be more concerned for their Country
and Nation, than [to break the Peace of] for the Interest of any single Man, or
Woman in it, as their Majesty's would then be styled. Nay, this great Concern
of yours for our Country and Nation, in opposition to the Interest of the
Prince, will justify any thing as well as being quiet or sitting still. It
exposes him to Ehud's Dagger, as well as Gideon's Sword, to Assassins and
Bravoes, as well as to Rebels, Deposers, and High Courts of Justice, for a
Prince in your Arithmetic is but a single Man, and if his Safety and Interest
is not in Reality or Opinion consistent with that of the People, they may
dispatch or depose him any way, it matters not how, a Ravilliac or a Clement
may do the Work with a Steletto, when a League or Association cannot do it.
Princes at this rate can be no longer safe than they continue in the good
opinion of the People, Page 29.
and are looked upon to be good Men, and encouragers of true Religion. As long
as the Case is so, you say, they are not only to be submitted to, bus to be
acknowledged as Blessings: But by the Rule of Contraries, If they come to be,
or, which is all one, happen to be thought bad Men by the People, and
Encouragers of false Religion, as Henry the 4th of France, and Charles the 1st
of England were, then they are no longer to be acknowledged as Blessings, but
to be resisted, deposed or murdered as Curses, and no Man ought to be
concerned at it, but to be quiet, and let the Deliverers of the People do
their Word their own way; for as you intimate the King is but a single Man, and
the Interest of the Country which others call the Public Good, is to be
preferred without Exception before the Interest, i. e. before the Welfare and
safety of any Particular Man.

I profess, my Lord, I cannot but wonder that any Government should prefer Men
that turn Subjects to it upon such loose and dangerous Principles, as are
equally destructive of all Governments, and can secure none: For this Doctrine
upon which your Exhortation is founded; undermines Senates, as well as Kings;
for as a King, my Lord, is with you but a single Man; so by the same figure in
Politics, Senates are but a few single Men met together, and so the People in
parity of Reason ought at all times to be more concerned for their Country
than a sew single Men. Nay, my Lord, by this Doctrine the minor Part, in a pure
Democracy, can never want a plausible pretense of resisting the major, in whose
Determinations they ought to acquiesce; for though they are the minor, they may
always pretend to be a sounder Part, that are more concerned for their Country
than for the Interest of any number of Men, though never so great; and so at
this rate there can be no Peace in any Nation or Government, but eternal
Opposition without a powerful standing Army, which is an uncertain state of
Peace; a Peace as long as it endures attended with Oppression; Poverty, and
Slavery, and not much better for the People than a State of War. Nay, my Lord,
you will find that this Principle of yours will ruin Bishops as well as Kings;
for when Sir George Mackenzy, and others of the Episcopal Party, defended the
Bishops of Scotland in the Convention of that Kingdom, What a do, said a
Presbyterian Lord, is here about the Bishops, I think we ought to be more
concerned for our Country than the Interest of Twelve Man.

It was of such Latitude as this of yours, and such Latitudinarians as you are,
that Dr. Sherlock complained, not long before he had taken the Oaths, had
ruined both the Church and State. He then saw how such loose Doctrines as yours
made them both Ohnoxious to an everlasting rotation of Turns and Revolutions,
and was not sparing in his Reflections and Invectives upon one whom he thought
the Arth-Latitudinarian; but as Dr. Collins said, at Cambridge -- Then was
then, but now is now; for since that he has left the narrow for the wide and
easy Way, or it I may compare Principles, as you do Religion to Clothes, Page
14.
he has changed his old straight uneasy Fashion, for the never easy Mode; he
has cast off the slavish Principles of strict and inflexible Loyalty to his
Prince, his Soul is no longer fettered with them, but is as free as the happy
Liberty of Obeying and Regnant Powers can make him. It matters not with you or
him, my Lord, what the King be, lawful or unlawful, real or titular, rightful
or wrongful, provided he be in Possession of the Throne. Thus let Twenty Kings
supplant one another, and you can transfer you: Allegiance to the later, though
you have recognized and sworn Allegiance never so solemnly to the former, and
declared that (...) Power can absolve you from that Oath, nay though you have
made a vow to God of Obedience to him, and he actually claims his Right, and
prosecutes his Claim, and charges his Subject, to keep their Allegiance entire
for him; yet notwithstanding all this you can turn Subjects to him that usurps
his Throne, though he got it and keep it never so unjustly. like the
Gentleman's Spaniel, who forsook his Master, and followed the Thief, after he
had knocked him down and got upon his Horse.

Thus with you, and such as you, my Lord, whoever can mount Bucephalus will be
your Alexander, whoever can get into the Throne shall certainly be your Caesar;
if God should suffer a Cromwell to destroy their Majesty's, and seize the
Crown, you would own him and be Subject to him, and pray publicly for him in
the Regal Style, because St. Paul has said, That every Soul must be subject,
Page 28.
and has bad us put up Prayers, and Supplications, and Intercessions for all
Men, especially for Kings, and all that are in Authority, without any
distinction or restriction what Kings, or what Persons in Authority we are to
pray for, and what not:

From these Words, my Lord, I presume to conjecture upon what Principles you
took the Oath; for being asked in Company some time since why you did not write
a Book to persuade men to take the New Oath, you replied to this effect, That
you believed you could write Satisfactorily upon the Subject; but you were
afraid the Government would not like your Reasons; and in truth, my Lord, you
had reason for what you said; for no Government can like this time-serving and
precarious Principle of swearing Allegiance unto Princes. Indeed a distressed
Government may connive at it in a time of Exigence, but it can never approve
it; it may be content with it upon Force, when it can have Allegiance paid upon
no better terms; but when it grows strong enough it will despise such beggarly
Elements of Subjection, being the Anthers of then, to condign Punishment, and
order their Books to be burnt by the hand of the Common Hangman.

For my own part I am not afraid to tell your Grace, that I hope to see such
Bishop and Priests become Base and Contemptible, in the Eyes Loath of King and
People, that expound St. Paul as you and Dr. Sherlock have done, contrary to
the Rules of moral Equity and Justice, and advance Allegiance to the Government
upon a Principle that is destructive to it, and the true and lasting Peace of
the Kingdom in which our Happiness does consist. No Divines of the Church of
England but you and Dr. Sherlock, and a few more since the Revolution, ever so
expounded Romans 13.1. and 1 Timothy 11.1, 2. and I have so good Opinion of the
Constancy of our Clergy to their Principles, that I verily believe were your
Exposition proposed to the Convocation, they would condemn it as contrary to
right Reason, and the moral Duties of Religion, acording to which all the
general and unlimitted Precepts in the Gospel concerning relative Duties, ought
to be limited and understood. Does not Nature it self, at first hearing, teach
us that the Apostle by higher Powers and Kings, in those two places, meant
rightful higher Powers and Kings? And will not you your self grant, that in
other places where he, or other Apostles exhorts, Children to obey their
Parents, Wives to obey their Husbands, Servants their Masters, and the People
their Pastors. that he me us only such as are truly and rightfully so, though
according to you own Observation, He makes no restriction, or distinction what
Father, Husbands, Masters and Pastors, are to be obeyed, and what not? But you
imply that the reason of this Exhortation to pray for Kings is general; and are
not the Reasons as general upon which he exhorts us to perform our relative
Duties of our other Superiors, as has been observed in the several learned
Answers to Dr Sherlock? to which I humbly refer your Grace for your better
information in the following Order, as I have read them with great Delight and
Satisfaction: The Title of an Vjurper after a through Settelement examined, p.
39 and forwards. The Duty of Alleg ance settled upon its true Grounds according
to Scripture and Reason, Chap. 3. Dr. Sherlock 's Case of Allegiance
considered, Sect. 3. The Examination of the Arguments drawn from Scripture and
Reason, in Dr. Sherlock's Case of Allegiance; in the Examination of Sect. 4.
Page 28

I have taken upon me to direct your Grace to these particular places, in hopes
that you will read them, and impartially examine the Reason of these learned
Anthours against Dr. Sherlock's way of Expounding the Apostle, Romans 13.1. and
by consequence against your own, who after this manner have expounded the
Apostle's Precept of Praying for Kings, in a Sense as unlimitted, as he has
done the other of Subjection to them; viz. of Praying for Kings without
distinction, provided they are in Possession of the Throne.

These Expositions, my Lord, as some Men think, reflect upon their Majesty's
and the Acts of Recognition; and if you have no more to say to justify your
Praying for them, Exaltabunt Jacebei, the Adversaries, I fear, will have
occasion to triumph.

My Lord, I could name some great Men among you, who when they were directed to
read some of their Books, replied that they were satisfied, and desired not to
be unsettled, but I expect better things from a Person of your Candor and
Ingenuity: Nay, my Lord, I think you are bound in Honor and Conscience, to
examine your Adversaries Reasons against the unlimitted Sense of the Apostle's
Exhortations, for fear you should happen to be in the wrong, and continue to
delude the People by an Exposition of his Words apparently contrary to the
dictates of natural Reason, and by consequence to the meaning of that holy
Spirit by which the Apostle wrote.

You cannot but know that this unlimitted Sense, in which you expounded the
Apostle, is of ill Fame, and has been generally disapproved by the learned
Divines of our Church; it was insisted on it the times of the late Usurpation
by Phanatical time-serving Writers, but rejected with disdain by the Martyrs
and Confessors of Loyalty among the Suffering Clergymen, as it now is by
Jacobeans. It was so expounded by Mr. Jenkins, who in the late Usurpation
argued for Subjection, as Dr. Sherlock does now, and was ever after Infamous
for it, and exposed without Mercy for it by your old Acquaintance Dr. Grove,
now Bishop of Chichester, as you may see in the Margent. Answer to Mr.
Jenkins's Farewell Sermon, p. 15. It is a most excellent Presertative against
Tower Hill. But what is this famed Position of the Doctor's? As far as I can
learn it was laid down in these very Words, or to this purpose, Regimen
Politicum fundatur in Provident a D^i Extraordinaria. This Mr. Jenkins calls
his asserting Providential Disposal, though one might conjecture what this
means, yet it had not been so clear without the Comment, which he has made upon
it in the beginning of his humble Petition to the Supreme Authority, the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England; in short it is this: That whoever
they be that get the Power into their hands, the Providence of God evidently
appears in removing others, and investing them with the Government, And he
looks upon it as his Duty to yield to this Authority all active and cheerful
Obedience, even for Conscience sake.

This is a fine pleable Principle as a Man can wish, 'twill lap about your
Finger like Barbary Gold. Thus when King Charles the First, of blessed Memory,
had the Power in his hands, this was an Extraordinary Providence, and the Right
of Government was in him: But stay, it may be the Dector had not studied the
point so soon. but to be sure when the Parliament got the better, that was an
Extraordinary Providence ideed, and then indeed without doubt they were the
Supreme Authority, as this Petitioner styles them; and so was Oliver Cromwell,
and so was Richard, and so was the Rump, and so was the Committee of Safety,
and so was I know not who, and so round until his Majesty's most happy
Restoration; and then because there was an Extraordinary Providence in that,
so is he too, and so Mr. Jenkins is as good a Subject as can be desired, and so
he had been whoever had come. And thus if the Turk should happen to overrun
the Kingdom of Poland, and deliver the People from Popish Tyranny, this were an
Extraordinary Providence, and the Grand Seignior would presently became the
lawful Sovereign of that Realm, and that (which the proud Mohammedan little
thinks) by virtue of a Position made at Cambridge above Twenty Years ago.

I have considered it as well as I am able, and cannot make the Doctor's
Providentia Extraordinaria to signify any more in effect, than what they call
Mr. Hobbs's Potentia Irresistibilis, and then the Doctor, and he, and our
Author, have been the only Three, for ought I know, that have perfectly agreed
in this uncouth, and 'till of late unheard of Point, that unsettles the
Foundations of the Earth, and gives a liberty to every bold- Usurper that
invades the Crown, at least legimates his Claim, if he can be but Successful
enough to place it on his own Head.

But Mr. Jenkins must know, that though this assertion be a good Expedient to
secure ones Neck under an illegal and tyrannical Power, yet it never can make
him a faithful Subject to his natural and lawful Prince; or it robs him of
Title, which he has by Inheritance, and justifies every thing by Event only.
It adds Affliction to the Misery of unfortunate Kings, and flatters the
prosperous Traitor, as if he were the Darling of Heaven.




Nay, you cannot but be conscious to your self, that two Years ago you were not
of opinion, at least you were not fully persuaded, that the Text allowed us to
pray in behalf of a King de Facto against the King de Jure, or in behalf of a
King in Possession against the legal King, as you and Dr. Sherlock still
acknowledge King James to be, though he is out of Possession; or, else why did
you at his House, in the Temple, express so much dislike and dissatisfaction at
the Prayers in the Office of the first general Fast: But the World is since
well mended with you, and what was matter of Difficulty to you then is no: so
now; for since that time you have better Studied the great Apostle at
Canterbury than you did at Norwich, and plainly discovered that he is, and
always was for the Uppermost, and directs us to pay our Allegiance and
Devotion, without enquiring into Titles, to the King in the Throne.

I wish for the Honor of our Religion, and the better Settlement of the
Nation, that these Notions had still remained among those without, and not
obtained admission within the pale of the Church, more especially I wish, for
the Honor of the holy Order, that they had never been taught in Pulpits, at
least by our Bishops and Dignified Churchmen, who are the more conspicuous
Lights, and upon whom the Reputation of the Clergy depends. Certainly, my Lord,
such insecure Doctrines to Princes, when once they come to understand them,
cannot be very acceptable to them, nor can they much value such Protean
Subjects, as will how the Knee to them to day, and do the same to their
greatest Enemies to morrow, if they can get into their Thrones I doubt not but
their Majesty's, when they have leisure to reflect, will be sensible how much
such Men impose upon them, and how little Security they have in their
Allegiance, though they pretend to transfer it all unto them, because it is a
temporary and a moveable Allegiance, which they can transfer in infinitum, and
vear backwards and forwards, or come about to every point of the Compass, like
the Weather-cocks upon their Church steeples, as the Wind shall blow. My Lord,
one Jacobite, could he turn to their Majesty's upon his own Principles, would
be worth an hundred such Subjects as you and Dr. Sherlock; and whenever
Providence shall remove the Obstacles which lie in the way of their Allegiance
to them, they will have reason to value them as so many Jewels of their Crown.

My Lord, I cannot deny but that I like the Conversation of the Men, cause they
are Men of Conscience, and Honor, and discourse, and write like Scholars and
Christians, though Dr. Sherlock calls then little Writers; this makes me keep
Company with them, and so I do with some Men of Parts among the Republicans,
and so I would do with Aristotle, Plato, and Socrates, were they alive, and see
how they liked your Principle of tying Allegiance to actual Administration. I
will not tell you what they say of you at Richards, for I am afraid it might
ruffle your smooth Temper, to let you know how unmercifully those Gentlemen
tear your Rocket without any regard to your venerable Character, but the
Jacobites are more respectful to it upon Principle; and I will spend the rest
of my Time and Paper in letting you know what they reply to every thing you
have said against them, from the 25th Page to the end of your Sermon, in which
you have exposed them as on a Stage, first to your Parish, and then to the
whole Kingdom.

They observe then, my Lord, Page 26.
that you might have exhorted your People to study Peace and Unity, and
endeavor in their several Stations to promote the public Tranquillity,
without pointing at them as disturbers of it; and they say they have reason to
think that you have done it, with a design to provoke both the Government and
People against them, and to that end they suspect it is that you represent them
as a Faction, more especially as a Faction in Religion, Page 29.
and tell the World they ground their Faction on a State-point, or, as you
afterward explain your self, upon a mere State point. This, my Lord, is the
great Charge you draw up against them; and they pretend that it is none of the
things of your Text, as being neither True, Honest, nor Just; and they wonder
they could be so falsely charged by a learned Man, who can distinguish very
well, though common Readers and Hearers cannot, betwixt a State-point, and a
mere point of State. These two things they say are very different, though you
fallaciously confound them together, and therefore they distinguish betwixt a
State-point, which is purely such, and a State-point which happens also to be a
point of Morality or practical Religion, and in its Nature affects the
Consciences of Men. As for Example -- The Spanish Match, say they, in the time
of James the First, was a State point, i.e. a mere State-point, which, had it
been effected, could not have obliged any Man in Conscience (though the Clergy
preached against it) to refuse Communion with the Church, or Subjection to the
State. The Vote of Non-addressing was also a State-point; but then say they,
not a mere State-point, but such an one as was withal a matter of Morality,
which many of the Members thought in their Consciences a great breach of their
Duty to concur with, and therefore left the House.

Wherefore, my Lord, they appeal to you, and the whole Casuistical World, if a
Safe point, and more particularly a point of Government or Policy, may not
become a Case of Conscience in a Kingdom, as well as in a Family, College, or
Diocese; and whether Questions about Right and Wrong, Lawful and Unlawful, Just
and Unjust, may not happen to arise in a Point, or Act of State, as well as in
other practical Points?

Was not the Engagement a State-point in those times? And did not the
Presbyterians make a Case of Conscience of it, and chose many of them to suffer
rather than to take it, because they thought the matter of it Sinful? Was it
not a State-point with the Loyal Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy, whether they
should turn Liege-subject, to Oliver? And yet because it was not a mere
State-point, but such an one as touched their Consciences, they chose to be
sequestered rather than sin in closing with the Usurpers, and transfer their
Allegiance from the King to whom they thought it due: The Clergy also then set
up separate Meetings from the Churches, and Private Worship in opposition to
the Public, in many places of the Kingdom, as Dr. Wild and Dr. Gunning in
London, and Dr. Fell in Oxon; for then they thought it was not the Place, or
the Numbers, but the Cause that made the Separation a Schism; and the
Jacobites in like manner think (how truly I shall not now dispute) that they
have just Cause of Separation given them, and that therefore their Separation
is no Schism. The New Oath of Allegiance which you intimate to be a mere
State-point, they think withal to be a great Point of Religion, in which the
Interests of Truth, Justice, and moral Honesty are concerned, and they verily
believe they cannot take it without breaking three or four of the Commandments,
which they think to be as sacred in themselves, and as dear to God that made
them, as any Articles in the Creed: For the same Reason they profess they
cannot join in the Prayers as they stand altered, nor with the additional
Prayers; and to speak my own Judgment, I think no Party of Men ever made a more
plausible Apology or Defense for themselves, than is made for them in a Book
called Christian Prudence, to which I refer your Grace, and I dare say you will
not think your Pains ill spent in reading of it, if you please to peruse it
with a free and unprejudicate Mind.

But, my Lord, besides that which you call a State-point, there is also a
Church-point, of which you take no notice, though it be another known Cause of
their Separation, and that is the putting of New Bishops into the Thrones of
the Old ones, whose Deprivation they pretend to be null and unjust, and give
such Reasons for it, as the tender Regard I have for the Government, and these
Erastian Times will not suffer me to recite. I have urged the Authority of the
Baroccian Manuscript against them; but to that they answer many ways very well,
and, which troubles me not a little, they assure from their Friends at Oxford,
that Mr. Hody has not printed the whole Manuscript, but omitted a Collection
of Canons, which immediately follows where he left off, written in the same
Hand, which shows that the Author is to be understood of Synodical
Deprivations; and if this be so indeed, as I fear it is, then I must say, that
Mr. Hody has not strictly kept his Jam ad alia, Lector, procedas; at priusquam
procedas, Votorum quorundam mihi testis esto; and olim, si unquam violavero,
Monitor; Vo torum quorundam eruditis Viris, proh dolor! hucusque ignotorum; sed
quae ego pertetuo a primis literis, ut facio, feci ex Cord: Faxit Numen,
Vt vel aeterno ego silentio inter non scribentes deliteseam,
Vel semper, ut virum ingenuum, liberalis ac generosae Educationis,
Veraeque Philosopiae studi^sum decet, scribam:
Verita^is unicae Indagator,
Absique omni Styli Acerbitate,
Mitis, urbanus, candidus,
Ad id quod indecens est adeo non pronus, ut nec movendus,
Nugarum demque Contemptor.
I do not know whether Ger. Joh. and Isaac Vossius, Uther and Dodwell, ever
made such a Vow; but this I dare say, if they had printed this (...)
Manuscript, they would have had so much Ingenuity as to have printed the whole,
at least to have given Reasons to the World why they did not.




Thus, my Lord, you see that the Noncompliance and Separation of our New
Nonconformists is not grounded upon a mere State point; so neither merely upon
a Point of State, and they think they have R^^s^n to expect satisfaction from
your Grace, not only for wrong assigning one Cause of their Separation, but
also for not assigning both. I confess their Opinion is dreadful in its
consequence, as being like to involve all the Nation except themselves in
Schism, and I have been so free as to tell them of it, and also prayed them to
consider what an Odium they will bring upon themselves by it; but to that they
say, they cannot hinder the Consequences of things, and wished me to conside,
That as a Nation, or Province, may fall into Indolatry, Rebellion, or
Sacrilege, so also into Schism, and that our Nation fell into the first of
those Sins in the time of Queen Mary, into the second and third in the time of
the Rump and Cron^well, and if they now charge it with the fourth Sin, it is no
more than what your Grace, and your complying Brethren do for Scotland, and the
same Apology they think will serve for both, though of the two they acknowledge
the Scottish to be the more grievous Schism.

Thus much, my Lord, I have said by way of Enquiry into the Grounds of the
Separation of the Jacobites, to acquit them from the Charge of Faction and
Schism, I now come to your Reflections, which they say are as unjust as your
Charge, and as groundless and impertinent as it. You represent them in p. 26.
as Men that have different Notions about Politics, and framers of Hypotheses
about Government. To which they reply, That if you mean that their Notions of
Politics are different from yours, that they confess to be true; but if you
mean that their Notions about Politics are different from the true English
Polity, or ancient Government of this Kingdom, or that they frame any other
Hypothesis about it, than what the Law has framed; this they deny, and desire
all the World to take notice, That they are by Principle so far from making
Hypotheses against the Government of England, or Alterations in it, that they
suffer both as Christians and Englishmen for their strict adherence to it, and
that you are the Men that have different Notions of Politics, from the
National Polity or Constitution, and that you have actually framed six or seven
Hypotheses about Government, as different from one another as from the Law it
self.

For the truth of this they appeal to your own Writings, out of which they
intend to collect such notorious Schemes of State-Notions, and Doctrines of
Politics, that they that dwell on the Earth shall wonder at them, as at the
Beast in the Revelations, when they behold them. One of them, as I am told,
has been at the pains to compare Dr. Sherlock's Notions about Politics with
those of Julian Johnson's, and can make it appear from that Collation, that
Julian is much the better Churchman, and the more Orthodox Apostate of the
two. In short, my Lord, in answer to this Reflection upon them, as Coiners of
Nations about Politics, they stick not to say, that you are the Statists and
Polincians, who with your humane Policies have corrupted your Religion, defiled
the Priesthood, dishonored the Church, scandalized her Friends, and caused her
Enemies to triumph.

In the next Paragraph you say, That it is very grievous for those that promote
a Separation, Page 27.
who have always declared themselves Friends to the Church, and Enemies to
Schism. To this Reflection they reply, That they are still as much Friends of
the Church, and Enemies of Schism, as ever; but then by the Church they
understand the True Old Church of England, with all her venerable Doctrines of
Faith, Justice, and moral Honesty, and all her strict Decrees against the
resisting, deposing, and forferting Doctrines; the Church of England with all
her plain Primitive Doctrines of Christian Honesty and Simplicity, against
Equivocations and Mental Reservations; the Church that always abhorred Treason
and Perjury, as well as Idolatry; that never allowed her Children to do any
moral Evil for a good End, or with a good Intention: In a word, the Church that
equally condemus both the Parts of Popery, that which teaches us to be false to
Men, as well as that which is injurious to God; that which pollutes our Morals,
as well as that which pollutes our Faith and Worship. This pure Virgin Church,
which they think is now driven once more into the Wilderness, they say is the
Church which they adhere to, and to which they think you ought to have adhered
with them, and that you have separated from her, and them, and not they from
you: For they say, they are just where they were when you were last with them,
and have not budged a Foot since from that Church, and that you cannot say they
have broken from you, unless you will affirm that when a Ship breaks from the
Shore where she lay at Anchor, the Shore removes from her, and not she from the
Shore.

And then as to the next Reflection, of being distasted at the established
Worship, for which they were zealous before, they say they are as zealous for
it as ever, as far as the Matter of the Prayers is the same; but the Matter of
some of the old Prayers they say is changed, and this Matter, with that of all
the New ones, being the subject Matter of the New Oath of Allegiance, they have
the same difficulty of Conscience upon them, as to saying of these, as taking
of those: Wherefore, in Answer to your fallacious Question about the Liturgy
and Prayers, they desire to know if you put the Question of the whole Liturgy,
and all the Prayers in it, or not: If not, then the Question is not to your
purpose; but if you indeed mean the whole Liturgy, and all the Prayers in it,
as you would be understood, then, they say, they must tell you that the Liturgy
and Prayers are not the same they were, and by consequence, that the
Proposition implied in your Question is false: For as Changing the Name of God
for the Virgin Mary, in the invocatory part of any Collect in the Liturgy,
would change the Object of Worship, and make it not as it was, a Prayer to God,
but to the Virgin; so changing the Name of a Man for that of his Enemy, in the
petitionary part of any Collect, makes it quite another Prayer, not for the Man
as it was before the Change of Names, but for his Enemy; and by consequence,
alteration of Names alters the Matter and Intention of the Prayer, and makes it
as different from it self, as the two Men and their Interests happen to be.
They suppose, that if a Man should raze the Names out of a Petition to their
Majesty's, and put the French King's Name in their place, that it would no
longer be a Petition to them, but to their mortal Enemy; and therefore in Reply
to the next Question which follows about the same Liturgy, they say, this
change of Names has changed the Prayers in the Liturgy, and that this change
disgusts their Consciences, and helps to drive them from your Churches, being
one cause of their Separation from the Public, and but one; for as I just now
showed your Grace, there was another, of which you were pleased to take no
notice.

Ay, but you say, they proceed so far as to declare open War, and set up
separate Congregations in opposition to the public. To this they say, for the
foresaid Reasons, That they did not begin this spiritual War, which on their
side is purely Defensive, because they are driven from the Public, and that
the same Reasons that will justify their Separation from it, will also
justify setting up separate Meetings in opposition to it, in which they think
the pure Church of England, with her pure Worship, may be seen and heard like
the Church of Jerusalem, in the first persecution of Christianity, in the upper
rooms. And in reply to the great Emphasis, which, to supply the want of
Argument, you put upon Separating from the Public, and Setting up
Congregations in opposition to the Public, they pray you to consider, That the
Multitude, or great Majority which usually makes the Public, is often in the
wrong. You will not deny but the Multitude or Public are now the Schismatics
in Scotland; they were so under the Donatist Bishops in Africa; they were so in
England under the Popish Marian Bishops; they were so under Aaron in the
business of the Calf; they were so in Israel under Ahab and the Idolatrous
Priests; and, lastly, they were so under the Arian Emperors and Bishops,
throughout the whole Roman Empire. In short, my Lord, they say when the Public
is in the right, and gives no just cause of separating from it, that then it is
a great Sin, to set up private Meetings against it; but when it is in the
wrong, and gives just cause of separating, it then becomes innocent, and a Duty
to do so, though the Public be in Possession of all the Churches, as it
usually is, when Safety, Honor, and Riches attend the erring side.

I hope by this time, my Lord, you understand what their Meaning is in Setting
up separate Congregations; for it is the Cause, and not the local Churches and
Revenues that make, say they, a true Church; and therefore, in Answer to your
Question, they pray your Grace to consider, that Men that have been branders of
Schism, may think it not only innocent, but their Duty to separate from the
Public, or public Worship, without changing their Principles. Nay, sometimes
their Principles, unless they can change them, will oblige them to do so,
though they do not think Schism can change its Nature; and this they think is
their own Case; and therefore they challenge you, and the whole Regnant Church
of England, with all the advantage if its Churches and Revenues, but more
particularly the Intruders, as they do not stick to call them, and all their
Electors and Consecrators, to prove that their Separation is a Schism. All your
Arguments about it are couched in a few trifling Questions, of which this that
follows is a terrible one, Have we not the sam: Government in Church and State
that we formerly had? And they appeal to your Grace's Conscience, upon second
Thoughts, and as you expect to be called to Account for the Sincerity of your
Ansiver at the dreadful Tribunal of God, if we have the same Government we
formerly had. Do you know of no Changes it has undergone, which may reasonably
aflect the Mind of every true Englishman, as well as the Conscience of a good
Subject? Was there no substantial Reason for throwing the Word rightful out of
the New Oath of Allegiance? Or for the Declaration that so many made for the
ease of their Consciences at the taking of it? And do not many among you still
complain in private of the Alterations that the Revolution has made in the
Government, and wish them unmade again. You cannot but know, they say, that
there are many Grumbletonians, and half Penitents among you; and therefore they
wonder with what Confidence you could put this Question about the Government,
as well as that about the Prayers.

But they say your Question is fallacious, because it is not to be put about
the Government but about the Governors, and they think you will not say, that
they are the same. They also make some distinctions about Things and Titles,
which I shall not here recite, because, I believe, your Grace has heard of
them, and knows them to be very material in Controversies of Allegiance, of
which Praying for the King, next to Fighting for him, is a principal part; and
therefore they say that in contests about Crowns in Christian Kingdoms, the
Subjects at the peril of their Souls are bound to consider for which of the
contesting Princes it is their Duty to pray, as well as for which it is to
fight.

The next Question to this, say they, is as little to the purpose, wherein you
ask, Have we not the same Articles and Doctrines of Religion publicly owned,
and professed, and taught, without the least alteration? To this they Answer,
That there are many Doctrines relating to the Controvertie between you and
them, taught, licensed, and allowed, which have been condemned by your
Predecessors of the Church of England in the late Usurparion, and formerly, and
of late censured by the famous University of Oxford, and which they verily
believe a free Convocation would yet censure, as contrary to the Doctrine of
the Church of England; such as these are, the Resisting, the Deposing, the
Forfeiting Doctrines, which are to be seen in your licensed Tracts. The
Doctrine in behalf of bare Possession, that it gives a Right to a Crown, to
which another King has a legal Title, that will justify a recuperative War;
the Doctrine of Providence, and actual Administration, the Doctrine which makes
War God's Court, and Victory his Sentence lately asserted by the Bishop of St.
Asaph. The Doctrine of laying aside Kings for Mocal Incapacity, and another
fine Doctrine, that Force from what Cause soever will disengage Subjects from
their Oaths of Allegiance, and justify their entering into contrary
Obligations; and they appeal to your Grace's Conscience, if these Doctrines,
not to mention others, which used to be so much branded and decryed by our
Divines in Popish and Presbyterian Writers, be Articles of our Religion, or
Doctrines of the Church of England -- and the Preaching and Printing these
Doctrines with Allowance, not mentioning the Preferments Men have for Teaching
of them, is an Argument, they say, that the Articles and Doctrines you speak of
are not owned, but disowned, not professed but suppressed; and that they are
not taught so publicly as formerly, because they are not pleasing, and some
Men you know do not love to teach displeasing Things, though they be true,
lovely, honest, and just.

But say you again, What Government is there in the World will not meet with
such Subjects that are not satisfied with it, and if that disaffection be a
just Reason to break Communion with the Established Church, what Ligaments have
we to tie Christians together? Here they say, my Lord, you couch a Fallacy,
which it did not become your Grace to make for the dissatisfaction of Subjects,
or rather, if you please, of the People against any Government, is, they say,
of two sorts, one upon the account of want of a good Title in the Governors,
and another upon the account of want of good Administration, and with respect
to the later, they acknowledge, there are very few Governments, which have not
in some measure dissatisfied their Subjects, but this sort of dissatisfaction,
they say, is very consistent with Church Communion under any Government, though
the Churchmen should happen to favor the Maleadministration, as sometimes
they chance to do.

But then with respect to the former sort of dissatisfaction, which is upon a
moral Account, they say, it becomes a just Reason to break off Communion with
the Church, when an acknowledgment of Right in wrongful Governors, at whom
they are so dissatisfied, is made a condition, or part of the Communion in the
Prayers, and Sacraments of the Church, in the partaking of which Communion does
consift: In this case they say the change of Names in the Prayers, as to the
use of them, affects the Consciences of People, as much as the change of them
in the Oath of Allegiance; and therefore for the People to join in them, would
not be to hold the unity of the Spirit, but to make themselves Parties to that
which they think an unrighteous Usurpation, which would be a great Sin.

But you tell us again, That great Revolutions have happened in all Ages and
Countries, and that you believe it will not easily be found, that ever any
Christians separated from the Church upon the account of them. Here, my Lord,
they distinguish again, and say, that Revolutions of Government are also of two
sorts; one in which the new Governors happen to acquire a clear and undoubted
Title to the Government, and the other when they acquire the Government without
a clear and undoubted Title, which happens when another claims it by a clearer
Title, and prosecutes his Claim. As to the first sort of Revolutions they
acknowledged with your Grace, that never any Christians did, or ought to
separate from the Church upon the account of them: But as to the second they
assert, that they commence just. Causes, as of Non-subjection, so of
Separation, when owning the Right of the new Governors against the better
Title, becomes not only a Condition to the Clergy of exercising their Ministry,
but also a part both in Prayers and Sacraments of the daily Offices of the
Church.

This, my Lord, is their Opinion; and had this ever been the Case of the
Primitive Christians, as you wrongfully suggest it was, they doubt not but
their Practice would have been answerable thereunto: For the Primitive
Christians. say they, were Christians all over, who served God faithfully in
the most difficult, as well as most easy parts of Religion; they were as
zealous for the practical as the speculative Doctrines of Christianity, and
stood up as much for probity of Life, as purity of Faith, and Worship. In a
word, they were as Righteous toward their Kings as toward God, and would have
suffered as much for the Third, Fifth, Sixth, and Eighth Commandments, as for
the First or Second, or any Doctrine of the Creed.

I have now, my Lord, repeated all the Answers which I have heard your
Adversaries make to your Querres, and I must needs beg so much favor from you,
as to consider me as the bare recite of them; for the sufficiency of which, it
is their part to undertake and not mine. But if they chance to prove sufficient
Answers, to say no more of them, then to espouse the Party of those Men, will
not, as you tell your Parishoners, be to espouse a Faction, or a Communion
which is not the Communion of the Church.

But you tell them how uneasy soever some of them may be in joining with the
[altered and additiona] Prayers [then it seems some are uneasy at the Prayers,
and what is the reason of that that? but] they will be ten times more uneasy
in separating from you; which may be true, say they, with respect to outward
ease, but not to the ease that is within And truly, my Lord, they themselves
are a sensible Example of what. they say, for you may read perfect Contentment
in their looks, and perceive by conversing with them, that they enjoy their
Deprivations more than ever they enjoyed the Possessions of which they are
deprived. Oh! my Lord, had you seen Him of Palsgrave-Court. after his
Extrution, you would have seen him look more Cheerful, and Great, and Venerable
than ever; and I seriously profess to you, I had rather have his inward Peace
and Satisfaction, than his Throne with all its Revenues, and be in his
Condition rather than that of any arrogant intruding Politician, who can scoff
at him now, to whom he would have formerly cringed, and from whom, before the
Revolution, he would have counted a smile a great favor; I wish the time may
come, when both the insulting Scoffers may repent of it, least another time
should come upon them like travel a Woman, when they shall say in anguish of
Spirit -- O let me die the Death of That righteous Man, and let my latter end
be like his.

Fathermore you tell your Parishoners of the Heat and Turbulency, the Passion
and Peevishness, the bitter Zeal and Incharitableness, that the being of a
Party does naturally engage Men in. This, my Lord, they acknowledge to be true
in all Church and State Divisions, especially with respect to them that are
engaged on the wrong Side. It is not my undertaking now to determine in this
Division of our Churchmen which Side is in the right; but this I can say, by
experience from their Conversation, that those who have separated from the
Public, have for the kind as few, and for the degree as little of those
troublesome Passions, as any sort of Men in the World: I appeal to your worthy
Successor, in St. Giles's-Parish, if one of the new Bishops was not in a very
disturbed, and uneasy paroxism of Spirit about accepting his Bishopric, and
whether in a great heat of Passion he was not ready to go to her Majesty, like
Dr. B. to desire to be excused. None of the deprived Bishops parted with their
Bishoprics with half that reluctance, that some of the accepters took them:
The Episcopal Seals were bespoke, and unbespoke, and at last after many Agonies
and Fluctuations finally bespoke again. But the deprived are calm, and smooth,
and uniform within, their Hearts are fixed on God, and their good Principles,
they are as free from bitter Zeal, as from Shame and Remorse; and if you do not
envy the Felicity of their Deprivations, I dare say they do not envy you their
Revenues, and think you no reproach to them, if you do not think them so to
you. But farther, my Lord, be the Passions never so great on both, or either
side, upon the account of the Separation, Who must answer for that? Casnists
say, that those that are the Cause of any War must answer to God for all the
Blood that is shed, and all the Devastations that are committed in it; and so,
I think, those that are the Cause of any Separation must answer to the God of
Peace and Unity for the Division, and all the Heats and Passions and irregular
Zeal, and Uncharitableness on both sides that is occasioned thereby. When there
is Pope against Pope, Bishop against Bishop, there will be Feuds and
Animosities; this is now the sad Condition of our other World, and let them
look to it who have set up the Seconds, who in the Judgment of the African
Church are none at all.

But you call the deprived, warm Men, and some that is a few warm Men. But as
for their fewness, my Lord, they say as the Orthodox, or Catholics used to say
to the World of Arians, That no Cause is to be tried by Numbers, that the
Number is often in the wrong, and that they are but some that will be saved;
for the Truth of this I refer to their former instances, with which you used to
stop the Mouths of the Papists, when they boasted of their Numbers; but I
perceive from your Writers, that Numbers, and the Public, are now become
excellent Arguments for Truth. But then as for the imputation of heat, as they
think it signifies not much, so they wonder you should reproach them as hot
Men, who apparently have so many Hot-heads among your selves. Certainly, my
Lord, had you called to mind your PP -- cks. and T -- ns. and P -- ns. and F --
rs. and H -- ns. and W -- ms. you would have spoken more respectfully of heat,
and not have been so ready to reproach the Jacobites as warm Men: For the
Philosophers, my Lord, that treat of the Passions, and the Use of them, tell
us, that Heat is the active Principle, and as necessary in the moral as in the
natural World, and a very cool Man, who since proved a Jacobite, once saying to
another, Brother, Brother, God send you Patience: Brother, replied the warm
Gentleman God send you more Passion; I am zealously affected in a good thing,
and I wish you were so too. And I remember your good old Friend, Dr. Calamy,
reflecting on some Men, whom you know, who condemned others as Hot-heads, for
preaching against the Faction in the Popish Plot-time, Discourse about a
Scrupulous Conscience. Epist. Dedicatory, preached at Aldermanbury, 1683.
said, I am very sensible that in this Age we live in, some are so
extraordinary Wise and Wary, as to censure and discourage all Men that speak
roundly, and act vigorously for the King and Church, as being more forward and
busy than is needful; but I am also sensible that if some Men had not shown
more Courage and Honesty, than those prudent Persons, bot would have been by
this time in far greater Danger than at this present, thanks be to God, they
are.

But now, my Lord, to apologize no longer for Heat, (which is good or bad, as
the Occasion upon, or the Cause in which it is used,) I appeal to your own
Conscience, Whether you do not know among the Jacobeans, as cool, and as
considering Tempers as any you know among your Acquaintance, who yet separate
from the Public upon the same Pretenses, which you tell the People some warm
Men suggest. I wish, my Lord, for the future you would take the Counsel of
Gamaliel, and let these Men alone; for if this Counsel, or this Work of theirs,
be but the effect of Heat, or Page 29.
unaccountable Humor, it will come to naught of it self; but if it be of God,
ye cannot overthrow it, though you may persecute them to destruction, lest
happily ye be found to fight against God.

I have now given your Grace an occasion to review your Faremwel-Sermon; in
which, by the leave of the Gentlemen of the Vestry, I must needs say, I think,
you have reasoned very indifferently, and-noot like your self. And though those
Gentlemen, through the great veneration they deservedly had for you, did not
perceive the weakness of your Reasoning, yet many others who can distinguish
betwixt the Speaker, and what is spoken, did. Nay, I can assure you that some
of the weaker Sex were sensible of it: Madam, said a Lady to another of great
Quality, You hear what my Lord says; Yes, says she, I have heard what be says
as well as your Ladyship, but he has said nothing to convince me: And if this
be all he has to say, I shall be more confirmed than I was, for I think I am
able to answer all that I heard him say. To this purpose spoke that Noble and
most Virtuous Lady; and I could do no less then tell your Grace of it, that
hereafter you may take care to print none but rational Sermons, which it
concerns you to do, not only as a Person of most venerable Character, but as a
great pretender to Reason, who in a certain time, and place, doubted if the
Bishops then suspended were good Reasoners, though you could not but grant that
they were good Men.

My Lord, I am your most faithful Monitor, and obedient. Servant.

FINIS.

