A VINDICATION OF The Naked Truth, THE SECOND PART: AGAINST THE TRIVIAL
OBJECTIONS and EXCEPTIONS (Of one FULLWOOD; (Stiling himself) D. D. Archdeacon
of Totnes in Devonshire) IN A LIBELLING PAMPHLET WITH A BULKY and IMBOSS'D
TITLE (Calling it) LEGES ANGLIAE, Or, The LAWFULNESS of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction IN The Church of England: IN Answer to Mr. Hickeringill's Naked
Truth, the Second Part.

By PHIL. HICKERINGILL.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Janeway in Queens-bead-Alley in Paternoster Row,
1681.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READERS.
IN the days of Solomon, it was certainly true, That -- of making many Books
there is no end; Eccles. 12.12.
what is it then in our days; and since this Germane Engine and Invention of
Printing is now so much Improved and Misimprov'd? Books seeming to engender one
another, (like those Genets of Spain) the Offspring of every windy and
Hypochondrick Vapor.

I, that love my Pleasure and mine Ease so much, would now for ever take my
leave, and last Farewell of the Press, if I could with a safe Conscience
connive at the Insolence and empty windy Vapors of this Huffing man, whose
flatulent Bluster has Begot (or rather Ravished) from me, this following Answer
and just Reproof: To say nothing of his Insufferable and vainglorious
Petulancy, in styling his Railing Libel -- Leges Angliae, The Laws of England,
too bulky to be comprised in his little Noddle, and little Scribble.

I know full well that this Vindication is needless to all Considering and
Understanding men, who have already nauseated the Trifling entertainment found
in the Archdeacons Pamphlet; The Frustration being so much the more enhanc'd by
the Promises and idle Invitations of the specious Frontispiece and staring
Title -- (Leges Angliae) of his thin, futile and cobweb Contextures and
Composures; and they will certainly judge this Vindication as unnecessary, as
unworthy any solid Pen: But all men are not Critics, though his Mistakes are
obvious and thick enough.

And doubtless, He will miss of his End and Aim in every thing, but one,
namely, of thinking thus to be taken notice of, for daring with such decrepid
force to grapple with the Naked Truth, Thus purchasing indeed a Name and Fame,
but with such Infamy, as makes him a Scandal even to Archdeacons, and to all
the D. D's of his little way.

A Vindication of the NAKED-TRVTH, The Second Part; In Answer to a Libell
called Leges Angliae, or the Lawfulness of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in the
Church of England.
NO man (who has read the Book called the Naked Truth, the 2d part, and
compared it with the (pretended) answer of Mr. Fullwood) can imagine that ever
the Gentleman read the Book which he threatens to Answer.

For many of the main Passages therein, he touches not at all; nay, against the
numerous and pregnant Testimonies (from undoubted Law Books, Civil, Cannon,
Common and Statute Laws, Equity, Reason, and Conscience) against Procurations,
Sequestrations, Synodals, and Visitations, etc. (To Vindicate the lawfulness
whereof (above all other things) it behooved an Archdeacon to bestirr himself to
make Answer unto,) he produces not one Reason, or Argument, except the Statute
of 15 Hen. 8. C. 7. which is only for Synodals, and Proxies to be granted from
dissolved-Monastries, and not one word therein to vouch that unconscionable
bougling of the richer Dignitories in preying upon the poor Vicars and Rectors,
and the Inferior Clergy, and going snipps with them in all the Benefits in the
Kingdom, shearing the Fleece of every flock, though they mind not at all the
cure thereof.

And for which they are smartly enough Chastised in Naked Truth -- Quaer. 3d.

But I Will do him right, and not o'reslip the least Tittle of his Arguments,
(which I wish were stronger,) nor do I contend for Victory but for Truth.

I am obliged to Track his Methods, and must therefore begin with the
Frontispiece, a stately but most unproportionable Porch, to such a Crazy and
rotten Fabric that only stands upon Crotches, and Crotchets; and if it were
not for the little Sentences of Greek and Latin to unriddle the Hieroglyphick,
it would be as Dark, Mysterious, and Unintelligible, as was of Old, Those of
the Aegytians; or as the Primitive painting, (whose Pens were glad to Surrogate
to their Pencels, and write -- This is a Cock, and This a Bull.

At the Base of his Cathedral lies a Wench in black, or Mourning Apparel, with
a Cross upon her, He makes her weep too, and make a face as if she had lost her
Maidenhead, her Purity, her Virginity, and what would Disconsolate say if it
could speak?

For my part I Will have nothing to do with her; for he cannot with any face make
her to lie there as a Purtraiture of the present Church of England: for In
nomine Domini -- In the name of goodness what would those D. Ds. and Archds. be
at? Have they not all the Sway, Power, Dominion, Honors, Manors and
Preferments, in the greatest Courts and Councels of the Nation? Surely, they
will be ashamed to put singer in the eye and cry; In the name of God, (I say)
what would these men be at? what would they have. And what do they want to keep
a wawling, and weeping, and wailing? what? never satisfied? never glutted?

The Papists indeed are crossed (of their Plots, blessed be God) but the Prelates
have (as yet) no Cross upon them; therefore I Will not offer to guess what Mother
he means that lies weeping there under the Cross, nor do I care, I am sure she
is none of my Mother; be she what she will.

Upon the Pinnacle of this Church of England sits a Pelican most kindly pecking
and piercing her Breast to suckle her young with her dear hearts Blood, (and he
makes her speak Latin too) Proprio vos sanguine Posco.

Whereby he seems to Insinuate that this kind Pelican (his Prelatical little
Church) has nourisht Mr. Hickeringill with her dearest and most precious
Treasures, her very Hearts-blood, (such he takes her best Preferments to be)
and indeed some men had as leeve part with their heart-blood as their flush
Ecclesiastical Promotions) calling him (in his Epistle to the Reader) A Divine
of the Church of England, who has also a share in her Government. -- And yet
this He, this ungrateful He, that has sucked her very Heart-blood, and got her
nearest and dearest blessings, she having taken him up, on to the Bench, and
given him a share in her Government; for him thus now to fly in her face, nay,
most ungratefully and slovenly to spue up and nauseate all this Heart-blood,
(those dear, dear Procurations, Synodals, Visitations, etc. dear as the very
heart-blood) and to throw them up, nay, at the face of this kind Pelican; Oh
temporibus, Moribus!

By all these Emblems I now perceive that this same Archdeacon knows not Mr.
Hickeringill no more then he is willing to understand his Book; for the Mother
he speaks of, has been always a Stepmother to the Author of the Naked Truth,
and he never had any thing of her but Frowns and Blows, at best, but a bit and
a knock; nay, when he had (above all others) dis-arm'd the Phanaticks of their
old Weapon that lay ready at hand to make use of and take up -- (by writing,
Curse ye Moroz) for which at least this same Stepmother might at least have
made him a Courtesy, and thank't him for his great pains;) no such matter, too
much envy and Ingratitude reigns amongst a sort of unthinking Black-Coats, the
Lumber of the Ship of the Church, that pester it in a Calm, and only help to
sink it in a Storm.

Nor has he any share in her Government, nor never will, till they show as good
Authority for their Government and Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, as he can for
his, namely, 4 Patents, from 4 Kings of England, granted with all Royalties,
Immunities, Jurisdictions and Privileges in the exempt Jurisdiction of the
Soken in the County of Essex, and the Inheritance of the most Noble Earl
Rivers, but in no Diocese, nor subject to any Archbishop, or Bishop, and of
which Mr. Hickeringill is Commissary lawfully Constituted, and he and his
Predecessors have been the only Ordinaries; from whose Sentence there is no
appeal but, to the King in Chancery, (or the King in the greatest Court of
Judicature in England, (or perhaps in the world) the House of Lords.

But for this he has so little cause to thank the Bishops, that, I believe,
they would take it from him (if they could) and by privy whispers, and
Fictions, and Stories, do him all the mischief (good Catholics) that in them
lies, for opposing their Usurpations and Encroachments, at least of some of
them; and for vindicating the ancient Immunities, and Royalties of the
(many-ages enjoyed) Inheritance of that Noble Earl: and from Nasauces and
Encroachments of greedy Neighbors that think they can never have enough;
though (God knows) this Exempt Peculiar is but 3 Parishes, a Puinsul, almost
encompassed with the Sea, and is not worth five pounds per Annum, to Mr.
Hickeringill; who values the favor and good will of that Noble Lord (in
conferring it on him without his seeking or Petition) more then twenty times
the profit thereof; It being usually bestowed as the most Signal mark of
favor, upon such, whom that Noble Family had a mind to Grace.

But enough of the Pelican, Mother or Stepmother, and also of the
Frontispiece, with which trifle I have too much busied my self and the Readers;
Now for the Title, Leges Angliae; The Laws of England.

But by what Title his pitiful Pamphlet can challenge or lay claim to so
swelling a Title, shall be considered only by the Sequel.

Next his Epistle to the Reader. Wherein, at first dash, he endeavors to
preoccupate and prepossess his Readers with an opinion of his Modesty, (good
man!) he cannot wail nor whip his Adversary; (That Is pity) -- And yet he begs
pardon that (he is such a Doe-little) he has not chastised so spightful an
Adversary according to his Merits and provocations, for he verily wants the
Talent and dislikes the Sport.

As if he should say, Time was, in his Juvinile years when he was (as indeed he
was) a furious chastizing Paedagogue, another Whipping-Tom, that took pleasure
to lash and slash, but those merry days are done, (that is happy for Mr.
Hickeringill) He now verily wants the Talent and dislikes the Sport.

What a Tarmagant Whipster would this have been, if he had taken pleasure and
made a sport of whipping men according to their Merits and Provocations? But
why he should at first step fall down of his knees and beg his Readers pardon
for not chastizing Mr. Hickeringill, for not being cruel to him, for not
bringing him to the Whipping-Post, I cannot imagine; I am sure if he cannot
slash and lash, and chastize, if his Bridewel-Accomplishments have now forsaken
his old withered Arm, he yet retains his Billing sgate; Old men can prate
(however) and Scold, and so does he; He calls Mr. Hickeringill all to naught,
he calls him Papist in the very next Page, (I suppose) for writing the
Naked-Truth, and exposing the wickedness of Papists and their Popes in p. 2. of
the Naked-Truth; nay, he makes another Hugh Peter's of him, and that is somewhat
strange, that Hugh Peter's should be a Papist; and more strange that Mr.
Hickeringill should be Hugh Peter's; and also afterward he makes a Quaker of
Mr. Hickeringill, nay, p. 6. He calls him both Papist and Hobbist, and most
unmercifully tears him with Pun and quibble (for which a very Barber ought to
be kicked) saying, I thought I had caught a Hobby, but war-hawk.

And a great deal of bad Language this Archdeacon and D. D. does very liberally
bestow upon Mr. Hickeringill in almost every page, the wonted Attaques of such
feeble and effeminate Disputants.

Well -- even what he pleases, he brings Mr. Hickeringill within two strides of
the Gallows, saying, he takes him to be at Hugh Peter's Game, (I supose for
Preaching on -- Curse ye Meroz and drolling upon Hugh peter's Sermon) and
running his wicked race.

I see there is no remedy (at present) against such a Cursing Railer, the next
now, and all that remains, is to make Mr. Hickeringill Infidel, Pagan, Atheist,
Turk, and great Magul; and yet this Modest Archdeacon cannot, nay, has not the
Talent to Rail, and dislikes the Sport.

Then lastly (he says) for Pride, Envy, wrath, Malice, Spite and Revenge, some
say, he ( Mr. Hickeringill) is a very Angel of light and somewhat more
excellent --

Bless thy seven Wits! dear D. D! for thou art the first that has made an Angel
of Light -- old excellent -- Pride, Envy, Wrath, Malice, Spite and Revenge.

The only modest expression in his Book is the last clause -- To the Reader --
where he confesses his unparalleled shallowness of Conception -- saying. If
others can find Truth in the man he cannot; So that -- what has already got a
verdict all England over, (except amongst the Archdeaconry, and men Byas'd with
Interest,) its Grace is stopped by a sorry D. D. that confesses his Ignorance,
and hates the Truth that thwarts his Gourmaudizing, would lessen his Paunch,
animus in Patinis.

Thus much for his Epistle, It Is well it is no worse.
The Proem.
This Proem takes up all the sense, and also almost one quarter of doughty
Pamphlet; Indeed it takes up too much Room -- And Arbitrary Government of Will.
the Conquerers Long Sword and Proclamation, is all the Reading he has shown
throughout the whole Book, citing an old Edict -- (out of Spellman, but he
conceales the Plagyary) and will not loose the Worm-eaten honor of some
ambitious Antiquary: whilst he quotes the Record, and puts us to our Trumps to
guess how, or when or where he came honestly by it.

Well, much good may it do him, when we come to it.

And first like a Churchman (of the old stamp) he will permit his Majesty to
come into the Church (that is more kindness then old St. Ambrose, Bishop of
Milan, would show sometimes to the great Emperor Theodosius when he did not do
as he would have him to do) nay, This Archdeacon opens the doors himself to let
his Majesty into the Church, but he will not trust him which the Keys; as who
should say, we will open the Church doors to your Majesty, and come in and
welcome, whilst we continue good friends.

But they that keep the Keys and can open the Church-doors to let his Majesty
in, can also (whilst they have the keeping of the Keys) upon displeasure, lock
him out; well, for this very trick and for another late Scotch trick; If I were
a Privy-Councellour, I would advise his Majesty as Head of the Church, and
Governor thereof, to keep the Keys of the Church in his Pocket, or hang them
under his Girdle; if it be but because this Prelatical Champion, this same
pitiful Archdeacon, like another Pope, or St. Peter, will keep the Keys of the
Church, and will keep his Majesty from them, and would fain persuade him, that
our Laws (to use his words p. 2. of the Proeme) Exclude this purely Spiritual
power of the Keys from the Supremacy of our Kings, except it be to see that
Spiritual men do their duty therein. Belike this same Archdeacon carries the
Leges Angliae, the Laws of England in his belly and greedy gut; for I am sure
he carries them there or no where, he carries not these bulky Laws of England
in his Brains, he has no Guts in his Brains. For, I pray, good D.D. where does
our Laws exclude this purely Spiritual power of the Keys from the Supremacy of
our Kings, if our Kings, (like good King David,) or wise King Solomon should
have a mind to be Ecclesiastes?

In the days (even) of Popery, I never heard of a King shut out even from the
Topping-Pulpit, if he had a mind to climb so high; stout King Henry the 3d.
made bold to Invade the Pulpit, took his Text Psalm. 85.10. Righteousness and
Peace have kissed each other; and then in his Sermon ad Clerum -- to the
Learned Monks of the Cathedral Church of Winchester, when he had a little
self-end too (as some Pulpiters have also had) in the case, namely, to Cajole
the said Monks to Elect his Brother (Athelmar) Bishop of Winchester; Bak.
Chron. p. 82.
Paraphrasing and enlarging upon his Text, and saying (to use his own words) --
To me and other Kings, who are to govern the people, belongs the rigor of
judgment and Justice; to you (who are men of quiet and Religion) Peace and
Tranquillity; And this day (I hear) you have, for your own good, been
favorable to my request, with many such like words; I do not know whether the
King had got a License to Preach -- from a Bishop. It seems the Clergy (then
too) would favor Kings, in what was for their own good, and, if it were for
their own good, would also permit the King to take a Text and Preach in their
Cathedral-Church; how hard-hearted, or strait-lac't soever our Archdeacon
proves, and will not suffer our Kings to have the Keys neither of the Church
nor Pulpit; I say, therefore, some Kings would therefore keep the Keys of the
Church themselves, and trust never a D. D. of you all with them, no, not the
Pope himself.

But what if I prove that our Kings at their Corronations, have at the same
time been ordained Clergymen, they are no more excluded (then) by our Laws from
the power of the Keys then Mr. Archdeacon or the Pope himself.

What is Ordination, but the ordering, designing or setting a Man a part to
some office? if, to the Ministry, then there are certain significant Words to
that purpose; and what more significant Words for Ordination to the Priesthood,
or making a Man a Clergyman, then those the Bishop uses to our Kings, namely,
with Unction, Anthems, Prayers, and Imposition of hands (as is usual in the
ordination of Priests) with the same Hymn, -- Come Holy Ghost, Eternal God,
etc. The Bishop saying, also, amongst other things, Let him obtain favor of
the people, like Aaron in the Tabernacle, Elisha in the Waters, Zacharias in
the Temple, give him Peter's Key of Discipline, and Paul's Doctrine.

Which last clause was praetermitted (in times of Popery) from the Corronation
of Hen. 6. Bak. Chron. 742.
till Charles 1. and Charles 2d.) lest it should imply the King to be more a
Clergyman and Ecclesiastical person then these Archdeacons could afford him;
but our Gracious King Charles 2d. and his Father, at their Corronations, had
the ancient forms of Crowning Kings revived, and in the Anointing, the Bishop
said, Let those hands be Anointed with Holy Oil, as Kings and Prophets have
been Anointed, and as Samuel, etc.

Then the Archbishop and Dean of Westminster put the Coif on the Kings Head,
then put upon his body the Surplice, saying this prayer, O God the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, etc.

And surely (of old) the very Pope himself looked upon our anointed Kings as
Clergymen, else why did the Pope make Hen. 2. his Legate De Latere here in
England? the usual office of the Archbishop of Canterbury (usually styled)
Legati Nati.

Therefore, Mr. Archdeacon, you talk like an unthinking Black-coat, stockt with
a little superficial Learning, when you say, our Laws exclude the King from the
Keys of the Church, to which he has as good right as your D. D. Divinityship.

And (indeed) to give the Man his due, he is glad (afterward) to confess that
Constantine and the Eminent Christian Emperors called Councels and approved
their Canons.

Then, by your leave, dear D. D. They also, for the same reason, might, upon
occasion, and if they had seen cause, also disprove the same; who then was Papa
of old? Pa-ter Pa-trum? surely no other but he that is Pa-Pa, (I mean) Pa-ter
Pa-triae?

Into a volumn (beyond mine or the Readers Patience or leisure) must this
Vindication swell, if I should trace him in all his Extravagancies,
Impertinencies, and nauseous Repetitions, and therefore I must quit my first
design, and summarily contract the crazy Principles and Postulata on which his
mighty Fabric of the Laws of England is E^^^^ed

CHAP. I.
In his first Chapter, after a great deal of prattle to no purpose, he Sets up
the Propositions suggested by Mr. Hickeringill, and then he Batters them.

The Propositions suggested by Mr. Hickeringill, are these following.

1. THat before Hen. 8. All Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in England, was derived
from the Pope: as Mr. Carry. p. 6.

2. That Hen. 8. When he annexed the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to the Crown,
he took it wholly away from our Ecclesiastical Ministers.

3. That the Church had no Jurisdiction after Hen. 8. had annexed it to the
Crown, till 1 Edw. 6.2.

4. That if there be any Ecclesiastical Power in our Church, it cannot be
executed but in the name and with the style etc. of the King, according to 1
Edw. 6.2.

5. That all our Ecclesiastical Power was lately founded in 1 Eliz. 1. as it
Established the High-Commission-Court; And that Act being repealed, All
Ecclesiastical Power was taken away with the Power of that High Commission.

Then most insultingly concludes, in these Words, -- On a Rock consisting of
these Sands, stands our mighty Champion, triumphing with his Naked Truth, etc.

And truly if our mighty Champion stand thus Triumphing upon a Rock made of
Sands, It is the first Rock made of Sands, that ever was seen in the World
before: I have seen great hills of Sands, but never a Rock consisting of Sands
before: for lively and natural expressions, and tough and sinewy Arguments,
it is the very Nonesuch of the D. D? Come, confess ingeniously, Is there not
more and better Heads then your own in this Elaborate Work? Is it not the Six
Months labor of a Prelatical Smectimnuus, or Club-Divines. Now for his
Rancounter.

CHAP. II.
Wherein very Majesterially he asserts (contradictorily) In defiance of the
said Propositions and Rocks of Sand, That Our Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in
England was not derived from the Pope, but from the Crown before the
Reformation, by Hen. 8. Sed quomodo probas, Domine D. D?

First by begging the Question, Petitione Printipij, And asking sternly and
demanding in 8 bold Questions, first, Dare any Protestant stand to the
contrary, etc.

So that he has got Mr. Hickeringill upon the Lock, and upon the Hugg, the
Devonshire and Cornish Hugg; Hang, or Drowned, there is no escaping; yield, or
confess your self a Papist, concluding that to say so, is not more like a
Hobbist than a Papist. I thought I had caught a Hobby, but War-Hawk.

To which I Will only say, that (as Seneca (in his Epistles to his dear
Lucillus) speaking of Harpast (his Wives Fool, a poor ridiculous creature) That
if he had a desire to laugh at a Fool, he need not seek far, for he could find
cause enough at home to laugh at himself, so) you Mr. quibling Archdeacon need
not be at charge to keep a Jester, you may find one ridiculous enough within
the Corpse of your own Archdeaconry -- Hobby-War-hawk.

But then he falls, and grows calm, and leaves this bold Italian way of Reggin^
and comes to his proofs.

First, Then our Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was not derived from the Pope, but
from the Crown before H. 8. because it was a known Law (25. Edw. 1. and 25.
Edw. 3.) long before Hen. 8. that the Church of England was founded in
Episcopacy by our Kings, etc. and not in the Papacy.

1. I always thought (till now) that our Church of England (I know not for his
Church of England) was neither founded upon Episcopacy, not the Papacy, but on
Christ the Rock of Ages.

2. The Popish Episcopacy (in the said two King Edwards time) and the Papacy
were one and the same piece; the Pope the Head, they the Members, and
derivative from him, influenced by him, and would never obey our Kings further
then they list, as appears by stout Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, another
Becket: And though the Kings made bold to recommend an Archbishop, or a Bishop
to the Pope, yet the Pope Invested and chose whom he list; (the greater Usurper
he, but who did or could help it?) till stout King H. 8. did behead the Pope,
and made himself (by Parliament) Head of the Church.

It Is true, Rome was not built in a day, and neither did nor could extend its
Suburbs and Commands as far as England, till William the Conqueror (the Pope's
Champion) and who fought under the Popes Banner (which he sent him for the
Invasion of England) did with his French, and Normans, and all Gatherings,
bring with his French and Italian Troops, the French and Italian Laws, and the
French Mode of Ecclesiastical Polity and Jurisdiction; And therefore ('it is
rightly noted) that 'till Will. the Conqueror, there was no Bishops Courts or
Ecclesiastical Courts but the Hundred-Courts, (the only Courts of Justice in
England in all Causes Ecclesiastical and Temporal.)

But the Pope made his Champion Will. the Conqueror and all succeeding Kings
after him, till H 8. set up such Ecclesiastical Courts and Jurisdiction (as
were at Rome) wherein they Judged and proceeded according to the Popes
Canon-Laws, and he himself was the Head and Supreme of those Courts, and
nothing more frequent then Appeals to Rome, till the 24. H^n. 8.12. ordained
that there should be no Appeals thither, where he had emptied so much of his
purse, and yet could not obtain a Divorce to his liking; if appeals to Rome
from our Ecclesiastical-Courts, then they were only Romes Inferior Courts.

And was there ever any Statute made, from Will. the Conqueror, or rather Hen.
3. to Hen. 8. but by the consent of the Popish Clergy, that is to say, the
consent of the Pope their Head; whose Laws they obeyed in defiance of their
Leige-Lords and Sovereign Kings.

I know there was old Tugging frequently betwixt our Kings and the Popes, and
sometimes the staring people cried Now the Pope, then (in hopes) Now the King
has got is; but, if any stout King did (as they did) try for Mastery with this
Whore, and who should wear the Britches, yet Pope Joan, or Pope John; or
howsoever named, always got the better at long run.

Of which I will Instance in some few particulars that first occur and come to
mind, for I scorn to spend so many days as this D. D. (with his Smec-conjoyn'd)
has been Months in Labor for the production of his Ridiculus mus.

Robert Kildwardby Archbishop of Canterbury, 6. Edw. 1. Fleec't the whole
Province of Canterbury (namely, the greatest part of the Kingdom of England) by
his Provincial-Visitation, not by downright plundering of the Clergy,
Churchwardens, and the poor and rich Sinners; (he knew a way worth two on it,
the other had been the ready way to be hanged, for Edward 1. was neither Bigot,
Antiq. Brit. Ec. p. 196.
Fook, nor Coward,) for He (says Mat. Parker) being the Popes Creature, went a
visiting (as some do now a days) without any Commission from the King; no
strange thing in those days, more strange in our days, now that they have not
(as formerly) a Pope to back them, and whose Creatures they were in despite of
the King; But this crafty Robert Kildwardby played the Fox in his Visitation;
and Se donis (says the Historian) non imperitando sed artificiose, ut fratres
sui ordinis solebant, suadendo locupletavit: that is, He enriched himself and
filled his pockets, but how? not by an open violent way of force and command,
but craftily, with sleight of Hand and Tongue, (as the Brethren of his Order
are wont to do) picked their pockets with a parccl of fair words.

Why, that is better yet, then the Hectoring way, Come -- Clergyman -- deliver,
your Purse, your Purse -- for Procurations, Visitations, etc.

The Naked-Truth on it was, the Pope (Nicholas 3d.) had a Cardinals Capp at
Robert's service, if he would come up to the price on it, and bid like a
Chapman; but all the craft lay in the catching -- the Money to day the purchase.

Whereupon Kildwardby does not go in the old Road of Procurations, Synodals and
Vilitations, that (even in those times were not only grumbled at by (the
Slaves) the Inferior Clergy, but many Canons and Decrees made against the same;
(see Naked Truth 2d. part.) And therefore Robert went another way to work,
namely, the way of Loanes, or Gifts, (for they have often proved one and the
same thing, though the public Faith has been surety and bound for repayment,)
And therefore -- Se donis artificiose suadendo locupletavit, he wheedled them
out of their Moneys with a parcel of fair words; (why? that is fairer play, then
to Hector and Brow-beat the Clergy out of their Moneys with threats of
Suspension, Excommunication, the Devil and the Gaol.

But Rob. had no sooner done his Business, and won the Game, most neatly and
above-board, filling his Coffers, but he begun to take pleasure (as Misers do)
in looking upon the Beauty of his mighty Treasures, and liked their looks
better then that of a Cardinals Cap; but Old Nick (the Pope) heard of his good
luck, (for he had Spies that told him all along how the Game went, and what
good fortune the Archbishop had, and how he thrive in his
Visitation-Provincial) whereupon Nichol. the Pope forthwith sends for him to
Rome, and is resolved to go snips, and half Stakes, and therefore cries -- half
mine, and bids him devide the booty -- these are not my words, nor the comment
of a Hobbist and a Papist, but the very words of the Historian of those times,
-- A Nicalao 3. papa Romam ad praecium participandum accitus est; ab eoque
Antiq. Eccl. Brit. 196.
Cardinalis Hostiensis and portuensis Episcopus creatus est: For half of that
Money the Pope made him Cardinal of Ostia, and Bishop of Portua.

I have heard of many a Thief that has robbed poor Men of 500 l. and been
condemned, and yet have got a Pardon; And the Popes-Collector for Peter Pence
(Polidor Virgill) does as smartly observe upon them and their Trucking for
Souls and Benefices, ( Lib. 17. Hist. Angliae.) Legem nunc prope eversam, etc.
Polyd. Virg. 322. H. Ang.
telling what feats in those days Money could do in the Spiritual-Courts, and
amongst Spiritual Men, and to purchase a Benefice, a Bishopric, or an
Archdeaconry; but now a days there is a Law against Symony, and an Oath against
Symony; yea, yea, so there was in those days.

Thus that Pope was his Crafts-Master, and killed two or three Birds with one
stone; you heard how dear he sold, and what a mighty price he got for a
Cardinals Cap, and a pair of Lawn-Sleeves; and one would have thought he might
have sit down contented, and have slept quietly for that night, and never have
writ Diem perdidi upon his Beds-head: But this was but a Lean-days-work in
comparison of what he got by the very same Bargain, namely, The Vacancy of the
Archbishopric of Canterbury, which was as good to him as ready Money in his
Purse: It would not be long upon his hands, such Ware (as that) will off to one
or other; or perhaps, he had promised the Gift and Donation thereof to one of
his Harlots, no strange things even in those days.

For his Wench, or he (I know not which) contracted for the said
Arch-plshoprick with John Peckham (the fairest Chapman) and a notable Blade at
the Canon and Civil Law; an Advocate, a glib Hackney-Tongue he had in his head,
(says Matthew Parker) Lugduni cum esset, Jure civili atque Pontisicio operam
dedit, in qua causas tanta furis peritia tractavit, etc. A notable bold Fellow
(it seems he was) at the Bar, and ( as is usual to such as are so well stocked
with impudence) he knew it as well, and looked big, and high, and staring,
surly, Mat. Paris. Hist. p. 90, 97.
and grim, Gestu, incessu, and sermon glorioso and elato fuit. And yet all
those mighty virtues would not help him to preferment, but that he truckl'd
underhand with the Popes Wench, he knew the way to the Wood, and how the
Market went, as well as another; and therefore in plain down-right-Symony
(without the ceremonious equivocation of a Game at Tables with the Patron,
buying a foundred Jade of him for 100 Guinnies, or making Friends to his Wife
or Miss,) he became bound to the Pope in 4000 Marks, (a wonderful sum in those
Days) and was esteemed above Seven Years purchase at that time for the said
Holy-See of Canterbury.

A good round sum for poor John Peckham (for so he styled himself) to soften
the Hearts and melt into Money his Province, that had been reaped and fleeced a
little before by Rob. Kildwardby his immediate Predecessor, Poor John came but
to the gleanings and picking of Wool; but its no matter, in 13 years (for so
long he sat Archbishop) he paid off his Bond to the Pope, saw it cancelled,
Antiq. Eccl. Brit. p. 206.
advanced all his Kindred to great estates, and left (all charges borne and
debts paid) to his Executors 5305 l. 17 s. 2 d. and q. (making Nicholas of
Knovile Rector of Maidston, and Simon de Greille his Executors.)

A vast sum, Jo. Buleus. Scrip. Brit. cent. 4. c. 64. p. 348. 349. Godwins
Catal. p. 78.
in those times, especially considering how poor and insolent he was when he
first made the bargain with the Pope or his Lemman, and entered into Bond; nay,
and to his dying day he kept the old style, calling himself in his Letters
constantly, Poor John Peckham, (like the blind Beggar of Bednal-Green) for good
people enriched him out of mere charity and in compassion of his pitiful cries
and importunate begging; and none could imagine, till their deaths, that they
were worth a Farthing, all debts paid.

Thus he begun some of his Letters, Johannes frater Cantuarensis Ecclesiae
servus humilis, qui Regi suisque Ministris audaciter restitit, etc. In English
-- Poor John a Friar of Canterbury, the Churches humble servant, that always
stoutly rebelled against the King and Court, etc.

But though he was hard enough for this King ( Edw. 1.) as stout as he was, yet
the Pope was too hard for poor John; it is ill halting before a Cripple.

For he was no sooner well warm in the Sea of Canterbury, and found the virtue
and comfort of Lambeth, but he begins to cast about how he might cheat the Pope
his Patron, because, quoth he, to deceive a deceiver is no deceit, and the 4000
Marks is a Symonical Contract, and being a cunning Lawyer, and also loving his
Money, most ungratefully he went about to chouse the Pope of the Money,
thinking he had Law enough of his side; and that a Simoniacal Contract and Bond
is ipso facto void in Law and of no effect, strength nor virtue.

But the Pope presently smelt him and his Tergiversations, and was as cunning
as Peckham was crafty, and was resolved to rub up his memory and teach him
better manners then to forget his Creator; and therefore without any dallying
or Shall I? Shall I? he makes no more a do but fairly cursed the Archbishop by
Excommunication (sent over and) nailed on the Cathedral Church doors of
Canterbury, and also a Bull of Deprivation; upon condition though, That if John
paid the said 4000 Marks (the subject of the Quarrel) to the Lucan-Merchants
within one Month after demand,) the Pope and Peckham would be as good Friends
as ever.

John Peckham thought of having a fair hearing at the Bar, and Advocates and
Council on both sides, or perhaps John would have pleaded his own cause to make
void the Bond; but some are Wiser then other some; the Pope knows a trick worth
two on it, and without more ado, sends him to the Devil, and deprives him of
his Archbishopric, except as before excepted.

In short, seeing he had met with his match, there was no remedy but the Money
must be paid, not a Farthing bated of the Principal; only the Pope gave him a
Years time (instead of the said Month) for the payment of so immense a sum.

Of all which hard Measure Poor John Complains in his Letter to the Pope, in
these very Words. -- Ecce me creastis, and quanto creatura a sua naturaliter
appetit perfici createre, sic in meis oppressionibus censeo per ves recreandum.
Sane nuper ad me pervenit Cujusdam executionis Litera horribilis in aspectu and
auditu terribilis, quod nisi infra mensem mercatoribus Lucanensibus cum effectu
de quatuor millibus in arcarum quae in Romana Curia contraxi, extunc sunt
excommunicationis sententia innodatus, and in Ecclesia mea and alijs. Majoribus
pulsatis campanis, accensis Candelis, excommunicatus denuncior, singulis diebus
Deminicis and festivis. Hanc tam graudem solutionem impossibilem sibi futurum,
rescribit, etc.

A great deal of heavy splutter he had (poor man) all the days of his Life,
whilst he sat Archbishop, what with the Pope on one fide, the King on the
other, and the Augustine Monks of Canterbury, who were wonderful Rich, and
well worth the shearing and fleecing; Chron. Will. Thron. col. 1960, 1961.
and therefore he would have gladly have been at it amongst them with
Visitations: But they stood upon their guard, defied him, and bid him come at
his Peril, or dare to meddle with their exempt Churches, of Menstre, Chistelet,
Nordborne, Middleton and Faversham, etc. And that they would suffer none to
visit them but the Pope and his Legate; which Privileges they contested with
him Anno 1293. and maintained that they were no other than the Privileges of
their ancient Foundation granted by Augustine the Monk, Apostle of England,
(the Popes Apostle) and first Archbishop of Canterbury; Anno Dom. 600. or
thereabouts.
and confirmed by Pope Boniface, Agatho, Caelestine, Calixt, Innocent, Urban,
Eugenius, Lucius, Alexander, Gregory, Innocent, Alexander and Honorius.

But Peckham after a weary life took occasion to dye, and there was an end of
his Contests, his Creator (Pope Nicholas) departing his busy life a little
before him, but first calling all his Cardinals into his Bedchamber, Saxoniae,
l. 8. c. 35. Cent. Magd. 13. c. 10. col. 1091.
where he lay upon his Deathbed, and by the Prerogative of his Power; degrades
them every man, and makes as many Friar-minor's (of his own Order) Cardinals in
their Rooms, and charging them upon his Benediction to choose none but
Friar-minors into the Papal-Chair for ever. Which they performed to their
utmost, and until Sextus 4. was Pope, there was always a little-Pope lurking
among the Fryar-minors, and he had his Cardinals, and pardoned Sins (I Will
warrant) as well as the best Pope of them all; only he sold his Indulgences
much cheaper and a better Penniworth.

This mischief happened An. 19 Ed. 1. and by Peckham's death, the King was freed
of a Tiger of a Priest, that always resisted his Majesty tooth and nayl,
threatening and vapouring with his Bell, Book and Candle: But after their death,
the King took heart, as by a memorable Example in our Common Law Books
happening at this time, may appear; before the Statute of Carlisle against
Popes Bulls and Provisions: For, A Subject of this Realm procured a Bull of
Excommunication from the Pope against another Subject, and gave notice thereof
to the Treasurer of the King; for which offense, Le Roy voluyt quil ust este
tray and pendus, The King willed he should be drawn and hanged as a Traitor.

Here Is an Instance (Mr. D. D.) as pregnant as your 25 Ed. 1. against the Popes
Usurpations: But this was no thanks to John Peckham Archbishop of Canterbury,
and the rest of the Bishops. For all resisted, all the Clergy, and did as much
mischief as in them lay: But the King and Parliament got the day, An. 7. Edw.
1. and made John Peckham the Archbishop Recant his dissolute Canons made in the
Convocation (at Rading) in these words:

Memorandum quod venerabilis Pater Johannes Cantuarensis Archiepiscopus, venit
coram Rege and Concilio suo in Parliamento Regis sancti Michaelis, Claus. 7
Edw. 1. m. 1. dorso. Revocationes Provisionum Concilii Rading.
anno Regni Regis septimo, apud Westminster. and consitebatur and concessit quod de
Statutis, Provisionibus and Declarationibus eorundem, quae per ipsum
promulgatae fuerunt apud Rading, mense Augusti, Anno eodem, inter quasdam
sententias Excommunicationis quas idem Archiepiscopus ibid, promulgabat.

Primo, deleatur, and pro non pronunciata habeatur illa clausula in prima
sententia Excommunicationis quae facit mentionem, de Impetrantibus literas
Reglas ad Impediendum Processum in causis quae per sacros Canones ad forum
Eoclesiasticum pertinere noscuntur.

Secundo, quod non Excommunicente Ministri Regis, licet ipsi non pareant
Mandato Regis, in non capiendo Excommtnicatos.

Tertio, de illis qui invadunt Maneria Clericorum, ut ibi sufficiat Paena per
Regem posita.

Quarto, quod non Interdicat vendere victualia Eboracensi Arch^episcopo, vel
alii venienti ad Regem.

Quinto, quod tollatur Magna Charta de foribus Ecclesiarum; Consitetur etiam
and concessit, quod nec Regi, nec Haeredibus suis, nec Regno suo Angliae,
ratione aliorum Articulorum in Concilio Rading, Contentorum nullum prejudicium
generetur in futurum.

In English thus.

Be it remembered, that the Reverend Father John Archbishop of Canterbury came
before the King and the King's great Council of Parliament, in Michaelmas Term,
at Westminster, in the seventh Year of his Reign, and confessed and acknowledged,
that -- of the Laws, Provisions, and Declarations, which were by him
Promulgated at Rading, in the Month of August last past, amongst other
Sentences of Excommunication which the said Archbishop did there pronounce:
First, Let that clause in the first Sentence of Excommunication (pronounced
against all those that obtain the Kings Prohibition to hinder Process in
Ecclesiastical Courts, of such Causes as are known to appertain to
Ecclesiastical Cognizance and Jurisdiction) be made null and void, and stand
for nothing, as if it had never been made; as also,

Secondly, That the Kings Ministers of Justice shall not be Excommunicated,
although they do not obey the King's Mandates for apprehending such as are
Excommunicate. ( Note by the way then that the Writ de Excommunicato capiendo
(the only Weapon of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and the only Prop of
Ecclesiastical Courts) was not Common Law, but long after, (only Statute Law,)
and but in some Cases neither: 5 Eliz. 23. The Queen finding (that since the
mist of Superstition was vanished by the Sunshine of the Gospel, the People
could not discern any Terror in the Thunder of Excommunication for every petty
cause, and therefore) that without the temporal Sword was also drawn to back
it, her new High-Commission-Court, and consequently all other Ecclesiastical
Courts (that had no Weapon but the Spiritual Sword of Excommunication) could
strike no Awe, Terror nor Reverence into the obstinate and contumacious; much
less into Delinquents.)

Thirdly, That the Punishment inflicted by the King alone, upon those that
Invaded the Clergy-mens Manors, should be held sufficient.

Fourthly, That he would not hereafter interdict and forbid any one from
selling any Meat or Drink to the Archbishop of York, ( Whom the proud Prelate
had Excommunicated about a Quarrel betwixt them for Precedence, etc. And
therefore he thought thus to famish him, as happened after to Jane Shore
Excommunicate: God deliver men from a furious Bigot and Proud Prelate, when he
has Power to be Mischievous;) or any other that comes to the King.

Fifthly, That Magna Charta be taken off from the Church doors; ( For you must
know, that the Impugners of Magna Charta were in this Synod of Rading again
declared Excommunicate; which the King and Parliament did dislike, and would
not suffer any such Sentence of Excommunication to pass, except for things
thought worthy and deserving the same, in the Judgment of King and Parliament,
who were Judges also even of the timing of an Excommunication, even in
particulars, which had (like the Impugners of Magna Charta) been adjudged
formerly to deserve to be struck with that Thunderclap, that grew so frequent,
it lost its Terror;) the said Archbishop also confesses and does acknowledge,
and grant, that neither the King, nor his Heirs, nor his Kingdom of England,
shall receive any damage by reason of any of the said Articles contained in
the Synod of Rading.

Bless us! what work's here, to keep the Archbishop and his Clergy quiet, that
a King and Parliament must use all the skill and Power of England (which
commonly 'till Hen. 8. was all too little) to bind these Brats of Rome (and
Creatures of the Pope, and Symonists,) to the good Behavior, and to tie up
their Hands and Tongues from doing the King, his Heirs, and his Kingdom of
England any Mischief.

And now (Mr. Archdeacon) I have bestowed some little Pains (you see) to draw
you a Picture in little, of those times of Edward 1. that you bring to make
something to the purpose of exalting your Ecclesiastical Hierarchy and
Jurisdiction, (from the Prospect of those times;) and what Honor you have got
to your Hierarchy by this Provocation, Plume your self with; but, I dare say,
the Reader will say before I have done with you, that you had done your Church
as much Service in the Convocation, where the men of your little ray, of your
Talent and Improvements, would listen to your Leges Angliae with great
admiration; rather than thus to neglect your great employment (there) by this
impertinent Diversion of Writing and publishing the Laws of England, in which
you have no more skill nor ability than you have in undertaking to Answer the
Naked Truth.

But to take a little further View (with the Reader's Patience) of those Popish
times of King Edward, etc. before Hen. 8. which (the Archdeacon thinks) do
make so much for his Turn.

Afflictions seldom come alone, as poor John Peckham found true, by sad
Experience; for besides, that there was no help for it, but the 4000 Marks must
be paid, or the Symonist Archbishop lose both Heaven and Earth, King Edward
also for his Wars with Scotland was as needy of Money as the Pope, and he
borrowed by way of Loan a whole Years Revennue of the Profits of the said
Archbishopric, and that Loan (poor John Complains) being little better than a
Benevolence, came in a very ill time; For, Robert Kilwarby the late
Archbishop, and before him his Predecessor Boniface, had left the
Archbishopric lean, cadaverous, forlorn, delapidated and Poor, the People too
were exhausted by Wars and Seditions:

For if they had had it, he could not (he would not) have wanted it; and the
Pope too resolved that if the Archbishop or the People had it, he also could
not (would not) want it; (as his Brother Pope used to say) he could never want
Money so long as he could hold a Pen in his hand to write to his Ass, (meaning)
England; for the whole World had not (I had almost said has not) such Religious
Zealots and Bigots, that would run at all, right or wrong, in the Cause of
Religion, Religion, (as Hud. says) whose Honesty they all will Swear for,
though not a man of them knows wherefore.

For the subtle Italian Papists that stand near, and sees within the Scenes,
the Lives of Popes and Cardinals, etc. understand the Juggle, and will not give
two Pence a piece for an Indulgence, that here in England will go current for a
hundred pounds; whilst the modest Papists at Rome smile at the known pious
Frauds, and the rest Laugh right out, or (at least) in their Sleeves.

But to return --

Though the Pope Bubled poor John Peckham, as aforesaid, He also after he had
got a little heart (Papae ad exemplum) does endeavor to Hector or Wheedle the
King out of some Money by Texts of Holy Writ, (the very same that some
Religious Bigots have made use of, to as vile ends in our times) in an insolent
Letter to his Majesty, written 9 Edw. 1. beginning with these very words --
Excellentissimo Principi, ac Dom. Edvardo, Spelman's Council. p. 341, 342.
Dei gratia Illustri Regi Angliae, Domino Hiberniae, and Duci Aquitaniae, etc.
Johannes permissione divina Cantuarensis Ecclesiae minister humilis, etc. Which
see at large in Spelman; and after some Complements, he falls on in downright
Earnest -- quia tamen oportet Domino magis quam hominibus obedire -- and ad
praevaricationem Legum illarum, quae divina Authoritate absque omni dubio
subsistunt, nulla possumus humana constitutione ligari, nec etiam Juramente --
That is (in plain English) the Archbishop told the King, he would be his
humble Servant, and as loyal a Subject as the best, but only that he was bound
to obey God rather then men, and that no humane Laws, no though he had Sworn to
obey them, Acts 5.29.
should tie or oblige him to the breach of those Laws which are founded upon
Divine Authority.

Of which, he and the Pope were the Interpreters and Commentators; he might as
well have told the King, he would be his humble Servant, when, where, and in
what he list.

For presently after he brings that of Isa. 10.1. to vanquish the King and
Parliament that made him Recant (his own Canons) two years before; Isa. 10.1.
Dicente Domino per Prophetam, Vae qui condunt Leges iniquas, etc. Woe unto them
that Decree unrighteous Decrees, etc. (meaning the Statutes made by the King
and Parliament;) for so he goes on -- quia igitur ab antiquo tempore inter
Leges and Magnates Angliae, ex part una, and Archiepiscopos, Episcopos and
Clerum ejusdem Regniex altera, duravit amara dissensio, pro oppressione
Ecclesiae, contra Decreta summorum Pontisicum, contra Statuta Conciliorum,
contra Sanctiones Orthodoxorum Patrum, in quibus tribus summa auctoritas, summa
veritas, summaque sanctitas consistunt, supplicamus Regiae Majestati, etc. huic
periculosae dissentioni dignemur finem apponere salutarem, cui finis aliter
imponi non potest, nisi vos sublimitatem vestram praedictis tribus, scilicet
Decretis Pontificum, Statutis Conciliorum, and Sanctionibus Orthodoxorum
Patrum, juxta Domini beneplacitum cum Catholicis Imperatoribus dignemini
inclinare, ex his enim tribus sunt Canones aggregati, and jura Coronae vestrae
Christi Coronae supponenda, cujus sunt Diadema and Sponsae suae monilia,
universae Ecclesiasticae Libertates, -- (All which are most emphatical words,
and most apt for our purpose to stop the Arch-deacon's Mouth, that would have
the present Church of England and its Jurisdiction derivative from Edw. 1. and
Edw. 3. Nor do I know any man more able (in all History) to write all that
could be said for Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, Canon Law, or Civil-Law, than
the said Peckham; nor can any thing better represent the posture of Affairs in
England as to Ecclesiastical matters, than the said Letter, which I will
English faithfully, as follows --)

Because (quoth the Archbishop) there has been of old and long has continued a
bitter Dissension betwixt the King and Parliament of England, on the one part;
(God grant they may always be so, (as they ought to be but) one part,) and the
Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergy of this Realm, on the other part, to oppress
the Church, contrary to the Popes Decrees, contrary to the Canons of Councils,
contrary to the Sanctions of the Orthodox Fathers, in which three consists the
Supreme Authority, the greatest Verity, and the choycest Piety: We entreat your
Royal Majesty, that we should vouchsafe together to put an end to this
dangerous Dissension and Differences, which can never be concluded, except you
will please to submit your highness to the said three things, namely, the
Decrees of Popes, the Canons of the Synods, and the Opinions of the ancient
Orthodox Fathers, according to the Command of the Lord, and after the Example
of Catholic Kings:

For of these three are the Canons made, and the Rights of your Crown must
submit to the Crown of Christ; the Churches Rights and Liberties, being the
Diadem of Christ and the Ornament and Jewels of his Spouse, etc.

Whence I make these plain Remarks.

1. That as the Devil (Tempting our Blessed Savior) accosted him with Holy
Scripture in his Mouth, so does this filthy Symonist talk Scripture Language to
the King and Parliament, whilst he himself hated to be Reformed.

2. That there was and has been an old Feud, Difference and Dissension, (and
cannot possibly be otherwise) where the Layety are Governed by one Law, and the
Clergy by another; the Layety a distinct and peculiar Party, on the one part;
and the Clergy with other designs, a party in Opposition to the Layety, on the
other part. The Devil and the Pope brought in that distinction of Layety and
Clergy, (not God and Scripture,) and it was never a quiet World in Christendom
since that time of making that distinction, which God never made.

3. That when the King and Parliament Thwarts the Clergy and the Canons of
their own devising, and made to gratify (as those of Rading aforesaid) only
their Avarice, Ambition and Revenge; yet that is called -- Oppressing the
Church of God.

4. That Kings must always (under the notion of submitting to God and Christ)
submit their Scepters, Crowns and Dignities, to Religious Zealots and Bigots,
when they get the Power; and they will have it too, or they will want of their will.

5. That the Clergy, Archbishops and Bishops accounted themselves, and were
taken and accepted for the Church of England.

6. That the Pope was Head of this Church, his Decrees their Rule and Canons to
walk by, and carry on their Ecclesiastical-Courts and Jurisdiction.

7. That their Laws were contrary to the sense of the King and Parliament.

8. That the King and Parliament were sometimes (though but a little, little
time) too hard for those Archbishops, Bishops and Clergy, of whom the Pope was
Supreme head.

9. That it is impossible that our present Archbishops, Bishops, and
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, can derive their Authority for Ecclesiastical
Courts from the Popish Archbishops, Popish Canons, Popish Bishops (that had
the Pope for their head) since our Clergy, Archbishops and Bishops, do renounce
the Popes Supremacy.

10. That the Ecclesiasticals before Hen. 8. (whilst the Pope was their head)
looked upon the Kings of England as their Inferiors; and that the King and
Parliaments Sentiments and Decrees should truckle to theirs; And if some had
not some strange Relics, they would not dare (as this Archdeacon does) to
write, and defend a Jurisdiction and Courts in England, without special
Authority and Commission from the King.

And for him to say, They Keep Courts by Common Law, is the idlest of all his
dreams.

1. Because before Will. the Conqueror there was never any Spiritual Courts
Kept distinct from the Hundred-Courts; and if they have right to keep them
there at the Bailiffs house, let them come, but instead of Chancellours,
Surrogates, and Officials, and Archdeacons, must sit for Judges there (as now
and of Old) two honest Freeholders; let them come then, with their
Ecclesiastical Courts founded in the Common Law before William the Conqueror.

2. The Common Law ( this D. D. calls, p. 51.) long and granted Use in the
whole Land; but then if they plead for their Ecclesiastical Courts according to
ancient use and custom, they must keep them in Places, Times, and by such Laws
and Judges, as were of the ancient use and custom.

3. The Common Law of England is ancienter than our Christianity; but Bishops,
as now in England, much less Archbishops, (for Austin the Monk (sent hither by
the Pope) was the first Archbishop) and much less Archdeacons, are the
Inventions of men, and the favor of Kings, at first, of Popish Kings; for
before Austin the Monk, Anno Dom (...)
England had neither Lord Bishops nor Lord Archbishops after the manner they
are now, therefore neither they nor their Courts (as now kept) have any
foundation in Common Law.

4. By his own showing, that Edict of William the Conqueror enjoins that no
Bishop nor Archdeacon hold Pleas any longer in Hundret, nor bring any
Ecclesiastical cause to the Judgment of Secular men; Therefore William the
Conqueror (the Popes Champion) brought with him this new distinction of Clergy
and Layty, and Ecclesiastical Judges and Secular Judges; for it seems
Ecclesiastical Causes (as well as Secular) were brought in the Hundret Court to
the Judgment of Secular men, not Ecclesiastical men.

5. The said Proclamation ordains every man to do right to God and the Bishop,
not according to the Hundred, but according to the Canons and Episcopal Laws.

Which answers the greatest Stress of the D. D. Answer, The Conqueror with the
Pope brought in the Canons and Episcopal Laws, and when the Pope's head was cut
off and his Supremacy taken away, vanish also did his Canons and Episcopal Laws.

And the Popish King and Parliament in Hen. 8. time knew it as well, and
therefore when they had made the King Head of the Church, as well as State (a
fatal distinction of Church and State, and often makes a Kingdom divided
against its self) cutting off all Appeals to Rome, 24 H. 12. (in the very next
year) they found a necessity to abrogate all Popish Canons that were
contrariant to the Kings Prerogative, and the Laws and Statutes of this Realm,
but such as were not so contrariant and repugnant to remain in force.

And to that purpose there was to be a Book of such Canons compiled by thirty
two Commissioners, party per pale, one moiety Clergy and the other Lay; but
they did nothing, and so that project in the Statute came to nothing; And for
my part, in the Knowledge I have in the ancient Councils and Canon's, (in the
making whereof the Pope had the great hand) they might as well seek a needle in
a bottle of Hay, as seek for Canons (amongst the old ones) suitable to the new
face of our Church when it had lost its old wonted head, that had Authorized
and Fathered the English Church and all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction from
William the Conqueror, till 24 Henry 8. which was 467 long years, and during
the weary Reigns of twenty Kings together; who were so tired with the Pope's
Insolence, that some of them (as King John) meditated rather to turn Turk, than
undergo the Infamy as well as Tyranny and Cruelty, in being (all his Reign) so
shamefully Priest-ridden; complaining and bemoaning himself, that after he
subjugated himself and his Scepter to the Pope of Rome, nothing prosper'd that
he undertook ever after.

Therefore hard is the fate of that Man, much more of that King and Kingdom,
that are under the Tyranny of these Bigots. -- How do they wrest the holy
Scriptures to surrogate their preposterous Hierarchy, as did the said Popham
Archbishop, in his said Letter to the King, ( Edw. 1.) aforementioned, quoting
-- Mat. 16.19. Whatsoever thou shall bind on earth shall be bound in Heaven:
and threatening the King with death -- from Deuteronomy. 17.12. And the man that shall
do presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the Priest, (that stands to
minister there before the Lord thy God) or unto the Judge, even that man shall
dye.

Then, he threatens the King with Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19, 20. and with Luke 10.16. He
that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you, despises me; And he
that despises me, despises him that sent me: which (says the Archbishop) St.
Dyonisius expounds -- Ierarchis in his quae agant Ierarchice, obediendum est,
sicut a Deo motis -- To the Hierarchy or Prelates in what they act as Prelates,
we ought to obey them, as those that are influenc't by God himself.

Then he quotes Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9, 10, 11. and Heb. 4. and Mat. 17.5. Mat. 28.20.
Acts 3.22. Mat. 18.19, 20. Mat. 18.17. Mat. 10.20. as Impertinent as tedious to
insist upon, concluding his Letter in a menacing way, -- from Lambeth,
November, Anno Dommi 1281. and the third year of his Translation.

Instancing also (for his Platform and imitation in this his contumacy) the
example of Thomas Becket, and Boniface, his Predecessors, as fierce and
Seditious as himself.

But wise King Edw. 1. like his Grandfather Hen. 2. and his Father Hen. 3.
would not so easily part with the Reins of Government; for he disanulled (not
only the Rading-Canons as aforesaid,) but also the Lambeth-Canons, Anno 1281.

Even as his Grandfather Hen. 2. abrogated all the Canon Law (being then Duke
of Normandy) and particularly the Canons of the late Council of Rhemes, And by
Proclamation forbidding ( Hugo Archbishop of Roan) to put the same in
Execution; and threatening Pope Innocent 2. that if he would not restrain the
said Archbishop therein, he would turn Protestant (so I translate the words of
the Kings letter to Pope Innocent;) Minatus est Aperte divortium ab Apostolica
sede, nisi praesumptio illius Archiepiscopi reprimeretur.

Which so frighted the Pope, that he was glad to knock under and yield to the
time; (foreseeing a Storm approaching) he very wisely made fair weather on it,
(to use his own words;) -- Quod prefecto quamvis Justum fuerit, Mat. Paris.
Hist. Aug. p. 96, 97.
and a nobis in Concilio Rhemensi mandatum, pro ejus tamen charitate aliquando
condescendere (quando non ascendere possumus) debemus, et pro tempore, ipsius
voluntati assensum praebere. That is (says the Pope) -- What was done in the
Council of Rhemes, was nothing but what was Just and right, and also by us
Commanded; nevertheless for charity sake we must be lowly and condescend then
when we cannot climb and ascend and be uppermost, and for the present, give our
assent and consent to the Kings will and pleasure. And there had been a fatal
divorce (or beginning of Protestanism) from Rome by another Henry, ( Hen. 2.)
long before Hen. 8. if Pope Innocent had been as stiff and inflexible as was
Pope Clement to Hen. 8.

So that all along, those (that please to observe our Statutes, Histories and
Chronicles, they) will find, that ever since our Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
was brought from France and Rome by William the Conqueror, sometimes the
Churchmen and (their head) the Pope had the weather-gage, and sometimes the
Kings, as they happened to be some more prudent, some more weak, some more
potent, and some in greater straits than other; of which last condition,
namely, when our Kings affairs were in a Peck of troubles and distresses, the
Pope and his Janissaries (the Popish Prelates,) always wrought upon their
necessities, and (most unmanly) would never give them fair quarter, when they
had them down; None so cruel as Women and cowardly Gownmen when they get men at
advantage; many Instances whereof you may see in the reigns of King John, the
King Henry's, and the King Edwards, etc.

So that -- now Canon Law, now Statute Law -- now the Church, and now the
State, now the Lord Archbishops and Lord Bishops, and now the Lords temporal
and the Common's had the upper-hand: but the Bishops carried it for the most
part, and always at long run, whilst they had the Pope or the High Commission
on their side; And (even since) they have lost those two main Pillars, I do not
see but it may be (yet) in great measure true, what the Learned Spelman says
was Current (of Old) even to a Proverb, -- Os Sacerdotis Oraculum esset Plebis;
Os Episcopi Oraculum Regis and Reipublicae; Both King, People and Commonwealth
took all for Gospel that the Bishops and Priests said and persuaded.

And therefore no wonder at what Mr. Archdeacon says, p. 49. That our great
Churchmen had no small hand in making all our Laws, both Ecclesiastical and
Civil; and made bold to sit upon the Benches with the Judges, in the Kings
Palace and Court, in the Council and Parliament; In the County, with the Earl
and Justices of the County, in the Sheriffs County Court with the Sheriff, and
in the Hundred-Courts with the Lords of the Hundred.

All true to a Tittle; why, who durst take them by the Lawn-sleeves and ask
them what they had to do there? They had as good have taken a Bear by the
Tooth, the stoutest Layman of them all.

Besides, a Scholar was a rare Bird in those days; Ignorance is the Mother of
Popish Devotion; and therefore neither Lords, nor Parliament Men, nor Judges,
had any more Learning than needs must, no, nor skill in Laws.

So that the Clergy did all; who swayed the Kings Councels but they? who were
Lord Chancellors, Lord Treasurers, Lord Chief Barons, Lord Chief Justices,
Master's of the Rolls, but they?

Was not Nigel Bishop of Eli (in H. 1. time) Lord Treasurer, and wonderful
skilful in the Laws and Court of the Exchequer? Was not Martin de Patishal
Clerk and Dean of Paul's made Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench (in H. 3.
time) because of his skill in Law? Brail.
So also was William de Raleigh Clerk, made one of the Judges of the
King's Bench; Henry de Stanton Clerk, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas;
and the Parson of Oundell in Northamptonshire, made Master of the Rolls, with
thousands more, even to our times, Bract. Rot. Pat. 17. E. 2.
and in man's memory; was not the Bishop of Lincoln, William's, Lord Treasurer?
(so also Bishop Juxton Bishop of London:) And Archbishop Laud did all in all
with King Charles 1. And in the Case of Ship Money, and the Loans and
Benevolences, (those hard shifts,) that good King might well repent that ever
he followed such precipitate Counsels.

And therefore, (Mr. Archdeacon,) it is no great Credit to you (nor for your
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical) to quote all the 12 Judges and their
Subscriptions, to vouch your Citations in your own Name, and not in the Name
and Style of the King, because that Opinion was subscribed by 12 Judges, --
John Brampston, L. C. J. John Finch, L. C. J. Humph. Davenport, L. C. B. Will
Jones. Jo. Dinham. Ri. Hutton. George Crook. Tho. Trevor. George Vernon. To.
Berkley. Fr. Crauly. Ri. Weston.


For they were very man of them, except Hutton and Crook, condemned by
Parliament, for betraying the Rights and Properties of the Kingdom in the case
of Ship Money.

And therefore, (Mr. Archdeacon) I except against the Judgment and Opinion of
your 12 Judges (very legally) in the cons truction of the Statute of Edw. 6.2.
Alas! good men, to say otherwise, it was as much as their places were worth,
(besides the Terror of the Star Chamber, and High-Commission-Court, and indeed
every Spiritual Court, which were then as horrible as the Spanish Inquisition,
and so much the more cruel that by the Oath ex Officio a man was bound to
accuse himself, which is not required by the Inquisition of Spain.

And therefore some have observed, that when the severe part of the Law, as in
Sentences, Fines, etc. has been put to the Vote in the Star Chamber and other
Courts against Offenders, the Clergymen there, (who should have been Exemplary
in Mercy and Charity, and not for summum Jus,) were always more rigid and
fierce than the Laity.

As for Instance, when Mr. Chambers, 5 Carol. 1. said (and only privately to
the Privy Council, called thither to answer for not paying Customs,) That the
Merchants in England were more wrung and screwed than in foreign parts: -- And
what if it had been true? why may not our Laws screw them, and enact bigger
Customs and Excise, (as of Wines, etc. we do;) where is great mischief? Why; for
this he was to be fined in the Star Chamber, (for the words are not other where
actionable:) And the Chancellor of the Exchequer he was for fining him (for
those words) 500 l. so also voted the two Lord Chief Justices: Ay, but when it
came to the Bishops -- Doctor Neal Bishop of Winchester -- cries -- 3000 l.
then also Doctor Laud Bishop of London -- 3000 l. At last the business was
adjusted, and the Fine settled -- 2000 l.

Therefore, (Mr. ARchdeacon) do not vapor and tell us of the opinion of the
Judges when High-Commission-Court and Star Chamber were up; do not we know, who
penned the Proclamation's; and who did the business, and every man's business
that durst st and in his way?

You may as well say, That Atturny General Noy was a great Lawyer; who doubts
it? does it therefore follow that Ship Money (his Invention) was Legal? Anno
Domini 1632.

And the Judgment of a whole House of Commons might surely stand in Competition
with the opinion of a single Archdeacon, though he had some of the Judges on
his side; although it was that House of Commons in 1640. for not one in Ten of
them were Rumpers.

Resolved -- That the Clergy in a Synod or Convocation has no power to make
Canons, Vote of the House of Commons.
Constitutions, or Laws Ecclesiastical, to bind either Laiety or Clergy without
a Parliament: And that the Canons are against the fundamental Laws of this
Realm, against the Kings Prerogative, Property of the Subjects, the Right of
Parliaments, and do tend to Faction and Sedition.

And therefore, your Doughty work and Leges Angliae, which (you seem) to
commend as the sense of a Convocation, and you their Prolocutor, saying, p. 66.
So whether it seem good to the King and his High Court of Parliament, to
augment or lessen it (Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction) or to continue it as it is,
we, ( we again) shall still maintain our Loyalty (that is kind) and manifest our
duty, and cheerfully submit our selves.

I am glad to hear it; if this cheerful submisson be the sense of your
Brethren, and that you have (Mr. Archdeacon) from them authentic Letters of
Credence for this Manifesto.

But I doubt it; for (certainly) your Brethren are better Scholars, and better
principled than to own such an idle and impertinent Discourse as this of yours,
that is throughout so loose, futile, and tending to such arbitrary Principles,
that indeed none are so fit to answer you as a Parliament, if they do not think
it beneath them to take notice of such a Prater; that has so little Judgment as
to think it possible to prove the Spiritual Courts and Jurisdiction, (as now
practiced) to be Common Law Courts, much less Statute-Law-Courts; which is next
to be considered, in his

CHAP. III. Whose Title is, That
KING Henry 8. did not, by renouncing the power pretended by the Pope, make
void the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; neither was it void before it was
restored by 1 Edw. 6.2.

And to prove this Negative, he is at it again with his old way of Questions,
but that he shows a little more warmth and wrath against Mr. Hickeringill in
this Ironical Sarcasm -- Pray Mr. Wiseman where, and by what words did H. 8.
cut off, as you say, all these ordinary Jurisdictions?

Mr. Hickeringill told you enough of it in the Naked Truth, which read over
seriously before you answer any more such Books ( good Mr. D. D.) He told you,
that when the Popes Supremacy and Head was be-headed, and the King made Supreme
Head of the Church (as well as State) and of the Spirituality as well as
Temporality, by Act of Parliament:

The same King and Parliament devised also, and advised, by what Laws this new
face of the Church (having got a new head, sure it had a new face) should be
guided and governed.

Therefore the King and Parliament enact, that the King shall appoint
Thirty-two Commissioners, not to make new Laws, but compile them out of the old
ones; so that they were not repugnant to the Kings Prerogative, nor the Laws of
the Realm.

But that was a thing impossible, for most of the Canons being forged at Rome
(or Licensed there, and Confirmed) and also they supposing the Pope Head of the
Church (which was against the Laws of this Land) nothing could be done; and the
reason is already given in the former Chapter, at large; so that less shall
need to be said to this Chapter, or indeed to the remaining part of his mighty
Volume, or Leges Angliae.

And truly, that King Henry 8. had so much to do to keep and secure his new
acquests -- (the Abby-Lands, Monastries, etc.) and to Counterplot the Pope and
his Emissaries; and on the other side, the English Bishops were so consternated
(at the sudden and total downfall of their Brethren and Sisters (the Friars,
Abbots and Nuns) that they were in a bodily fear, lest that King (thus flesh't)
finding the sweetness of the Booty, should hunt after more Church Lands: And
therefore Mr. Archdeacon needed not ask the Question, Was that watchful Prince
asleep? no, (surely) nor yet the watchful Bishops (I fear) did not sleep very
quietly, but were always troubled in their sleep, crying out, -- oh -- this fat
Manor is upon the go -- And these brave Walks, Houses and Orchards are a
departing --

And as dreams sometimes prove unluckily true, so did these dreams; for soon
after was (first) exchanged with the two Archbishops by the Satute of 37. Henry
8.16. Sixty-nine fat and stately Manors (named in the said Statute) at one
time from the Archbishop of York, and also a great many brave Country-houses,
and rich Manors from the Archbishop of Canterbury, and from Edmond Bishop of
London; which See was particularly named in the Statute.

But some may say, that the Abby-Lands which the King gave in exchange, were
not comparable in value to the said Archbishops Lands and Manors.

Who can help that? if they did not like those Abby-Lands (I suppose) they
might have let them alone.

Thus the King having been busied in the 24th year of his Reign, with cutting
off the Roman Head, and all appeals to Rome, then troubled with his Abby-Lands,
beginning with the lesser Monastries, 27 Henry 8.28. those digested, then the
great Monastries and Nunneries, 31. Henry 8.13. then the next year the brave
Houses, Lands and Revenues of the Templers, called the Knights of the Rhodes,
and of St. John of Jerusalem; 32. Henry 8.24. then the Free-Chantries,
Hospitals, etc. in 37. Henry 8.4. and in this his last year, that sad exchange
with the Archbishops, and Bishop of London, 37. Henry 8.16.

I do not see any cause, Mr. Archdeacon, why any flesh alive should say, that
either the King or the Bishops were asleep for Thirteen years together, in
which time every one had work enough to be watchful.

The best on it is, that the man thinks he can answer all Mr. Hickeringill's
Arguments (in the Naked Truth) with a Story which he tells, p. 14. and so silly
and so little quadrating with the question in controversy, that it is not
worth the answering, nor his observation thereon -- namely, that though the
Lords (of the Manors) were changed, yet the Customs, and Courts, and Officers
were not changed.

No, were not the Customs, Courts nor Officers changed? God forbid, for then it
must still be a Custom, that neither the Bishop nor the Archdeacon may lawfully
Marry: it will still be a Custom to excommunicate (as it was of old) all that
did not pay the Pope the first fruits, and tenths, if the Customs be not
changed; and a thousand such exceptions could I make, if it were not below me
to take notice of all his idle and impertinent Whimsies and Stories, obvious
enough to every learned and ingenuous Reader, without my remark or asterisque
to expose it.

Nor does any body deny, but that King H. 8. willing to have a Divorce from
Queen Katharine, from Rome, and not able to obtain the same, got it at home;
the said Statute of Appeals cutting off all Appeals to Rome, and enabling the
Kings Courts, Spiritual and Temporal, to determine the same, Any Foreign
Inhibitions, Appeals, Sentences, Summons, etc. from the Sea of Rome, etc. to
the Let or Impediment in any wise, notwithstanding. 24. Henry 8.12.

Whence note,

1. The design of the Statute is to cut off Appeals to Rome, this Realm of
England being an Empire of it self, governed by one Supreme Head.

2. Therefore no need of such Appeals, when they may be with less trouble ended
here within the Kings Jurisdiction, in Courts Spiritual and Temporal.

3. That Statute limits the cognizance of all matters cognisable in Spiritual
Courts, to these Three sorts -- namely, Causes Testamentary, Matrimonial, or
Divorces, Tithes, and Oblations, and Obventions; and if they can prove their
Courts to be lawful Courts, and by lawful Anthority, who ever doubted but those
Three things were matters and causes of Ecclesiastical cognizance? but they are
not content to keep themselves there; and therefore the great design (of the
Naked Truth) is not in the least to check their proceedings in those Three
Particulars, but their exorbitances in meddling with Church Wardens, the Oath of
Churchwardens, exactions illegal and unconscionable in their Fees, in despite
of the Statutes, in Probate of Wills, Procurations, Sequestrations, Synodals,
Licenses to Preach, Visitations, etc.

4. The Archbishops, Bishops and Clergy in Convocation, in less than Twenty
years after this Statute, found so little Authority in this 24. Henry 8.12. for
keeping Spiritual Courts, and exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction (it coming
in but by way of Parenthesis, and not the purport and main design of the
Statute) that they all acknowledge and confess, uno ore, and 2. Phil. and Mar.
that their Jurisdiction and Liberties Ecclesiastical, were taken away, and
desired their restoration; and surely they better understood their
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in those days, than this Archdeacon can possibly at
this distance, in these days.

Lastly, The Temporal as well as Spiritual Courts are enabled by 24. Henry
8.12. to determine the controversies in this Realm, without Appeals, and yet
none of them take upon them to Sit without the Kings special Commission and
Authority, except petty-Hundred-Courts, etc. which are Common-Law-Courts; but
so are not the Ecclesiastical (at best) further than Ecclesiastical matters may
still by the Common Law be tried before the Lord of the Hundred, or his Steward
and the Freeholders; and the Bishop also and Archdeacon may be suffered to come
into the Room; but whether they may come in without knocking, or must sit or
stand, be covered or uncovered, when they come there, by the Common Law, (it
seems) it is not by (our D. D.) the great Common Lawyer as yet determined.

And therefore it is much better for the Archdeacon, at least much more proper
for him, to leave these doubtful matters (as whether 1 Edward 6.2. be now in
force, and how far, and to what Commissioners the 13 Car. 2.12. does extend
(wherein the Author of the Naked Truth would not peremptorily assert any thing)
to the decision of a Parliament, or wiser heads than his own.

Then in Chap. 3. Sect. 2. the D. D. tells of another Statute, 31 Henry 8.3.
and cites the words, but most egregiously false; there is not one such clause
in 31 H. 8.3. But if there were, as perhaps (I will not deny) something to that
purpose in another Statute, that Archbishops, Bishops, etc. may wear the
Tokens, and Ensigns, and Ceremonies of their Order; and whilst they do nothing
but what to their Office and Order does appertain, no body will trouble
themselves about them.

And more false also is what he would make 25 Henry 8.19. speak, as though by
that Statute the Convocation has power reserved (by the same Act) of making
new Canons, provided the Convocation be called by the Kings Writ, and have the
Royal assent and License to make, promulgate, and execute such Canons.

If this be true, I do not know but the Lambeth-Canons (exploded and condemned
by Act of Parliament) and those of King James, are all Statute Law; for the
Convocation (that made them) were called by the Kings Writ, and they were
confirmed also by the Royal assent --

In a matter of this consequence, let us turn to the Statute, and trust our
Archdeacon henceforward no further than our own knowledge.

That of 25. Henry 8.19. begins thus --

The Title.

The Clergy in their Convocation shall enact no Constitutions without the Kings
assent.

And as the Title, so the body of the Act, Where the Kings humble and obedient
subjects, the Clergy of this Realm, etc. promise in verbo Sacerdoti, that they
will never presume to attempt -- premulge, or execute any new Canons, etc.
unless the Kings Royal Assent and License be to them had, to make, promulge and
execute the same --

Now is this D. D. an honest man? when the Statute only binds them to good
behavior; namely, not to presume without the Royal assent; but does not enable
them to make any new, though they have the Royal Assent?

False also, most impudently false, is his next quotation of a Statute 37 Henry
8.16. But if he mean 37 Henry 8.17. still it is false, either through
Imprudence, or unparellel'd Impudence; for there is not one word to the matter
in question, but the whole Statute is only a License to Marry, a License for
civil Lawyers to Marry; and that though they be Married, yet that shall not
make them incapable of being Commissaries, Chancellors, or Vicar-generals, or
Officials; but does not create or constitute any Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
or Courts to put them in.

Indeed, the said 37 Henry 8.17. is a clear and evident explanation of the 25
Henry 8.18. that thereby the King and Parliament did look upon all
Ecclesiastical Canons, Ordinances and Constitutions, formerly made, to be null,
and void, and repealed, and of no effect by the said 25 Henry 8.18. saying,
that the Bishop of Rome and his adherents, minding utterly as much as in him
lay to abolish, obscure and delete such power given by God to the Princes of
the earth, whereby they might gather, and get to themselves the government and
rule of the world, have in their Councils, and Synods Provincial -- made diverse
Ordinances and Constitutions -- And albeit the said Decrees, Ordinances and
Constitutions by a Statute made 25 Henry 8. be utterly abolished, frustrate and
--

1. By this it is evident, that as the King, Pope and Bishops had all work
enough to look to themselves, and that King Henry, and his Parliament, and
Bishops, were still Popish; so if the Spiritual Courts had any Jurisdiction,
yet they had none but by way of Parenthesis in the said Statute of Appeals.

2. And that only in causes Testamentary, Marriage, or Divorce, Tithes or
Oblations --

3. And to Judge of these, and determine, was impossible, because they had no
Canons, Decrees, nor Laws Ecclesiastical, by which to Judge and determine of
them.

4. And therefore Mr. Archdeacon, though by what has been said, your Official
might keep Spiritual Courts, although he were Married, so also he might keep
Spiritual Courts, although he did nothing but whistle there all the while, or
throw stones at all that came near him; for Sentences and Decrees cannot be
made but according to a Canon Law or Rule; and Canons there were none in force
at that time, in the said Judgment of the House of Commons.

And therefore though you had never so much Authority and Commission for
keeping your beloved Courts, what is that to the Naked Truth? Have you any
Commissions for Extortions in Probate of Wills, for illegal Extortions of
Money, for Citations, Licenses to Preach, Institutions, Inductions,
Sequestrations, Synodals, Procurations, Money from Churchwardens,
Commutations, Visitations? to confute which, is the great import of the Naked
Truth; and you have not one word in your Leges Angliae to say for them, or for
your selves, or to justify by whose, or by what Commission, or by what Canons
you act and proceed.

It is a most dangerous and fatal thing sure, for a man to think as the Papists
do think (in these days); whereas I thought, a man might have believed, that
Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and a thousand things more that the Papists
believe, and yet keep out of harms way.

But no; our desperate D. D. has ( p. 22.) got Mr. Hsckeringill upon the Hip
again, and gores him too with one of the unavoidable Horns of the sharpest of
Arguments, a Dilemma (in these words) namely, --

I leave it to Mr. Hickeringill himself; for if he think that that Convocation
( namely, in Queen Marys Reign) spoke that which was not true, he has said
nothing to the purpose (so his business is done that way). But if he think they
did speak truth, then he thinks, that the Jurisdiction of the Church of
England, as derived from the King, according to the Statute of Edw. 6. or in
Hen. 8's time, was no lawful Jurisdiction; that is, Mr. Hickeringill thinks as
the Papists think: War hawk again Mr. Hickeringill, and a Praemunire too.

Let him even pick and choose, I see there is no escaping, yield or dye; there is
no fence against a Crambee-Pun and Quibble; the second assault is always
irresistible.

And yet this Joke is not so witty as it is sharp and poynant, insinuating,
that Mr. Hickeringill's opinion is a Popish opinion; so in plain English he
says before -- Chap. 2. Sect. 2. In these words -- Thus our ancient
Ecclesiastical Governors and Laws depended upon the Crown, and not upon the
Pope, by the Laws of England, and in the Judgment of all the States of the
Kingdom before H. 8. and so did also the execution of those Laws, by those
Governors in the same public Judgment -- All this is true, and the very Naked
Truth in other words varyed. And what of all this? listen -- a little better
than Mr. Hickeringill 's Popish opinion.

And why, I pray, Mr. Archdeacon, why this unsanctified Epithete of -- Popish
-- To vindicate in the words of the ingenious Hudribas -- When you at any thing
would rail,
Then you make Popery the Scale,
To take the height on it and explain
To what degree it is profane.


Well, look to thy hits D. D. for all the corpse of thy Archdeaconry, together
with the Extortion money in Visitations, Synodals and Procurations, will not be
able to pay the damages that you and your Bookseller Royston are like to
undergo, forfeit and pay, for bringing that scandalous imputation of Popery so
often in your Book against Mr. Hickeringill, who though he has not much
Ecclesiastical Emoluments to lose thereby, if the imputation be true, yet he
pays the King Assessments, and finds Arms for above 200. l. per annum, temporal
estate of inheritance; a third part whereof (besides other mischiefs) are
forfeit, if you can prove him a Papist; and if you cannot, it is fit that on the
Gallows which was set up for innocent Mordecai, that wicked Haman should be
hanged thereon; and the mischief which you wickedly designed against him, it is
but just it should fall upon your own Pate; and that you and your Bookseller
should for the Libel fall into the same Pit which you have in malice and
wickedness dug for the innocent. Alas! you do not know Mr. Hickeringill (the
man you scandalize) in time he will make you know him better, I dare assure ye; as
he has, and will do to some others, such railers, liars and slanderers as your
selves; sure Mr. Archdeacon you do not say your Prayers, you do not (sure) say
your Litany D. D.

But all your provocations cannot make Mr. Hickeringill render you railing for
railing, the wonted attacks of effeminate and doting old men.

The Author of the Naked Truth is so much against the Popes Supremacy, and all
other Religious Bigots, that some think (as does this Archdeacon) that he gives
the King too many, even all the Keys of the Church.

For it is undoubtedly true, that the Crown of this Realm of England is, and has
been (before H. 8.) Imperial; that is, de jure, not de facto; thanks to the
wicked Usurper, the Pope and his Legates, like that Paudolfus, who in huffing
pride set his Ecclesiastical foot upon this Imperial Crown in King John's time;
or like those Popes that made the Emperors themselves hold their Stirrups.

This ought not to have been done, it was not de jure, it was commonly de facto
done, before H. 8ths time: and thus (with his Quixot-chivalry) he assaults the
Windmills set up by his own brains, like boys that set up their
Shrovetide-Cocks only to throw at, and busy themselves.

As for example, Chap. 2. Sect. 3. he says, the Statutes grant Consultations
and Appeals into Chancery from the Spiritual Courts -- It Is true, but what
then? it only supposes that the Spiritual Courts meddle with those appealable
Causes, (as Matrimony, Tithes, etc.) which are but very few.

And whereas he says, the Bishops may deprive, and have Statute Law for so
doing; it is false, they have indeed power by 1 H. 7.4. to commit a Minister
that has committed Incest or Fornication, to the Gaol, but for no other
offense; and that Statute was made upon force, when the Laity durst not meddle
with a Clergyman, though a muderer, without consent of his Ordinary.

However the Clergy then were so goatish, numerous, and high-fed, that no man
could keep his wife or daughters from those lazy and bucksome Abby-Lubbers; and
so let the Bishops (still) for Incontinency send the Delinquent to Gaol; but (I
thank you) no such matter, Incontinency is now as modish and fashionable a sin
as ever; I have known Two or Three notorious Whoremasters (Ministers in Essex)
convict, but they escaped the Gaol, and one of them (a Scotch-man) that had two
Bastards in one year, got a Pardon.

The sin of Adultery and Fornication is a filthy and abominable sin in all men,
especially in Divines, but as long as it is the Mode, it will sind great
Patrons to countenance and abet it; sweet-lips cannot forbear so sweet a sin.

No body denies, but Procurations, Synodals, Robbing by the Highway,
Visitations and Picking of Pockets (in spite of Laws, Canons and Decrees of
Holy-Church to the contrary, in spite of Equity and Conscience, in spite of
Mercy, Pity and Compassion, has been (in times of Prelacy) in spite of Christ's
command, and the Apostles command (not to wrong men for filthy lucres sake) has
been, I say, an old and ancient practice; and indeed, in the days of Popish
Prelacy and the High Commission, they did what they list, who durst control or
gainsay?

But now that Popish Prelacy and the High Commission are nulled and made void,
and all their Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction so precarious, and no authority for
their Procurations and Synodals, no authority to call Churchwardens and
Ministers before them to a great Town and Tavern, no authority for such
Visitations, much less to demand money for the same; no authority (neither) to
demand money in Ecclesiatim-Visitations: (and yet they will have six shilling
and eight pence ready money, and visit Twenty Churches in a day (a very special
Trade). They will not be put off with a little Victuals, Bread and Cheese, or
Pottage: no -- these Ecclesiastical fellows are high fed.)

And truly to spoil all their Courts, though they had never so lawful an
authority, let but the people follow this following advice, and you will not
long be troubled with them.

Namely, When the Minister and Churchwardens are cited to come to a Visitation
at a great Town, and there is a great Tavern, take no notice of it, refuse to
be hurried from your business, your families and your homes against Law; let
them proceed against you as far as they dare; if they excommunicate you for
contempt, a good Action of the case lies against them, for there is neither
Statute Law, nor Common Law, nor Civil-Law in England to justify such
Citations and Visitations.

Indeed, there is old Canons in times of Popery, to justify, that there has
been Ecclesiatim Visitations: namely, for the Visitor or Bishop to come to your
Churches, and see how you do; but it is against all Law, Equity and Conscience
-- to see how your Pockets do.

Therefore if they come, Ecclesiatim Visits, give them such poor fare as the
Vicar feeds upon; if they be hungry feed them, do not fat them, do not feast
them, and I Will secure, you shall not be often troubled with them thence
following; but give them not a cross of money, and fear not that ever they will
disquiet you very often.

As it is in the Naked Truth -- if their visitationes morum prove not to be
visitationes nummorum, I Will be your warrant, you shall not need a new Act of
Parliament to stave them off.

So, if they call upon you, and cite you to prove a Will, or take an
Administration, though the Sumner or Appariter come Forty Miles, do not give
the knave a Groat, but for him, and his Masters, and the Citation or Process,
give him Three Pence, and no more, as by Statue, 23. Hen. 8.9. 1. Eliz. 1.

If they ask or demand any more, sue them upon the said Statute, inan Action of
debr, or qui tam -- five Pounds due to the King, and five Pounds to the party
grieved.

The like penalty upon them, if you sue them for taking more for
Administrations or Probat of Wills than is allowed by Statute; nay, if they
will not give you back your Will, when proved, into your own keeping, upon
demand, there lies a swindging Action against them, as Baron Weston declared at
Chelmsford the last Assizes in open Court to the Country, exhorting them to
bring such Actions against those Ecclesiastical fellows (so he styled them) and
if they brought such Actions before him, he would make examples of them.

The cry, the common-cry against the extortions of these Ecclesiastical
fellows, was loud and clamorous all over England, and reached the ears of the
King and Parliament in Henry 8ths time (as in good time it may again) which
occasioned the Statute of 21 Henry 8.5. as appears by the Preamble of that
Statute against their extortions, in these very words, -- namely, --

Where in the Parliament holden at Westminster, in the 31st. year of the Reign
of the Noble King of Famous Memory, Edw. 3. upon the complaint of his people
for the outrageous and grievous fines and sums of money, taken by the Ministers
of Bishops, and of other Ordinaries of Holy Church, for the Probat of
Testaments, and for the Acquittances by the said Ordinaries to be made
concerning the same: The said Noble King in the same Parliament openly charged
and commanded the Archbishop of Canterbury, and other Bishops for that time
being, that amendment thereof should be had: and if no amendment thereof should
be had, it was by the authority of the same Parliament accorded, that the King
should thereof make inquiry by his Justices, of such oppression and extortions,
etc. And where at the Parliament holden at Westminster, 3 Hen. 5. it was
recited, that the Commons of this Realm had oftentimes complained there in
diverse Parliaments, for that diverse Ordinaries do take for the Probation of
Testaments, and other things thereunto belonging, sometimes XL. s. sometimes
LX. s. and sometimes more, against Right and Justice; where in time of King
Edw. 3. men were wont to pay for such causes but 2. s. 6. d. or 5. at most, by
which unlawful exactions, etc.

Then it follows in the Statute, and is enacted, that none of these Bishops
Ordinaries, Archdeabons, Commissaries, Chancellors, Officials Registers,
Scribes, Praisers, Summoners, Appariters, or other their Ministers, shall take
or demand for Probation, Writing, Sealing, Registring, making of Inventories,
or giving of Acquittances, or for any other manner of cause concerning the
same, any more than what follows, namely,

Where the goods of the deceased amount not to more than 5. l.

l. s. d. To the Register For the Probat of the Will 00 00 06. To the Register
Or if an Admistration, then also 00 00 00. To the Register And to the Judge 00
00 00.

Where the goods of the deceased amount to more than 5. l. and yet under 40. l.

l. s. d. To the Bishop, or Ordinary 00 02 06. And to the Register 00 01 00.

For such Probat, Inventory, or Administration, Where the goods of the deceased
amount to above 40. l.

l. s. d. To the Ordinary, or Judge Ecclesiastical 00 02 06. And to the Register
for Probat of such a Will 00 02 06. And for Administration of such goods of
that value, to the Register 00 00 00. Or the Register, or Scribe may refuse the
said 00 02 06.

And if he please, may take and demand a penny for writing every ten lines of
such Testament, each line to contain ten Inches.

For Inventories they usually take 40. s. a Press (as they call it) that is,
the length of an ordinary sheet of Parchment.

But by this Statute, for Inventories not one farthing.

Here Is (now) one would think, a Law to keep them in awe, but it signifies
nothing, they have got so many cunning starting-holes to creep out, it is hard
to catch a Fox.

For if they be Indicted for extortion, or that you bring an Action of Debt upon
the Statute, or a qui tam -- namely, l. s. d. Due to the King for every such
extortion 05 00 00. Also to the party grieved 05 00 00.

But here too you will be baffled again, except you punctually observe these
following Conditions: If it be a Will that is to be proved,

1. You must bring the Witnesses along with you to prove the Will, and that it
is the true, whole, and last Testament of the Testator, and that the Executor
also believes the same to be the last Will and Testament of the Testator. 21 H.
8.5.

2. You must bring Wax also (soft Wax) ready for the Judge to put to, and affix
the Seal of the Court, if the goods of the deceased amount not to five pounds.
21 H. 8.5.

3. You must bring two Inventories, fairly written and Indented, the one to be
left with the Ordinary, the other to be carried away by the Executor, or
Administrator. 21 H. 8.5.

4. The very Individual Will and Testament of the Testator you must carry away
with you again, so soon as it is Registered, as 21. H. 8.5.

5. You must carry with you good Witnesses of the Tender of the said Fees.

And keep but to these Conditions, which are plain and easy, and there is
never a Register, or Chancellor, or Sumner of them all that will give many
hundreds of pounds for the Place, nor will you be much pestered with these
Ecclesiastical-Courts, or Ecclesiastical fellows: (for that now belike is the
word, Ecclesiastical fellows); nor with Archdeacons, although they had never so
good Authority for keeping Courts, and sending Citations in their own names,
and not in the name and style of the King (their head) and the head of the
Church, as well as State; and as all other his Majesty's Courts are kept in
England.

Indeed the Courts-Baron, and Courts Leet, etc. are kept in the name of the
Lord of the Leet, Hundred, etc. they being the Lords-Courts properly, and not
the Kings-Courts, no more than his Lands or Manors are properly the Kings
Lands and Manors.

But the Courts of Justice, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, ought surely to be
open to all the Kings Liege people, and have the Kings Authority, name and
style, not only for their Warrant and Authority, but to give them thereby life,
vigor, power, Granduer and Majesty.

And it is strange to me, that men who have taken the Oath of Supremacy, have
bid desiance to the Pope, and do not pretend to set up a Commonwealth in a
Commonwealth, nor any Government independent of the Crown Imperial of this
Realm, nor have no privy designs (at some time or other) to stand (as of old)
upon their own legs without dependence upon the King (whom both Papists,
Presbyterians, Fift-monarchy-men, etc. endeavor to subjugate to their
discipline) should be so awkward, and loath to have their Processes and
Citations go out, and run (as other Writs) in the Kings name and style; and it
were but for their own ends to agrandize their Processes and Proceedings;
except (as formerly) the Clergy do take care to have as little dependence upon
a Layman as possibly may be; and I say again, it will never be well, nor our
differences cemented, until Lay and Ecclesiastical men be one and the same,
with one and the same ends and designs (in this Kingdom) where all
Ecclesiastical and Lay-power is united, and one and the same, in one Head, our
Sovereign Lord the King.

It Is this Bigottism that undoes us, and wars upon the score of Religion that
(above all other things) has blooded all over the woeful face of Christendom.

But let me hear of no more Extortions for Visitations, Procurations, Synodals,
Institutions, Inductions, Ordinations, Licenses to Preach, Sequestrations,
Pilling and Polling the Clergy, nor (in Probate of Wills) the Laity; and in
Visitations, Churchwardens.

And when they have done, and (Performed their said Great Duties) if (after
that) they cry out, for want of work and Employment, let them (also) sit upon
as many Benches, as shall be thought fit.

It is acknowledged, also, That Convocations are, always have been, and ought
to be Assembled by the King's Writ only; no doubt on it, (for else they are an
Unlawful Conventicle:) And there let them Sit together, 'till I, or any Body
else disturb them, or meddle with them.

The Power to make Laws for the Church, was ever in the ( King and Parliament
only;) and who ever denies the same, it is fit they should severely Answer it in
a Parliament: Have a care of a Parliament, (Mr. Archdeacon;) Have a care of a
Praemunire, War-Hawk; (I will not say,) War-Buzzard.

I had almost forgot to touch upon one String, with which he makes a great
Sound and Noise in his Proem; and that is, to prove, That Chancellors,
Registers, Sumners, Officials, Commissaries, Advocates, Notaries, Surrogates,
etc. ejusdem farinae, are all Church Officers Jure Divino, and according to
Holy Writ: Ay! But where? What Chapter? What Verse? (It follows as close as any
thing) In 1 Cor. 12.28. Helps in Government.

The Registers are but to Make (I thought that had been the Judges Office, to
Make) and keep the Acts of Court, etc. Advocates and Proctors, to Order and
Manage Causes; And Apparitors, to Serve Process, and Execute Mandates, etc.

Then this Remark; -- Mr. Hickeringill is a Man of great Experience in
Spiritual Jurisdiction, and need not be told of these plain Matters; (having
said in the first words of this Paragraph,) But, How Witless, and Quakerlike is
this? And, How unlike Mr. Hickeringill?

Sometimes he makes (Mr. Hickeringill) a Hobbist, a Papist, a Statist, and a
Man of great Experience in Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; and now a Witless
Quaker; (Even just what the Good Old Gentleman pleases.)

But sure, Mr. Archdeacon does mistake, and Mr. Hickeringill is not a Man of
so great Experience, but he had need to be told of these Plain Matters again
and again, before it can be beaten into his Head; That the Apostle (who never
had Register, Surrogate, Apparitor, nor Commissary, Official, nor Advocate,
(nor the Primitive Church) no, not so much as an Archbishop, or an
Archdeacon) should ever intend, or mean any such Creatures, when he told the
Corinthians of, Helps in Government.

Well, of a D. D. it is an Incomparable Finder, a Piercing and Quick-sighted
Commentator for a Man of his Age, that cannot see without Spectacles.

For Proctors, Sumners, and Apparitors, are just such Helps in Government, in
the Church; as Squire Dun, and Gregory, in the State; namely, Helps to Ruin
many. Alas! Poor Primitive Church of Christ! That made a Shift to subsist many
Hundreds of Years, (by Miracle surely) and yet never had these Ass-sistants, or
Helps in Government.

Such Helps in Government, (God knows!) Plut. Lives, p. 940.
as are far more fit to People the City that Plutarch speaks of, called
Poneropolis: God grant them a good Shipping; they will meet with many of their
Brethren in Spain and Italy.

And it is as senseless to Defend these Ecclesiastical Fellows by Magna Charta,
because such as They (if they still be Papists, as those were) were (then)
Members of Holy-Church, and brought hither from Rome by William the Conqueror.

For by that First Clause of Magna Charta, That the Church of England shall be
Free, and have all Her Liberties, etc. can never be meant, (as the Archdeacon
would insinuate) that it is a Sin to alter that Frame of Government, and the
Rights and Libertyes of Holy Church: For Peter Pence, First Fruits, and Tenths
to the Pope, Investiture of Bishops, etc. with many other, were then the Right
and Liberties of Holy Church, (as aforesaid) when Magna Charta was Made.

I have not willingly omitted to give Answer to all, and every the idle Cavils
and Exceptions in his Book: Once for all, (by way of Conclusion; for I am quite
tired with his Impertinencies) let the Reader Read the Statute of 1. Eliz. 1.
and he will find,

1. That the Popish Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of the Church, at the Making of
that Statute, was cut off utterly, by the Name of all Foreign Powers,
Repealing the 1. and 2. Phil. and Mar. 8. whereby the Sea of Rome had been
again set up in England, from whence (that Statute confesses with great
Contrition) (to use the Words of that Statute,) They had a long while wandered,
and strayed abroad; and in which Statute, the Protestant Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction (set up by Edward 6.) is Disanulled.

2. That therefore by 1. Eliz. 1. it appears, there was then neither Popish nor
Protestant Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical.

3. That therefore full Power and Authority is granted to the Queen, Her Heirs
and Successors, to set up the High-Commission-Court, the Soul and Life of all
the other Inferior Ecclesiastical Courts.

4. That this High-Commission-Court might (for the Greatness thereof, for the
Novelty thereof, and for the Grievous Vexations thereof) be called
Extraordinary; yet all the Inferior and Subordinate Courts were all of a Piece:
It was the Head-Court, whither all Appeals at length might come; and it
animated all the Rest: and when it was Disanulled, and that Head Beheaded by
13. Car. 2.12. all the little Inferior, and Ordinary Ecclesiastical-Courts,
were held Dead in Law, and Spirit-less. And when we shall persuade the King and
Parliament to Revive Them, God only knows.

But let us suppose, that they have Right in their Ecclesiastical Courts to
take Cognizance of causes Testamentary, Matrimonial, of Tithes and Oblations;
and by 1. Eliz. 2. for not coming to Divine Service: What Is this to
Visitations, Churchwardens, and the Oath of Churchwardens, Procurations, etc.

In Causes Testamentary, (whether Men be cited, or not cited) I will (as I am
an Ecclesiastical Judge) give my Countrymen this honest Council (without a
Fee) merely for the Public Weal:

Bring your Will (if you be Executor and Inventory as aforesaid) as also, make
the same application to them, if you be next of Kin to the Deceased, and have
Right to take Letters of Administration) keep to the former Instructions, and
Tender them the aforesaid Fees: And if you be an Administrator, then according
to a late Act, (for an Administration-Bond, tender them One Shilling more.) If
they Refuse to Dispatch you, without Frustratory Delay, go away: And what ever
you are Damnifyed thereby, the Law will give you Right, and Satisfaction and
Reparation upon them.

And if they be thus held to Justice, and to take no more than due and legal
Fees, there needs no Act of Parliament to Discountenance the Ecclesiastical
Courts.

And indeed they cannot afford to buy their Offices, and yet get no more than
legal Fees; for the value of Money is so different from what it was in Henry the
Eighths time, (when a Harry-groat was the chiefest Silver-Coyne, and would have
bought as much Victuals as Half-a-Crown will now) that they cannot afford to
keep Clarks, nor to write and Register Wills at this day for the Legal Fees.

But who dare Make himself wiser than the Law; when the High-Commission-Court
was up, there was no dealing with them, nor with their extortions; And ever
since that Court has been defeated, no Parliament has (as yet) thought them
worthy of larger Fees; and why should men be wiser than what is written, and
enacted in the Statutes of this Realm?

No doubt but the settling of these Ecclesiastical-Matters, and the Curbing
these Ecclesiastical Fellows, are things of weight and great Consequence,
deserving the most serious debate of the highest Judicature, a Parliament; But
till they have time, or till they think fit to take some Order herein, I have
shown you how to do their business.

Nor have I done this, out of Malice and Spleen, against these Ecclesiastical
Fellows, that do so Huff the Country, and the Inferior Clergy, but in
Detestation of their Avarice and Extortions, Aggravated with such insufferable
Insolence, that I speak but the sense of the Common-Cry of the Country against
them, as Loud and Obstreperous, and for the same exorbitances, as in the Reigns
of Edward the Third, Henry the Fifth, and Henry the Eighth, when those three
Statutes were made on purpose to check their Insufferable Pride and Greediness.

And for an Example to them, I Will only Instance in the said Popish King Edward
the First, how he made an Example of them. 1. In England, 2. Scotland. 3.
Ireland.

1. In England, when John Roman Archbishop of York, Excommunicated Anthony
Beck Bishop of Durham, for Imprisoning John de Amelia, and william de Melton,
public Notaries, sent by the Archbishop to Summon before him and the said
Bishop, then employed in the Kings-Service, in the Northern parts, the
Archbishop admonishing him thereunto, Once, Twice, Thrice, and still the
Bishop (or his Ministers,) refusing to release them, the Archbishop thunder's
out the Curse (against him) of Excommunication, to the Prior of Boulton in
Craven, to cause the same to be published in the Churches of Alverton and
Darlington, beginning, Claus. 20. E. 1. m. 2. Dorso Brevia Regis.
Johannes Permissione dia Eborac. Archi-Episcopus, Angliae primas, Dilecto in
Christo filio Priori de Boulton, etc. Dat. apud Sanctum Martinum juxta
viterbium 13. Kal. Maii, Anno Gratiae, 1292. and Pontificatus nostri Septimo;
In the seventh year of our Popedom.

(For Papa, or Pope, was the Common Complement every little Bishop past upon
his brother Bishop, in those days; of which, I can Instance in many Records,
if needful.)

This difference was decided by Parliament. See placita Parliam. An. 21. Ed. 1.
nu. 17.18.
Johannes Archi-Episcopus Eborum Attachiatus fuit ad respondendum Domino Regi,
de placito, quare cum placita de Imprisonamento and alijs transgressionibus in
Regno Regis contra pacem Regis factis, ad Regem and Coronam -- Idem
Archi-Episcopus per Johannem Priorem de Bolton in Cravene Commissarium suum, in
venerabilem Patrem Antonium-Episcopum Dunelm. etc. Die mercurii prox. ante
festum S. Jacobi Apostoli Anno vicessimo apud Derlington, etc. Sententiam
Excommunicationis in dictum Antonium, etc. fecerit fulminari, etc. In Regis
contemptum, etc. in despectum ipsius Regis 20. Mill. Librarum, and hoc offert
Rioardus de Bretenil pro Domino Rege verificare, etc.

Et Archi-Episcopus venit and defendit omnem contemptum and totum, etc. and
dicit quod Ipse nihil fecit in contemptum Regis, nec contra dignitatem suam,
etc. and dicit, quod de sententia a Canone lata and per ipsum declarata, in
curia Domini Regis non debet respondere; sed tamen salva liberate Ecclesiae
suae ob Reverentiam Domini Regis vult plane declarare factum suum, etc.

Et Richardus de Bretenill qui Sequitur, pro rege dicit, quod Praedictus
Episcopus Dunelm. Habet duos status, viz. Statum Episcopi quoad Spiritualia, et
Statum Com. Palatii quoad. Ten. sua Temporalia, etc. too long here to Recite;
(I can show the whole process in Parliament) where the Archbishop was voted to
be committed to Prison, to Absolve Bishop Anthony, and to pay what fine the
King pleased, which was Four Thousand Marks of Silver (an Immense Sum, in those
days) but the Archbishop was vastly Rich, and though the Son of a whore (a
poor Chambermaid) yet she had the wit to lay the Bastard at a Rich Man's door;
Fathering it upon one John Roman, Treasurer of York, who educated him very
well, made him a Scholar; and * H. de Knighton. de event Aug. l. 3. c. 7. Col.
2507.
Henry De Knighton says, he was a right Roman, for he inherited the Roman
Avarice of those days, as well as the Name; being the first Archbishop that
wheedled himself into the estate of the deceased that died Intestate, or that
gave Letters of Administration, in England; ( and yet this deep-read
Archdeacon makes the common Law depose and Justify their proceedings in
Spiritual Courts) Pretending (that since the Poor Soul died without a Will, and
so (Consequently) had not taken care to Redeem his Soul out of Purgatory, by
giving the Priests his Goods, Money or Lands, for so many Masses to that
purpose; therefore the Archbishop (Piously) took that care upon him; yet he
himself happened to dye (though not Intestate, yet) so suddenly, (for two
judgments in Parliament against him, (namely, the aforesaid,) and, presently
after, for endeavoring to defraud the King of Three-hundred pounds of Money
belonging to one Bonamy, a banished Jew, and which he would have been fingering
for himself, knowing that the Money lay in the Priory of Bridlington within his
Jurisdiction) Broke his heart, his Executors would not, or durst not meddle
with his Goods.

Executores enim sui se intromittere noluerunt, Ibid
ita quod non proprio sed potius alieno fiebant expensae funerum, and in
ecclesia sua cum honor simplici repositus est, non enim panis vel obolus pro
anima ipsus dabatur: unde justo dei Judicio contigit, ut qui subditorum bona
and maxim ab Intestatis sitiret, subita quasi morte praeventus, nullum vel
modicum ex Testamento suo proprio consecutus est Emolumentum: That is (says
Henry De Knighton) His Executors would not meddle with the Execution of his
Will, so that his Funeral expenses were defrayed, out of other Men's, rather
than his own Estate; he was buried in his own Church after a very homely
manner; for not a bit of bread was given to the poor, nor one farthing, to pray
for his Soul; by the just Judgment of God upon him, that he that did so thirst
after Intestates Estates (especially) dying in his province, being prevented by
a sudden death, got none or very little benefit by his own last Will and
Testament.

The second Instance shall be in Scotland; for King Edward the first was King
thereof, at least, by conquest, ( King Edward the Conqueror of Scotland) when
the Bishop of Glasgow having a spite, and a pique against a Minister of his
Diocese, Deprived him of his Living Tortiously and Arbitrarily, whereupon King
Edward the first by his Letters to his Lieuetenant, or Guardian of Scotland,
restored him upon the Petition of John Common, in these words.

Al Tres honorable prince e noble, In Bundel. Brevi^n and petic. in Tur. Load.
An. 24. E. 1.
e a son Trescher signur lige sire Edward par la grace Dieu, noble Roy
Dengleterre, le ce ou, si luy plest, Johan Common Kaunk il set e poet de Honur e
de Reverence Com a seon seignur lige. Chire sire si vus plest, io vus pri
especialment ke vus deyngnet mander vostre Lettre au Gardeynde Escoce pur
mettre mesh Robert Mounsycitien partur de ceste Lettre en la eglice de grant
Dalton, de la quele sire Robert Evesk de Glascou, etc. it is too tedious further
to recite.

The last Instance is a Record of a Fine set upon the Bishop of Cork in Ireland
for holding Plea (in the Spiritual Courts) of things belonging to the King's
Crown and Dignity, for which he was amerced 140. l. Claus. 20. E. 1. m. 13.
Hibern. pro Roberto nuper, Corcagensi Episc.
to be Levied upon his Goods and Chattels, in these words:

Cum venerabilis Pater Robertus Cortagiensis Episcopus huper coram venerabill
patre, S. Tuamensi Archi-Episcopo tunc Justis. Regis Hiberniae, amerciatus
esset ad centum libras pro contemptu, and idem Episcopus Amerciatus esset
postmodum coram eodem Justic. ad quadraginta libras, pro eo quod advocavit se
tenuisse placita in Curia Christianitatis and Coronam and Dignitatem Regis
spectantia, etc. Test Rege apud Westminster. primo die Decembris. 20. R. R. E. 1.

And it is observable this great Fine was set by an Archbishop of Tuam, then
the Kings Lord-Chief-Justice in Ireland.

For indeed (in those days) The Clergy were the greatest Lawyers and had the
greatest places; Bak. Chron, p. 50.
and yet they would not suffer any Clergyman to be subject to temporal
Magistrates, by a Canon made, B. Steph. in a Synod held at London by Henry
Bishop of winchester, the Pope's Legate.

It Is true King Henry the Second opposed this Canon, and Thomas Becket
Archbishop of Canterbury that stood up for it, and the Contest almost ruined
them both. But no King like King Henry the Eighth, Bak. Chron. p. 95.
and Edward the First, for keeping the Crown safe from the usurpations of the
Clergy; this latter not suffering any Prelates to sit in the Parliament at
Saltsbury, Anno. 1274. and took their great Treasures hoorded up in Churches,
and Monasteries, and put it in the Exchequer.

And though stout King ( Edward the Third) strugled hard, and a long time tug'd
with John Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury, who threatened the King, that he
would exercise his Ecclesiastical Authority and proceed to Excommunication of
his Officers, though not of himself, Queen, or Children; yet the great Offices
of the Realm were executed by Clergymen in his Reign; for at one time when
Simon Langham was Arch Bishop of Canterbury, he was also Lord Chancellor of
England; (a Place that Becket resigned when he was made Archbishop of
Canterbury, denying to be at the Helm of the Common Wealth, and the Church both
at once;) william Wickham Archdeacon of Linclon was Keeper of the Privy Seal:
David Willer Parson of Sommersham, Master of the Rolls; Ten Benesis't Ministers
Civilians, Masters of the Chancery; William Mulse Dean of S. Martins Le Grand,
chief Chamberlain of the Exchequer, Receiver and Keeper of the Kings Treasure
and Jewels; William Aksby Archdeacon of Northampton, Chancellor of the
Exchequer; William Dighton Prebendary of St. Martins, Clark of the Privy Seal;
Richard Chesterfield Prebend of St. Stephen's, Treasurer of the Kings House;
Henry Smatch Parson of Oundel, Master of the Kings Wardrobe; John Newnham
Parson of Fenny-Staunton, one of the Chamberlains of the Exchequer; John Rawsby
Parson of Harwick, Surveyor and Comptroller of the Kings Works; Thomas
Brittingham Parson of Asby, Treasurer to the King for the part of Guifness, and
the Marches of Callice; John Troys a Priest, Treasurer of Ireland.

But certainly a Gospel-Minister may find work enough, (though he be a Bishop
or Arch Bishop) in the Works of his Ministry; and most Honor; I am not for
Alterations and great Changes, yet certainly the Face of our Church of England
is not only comely, but beautiful and well guarded by the Statutes of
Uniformity, and Confining all Places of Honor and profit in the Kingdom to the
Son's of the Church, and to such only as can Conform to Her Liturgy and
Administration of the Blessed Sacraments.

And what would men be at? what would they have more? than a certain settled
Religion (as in Holland) which (alone) is countenanc't, (alone) Entrusted with
affairs of State, Places of Honor or Profit both at Sea and land; indeed other
Religions or Modes of worship, are rather connived and wink't at, than
encouraged, both in England and Holland.

And will no face of a Church please some men, but the Blood-red, Bloaty and
Sanguinary Carbuncle Fiery Face of an Inquisition, Canon's, or High Commission,
or Low Commission Courts, unkown to the Primitive Church and Christians, that
were content to serve God, though they had not power to Damn, and Cram and Ram,
(etc. Oaths, Canons, Creeds) down Men's Throats in spite of their Teeth.

But on the other hand, I abhor the novelty, as much as the Ruin, I foresee, in
Men that are so given to Change and Reformation, that nothing terminates their
designs but total Destruction.

They cannot be content to sweep the house, but they must pull it down, and how
to set up one (a better) in its room, more cleanly, and more convenient, they
have neither skill nor will to enquire; like the late Reformers (in the late
times) that pulled down and pulled down, without considering what next to set
up and erect, or knowledge how to do it.

And indeed the Extortions in the Spiritual-Courts are inconsiderable in
comparison of those amongst the numerous fry of Common-Lawyers, Atturneyes,
Clarks, Notaryes, Sollcitors, Splitters of Causes, etc.

Whose numbers are almost numberless, and now they are born, they must be kept;
and if one or two Lawyers in a Country be enough to disquiet the same, what are
all those growing and threatening swarms, twenty times more than in the days
of Qeen Elizabeth, who astonished and afrighted at the wonderful growth of the
numbers of Lawyers, Atturneyes, Pettifoggers and Solicitors in her time,
seeming to threaten some alteration; (as the Spirit that Conjurers raise, (some
say,) will fall upon their Masters for want of other work and employment) was
comforted by the Learned Lord Treasurer Burleigh, with this answer, Madam the
more Spanyells (always) the more Game.

And there may be the more sport for the Lawyers, but still the Country, the
poor Countryman, the Laborious Countryman (the staff of bread,) is there
Decayed and Impoverish't; through numerous Shoals of Beef Eaters and
Man-Eaters, which (if they were honestly put to Sea and the Plantations) the
sturdy young fellows would do good work, and live with less care, less shifts,
more honestly, nay, more profitably also both for themselves, and their country.

And therefore, though I have told you that the Spiritual-Courts are naught,
stark naught; yet where shall we mend our market?

For I am certain that the Fees of Lawyers, and the pretty devices (to fill up
Atturnyes Bills) (in despite of 3. Jacob.) so notably of late found out and
enhanc't, That a man might have tried two causes twenty years ago as cheap as
he can try one now.

Some Men never know when they have enough; ten shillings or twenty (at most)
use to be the Highest Fee for the best Sergeant that came to the Bar; now,
every Petty Counce look's asquint and lakes it in disdain, if you proffer him
Silver and not Guinies; Two, Three, Four; nay, Ten or Twenty Guinies, some of
them think all too little.

And if you do not satisfy these Breath Sellers, (and it is almost impossible to
satisfy them) they may perhaps leave You, and your Cause, in the Lurch; or find
out some Quirk^ or Quiditty, or (...) Trick, to unravel all you have done: And
then fet you to begin again, and at it again; more Guinies again.

And therefore, Men that try, will certainly find, (perhaps too late) that
Seldom comes a Better.

All violent Changes distemper a State, which Caesar's Murderers found to their
Cost, repenting they did not rather Submit to the Time, and endure his
Usurpation, (the Ruin of the bravest Commonwealth, that ever was in the World)
rather than by such Violence, to give the better Color to the Pretenses of his
Successors, who wanted Caesar's Incomparable Clemency, and Magnanimity.

I Will Conclude with the Story of Pacavius Calavinus, a Man of Great Authority
in Capua, (the Second City of Italy) who by a wile had shut up, and secured the
Senate, and Chief Magistrates of that Famous City, in the Guild Hall there;
being Men Bad enough in all Conscience; and the Common Cry against them for
their Enormities was not Louder, nor more Universal, than in England of late
Years, against the Rump, or Committee of Safety.

But Pacuvius (having made them thus fast) called the People into the Forum, or
Marketplace, to hear their Good Pleasure, and what Sentence or Punishment they
would doom them unto: With one Mouth the People, Ne^ine Contradicente,
Condemned them to Death and Torture, and to be drawn out by Lot, one by one to
Execution; but not one to Suffer, 'till another was chosen by the People to
supply his Place; (for they knew, they could not subsist without Justice, and
consequently Justices and Governors.)

First, That One (on whom the Lot happened to fall) was called out by Pacuvius,
and Sentenc't to be cut off, as a Pernicious and Rotten Member: But (First)
says Pacuvius, Make Choice of another better Qualifyed to supply his Place.

This unexpected Speech bred a Distracted Silence, and the Multitude were put
to a Grievous Plunge; one thought upon One Friend; and another, of Another;
every one as his Interest, Relation, Friendship, or Acquaintance most
persuaded; at length, one of the Boldest of the Rabble ventured to Name One,
Fittest (in his Opinion) to Succeed.

And no sooner was he Nominated, but the Multitude (who had other Designs, for
other Friends of Their Own; or some Just Cause of Digust against Him that was
proposed,) by a general Consent of Voices, did Condemn this New-Magistrate with
a more Loud, and Universal Outcry, than the former old Senator, who was bad
enough, but not Guilty of so many Hundred Imperfections and Faults, as was
Objected against this New-Upstart.

So that these Contradicting Humors growing more Violent and Hot, every one
following his private Affection or Malice, a far greater Confusion and
Hurly-Burly ensued upon the Nomination of a Second and Third; for in Choosing
fit Successors, the Multitude could never agree.

At last, weary of this Tumultuous Toil, One sneak't Home one way; Another,
another way; Scattering and Stealing away from this Rabble-Rout, every one with
this Resolution, That, since all Men are frail, Mortals not Angels, of Two
Evils, best to choose the Least; that some Diseases are safer to be Ender'd,
than Cured; and better an Old Evil, (of which we know the Worst, and have had
Experience) than a New-Evil, that we know not whither it will tend, or where it
will End; and Finally, That Seldom comes a Better.

Let these Elegant French-Verses finish the Discourse, (made by Pi^rack, the
French-Poet; but more Honestly, than Elegantly.)

Aim l'estat tell que tu le vois estre
S'il est Royal, aim la Royante,
S'il est de peu, ou bien Communante,
Aim l'aussi, car Dieu t'y a faict naistre.
Love thou thy Country's State, whether it be
A Commonwealth, Senate, or Monarchy:
All Change is fatal, count then that the best,
In which thy Country finds most Peace, most Rest.
AN ABSTRACT OF THE PREMISES, IN A SHORT CONCLUSION.
It Is evident (then) by his own Showing, That there was no Ecclesiastical
Courts distinct from the Hundred-Courts, and Lay-Courts, till the Pope's
Champion brought over that New French and Italian Mode, with a long Sword into
England; and Odo Bishop of Bayeux, (Brother to the Conqueror) assisting to set
up the Pope's Usurpations in Spiritual Courts, or Spiritual Tyranny, forbid by
Christ, and his Holy Apostles; who pretended not to this Hierarchy or Frelacy,
Names as Unknown, as Archbishops or Archdeacons, (Chancellors, Officials,
Surrogates, Advocates, Proctors, Sumners, and the rest of that kind) to the
Primitive-Church.

Secondly, That it is great Impudence for the Clergy, much more for the
Frelacy, to call themselves the Church; as if the Lay People were not as much
Members of Christ; nay, as Learned, Prudent, Modest, and Honest, as the best of
them, I will not except the Pope himself: And that to Style the Clergy alone
the Church or Holy Church, is contrary to the constant Style, and Dialect of
Holy-Writ; as appears by Mat. 16.18. Act. 2.47. -- 5.11. -- 8.1. -- 11.26. --
13.23. -- 14.27. -- 14.23. -- 15.3, 22, 41. -- 16.5. -- 20.17, 28. Romans 16.1,
4, 5, 16, 23. 1 Cor. 4.17. -- 10.32. -- 14.4, 5, 23, 33, 34. 1 Cor. 16.1, 19. 2
Cor. 1.1. -- 8.1.18, 19.23, 24. -- 11.8, 28. -- 12.13. and in all other places
(which are numerous) throughout the Holy Scripture.

Thirdly, That by the Oath given always to Excommunicate persons before they
be Absolved (namely, Stare and parere mandatis Ecclesiae, to stand to, and obey
the Commands of the Church) by Church, they always mean themselves, the
Prelacy, or Governing Men of the Church; And by Holy-Church being free (in
Magna Charta) was, and must be meant the Clergy, and the Pope their Head; but
how Holy they were in those Times, what Symonists, and (consequently) Perjured
Persons, appears fully in the Premises. By the Angel of the Church of Ephesus (
Rev. 2.1, 8. the Prelates say by Angel (there) is meant the Bishop or
Presbyter; by the Church (there them) must be meant, the Christian People of
Ephesus; and if these Clergy, in Edw. 1. (such as Old Nich. Pap. and
Archbishop Peckham, etc.) were Angels, they were black ones surely.

Fourthly, That from the Reign of William the Conqueror, to Hen. 8. The
Clergy, or Ecclesiastical Men had one Head, namely, a Foreign Head, the Pope;
and the Laiety another Head, the King.

Fifthly, These Two Heads (namely) The Pope the Head of the Church, and the
King the Head of the State, were (ever and anon) knocking one against the
other, and the English-Clergy always sided with their Head, the Pope, to make
the other Temporal Head bow down, and submit to this Spiritual Head.

Sixthly, That when this Spiritual Head would not submit to the Temporal Head,
and Gratify the King's will (in the desired Divorce betwixt King H. 8. and His
Queen) (who had been Twenty Years his Wife.) He caused this Pope, his Spiritual
Head and Forreign-Power to be Beheaded, and cut off; till it was restored, and
patch't on again, by 1. Phil. and Mar. 8. And indeed what ever that resolute
King Henry did will, that will soon became a Law: if the King would have Queen
Katherine Divorc't, and her Daughter Mary declared Illegitimate, Yea, quoth the
Stature 25. H. 8.22. when His Will was to have the Princess Elizabeth
Legitimate, and inheritable of the Imperial Crown of this Realm, Yea, quoth the
Statute 25. H. 8.22. Again when he was minded to make her incapable of the
Crown, Yea, quoth the Statute, 28. H. 8.7.

And Lastly, when his Will and His Mind was changed, and that both the
Princesses Mary and Elizabeth (though it was Impossible but one of them was
Illegitimate, and both of them so declared Illegitimate in the said Statutes)
should be capable to Inherit (as they both did) the Imperial Crown of this
Realm; Yea, quoth the Parliament, 35. H. 8.1. when the Bishops grumbled that
they had not their old Procurations out of the Dissolved Monasteries, and
Consequently, could not pay him their First Fruits and Tenth's (though the King
knew it was against their own Laws and Canons to have any) yet the King
(willing to stop their Mouths) and knowing that to take some Men by the Pocket,
is as bad as to take them by the Throat, rather than he would disoblige them
(he being also at variance with the Pope) he allows them these little snips,
out of his large New-Conquests and Acquests, by the Statute 34. and 35. H.
8.19. But made them only recoverable in Ecclesiastical-Courts, and only such as
were paid Ten Years before the Dissolution of Monasteries, which now is a thing
Impossible to prove; their own Registers being no competent Witnesses, being
Parties, and their Register-Books no Records.

7. That all the remaining Years of the Reign of Hen. 8. (after the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction here in England had no dependence of the Pope) they
had no Laws, no known Canons, nor Rule to Proceed upon, and if they kept
Courts, these Ecclesiastical Courts could take no Cognizance but of Three or
Four things, namely, Causes Testamentary, Matrimonial Ties, and Obventions, and
(such perhaps they have cognizance of at this Day) if they have Authority for
keeping Courts, and have any Laws or Canons (other than Acts of Parliament to
direct them) which (I think) they have not.

8. That when the Ecclesiastical Courts, and Jurisdiction had got a
Protestant-head, it also had a Protestant-face, by 1. Edw. 6.2. and it is
senceless to Imagine, that that Statute was not constantly put in Execution,
and all Processes in the Name and Style of the King.

9. This Protestant-face of Ecclesiastical Authority was Blasted by 1. Mar. and
in its Room was again set up the Pope's head, and the Popish-Church, by 1.
Phil. and Mar. 8. and Foreign Powers, and Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical after
the Old Italian or Romish Mode.

10. This Popish Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and Foreign Powers were Defeated
(in 1. Eliz. 1.) by repealing 1 Mar. and 1 Phil. Mar. 8. that had repealed 1
Edw. 6.2. which had been under restraint and made of no Force by the Repeal
aforesaid, and thence resumed its former Vigor and Virtue, but of that Quere:
All the Reason in the World for it, as Mr. H. Carry learnedly insists.

11. When 1. Eliz. 1. had canceled all the Popish Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
and Spiritual-Courts, there was none, till the same Statute gave the Queen and
Her Heirs and Successors Power by Commission to settle a new Form and Face of
Government Ecclesiastical.

12. That Branch of 1 Eliz. 1. that gave the Queen and Her Heirs this Power and
Authority (being repealed by 13. Car. 2.12.) For my Part (I must say) It is
beyond my Apprehension to find out where the Authority of Ecclesiastical-Courts
can or does consist, or subsist; or who gave them the Authority they pretend
to; not the Pope, (as of Old,) not the Common Law, (I am sure) nor can possibly
the Canon Law, or Statute Law.

13. Grant they have Authority, It is but in Three or Four particulars, Causes
Testamentary, Matrimonial, Tithes, and for neglecting to come to
Divine-Service, by 1 Eliz. 2. or (at most) but those Ten Things in 5. Eliz. 23.
de excommunicato capiendo, enumerated; what is this to justify their great
extortions in Probates of wills, and Administrations, and their illegal Proving
the same, and keeping Men's Wills contrary to that Statute? What Is this to
Justify the Force of any Canons at this Day? Or who made them Laws of England
without a Parliament? What Is this to Justify the Pilling and Polling the
Churchwardens, and the inferior Clergy by Procurations, Articles of
Visitation, Oaths Arbitrarily imposed upon them both for Canonical Obedience?
What Is all this to their great Business (in Visitations, and Court-keeping)
namely, The Money-Business?

And lastly, what a shameful thing it is to Impose upon the consciences of the
Clergy an etc- Oath of canonical obedience condemned by Act of Parliament, in
condemning the canons of 1640. in 13 car. 2.12.

What Insolence, for a Bishop to commend the observation of those Canons, which
the King and Parliament have condemned by Statute? Quer. What punishment do
such Incurr? and for Imposing Oaths upon Churchwardens to enquire into the
breach of such late Canon's? which cannot be possibly, the Laws of England, if
made since the days of King Henry the 8th. Their shameful and illegal
extortions are a Thousand times more sufferable and pardonable than these
Arbitrary Impositions of Oaths, to torture and rack men's conscienees, if not
to precipitate them into Purjury; nay, (except God be more merciful than they)
eternal damnation, making men swear Stare mandatis Ecclesiae, to obey the
commands of the Church, and to obey his Majesty's Laws Ecclesiastical, when it
is not defined what or where these Ecclesiastical Laws are; the wisest of them
all will not, cannot, dare not tell, nor determine. I Will bid this Arch Deacon
farewell with the same complement he passes upon Mr. Hickeringil in his last
words, bidding him not be wiser than the Law.

If this D. D. had not been wiser than the Law, he had not writ such a thin
discourse, and yet face it with a Bulky and Imbost-Title, stiling it Leges
Angliae. If the Spiritual Court keepers were not wiser than the Law, they would
first prove their Courts Legal, their Canons Legal, their Fees Legal, their
Extortions and Impositions of Oaths (upon the consciences of the King's
Subjects) Legal.

Nor write I this to weaken their Authority, but that it may, (if it seem good
to the King and Parliament) prove Instrumental to give them a just Authority,
and a true face of Power, and also limit their Exorbitances: There Is no wise
man nor good man that favors Anarchy. The Kings Throne (which God long
preserve) is established by Justice and Law, and it is the Peoples Happiness to
be governed and guided by honest Laws, not Arbitrary Canons, Impositions and
Methods, but such as are of the right English Make and Temper, enacted by King
and Parliament.

And I dare justify, That there is nothing in the Naked-Truth, but what is good
for the Clergy, (as well as the Laity,) if they will lay aside Prejudice and
Pertinacy; Pride and Covetousness.

Finally, for I am heartily weary of the Company of this same
Totnes-Arch-Deacon, and with conversing thus long with such an impertinent D.
D. that has not his fellow among them all for Insolence and Impudence, in
defaming and belying a Gentleman he never saw, nor knows any harm by, except
perhaps from malice, that never speaks well and seldom speaks true; or from
fame, which was a liar of old; and long before ever there was an Archdeacon
heard of in Christendom.

And now at length to make Mr. Hickeringil the Common odium, nothing will serve
but to make him a Papist, a Hobbist, etc. when all his Enemies that know him,
have not effrontery to deny, but that he has more Loyalty than to be a Papist,
more Conscience than to be a Simonist, (though an Arch-Deaconry of Totnes might
be put into the bargain and Seal,) more Honor and Ingenuity than to be a
Parasite, more Reason than to be an Atheist, more Religion than to be an
Hobbist, and more Honesty and Plain-dealing than to be Well-Beloved in a
Dissembling Age of Sycophantry.

But after all this bespattering Language, how inhumane it is in an
Archdeacon, and a D. D. so unmercifully to attacque Mr. Hickeringill with Pun
and quibble, a persecution beyond the plague of Barbers, in an Itchy endeavor
to be witty (forsooth) in despite of Nature and his Stars, who have all entered
sufficient Caveats against it?

Then for the Serious part (if there be such a part) in his Idle Pamphlet; Is
it not Quixolisme, beyond the relief of Hellebore, to style his Insignificant
babbling -- Leges Angliae?

Make Bonefires of your Cook, your Littleton, your Crook, Dyer, Statute-Books
and Common Law Books; for behold (here) in thrifty Querpo, Leges Angliae, the
Laws of England, price 8 d.

Nor less madness is it, in him, or more Idle vapor, than to appear thus
publicly upon the Stage as the chavalier, or champion of Mother Church, in
answer to Mr. Hickeringil's Naked-Truth, when he only tickles over the Skirts
of the business, and says not one word in answer to the main drift and design
of the Naked-Truth; namely, in answer or vindication of the Canons Authority to
keep Eclesiastical Courts or to impose Oaths of Canonical Obedience upon the
Clergy, or to impose Oaths upon the Churchwardens; nor one word does he say to
vindicate their unjust and unconscionable Impositions and Extortions upon the
Clergy, in Procurations, Institutions, Licenses to Preach, Ordinations,
Inductions, Sinodals, Visitations, etc. and yet (most Impudently) styles his
Book, An Answer to Mr. Hickeringill, etc.

Nor does that Statute 25. Hen. 8. give any Authority to Archbishops, or
Bishops to keep Ecclesiastical courts or jurisdiction, except such as was then
practiced when the Statute was made, namely, Popish Courts, Popish Articles of
Visitation, Popish Habits, and Palls, and to be worn by Popish Archbishops,
and Bishops; But we have none now: You know Hen. 8. (that made that statute)
lived and died a papist, as aforesaid. But what is that Statute however to
justify your Arch-Deacon's Courts? that Spiritual creature is not Named in 25.
Hen. 8.

Well, come Mr. Archdeacon, Friends must part; I Will (even) bid you far-well,
and shake hands with you, in hopes never to meet with you again; but because I
am in your debt for that witless Quible, -- Hobby War-Hawk; I Will pay you Quid
Pro Quo, in the same coin; namely, an Anagram for your Pun and Quibble; nay,
an Anagram, as Silly (if possible) as your Quible, -- War-Hawk -- Fra-Fulwood,
(Anagram) War-dul-Fool.

THus has it cost me some pains (the Labor of Six days, not Seven days, I
protest) to answer the Six Months Abortive Throws of a sibling, quibbling,
fribling, fumbling Archdeacon.

And it is enough, (at least) as much as is needful, and more than I could well
afford upon so despicable an Opponent; besides a subtle Anagram franckly
vouchfaf't to him, and ex abundanti, liberally thrown (and given him) into the
bargain.

To teach his costive-wit more Sobriety, than to attacque the Naked-Truth,
(only with Impertinencies; and Pun and Quibble) In his next attempt, when
peradventure he makes a second adventure.

Which, not I (so much as the the Booksellers) greedily expect from him, or
rather some more modest, more solid, and better accounted champion of the
Kirk's.

But enough (I say) at present, not only because I am in haste, and have other
more Important affairs in hand, than to spend much time with such a Scribbling
D. D.) but chiefly because the Naked-Truth is Luscious, too much at a time is
apt to Glut and Nauseate; to eat much Honey is not good.

(...).
The Husbandman, with wary Hand
(Not with whole Sack-fulls) Sowes the Land;
But Thriftily contrives his Gain,
By Handfuls Husbanding the Grain.
FINIS.
London, Printed for R. Janeway, in Queens-Head Alley in Paternoster Row.


