THE CHARACTER OF A Sham-Plotter or Man-Catcher.
A Sham-Plotter (to begin with his Pedigree) is the Spawn of a Papist, as a
Toad-Poll of a Toad, their Inwards and Venom are the same, but they differ in
outward Shape, Lineaments, and Proportion, for want only of maturity:

For Evasions, Lies, Oaths and Equivocations, he is Conscienc'd like a Jesuit,
Covetous as Ahab, and Bloodthirsty as Jezabel.

You may call him Horse-Leech; for blood he thirsts, by blood he lives, and by
blood he usually dies, it is his Food and his Bane, as Fatal as Pleasant to his
Appetite.

He is the Land-Pyrate, that Pickaroons men's Lives and Estates, by putting out
false Colors, his whole Cargo and Stock being only a stock of Impudence, Lies
and Oaths.

For he Swallows Oaths with as nimble conveyance as Hocus does Knives; and as
ready to spew them up again to Murder the Innocent: for the Daggers that
Clements and Ravilliacks carried in their Sleeves, he carries in his Mouth,
ready when his Cue comes, to Stab his Brother with the Dexterity of Cain, and
for the same Reason; because more Righteous than himself.

There is no more fence against his strokes, than against Lightning or
Thunderbolts, no caution, no prudence, no Innocence can protect; God help the
while.

He gets his Bread (like the Spanish-Bravo's) by killing of men, and when
Conscience flies in his Face for it, he fobs her off, with saying -- It is his
Trade, and Vocation.

He is the worst and blackest of Knights of the Post; for these formerly Swore
men out of nothing but their Estates, but this Vulture and Bird of Prey is Keen
and Sharp, flies at all: can ruin Life, Honor, Estate and Posterity at once.

No man ever took more pains in hunting after Game for his Pleasure, than this
does for Gain and Revenge; he beats every Bush, turns every Stone, insinuates
into all Companies, seeks occasion, gives occasion and provocation, incessant
in mischief, like a true-bred Incarnate-Devil, walking to and fro, seeking whom
he may devour.

He is so very a Judus that he often betrays his own Masters and Employers, (as
Imps betray Witches so) this Impe betrays to the Gallows the Haggs that suckled
him, fed and nourisht him.

For (like other Asses) he follows his Rider only for the sake of Provender,
and when that is done or eaten, rewards his Keeper with a kick, and a jades
trick if he can.

For his Life is the great Riddle of the world, it puzzles the wisest Critics
to know what to make of him; for here you shall have him, and there you shall
have him; sometimes Swears on one side, sometimes another. And when you think you
have him sure, Ixion-like, you do but Hugg a Cloud and Embrace a Shadow; for
there is nothing of Truth, substance or reality in him; he changes his Oaths, as
Chapmen come, or (as at a Lyth-Coop) for -- who bids more?

Nothing being the Master of his Conscience but money, and therefore no more
credit to be given to his Oaths or Words, than to those Ambodexter-Lawyers,
that take Fees on both sides, Plead Pro and Con, Bawling, (like Cursed Currs) at
their very Masters whose handsfed them but the day before; being therefore the
very Baboons of Ingratitude, as having nothing in them of humanity, but the
shape.

This Couple or pair usually Hunt together, and in Couples, being as necessary
to each other as the Pick-Pocket and Rope-Dancer; or as the Bawd and the Whore;
or as the Lion and Jackall; or a Pimp and a Whore-Master; or a Greyhound and a
Finder; or a Mountebank and his Fool; the one Sets, and brings in Game, and the
other Hunts it down, and then both go snips in the Prey; both of them are best
pleased and most applaud their Industry when Prosperous in Villainy; then
Huzzah, -- Huzzah. -- And, like other Toads, the more Venom they suck, the
greater they gram, swell and look bigg: for their Primum Mobile is hopes of
Preferment, and money, money; that is the burden of their Song to their Clients
and Customers (like that of Jago in the Moor of Venice) go, put money in thy
Purse, make all the money that thou can, Fill thy Purse with money.

The Judge and Jury that would take them right, must Construe them as they do
Dreams (or Witches-Prayers) read them backward, and by the Contrary.

When these pair of Brothers meet (like two Knives) (as in a late instance)
they whet one another, and sharpen to mischief.

The Indian-Cannibals and Man-eaters are (to my knowledge) but a Romance to
these, that (like the wild Arabs in the Desert) live upon man's Flesh, and get
their living by Mummy.

When they ^ope their breath-selling-mouths, you would think Pandora's Box
begun to gape and open, for out flies Plagues, Death and Ruin.

There Is no more Truth in them, then in an Hypocrite; And they are as full of
Lies as any Gazet, or Domemestick-Intelligence; and as full of Flattery as an
Epistle Dedicatory; or a Probational Sermon (in presence of the Patron) when
the trembling Candidate has prospect of a Benefice.

They (both of them) Love and Hate (as their Whores do) only for money and
preferment; and to compass their ends become the Renegado's of Truth, Honesty
and Religion.

But I Will uncouple the Dogs a while, and Hunt them single;

And first methinks I see my Sham-Plotter; I know him by his looks, which are
as full of Melancholy and Despair, as the Sybills of old, or Mother Shipton
meagre and wan, as always poring on Revenge, and meditating and remembering his
latter end (I mean) Hell and the torments thereof, which have begun to commence
in his own Bosom.

For his mind is hot as Aetna, and his Conscience (when he is awake and not
drunk) is Turgid and troubled, as the Bay of Biscay, always threatening a a
Storm; his visage (like Faux in disguize) ready to give Eire to the Train of a
well and deep-laid-Plot.

His love, (if he have any,) is only that of Cuckolds, loves them best that are
his undoers; nor is he ever good natured or merciful but (as Cowards are) when
he dares not be mischeivous: for he has no more remorse, Follow-feeling, pity
or relenting, than a man of Alabaster.

He has the Plague all over him, and like other infected Persons, desires to
spread his Venom and Infection, and kill as many as he can; and therefore all
that know him, avoid him, as the Pestilence.

Nay, He Is the worst of Plagues, Charity is never a sin but to him alone. it is
a sin, to bid him -- Godspeed, or to write so much as a -- Lord have mercy --
over his door.

In short, to Limn him right, he is the very Picture in little, or Epitome of
H^raclitus Ridens, (that is) a Villain Burlesque, an equal Compound of Knave
and Fool, the single Hieroglyphick, of Balaam and his Ass together.

He Is mischeivous in Earnest, but never speaks Truth but in Jest, or makes a
Jest of Truth; a serious-dull-Phlegmatick piece of Scurrility; and like
Merry-Andrew spoils all the first proffers of Ingenuity, by being Flaccid, and
stail at the last, and nauseous to a Crambee; a mere Commonplace of Dullness
and Calamny ana, or the Grimace of Honor and Wit.

Yet, as prosperous as he is in Villainy, he is as poor as a bad Poet, or as a
Lampoon-maker, or an Intelligencer: but as Impudent in begging, as the Mumpers
in Lincolns-Inn-fields, for he seeks to all Comers; and a Pension the Slave
will have one where or another, from the good, the bad.

For his Debauchery and Riots make him poor and Needy, And his Poverty (like
his Lusts) makes him a Beggar and a Pensioner, sometimes Mumping for an Alms
from Rome, sometimes from the University; Yet as Poor as he is, he is ('It Is
Strange) also guilty of Coveteousness, The Root of all Evil, enough, (like
Original Sin) to Infect the whole Generation.

To give some Credit to his Sham's, he often interlaces his Discourse, --
Remember -- 41. Meaning the Commencement of the Unnatural Troubles in England
in -- 41.

But he never Intends thereby that men should Remember the Bloody Massacres of
his Brethren (the Tories) in Ireland in -- 41. Nor has he (now) any more Pity
or Remorse for an Innocent man (when his Turn comes to Swear) then his Brethren
the Irish Cutthroats showed to the Innocent Babes in -- 41. When they Ripped
them alive out of their Mothers Bellies, and carried them on the Top of their
Spears, (as Trophee's of their Murder) in -- 41. A Cruelty Designed for all
Protestants in England, Scotland, and Ireland, in -- 41. If God Almighty and
their Valor had not Subdued the Rebell-Cut-Throats -- in 41. Come then, Let Us
Remember still -- 41. -- 41.

When Shoals of these Shirks these Tories and Sham-Plotters, appear Bare-fac't
in any Land or Nation, they are as Fatal and Prodigions, as Sword-Fishes,
Sharks, and Whales, when thrown up in the Thames, allways Foreboding some
ensuing Plagues, War, or Mischiefs, like Vultures that Haunt (by wise Presage)
an Army before a Bloody Battle, Prophesying Streams of Blood shortly to Ensue.

He never Forswears Villainy till he comes to the Gallows (like Fitzh-) and can
no longer Practice it; like Gamesters that Forswear play, only when their
Moneys are lost and gone, and they want Stakes to play on.

He likes his Trade (as bad as it is) because since he left the Pad, he has no
other; and he likes it so much the better, because he cannot break on it till he
break his Neck; nor ever will want Customers or Money, till the World wants
Villainy, or till Truth get Credit in the World.

He Swears and gives in Evidence (as a Young player says his Part) only as he
is Prompted, But Blushes no more when he is out of his Story, and has Sworn
Counter, then does an Old Stage Player, hardened to the work, and Inured beyond
the possibility of Modesty or shame for an Escape.

His Complexion is allways A-la-mode (I mean) Painted and Hypocritical; he is
not (nor does he Desire to seem) what he is: For should he appear as naked as
Truth, he would look as Ghastly and Deformed, as old Lady Death's head (the
French Pimp) before her Essences are laid on: But let him Trim himself with
some Dress of Religion, Loyalty and Honesty, and of (I know not what) Church,
yet if you knew his Inside, you would think yourself among the Negro's, and
(with them) call the Devil, (Strange it should be) -- a White-man.

He Is a Younger Brother (both by Father and Mother side) to the
A-la-mode-Murderers, the Poysoners in France, Engendered by a Jesuit upon a
Succubus (or she Devil,

His very Smiles are as Dangerous as the Fawnings of a Mad-Dogg; he offers to
lick your Fingers only to Snap at them; therefore keep him at a Distance, and
Stave's-End; For his Embraces are as Fatal as those, of his Whore; and as
hollow and Counterfeit as those of the Prelate, when he Cringes, and Bows;
Leers and grins fawns and smiles on an Athiestical Don or Pimp.

An Informer or Promoter comes a far short of a Sham-Plotter as a Chick in
Embrio from a feathered Fowl, or as a sucking Imp from a Grand Devil, or as a
Whelp from a Dog of the same kind time and experience will improve him, and
make him perfect Dog.

In short, He Is more Cowardly than a Tory, and yet Lustful enough to Debauch
the Stews; and therefore the old Character fits him to a hair, namely, Mars ad
opus Veneris, Martis ad Arma Venus.

In English thus: In Sports of Venus he is a Mars,
But a mere Woman in the Wars.


Or thus: When he is to fight his heart is broke,
But at a Wench he is heart of Oak.


Or thus: In the grim Wars (alas!) he is no Man;
He Will play the Man (though) with a Woman.


He never confesses his Villainy, except (as Thieves sometimes do) to acquit
himself by Impeaching his fellow Criminals.

In fine, (for I am weary of drawing his Picture, and sick of him and his
Deformities) He has Impudence enough to out-stare a Courtier, and make him
blush; Knavery enough to teach a Jew, a Proctor. or a Register; Lechery enough
to tutor a Cardinal; Atheism and Irreligion enough to pervert a Renegado, and
make him worse; Oaths, Curses, and Imprecations enough to profane a Court, or
the Ordinaries; Folly and Madness enough to merit Bedlam; yet Roguery enough to
merit Bridewel; Lies enough to outvie a Traveller, or THOMPSON the
INTELLIGENCER; Cruelty enough to improve an Irish-Tory; Dullness and Slander
enough to out- Billingsgate HERACLITVS RIDENS; Villainy enough to mislead and
scandal a Goal; Sycophantry enough to out-pimp -- etc. -- Flattery enough to
out-dwindle a Prelate; Prodigality enough to Instruct (as well as Ruin) a
Young Heir; and yet Covetousness and Ambition enough to surpass a Conclave;
Hellish Stratagems and Sham-Plots enough to shame the Devil or a Jesuit;
Profaneness enough to out-rant a Tory; Ingratitude enough to equal Judas
himself; Despair enough to hang himself; yet Vileness enough to discredit the
Gallows. And there I leave him, for that groans for him, and is often his --
END.

But we have had too much of him already: For his further Character I refer you
to that Seasonable Sermon of the Horrid Sin of Man-Catching, where you will find
this Man-Catchers Picture is drawn to the Life by E. H.

LONDON, Printed for Ab. Green, 1681.


