A LETTER FROM A Person of Quality To an EMINENT DISSENTER, To rectify his
MISTAKES concerning the SUCCESSION, The Nature of PERSECUTION AND A
COMPREHENSION.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. for Randolph Tailor near Stationers' Hall. MDCLXXXV.

A LETTER sent from beyond the Seas to a Noted Dissenter.
Dear Cousin,
I Was very glad to receive your Letters, but very sorry to find by them, that
you are still so extremely desirous of Innovations in a Government so well
Established, as that is under which you live. I perceive you are more zealous
then it becomes a good Subject, or a good Christian to be, for carrying on a
Project of the Earl of Shaftsbury, as Unreasonable as New; viz. That of
Disabling a Papist to Inherit the Crown. For doubtless that proposal was first
made, and afterward promoted by him, the last Sessions of Parliament, not out
of true Love to the Reformed Religion, but out of Spite and Revenge to the D.
of Y -- Who, were he not only Papist, but Heathen or Mahumetan (which I think
is not much worse) would certainly have as good a Title to his Crown, and all
his Temporal Rights, as if he were the most Orthodox and Holy Christian in the
World. And I am persuaded, that my zealous Lord Chose would not be willing that
the King and Parliament should make a particular Act, to disable his own
Posterity, to Inherit the great Estate he has got, if they should turn Papists
or Atheists, as others have done before them. We all know what mischief in the
World, that Damnable Doctrine has made, That Temporal Rights and Inheritances
depend upon Saintship and Grace. And if it be clear from Scripture (as nothing
is more clear) that a King ought not to lose his Crown, for not being a
Christian, or for renouncing the Christian Religion as Julian did; then it is
plain, that neither the Duke nor any other Prince ought to be debarred from the
Crown, which is the greatest and most sacred of Temporal Rights, for not being
Protestants; or which is more, for renouncing the Christian Religion.

And I am heartily glad, that God gave the Fathers of the English Church the
Grace and Courage to defend her Doctrine, in opposing that Unreasonable, and
truly Romish Proposal of my Lord Chose; which if they had approved, and
defended after it was proposed, they had truly acted in that like Prelates
Popishly affected, and really showed themselves to be what their Adversaries
would fain persuade the World, they are. For it is the Romish Church, and her
Doctors, which maintain, That Kings Excommunicated, or Heretic Kings, or
(which is all one) that Kings that renounce the Apostolic Faith, ought to be
Deprived and Deposed. But it is the Church of England that maintains the
contradiction of that Unscriptural, Unevangelical Principle; and thinks her
self as much obliged to submit her self to a Heathen, Atheistical, Heretical,
or Popish Prince, where she can, as to an Orthodox King; and where she cannot,
she thinks her self obliged to suffer, as her Savior, like a Lamb brought to
the slaughter; and dares pretend to take up to Arms but those of the Primitive
Christians ( Whose true Copy she is) Tears, Arguments and Prayers. I say, it is
the Church of England, that is of this Judgment, and neither the Church of
Rome, nor the Kirk of Scotland; both of which have actually Excommunicated and
D^posed Lawful and Rightful Princes, under the Notion of being Heretics, and
Enemies to Christ's Kingdom; forgetting both alike the Pr^cepts and Examples of
our Savior and his Apostles, on which the Church of England has grounded the
contrary Doctrine, as well as on right reason.

Our Savior, though God rendered unto the Heathen Caesar the things that were
Caesar's; he owned his right to the Empire, both by word and deed, although he
were but the adopted Successor of the greatest Usurper that ever was in the
World. Nay furthermore, he owned and submitted to the procuratory Power of
Pilate, who acted but by Commission from the Emperor Tiberius; who (if there
be any truth in the Character of Tacitus) was one of the greatest Tyrants, and
most wicked men that ever the World saw. And as for St. Paul, there is no
Article of our Religion, not even that, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God,
more clear in his Epistles, than that Every Soul should be subject to the
Higher Powers; that we should Obey, not only for Wrath, but Conscience sake;
that whosoever resisieth, receives to himself Damnation; and lastly, that all
the Powers (and when he wrote there were none but Heathen Powers) were ordained
of God.

I might here insist upon the Practice of the Apostles, as it is represented in
their Acts, and the constant Submission and Sufferings of the Primitive
Christians, as they are reported by the Ecclesiastcal Fathers, and Historiaens;
but the Scripture it self is sufficient to demonstrate the truth of this
Argument, which the Church of England has not only established in her Doctrine,
but her Fathers and Sons of late, maintained in their Practices: and which the
Kirk of of Scotland (agreeing in this and many other Points with that of Rome)
did ever oppose, both in Word and Deed. And since that Kirk and Nation have
been of this Opinion, we need not wonder that the English Disciples of their
Buchanan and Knox have practiced those rebellious Principles, which have so
debauched and corrupted the Subjects of the Kings of England, as to make them
be proverbially called, The Kings of Devils: And which the Anababtists in
Germany improved into this Maxim, That Saintship was the Foundation of
Sovereignty, and that the Righteous ought to Inherit the Earth.

And furthermore, if Crowns ought to descend upon Protestants only, then it is
but just, that the Estates of all Subjects whatsoever should be so Entailed:
and if for example, the D -- of Y -- must be cut off from his Right, for being
a Roman Catholic, then let the rest of the Papists lose theirs; they are all
alike Idolaters, and let them all alike suffer. And, to bring the Case to your
own House, can you imagine that you your self ought to lose your Right to the
Estate you have, or may have hereafter, upon that supposition, that you should
turn Papist; which men as firmly resoved against it as you have certainly done.
These Practices and Proposals are such, that they have left a blot on the
memories of some men, that seem more zealous than their Brethren. And I am glad
at present, that the Religious Lord Chose is the Chief Patron and Promoter of
such and Unreasonable and Romish Design. It is unreasonable to exclude a Popish
Heir from a Crown, to which he derives his right from Popish Ancestors, and I
have more than ordinary reason to call it Romish, because I have heard it
maintained here among all the Priests I converse with. It is a Doctrine dearly
beloved by the Romanists: And put but the Name of Heretic to a Prince here,
and it is just the same case, as when you call a Prince a Papist in England;
where, if there be no more than my good Lord Chose that are Fautors of this
Romish Doctrine, my Country is in a far better case than I thought it to be.
And truly this noble Project of the late Lord Chose was condemned by all
Protestants as soon as it took air in France; not only for that it was an
Ungospel way of Proceeding, and savours strongly of the Doctrine of Rome, which
they abhor; but because it puts their King in mind of a Project he is very much
inclined to, viz. To make a like Law here, that none but a Roman Catholic
shall ever be King, or bear any Office or Trust in the Kingdom. And certainly,
if it should ever please God, for our sins, to suffer our Princes to backslide
into Romish Idolatry and Superstition, we have nothing to do, but to pray, and
like our Glorious Ancestors in Queen Mary's days, suffer quietly, when we
cannot fly. And therefore I wonder that you would so obliquely reflect upon
the Bishops, and censure them for doing that, which in Honor and Duty, they
were bound to do, and represent this to their Disgrace, which all good and well
advised Protestants must needs Commond them for, if they will be Impartial.

But put the case such an Act were made, who can see the bad consequences
thereof? The Union of Great Bri^tain will be broke upon it, and War entailed
upon both Kingdoms, and by the same reason, that none but a Protestant shall
succeed now, Faction still increasing, none perhaps within a while, will be
thought sit to Inherit the Crown, but a Presbyterian, etc. For you that are
used to talk of Numbers and Strength, can best tell how Numerous and Powerful
they are that are possessed with as firm a prejudice against the Church of
England, as the Church of Rome it self; denying Communion equally with both;
and who educate their Children in perfect hatred of the one, as the genuine
Daughter of the other.

I have wrote all this to present to your view what (perhaps in the hurry of
Zeal) you have not had time to consider. And though I think it very impious and
unreasonable to debar any such Prince from the Crown, upon this account, yet
could we imagine the Government were to be formed again, I would be as Zealous
for this condition, as the greatest Zealot of them all: And am as sorry as any
other good Protestant, that it was not always one of the Fundamental Laws of
England, though now it be too late to make it such.

You tell me also that my Lord -- intends to come and live in London; I suppose
it may be under pretense to secure his Person from the Papists; but I wish it
may not be with a design to act over the same things, under a pretense of
securing the Protestant, which the Duke of Guise acted in Paris, under a
seeming Zeal to secure the Popish Religion. The Reason that makes me fear it,
is the conformity of our times in England with those in France, as you may see
by the following account.

The Duke, who was a man of an High Spirit, and not able to bear the least
disgrace, being removed by Henry III. from them most Rich and Honorable of his
Court-Preferments, became thereupon Malcontent; and retiring from the Court,
which he now did hate, went to live at his House in Paris: where, by many Arts,
as in particular by the subtle Practices of the Priests and Jesuits, he became
in a short time the Minion of the People; whose Affections he drew off from the
King, by representing him (though a hearty Roman Catholic) as a favorer of the
Heretics; who under the protection of the Princes of the Blood increased
mightily in his Reign. He also represented him in particular to be a great
favourer of the King of Navarre, against whom he himself had a particular ill
will; and whom the People, through the Instigation of the Priests and Jesuits,
did perfectly hate, because he was a Protestant; although he was Primier Prince
of the Blood (for whom the French commonly have a great Reverence) and by
Consequence Heir Apparent, or as a Friend of your would have said, Heir
Presumptive (for the King had no Child to Inherit) to the Crown of France.
After he had thus made the credulous People, by the help of the Priests and
Jesuits, zealous for the Defense of their Declining Religion, he drew them to
League into Rebellion against their lawful Sovereign, under a pretense of
securing the same, by removing Evil Counselors from his Person, and obliging
him to employ his Royal Power in suppressing the Protestans; and in particular
by declaring the Heretic King of Navarre (afterward H. IV.) incapable of
succeeding to the Crown.

For the sake of Peace the King was willing so far to deny himself as to grant
the two first, but could never be made so false to the Interest of the Royal
Family, as to consent to the last, by changing the order of Succession to the
Crown, by which his Ancestors had Reigned so many hundred years; and which have
been so long established, without any respect to Religion, by the Salique or
Original Laws of France. Hereupon the League (in Imitation, and after the
Pattern of which the Solemn League and Covenant was formed) or Rebellion grew
so high, as to beat the King out of Paris; where the Guisards had a design to
sieze upon his sacred Person, shut him up, like King Chilperick, in a
Monastery, and set up the silly old Cardinal Bourbon, the King of Navar's
Uncle, to Reign in his stead. But the King escaping from Paris, sheltered
himself in Chartres; where to compose Differences, he issued out Writs to call
together the three Estates (which much resemble our Parliaments) at Bl^is.
Thither the Deputies or Members repair, some for the King, but far more for the
Cursed League; and therefore the Guisards finding themselves more potent than
the Royalists, insisted almost on nothing else, but securing the Roman
Catholic Religion, by de claring the King of Navarre, because an Heretic,
incapable of Succeeding to the most Christian Crown.

You see Cousin, what a Parallel there is between those times and ours;
excepting First, that there are no Priests and Jesuits to second such a Design
in England, as there were in France: But to supply that Defect, there may be
found men as fit in all points as they in Black, to stir up the People to
Discontent and Rebellion. I mean the same sort of Persons that Preached up the
late Bloody War; who really are the Bastard-brood of the Monastic and
Jesuitical Emissaries, though they bear not the Names of their Fathers; but
(like Bastards) are disowned by those that begot them. The Seditious
Principles. Preached and Printed by them in the late Times, are Evident Proofs
of what Race they are come: And as a man may Travel so far West, till at last
he come to the same Eastern Point from which he did set out, so you Cousin, and
your Brethren have gone so far from the Church of Rome, that you are (some I
believe unawares) come thither again; as is unanswerably proved by Lysimachus
Nicenor, lately reprinted at Oxford, in his Letter of Congratulation to the
Kirk. But Secondly, the Parallel fails in this too, That his Royal Highness is
not a declared Papist, as the King of Navarre was a declared Protestant; nor
has yet openly renounced the Communion of the Church of England, for which his
blessed Father died a Martyr. And therefore of the two, our English Guisards
are much more to blame, in representing his Roual Highness as a Papist, which
is so difficult to imagine him Strictly to be.

But furthermore, upon supposition he were a declared Papist, the Proposal of
my Lord Chose was very ridiculous, since it did suppose a possibility of
prevailing with his Majesty to Disinherit his Royal Brother, who must needs be
so much dearer to him, than the King of Navarre was to Henry III, as he is
nearer in Blood. And for may own part, I cannot but imagine at this distance,
that his Majesty who is a Prince incomparably wiser and juster then was Henry
III. of France, must needs disdain and abhor such a Proposal; which, were it
Enacted, it would enervate the Laws of Succession by which He and His Ancestors
have hitherto Reigned, and give a greater Blow to the English Monarchy, than
that which cut off His Royal Fathers Head.

I have here forborne to give you an Account of the Tragical End of the Duke of
Guise, which is a Lesson well worth your Learning, and may teach all Persons,
so disposed as he was, how unsafe it is to provoke Sovereign Authority; since
the goodness of the best of Kings, like the infinite Goodness of God himself,
whose Ministers they are, may at length be so injured and affronted, as to be
forced to sharpen it self into Sovereign Vengeance and Justice. And therefore
Cousin, let me advise you, if not for Conscience, yet for Wraths sake, to have
nothing to do in Blowing up the Flames of Sedition: Nor let your Soul enter
into the secret of my Lord -- though his Interest among the Senators (as you
write) be so very considerable and strong.

You likewise forget your self, in miscalling the Execution of the late Laws by
the odious name of Persecution; which if you can prove to be such, according to
the Scriptural notion of Persecution, viz. Infliction of Evil for Righteousness
sake, then will I become your Proselyte, and forsake the Church of England, as
much as I have this Idolatrous Church of Rome.

For no man is persecuted, but either for immediate matters of Divine Worship,
which concern the First Table; or with respect to matters of Morality, or a
Good Life, which concern the Second.

With respect to the First; a man is persecuted either on a negative account,
for not worshipping a False God, as the three Children in Daniel; or for not
worshipping the True in a False way: as St. Paul and the other Apostles were
persecuted by the Pharisees, for not worshipping the True God according to the
Jewish manner after it was abrogated: Or as our Fore fathers in England, For
not worshipping God and our Savior after the Romish Rites. Or Secondly, on a
positive account, For worshipping the true God in a way that is true; or to
express it yet more clearly and absolutely in your own terms, For serving of
God: as Daniel was cast into the Lions Den, for praying to God against the
King's Decree.

With respect to the Second; A man is also persecuted on a negative account,
For not doing something, which is in its own nature, or by God; positive
command, morally evil: as the good Midwives were afraid to be persecuted by
Pharaoh, for not murdering the Hebrew Infants. Or else on a positive account,
for doing some good moral action, which ought in such and such circumstances to
be done: and thus was our blessed Savior persecuted, for opening the eyes of
the blind man, and for healing on the Sabbath Day.

Now these distinctions being premised, tell me in which of these cases you are
Persecuted? or, which is all one, for what you are Confessors and Martyrs? For
no man is persecuted, but as he is persecuted he is a Confessor or Martyr; and
by his sufferings bears witness to the Truth. With respect to the Second head,
you cannot say that you are persecuted; and therefore let me see whether you
are so with respect to the first. And First, it is plain that you do not suffer
for not worshipping a false God; and it is likewise as plain, that you do not
suffer for not worshipping the true God in a false way. For first, the Laws,
whose Execution you mis-call Persecution, do not punish you for not worshipping
God after our way; or if they did to prove their Execution to be Persecution,
you must First prove that the Church of England (whose Doctrine is down right
against Idolatry and Superstition) does worship God in an Idolatrous and
Superstitious manner; which, good Cousin, you know can never be proved.

There remains nothing then but to assert, That you are punished for serving
God, or for Worshipping God in a way which you are sure is true. That you
worship God in a true way, I verily believe, and could heartily join with you
in other circumstances. But then you are not punished for worshipping God in
that manner; for the same Laws you complain of, allow you to worship God in
what fashion you please; and not only you, but your Family, be it as great as
it will; and lastly, not only your Family, but Five Persons more; Which
allowance, were you the only Christians in the World, and the Magistrates
Heathens; or, which your Friends are more likely to suggest, were they Papists
or Atheists, is so far from being Persecution, that were you of the temper of
the Primitive Christians, you would esteem it as a great privilege, and instead
of reviling, thank the kind Magistrate for the same. But then if on the
contrary hand you be considered (and many good English men, and good Christians
cannot but consider you) as a sort of men that have formerly raised a most
Unnatural Rebellion, and now make Schism in the Church, and Broils in the
State, the punishments you suffer and complain so loudly off, will be so far
from seeming Persecution of you as Christians, that they will rather seem your
just Desert, as Factious and Turbulent Subjects. And I assure you, that your
Brethren in France (whom you falsely so call, and for whom you pretend so great
respect) are so far from Judging you persecuted, that they will not excuse you;
but wonder at your non-submission to the Church, and pity your mistakes, that
make you stand out against the Laws. They that have seen and examined our
English Liturgy, which is Printed at Geneva in French, cannot understand your
Notion of Persecution. And Ministre Claude, the most famous of them all, for
Piety and Learning, told me in the presence of many others, (after a Discourse,
wherein he said all for you that could be said) that he wondered how the
Presbyterians in England could rend the Peace of the Church, for such little
indifferent mat^ers; and that, if he were in England, he would be of the
Episcopal Party, and heartily submit himself to the Discipline and Government
of the Church of England. And if you would do so too, how happy a thing would
this be both for your selves and the Nation? Or seeing, as you pretend you
cannot, yet at least live Peaceably, and forbear to trouble the World with
compassing Sea and Land; that is, by doing all that you can, like your Fathers
the old Pharisees, to make Proselytes; when yet you cannot show any sinful
condition of Communion with the Church of England, nor prove your way of
Worship as Apostolical, as that of hers; from which out of Pride, Interest or
Ignorance, or partly altogether you Dissent. I am sure this would rather become
the Dissenting Brethren, then to Foment Divisions Raise Parties, betake
themselves to the wickedest of Men, as of late to -- and cry up the Kings
Prerogative, which they formerly cried down; which with many other
self-contradictions, confirms me in an opinion you know I was of before, That
in those matters wherein you differ from us, you are men of no Principles, and
know not where to six.

I have Enlarged upon this Theme more than I thought to do a first, because the
Papists here in France complain as loudly as you of the cruelty of our
Ecclesiastical Laws; and cry out wherever they come, how their Brethren have
been; and still are Persecuted among us; though with this difference, that in
disputing ad hominem, their case is far more reasonable and pleadable then
yours. As for you, I pro^est, though the Laws you complain off look like hard
Laws, when I consider you as Free born Subjects of England, yet when I consider
you as Headstrong, Turbulent and Factious Subjects, I cannot but think them
just and good, and I will maintain that the Execution of them would not be
Persecution, although you (...) the only true Christians in the World. For, as
^^^^ted before, you have the Liberty in your Houses so profess what Religion
you please, and to worship (...) ^n what manner you will: And for sear your
Fa^^^^ should not be a just Congregation, you may have (...) ^ore: But for fear
you should do as you have (...) done, you are not to have five Hundred, or
(...) thousand; which Liberty, not only the Primi(...) Christians, but our own
Ancestors, an hundred (...) would have called a Blessing, and a Privi(...) have
heartily thanked God and the King for (...)e. And God grant we may never see
that time England, when truly tender Consciences will esteem so much Liberty as
the greatest blessing in the World. The good Protestants here in France, though
their Religion is made an Obstacle to all State-preferments, though it Disable
them to sit in the Courts of Parliaments (except just so many as serve in the
Chamber of Edicts, to decide Controversies between Protestants and Papists) or
to have any other Charges of Judicature, or any high Offices in the Army,
though their Numbers are much diminished, and their Interest weakened, by a
Prohibition to Marry with Roman Catholics, and by a Capital Law, which makes
it Death to return Protestants after they have once turned Papists; and though
a great number of their Temples have been demolished (some under a pretense
that they were built since the Edict of Nantes, others that they were built
without License, and others that they were built upon Holy Ground) so that
hereby they are forced in very many places to the grievous Inconvenience of
going two, three, four or five Leagues to Church, it not more: And though all
the Places of Strength, where they do abound are Demolished, and Cittadels are
Erected to awe them in other Towns, where they are Numerous; though their own
particular Hospitals, and all other their perpetual Provisions for their Poor,
are taken away, and they disabled, either living or dying, to give any settled
Maintenance either to their own Ministers or People (as to Endowe Churches,
Bu^ld Schools, Colleges or Hospitals, etc.) nay, though they are deprived of the
benefit of other Hospitals, provide for the rest of the Subjects; and although
their Ministers are forbid to speak against the Pope, or to Preach against the
Romish Religion, with half that freedom and plainness that you dare speak
against 02 the Church of England; or to Preach in any places out those few
appointed by the King, though they are forbidden to call the Papists in their
Sermons by any other Name but that of Catholics; or to make mention of their
Religion and Ceremonies, without Reverence and Respect; though they are forbid
to call themselves Priests or Pastors, and have no other Title allowed them,
but only ministres de la Religion pretendue Reformee; and thought it be
Enacted, that their Religion shall be called by no other Name in any Public
Acts, Registers, etc. Though they are forbiddent to bury their dead in
Catholic Churches, or Churchyards, even where the deceased Person was Patron
of the Church; of where his Ancestors had purchased Buring-places for their
Families; Though they are forbid to make any Public Exhortations or Prayer, or
to sing Psalms at their Burial: Though they are forbid to Instruct or Condole
those of their own Religion in Prisons or Hospital; or to pray with them in a
voice so loud as to be heard by the standers; by, though they are forbid to make
any Collections of Money among themselves, but such as are permitted and
regulated by the Edicts of the King; Though they are forbid to Work or open
their Shops on Romish Holydays, or to sell Flesh on their Fasting-days, etc. I
say 02 the good Protestants here in France, notwithstanding all this hard
dealing, are yet so far from complaining of Persecution, that they show
themselves thankful both to God and the King, for the Liberty and Indulgence
they enjoy. Indeed they will complain, for the aforesaid Reasons, that their
Religion is very much discouraged, and they themselves hardly used: But
Persecution is a Notion that they rarely think or speak of, when they discourse
of their own condition, being very far, though not so far as you, from a State
of Martyrdom; which consists in a forcible Obligation to Suffer or Renounce the
Truth. And therefore Cousin I beseech you and conjure you, not to misuse the
Name of Persecution again. It is a very sinful way thus to abuse and amuse the
Vulgar, by calling things by their wrong Names: and as to this particular,
honest and knowing men will be apt to suspect, that through the Name of
Pers^cution, you have a design to make your Governors pass for Tyrants, and
your selves for Martyrs.

To conclude: If this which you call Persecution, be not such indeed, then I
doubt not but they who Miscal it so, that is all presumptuous or affectedly
ignorant Schismatics, without bitter pangs of Repentance, will be persecuted
by the God of Peace himself to a sad and endless eternity.

As for the Bill of Comprehension, it begun to be talked of, before I left my
Country, and I have often discoursed it with many of the Projectors, but could
never understand from them, how it was practicable to unite so many
Incompossible Sects, which agree in nothing, but their opposition to the
Church. However if the altering, or taking away of a Ceremony or two could
effectually unite the Protestant Partys, as you are pleased to assert, I think
it would be worth the while to do it, and that the doing of it for so sure an
end, would reflect no dishonor upon the Church of England, which acknowledges
the few innocent and decent Ceremonies, which she has ordained to be
indifferent and alterable, according to the Exigency of times. Neither, if this
were done, could the Romish Church have the least apparent reason to reproach
us for such a slight alteration; seeing her own Missals and Breviaries have
been so diverse and different in several times and places; and have undergone
so many Emendations, or rather Corruptions, before they were established in the
present Form, by the Authority of Pius V. and the Decree of the Council of
Trent. But unless this Alteration would surely and infallibly produce this
effect, it had far better be let alone, and in the mean time, I would have all
good Christians wait in Peace and Compliance with the Established Religion,
till Authority shall think to make this Alteration in it, that so a poor
English Traveller would not be tauntingly asked by every impertinent Priest
here, Whether he were a true Son of the Church, or Presbyterian, or
Independent, or Anabaptist, or Quaker. And I assure you, when they meet with a
man that owns himself a true Son of the Church of England, they will seem with
great Formality to pity him more than any other; but yet they will never
attempt to convert him. But when they meet with one that will own himself of
any other sort, they will be pleased, smile in their Sleeves, and set upon him
as a Person not far from their Kingdom of God. Ana I am persuaded, had you seen
or heard as much of their Idolatries, Blasphemies and Superstitions, as I have
done in one Christmas, one Line and one Easter, you would be so far from doing
the Church of England any ill Office, that you would rather (like St. Paul
after his Conversion) preach against your own Partisans, and thank God that you
lived in a Church reformed from Romish Idolatry and Superstition. And I cannot
but freely confess, that I am since my Travels become ten Times a greater Lover
of our own Church, and as many times a greater Hater and Detester of the Romish
Church, than I was before. And therefore I cannot here dissemble the hearty
Grief I have conceived, for the great hopes you have, that the Licenses (as you
express it) will be once more authorized by his Majesty, or the Declaration
revived. For as it is that which at first was hammered out by a Popish Lord,
who was the Patron and Idol of the Presbyterians; so it is that which the Roman
Catholics here (especially the Priests) do hope, and wish for as well as you.
They desire nothing more, than such a Toleration, as that was, knowing that it
must needs tend to the Ruin of the Church of England, which is the principal
Butt of all their Envy and Malice; as being the main support and credit of the
Reformed Religion every where, and the only hedge against Popery it self in our
unfortunate British Isles. We meet with not a few Priests of several Orders,
that have the confidence (in our most familiar conferences) to tell us, that by
the just Judgment of God upon our Church, the time of Her Ruin is at Hand; the
Nation it self being overspread with Schism and Atheism, and the Hearts of the
Faithful being disposed by the Spirit Providence of God, to re-embrace the Holy
Catholic Truth. And therefore they freely Confess, that this time of
Distraction is their Harvest; and withal express their Intentions and Zeal to
Transport themselves into England at the Critical time of Toleration, that they
may be Fellow-laborers with your selves in the Harvest. They seem to lament as
much, and complain as fast, of the prodigious increase of Schism and Atheism
among us, as you are wont to do of the daily growth of Atheism and Popery. And
whilst you both complain alike, and in the formality of your complaints, both
alike reflect upon the Church of England: It is she only that is the sufferer,
and she only that truly laments the growth, and at the same time sets up Banks
to hinder the perfect Inundation of all the three among us! As for Schism among
Protestants, you were the first Fathers, and continue the chief Fautors
thereof; all the inferior Sects having sprung from you, and dividing both from
you and one another, under pretense of the same Reasons, for which you profess
to divide from the Church. And it is from you, that even the Quakering Sect it
self (the dregs of Schism) have learned to talk of Illumination, and the
Spirit: and the rest of the Sectaries; in what number soever they be, differ no
more from you than the second, third, or fourth, etc. from the first Book of
Eu^lid. Not that by this comparison I intend, that you have any such
Principles, or Data among your selves, as there are among, Mathematicians; for
I am very well assued; that take but any four of the Presbyterian Demagogues,
and they can scarce agree amongst themselves in any four Particulars, wherein
they differ from the Church of England. And therefore if you be not
Schismatics, then the Church of England, from which you separate, and out of
which you have gathered Congregations, and preach and administer the Sacraments
unto them; I say, if you be not Schismatics, then our Church must be the
Schismatic, in the Controversy between us; and be justly chargable with the
same Indictment, which she has drawn upagainst the Church of Rome. An
Assertion, Consin, which I never knew any other Person, except one or two,
besides your self, have the confidence to aver, and an Assertion, which no
Protestant here in France could hear us yet relate, without Horror, Impatience
and Disdain. And therefore, if the Reformed Church of England, from which you
wilfully divide, and to which by your Divisions you cause so much Scandal
abroad and Evil at home, be not a Schismatical Church, that is, a Church which
requires some sinful conditions of Communion; in what a woeful condition will
your unpeaceable, seditious Spirits appear before the God of Peace? And how
will you answer that, at the Tribunal of his Wisdom and Justice, which neither
your Fathers, nor you could never yet answer, to those Instruments of his
Glory, Judicious Hooker and the Venerable Sanderson? But whether you are
Schismas ticks, or whether you are not, the Separations which you and your
Brood have made from the Church, are the Apparent Causes of the Growth of
Popery; and both your Separations, and your Superstitious Enthusiastical Way of
Worshipping that God, whose People you Emphatically pretend to be, are the true
Causes of that abundant Atheism, which at present makes England an Astonishment
and a Scandal to Foreign Nations. And if you, or any other of the Brotherhood,
think it strange, that I charge yours, which is the Capital Sect, with
Enthusiasm, or make Superstition, which seems diametrically opposite to
Atheism the Mother thereof; I offer, upon the Challenge, to make good the
Charge, in both particulars: But in the mean time, to show you how unsafe it
will be to provoke me to that Trouble, I advise you to read one or two short
chapters in the beginning of Mr. Smith's Discourses, concerning these
Distempers of the Soul, and you shall find what I have said, proved with more
Plainness and Perspicity, than, I am confident, you would wish to see.

But besides the Schism and Enthusiasm, the Bloody Wars, which you formerly
made in the State, under pretense of the Glory of God, and the Reformation of
of the Reformed Religion, have given many inconsiderate men occasion to
suspect, that all Religion, like that of most of your Leaders, is but a
Politic Engine which Men use, to make themselves Popular and Powerful, that
they may afterward act with good color whatsoever their Interest shall
suggest. And furthermore, to consider, That the great Pretenders of the Spirit,
and the Power of the Christian Religion, (which with respect to Magistrates
teaches nothing but to obey or suffer) should notwithstanding Preach up
Rebellion against their Rightful Prince, Fight Him from Field to Field, Romove
Him from Prison to Prison, and at last most barbarously put Him to Death, is
such an Absurdity against the Principles of Right Reason, so repugnant to the
Laws of our own Nation, and so inconsistent with the Peaceable Doctrine of the
Gospel; that, besides the Atheists it has made, it has, and ever will
constrain Men of honest Principles, and just Resentments, to Persecute you with
Satyrs and Exclamations to the end of the World. I had not here presented that
Tragical Scene of the King's Murder, but that I have had so many unpleasant
Occasions to hear Our Nation Reproached with the Scandal and Dishonor of that
Inhumane Fact. Particularly, it was my bad Fortune to be at a Station in Paris;
where there were met about two hundred Persons, to read the Gazetts, at that
very same time, when that of England came full charged with the News of Burning
the Pope in Essigie at London. This Feat did at first surprise that Roman
Catholic Concourse of People; but after a little recollection, collection,
they ceased to wonder, saying in every Company as we passed along; It is not so
strange that the English Devils should do this, who formerly Murdered their
King. And another time, it was my ill luck also to be at the same place, when
the London Gazette brought us the News, That the House of Lords had taken into
consideration the Growth of Atheism in our Nation: Whereupon some French
Gentlemen of my acquaintance seriously enquired of me the Causes of so much
Atheism, amongst such a Thinking and Solid People. I assigned the same Reasons
which I have written above, besides some others which I will not stand to
mention, as the most probable Causes thereof. And as I hope I did not misinform
them, so I am confident did not unjustly charge you in any particular,
especially with the Murder of the King. For there were no Accessaries in the
Murder of that Sacred Person: neither was it the last stroke only that sell'd
the Royal Oak; but you and the Independants, like the two Sacrilegious Priests
of Jupiter, are equally guilty of the Crime; the one for Binding the direful
Victim, and the other for putting the Knife to his Throat.

But to be short, where I am so unacceptable, I Will conclude my Argument with a
Fable. A Principal. Ship, which for many Years had been Sovereign of the Seas,
was at last Attacted by a Tempestuous Wind, which the Devil raised, and
notwithstanding all the Help that could be made to save her, was driven by the
force of that Malignant Wind, and split upon a Rock. The very same Instant she
dashed upon the Rock the Wind ceased; and being afterward cursed by the
Seamen, for the Wrack of the Royal Charles (for so the Capital Vessel was
called) answered, You Charge me most unjustly my Friends, it was not I, but the
Rock as you saw that split your Ship. The Moral of this Parable is very
Obvious; and if the Application thereof, or any thing else that I have written,
may conduce to awaken your Conscience, and reclaim you from Schism, I shall
think my pains well bestowed. But if you and your seditious Brethren will still
persevere to assault the Church on one Hand, as fast as the Romish Priests do
undermine her on the other, her days are like to be but few and evil; and
except God incline the Hearts of our Magistrates to put the Laws in Execution
against them, and sind some effectual means to reduce you, you may live to see
her Ruin accomplished, which you both alike desire and expect. How numerous you
are, the World can guess, and if the Accounts which we receive from the Fathers
of Intelligence of several Orders, be credible, there are about three Thousand
of them, which sind Entertainment and Success within the King of Great
Britain's Dominions. But in the mean time, till her hour is come, she
struggleth against both, like her Savior against the Pharisees, whose true
Disciples in part you both are; they representing those sworn Enemies of the
Gospel, by the Cabala of their ridiculous and impious Traditions; and you
representing them in their Hypocrisy, Pride, Envy, Evil-speaking, moross and
censorious Dispositions, etc. (which are Sins scarce consistent with Humanity,
much less with Grace) as likewise in observing many Fasts and making long,
Prayers, with design not to serve God, but to delude the People. And therefore
I wonder not that you are such malignant Enemies to the Church of England,
since that Pharisaical spirit, which reigns so much amongst you, is a wicked
Pusilanimous spirit, that affects to be seen in the Head of Parties, and
Dictate amongst the Ignorant; and loves as much to Rule, as it hates to Obey.
But would you once be so sincere, as to subdue your Pride, lay aside your
Prejudice, inform your Ignorance, and forsake your dearly beloved Interest, for
the Truth; it would not be long ere we should see you join with the Church of
England, without troubling our Senators to bring you in with an Act of
incomprehensible Comprehension. Your Pride appears in Heading of Parties, and
in the Pleasure you are seen to take in the Multitudes, that run after you; and
in your boasting, that without you the Souls of People would starve for want of
Knowledge. Your Prejudice is an effect of your Pride, and discovers it self
together with your Ignorance, in not submitting to those Invincible Reason
which you cannot Answer: And as for your Interest, the greatest Paradox of all,
that is evident enough to me, who have so often heard many of you glorify your
selves in the Number and Riches of your Followers, boast of their Affection to
your sacred Persons, and brag of the great Sums you have Collected in your
Congregations; which makes the King's Chapples (as you arrogantly call your
Conventicles) better places than most of the Churches, of which He is Patron.
And therefore never complain that you live either worse, or at greater
uncertainties than you did before. For by your Pretentions to Poverty and
Sufferings, and by other unworthy Arts, you have so wrought your selves into
the esteem of your Disciples, that few of them are either so Covetuous or so
Poor, but they will Pinch at home to supply you. There are several orders of
Fransciscans here, who have renounced not only Parsonages, but all Temporal
Estates and Possessions whatsoever; and by their vain Glorious Sanctity and
Austerities, they have got (like you) such fast hold on the Souls of the People
(which is the fastest hold of all) that they can easily make most of them
dispose of their Children, cashire their Servants, and settle their Estates as
they please; and by these Tricks do more effectually promote the Interest of
Rome, than all the Parish Priests within the Pale of that Church. And really,
when I consider what Influence these Sanctimonious and self-denying Zealots
have over all Families, in all places where they live; how they Steal away the
Hearts of the People from their Parish Priests, and drain their Congregations;
and how the deluded People had rather give them the worth of a shilling, than
the dues of two pence, to their own Curees; it makes me often run the Parallel
between you and them, and think what a Politic and Gainful Pretense you have
got to renounce your Livings, for to secure your Consciences, and to preach the
Word gratis like the Primitive Apesiles; when God knows, it is not out of love
to the People, but to your selves.

And I protest to you, were I a man to be maintained by the Pulpit, and
consulted my Prosit more than the Goodness of my Cause, I should take the same
course that you do; I should rather be Mr. M. than Dr. A. of Plymouth; and
should choose the plentiful Income of that dull Zealot Dr. Manton, before that
of his most Learned and Religious Successor of Govent-Garden. But though you
live very well, and better indeed than most of the Ministers of the Church, yet
the Mischief of it is, you are incapable of Dignities; which makes you such
Aerians, and upon all occasions opens your Throats as wide as Sepulehres
against the Bishops and the Church. You know what an History of Bishops Mr.
Pryn has wrote, and what a fair Collection the Learnes Smec. has taken out of
him; as if when a Bishop is defective, either in Piety, Learning or the Skill
of Government, it were not the deplorable unhappiness, but the fault of the
Church of England. Should an Heathen or Mahumetan, make such an Historical
Collection of Scandalous Christians, either in this or former Ages, you would
not be persuaded for all that, to prefer the Alcoran before the Gospel; or the
most exalted Paganism whatsoever, before the Christian Religion. Therefore wise
and sober men will make no Inference but this, from such a malicious
enumeration of particulars; that corruptions will creep into Government,
notwithstanding all the care that can be used to the contrary; and that by the
favor of Princes (who hear with other men's ears, and often receive undeserved
Characters of Men) sometimes Ambitious, sometimes Ignorant, and sometimes
Slothful, Imprudent or Debauched Persons, will be Preferred to the most
Honorable Dignities in the Church. But this, as often as it happens, is the
misery of the Church of England, which all true Church men lament; though the
men of the short Cloak take all such occasions to expose her to the scorn of
the common people who judge by Sense, and not by Reason; and who are taught by
you, to make no distinction between the Bishops and the Church. But were all
her Bishops the best Christians, the best Scholars and the best Governors in
the World; and should the Royal Hand place her Mytres on the Heads of none but
Jewels, Whit-gift's, Andrews's, Hall's, Ushers's, Morton's, Taylor's, and
Sanderson's, yet that Unchristian Spirit of Envy and Discontent, which informs
the Non-conformists, would still fly upon her with open Mouth, like Beasts upon
the Saints of old condemned to the Amphitheater; and make her, as she has
already been for almost forty years, a Speactacle to God, to Angels, and to
Men. The wicked Lives of Scandalous Bishops and Priests, if there be any such,
are her sad Misfortune, but cannot justify the Schism you are guilty of; who
are bound to hear even them, as much as the Jews were bound to hear the Scribes
and Pharisees those Hypocrites, that sat in Moses's Chair. And in that
deplorable state of the Jewish Church, when the Priests and Prophets were both
alike corrupted and called by the Holy Spirit, Dumb and greedy Dogs, yet it had
been unlawful to make a separation, and set up other Altars against that which
God (who was their King) had set up. I cannot but mind you of the Schism of
Jeroboam, who by dividing the Church, as God was pleased to divide the Kingdom
into two parts, made Israel to sin. But to insist on the Samaritan Secession,
and write all, that is necessary to discover and aggravate the damnable Nature
of Schism, would require as much more Paper as I have bestowed, and so make me
as tedious again, as, I fear, I have already been. Besides, it would oblige me
to answer Mr. Hale's Treatise of Schism, with whose Leaves you vainly endeavor
to cover you shame: And I had indeed a year ago undertaken that easy Task, but
that a Western Gentleman, to whom I discovered my Intentions, told me, That Mr.
Long Prebendary of Exeter, a Friend of his had already begun that good Work: so
that I hope it is printed by this time. And if either that or this, or any
thing else, a thousand times better, and I am able to write, may prove
effectual to reclaim you from Schism; I shall be as glad, as to see some other
of our Friends reformed from Drunkenness, Swearing, and Uncleanness, which are
very grievous, and dreadful Sins, but yet not more damnable in their Nature,
nor more destructive to the Christian Religion, nor more deeply rooted in the
Soul of man, than that of Schism; From which, I pray God, by the Power of his
Grace, to Preserve me, and Reform you, through Jesus Christ our Lord; to whose
Protection I commit you, and rest,

Your most Affectionase Cousins, And humble Servants.
Saumur: May 7. 1674
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is lately Published a Book Entitled, The Royal Apology: or an Answer to
the Rebels Plea: Wherein the most Noted Anti-Monarchical Tenants, First,
Published by Doleman the Jesuit. to promote a Bill of Exclusion against King
JAMES, Secondly, Practiced by Bradshaw and the Regicides in the actual Murder
of King CHARLES the 1st. Thirdly, Republished by Sidney and the Associators, to
Depose and Murder his Present MAJESTY, are distinctly considered. With a
Parallel between Doleman, Brad, shaw, Sidney, and other of the True Protestant
Party. London, Printed by T. B. for Robert Clavel, and are to be sold by
Randolph Tailor near Stationers' Hall. 1684. Price 1 s.


