A TRUE AND FAITHFUL Narrative, Of the Unjust and Illegal Sufferings, and
Oppressions of many Christians (Injuriously, and Injudiciously called
FANATICS, holding all the Fundamentals of the Christian Religion, Believing
all the Articles of the Christian Faith; and whose Lives and Conversations are
as Consonant, and Agreeable to the Laws of God as theirs that Persecute them)
under, and by several of his Majesty's Justices of Peace, and others, who are
no Officers, but Informers, in the County of Devon, since the Tenth of May,
1670 from a pretended Zeal, to put the Law against Conventicles in Execution.

AS ALSO, Of the most Malicious Prosecution of Nine Innocent Persons, to take
away their Lives, under a False pretense of Murdering an Informer: And of the
Trials that were betwixt Matthew Hele, of Halwel, in the Parish of Pool,
William Bastard, of Garston, in the Parish of West-Alvington, Esquires, and Mr.
Edmund Reynel, and John Bear, (Called by a Nickname Cocky Bear) Two Informers
for pretended Neglects, of putting the Act against Conventicles in Execution,
and the hard Measure they met with from the Judge; with the Horrid Perjuries of
the Witnesses brought against them, at the Assizes held at Exon, in the County
of Devon, April 1671.

Printed in the Year, 1671.

READER,
IT is not necessary, that thou should know who has Composed, and Published,
the ensuing Narrative, I shall only thus Characterize him to thee, that he is
an Enemy to none that is a Friend to the Lord Jesus Christ, and his glorious
Gospel; that he does not value men by their most splendid Profession, but
serious practice of Religion; not by Religious Notions, but by a Religious
Nature; nor by being of a Party, but by the practice of Piety; not by a not
intemperate Zeal, either for Negative, or possitive Superstition, or the
slender Circumstances, but the Vital parts, and substance of Christianity. He
loves, esteems, and prefers an Episcopal person, that is a strict, and close
walker with God, whose Life is consonant, and whose Actions are correspondent
to that complete and perfect Rule, which Divine Laws do constitute; before a
profane Presbyterian, or Independent, etc. and a Pious, Painful Conformist,
before a loose and lasie Nonconformist, when he knows it is so, though he must
confess according to his Observation; the latter are not generally so morally
Criminous, and Peccant as the former. He heartily desires, that in these three
Nations, all were of a pacate Spirit, and peaceable Deportment toward each
other, and that every one were dispossessed of a censorious Devil. And as he does
not think any form of Civil Regiment, to be of Divine Right, so he can Honor,
and Pray for the Governments that God does set over us; and though he earnestly
desires that all may answer the end of Government, which is the Advancement of
the Common Good (this being the will of the Universal Rector, as his Supreme
Law, or Rule in Politicals) and that every Law of theirs may be Congruous, and
not contrary to the Laws of the Supreme Monarch, and highest Legislator; and
that all may have their Foundation in Right Reason, and common Equity, which
may make their Obligation unquestionable, and give the Esse of a Law indeed to
them; yet when they are not so, though he cannot yield an Active Obedience to
them, yet he can a Passive Subjection to the Magistrate that makes them;
distinguishing between the Authority of his Laws, and of his Person, so that
though he judges not the former Obliging to his Conscience (or to speak as
properly that his Conscience binds not to such Laws) yet he does the Latter to
his outward man, to keep it from resisting when Punished, though he could avoid
such Punishment by Resistance.

He wishes that the Smiles, and Favors of Royal Majesty, may be as a
sovereign Bals^me, to heal those many Wounds that are now made in our Body
Politic, that it may at last be reduced to an Eucrasy, or a So^^d, and
healthful Constitution; but if that cannot or must not be, he equally desires,
that they who feel the Smart, that Sigh, and Groan under the Anguish of them,
may be of a Sedate Spirit, and to be persuaded unto a patient Tolleration
thereof; till the chiefest Physician by his Infallible and unerring Wisdom,
contrive and provide a remedy that may insallably, and with irresistible
^nergy, effects the Cure.

He will not charge it upon any of our Legislators, that they have made
unreasonable, and Unjustifiable Laws, to be as Swords, and Spears to make these
deep and dangerous Wounds; to Vulnerate almost Mortally the greatest part of
the Political Body, to gratify a few Members thereof; but he asserts that an
Illegal execution of Laws, makes these fresh-bleeding Wounds, which the ensuing
Narrative will present to thy View, and which I hope, if thou be but either a
truly Pious, or Right Noble, and Generous Soul, thou cannot look upon without
pity, and a compassionate Resentment. Not only Piety but Generosity is
productive of highest Compassions, and Commisserations. I hold it more Eligible
by far to fall into the hands of a man, that has a Soul bravely Impregnated
with that principle (supposing him to want the other) then of him; whose Soul
was scarce ever Elevated, and raised a Degree above a Dunghill, who Lives and
Acts as if it were but the very Origin, and Offspring thereof, knowing, and
affecting nothing but Sordidness, and Baseness, such a one is most Insolent,
Insulting, and Domineering, Proud, and Scornful, when he has power, most
Incommiserate, and Incompassionate, when others stand to his Mercy, and he sees
he can Tread, and Trample upon them, he is most Revengeful when he has an
oppertunity, which he is ever greedily waiting for; and what ever is Indecotous
for a man to do, or unbecoming Humanity, that will he do; or has still an
innate habit, or principal connatural with him, to act him thereunto, which
will break forth, and show it self if not curbed, or restrained by some
foreign force, or external power; for this reason, it is always better to have
a truly Valiant Person ^or an Enemy, than a Coward, because if he Conquer, he
will very tender of spilling Blood, unless there be an absolute Necessity that
compels him to it. If therefore this Narrative can but have the Honor, and
Happiness to kiss the Hand, and be Viewed with the Eyes of any truly Generous
Spirit (which has such a Law of Nobleness Enthroned in it, as I am sure it
cannot Violate) what ever persuasion he be of, I know he cannot but highly
disdain the Actings of some, and pity the the Wrongs, and Oppressions of
others.

Why should not Sufferers hope? Our King is of that Mansuete, Mild, and
Compassionate Temper, that if he did but Read, and had but a right Information
of such things as are contained in this Narrative: (But alas! There are too
many which endeavor a prevention of their access unto, and arrival at his
Ear, and Eyes, or represent them in a false Glass; and this is many times the
Misery of Princes, and a considerable cause of their Miscariages in Government,
that they cannot hear with their own Ears, from those that would give a right
Information and true state of Persons, and things; nor see with their own Eyes
what is needful to be Exposed to the View, and lie open to the Observation
thereof) but he would endeavor some speedy Relief for the Oppressed, if not
grow Big with Royal Indignation against the Oppressers.

I shall not much concern my self, whether this Narrative be Grateful, or
^^^^teful to the Reader, seeing it is composed of Truth; for what I have
Collected, and Published, I have done it with awful Apprehensions of the severe
inspection of God's All-seeing Eye; and therefore would not wilfully, and
wittingly send abroad Falsehood to Travel in the World, neither would I deviate
or vary from Verity in the most minute, and Inconsiderable Circumstance: But if
I should, as possibly I may, yet I hope I shall be pardoned by the Candid
Reader, and that he will become an Advocate for me (seeing the best, and truest
Historians are Obnoxious to such mistakes) so long as the Substance is true:
Which take as follows.

May the 29th. 1670, Mr. George Reynel of Malson, in the Parish of Sherford,
Devon (now a Prisoner in the Kingsbench) one of his Majesty's Justices of Peace
(though a sufficient disturber thereof, of which you have some signal Instances
in the following Narrative) being informed by some Infamous fellows (employed
for that end) that there was an Assembly of People at Mr. John Hicks his House,
(a Nonconformist Minister) in the Town of Kingsbridg, came thither about
Eleven a Clock in the Forenoon, attended with diverse Persons (most of which are
well known to be Lewd, and Debaucht) and most furiously attempts to Break open
the Street-door, with an Iron Bar, or Sledg of Iron, which not being able
speedily to do, his Brother, Arthur Reynel, goes to the Backdoor, which being
open, he enters, and hastens to the other, and not finding the Key in the Lock,
begins to Curse (judgd by some a minute Crime in comparison of Praying, and
Preaching the Gospel) in this manner, the Plague take you, throw too it; but
the Key being speedily found, the Door was opened to the Justice, and his
Attendants; who without delay, having entered the House, presently ascends to
the Chambers (leaving his Brother Arthur and some others below) and enquires
for the said Mr. H. being supposed, but not proved, to have Preached; whom not
finding, most unbecoming a Gentleman, and a Justice of Peace, before his Wife,
Reviles, and Calumniates, calling him then, and at the Tavern after, Rebel,
Rogue, Rascal, Town-Bull, Whore-Master, Bastard-Maker, etc. Then he above, and
his Brother below, begin to take the Names of the People whom they found there;
but in vain was the Assay, for both their Hands Trembled so much (which was
Obvious to the View and Observation of many Spectators, who are ready now to
Attest it) that they could not scarce write one Name, and so were for^^t to
desist. What was Productive, or Causative of this Paralytical Distemper, I
leave the Intelligent, and Impartial Reader to Judge. Yet notwithstanding, the
said Justice ( as if he would attempt a Conquest over the Terrors of the
Almighty, and would Baffle, and Stifle the Consternating Convictions of his own
Conscience) proceeds May the 30th. to a Coviction of several Persons to suffer,
as he pretended, according to the Law made against Conventicles. First then,
though no Minister was found, nor could it be proved that there was any,
muchless that Mr. Hicks, or any other Minister did either Preach, or Teach
(which is the Crime that Incurs the penalty of Twenty Pound) yet be Levied
Twenty Pound upon the said Mr. H. for Preaching, and issues forth his Warrant
to the Constables of Kingsbridg, to take Destress upon his Goods (be judging
and declaring him upon the sight of his Household Goods the Sabbath Day,
sufficent to satisfy the Law) but he refusing to open his Doors, the lu^^
eaten against Law, transfers the Penalty from him, to some of his supposed
Hea^e^s; and amongst the rest, he Levieth Forty Shillings upon one
Roger-B^^^rd, who was not the Lord's Day before at Mr. H. his House when the
Justice came, and though he made his complaint to him of the wrong done him,
yet he would not relieve him: Twenty Shillings he Levied upon Thomas Cole, of
Kingsbridg, who refusing to pay it, he ( as if he (...) been too merciful, and
compassionate before) adds Fifteen Shillings more to it, and commands the
Constables to Destrain thirty Sheep for it; which is a most horrid Oppression,
and highest Injustice, contrary to all Law: As the 51. Hen. 3. which says,
That Distresses must be reasonable, after the value of the Debt, and Demand. --
52. Hen. 3. Which says, That Destresses shall be reasonable, and not too
great, and he that takes great, and unreasonable Destresses, shall be
grievously Amerced, for the Excess thereof. So 28. Ed. 1. 12. Forty Shillings
further he Levieth upon Chrispin Collings, who finding himself Agrieved, makes
his Appeal according to Law: And now the Injustice, and Oppressions that he met
with at the Sessions, may be Read. First, when he came up with Witnesses to
prove several things of Moment, and had been at great Charges, he was not
suffered to Travers his Appeal, but (as if on purpose to Oppress him the more,
and because there could be no Witnesses then got to prove he was at Mr. H. his
house) made to enter into new Recognizance to do it, the next Sessions after;
which when he came to do, he found Justice stood afar off, and Equity could not
enter; for there Judgment principally past upon the Evidence of an Ignorant
Fellow, who Swore he saw him in the said Mr. H. his House, and when it was
demanded at what time, he replied, in the Afternoon, and yet the pretended
Conventicle that Mr. Reynel would Convict of, was in the Forenoon; and though
it could not be proved that Mr. H. did at that time either Preach or Teach, yet
was the said C. Collings adjudg'd to part of the Twenty Pound, besides the
Treble Cost, which was screwed up to the highth. The most that could be
Attested, was that the Voice of Mr. H. was heard; and yet he that did Swear
this, was at that distance from his House, that it rendered it very difficult
either to hear the Voice of a Man, or so as to distinguish betwixt the Voice of
one man, and another; and impossible to know whether it were the Voice of one
Praying or Preaching, by the most open and attentive Ears; yet this was Valid
and Authentic enough, to prove that there was Preaching. But as I have heard
of a man that was usually of the petty Jury, for Life, and Death, in the County
where he lived, and when Evidence was not clear to the Jury of a Felonious
fact, would still say, let us hang the man at a Venture: So were most of the
Justices at the Sessions, and the Jury (which is usually according to their
hearts desire) resolved to do with Chrispin Collings to make him pay part of
the Fine, whether there was Preaching, yea, or no. And this has been their
practice from Sessions to Sessions, as shall by several following Instances be
proved.

Before the next Sabbath, Mr. Reynel left the Country, but his Setters, or
Informers continue in it (whether they were Volunteers, and Spontaneous Actors,
or stired up by him to this Illustrious work, and Honorable employment, I
shall not determine) who the ensuing Lord's Day were very Active, Sedulous, and
Industrious to discharge the trust reposed in them after sometime therefore
spent in Hunting, they, Scent a Conventicle near Surley Butts, in the Parish of
Well^^vington, to which with great Celerity, and Speed, they hasten, and
J^h^-like, drive most furiously, least they should miss of their Game, and
Prey: The considerable Circumstances of which Actions, are as follows. First,
the number of Persons engaged therein, which were about Fourteen Horse and
Foot. Secondly, their Quality, one or two of them Gentlemen ( in that Common,
Absurd, irrational Notion, and Acceptance of a Gentleman among us, that is one
descended from such an Ancient, dignified Family, when there is a Degeneration
from all the true Noble Accomplishments, and behavior of Gentlemen; and a
total, and shameful Laps from all real Virtue, that true Gentility is the
Genuine Offspring of, which it gives its first rise, and being too, and which
necessarily it must have its foundation laid in; when he has scarce a Rag, or
Shadow of it left, nothing but Romantic Complements, Pedantick Postures, and
Legs made with some Geometrical proportion) with one Mr. John Bear, who is now
in a probability to be lickt into some form, and shape of Gentility, with
Thomas and Nicholas F^^^d, what they take themselves to be, I know not; but I
think their Gentility will scarce pass for Current Coin in the Country where
they live: The rest were the very Scum thereof, a mere Catalines Crew, whose
Employment did exactly Harmomonize, and Correspond with their Quality; for
Durty Fellows or most fit for Durty work. Thirdly, Their Condition, which is
Necessitous (for the greatest part of them) a sufficient Provocative, and spur
to these Heroic Achievements. Fourthly, The Head of this Informing Party the
abovesaid Mr. John Beer, or Bear (as he writes after his Grandfather,, the Old
Committee-man, who Usurpt, and Assumed the Name of Bear, which is the Name of
another worshipful Family in Devon, to dignifie his own with) of Woodmason, or
Bears-comb (as the old Committee-man denominated it from his New Name, Bear)
near Kingsbridg, this New-stampt Gentleman, was the Captain of, and had the
honor to Conduct this Peerless Party, and Squadron: Of whose Unchristian,
Ingenerous, and Disobliging deportment among his Neighbors, with many of his
sordid Actions, you shall have a further and fuller Account. Fifthly, The
manner of their coming which was with ursine Rage, Bellaine Fury, Impetuous
Insolency, Beating a Youth in the way, whom they supposed gave warning to the
People; to whom in a most outrageous manner, at first they approach, their
Renowned and Gallant Leader, Mr. John Beer, or War (but let us not deny, or
grudg him the latter name, it being so Congruous to his Nature) his first
Salution being: Where is that Damned Rogue, (meaning the supposed Minister)
others of them cried out, Ride for your Lives; which they did without any
respect to the People in the way: And such were their rude Voceferations, and
Exclamations, with their most soul Calumniations, that well might any have
judged some Bedlam-madness to have possessed them, or that they were some
Tartarian Troop, brought by an Invisible hand thither. And when they could not
find the said Minister, Mr. John Bear, Retreats; and Advancing toward several
Gentle-women (whose Virtue and Modesty, is well known, and acknowledged in the
Country where they live, by all, but those that have respect for, or value
neither) begun Prodigiously to Curse them, after this manner: The Plague take
you, What have you done with Hicks? And then adds to it, Swearing by the most
Sacred, and Terrible Name of the Supreme Majesty: You have hid him under your
-- The rest of his words being so Obscaen and Filthy, I shall break off with an
Aposioperis.

George Bear, the younger Brother, coming to a young man, demands of him Ten
Shillings; who mildly Replied, Do you want Money? Whereupon the said G. B.
spurs up his Horse with much Fury and Fierceness against him, but (as if he
were sensible of the Inhumanity of his Master) he denies Obedience, and
Recoyls; then G. B. commands one Lucas his Informing Brother (a Fellow of vast
Dimensions) to Beat him, with these words; Beat the Rogue; who prensently with
a great Cudgel, most furiously and forcibly, gave him several Blows upon his
Head, bruising it very much, and in all probability had he not kept on his Hat,
his Life had been endangered: Yet the other took his abuse very patiently,
making not the least resistance. Tho. Ford, a most busy and active Informer
(having his Soul impregnated with such principles of matchless Magnanimity,
that one might suppose there was now a clear demonstration of the
Metempsenchosis of Souls, that some Hectors, or Scanderbegs, had transmigrated
into his Body) with most Heroic, and Invincible courage, charge three young
Women, commanding them with most fierce Looks, and the Rays of highest Valor,
sparkling through his sprightly Eyes, to stand for their Lives, Minacing, and
Threatening most formidably, that he would run them through, if they would not
tell where Hicks was; the words were so like Thondering and Lightning, that
they were struck into Consternation, and some of them through fear Fainted, and
fell down: If Ne Hercules contra duos, What a rare Son of Mars was here, that
durst Encounter with three at once. Certainly on Army of such men would have
been signally Serviceable to his Majesty, when the Dutch came first up to
Chatham, when all the Sons of Bacchus, and Venus, gave a clear Demonstration by
their Pannick fear, how little of Mars was in them; no doubt if he had been
then Employed, he would have merited Immortal honor. And to conclude this,
when these Informers were together, nothing could scarce be heard but whole
Volleys of Oaths, with a most execrable Eructation, and Evomition of Curses,
insomuch that one would have thought Infernal Spirits had made use of Corportal
Organs. Some of them were (as the two Informing Beers) upon Conviction by Mr.
Bastard, of Garston, punished according to Law, for Swearing.

June the 12th. these Informers, with fresh Auxiliaries, and an Addition to
their Number, in a very Hostile manner, came into the Town of Kingsbridg, and
when they were near Mr. Hicks his House, they drew their Swords, to the Terror
of some of the Inhabitants that were within view thereof, and then hasten to
his House to beset it; the better to effect which, they violently, and
furiously, broke open his next Neighbors Street-door, and then some of them
run through his Entry, and Garden, and Leaping over the Hedge, came to Mr. H. his
Backdoor, that they might forcibly keep in the People (which they supposed
were there) till a Justice of Peace came, and Apprehend the said Mr. H.; which
a few days before, one of the Informers (and that George Bear, if I mistake
not) said Fifteen of them had engaged to the Bishop of Exam, to do. Now let the
Reader know that these Informers came (as they did the Sabbathday before) thus
Armed with Swords, and Pistols, without any Warrant or Authority from any
Justice of Peace, and without any Officer with them; the People therefore
knowing there was no Authority to Restrain, and Deprive them of their Liberty,
resolved to go out at the Backdoor, were they found one John Lucas, a
Carpenter, with a Pistol in his hand Cockt, and presented to them (which Lucas
was bound to the Peace, or Good Behavior, for Beating the man the Lord's Day
before, of which an Account is given) yet thus they Arm him; when the Pistol
was first given him, he quickly and speedily, run to the Backdoor of Mr. H.
his House, and then returning hastily again, cried our to his Informing
Brothren, Yonder are the Rogues: But then said, What shall I do with this
Pistol, there is nothing in it? Upon which words, one of the Informers was seen
to deliver him something, which he put into the Pistol, and hasted toward the
Backdoor again, saying; Now I am fitted for the Rogues: And when he stood at
the Door, he was further heard to threaten, that he would Pistol those that
came forth; which caused two of the Company (viz. Nicholas Huxome, and John
Leech) to disarm him, to prevent his doing Mischief (for he that had beaten one
the Sabbath before, might kill another now) which when they had done, several
of the Informers came, as Mr. John Bear, his Brother George, the Valiant Tom
Ford, etc. to justify him in breaking of the Peace, and with drawn Swords, and
cockt Pistols, they pursue some Persons, threatening to kill them: One of them
set his point of his naked Rapier to the Breast of a Woman (who says, she
thinks it was George Bear) uttering Bloodily, and Barbarously these words: Thou
impudent Jade, or damned Whore, I could find in my heart to Run thee through,
and if I should do it, I should do God good service. The said George Bear, set
the point of his Rapier to the Breast of Nicholas Ha^^me, and Swore he would
Run him through. Likewise Walter Campion (of whose prodigious Perjuries
hereafter) a Blacksmith in Dadbrook, near Kingsbridg, Seized a young man in the
Street (who had been long Sick before, and had Recovered a little strength now
to come Abroad) and commands him to go along with him; which he refusing to do,
he forcibly Drags him along; the other demanding a Warrant of him for so doing,
he took a Pistol out of his Pocket, and told him that was his Warrant,
threatening no less than death to him. Another of them highly and terribly
threatened a young Woman, bruising her Arms by a forcibly Hailing, and Pulling
her along, whereby she was much Affrighted, and whereof she much complained.
These are some of their brutish Carriges, and savage Actions at that time.
After which, John Lucas (who was disarmed) to be revenged, accused several for
beating him, whereof William Gilberd, of Kingsbridg, was one; accordingly a
Warrant was granted by Mr. Hele, upon the Oath that the said Lucas had taken,
to Convene the said W. G. before him; who when he appeared in obedience to the
same, Lucas acknowledged he was mistaken, after he had thus sworn against him.
When the Sessions came, Lu^us who was Bound over to them, makes his Appearance;
but the Judge of the Sessions, Mr. Car^w, would take no notice of his Breaking
the Peace, but shamefully Acquits him, Justifies him in what he did, highly
Countenances him; the Clerk of the Peace refused to take any Fees of him,
whereby all Encouragement was given him, and the rest of the Fraternity,
outragiously to Abuse at their will and pleasure, such as are called
Conventiclers, and Fanatics; and though this was so Notorious a Riot,
according to the Laws of England, yet the least Notice was not taken of it. Had
a Heathen seen with what Partiality, and Favor toward one Party, all things
were managed, and with great Rigor, Injustice, and Cruelty toward the other
(that is, those whom Lucas falsely accused for beating him; and one William
March, as wrongfully, for speaking some Seditious words, whom Mr. Carew would
not give any time to provide Sureties for the good Behavior, but Commanded
with a most stern Countenance, and in a most wrathful manner, which showed how
much his Heart was filled, and envenomed with Envy and Malice, the later
presently to take him) he must needs have Cried out, that certainly
Christianity Eradicates, and destroys common Equity. Here the very Scum of the
Country, the most abject Fellows, and Dross of Mankind, were by Mr. Carew,
suffered to Taunt, Vilify, and set at naught some Justices upon the Bench, as
Mr. Hele, and Mr. Bastard (being looked upon as Favorites of Fanatics, and
because they would not Oppress their Neighbors; but more concerning them in
the subsequent part of the Narrative) as if they had not been worthy to wipt
their Shoes: No Check, or Control was given them, but all was heard with much
seeming delight, and Complacency. Here every Informer was suffered to talk, as
if he had been a Justice of Peace, or a Person of greatest Honor. Among the
rest the Magnanimous Tom Ford, taking his place upon the Bench, aloud asked
Lucas, if he wanted any Money, he should have enough: And because Lucas, after
he had taken a positive Oath, that William Gilberd beat him, acknowledged his
Error. Tom Ford, in open Court, aloud, further told him (that he might be sure
not to Err the second time) that if he that Beat him had Black Hair, then it
was William Gilberd, but if he had Yellow Hair, it was Richerd his Brother (as
if Black and Yellow, put a Characteristical difference betwixt them, and all
other men) whereupon Lucas at a venture, swore it was Richard that beat him,
which was notoriously false; and this desperate Oath was taken, and the said
Richard was Bound over to two Assizes, of which there is yet a fuller Narrative
to come.

Two Lords-days more, viz. June the 19th. and 26th. these Informers hunt
eagerly, but could find no Game, till July the 3d. when Mr. George Reynel was
returned into the Country, and then to work they go Early in the Mourning,
having the fresh Scent of a Conventicle in their Noses at Liuckham-hill-head,
near Salcomb, in the Parish of Malborough, thither therefore they repair with
all the strength they could make, being about Twenty, or Thirty Horse and Foot,
Armed, Swearing they would have Hicks if he were above ground: As they were
going to the place, they overtook a Young Man of Kingsbridg; of whom Mr.
Reynel, demanded where the Meeting was: He replied, He knew not (as he did not
the particular place) and then leaves the Lane, to go into a Field^ which Mr.
Reynel seeing, quickly Dismounts, and ran after him; whom overtaking (most well
becoming a Justice of Peace) he Beat him with his Horsewhip, the Stripes
whereof left their Marks and Prints behind them upon his Back, and Shouldiers.
When they came near the place, where they supposed the Meeting was, they
divided themselves into two Squadrons, thinking by that means to Encompass the
Minister, and People, and take them all in a Net at once, but when they came,
they found only some few in the Circumjacent Fields; then they Rode fiercely
about, being most Impetuous, and Eager in the Chase, and Pursuit of Mr. H.
(though he had stolen neither Gold nor Silver) Mr. Reynel offered Ten Pound, or
a good Sum of Money to one man, if he would discover where he was, and demands
of another to tell him, who being silent, he either ordered, or suffered one of
his Attendants (I think his own Servant) to Beat him, which was Inhumanly done,
with a Cudgel: Then meeting with a third Person, who upon demand, refused to
make Discovery of Mr. H. and being unwilling to go along with them, one of the
Company (whether by the Order of the Justice, or no, I cannot certainly tell)
Knocked him down, and then two of them, whereof the Perjured Companion was one;
dragged him along several Paces like a Dog, by the Heels, which put the man to
great pain (he having not long before broke his Leg) which Extorted outerys,
and complaints from him, a young Woman being near him, bid him be of good
comfort, and not fear, for God would be with him (or words to that purpose)
this wretched Champion hearing her say so, endeavored to bring her into
trouble: Saying to the Justice, Hark what ^he says? She says the Devil is
with us, and God is with them; but some of their own Company witnessed the
truth, and contradicted him: Then says he, if she said not so, she meant so.
Then after they had spent two or three hours in making a diligent search in
Fields, Houses (some whereof they violently broke into, without demanding any
entrance, or having a denial given them) Orchards, Gardens, etc. for Mr. H. and
had wearied out themselves they depart; but Conviction was made of a
Conventicle. Twenty Pound is Levied for Preaching, though it could never be
proved; many did suffer, though they never knew their Accusers, which is usual;
and commonly there is no other Evidence to ground, and bottom a Coviction
upon, but what is given by Informers. And how Unreasonable, Unwarrantable, and
Illegal this is, let all Englishmen, yea, and the world judge, seeing they are
Parties so much concerned.

Now Mr. Bear (the Head of the Informers) expects some considerable Reward for
his good Service done his Majesty, and the Church, as he accounts it, he writes
therefore to the Bishop of Exon (as he had done sometimes before, declaring his
several Services for the Church, his Endeavor to bring to Condign punishment
all di^^enters from her) to acquaint him he had now done what he could in that
single Capacity he was in, hoping to arrive at some higher pitch of Honor; the
Merit of his Zeal, and illustrious Achievements, in his own esteem,
challenging no less than the reward of being made a Justice of Peace: Which if
he were invested with the Authority of, he promises him with what Vigor, and
Activity, he would Ruin, or Reduce to due Obedience, the Churches Enemies. The
Bishop perceiving him to be a Prompt and Active Young man, to promote the
Hierarchical Interest, and having had Ample experience of his scorning to stick
at the breaking of any Law, or committing the soulest Riots to advance the
same. He had no reason to suspect his Cowardice, if he could get him Advanced
to a Justiceship, in adventuring Soul, Body, Conscience, Estate and all, for
the preservation thereof. He therefore bestirs himself to get him into the
Commission of Peace, which after much difficulty by the Archbishop, and the
Earl of Bat^, he effected. One might indeed have thought, that in good time
there would have been a probability of his Advencement to the Degree of a
Hundred, or Head Constable, but few or none judged him worthy of a higher
Dignity, considering the Inferiority of his Quality, the Inconsiderableness of
his Estate, being as his Neighbors (that know it well) affirm, at the utmost
but 200 Pound per annum, out of which he pays his Father, his Brother George,
and two Sisters, such Annuities, that he cannot have much more than 60 pound
per annum to maintain, and support the Grandeur of a Justice. Its known
likewise he is Indebted, being a Borrower of Money; How fit is he for his
present Preferment, and capable of such an Advancement, let all true English
souls judge? I know no other reason why his Fellow-Justices so much scorn and
disdain him, why none of them, nor any other Gentleman at the chief Sheriffs
Table the last Assizes, thought him worthy to be Drunk to; which was but sower
Sauce, I believe, to his sweet Meat, and enough to hinder the good Concoction
thereof, But however, though he that was so lately the Head of the Informers,
be now looked upon but as the Tail of Justices, yet he is resolved to make his
Neighbors, and the Fanatics to know his Authority; forthwith therefore he
begins to display its powerful Beams, the scorching Heat whereof, he makes the
Conventiclers sufficiently to feel, but Excentrick to all Law, as the following
Instances will most clearly Demonstrate.

To begin then with his first Conviction of a Conventicle held at
Linckham-Hill-Head, the 26th. of July, 1670. which he expressed in his Warrant to
the Constables for Distress, was grounded upon the Oaths of two or more
Witnesses, but who these were is unknown; no Person being Convicted in the
presence of his Accusers, nor Summoned to appear before his Worship, to hear
what was Evidenced against them, or what they could plead for themselves, till
the Warrants were granted for Levying Fines, to the Value of Twenty Four Pounds
Ten Shillings, upon six Persons by Distress, without making Demand of the
Money. Besides several other Distresses, that I forbear to mention, which the
Sufferers groan under, they being so Unreasonable, and their Goods sold so much
under Value. Also, they were able to prove themselves elsewhere the 26th. of
July, which when Mr. Bear understood, he gave the Constables new Warrants to
keep the abovementioned Sums for the 3d. of July, commanding them to return
the Money to some whose Goods they had taken, and under-sold: The Constables
therefore of Kingsbridg, bring to Mr. John Hingston, Seven Pound Ten Shills,
which was Levied on him: He told them they had no Money, but Goods from him,
which if they would bring back again, its likely he might receive them; whereon
one of the Constables threw down the Money on his Table, and the other caught
it up by a second Warrant, he not receiving it, and the first Warrants Mr. B^ar
has since forced from the Constables.

Another Conviction of his was as follows: Mr. Tooker, a Nonconforming
Minister, living in the Parish of West-Altington, in the County of Devon,
having three Gentle-women at his House on a Sabbath Day (who visited his Wife,
being much afflicted for the death, by drowning at Sea, of her Son and only
Child) Prayed with them, it being in the Afternoon when there was no Minister
at the Parish Church; and while he was engaged in this Christian Work, and
Duty, come Lucas, Campion Arnel, with Leech (the Apostate, and Judas) all of
the Informing Crew, with some others, and beset the House, to see that none
should pass in or out, while they sent for the Constables, and Churchwardens
of the Parish, before whose coming, one of the Gentle-womens Servants came with
a Horse to carry her home, but seeing the House beset returned again
immediately; and when they came, the Doors were presently opened to them, who
entering the House made a general search, the Informers assisting them, but
found not one Person besides the three aforesaid Gentlewomen, and the Family;
this highly discontents, and enrugeth the Informers, because they misled of
their expected Prize, and Prey. However, they said, this should not serve their
turn, but they would make a Conventicle of the three Gentle-womens being there:
Accordingly they immediately repaired to the New Informing Justice Bear, and
acquainted him; that though there were but three Persons in the House besides
the Family, yet there was a Servant of one of the Gentle-womens, who came
Riding thither, and Mr. Revil Bastard (who hearing that the Informers were
there, came to the House to see what they did, although not until the Officers
had searched the House and were gone) with Joseph Tripe, who was then walking in
his own Ground, where it was not possible for him to hear any thing that was
spoken in the House, and the Informers were betwixt him and the House likewise,
and this Mr. Bear judged to be Notorious Evidence, and Circumstance of Fact
sufficient to make it a Conventicle; and accordingly the next Morning (without
sending for any of the Persons complained of, to hear what they could say for
themselves) grants his Warrants for Distraining of Mr. Tooker for 30 Pound, and
Joseph Tripe for 10 Pound; the Officers of the Parish the same day, came to Mr.
Tookers House, and the Informers with them, without being required, or
commanded, who pulled and Tore down all the Goods in his House; and such was
the Inmanity, and Inhumanity of these Rapacious Harpies, and Voracious Birds of
Prey (I mean the Informers) that they did not only Seize his Beds, and
Bedclothes, but the poor Childrens Wearing-clothes, and the very Victuals that
was in the House, they left no Corner or Place they could find unsearcht, for
Money; neither his Pockets, nor the Flesh-Tubs, Pigs-pailes, all sorts of
Bottles, nor yet the very Close-stool (as if the evacuated Excrements of
Fanatics, could be converted into Coin, or were rich Bullion, however these
New-Gold-Finders judged that something more precious, and Odoreferous a
Partepost might drop from them, than other persons) ten Shillings they stole,
but who was the particular person that did it, I know not; but this I know,
that one of the principal Actors among them was John Bear, or Beer (who by a
Nickname is called Cocky Bear in the Country) a Cousin of the New Justices,
that had sufficienly experienced the Pinches of Poverty, before he took up this
most Disgraceful, Informing Trade, and now he with the rest, live upon the
Spoil of the Country.

Josep Tripe, having his Goods destrain'd, immediately repairs to Justice Bear,
and acquaints him that he was so far from coming to Mr. Tookers House, as that
he shund and estranged himself from it (there being a Suit in Law betwixt him,
and Mr. Tooker, upon her former Husbands account) and further proved, that he
was within his House all that day, until that time that the Informers came, Mr.
Bevil Bastard, and the Gentle-womans Servant prove the same; upon which, Mr.
Bear dismissed them, and set their Goods a^ Liberty (Mr. Tookers being much
Spoiled, and Damnified) but he had not his Money again, which was stolen from
him; and because Mr. Tooker, about half a year after, complained of the damage
done to his Goods, and that he had reason to have Satisfaction for it; Mr. Bear
grants a new Warrant to Seize all his Goods, and in case no Goods could be
found, then to Apprehend his Person; which Necessitates, and Enforces Mr.
Tooker to Disperse his Family, and betake himself to a Wandering Life, to avoid
his Impla^able Wrath and Malice.

September the 11th. This Gorings Crew, or Plunderers, went to Mr. Burdwoods
House (a Nonconformist) in the Parish of Malborough, where they found him
singing a Psalm with four of his Neigbours, besides his own Family; and having
a Mastiff-Dog without at the Door, he Barks at them, a Girl living near,
perceiving this, sets on the Dog (it is likely understanding that though these
were not of the same Species, or Kind with the Dog, yet that they were of the
same Disposition) which the People of the House hearing, presently call off,
and opening the Door to let him in, the Girl being affrighted, enters in too,
and the Informers with her, even upon her Heels; and this Mr. Bear makes a
sufficient Ground and Reason, to proceed on to a Conviction of a Conventicle
(notwithstanding that one of the Informers did acknowledge, that the Girl went
in when the Door was opened, to the Dog) he Levieth therefore Twenty Pound upon
Mr. Burdwood for his House, Twenty Pound more for Preaching, and Five Shillings
for each of the rest. One Chiswel of Kingsbridg, Blacksmith, owing Mr.
Burdwood Three Pound, had a Warrant sent him from this New Justice, requiring
him to detain the Money in his hand, which he through fear did; another Warrant
he sent to the Constables of Cornwoody, for the Seizing of an Estate which Mr.
Bardwood had there, if they found it Chattel for Lives, or Years. April the
23d. of this present Year, Leech (the Judas) and Arnel his Brother Informer
(two expert and considerable Setting Dogs, that Mr. Bear is the Master of) Hunt
about the Country for Game, both for their Master, and themselves, and at last
they came to a Farmers house, in a Village called Leigh, in the Parish of
Modbury, about Five or Six Miles distant, from the place where they live; and
seeing some persons pass into the Farmers Yard (it being the Forenoon) one of
them stops at the House to watch, the other went to call the Officers of the
Parish, who came with all possible speed to the House, and narrowly Searched it,
but found not one person in the House, or about it, besides the Family
belonging to it (and the truth is, the people only passed through the Court,
and went to some other place, or about their Occasions elsewhere, while the
Farmer was Praying with his Family) Nevertheless, the Consciences of these
Informers were so prodigiously Debaucht, and Cauteriz'd, that they took their
Oaths before Mr. Bear, and Mr. Bruton, that they saw a great number of persons
go into the House, and that there was at that time a great Number there. Mr.
Bear, who called his Neighbor Justice Bruton, to assist him (one ready enough
for such an undertaking; which makes the Fanatics in those parts, sometimes
beholden to the rude Bailiffs.)

Goes out of his own Division to Execute the Law; comes therefore to Mudbury a
day or two after, and makes a Warrant to this purpose, That whereas they are
Credibly Informed, that now there is a Conventicle at such a place, these are
therefore, etc. The Informers accompany the Officers to the Farmers house (this
Lie being forged and framed to attain their end) and violently Break open the
Doors (there not being one person within) and enters the House, which when they
had done, the Informers showed the Officers another Warrent immediately to take
Distress; to work therefore they go, and empty the man's House of all his Goods,
leaving him neither Bed, Pot, nor Pan, Dish nor Spoon; they took away his
Sider, and sold it for about Four Shillings a Hogs-head (as they did all other
things at an under Value) and I hear likewise his very Fuel, which was for the
Twenty Pound that was Levied upon him, by which the poor man is almost, if not
utterly undone. Should I write all the unjust, and Illegal Actings of this (by
an A^tiphrasis) Justice Bear, it would make these few Sheets swell to a
considerable Volumn: However I will Epitomize a few more before I have finished
this Narrative, and bring them within as narrow a Compass as I can, that it may
be known how much his Majesty is abused, and dishonored by such Oppressing,
and empty Persons; who only Prostitute Authority to Contempt, and Gratify a
single particular Interest, which will be found too narrow a Basis for our vast
Structure, and too weak a Leg for our great and Bulky Body Politic, to stand
long upon.

I have in the preceding part of this Narrative, told the Reader of Fifteen
Informers (or very near the Number) who as Volunteers, Invaded, and Beset in a
most Hostile manner Mr. H. his House at Kingsbridg, the 12th. of June, 1670.
Among whom, there was one John Lucas, who stood at the Backdoor with a Pistol,
threatening to Kill any that come out, which was the cause why he was Disarmed,
being bound before to the Peace, or good Behavior, and deporting himself so
Minaciously, without any Authority. This Lucas, in the Month of December last
Sickned, and Died the beginning of January; when he was Dead, his Informing
Brethren Mr. Bear, and the rest, threaten that some should suffer for Murdering
him. Mr. H. the latter end of August, leaves the Country about Eighteen Weeks,
and near the time that the said Lucas died, his Adversaries conjectured, he was
returned in Devon. They resolved to make him guilty of this horrid Murder, as
they reported it to be (though while Lucas was well, and in health, he never
Accused him for Beating, or Assaulting him at the time spoken of, or any time
after) Justice Bear being returned from the Sessions, presently enquires into
the pretended bloody Fact. Lucas his Widow, she swears before him (who was
then the Head of this Informing party) that when he lay upon his Sickbed, he
said that Mr. H. came out in the Head of Threescore men (or near that Number)
and Knocked him down, and that Eight persons more, viz. Mr. Bevil Bastard, Mr.
Henry Luke, William and Richard Gilberd, -- Merrigame, J^hn Leech, Nicholas
Hexome, and John Bowen, fell upon him, and Beat him so cruelly, than he was
never well after, but gradually Languisht, which was the cause of his Sickness,
and so of his Death; her Father Kisland (a Fellow that Lucas was heard to say,
not long before he fell sick, would for a Groat betray, or take away any man's
Life, or words to that purpose) Swears that when he was stripped, there were the
Impressions of the Blows, which he called Stripes, upon his Back; this being
done, Justice Bear grants forth his Warrants to Apprehend all these Persons
upon Suspicion of Murder; they all yield themselves, but Mr. H. (who was not at
home, nor has been for many Months) Mr. Bear refused to Bayl them, though the
Case will admit thereof, to the Goal therefore they must go; the Mittimusses of
some of them were made, but two other Justices did Bayl them, either not being
so Ignorant of the Law, or not so Malicious as himself, Now though this Justice
and the rest of the Informers confidently Report, and Assert, that this was a
most Bloody, and Barbarous Murder, yet they Bury him, never endeavoring, and
it is likely never intending, to have him Crowned; a Coroner indeed came not
long after, but did not his Office (I will not confidently avere that Mr. Bear,
or any other, did tamper with him privately to be gone, knowing that no Stripes
would be found upon his Back.) But the Accused knowing their own pure, and
spotless Innocence, were resolved to have him Crowned, and accordingly sent for
a Coroner, who came and Executed his Office according to Law. When his Jury was
Impanel'd witnesses on both sides, with Impartiality were Examined. Lucas his
Widow, and her Father swore as before the Justice (except as some say she
accused not Mr. H.) to whom was added a new Witness, John Bear (a Fellow that
not long before took an Oath before a Justice of Peace, that Mr. John Tripe of
Kingsbridg, was at a Conventicle, when he was sick at home) who swore that
going with Lucas to find a Conventicle, he Riding and the other walking on
Foot; and not holding pace with him, he asked him the reason why he could go no
faster. To whom he replied: He was never well since he was Beaten at Mr. H. his
House. After the Evidence of these three was taken, then were Witnesses for the
Accused Examined; who were first his own Natural Parents, its well known in the
Country where they Live, that there was much Love betwixt these and their Son,
that he was very dear to them; insomuch that his Affectionate Mother, from the
Intensness and Strength of her Love, when her Son was taken out of the Grave,
after he had putrified there a full Fortnight, Embraced him (as if by her own
warm Bosom, she would have Reanimated, or given him a second Life, or breathed
her own into him; yea, she abundantly wept over him, as if with a Flood of her
own Tears, she would have washed away the Filth, and Corruption of his Body)
Certainly then if they had Apprehended, or Suspected these Persons, or any
other to have shed his Blood, they could not have been backward to prosecute
them; but they being convinced of the contrary, they Voluntarily take their
Oaths that to their Apprehension, their Son was us Healthful, Strong, and
Lively from the 12th. of June, to the time he sickned, as ever they knew him,
that they never heard him complain of any of the Accused doing him wrong, or
hurt: They further Swear, that all the time of his Sickness, they never heard
any complaint of this Nature, and that they did believe in their Consciences he
had no wrong, or harm done him by the Persons Accused; and for the Stripes upon
his Back that Kelland swear to, they did judge them nothing but Strikes made
with the folding of his Shirt, and Wast-coat, lying much upon his Back. Another
Witness was his Physician, who Attested upon Oath, that he died of a Putrid
Fever. A third that gave Evidence, was a Fellow-workman with him, who did
Swear that the next day after this pretended Beating was, he came to work with
him, and he asked him if he was Hurt by Beating the day before? and he
answered, No; And further he Witnessed, that he wrought with him Seven Weeks
together, and that all the time he did his Work (being a Carpenter) as Lustily,
and Lively, as ever he knew him to perform it. William March (who is lately
Dead, but while he Lived, was known, and approved to be an Honest man, and
Peaceable man, by all his Neighbors) had not Providence prevented his coming,
would as he intended, have taken his Oath, that he, being next Neighbor to
Lucas, heard him the Evening of the same Day in which it is said he was Beaten,
speak these words, as he was walking in his Garden with another man: That he
had no more hurt than himself; when he asked him the Question, whether or no,
he was so Beaten. And further told him, They did, or might Strike one another;
but they could not Strike him they stood so thick: This, William March often
while he Lived, affirmed to be a Truth; but though he was now wanting to give
in such material Evidence. Yet the former with Barbary Cawseys, who (being Mr.
H. his next Neighbor) was in her own Court, or Garden, a Spectator at that
time, was so Pertinent, Demonstrative, and Satisfactory, that there was no need
of any more.

Evidence therefore being thus given on both sides, the Jury Advise, and
Consult together, what Verdict to bring in; the far greater part presently
concurred in their Judgments, that Lucas died a Natural Death; Three or Four
dissented from the rest, which caused a Debate, and Things to be Argued Pro and
Con, several Hours: Then one Mr. Ford (who has good Judgment and Skill in
Surgery) being a Juror, declared his Opinion; That if Lucas had Sickned, and
Died of any Blows that was given him so long before, they must have
Impostumated before that time, and this gave general Satisfaction: So the
Verdict of the Jury was, that he died a Natural death, by the Visitation of God.

Notwithstanding this Search is not only the Mortal, but Immortal hatred and
malice of this Justice Bear against Mr. H. That about three Weeks after he
grants forth a Hue and Cry, to pursue him for Wilful murder; when his u^si^e
fury could not reach him any other way: And though by Virtue of his Warrants,
his House had been Searched for him several times before, yet now he is resolved
to make through work (supposing him to be in that Country, when he was not) on
a Saturday Night therefore about Ten a Clock, came the Constables of
Kingsbridg, with most of the Informers for their Guard, and many others, to the
Number of near Thirty Persons, and Besets his House; to whom his Wife opened
the Doors, a strict Search then they make for him: One of the Constables
commanded to Stab any that should go out (a Fellow lately put into that Office
by Mr. Bear, who was never judged fit for it, or capable of it before) but not
finding him there, they made a further Search, very diligently all that Night
in the Town, disturbing many Families; and among the rest, they re^uire some
Quakers to open their Doors (though no doubt they expected him not to be
sheltered in their Houses, as the Sequel declares, from whom he had met with so
much Disturbance, and Opposition in Preaching) and when they were got in, they
violently took away their Goods. The Sabbath Day in the Morning early, they
leave Kingsbridg, and go to Westalvington, where a Search was made in some
Gentlemen's Houses, but to no purpose; from thence they proceed to Milton
Parish, from it to Hughes, so to Salcomb, thus they spent the Sabbath: And
after they had by their great Labouriousness, and Diligence tired themselves,
they gave over, not finding their Prey, having Searched near Thirty Houses: How
unwearied, and implacable is Malice, how sweet is Revenge?

When the Assizes begun at Exon, the eight Persons spoken of before, according
to their Recognizance, made their Appearance, and the Grand Jury debated the
finding of the Bill of Murder against them, which continued from Wednesday, or
Thursday, till Monday (when the Assizes were nearly concluded) the Gentlemen
being divided Thirteen against Twelve; the greater Number were for finding it
an Ignoramus, but the Twelve were for finding Billa Vera. Now the Reason why
there was such a Number for it, was in all probability some Underhand dealing
with the Undersheriff, Mr. Norman in Exon; for Sir John Davy, the chief
Sheriff of the County, had sent a List of such Gentlemen to Mr. Norman, as he
desired the Grand Jury should consist of, with Orders to warn them; but he not
liking what his Master had done; without acquainting him with it, takes upon
him to alter his List, leaving out whom he pleased, and warning such in their
stead as he judged more fit, and such as he knew would gratify the Malice of
the others, whatever it did his own. Notwithstanding therefore, all the care of
that Honorable Person Sir John Davy, to have a Grand Jury, in reference to all
Concernments that should come under their Cognizance, of Sober, Solid,
Judicious, and Honest Gentlemen; it was now in a great measure otherwise
Constituted, there being those that without any respect to Equity, and Justice,
would take away the Lives of those called Fanatics. The Bill being now found,
the Prisoners were called to the Bar, where they Pleaded not Guilty, and then
came to their Trial, which lasted about three Hours; in reference to which, I
shall give an Account both of the prodigious Perjuries of the Witnesses for the
King, and the Partiality (to give it no worse Name) of the Judge, before whom
the Trial was.

And while I present to the Reader some of those Sour Grapes, which these
Plants so far Degenerated from all Truth, and Righteousness, brought forth; I
shall begin with Mr. John Bear, the Justice, who being called to be a Witness
against the Prisoners, Swore as if he had no Sense of an Omniscient Deity, or a
Divine Nemesis, to take Vengeance upon him, for his unparrelled Perjuries. The
Sum and Substance of his false Oath, is, That Lucas was almost Beaten into the
Ground, that the Prisoners did lie upon him, and Beating him, had made a Pit in
the Ground, enough to bury him in, (which must be very large considering his
great Dimensions, but its likely this Gentleman was resolved to Swear
Rhetorically, by an Hyperbole) when the Ground the Pit was made in, was only a
very soft Dunghill, and many People passing over it, at that time, had Trod it
down, and made some Holes, or Pits in it; at this desperate rate he went on
Swearing Roundly, and Smoothly, but with such a still and low Voice, that the
Prisoners at the Bar, could not distinctly hear him: Therefore Mr. Luke, humbly
desired the Judge, that he would command him to speak more Audibly, which being
so Just and Reasonable a Request, was granted; in obedience to the Judge, he
raised his Voice a degree higher, but yet not Loud enough to be heard by the
Prisoners (from all probability he was unwilling they should hear him, that
they might not except against any thing he Swore, and so all might be credited
by the Jury, and likewise his Conscience might fly in his Face, and tell him
what monstrous falshoood he did attest) Mr. Luke therefore moved again, that
he might more extend his Voice: Which at last doing, he desired the Judge to ask
him; Whether he swore those things from his own knowledge? The Question being
asked him, he replied No, but he was informed of it, and had heard so. Now he
was pincht to the purpose, for if he had answered Affirmatively, there were
those present (which he was not ignorant of) that could prove the contrary, he
not coming till after Lucas was disarmed, and upon his Legs, and when there was
no person in the least that did molest him. How may the Reader see what bloody
Malice, Prompted, and Acted, this Justice Bear, to precipitate, and hurry
himself into the absorping Gulf of Perjury. For supposing all had been Truth
which he Swore, yet it is False-swearing in the sight of God, to Swear what he
had no certain knowledge of, (such knowledge being an Essential Constitution of a
right Oath, as the Divine Oracles, and Casuists do Determine) and it is very
probable, he contracted more of this dreadful Guilt upon his Soul: For he
further Swore, that a little before Lucas his Death, he was with him, and that
then he heard him charge his Death among others, upon William Gilberd; and yet
afterward, when the Question was asked him, Whether Lucas did not Acquit the
said W. G. before Mr. Hele (then one of his Majesty's Justices) after he had
Accused him upon Oath, for Beating him, he confessed he did; it being so known a
Truth, he could not deny it. Let the Impartial Reader judge, that rationally it
must be dissonant from Truth, that L. who had Acquitted J. before a Justice of
Peace, would so long after, charge his Death upon him: And though Mr. Bear
swore he did it upon all the rest, yet this having the ugly Visage of a Lie,
what may we judge of the whole, but that it was a Contexture, and Concatenation
of many notorious Falsehoods together. Now we will leave Mr. Bear Immerst, and
Drowned in the dreadful Guilt of his Perjuries (though afterward we shall find
him sinking deeper) and proceed to another desperate Swearer, by Name John
Roope, in the Parish of Chestow: He Swore, that when he came he found Lucas
lying upon his Back in a Wet, or Dirty place, and John Leech, and H^xome upon
him; and that Lucas was so weak, and Spent, when they rose from him, that he
had not strength of himself to rise, but was help^, or listed up by him: But
Barbary Caws^y witnesses (who was a Spectator, standing upon the Hedge that
parts betwixt Mr. H. his Garden, and here, under which Lucas was thrown down,
and lay at that time when R. came, so that she had him full, and perfectly in
her View) that its true J. R. coming immediately as H. ro^e from L. he took him
by the Arm, but by his own strength, with much Ni^bleness, and Quickness, he
Leaped, or Sprung (but was not Pull^d) up, and threw his Arms about him, crying
out with great Vehemence, and Voceferations, There Is the Rogue (pointing to H.)
that took away the Pistol; and to give a clear Demonstration, that he was not
so spent, with great Force and Fury (Mr. B^ar with some other Informers, being
then in sight for his encouragement) fell upon H^xome, wrapping one hand in his
Hair behind, and pulling back his Head with the other hand, gave him such a
Blow upon the Mouth, that he struck him down to the Ground, where he lay a
considerable time before he could rise, being deprived of his Senses by the
force, and greatness of the Blow.

The next Witness against the Prisoners, that I shall give the Reader a
faithful Account of, is, Walter Campion, (who bears the Bell away from all the
rest of his Perjured Brethren, being a most profound Sink of Lies, and Abyss of
Falsehoods, to whom the precedence of all the Knights of Post is due) who Swear
he saw the print of Forty strokes in the pilm upon his Back. Roope swore, he
hearing a great Tumult in Mr. H. his Court, hasted with all speed thither (and
it was no great distance from him) where he found Lucas down upon the Ground,
and lying upon his Back, but saw no man strike him; it is strange then that he
should have so many Blows given him, in so short a time, and that in a Throng,
and Crowd, where one hinder another (as William March heard L. say in his own
Garden, they could not strike him, they stood so thick) he could not have them
when he was thrown down, because he lay upon his Back, as J. R. swears; and
it is strange he should receive so many behind, and not one before that did
appear, or was spoken of; either they were most base Cowards, that would only
Assault him behind, or he was a notorious Coward that would not face about to
defend himself. But any Impartial Reader may see by this, if no more should be
produced to Demonstrate it; What a Disperado this Campion is for Swearing? But
to evince this Perjury more clearly, let it be considered what J. R. Swore,
viz. That he found Lucas upon his Back, in a Wet or Durty place (which is a
truth, for there many times Water runs, and there is always Mud and Dirt) the
Forty blows then that C. swore he saw, must be either before he fell, or after;
before it could not be, because he was thrown down before R. came, who came
before Campion; after, no man can rationally suppose it to be, because he lying
in a Wet place upon his Back, the Pilm, or Dust must be removed, or changed
into Dirt, so that no Prints, or Impressions of Blows could be seen in it; yea,
if it had been in a Dry blace he fell in, yet Tumbling, and Struggling upon his
Back, would have defaced them altogether, or rendered them very
undistinguishable; it is strange further, that so many Blows should be
unobserved by all the rest, as if he who had a more notorious Lying Tongue,
should have a more quick and piercing Eye, than all his Brethren had. And take
all this in Conjunction with what Barbary Cawsey swore, that she was a
Spectator, and Observer of all Passages both at the beginning, and the end, and
saw not one Blow given him; and that she heard the people, or some among them
say; Strike him not a Blow: And then the incedibility of all that he Swore in
reference to this particular will be most manifest. So I will leave this, and
proceed to another piece of Perjury as Infernal, and Tremendous, as the former,
that he was Guilty of in the open Court, where he Swore twice (to render Mr. H.
as oudious as he could) once when he was called to be a Witness against Mr.
H^^^, and Mr. Bastard, for neglecting their Duty as Justices, in the Execution
of the Act against Conventicles; and now when he was a Witness against the
Prisoners, that the said Mr. H. near the time that the Act against Conventicles
was in Force, threatened, that if any man came to Disturb him in keeping them,
he would Knock him down, showing him a C^^^ as he termed it, near as thick as
the wrest of his Arm; to whom, Campion said, he Replied, You may miss your
blow, and if I close with you, I may prove as nimble as you (or words to that
purpose) and further said, he was not afraid of him: To whom Mr. H. replied
after this manner, Sav'st thou so, and pulling out of his Pocket a Ste^etto, or
long Daggar Knife, turned the point of it toward him, and told him, there was
that which should pick his Teeth. That the Reader may know the matchless
Empudence of this Fellow, and what a Debaucht, Profligated, and Canterized
Conscience he has, which Generates his most Horrid, and Hellish Perjuries, I
will give him a True, and Faithful Relation of this Matter; as Mr. H. calls the
Searcher of Hearts to Witness, and Verbo si^erdotis, does prosess. Which take
as follows:

About the midst of December, 1669. Mr. H. had a Horse dangerously wounded, and
employed Campion to cure him, who came to his House to dress him; and one
Evening before he went away, he asked him if he would Drink, which Campion
accepted of: He then put it to his choice, whether he would drink Beer, or
Sider. Campion replied; He could drink Beer at home, and he knew Mr. H. had
good Sider, therefore he would rather choose that; which when he had drunk, he
commended it. Mr. H. at that time had a Staff in Hand, which Campion took
notice of, and said, it was a good one: To whom he replied; That he had rather
have such a Staft, than a small Rapier, such as now was in use. Then said
Campion, But what if one should give you a prick? Mr. H. again: Possibly he
might put by one thrust, which if he did, he would prevent the second, if he
got one blow at his Adversary that should Assault him. Campion speaking of his
Skill in Fencing, and what Feats he could do with a Sword: Mr. H. told him
(which was the Conclusion of the Discourse) that if a man should Assault him
with a ^^o^d, he would be in such a posture with his Knife in his left Hand
(^aking it then out of his Pocket) and his Staff in his Right; and if he p^^ by
a Thrust, he would quickly pick his Teeth. This Knife is indeed made after the
form of a Daggar, with a little Cross-bar, to prevent its run^ing th^^^h the
Sheath; both Have and Blade, are but about a quarter of a Yard lon^. And when
Mr. H. first had it, they were frequently, and commonly u^'d for cutting Meat,
and for this purpose many Sober persons use them ^et: But in all this
Discourse, there was not one word relating to C^^ve^^icles, or in the least
bordering upon them, it being at that time when to Act was in Force against
them, and several Months before the present Act was made; and Mr. H. never
exchang done word with Campion, by way of any Discourse, since he paid his
Money for the Cure he wrought, which was a few days after it was done. And now
I shall leave this Fellow a while, deeply Abyst in his Perjuries, and under the
heavy Pressures of that Soul-sinking Guilt.

Thomas Ford (that man of Magnanimity, and Might, already mentioned) Swear that
Lucas was thrown down on his Back athwart a Gutter, which was pitched with sharp
stones, over which, by the Head and Heels, they drew his Body. Now that the
Reader may understand what a Brother in Iniquity this man is with the other, he
must cast his Eye upon what follows, viz. That Tho. Ford was not there when
Lucas was thrown down, and disarmed, neither saw he in what posture he lay. He
Swore further, that Mr. Bevil Bastard, and Mr. Luke, cried, Kill the Rogue,
Knock down the Rogue, and yet he was not there (as before is asserted, and can
be proved) when Lucas in struggling for the Pistol fell, or was thrown upon the
Ground; and none can prove, or does affirm, that one Minacious word was spoken
after he got up. I need not declare the Perjuries of Lucas his Widow, or her
Father Kelland, they being much the same at the Assizes, that they were before
the Coroner, except one Addition that Kelland made, viz. That Lucas not only
from time to time complained of his Beating, but spit Blood, and brought up
Knots of Blood as big as French Nuts at his Mouth, and that much Blood went
from him by Stool. To all that has been Evidenced by such near Relations, and
others to prove Rationally the contrary, I will add the Authentic Evidence of
Mr. George Sutchcot (who is known to be no Friend to Non-conformists, nor their
Meetings; but a most Intimate and Familiar Converser with the Informers, being
judged by many to be an Abettor, and Encourager of them) which was this. That
though Lucas the next day after his pretended Beating, complained to him
thereof, yet he wrought with him several Months after, without failing any
thing in his Work, and he never heard him to complain more of it. I could Write
much more to Confirm what has been Asserted, but let this Suffice, till there
be need of further Evidence.

I will now proceed to the Narration of the Judges Partiality, I will not say
Injustice, and apparent Malice. First, It Is evidenced that the Judge came
Prejudiced to the Trial of the Prisoners, and had hearkened to their Enemies
Informations before he came; for at Mr. H^les Trial at the Nisi Prius Bench,
when there was an occasion to speak of the Conventicle held at Mr. H. when
Lucas was disarmed, and of the Barbarous, and rude Carriage of the Informers;
he justified them, and said, it was well they were all Armed (or word to that
purpose) or they might all have been Murdered at it as Lucas was, whom he
declared was then Murdered, for want of Arms to defend himself: All which was
before the Trial of the Prisoners, whereby it evidently appears with what
prejudice he was possessed, and how little he intended to do Justice.

He gave also the Witnesses against the Prisoners, the utmost Liberty to
declare themselves; and when Mr. John Bear Swore so desperately by Hearsay, and
Information, and Ro^p, and Campion, did in their Oath contradict themselves, he
took no notice of it: But the Witnesses for the Prisoners were Snib'd, and
Discouraged not a little by him, he lying still at the Catch, to make their
Evidence to Interfere; he used likewise all ways to Nonplus, and daunt them,
that they might not have boldness to declare the Truth. The Mother therefore of
Lucas, when she came to Evidence for the Prisoners, he asked her, How much
Money was given her for her Sons Blood? And told her, she came to Sell it for
Money (or words to that purpose) he Tauntingly, and Scornfully reflected upon
Mr. Bastard likewise, who was desired to be a Witness for the Prisoners;
saying, He thought it a fine thing to stand there to own a Cause. So he dealt
with another Person (who was a material Witness in the behalf of the Prisoners)
floutingly: Telling him, That he was dressed up in a Coat, or Cloak, with a fine
made Story. To another Witness Jeeringly, and Scoffingly, he said: He did
believe that she was one of them, for she did Tone it out like one of them. The
Coroner likewise being desired to speak something of the death of Lucas, was
suffered to say little or nothing, the Judge telling him, That Coroners were
wont to be Tampered with: And when he came to give Instructions to the Jury,
and to Sum up the Evidence, against, and for the Prisoners, he Omitted most of
the material Circumstances that made for them; and told the Jury they must find
it Wilful Murder, or nothing. And when the Jury brought in their Verdict not
Guilty, he seemed to be discontented, not letting the Prisoners depart, without
Slurring them in the open Court, and rendering them as Odious as he could:
Telling them, That though Men had Acquitted them, yet there was a God that knew
they were Guilty, of that they are charged with (or words to that purpose) I
shall leave the Impartial Reader to Judge thereof.

And now that none may Ignore, or be Unacquainted with the true Ground and
Reason of this Violent, and Virulent Prosecution of so many Innocent persons: I
shall but briefly relate a few Passages, viz. George Bear's words (who Swore
desperately enoug among the rest) who when he heard what full Evidence was
given for the Prisoners, swelling with Indignation, burst forth into these
Audable words, which contained a Diabolical Imprecation, to this purpose: The
Pox of God take them, they will be all Acquitted. The Widow of Lucas returning
home, did Chide her Mother in Law, for the Evidence she gave, and told her if
she had been good (or words to that purpose) she might have got her a Thousand
Pound: The Mother replied, What Advantage could it be to you, if the Prisoners
had been Hanged? The Widow replied, Rather than so they would have given her a
good part of their Estates. Justice Bear, when the first Examination of matter
of Fact was, and Lucas his own Father was Summoned before him, who Swearing
that they were but Strakes upon his Back, made with the folding of his
Wastcoat, and Shirt, which Kelland swore were the Impressed blows; he commanded
his Clerk to Write down Stripes. The Coroner that came first, (as I have told
the Reader) went away without doing his Office: I will not absolutely determine
who was the cause, or what was the reason of it; but we have another Notorious
Exidence, and Circumstance of Fact, from Mr. Bears sending for the Coroner,
that came upon notice given him by the Accused, who refused to go. Now I leave
it to the Ingenuous, and Judicious Reader, to determine in his own thoughts,
whether this eager Prosecution was to Vindicate Inn^^l Bl^ spilt, or to spill
Innocent Blood, Now if it be questioned by any, What Is the reason Mr. H^ks did
not appear with the other Eight, that his Innocence as well as theirs, might be
cleared? The Answer is briefly this: That he being at some considerable
distance from his own House, when Mr. Bear so Illegally, and Maliciously
pursued him with a Hue and Cry, and never being where it came, he judged it
fit, with many others, to take no Notice of it, but enjoy his Liberty till the
Assizes; when, if he were Accused to the Grand J^ry, and the (...) of Murder
found against him, with the Fest, he intended to make his Appearance, and put
himself upon his Trial, if he could have any hopes of Justice, and Moderation:
But understanding how the Judge did prejudg the ^act, calling it Murder, when
the Trial was betwixt Mr. H^l^, and one of the Informers; and how those that
were witnesses then against Mr. H^l^, did most prodigiously Perjure themselves,
and who were to be Witnesses against himself; and not being Ignorant how
Active, and Industrious some (...) s^asticks, or Hierarchists, were to Ruin
him if they could ( ^aving (...) st^ a^arn'd; for that end, some saying, (...)
him, (...) ^ld H^g for all the rest) considering with all these things, the
Care and Industry of the Undersheriff, to have a Grand Jury so Constituted, as
the B^ll of M^rder might be found against him, with the Rest. He had good
reason to Suspect, and Fear, that he had also provided such a P^tty J^ry, a^
would gratify the Malice of his Enemies, and into whose hands it would not be
safe for him to put his Life. Upon all these disadvantages he thought it not
fit to yield, and give up himself to those who Intended, and Attempted so
Voraciously to make a Prey of him. If it be said -- Hic ma^s ab^^s (...), etc.
And that Absconding, and Flying, argues Guilt. I Answer, That sometimes the
most Unstained, Unspotted Righteosness, and Virgin ^^^^en^^, cannot stand
before malicious Fury, and powerful Malice, or devouring Envy Armed with power
(which made the w^te M^ say, T^^^ ^^metimes the Righteous d^ ^eri^h in his
Righteousness, the r^^^^^^gth^ that (...) justifi^ (...) wicked, and co^^ the
other, though both be (...)) and when it^ so, it is no dishonor to any person
to secure himself by ^ight; (...) does it Administer a just ground of jealousy
in any other, that (...) the case of Guilt, which it cannot in the least Infer.
What Mr. H. does, many who have been in the same Circumstances, have done. But
this is not all that he has to plead for himself; For there is Imprisonment,
which his Enemies design against him, so if they cannot deprive him of his
Life, they will of his Liberty; and Liberty being more Eligible, and D^able
than Restraint, he is resolved to enjoy it as long a^ he can. And (...) he
desirs may be Published to the whole World, that let him have a (...) before a
Just, Upright, and Unb^aft Judge, and have a Jury of Indi^ (...) Indicious
persons, not chosen by Malice, and Prejudice; and (...) ^f he be not found
Guilty, he shall have his Liberty, He will p^ (...) it, for the clearing of his
Innocence.

I now proceed to give the (...) fully, and Impartially of the Trials that were
betwi^ (...) ^n Bastard, Esquires, and Mr. Edward R^ynel, and J^ (...) or Bear,
for pretended Neglects of putting the Act against Conventicl^ in Execution,
etc. The first Infomer Sued Mr. Hele for three Neglects, and so was in hopes of
having one Moity of Three Hundred Pounds, however his Majesty would dispose of
the other (it is likely he was not without hopes of it, as the Merited reward of
his Signal, and eminent Service) now let the World know the Ingratitude, and
Disingenuity of Edward Reynel, toward Mr. Hele, not only as he is his God-Son,
but as he at that time Owed him several Sums of Money, both on his own, and
Fathers Accounts; his Elder Brother, Mr. George Reynel (the Prisoner in the
King's Bench, and the Justice) Owing him likewise an Hundred Pound, which his
Lady sent for some Years since, to pay her Physicians with, and had it from
him, only on her single Letter, without Bill, or Bond, and which is not Paid to
this day, He is now resolved to requite Mr. Hele well, for all his Civilities,
and Favors showed to him, and the Family. The other Informer Sued Mr. Bastard,
for two Neglects, and now thought to enrich himself with the share of the Two
Hundred Pound, thereby to get above the Disgrace, and Contempt of Poverty: Non
habet infaelix paupertas durius in se, quam quod rediculos homines facit -- In
this Account which I give, I shall as before Methodize, and Digest it into this
Order. First, To relate the Perjuries of the Witnesses that swear against both
the Gentlemen, and the hard Measure they met with from the Judge; who set
himself with that Violence, and Vehemence against them, that it was observed,
and spoken of generally with Abhorrency, and Detestation.

When Mr. H. Trial was put forth after four days Attendance on the Assizes, and
the Jury called, Robert Adams, of Malborough, being the Foreman of it, was
excepted against by Mr. Bear, the Justice (who was not long before the
Principal Informer) as an Excommunicated Person, for which he took his Oath in
the Court, whereby the said R. A. was Incapaciated to serve in the Trial,
relating to Mr. H. and Mr. B. Now the Reader must know, that the foresaid
Person was suspected by the Informers, to Favor, or bear Good Will toward
those they call Fanatics; and they could contrive no way to remove him but
this, to prove he was not Capable of serving as a Juror (which by the Law no
Excommunicated person is) Mr. Bear therefore he undertakes for an Expedient,
and that is, to call the Omniscient God, and Him that is Essential, and Eternal
Truth, to be a Witness to a Lie. For since the Assizes, it has been enquired
into, and found that Robert Adams was not then Excommunicated. M. Bear further
Swore, to Aggravate Mr, Heles supposed Neglects, that the Insolency of
Conventiclers was grown to that height, that all Loyal Subjects had just cause
to fear a Rebellion: That they (speaking of Mr. Hicks, and the people he
Preached too, did not only Usurpt the Pulpits of Lawful Ministers, but pulled
them out of their Pulpits, and laid Churchwardens that came to Suppress them,
flat on their Backs in the Church, and broke open Church Doors, etc. all which
things, if Truths, Mr. Bear was never an Eyewitness of: But what Notorious
falsehoods these are, the whole Country round about knows. It Is strange, and
most Inconsistent with Reason, that they who were continually Attempting to
bring Mr. Hicks into trouble for Preaching, should never take ^o great, and
fair an Advantage against him, as hereby they had. If Mr. Bear can produce one
Churchwarden, or any Officer in a Town, or Parish where Mr. H. Preached
publicly, that will affirm, that either he opposed him, or that any Assault,
or the least Violence, and Incivility was offered by him, or any of his
Hearers, upon the Account of his Preaching; or can bring one Minister to prove
that ever Mr. H. or any of his Hearers did dispossess him of a Pulpit, when he
was in it; or that any Church Doors were Broke open to possess the Pulpits,
then will I engage Mr. Hicks shall appear at any Assizes, or any other time, to
suffer whatever any Law in the utmost Extremity can Inflict upon him, and
promise never to Indite Mr. B. for Perjury.

The Jury being Sworn, one Witness upon Oath, Swore that Mr. Hele refused to
take Informations upon Oath, that there was a Conventicle at Mr. Hicks his
House, May the 19th. When another of them upon his Oath did confess, and
acknowledge, that Mr. Hele did take their Informations, which also several
persons of Mr. Heles House, did Attest. As for the other two Neglects Mr. Hele
was charged with, and Sued for, which were in one day, June the 19th. 1670. I
shall speak nothing concerning them, till I relate the Carriage of the Judge, in
reference to them.

When the Trial betwixt Mr. Bastard, and John Bear, was put on for two
Neglects, the first being for the 29th. of June. Likewise, one of the
Informers, and the Dog-whipper, Swore they came between Twelve and One a Clock,
to Mr. Bastards house, to Inform of a Conventicle near Kingsbridg, in Mr. H.
his House; and that it was three miles betwixt Gorston (where Mr. Bastard
dwells) and Kingsbridg; but the contrary to all that they affirmed upon Oath,
was so fully proved, that all who heard it, might, and most were convinced what
perjured Miscreants they were: Campion Swore that he saw Mistress Bastard, Mr.
Bastards Wife, at the same Conventicle, whereas it can be proved she was
elsewhere, by several Witnesses. Should I publish to the World all the false
Oaths, and Voluminous perjuries of these, and other Witnesses, the Narrative
would break the bounds, and stretch it self far beyond the Consines, I intend
it shall be kept within. I shall now conclude all with the Carriage of the
Judge, who suffered without any Check, Mr. Hele, and Mr. Bastard, to be Jeared
and Flouted, and high Affronts put upon them, by such Humuncios, and Dregs of
Humanity, as Campion, the Smith, Leech (the Judas) that is glad of a days work
in the Country, the Dog Whipper, and others. When Campion swore he saw Mr.
Bastards Wife at a Conventicle, and the Judge asked him, How he knew it was her?
He most Saucily, and Impudently replied: He could not tell whether she was
Married to him, or no, but he had had several Children by her, etc. And yet the
Judge did not in the least reprove him for, or show the least dislike of his so
shamefully abusing Persons of that Worth, and Honor, they are known, and
esteemed generally to be. When Leech swear, That if Mr. Bastard had been so
zealous in Executing the Kings Laws, as he was to maintain Rebellion, the
Conventiclers had been all Routed before that time; the Judge did not in the
least Check him, for that high and most scandalous Charge, but seemed rather to
be delighted with it, and all the rest of that filthy Trash. He suffered
likewise the very Council to be Flouted by some of the Varlots, as the Campion,
whom he permitted as long as he pleased, to Act the parts of a Fool in the
Play, to make Sport for, and move Laughter in Court; and he himself Reflected
sufficiently upon the Gentlemen, insomuch that one of them told him, if he were
an offense to him, he would go out of the Court. Yea, he Labored to Discourage
their Council, and to prevent their full, and effectual Pleading for their
Clients: Telling them, he was sorry to see any Plead in such a Cause, bidding
them for shame to hold their peace (or to that purpose) but said, he thought
what they did, was for their Fees. When the Council for the Informers, had all
desirable Liberty to speak, yea, and were often eased, and Assisted by him. And
though as to the first Neglect, Mr. Hele was Sued for, it was fully proved,
that he did not refuse to take the Informations of the Witnesses, by the
acknowledgment of some of them in the Court, as well as by the Evidence of his
own Servants; and none could Swear that there was either Praying, or Preaching,
or any Religious Worship dissonant from the Liturgy, and Practice of the Church
of England, at that time, but that about three Fields off (besides a high
House, that the Voice was to ascend over) they heard a Voice, which they
concluded, came from Mr. H. his House: Yet he gave a strict charge to the Jury,
to find for the Informers, the Plantiffs. Concerning the two other Neglects,
which were for one day, the one for the Forenoon, the other for the Afternoon,
how the Judge suffered Justice to take Place, and Sway; what follows may give
the Reader ample Satisfaction. In reference to the Forenoons Neglect, the
Witnesses Swear that they were at Pool (Mr. H^les Parish Church) about Ten of
the Clock in the Forenoon, to Acquaint him with a Conventicle at Mr. H. his
House, which was confessed upon Oath by them, ended a considerable time before
Mr. Hele had any Notice of it; and yet it was judged a Neglect, that Mr. Hele
came not soon enough to Suppress the same: And as to the other pretended
Neglect in the Afternoon, though Mr. Hele proved, he sent immediately for his
Horses to be fitted for him against he came from Church; and after he had
refresht himself with some meat, he came to Mr. Hicks his House, where he found
neither Preaching nor Praying, neither could any of the Informers Swear there
was any; but they heard a Voice of one in such an Exercise, and that it was Mr.
Hicks's Voice (which was desperate enough, seeing Voices are many times as like
as Faces) and that this Conventicle began at a Eleven a Clock, and ended at Two
(which was more than Mr. Hele then knew) yet not the least Grane of Allowance,
must be laid in the Balance for Mr. Hele; and whatever was said by his
Adversaries, was sufficient to Preponderate, whatever might rationally be
pleaded, to Acquit him from the Guilt of a Witting, and wilful Neglect of his
Duty (the most Rigid, and Severe Interpretation, being put upon all his
Actions, and the smallest Circumstance aggravated to the highest Pitch, that it
was possible for Malice, and Prejudice to Rack, and Screw it up to) as that
it is Contravertible, and Disputable, whether the Act does require a Justice of
Peace to come in Person to any place, where he is Informed a Conventicle is,
there is no such Law expressed; if there be any thing of that Nature, it is but
very Darkly implied. And further, that he was Engaged in the Public Worship of
God when the Informers came: And should he leave that, to Ride Three or Four
mile upon an uncertainty at the best? (And if he had come, it had been to no
purpose, there being no Meeting at that time) And after the Worship was over,
it was most reasonable that Nature should be refresht, before he Ride so far?
And yet he came at the most probable time to find a Conventicle, which was
about Two a Clock, the ordinary and usual time, that Mr. H. was wont with the
People, to meet at his House. And certainly, if the Informers had not Alarmed
them by their coming, before the Justice, he had Surprised, and found them all
like Bees in the Hive together; And when he came, none did Swear that there had
been any Worship of God, only a Voice of one Praying, or Preaching, was heard,
and it was Mr. Hicks's. And suppose it had been so, they did not Swear that it
was to above the Number of Five: It Is true, Mr. Hele found some Women in the
House, and he Asked them, How they came there? And how, or when, or to what end
they came: How could he know? Mr. Hicks had a Child very Sick, and they were
with his Wife, in the Chamber where the Child lay: And how this could be a
Notorious Evidence, and Circumstance of Fact (that is such a Circumstance, that
carries in it, a certain Demonstration of the Fact, coming within the compass
of that Axiom, or, Maxim posita Circumstantia rei, ponitur res ipsa: For it is
Absurd otherwise to Interpret the Law the two former ways of Conviction, viz.
Confession of the Party: Or the Oath of two Witnesses, being certain Quoad Nos,
the last must be of the same kind) to him, that there had been Religious
Worship, and differing from the Liturgy, and Practice of the Church of England;
or a sufficent Reason to prove him Guilty of a Witting, or Wilful Neglect of
Duty, let all Sober, Impartial, or Unprejudiced men judge. However, the Judge
strictly charge the Jury (which destroys the Liberty of a Judgment of
Discretion, as well as of Determination in them, and so makes Juries to signify
nothing) to find three Neglects, which is more than the Law (as many that are
Judicious rationally suppose) does charge him with, or any other man; for it
does not say Toties Quoties, or so often as a Justice does not Convict of a
Conventicle when he may, he shall Forfeit so many Hundred Pounds, but not doing
his Duty he shall Forfeit one Hundred Pound; When our Wise Legislators
intended, that Conventiclers should suffer for every particular Crime, they
Express it: Why then should we think, much less absolutely determine, that
seeing they have not expressed it with respect to Justices of the Peace, that
they did certainly intend it. The Jury having this charge given them, after
some time, bring in their Verdict to the Judges Chamber, of Two Hundred Pounds
for two Neglects only; at which, he was highly displeased, and would not
receive their Verdict, till they brought it in for Three.

Mr. Bastard producing such full proof, and clear Evidence to Acquit himself
from one Neglect he was charged with, and Sued for, he was resolved to make him
Guilty of the other; therefore, though Mr. Bastard proved that he took all the
Informations of the Informers, and every word that they said in reference to
the same, and every Name of the Persons, that they affirmed were then present:
To which Informations likewise, the several Informers put their hands, but
without any proof, that there was either Preaching or Praying (Mr. John Bear
upon his Oath, acknowledging he saw, or knew of no manner of Worship among the
people; and the rest, that there was no Worship contrary to the Liturgy, and
Practice of the Church of England.) And notwithstanding this, though Mr.
Bastard (that he might not Neglect his Duty) made a Record hereof as a
Conventicle, which was put in at the next Sessions; and the Money returned of
those Offenders (whom two of the Informers swear, were there present) so much
as concerned the King; yet the Judge declared it a Neglect, because the Record
was not Dated the First day of the Sessions, but the Third. Whereupon Mr.
Bastard declared openly, and in the Face of the Court, that he did not Neglect
his Duty Wittingly, and Wilfully (which are the express Words of the Act
against Conventicles) for he could as well have Dated it the First, as the Third
day; but he knew nothing to the contrary, but that it was Valid enough if
Entered, and Dated any time during the Sessions (which are taken in a general
Sense, every particular day not being a New, or distinct Sessions) and what
Unprejudiced Persons can rationally think, or judge otherwise: However,
according to the Directions given to the Jury, he was Fined a Hundred Pound.
Now if the Reader be curiously Inquisitive to know what Judge this was, that so
far Deviated, and Swerved from all Justice, and Equity, least any other should
be censured for him, I must declare; it was Judge Rainford, who is profoundly
Wise, and Understanding in the Law, Mild, Compassionate, and Impartial in the
Administration of Justice, here in England (for ought I ever heard to the
contrary) except when the Causes of those called Fanatics come before him; and
then like Naaman, he must be pardoned.

At Ashbrenton, near Totness, on, or about June the 12th. one Andrew Helly,
with his Son, Daughter, and a Friend, were Repeating a Sermon in a Barn of his,
about a mile from his House; to which place, just as they had ended, came James
Parrat, and a private Person, the Setting-Dogs being Abroad, Scented, and
espied the Game, and rather than they would not be rewarded for their pains,
resolutely Swear, he was the Minister; and so the Number Five is made up, and
consequently a Meeting proved, and Preaching too Logically concluded. So
Parrat, that was never near the place till all was done, was Fined Twelve
Pound, A. H. and his Relations, Twenty Eight Pound; and this was done by
Justice Fowel, and J. Kelland, who made the Evidence of Informers (that are
parties) the ground of this Conviction, which was against all Reason, and Law.
For suppose the Barn part of the Dwelling House (which is about a mile distant
from it) then though J. P. had been present, and a Preacher too, there could be
no Conventicle, A. H. and his Children being of the Family: Let it be taken
otherwise, yet Parat not being there, there could be no Conventicle, the other
not being a Number above what the Law allows; so the place was not liable to
Twenty pounds. But grant that he were there, yet not being a Minister, or if he
were, yet he neither Preaching, nor Teaching, no Law does punish for Twenty
pounds more. But the Justices were resolved to set this Poor Barn, like a
Shepherds Tent, on Wheels, carrying it home to the precincts of the
Dwelling House, for the Fining of that, and then Recarrying it to the Fields,
for the Fining of the people. The Agrieved become Appellents to the Sessions,
where they find no Relief, or Redress, but great Oppression; instead of a
Plaster, their Heads are Broken more, they are Cast, and Treble Costs they
must pay for their Traverse, which is always an Hyperbole in the Excess, never
in the Defect, at the Sessions.

At Silverton, near Exon, Justice Sainthil, Seized some persons, with a
Nonconformist, Mr. Treg^ss (I hope now after all his Storms, Arrived at the
Haven of his everlasting Rest) in a private House, about Nine a Clock in the
morning, and Fined the House Twenty pound; and though he could not prove that
there was any Preaching, or Teaching (as there was none) yet some of the people
were Fined for the Minister, Twenty pound more: Though he had an Estate of his
own, which he Acquainted the Justice with, and desired he might bear his own
Fine, but the Gentleman would not grant it: The Agrieved appeal to the General
Sessions, where they Traverse with some good Success, touching the Preachers
Fine, his Conviction not being Recorded; which the Appellants Advocate observed
to Advantage: But yet the Remedy was almost as bad, if not worse than the
Disease; for being found Guilty of the Meeting, though not of Preaching; they
were Sentenced by the Judge of the Sessions, Mr. Carew, to pay treble Costs as
high, as if they had been Cast in both parts.

At Exon, there lives an Old Gentleman, called Mr. Butler, a Justice of Peace
in the City, who has been a Notorious Conventicle-Hunter many years, the Fame
whereof is diffused through all the West: The Ardours of whose Zeal and
Passion, when he is to Engage in this Honorable Employment, so far Transports
him, that many times he becomes a complete Th^mobedlamus; his Gestures,
Postures, Ravings, much resemble theirs, whom I have seen bound in Chains,
which the Boys in the City can Act, and Imitate with admirable Dex^y, though no
doubt he deserves for them a Canonization of Saint^hip, but by the Romish
Church; because he is never zealous for the Fifth of November, and an esteem of
a greater Wit, because what he has, appears hereby to be mixed with Madness. I
might Write Voluminously hereof, but I will Omit, and pass by all things
concerning him, except this one, which the Reader may be pleased to cast his
Eye upon, thereby to take a measure, and judge of all the rest. One Evening upon
Information given him by some of his Familia^s, that there was a Meeting of the
Fanatics, at Mr. A. Jeffreys, thither he hastens as the Eagle to the prey;
when he came to the House, the Doors without delay were opened to him, there he
finds about sixteen persons, most of them Relations of the Family, and Invited
to Supper; but this Quick-scented Justice smells another Feast in his
Conventicling-Fancy, and judging rather by Number of the persons, than weight
of Reason, after some wonted Ravings, and Ragings, Fines the House Twenty pound
for a Supposed Meeting; and Mr. Chrispin, besides his own Mulct and his Wifes,
was Fined for several Rich persons, directly contrary to Law, which makes the
Rich to pay for the Poor only (not whom a Justice shall judge to be so, but who
are really to be so.) Mr. J. and C. appeal from the Rage of one single Justice,
to the Reason of a Bench: At the City Sessions they Traverse their Appeal,
where Mr. Butler was not only Judge, but Witness in his own Case; his Oath most
unreasonably taken, and as falsely he Swears in the Face of the Court. That when
he came to Mr. Jeffreys House, he could have no entrance, but was forced
Violently to break open the Door, insomuch that he made the Staple fly; the
contrary whereunto was sufficily proved, viz. That the Master of the House
opened the Door quietly, and seasonably; the Attendants that stood by,
perceived no such effects of his Vigor, and Vivacity. But no wonder to hear a
false Oath drop from a false Lip, that has caused a Wide-mouthed untruth, to
pass proverbially under the Name of a Butler: But happily he might Lodge some
mental reserve, for a Salvo to his Oath, and so be able to say with that
profane, and profligated Wretch -- Jur^, at mentem injuratam Gero. It was
likewise Sworn, if I mistake not, by some of his Setting-Dogs, that the Meat
was laid down to the Fire, after, or about the time they entered the House;
which was proved by the Appellants, to be then near half Roasted, and that all
the Harbingers of a Supper, were there. But however, though they did
sufficiently Invalidate all Circumstances of Fact, that the Justice would
ground his Conviction of a Conventicle upon, yet it was to no purpose: For
Justice Carew sitting as Deputy Recorder, and Judge of the Sessions, so
instructed the Jurymen, who were fit to receive his Impressions, that they
brought in their Verdict against the Appellants, and they are Laden with treble
Costs, according to the liberal Calculation of the Judge.

At Derwood, near Exon, on a Lord's Day, a little after the 10th of May, some
persons met together in a Wood, but not so close as to escape the Eagle eyes of
the Informers, who observed their going in, which they concluded confidently to
be a Conventicle. The adjacent Parish upton-pines, being speedily Alarmed
herewith, from thence rush forth with all Expedition, and Fury, a company of
Club-men, whereof the Son of the Parish Priest was one, and fall violently upon
one person; which madness, when a Sober, Honest man rebuked, telling them he
would go without compulsion; they outragiously fell upon him, Drawing, and
Dragging him along, some taking hold of his Arms, some of his Legs, and so
rudely was he handled, that he Recovered not for some considerable time of
those Distortions, Compressions, and Contusions, which his Body suffered by
them. At last, some few of them (the rest escaping) were brought before Justice
Tackfield (that blustering Tempest of Wrath, and Rage, against his Fanatical
Neighbors) where being in an outward Room, they heard what the Informers Swear
before him, viz. That they heard a Voice, but whether there was either Prayer,
or Preaching, they could not tell. However, this Don Farios^ (that he might
make some further Compensation for his Notorious Quandam Fanaticism) Convicts
of a Conventicle, Fines some of the people for themselves, and some for a
Minister, though none could be so much as proved to be there, much less to
Preach, or Teach: But, Corruption optima est possima, Which is not only true
Physically, but Morally.

At Darlington near Totness, Goodman Searls House was Visited upon suggestion
of a Meeting; by Mr. Tho. Carew, where he found but one Person (above the
Family) Viz. a Kindsman of the said Searls. But the quick-sighted Justice in a
certain Room finds many Spittle spots, and thence by Logical Deduction
Concludes it a Company, and at next step a Conventicle, Two or three being met
in a certain Field, at some distance from the House: now a most dim suspicion
is made, a very demonstrative cercumstance, and notorious evedence that God had
been worshipped there by more then Four, besides the Family, or that there was
a Meeting for such an end. When a man looks through a multiplying, and
magnifying Glass of malice, the minutest circumstance shall be substance
enough, and a dark shadow a clear Sunbeam: rather therefore then he will not
attain his end, even that which is next to nothing shall be a sufficient ground
to pass a Conviction upon; So now woe be to the Rheumatck People, for they must
pay large Fees when this Man is their Physician, twenty pownd therefore must
the shoulders of the poor man (the Master of the Family) bear the weight off;
and unless he and his Family will forbear spitting, when together, he may be in
danger of paying more: but all that this Justice does, is little enough to
Compurgate and absolve himself from the Imputation of Fanaticism, and he must
be pardoned if he show his Valor in this Cause, as he once did in another of a
differant Character, when a Champion in Captain Braddons Troop,

D^ven. and Cornwall being so nearly Conjoined, and such frindly Neighbors, it
may not be impertinent, and unlawful to cast an Occular glance upon the
Borders, and Fronteirs of it; where there is a Town called Landrake, vulgarly
Larrake, at which lives an Aged Reverend Divine, whose vvorth is furrher known
then his own Country, a Nonconformist, by name Mr. Gasper Hicks, Who
continuing to Preach in his Family since the 10. of May, 1670. to the Number
that the Act against Conventicles allovvs of, with others under 16 years of
age, it did highly inrage a young Levite of Jejune, and Immature Brains; Who
Serves for the Parish Priest, by Name Mr. Winnel, or Windle; this Supercelious,
Pragmatical, and self-conceited Novice resolves therefore to injure as much as
posibly he could, him whom he ought to have revered and had in high
Veneration; to accomplish his end he sticks not to turn Informer (the most
dishonorable and imfamous Miscreant upon the Earth) against him, that he kept
Conventicles, he gets the Officers of the Parish to search his house, who
found none but four Persons of or above the age of 16, with some fevv under,
besides his own Family: Hovvever this Munseur Furibundo, rides from Justice to
Justice to make a conviction; but these worthy and noble Gentlemen that were
his Neighbors, who have right resentments of Genorosity, and walk according
to the Rules of Justice and Equity, as Sir J. C. Sir W. M. Mr. S. would give
him no Countenance, knowing the Law was not violated by Mr. H. Then he spurs up
his Horse further Westward, where he met with some Justices, who like Tinder
presently took fire; upon the first Information: (I know not all their Names,
but one of them was Dr. Polewheel, that terrible Fulminoso, who for these 10 or
11 years past, has anhelated nothing but threatening cruelty against those
Catachrestically called Fa^aticks) with the highest impetuosity and rage; These
Justices fall upon Mr. H. creating something out of nothing, they Convict him
of a Converticle kept in his own house, and likewise take it for granted,
without any proof, that he Preached, and so Levy 40 l. upon him: He finding
himself agrieved becomes an Appellant to the next General Sessions, which is
out of the Drying Pan into the Fire, for all Justice was banished from the
Bench, Mr. H. was denied a Jury, directly contrary to the Law, Page 9 of the
Acts against Conventicles; Mr. P. and others cried to the Vote, which was done;
and so not withstanding all the strenuous, and nervous endeavors of several
Justices there to make Mr. H. his innocence a fence against the storms and
flames of the others fury, and to shelter him from oppression, Judgment by an
illegal Vote only passes aganst him; and his Appeal hereby being made unjust,
besides the 40 l. they give treble cost against him, and most ignobly load him
with soulest revilings, and reproaches: never was there more monstrous and
barbarous Injustice acted. First, that they should deny the Appellant that
previledge which the Law gives, and which is every English-mans Birthright,
Viz. his Trial by a Jury. Secondly, that they should judge him guilty of a
Conventicle, when there were no more then four Persons of or above the age of
16 years besides his Family, neither was he accused of having more; but however
it holds to be a Conventicle by a new nice, and subtle distinction, (which
like an Ariadnes fine spun thread, helps and conducts them out of the Labyrinth
they were in) viz. That though persons under Sixteen years of Age, be no
Conventiclers, yet being found with those that are of, or above the same Age,
constitute a Conventicle: Whereas the old Axiom is, Quicquid effecit tale, est
magis tale. These New Philosophers can make Non-entities, productive of
Realities. Children must make men guilty, and yet themselves remain Innocents
still. A Thousand under the Age of Sixteen years, are Nullities in Law, but in
the Execution thereof, make others Criminals and Penals too. These New Oracles
of Law make the former Criminals, but not exposed to Penalties (though they
expose others) and so makes the Law in this respect an ineffectual Vanity,
supposing it to make Offenders, without a Sanction, and Allotment of punishment
for them. These New Arithmeticians, can make Ciphers, cast Figures, Four above
the Family in Law, is nothing, Ten Thousand under Sixteen years, are nothing;
but now according to their Rule, add nothing to nothing, and you make Five, or
more. But their definitive Sentence, and final Determination by Vote (to which
he must stand) shall make all sound Philosophy, good Law, and true Arithmetic.
Thirdly, That they should Convict him of, and punish him for Preaching, when
none could prove it (supposing him guilty of keeping a Conventicle) neither was
there the least Circumstance to be Demonstrative of it. It Is true, our
Legislators have made Notorious Evidence, and Circustance of Fact, to prove a
Conventicle, but no such thing to prove Preaching, or Teaching, for it can
scarce possibly admit of any proof thereby. For, grant a Minister be found
among a people above the number of Five; What notorious Evidence can result
from this, that he Preached? for it might only be (as often it is) to Pray, or
his Preaching might be prevented; or grant he were sound with his Bible, and
Notes in it; yet this cannot evince clearly he did Preach: It may indeed beget
a suspicion, that either he did, or intended to do it. But is it Legal, or
Rational, to punish persons upon so slender a ground as this? To inflict the
Law upon him from a jealousy of his Intentions, is to make such an Act of his,
or another Nonconformist, worse than Murder, or Theft, etc. For no man is
punished as a Felon for intending, though it be manifested by Attempting Felony,
when it is not Actually committed. And to punish him for having done it, when it
did not so appear, is equally unjust, and unreasonable: For, De non
apparentibus and non-existentibus eadem est ratio, Does our Law condemn any
Felon from a naked abstracted Jealousy, that he is guilty of the Crime he
stands charged with, when there is no Evidence to prove the same: Our Law
therefore is most Just, that Jurors must proceed Secundum allegata, and
Probata. And that every Conviction of Guilt, and judicial Sentence must be
Founded, and Bottomed upon the same: But here was no such thing to be the Basis
of the Determination at this Sessions, by the Major part of the Bench, against
Mr. H. they were therefore so uncertainly Fluctuating, and Dubious, whether he
Preached, yea, or no, for want of clear demonstrative Evidence: That in the
Record of the Offense, it was expressed Disjunctively that Mr. H. did Preach, or
Pray, and not Copulatively that he did both, or possitively, and absolutely he
did the first. His Council pleaded to this, and opened the Law fully to them,
showing them their Gross mistake. But all was to them like beating the Air, for
neither Law, nor the strongest Reason, can be an impregnable Bulwark against
their Envenomed and Virulent malice, which was so Oppressingly disgorg'd upon
Mr. H. Thus Reader, thou see how Illegally, not only in Devon, but Cornwall,
many Justices Act, and that the New Chancery, or court of Appeals, which should
be a cherishing Bosom to the Oppressed, is made a Ponderous, and
Pressing-stone for such as will not yield to the unjust Convictions of one or
more private Justices. Thus poor Distressed, Agrieved Conventiclers, like
unweary Birds, fly from the Hawk, into the Fowlers hand: So that henceforth,
the Philosopher must be the Appellants best Councellor, who having his Head
broken, and being by a Friend advised to go to the Magistrate, and get the
violent Fellow punished: Nay, said he, it is better to go to the Surgeon, to get
my Head healed. The best Remedy for Sufferers, is to cry to that God who has
his Throne (as the Psalmist tells us) established in Righteousness, and
Justice, and Judgment, for the Habitation thereof, that executes Judgment for
the Oppressed; that for the crying of the Poor, and sighing of the Needy, will
arise, and from whom their cries, by reason of their Oppressions, cannot be
debarred. That will bring forth their Righteousness as the Light, and their
Judgment as the Noonday; who ordains his Arrows against the Persecutors of
his people. To that Essentially, and Eternally Just, and Righteous God, be
Glory for evermore. Amen.

A POSTSCRIPT.
THough I have given an Account to the World of those miserable, and deplorable
Oppressions that very many in Devon, Labor and Groan under; yet have I not
made known all, for want of a perfect and true Relation thereof, neither have I
declared all the unjustifiable Actions of their Oppressors: As how Mr. Bear
vin^^^^^d ^eech (the Judas) after he had Robbed a Woman in the way as the (...)
going home, coming toward her with his Sword drawn, demanded if her Money,
which she durst not deny him. How he has detained the Third part of the Money,
due to the Poor of several ^^^shes, where he has made several Conviction of
Conv^ (and if I mistake not too, after it has been demanded) how he ^^^uraged
a Constable, when he was to Execute his Warrant for Distress; to take a 100
pounds worth of Goods, for 5 or 6 pound, telling him that he paying the Money
for which the Distress was taken, he might keep the Overplus; and should not be
liable to return it. How he sent a young man of Kingsbridg, to the common Goal
(contrary to Law) for not coming to the Common Prayer, when there was none
publicly Read in the Town Church. How he bound over to two Sessions, a person
whom he supposed was at a Conventicle (putting him to great charges and
trouble) because he would not take his Oath there was one, that he with Leech,
might make two Witnesses to prove the same. How he made the Rich pay for the
rich, when he knew not how to come by their Estates, which is contrary to the
Law; which says, they must be poor, and unable to pay, when their Fines are to
be Levied upon those that are able. How he Fined one for another, that died 3
or 4 years ago. How he commanded violently to Break open Doors to take
Distress, which is not required by the Law, with many other Illegal Actions,
that he is deeply guilty of. I have Omitted likewise the horrid Injustice of Sir
Peter Prideux, in his dealings with Mr. Collings of Mary Otery, a
Nonconformist. I have made as severe a Scrutiny, and Critical a Search as I
possibly could, into the Actions of all these fore mentioned Justices, so far
as they do respect the Execution of the Act against Conventicles; and most of
them appears Extra, or Contra-Legal. Let but some of the words of the Act be
examined and rationally weighed, in the Balance of an unprejudiced Mind, and
Judgment, and then the Illegality of their Proceedings, and Convictions will
appear. The Number of Persons prohibited to Meet is Five, of, or above 16 years
of Age; the Ground of this Prohibition, is their Congregating or Assembling
themselves together under Color, or pretense of any Exercise of Religion in
other manner, than according to the Liturgy, or Practice of the Church of
England, etc. Page the 4th. This being so, two things must be proved. First,
That there is some Exercise of Religion among them. Secondly, That it is
dissonant, and disagreeable both from the Liturgy, and Practice of the Church
of England. Which words are Copulative, and not disjunstive, so that if they be
guilty of the one abstracted from the other, they cannot be liable to the
penalty of the Law: Which things were scarce ever proved, but only taken for
granted, neither is it facil, or possible to prove it, unless some should be
Eye, or Ear-witnesses from the beginning to the end of the Meeting. If two
Witnesses should come to a Conventicle, when a Nonconformist is Praying or
Preaching, etc. they must Swear there was no Divine Exercise consonant to the
Liturgy, etc. before they came; or they will prove nothing to warrant a Legal, and
rational Conviction, and if there be singing of Psalms (such as are allowed by
Authority, and used publicly) Preaching, and Praying before Sermon, it is
according to the practice of the Church of England, without a Worship agreeable
to the Liturgy; yet are they not Obnoxious to punishment, because they are not
guilty of the Neglect of both, the words being as was said before, Copulative,
and not Disjunctive. The Law against Conventicles, determines a threefold way
for proof to a Magistrate, to proceed unto a Conviction upon, either confession
of the Party; or Oath of two Witnesses, or by notorious Evidence, and
Circumstance of Fact. Page 4. The two former, these Justices never had, for
Informers cannot be Witnesses, being parties concerned (to assert this, is as
absurd as to affirm a man may be a witness, for himself, or in his own cause)
the last they seldom or never had; that is such a Notirious Evidence and
Circumstance of Fact, as is as clear and valid a proof, as the two former, for
such must it be, it is not what men judge to be such from Malice, or Avarice,
but what is so in it self, for what is only productive of mere Probabilities,
or Haesitating conjectures is no proof. If a Law were made, that whosoever goes
into a Bawdy House, or Stews, to commit Uncleanness (that Reigning, predominate
Bestial sin among us) shall be liable to such a punishment, upon proof made any
of these three ways. I believe there are some, very eager and zealous to
Execute the Law against Conventicles, that would think it a very irrational and
unjust thing to Convict a person of this Crime, either by his going into such a
place, though he was not seen come out, or by being seen to come out, though
not to go in, or both, or only by being found there without any Immodest
posture: This is the very Case as to that notorious Evidence, and Circumstance
of Fact, that most of our Justices make the proof of a Conventicle. Sometimes
several Christians may meet together, without any set and solemn Exercise of
Religion, and though they might intend it, yet many times it may be prevented;
but going in, or coming out of a House, or being found there, is made a
Circumstance evincing enough with our Justices. If it be Objected by way of
defense, that this Act and all Clauses therein contained, shall be construed
most Largely, and beneficially for the Suppressing of Conventicles, and for the
Jastification and Encouragement of all persons to be employed in the Execution
thereof, as page 12. of the Act. It may be Answered, That this must be
understood either so far as things are, or persons Act agreeable to the Rules
of Common Justice, or Right Reason (though all things of that Nature be not
Expressed in the Act) or else we must suppose his Majesty, and our Legislators
did intend and design nothing hereby but Wrong, and Injustice, which is not to
be asserted,

I hope all these things in Conjunction together seriously weighed, and
considered, may rationally plead for his Majesty's interposing betwixt his
Distressed, and Oppressed Subjects, and the Violence and Injustice of their
Oppressers. If their Purses (who are so many, and so considerable a wealthy
party in this Nation) be thus Evacuted, and Exhausted, and such a constant
Devoration and Consumption, made of their Estates by those country Caterpillars
(which brings not the least profit of Advantage to his Majesty, nor affords any
Support to his Government,) How is it possible that he should have adaequate
and proportionable Supplies of Money to his wants? Can men make Brick without
Straw? Give Money when they have it not? Or what Encouragement can Thousands
have (whom this Act concerns) to improve to the utmost, their Estates by
Trading, when they know to what Gredy Hounds they shall be made a Prey. That
they who are, or may (by the blessing of God upon their lawful Endeavors) be
Rich, shall be reduced to miserable Poverty, to enrich others who are miserably
poor, and who will not continue long Rich. I think it is not difficult to
demonstrate how the violent Execution of the Act against Conventicles has more
Enervated, and decayed Trade (which will ever prove the strongest, and firmest
Pillar for Government to be supported with, and to project, or assert the
contrary, will terminate Indefeatably at last in a political Solecism) has
pauparized and Impoverished more persons, and Families in this Nation, than any
one thing (yea more than many things that may be judged Burdensome and
Exhausting) for these many years. How loud a Cry should this have in the Ears
of his Majesty for some Indulgence, and a Relaxation of the rigorous Execution
of such a Law against so many Thousands of his faithful Subjects, and to blunt
the Edg of this Sword that Cuts in pieces, and mangles so many Members of that
Body, that he is the Royal, and Supreme Head of; which with much Facility may
be done, not only by Vacating and Repealing the Law, or superceding it by his
own Prerogative, but as he has all Executive power of Law, to hinder the
Execution of it in a way Subservient to the Malice, penury, and Avarice of many
of his Justices in the County; which may be done, and yet it remain a Law, by
declaring what is the proper Genuine sense, and Construction of words and
phrases in it, and then to suffer it to be Executed in no other manner than
what is agreeable to the same. As that though there be never so many under 16
years of age, yet it is no Conventicle when there are no more than four of, or
above that age, besides the Household. That no Informers shall be Authentic
witnesses: that it shall be no Conventicle unless it can be proved, that the
Exercise of Religion from the beginning to the end thereof, was in other manner
than according both to the Liturgy, and practice of the Church of England.
That nothing shall be judged a notorious Evidence, and circumstance of Fact,
but what can be as certain and clear a proof of the Fact, as the Confession of
the party, or Oath of two witnesses, so as still to be consonant that Axiom,
Posita Circumstantia rei, ponitur res ipsa (and not to leave it to every
Malicious, Indigent, and Avvricious Justice, to judge what he pleases to be
such an Evidence, and Circumstance) that no Constables, Churchwardens, etc.
shall be liable to the Mulet of 5 l. for not executing Warrants for Distresses,
seeing the Act does not express it, page 6. (the penalty of 5 l. referring
only to such Officers Neglects of Informing some Magistrate when he knows, or
is credibly Informed, Conventicles are held within his Precincts, Parish, or
Limits, and shall not endeavor the conviction of the parties, page 11. of the
Act against Conventicles) that when it is said page 12. That this Act, and all
Clauses therein contained, shall be construed most largely, and beneficially
for the Suppressing of Conventicles, and for the Justification and
Encouragement of all persons to be employed in the Execution thereof: It must
be understood so far as it is agreeable to other Laws, Rules of Justice and
Reason. That no Justice of the peace, or chief Magistrate, shall be subject to
the Beck of every Informer, to go to any House, or place where he is Informed a
Conventicle is, or else forfeit the Sum of 100. pounds, the Law not Expressing
it, and that having paid one 100 l. he can forfeit no more by the Law. And that
whoever forfeits one 20 l. for any House, Out-house, Barn, Yard, or Backside,
shall be liable to no other forfeiture ever after, by virtue of this Act, it
not expressing it. That Fields not being mentioned in the Act, the Owner of
them cannot forfeit 20 l. page 8. Notwithstanding, meeting in such places, make
a Conventicle, page 4. That no Meetings in public Churches for Religious
Exercises, shall be adjudg'd Conventicles (a Conventcile being properly a
Meeting of persons together clandestingly, and in some private place for an
evil end) for though the Law says, page 4. That if the Assembly be in a House
where there is a Family Inhabiting, or if it be in a House, Field or place,
where there is no Family Inhabiting, then the Magistrate upon proof shall
punish them: Yet the word place, though it seem to be a Generical term, it
cannot Rationally comprehend a public Church, for we must suppose a Law not to
be made against Reason. And it is highly Irrational to judge a Conventicle
(according to the proper Notion, and common acceptance of it) which is in so
public a place, that every one that pleases may come, and both see and hear
what is done and transacted; the word place must therefore be such as a House,
Field, etc. that it is private in opposition to one of public use, by
Authoratative appointment. And lastly, That no Meetings be punished by Law, but
at which under pretense of tender consciences, Seditious Sectaries, and other
disloyal persons contrive Insurrections (for it is unreasonable any should have
the least favoux, that are not of a peaceable Deportment under his Majesty's
Government.) page 3. And that it may be known whether any such wicked
contrivances be at them, let there be particular places for all Parties, and
persuasions to Meet in, and let his Majesty appoint whom he shall judge most
fit, to be present at their Meetings, to hear and what they Preach, Pray, and
Do, and make a true report to him: How far his Majesty by his Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical Affairs (which the Act against Conventicles does not Invalidate,
or Avoid) can Relieve his Subjects distressed other ways, than by the Execution
of this Act, his own Royal Wisdom can sufficient Dictate to him; but if he
shall judge it fit to do both the former, and latter, who can be so Disloyal, or
Disingenuous, as to deny him Heart, Hand, or Purse, and not clap their Hands,
and cordially say, God Save the King.

The Epoche of that Maxim (No Bishop, no King) is the Reign of that profoundly
Wise, and Learned King James, and no doubt it was then a true political Maxim,
because of that general Interest they had in this Nation, whereby they could
afford considerable Support to the Crown of England: And it is very requisite
that the Supreme Magistrate of any Christian Nation, should have a Catholic
Interest in the Clergy, because of the swaying and prevailing Influence it has
usually upon Consciences, when it is honorable in the Eyes of the people; but
when their Interest is so debelitated, and languisheth, being at a low Ebb, and
becoming a waning Moon, and setting Sun in the Affections, and esteem of the
people, that are most considerable for Wisdom and Wealth, and whereof there are
many thousands that did once Revere, and Venerate them) that they are
Incapacitated to do that service to Royal Majesty, that formerly they could.
And there is another kind of Clergy, whose Interest is far more considerable
among the people: Why should it not become a new Maxim in our English Politics
(Maxims of State many times varying with present Circumstances, and Emergences,
unto which they are to be accountated few, being calculated for all times,
unless such as have their foundation in Universal truth) No Nonconformist, no
King. Let but his Majesty try further, how far they can be Serviceable to him,
and grant them their public Freedom, and Liberty, to serve Lord, and he will
find that with all Unanimity, and a Joint concurring consent, they will say, O
King Live for Ever.

FINIS.

