THE TRIMMER, HIS FRIENDLY DEBATE WITH THE OBSERVATOR CONCERNING UNIFORMITY;
Rendition of Charters, the House of Commons, not a House of Courtiers; and
twenty things more, not worth the Rehearsal in a Title Page.

Though it be the Common Policy of some Authors or Booksellers to Wheedle Men
in to the Exchange of Money for Books, by putting more in the Title Page, then
you shall find in the Book; and (like the Observator) more in the Contents then
in the Chapter.

LONDON, Printed for R. Hall; And sold by most Booksellers. 1683.

TO THE READER,
IF any one be inquisitive to know who comes here? (and under the guise of a
Trimmer) I answer, a Friend, a Friend to his Country, as are all those, and
only those that are Loyal to the King; and because the Observator also appears
(only) in Masquerade, I also thus muffle up my self in the dark, and go a
mumming with him.

And indeed I may well be loath to be apprehended, and known, and taken in such
Company. where gravity itself may well blush to be seen with such a
Scaramucchio.

Not that I need be afraid, or ashamed at any thing here writ, nor that I want
a lawful Commission to call him (thus) to account, since the Law of God, the
Law of Nature, Self-preservation, and the Common Law of Mankind, gives every
man a Letter of Mart against the Common-Picqueroon of all good men's reputations.

And if I have indulged an humor that may sometimes (possibly) seem Picquant
and Eager, the malignity of the humor to be corrected, may require (at least)
indemnity. Besides the Observator has so coated himself in his own dirt, that
there is no coming at him, till he be scrap't.

For Spies (or Observators) very subtlely walk Incognito and with a dark
Lanthorn (like Faux) in disguise; and though always ready to give fire to the
Train of their own laying, to blow up whom they list, and when they list, yet
no body can certainly tell who hurts them; they shoot in the dark; and with
white powder, doing Execution, and yet not betrayed by the report.

So that I am forced to bring him to light, and unhood him sometimes by some
(otherwise unwelcome) Periphrasis.

Yet can no man imagine that I or any man should be overforward to attack such
an Hydra, that decollate his venom never so dexterously, and assuredly yet the
next week he shall still perk up his head anew, so long as he has any mischief
to exert.

-- Iram atque animos ex crimine sumit. Besides, There is no conquering an Ape,
all Correction is lost upon him, for lash him, and slash him never so tightly
for his lustful Pranks, and mischievous Gambols, yet He Will turn up his Scut,
and snear in your Face,
With an impudent Grin, and a learing Grimace.


THE TRIMMER, HIS FRIENDLY DEBATE WITH THE OBSERVATOR.
CHAP. I.
Trim. NOW, we have begun to Parley, I see some blooming hopes of a Peace
betwixt us, at least a Truce!


Obs. Never, never, I am against all Peace with Whigs, Trimmers, or Dissenters;
and am only for Obs. 269. Jan. 10. 1682.
Execution, Execution -- with a firm, hardy, and unalterable determination.


Trim. Are you not capable of any mitigation, nor moderation?


Obs. No; no; speak not a word on it; I have (indeed, long ago) hung out the
White-flag, (then was then, and now is now; then was your time of Treaty;) but,
now like Tamberlain, I hang out nothing but the Blood-red Flag.


Trim. Notwithstanding which, I am (still) of opinion that your rage might be
mortified, and by my hand too; at least moderated, or mitigated.


Obs. What? Do thou think that my Ring-worm Observation's inveterated now to
a Tettor, can be corrected with a little gall-less Ink, and a blunt Pen?


Trim. It is not impossible, if a man could think it worth his while: or, if it
were proper to be grave with a Buffoon.


Obs. Then you take the Observator (on whose vigilance, and strenuous sedulity
depends the public Peace) to be but a Mimick in your esteem.


Trim. I think it is as needless as ridiculous to talk seriously to an Ape; and
he that does it, is the greater Ape of the two; and yet, to suffer the
mischievous Ape, to play his Gambols uncorrected, what patience or wisdom can
endure it? For so noisome and offensive are some Animals to humane kind, that
it concerns all mankind to get quit of the Annoyance, with as speedy a riddance
and dispatch as may be, by any lawful means, how great soever be the drudgery.


Obs. Then why do you undertake such a drudgery?


Trim. I confess there is no credit in the Rancounter, where the victory
deserves pardon (only;) no Triumph.


Obs. Then you doubt not the victory be like.


Trim. Victory? I attempt none over thee, more then (a Scavinger does) over the
Kennel; it is an employment more easy, and necessary, then creditable; and he
that (for publick-good) stoops to it, cannot possibly do it without dirtying
his fingers, be he never so warily cleanly. Besides, there is in an Observator,
such a concurrence of odd and sinister qualities, that it is some difficulty to
treat him suitably, and yet effectually.


Obs. Why so? Am I a man of such Cross-purposes?


Trim. Let the Company judge, for, treat a Monky seriously, and correct him
never so effectually, and he will only stear at you; and on the other hand, treat
him suitably (that is) Apishly, and the Bystanders will laugh at both; the
best way is to put a chain about the loins of the wanton Baboon, and tie him up
from further harm.


Obs. And in the interim, you will show a good reason for it.


Trim. As good reason (at least) as you show for execution, execution of all
Trimmers, and Dissenters, men of as good conscience, and merit (surely) as your
good Worship. For God and Nature, Justice and Reason, Self-preservation, and
the common law of mankind have given every Man a License to smite a Viper, or a
Mad-Dog, that foams out nothing but rage, and ruin to all he can snap at,
biting (like mad) all that comes in his way, as long, and as far as his feeble
Legs, and old Teeth will permit him; and when they fail still the howls out,
Execution, Execution -- will any man in his wits stop that charitable hand,
that will maul the old Cur?


Obs. You make a very Beast of me; the worst of Beasts? Viper? Mad old Cur? You
begin to be good Company; but is not this too reflecting, rude and Personal?


Trim. It is Just and Personal; Obs. 273.
for he that unmans himself by losing all sense of humanity, spitting fire,
vomiting Daggers and Knives, disgorging Halters, as fast as a Jugler does
Ribbons, and breathing flames, and Execution, Execution, with a firm, hardy,
and unalterable determination, howling against all moderation, mitigation, etc.
makes a Beast of himself, and by his Barbarity turns Salvage.


Obs. Have you any Commission to use me thus?


Trim. Yes; the Commission is made in nature, and given to all; is it not
lawful to wipe off the dirt, that rude hands shall throw at any man's face? at
least, more lawful then to asperse and calumniate? That man that turns Satyr,
discovers thereby (like the Devil, who also like a Satyr is pourtrayed with)
his Cloven-feet; every man blesses himself from him: And therefore a Satyr is
also painted with wrinkled Horns; that as he gores every man, so every man
thinks it lawful to have a sling at him? A Commission (quoth he?) to chastise
an old Apish mischievously mad Observator, that like a Salvage-Indian, runs a
muck, killing all he can come at, till some lucky hand knock the desperate
villain down, and so prevent Execution, Execution, with which he plagued
mankind, with a firm, hardy, and unalterable determination. Surely the Law and
Justice that permits you to asperse men with your false Colors, and dirt of
your own invention, and scraping up against me a Trimmer, and all Trimmers for
my sake, in your weekly and daily Pamphlets, cannot in Equity or Justice keep
two scales, and two measures, one to buy by, and another to sell by; one
Winchester-measure, another Rumford; one for savor, and affection, another for
disaffection; one for an Observator, another for a Trimmer, one for a Tory --
non -- con -- another for a Whig -- non -- con -- one for an erroneous
Conscience, another for him that has none at all. Justice should be blind, as
well as keep just weights and measures; Justice, true Justice have no respect
of Persons, know not their own Sons (ay, marry, (Sirs!) who does?) nor yet
their own Masters, nor friends in Judgment; for they that have but one Ear open
deserve to be cropped, and to lose both, They should not be like the
Scotch-Prophet, who undertook certainly to Divine, and foretell at any time in
any Lawsuit, which side would be worsted, long before trial; but the Fawse
Loune took aim (like crafty Astrologers) from answers to some previous
questions, which always guided, and directed his Divination, wherein he seldom
or never did err: enquiring first, (thus) Ken ye wha is the Whig and wha is the
Tory? And accordingly gave Judgment for Plaintiff or Defendant, as the Judges
(he knew) were inclined; Judge Hales is dedd.


Obs. Ay, long ago, but his place is not empty.


Trim. Such places seldom stand long empty, may they for ever be well-fill'd,
and then Justice will not be severe against a necessary Apology, and yet
connive at an Observator that bespatters Trimmers with all the blood shed in
Eng. Scot. and Irel ascribing it ('it is Strange) to the moderating, mitigating,
abating etc. Councils of Trimmers.


Obs. What shameless villain could have so little modesty, or so little sense
to ascribe such dismal events to be the effects of moderation, and mitigation;
it is too much nonsense for so ingenuous an Observator to be guilty of it.


Trim. I cannot help that, but if I should take notice of all your escapes, I
should be more voluminous then Varro; besides, since your weekly, and sometimes
daily Observations has replenisht the world, they need no more Bumfodder this
seven years, I Will maintain it. Therefore I Will neither offend my self, nor my
Reader, with turning my head further back (to look upon such nasty Excrements
of your Brain) then from January 10. 1682 Obs. N. 269. where you ascribe not
only all the Blood shed for 40 long years, and upwards, to the moderating and
mitigating Councils of Trimmers, but particularly also the death of the Earl of
Strafford, and the murder of the late King is filed to the same account.


Obs. I remember no such matter.


Trim. A man of your talent needs a better memory, but you did say so.


Obs. Where?


Trim. I have told you, in Obs. n. 269. What was it but trimming Councils that
ruined the late King, etc.


Obs. Go on.


Trim. Ay, that would be wise work, to reprint your Observator, when any man
may have them at the upper end of Holborn for two pence a Bushel: Do you not
say, How was all this brought about? By moderating (you answer) mitigating,
qualifying, abating, promising, undertaking, flattering, distinguishing,
insinuating, expostulating, importuning, supplicating, whining, deploring,
desponding, etc. in cases where there was no way left to preserve the Public
but Execution, Execution, with a firm, hardy, and unalterable determination.


Obs. Nay, If I have said it, I Will stand to it, my Pen never undertook any
thing but it carried it.


Trim. The wrong way, commonly. Will you promise not to laugh at me, if I be a
little serious with such a Scarramuchio?


Obs. Speak your pleasure with the same liberty that I have taken.


Trim. If I should say, Let your moderation be known unto all men, I should too
gravely refel your Boffoonry; but prithee tell me soberly, (if thou can be
sober) Did ever Christ, or his blessed Apostles breath nothing but Execution,
Execution? Did they not conquer the salvage World with meekness, moderation and
mitigation, mildly teaching the nearest way to Heaven, and to Temperance,
Sobriety, Meekness, Piety, the only way thither; and the only way to Peace and
Happiness in this World, as well as in another World?


Obs. I cannot deny it.


Trim. Then (prithee) why do thou pretend to be more concerned for men's
temporal and eternal welfare than they are themselves?


Obs. I would but guide them; and if they will not follow, they know what
follows, and let them take what follows.


Trim. Ay, ay, so let them; Execution, let them have it, firmly and malterably,
till the Hang-men be tired and gorged till they vomit blood again; and spue
like a Horseleech, or like that horrid French King, (that great persecutor of
the Protestants) that died bloody all over; his blood could not by any Art be
stopped, but gusht out at Mouth, Eyes, Nose, Ears, and all the other holes in
his Body; after his Parisian Massacre. And yet Atheists and Persecutors
attribute this to chance, when the finger of God was so visible, (so did Iannes
and Iambres, till at last, to their confusion, they were convinced.) This was
the end of that Charles the 9th of France, who viewing the dead Carcasses of
his Protestant Subjects, that lay unburied after the Parisian Massacre, and
amongst the rest, the dead Body of the Admiral of France. Oh! (said he) quam
sudviter olet cadaver inimici? How pleasant is the smell of an Enemies corpse?
So the Queen Mother of Scotland beholding the dead Bodies of her Protestant
Subjects, (whom she had slain in battle) said, she never saw a finer piece of
Tapestry in her Life. But these Horse^eeches lived by blood, and by blood they
died.


Obs. Ay, but we are not for blood, for killing Men for Religion.


Trim. A good reason why, you cannot, because the Writ de Haeretico comburendo
is null and void: But was there not ways to bring a Granmer to death for
pretense of Treason, when Heresy could not do it? And will any man that makes
no Conscience to take my purse, scruple to knock me in the head, if he have
opportunity. All Persecutors, like all Dogs, are all of a kind, though some are
of loss growth and strength than others; a peevish cursed Gurr would tend and
tear like a Mastiff, or an Irish-Greybound, if it had the power, which makes me
think of Sir Genge Blage, one of King Henry the 8th's Bedchamber, and in whom
the King took great complacence and delight; for Sir George was most pleasantly
facetious, and Company for a Prince, but he was a true Protestant in the very
heart of him, and consequently did no very good Offices to the King (the
Bishops thought) in reference to them and their Ecclesiastical ways; but to be
revenged ( an Execution, that they seldom adjourned longer than till the
Gallows was set up, and the Master and Hang-men ready, good Men!) they got Sr.
George into their Spiritual Courts, and condemned him forthwith for Heresy,
(hoping to dispatch him before the King should have notice) and just as they
had turned him over to the secular Power, only to burn him a little to ashes,
(tender hearts) unluckily came the Kings Pardon, and spoiled the sport, when
Sir George coming to thank the King for his grace, Ah, my Pig! (quoth the King,
for so he used to call him) yea, says Sir George, but if your Majesty had not
been better to me than the Bishops, your Pig had been roasted before this time.
And if the Governors had followed the Execution, Execution, to which (like a
Malepert Incendiary) you tutor them, our business had been done by this time,
either roasted or raw. Thus you are become the Public Bellows, daily kindling
and blowing up the Coals of Dissension keeping up Differences, and Parties, and
Animosities, that would lie dead if Hodge had bread.


CHAP. II.
Obs. WHy am I thus neglected then? no preferment stirring a days?


Trim. Preferment? Yes, for want whereof, you have under my name, and upon my
back, like a discontented Pedant, whipped and slasht men in place and Power
(these two months) as men that are so ignorant as to be so stupid, as to be so
dull, as not to see your merit, and how well you have deserved of the public.


Obs. Such men (as you speak of) like your self, are crept up into High places
and Preferments, and not only so, but (as if you were also the very Pimps to
preferment,) hold the door, shutting it against better Men than your selves,
Men that have been always Loyal, always constant; it is these Trimmers that know
my merit and Loyalty so well, that their knowledge of it has undone me; Obs. n.
272.
they know I am too honest for some Courts, and too plain a dealer, which (as I
told you lately) has undone me.


Trim. Thou Loyal and constant? yes, thou wast always loyal to White Hall; and
very complacent to old Oliver, to humor and oblige him, with the only talent
you can glory in, or Oliver took delight in, namely, your Fiddle-sticks; thou
art loyal and constant to White Hall, whoever is the occupant, and in
possession, right or wrong.


Obs. Did not I give you a List (the other day) of those Names Obs. n. 268.
that have been always loyal, always constant; tried men, and never deceived a
trust, never warped from their duty, never doubled nor faltred in the worst
times?


Trim. Yes, you did, I remember by this token, that your own dear self was the
Foreman impanelled in the Inquest, with an Asterism, or hand in the margent
overagainst it, and underneath these words (which I suppose you stole out of
the Ring Mrs. Betty gave you) when this you see, remember me; sure you live
amongst bad neighbors, that you are glad (thus) to be your own Trumpet, Mr.
Nobs --


Obs. Trimmer, thou never spok'st a truer word in thy Life; a company of dull
Rogues, they see not the dimensions and goodly size of a man of parts; sometimes
even at Sam's Coffee-house the dull-Crapes will make a half-grin, when they
meet with a good jest and witty in my Observations, whilst others laugh at
them for laughing at that which (they say) is neither witty nor a jest; and
when I break as good a jest as any in the Three Kingdoms, Ay dad, they say it
is no more worth the laughing at, than if I had broke wind, (saving your
presence) calling me but the very Crackf -- of the Nation.


Trim. They abuse their own wit that suspect yours.


Obs. Ay dad, Trimmer, I begin to love thee now for that very word, and if all
the men in Place and Power, whom I have persecuted so long under your vizzard,
had but your Brains and Eyes in their Skulls, I had not thus long been
neglected, and forced to write for Bread, my daily Bread sometimes; and dad I
have deserved better of the public.


Trim. And no doubt but you will be advanced in good time, according to your
deserts.


Obs. So I have hoped long, indeed, but I have lived upon hopes till I am
almost starved.


Trim. Why do you not chastise the Government for being such a negligent blind
Government, as not to discern the pregnancy of your parts, the constancy of
your Loyalty, and the great use and need they have of you?


Obs. Is that (now) to do? sure thou do not read, at least, not heed my
Observations; have I not rendered the great ones therefore (this 2 or 3 months)
a sort of hollow-friends to the Government, calling them Trimmers; ay dad, I
have paid them Obs. n. 260.
off, and have charged them with no less then the murder of the late King, the
death of the Earl of Strafford, the Massacre in Ireland, nay, the only cause of
all the blood and ruin in the three Kingdoms for above these forty years? I
have mauld them E dad, and revenged my self upon them sufficiently, (I think,)
inconsiderate men; they might have considered me sooner; E dad, I trounc't
them, for their moderating, and mitigating councils, Obs. n. 269.
that ruined all, when nothing but bold, and hardy Execution, Execution can
save us; and a firm, hardy, and unalterable determination.


Trim. And for which you must endure my severer lash by and by; why? Obs. Jan.
10. n. 269.
Thou more then Bedlamer! was ever moderation, mercy or mitigation, or Councils
compounded of such Ingredients, guilty of so much blood and ruin? I thought it
had been the bloody Irish, and Papists, that were the cause of the bloody
Massacre in Ireland, and also the Instruments thereof.


Obs. The Trimmers, E dad; I have said it;


Trim. Yes, you have said it, and printed it too; Obs. n. 269.
and if it had not been to undeceive you (for I suppose there is not a man in
the world believes it, except your dear self, and perhaps not your self
neither) I had not vouchsaf't to humble my self so much to censure, as to be
seen in such company; but now, that my hand is in, i will make you come on the
publick-stage, (now that I have got you on to my own ground) as often as I
list, (just as you have used me (these 2 months) and all Trimmers for my sake,
slashing us in Public, in spite of our teeth, and under the name of Trimmers,
have exposed men in Place and Power, to Coffee-house-chat, and laughter, most
sawcily (all the Kingdom over,) in revenge of their slighting you, and your
sullied Petitions for Preferment; for which I will chastise you Nobs -- before
I have done; indeed, I must, I will; come, Hot-cockles! you must (now) lie down
in your Turn.


Obs. Hold, Sir, hold! E dad, I do not like you at first, you seem to have
dogged, hard Vulcan's hand, this must not be suffered, nor will the Government
suffer a man of my Loyalty to be smitten in earnest, upon pretense of
Hot-cockles sport, or a Christmas-game:


Trim. Why! Does the Government think themselves so much concerned in you, and
for you, as not to suffer more true Loyalty, then any Tories heart or head was
ever capable of to wipe off that blood and guilt, which (it has quietly
suffered you (without check or rebuke) to throw upon all that has neglected, or
discontented you, or that stands in your way, only because you are hungry, or
angry.


Obs. It is not the Government that can be an Enemy to Nobs -- it knows it is
own interest too well; neglect Nobs, and neglect its self.


Trim. Who (then) has nanger'd thee? dear heart!


Obs. The Trimmers, hollow friends to the Government, and hollow hearts that
yet are got too near the head, it is these that I have so publicly chastised,
and whipped them for their pains, on the publick-stage, it is these on whom I can
never be sufficiently revenged; for they know if I were in play, they must sit
out, and be bystanders; I am so loyal, and have been so faithful all along,
and sincere, E dad, this plain-dealing has undone me; it is cogging, lying,
flattering Sycophants that carry it too often, Ay dad, I know where.


Trim. Nay, you do not stick to tell us where, you know the place where you
wooed the Usurper with your only Talent, that you knew he liked, your Fiddle.


Obs. This is old, and should not be again ripped up: it has kept me under all
along, and has been often dung in my Teeth.


Trim. Ay, and will be, when impudent men, (such as you Nobs,) will run away
with all the great Loyalty and constancy, the Neighborhood are up, and
presently in pursuit, (as after a man that runs away with a great bundle under
his Clothes) apt to cry, stop Thief, thinking themselves robbed, and therefore
will make bold to search him, and enquire whether he came honestly by it.


CHAP. III.
Obs. CAn any man deny my Loyalty, when I have told them so often (in Print)
that I had like to have been hanged for being loyal, at Lynn Regis, in the late
Wars.


Trim. For being loyal say you? was it not for being an Observator?


Obs. It was for being taken as a spy (or Observator) in the Parliaments
Garrison.


Trim. A spy (that comes under color of a friend to betray) is always hanged
up (by all sides, by the Law of Arms.) Men give fair quarter to a fair and open
Enemy, but seldom or never spare an Observator, or (to use your own word) a
Spy: But if you had swung for it, what cause would all mankind have had to
bemoan the loss of such an harmonious Fiddler? As cruel Nero apprehended his
death would therefore be lamented, whilst all mankind joyed in the deserved
death of the bloody and treacherous Monster of Men, who took delight in nothing
so much as in Execution, Execution, with a firm, hardy and unalterable
determination.


Obs. But I was a spy on the right side.


Trim. We Will talk of that anon. In the interim, What kind of Preferment would
you have?


Obs. Any place of Honor, Command, Authority, and Profit, especially this
last, for my Age requires Ease, and my merits ought to be paid: The State is
much in my debt.


Trim. I hope, your Arrears will all be paid to a farthing at last.


Obs. In the interim, here I sigh, and here for bread I write, and E dad the
wits do but jear me for my pains; Obs. n. 265.
nay, a considerable Lady (a She-trimmer) could say that I scribble for Bread,
but E dad I paid her off, and hit her home, E dad, into the very belly of her,
E dad, saying, have me recommended to her, we are so alike, for both of us
(like other Monkies) show tricks, and play tricks, and provide for the Belly; E
dad, I think it was a good jest; and yet the Rogues say, I grow dull.


Trim. Let such feel the acuteness of your wit, and make them smart for it, if
they question the sharpness of your pen and style.


Obs. Ay, Ay, but my very acquaintance also begin to give it out that I am
dull; now I am the furthest from it in the whole World, E dad, but only they
think so, because I can say nothing.


Trim. To the purpose.


Obs. E dad, let a man write never so well, there are now a days a sort of
persons they call Critics, that E dad have no more wit in them than so many
Hobby-Horses; but they will laugh you (Sir,) and find fault, and censure things
that, E dad, I am sure they are not able to do themselves. A sort of envious
persons, that emulate the glories of Persons of parts, and think to build their
fame by calumniating of persons that, ay dad, to my knowledge of all persons in
the world, are in Nature the persons that do as much despise all that as --


Trim. Hold, hold! enough! I know this has been your language and almost your
very words (these two months) against the persons that have despised and
neglected you, and indeed you are but a Plagyary for your pains: They are the
very words of Mr. Bays in the Rehearsal.


Obs. I cannot tell that; they are my own sentiments, and natural; good wits
may jump; but whether Bays stole it from me, or I from him, what is this in
excuse of the Hollow-Trimmers, that have neglected and despised my Loyalty and
Constancy, so long (hitherto) unrewarded?


Trim. You were made Overseer of the Press.


Obs. Pish, what is to be got by that?


Trim. A good job (you know) sometimes,


Obs. Trimmer, No more of that, if thou love me.


Trim. What is it (then) you would have me get for you?


Obs. A place, a place, an Office! get me some place of Worship, and Authority,
however Profit.


Trim. For what cause?


Obs. For my old Loyalty, and for my watchings and toils; daily and nightly
watchings and wardings (together with Honest Not: Irish Not. Loyal Not.) how
have we watched and warded ne Respublica detrimentum capiat, and all for nothing?


Trim. Yes; you have already got a Prison, Poverty, or a Pillory for your pains.


Obs. E dad, it is true: the world is an ungrateful world, a blind world, they
neither discern Men of worth, nor pay them to their value.


Trim. Yes, Not. was paid off.


Obs. Pish! now you jear; he was indeed paid poor Not. poor wretch, poor Tory,
poor Irish-tory, poor Curr.


Trim. That is the worst of Tories.


Obs. No, your Irish Tory is the truest Tory.


Trim. And the great Grandsire of Tories, and the Godfather of all true English
Tories, and gave them their name; but how shall we know an Irish or English
Tory from a Whigg?


Obs. A great many ways, for they are almost as contrary as Heaven and Hell,
Light and Darkness.

Your Whigg never swears, or if he does, it is some dwindling Oath, (as) by my
truly; whereas your true Tory-Boy lets fly no mouth Granado's, but such as
fills the bore, damme, sink me, Hell and Damnation, God bless the King, he
swears, and the Duke of York, and dam the Whiggs and the D. of M. still
interchanging Huzza's and Curses till his drink make him quiet, (that is)
asleep.


Trim. What else?


Obs. Your true Tory gets more by cursing, than the other by praying, yet both
preferred, one to Command, the other to a Gaol.


Trim. This is not for praying to God, but for praying to God without the good
leave and license of the Act of Uniformity.


Obs. E dad, we will uniform you all, and make you all alike, before we have
done; give me bold and hardy Execution, and hang up the mitigating and
moderating Councils, and all-heal, or compounding, mollifying Trimmers, Obs. n.
269.
abating, supplicating, whining, deploring, desponding Trimmers.


Trim. But how shall we know a Trimmer, a hollow-hearted Trimmer, that loves
the Government but only from the teeth outward?


Obs. Trimmer thou should not need to ask any such needless Questions; I have
published lately the only true Rule, and infallible, the very test of true and
constant Loyalty.


Trim. I have forgot it, repeat it.


Obs. Mark me Trimmer, would thou see thine own Face in my Glass? then look
you, Trimmer, see but that leering look of thine when thou look at me with
such scorn and neglect: That Is my Rule, despise the Observator, and you despise
the Government; despise the true, loyal, and always constant Friends of the
Government, and you are Trimmers in the heart of you, despise honest Hodg, and
honest Not. and E dad despise all the World; that has any worth in it, and
Learning, and a Man good at any thing, at every thing.


Trim. A very Kich-shaw of all Learning, the very Oleo Podrido of Arts, and yet
no body minds thee, nor heeds thee.


Obs. No, E dad, not to reward me, the Rogues will buy up my Observations, take
Politick-notes, and Divinity-notes too out of them, E dad; Divine and Politic
Observations to save the Kingdom and Souls also, and worth a million, and all
this for a Penny, a whole sheet full of Loyalty for a Penny: too cheap in all
Conscience, if it were not to friends, and that the safety of the Nation
depends upon these fingers, and these Eagle-sighted- Eyes in a poor, old, and
neglected Observator.


Trim. A Nation too that must perish, and come to naught, if the Gout should
cramp those as it has done your Toes.


CHAP. IV.
Obs. Then you would make us believe that it was not the old Trimmers
mitigating, moderating Councils that ruined all; but quite contrary, rash,
heady, and precipitate Councils for putting into bold and hardy Execution, the
Ceremonies and inventions of some Churchmen that would make the Scots conform
to them, or they won^d venture, and run the hazard of having the old Women of
Edinborough, and Boys throw stools and stones at them; and so the War first
begun; that ended not so easily, and from that Church Hell (first) broke loose.


Trim. I would not make you, nor any body else believe any thing, but what
woeful experience will (however) in time teach you, that God is the King of
Consciences, that to invade Gods Jurisdiction is as unsafe as sinful; that
Hair-brain'd-spitfires are the Nest of the Kingdom, and by their sanguinary,
and precipitate Councils, in maintenance of their own little fopperies, let the
King or Kingdom sink or swim, on they would, at all adventures, till they could
go no further; and then they sung another tune, and so will you (Mr.
Observator!) in time, when you have got your Belly full of Preferments, and
also your heart full of Curses, Anathema's, Fines, and Imprisonments, ruin and
desolation, and of the tears of Widows and Orphans, which have a cry.


Obs. And I must tell you (Trimmer!) if it had not been for such bold, and
hardy Executions, as I have advised and observed, things had not been in so
fair a way as they are.


Trim. Prithee instruct me (then!) for I do not see such a fair way as things
are in, (at least) nothing to bring on, least of all from your endeavors.


Obs. Why? Are not the Conventicles rooted? fined, ransomed; and Prisons filled
with the wretches?


Trim. And that you call your fair way.


Obs. I think things go towardly on, and are in a hopeful posture; ay dad,
these moderating, mitigating Councils of Trimmers had like to have spoiled all
again; Execution, Execution; I cry.


Trim. Have you always cried so?


Obs. Yes, ever since I understood the world, and the true seat of interest.


Trim. Was that your cry at Lynn-Regis?


Obs. Ay dad, I am glad you put me in mind of it again, for that piece of
Loyalty I was condemned to be hanged by a Court marshal (as I have told the
world in Print,) and yet, ay dad, here is the man that is (this day) unrewarded
(as yet) for that service.


Trim. Oh! you were condemned for being an Observator, taken as a spy, in the
Enemies Garrison.


Obs. Who knows not that?


Trim. And after Condemnation, you cried out, Execution, Execution, a bold, and
hardy Execution.


Obs. Ay dad, but (though I will not give you the lie) I say you tell a Whisker.


Trim. Then Execution, Execution has not always been the Word.


Obs. No, I confess there I was mistaken; but though I would have Sinners, and
Transgressors of the Law Executed, I would not have men hanged up that are
Innocent and Loyal.


Trim. I do not say but you might perhaps be (on that occasion) both Innocent
and Loyal, though a man may be Loyal, and yet not Innocent in some cases; as if
a Loyal man happen to act against the Law of Nature, or Law of Arms, or Law of
God, or his Oath in pursuance of Loyalty.


Obs. There is no Promise, nor Oath, nor Faith to be kept with Heretics.


Trim. So indeed the Council of Constance held, and so do the Jesuits now. But
in all Wars, one side is always the wrong side, yet there is such a thing as a
Law of Arms, and a Law of Honor, which both the right, and the wrong side hold
Sacred, for fear (at least) the wrong side (as it happened in your case) get
sometimes the longest Sword: and it has been thought no dishonor to take
Quarter, no more then to give Quarter, when the long Sword (though the wrong
Sword) keeps the Field.


Obs. A dad, I do not like this giving of Quarter to an enemy.


Trim. No, I see you attribute the Wars, and Blood shed to these mitigating,
qualifying, compounding, and moderating Councils; it is giving of Quarter,
clearly.


Obs. Ay dad, I do, and I will (to my dying day) oppose mitigation, and
moderation.


Trim. You do not know that; for you may be against Execution, bold and hardy
Execution, yet (once more) before you die.


Obs. Never, never: since my Councils and Observations were the Charts we
steered by, we have got the weather-gage, ay dad, and right before it.


Trim. Plume not your self on that score; for nothing is so changeable as the
wind.


Obs. I tell thee, (Trimmer!) my steady Councils are firm as a Rock.


Trim. So Dionysius said, that his Party was ti'd to him with Chains of
Adamant; you do not know the world (so much as you boast of,) if you know not
that its affections are more inconstant then those of Women, its glories fading
as beauty, youth or strength; nothing constant but unconstancy on this side the
Moon; not, that I do not pray against all change, nor will I meddle with them
that are given to it; but that single instance at Lynn-Regis, may alone make
you in love with moderating, and mitigating Councils, as long as you live.


Obs. You could not honor me, nor my memory more then in that single instance,
the only convincing Evidence of my Loyalty; ay dad, I 'scap't fair; I cannot
but tremble to think on it yet.


Trim. They were of the wrong side that condemned you indeed, but you were
condemned by their Law of Arms; I do not say justly, but would think the
contrary; yet Loyalty is one thing, and Treachery is another; does not all
posterity commend the Roman General that sent bound a treacherous villain to
Pyrrhus, (whom the wretch promised to slay) scorning to be revenged of his
Enemy by foul play; or if he loved the Treason, he hated the Traitor? We must
not do evil, that good may come thereof.


Obs. Dare you say it is evil to ruin Rebels?


Trim. Not by fair War; but Observators, or Spies (that come under color of
Friendship into an Enemies Camp, have by all Nations been abhorred, as contrary
to the Laws of Arms, and hanged up immediately.


Obs. And for that cause you think my Loyalty is well enough rewarded, if it
compound for the Treachery.


Trim. I say, as all men say, I love valor in an Enemy, and I hate Treachery
in a Friend; for he is not my Friend that consults not honor; nor can Loyalty
be meritorious, if accompanied with baseness, and treachery; who (but a needy
wretch) will be a Spy, or Observator?


Obs. Ay dad, I shall admire my Sagacity the better as long as I live for this
Trick; have I not prophesied right (all along) who it is that smote me? Ay dad,
I see plainly (now) even to demonstration true it is, that the reason why I
have not been preferred, and advanced according to my merits, is the whispers,
and sly insinuations of such Trimmers suggestions, (as this is) which has put a
spoke in my Ladder, ay dad, that has kept me down, from rising, thus long; a
man of my sufficiencies, usefulness, and abilities.


Trim. You may be mounted yet before you die.


Obs. I do not know that; but I know what you mean; And I fear no Colors, I
escaped narrowly once (though) ay dad; but my learning has been so beneficial to
the Clergy, that ay dad, they are ungrateful that deny me the benefit of the
Clergy, let the worst come to the worst.


Trim. But you that have been so near the Gallows (already) for being a busy
Observator, or Spy, should (by this time) have learn to be so wise for your
self, as not always to be spitting nothing but fire out of your mouth,
breathing vengeance, and howling out, Execution, Execution.


Obs. Ay dad, I do not know but it may be well enough yet; is Loyalty but a
name and a word? Is there no such thing?


Trim. Yes, sure there is such a thing, and one of the best things in the
world, next to Obedience to Heaven; but, (my friend!) is legality but a word
neither? Is Law, Justice, and mercy but mere words neither? Is there no such
things (think you) in nature? Is all the world ruled with precipitate, hasty,
Heady-Councils, hardy Execution, Passion, Violence, Force, and Revenge? You
know that we (in England) are not so ruled, nor ever were (long) so ruled: your
Predecessor (the Observator) Tacitus Tacit. in vita Julii Agricolae.
(above 1600 years ago) observed that Brittany bred men that would obey, and be
good Subjects, but were vilely loath to be slaves; they would pay legal Taxes,
but could not endure to be oppressed; Britannis dilectum ac Tributa and injuncta
Imperii munera impigre obeunt, si injuria absint; has aegre tolerant, jam
domiti ut pareant, nondum ut serviant: The Roman-valour had tamed them to
Obedience, but could not enslave them for the hearts of them, do what they
could.


CHAP. V.
Obs. AY dad, but some of your Friends (in New England) were glad to fly for
it, as some do now, to the Salvage Indians, and the Torrid Zone.


Trim. As the more temperate, and hospitable clime of the two, when Pillories,
and Anathema's, and Fines, and Jayls, and the High-Commission-Court made old
England too hot for them; and this is your Council now.


Obs. Yes.


Trim. But what were the events of these Councils in those days?


Obs. Ay dad, good lusty fines, etc. and almost beggared the Rogues.


Trim. And enrich't the King and Kingdom?


Obs. No, I cannot say that; it was thought the contrary, and to make such a
damp of Trade, and the Kings Customs so extenuated, and the People generally so
discontented, that the Parliament Mens-Pockets (that should have filled the
Kings empty Exchequer, and paid his vast debts) were filled rather with
grievances, grievances, the loud groans of the People, and cries and
lamentations all the Kingdom over. But I am the man that has (now) discovered
another way to the wood; would it not be brave to have all Parliament Men
chosen by the King and Court?


Trim. No, It would be so far from brave, that it would quite unhinge the
Government, and lift it up from its old fundamentals, and foundation, and by
seeming to advance it higher, shake it, and endanger it, and ruin that, which
has been a happy shelter to the Kings, and Subjects of England, more than any
other Kingdom under Heaven.


Obs. There spoke a Trimmer, and yet you love the King, you pretend.


Trim. Let him perish that loves him not better then thou do.


Obs. What, better then a Tried man that never warpt, etc.


Trim. Never (but once) when all the Kingdom warpt.


Obs. Well; no more of that, I know what you mean, but enough, enough of it.


Trim. Be it so; nor had your fawning Sycophantry, and complacence to any thing
that is uppermost (now) been lain in your dish, but that you (and such as you)
whose guilt and sins makes you tremble to think of a Parliament, an
English-Parliament, chosen by the People ( not by the Court) makes some seem to
think of altering the ancient Law, and rights of the three Estates of this
Realm, the very attempt whereof has always been accounted Treason, but over
Boots, over Shoes; He that knows he must be hanged, cares not which way he
mounts the Ladder: if Corporations shall have no Officers, nor any to Elect
Parliament Men, or to make returns, when they are Elected, but only whom the
Court shall approve, nominate, or at least confirm; then the third estate, and
great estate of this Realm, in the Money business especially, shall not (nay)
cannot be called longer the House of Commons, but House of Courtiers.


Obs. E dad, Trimmer, you are a perilous Trimmer I see, and would hinder the
Loyalty of Corporations from surrendering their old Charters for new ones, and
better, with only this addition, they shall hold their Freedoms and Liberties,
quamdiu se been gesserint, as long as they are good Boys, and choose none but
whom the Court does approve.


Trim. We have a good and gracious King God grant he may overlive all the Men
(now) in England, and from the Policy and bounty of Kings, and time out of mind
of man to the contrary, Liberties and Freedoms have been granted to
Corporations, and particularly that of choosing Burgesses in Buroughs, so that
no History can trace its original and beginning more than the head of Nile; and
all English-mens rights are so confirmed by Magna Charta, and many other
Statutes, that it has always been accounted Treason to endeavor the
alteration of the fundamental Laws; and no doubt but Justice will in time find
men out, if they endeavor it, lurk where they will, short-sighted Projecters
are they that would pull down Foundations, and Corner-stones, in hopes to save
their own heads, when it is the nearest way, and shortest way (they could take)
to Tyburn, if they should run for a Wager.


Obs. Why? Who endeavors to take away Foundations?


Trim. All they that (by any means whatsoever) endeavor to make the House of
Commons the House of Courtiers.

Why does his sacred Majesty (of blessed memory) so commend the constitution of
our well-pois'd Government, above all the nations of the world? saying, That to
prevent Anarchy we have a King and House of Lords, to poise and balance the
House of Commons; to prevent Arbitrary Power and Tyranny, we have a House of
Lords and House of Commons; and to prevent the worst of Tyrannies (Aristocracy)
we have a King and House of Commons: which if turned to a House of Courtiers,
where is the poise, where is the Balance?


Obs. But we have a just and gracious King, that will wrong no man.


Trim. And long may he live and reign; but the King cannot see with his own
Eyes every where, but the Law is omniscient and omnipresent in England, or
should be so, to decide all Causes, and shelter good Subjects and punish the
bad.


Obs. Why? Can any man be a bad Subject that is for the King, or a good Subject
that is against him?


Trim. No; It is impossible that a good man can be against the King, or a
Rebel; and also impossible that a bad man can be for the King.


Obs. Why, Are not all these Debauchees, Whore-masters, Cursers, Drunkards,
Swearers, and Blasphemers, whom we call true Tory-Boys, are not they, I say,
for the King?


Trim. No, no; they are the worst Enemies that the Crown of England can
possibly have, not only by being open Enemies to God, and consequently pulling
down his Wrath, Judgments, and Indignation upon the Kingdom, (no small piece of
Treachery) but to gratify their Lusts and Revenge, are always with their
hasty, heady, rash, precipitate and sanguinary Councils, disobliging Mankind,
as well as God, Humanity as well as Divinity, with their firm, hardy, and
unalterable Determination of Execution, Execution.


Obs. Oh! Your humble Servant, Trimmer, you are not for putting the Laws in
Execution against Nonconformists to Uniformity, the Act for Uniformity.


Trim. No; not except it be put in Execution against Tory-Nonconformists,
equally, impartially, indifferently and as severely as against
Whigg-Nonconformists.


Obs. E dad, it is all one to me; for I am for the Church of England, Obs. n.
271. Jan. 13.83.
and am not a Papist of the Church of Rome, nor do I side with that Religion,
or so much as meddle with it.


Trim. We'll do with you herein as with great Travelers, when they tell things
scarcely credible, better believe it than go to see; it is not worth the
Privy-search; though of the two, it would be for your honor rather to be of
the worst Religion, than of none at all; and rather ridicule all sober sense,
and the fundamental Laws, Obs. n. 265. December. 30. 1682.
as a well-meaning Papist and Zealot,than (if as a base Hireling) only to
provide for your Belly, as you confess.


Obs. E dad, I am for Uniformity.


Trim. I do not concern my self, nor does any wise or sober man concern
himself, who or what thou art for, further than to be glad thou art not for his
side; for such as you only discredit the cause you would promote, be it never
so good.


Obs. I am not for the good old Cause, every body knows that.


Trim. All the better, or rather, more is the pity.


Obs. Why so?


Trim. Because thou would then be a Promoter.


Obs. I hate, and scorn the Office, so inconsistent with a Gentleman, and a Man
of Honor.


Trim. I say, thou art a Promoter.


Obs. Bear witness, I wish I had honest Not. here, or some of his Countrymen
to bear witness.


Trim. Call whom thou will, I say again, thou art a Promoter.


Obs. Of what? You mean Roguishly; do you mean I am a Promoter of close
assignations, to bring things and things together, (Anglice) a Pimp? But, E
dad, a Pimp is ten times a better Trade, and a safer Trade, as well as an
honester Trade (you think) than a Spy or Observator; no man is hanged for
pimping, but preferred many times (the right way,) and advanced; whereas
(commonly) the Gallows takes the last view of a Spy or Observator. A Promoter?
I scorn it.


Trim. I say again, Thou art a Promoter.


Obs. Of what?


Trim. Of the good Old Cause.


Obs. I gave thee the Lie just now, after another great example in Print; and E
dad again, God forgive me, I was just going to swear you lie.


Trim. By my truly, you could not promote the good Old cause more (if you would
hang your self, than by appearing against it, though the favor merits no
thanks from the Noncon's, nor blame from the Con's, because you meant it not.
Do men gather Grapes of Thorns? Nor can they expect any good from an old
weather-beaten Weathercock, an old any thing, an old every thing but what is
virtuous, an old goatish, and therefore goutish, Observator? That (as you say)
Dec. 30. 1682. Obs. n. 265.
'Because the Observator has got the Pox in his Bones, therefore the Devil is
in the Trimmers, (or the good old Cause, you might have added,) why, thou can
not live without teasing something or other: And every Twinge in your Toe breeds
a Maggot in your Head: It Is the very humor of the damned to revenge the fire
in their own Tails, upon any thing that is next them.


Obs. Those are my own words, I taught you Satyr.


Trim. I durst not otherwise, Nay I would not however otherwise have made so
bold, as to judge and censure what might be the cause of your Gout, for I do not
think the Poet a true Prophet when he said, As Gout in Age from Pox in Youth
proceeds,
As Wenching past, then jealousy succeeds:
The worst Disease that Love and Wenching breeds.



CHAP. VI.
Obs. Well, then come on Trimmer, since you are so bold as, of your own metal
and accord, thus to come into the Ring, and into the Lists with me, why do
thou not answer my Challenge?


Trim. You have made so many Challenges, and sent them to the Trimmers
publicly, weekly, and sometimes daily, throwing down your Gage in every
Coffee-House, that I know not which of them I should first take up.


Obs. I mean, then, my last bold Challenge to thee, sent out, Jan. 13. 1682.
Obs. n. 271.
Answer me before we part; What Is become of all the Actions against the late
Lord Mayor, for usurping upon the Rights of the City? And how goes it with the
new Sheriffs? Did those of the last year quietly give up possession? Did the
Prisoners refuse to plead or no? How were things carried upon the Scrutiny?
What became of Kid's Action against Capt. Broomer, and the Jesuited Janissaries
that beat up the Conventicle in Exchange-Alley? And how came Coll. Quiney's
business off?


Trim. Would you have distinct Answers to each?


Obs. No, that is needless, answer them by lump, for they are all of a lump, and
therefore I have bound them up together --


Trim. And in gross, gross enough.


Obs. But what have thou to say to them Trimmer, or what dare thou say to
them?


Trim. This is your way, first to challenge a man, but then (to make all sure)
tie up his hands; shall I have equal Liberty, and fair play?


Obs. God forbid else; Justice and Honor pleads for you, that you should have
as much liberty to answer my Questions, as I to propound them.


Trim. Then you will not first challenge me to a dispute, and to make all sure
of your side, gagg me.


Obs. I scorn it, I am more a Gentleman, and a Scholar.


Trim. Still for all this, I am a little jealous of thee, and fearful, For thou
have got the weather-gage, and therefore you insult so, huff, challenge, and
vapor, knowing whoever encounters thee to Lee-ward, his own Powder and smoke
flashes in his face.


Obs. I Will wave the odds, come on boldly.


Trim. It is not in your Power to stemm the Tide, nor change the Wind, nor to
make it blow indifferent, and with a side-wind, equal to both sides, and
therefore I Will only say, what an awfe art thou to put the question? How came
the late Lord Mayor, the new Sheriffs, the Scrutiny, Broomer, the Jesuitical
Janissaries, and Quiney, how came they off? say thou, most insultingly; when
it is well known that their great Cause never yet came on, never hitherto has
been under legal consideration, much less legal determination, and sentence:
what rewards or punishments they merit, concerns not a busy Observator; and
for my part, I am bred to more modesty, than to meddle with so matchless and
stupenduous a matter that no English History can parallel it in times of Peace.
Prithee therefore let us leave it and them, to legal Trial, and the Decision of
the Laws.

And since you are so bold to ask questions, give me leave to ask thee some.


Obs. With all my heart, it is but just and equal.


Trim. Then what deserve they that by confederacy commit a Rape upon a Virgin,
a Sacred Virgin, a Vestal?


Obs. An Halter; every Mothers Son of them, there is a wise question, who knows
not that? It Is like the wit of a Trimmer.


Trim. What deserve they that commit a rape, or attempt to commit a Rape upon a
Widow?


Obs. Oh! ho! I begin to understumble you, E dad, I will not tell you.


Trim. Neither tell I thee what they deserve that commit a Rape upon the Sacred
Laws, that Ravish men's rights, and civil liberties with the Sword, and offer
violence to the Law.


Obs. Why? Who did? If I knew of any such Monsters, I would say, hanging is too
good for them; for, as the Romans (who had made no Provision in Law against
Parricide) were at a loss for an equal punishment, when a Villain (once) killed
his Father, the Author of his own life and being, persuading themselves that
the world could never droduce a Monster of such a Ghastly, and unnatural size,
such a Prodigy, and By-blow in nature; even so, to violate the Sacred Laws with
force, and a long Sword in time of Peace, without declaring Hostility against
the Laws, from whom we have our life, our beings, our well-beings, liberties,
protection, estates and birthrights continued and derived to us, is so
prodigious a Crime, that no punishment in this world can possibly equal it;
that a few men should by force (which yet is most easy in quiet times) cut the
banks and boundaries of Laws and Societies, is more prodigious from its cause
and effects, then from the Act it self; any Boy, any Erostratus may burn the
Sacred Temple, (as he did that of Diana) a goodly fabric, as any in the world,
the wonder is (first) in the cause, (that ever so much villainy should enter
into mortal breast, and upon what temptation,) and (secondly) that so weak, and
contemptible a Creature could produce such dismal effects; but what
Erostratus's do you mean? How do you apply this discourse?


Trim. It needs no application, for I am only speaking of punishments due to
those that commit a Rape upon Widows, or the Sacred Laws.


Obs. Why? Who did?


Trim. Who says who? Does your Conscience, or any man's Conscience accuse him?


Obs. Not in the least.


Trim. Then sit you merry.


Obs. You cannot mean it of me, or Quiney, etc.


Trim. Why should you or any man else that is innocent ask such a frivilous
question? If I say, he that commits a Rape, deserves to be hanged, will you be
offended?


Obs. No; I am not concerned.


Trim. Then how impertinent art thou to say, do you mean me, or Quiney?
Especially since (quite contrary) instead of punishment for any Crime, the late
Lord Mayor, new Sheriffs, Broomer, Jesuited Janissaries (none but a friend durst
have called them so, Jesuited Janissaries?) and Quiney have had thanks for their
pains.


Obs. By some that were as deep in the dirt as they in the mire; you would say.


Trim. What? You do lie upon the catch, do you? If you do; all the Company can
testify, that I never said that any body else gave them thanks, or that they
(that did give them thanks) had not cause to do so.

For, (even) Asses know when they are overloaded unconscionably, and more then
they are able to bear, and therefore beat them, till your hearts ache, and your
Cudgels break, they will not stir a foot, when overburthen'd out of all reason,
and measure.


Obs. I tell thee Trimmer, since you seem shy, and wary, chary, and fearful to
discourse of that great business of the late Lord Mayor, new Sheriffs, Jesuited
Janissaries, -- and Quiney; yet it was a business (then which) nothing is more
discoursed of (mutteringly) at this day; and, (indeed) which more sticks on
some men's stomachs! Indeed it was a great business, but E dad, it was
necessary, there was no other way to bring things to so fair a pass as now they
are; it was the very hinge of affairs, when things stood tottering in equal
Balance, and whether for a Penny, then came Quiney with his Hand and Sword
(which weighed just a pound) and turned the Scales.


Trim. It was boldly done.


Obs. E dad it was, and most courageously, the slaves never durst mutter since,
nor scarce say muff; and have we not carried it ever since in Courts, in
Sheriffs, in Juries, in every thing, ay and in Execution, Execution.


Trim. And so you win, because you bowl alone.


Obs. E dad, we carry the Goal, We got the Ball, took it, and run shear away
with it.


Trim. Nay, you have lost your old wont else (Tory;) for ever since I first
knew you, all the world can witness that you were as good (or better) at your
Heels than your Hands: But away with your provocations to this discourse, I am
sick on it; Therefore, to put you out of it, prithee tell me, how does thy Feet,
Heels, and Toes?


Obs. Ay dad, like my self, worse and worse this cold weather and hard times.
But away with this discourse, I like it not.


Trim. It is of your own raising, I will make no occasions, it is you that
first mentioned Quincy's business.


Obs. E dad, That business has done some peoples business for evermore.


Trim. And a day longer.


Obs. It was an Heroic Act: Alexander cut the sacred Gordian-knot with his
Sword, which none but sacred Hands did tie, nor could unloose.


Trim. Quincy's Act was a matchless Act, no story can parallel it; for
Alexander did it in time of War.


Obs. Time of War, or time of Peace: Tell not me; it was a necessary business,
necessary to the Cities Peace, and Kingdoms Peace, and to prevent Riots and
Tumults, by way of prevention, E dad, and preoccupation.


Trim. Do you think that the best way to prevent tumults in Westminster Hall is
to fill it with Soldiers, and awe the Judges, and do them violence?


Obs. I do not know what to say to that.


Trim. Rash men in a storm leap into the Sea for fear of drowning, notable
policy! Thus Gond^m^r (the Spanish Ambassador) most politically would have
persuaded King James to cut off Sir Walter Rawleigh's Head, (a Head that would
have become the best Shoulders in Spain) by way of Prevention and timely
foresight, before he went to Guiana, proving the justice of the Policy from a
story of a Woman, that whipped her Daughter beforehand, lest she should break the
Pitcher. Oh rich! Do but you hang up the first man you meet, for fear he should
steal your Horse, by way of prevention, and I Will secure you he shall never
steal him. It is the very policy of Herod, who was so circumspectly provident,
that he killed all the male Children of Bethlehem to secure himself from a King
of Gods making.


Obs. Trimmer, Trimmer, Necessity has no Law.


Trim. Nobs, Nobs, This was the old Plea for Ship Money, and other illegal
Taxes and Oppressions, afterward condemned by King Charles the First, and his
Parliament; because (quoth some) the Crown could not want them, it was so poor
and necessitous; which aggravated their Crimes, that by their buzzing at Court
kept off Parliaments Twelve long years, thereby keeping up a misunderstanding
and bad Intelligence, for want of that due and usual Correspondence betwixt the
King and his People in the old fundamental way of Parliaments, whereby the
Exchequer was brought into str^^n and necessities, borrowing (I have cause to
say) what was never paid to this day. And to expiate such Crimes, they brought
Mr. Necessity ( a Son of their own begetting, and the spurious Issue of their
Lusts) to vouch them; and what was the Issue? Did it not at length aggravate
their punishments as well as their Crimes, if you mark the end on it?


Obs. That was in the late Intestine Wars: Those days are done.


Trim. And I trust in God they will never return; and that they may never
return, the surest way (as well as the best way) is to get out of the dirty and
fatal Road (as fast as may be) which leads to such dismal Ends and Ruins,
abstaining from all violation of the sacred Laws, and illegal Rapes, which
(like that of the chaste Lucrece) occasioned the Civil-Wars at Rome, to the
Ruin of the Kingdom. He that uses a Sword in a Court of Justice, must throw
away the Scabbard; for Hell breaks loose (many times) like the Sea (when the
banks are cut,) ( an easy matter to perform in times of quiet by a few hands;)
the boundaries which the Laws have set are easily violated, but then, all Hands
together are scarce able to stop the Breach, and prevent an universal Deluge.


Obs. But what is all this to my Question, how Quiney and the rest came off?


Trim. I told thee before I would not meddle with them, and therefore I have
nothing at all to say to them, but what you said to Madam Trimmer, Have me
recommended to them, and tell them we all Provide for the Belly.


Obs. I (amongst others) am greedy enough of the Bait, but (you advise me to)
have a care of the hook.


Trim. He that is undone is out of Fortune's Power;
They that lie low as Earth can fall no lower.

Obs. There is no Remedy: The word is gone out from me: Ipse dixi: ((...)) The
Sentence is past. There is no other way left but EXECUTION, EXECUTION, WITH A
FIRM, HARDY, AND UNALTERABLE DETERMINATION.


Trim. And lest so portentous a sentence Obs. n. 269.
should escape admiration, you print it in great (you should not need) Capital
Letters: Let it be writ upon your Tomb.

For as you live in the ready Road from Newgate to Tyburn, so also if your Tomb
happen to be within a mile of the Gallows, no Epitaph can be more proper for
you, nor more immortallize your name to Posterity, than EXECUTION, EXECUTION,
WITH A FIRM, HARDY, AND UNALTERABLE DETERMINATION.

It is the very Quintessence of Devilry; for no Mortal in his own confidence,
could have said it; he must be more than man that could be so far divested of
all Humanity; or was the Devil in you?

If you had lived 1600 years ago, what a happy Tutor might you have been (Mr.
Nobs,) to the Roman Government, as well as now to ours! what an Observator has
Nero and Caligula lost (dull Truants in Execution,) they might have gone to
School to thee, Nobs: For they also scorned all moderation, mitigation,
qualifications, abatements, promises, undertakings, importunings, relentings,
repentings, supplications, prayers or tears, whinings and deplorings, scorning
also all diminutive and Retail-Executions, and lest their humanity should have
time to wamble in their bowels, wishing that Rome had but one common Neck, that
one blow might dispatch the Execution, Execution, with a firm, hardy, and
unalterable determination. If Lions, Bears, Vultures, Serpents, Dogs, Towzers,
Foxes, Cats, Tigers, Asses, Bulls or Wolves, had never been seen on earth, yet
that there are such Beasts might easily be gathered from their brutish natures
so visible and apparent in beastly men, roaring, rending, tearing, hissing,
biting barking, snapping, clawing, devouring, braying, bellowing, and howling
in brutish men, their counter part: And if we had no other Arguments that there
are Devils, yet are their natures (even to demonstration) evident, their
Devilry being so visible in devilish men, their true counterfeit and
Charter-part. Which made Cicero (though a Heathen) say to a prodigious Wretch,
a very monster of a man, for mischief and Execution, with a firm, hardy, and
unalterable determination, -- Multa quidem ipse,
Multa sed and demon tibi suggerit.
Some Crimes come from some Demon, or some Elf,
Some from no other Devil than thy self.


Much of thy wickedness comes from thine own villainous heart (says Cicero) but
much also the Devil taught thee; Execution, Execution (quoth he) with a firm,
hardy, and unalterable determination. This Wisdom comes not from above, but is
earthy, sensual, devilish; a few more such Phaetons, such Erostratusses, such
Spitfires are enough to anticipate Doomsday, by setting the world on fire, and
to ruin themselves too in the common Flame.


FINIS.

