A LETTER Sent from beyond the SEAS To One of the CHIEF MINISTERS OF THE
NONCONFORMING PARTY. By way of Reply to many Particulars which He sent to the
Author in a Letter of News. Useful for these Distempered Times.

By a Lover of the Established Government both of Church and State.

ANNO DOMINI, M. DC. LXXIV.

A Letter sent from beyond the Seas, to one of the Chief Ministers of the
Nonconforming Party.
Dear Cousin,
I Was very glad to receive your Letter, but very far from being glad to find
you still so extremely desirous of Innovations in a Government so well
established, as that is under which you live. I perceive you are more zealous
than it becomes a good Subject, or a good Christian to be, for carrying on a
Project of my Lord Choses's, as Unreasonable as New; viz. That of Disabling a
Papist to Inherit the Crown. For doubtless that proposal was first made, and
afterward promoted, by him, the last Sessions of Parliament, not out of true
Love to the Reformed Religion, but out of Spite or Revenge to the D. of Y --
Who, were he not only Papist, but Heathen, or Mahumetan, (which I think is not
much worse) would certainly have as good a Title to his Crown, and all his
Temporal Rights, as if he were the most Orthodox and Holy Christian in the
World. And I am persuaded, that my zealous Lord Chose would not be willing that
the King and Parliament should make a particular Act to disable his own
Posterity to Inherit the great Estate he has got, if they should turn Papists
or Atheists, as others have done before them. We all know what mischief in the
World that Damnable Doctrine has made, That Temporal Rights and Inheritances
depend upon Saintship and Grace. And if it be clear from Scripture (as nothing
is more clear) that a King ought not to lose his Crown, or any other Person for
feit his Temporal Rights, for not being Christians, or for renouncing the
Christian Religion; then it is plain, that neither the D -- nor any other
Person, ought to be deprived of their Temporal Rights, especially Crowns, (of
all Temporal Rights the greatest) for not being Protestants; or, which is more,
for renouncing the Christian Religion.

And I am heartily glad that God gave the Fathers of the English Church the
grace to defend her Doctrine, in opposing that Unreasonable, and truly Romish
Proposal of my Lord Chose; which if they had approved, and defended after it
was proposed, they had truly acted in that like men Popishly affected, and
showed themselves to be what their Adversaries would fain persuade the World
they are. For it is the Romish Church, and her Doctors, which maintain, That
Kings Excommunicated, or Heretic Kings, or (which is all one) that Kings that
renounce the Apostolic Faith, ought to be Deprived and Deposed. But it is the
Church of England that maintains the contradiction of that Unscriptural,
Unevangelical Principle; and thinks her self as much obliged to submit her self
to a Heathen, Atheistical, Heretical, or Popish Prince, where she can, as to an
Orthodox King; and, where she cannot, she thinks her self obliged to suffer, as
her Savior, like a Lamb brought to the slaughter; and dares pretend to take up
no Arms but those of the Primitive Christians, (whose true Copy she is) Tears,
Arguments, and Prayers. I say, it is the Church of England that is of this
judgment, and neither the Church of Rome, nor the Church of Scotland; both of
which have actually Excommunicated and Deposed Lawful and Rightful Princes,
under the Notion of being Heretics, and Enemies to Christ's Kingdom;
forgetting both alike the Precepts and Examples of our Savior and his
Apostles, on which the Church of England has grounded the contrary Doctrine,
as well as on right reason.

Our Savior, though God, rendered unto the Heathen Caesar the things that were
Caesar's; he owned his right to the Empire, both by word and deed, although he
were but the adopted Successor of the greatest Usurper that ever was in the
World. Nay furthermore, he owned and submitted to the Procuratory Power of
Pilate, who acted but by Commission from the Emperor Tiberius; who (if there
be any truth in the Character of Tacitus) was the greatest Tyrant, and the most
wicked man that ever the World saw. And as for St. Paul, there is no Article of
our Religion, not even that, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, more clear in
his Epistles, than that Every Soul should be subject to the Higher Powers; That
we should Obey, not only for Wrath, but Conscience sake; That whosoever
resisieth, receives to himself Damnation; and lastly, that all the Powers (and
when he wrote there were none but Heathen Powers) were Ordained of God.

I might here insist upon the Practice of the Apostles, as it is represented in
their Acts, and the constant Submission and Sufferings of the Primitive
Christians, as they are reported by the Ecclesiastical Fathers, and Historians;
but the Scripture it self is sufficient to demonstrate the truth of this
Argument, which the Church of England has not only established in her Doctrine,
but her Fathers, and Sons of late, maintained in their Practices; and which the
Church of Scotland (agreeing in this and many other Points with that of Rome)
did ever oppose, both in Word and Deed. And since that Kirk and Nation have
been of this Opinion, we need not wonder that the English Disciples of their
Buchanan and Knox have practiced those rebellious Principles, which have so
debauched and corrupted the Subjects of the Kings of England, as to make them
be proverbially called, The Kings of Devils: And which the Anabaptists in
Germany improved into this Maxim, That Saintship was the Foundation of
Sovereignty, and that the Righteous ought to Inherit the Earth.

And furthermore, if Crowns ought to be Entailed upon Protestants only, then it
is but just, that the Estates of all Subjects whatsoever should be so Entailed:
And if for example, the D -- of Y -- must be cut off from his Rights for being
a Roman Catholic, then let the rest of the Papists lose theirs; they are all
alike Idolaters, and let them all alike suffer. And, to bring the Case to your
own House, can you imagine that you your self ought to lose your Right to the
Estate you have, or may have hereafter, upon that supposition, that you should
turn Papist; which men as firmly resolved against it as you have certainly
done. These Practices and Proposals are such, that they have left a blot on the
memories of some men, that seem more zealous than their Brethren. And I am glad
at present, that the Religious Lord Chose is the Chief Patron and Promoter of
such an Unreasonable and Romish Design. I have more than ordinary reason to
call it Romish, because I have heard it maintained here among all the Priests I
converse with. It is a Doctrine dearly beloved by the Romanists: And put but
the name of Heretic to a Prince here, and it is just the same case as when you
call a Prince a Papist in England; where, if there be no more than my good Lord
Chose that are Fautors of this Romish Doctrine, my Country is in a far better
case than I thought it to be. And truly this noble Project of the late Lord
Chose was condemned by all Protestants as soon as it took air in France; not
only for that it was an Ungospel way of proceeding, and savors strongly of the
Doctrine of Rome, which they abhor; but because it puts their King in mind of a
Project he is very much inclined to, viz. To make a like Law here, that none
but a Roman Catholic shall ever be King, or bear any Office or Trust in the
Kingdom. And certainly, if it should ever please God, for our sins, to suffer
our Princes to back-slide into Romish Idolatry and Superstition, we have
nothing to do but to pray, and like our glorious Ancestors in Queen Mary's
days, suffer quietly when we cannot fly. And therefore I wonder that you
should so oblickly reflect upon the Bishops, and censure them for doing that,
which in Honor and Duty, they were bound to do; and represent this to their
Disgrace, which all good and well advised Protestants must needs commend them
for, if they will be Impartial.

But put the case such an Act were made, who can see the bad consequences
thereof? None but a Protestant shall govern now; but Faction still increasing,
none within a while but a Presbyterian, etc. For you that are used to talk of
Numbers and Strength, can best tell how Numerous and Powerful they are that are
possessed with as firm a prejudice against the Church of England, as the Church
of Rome it self; denying communion equally with both; and who educate their
Children in perfect hatred of the one, as the genuine Daughter of the other.

I have wrote all this, to present to your view what (perhaps in the hurry of
Business) you have not had time to consider. And though I think it very impious
and unreasonable to deprive any such Prince of his Crown upon this account, yet
were the Government to be formed again, I would be as zealous for this
condition, as the greatest Zealot of them all: And I am as sorry as any other
man, that it was not always one of the Fundamental Laws of England, though now
it be too late to make it such.

You tell me also, that my Lord -- intends to come and live in London; I
suppose it may be under pretense to secure his Person from the Papists; but I
wish it may not be with a design to act over the same things, under a pretense
of securing the Protestant, which the Duke of Guise acted in Paris, under a
seeming zeal to secure the Popish Religion. The Reason that makes me fear it,
is the conformity of our times in England with those in France, as you may see
by the following account.

The Duke, who was a man of an high spirit, and not able to bear the least
disgrace, being removed by Henry III. from the most rich and honorable of his
Court-preferments, became thereupon malcontent; and retiring from the Court,
which he now did hate, went to live at his house in Paris; where, by many Arts,
as in particular by the subtle Practices of the Priests and Jesuits, he became
in a short time the Minion of the People; whose Affections he drew off from the
King, by representing him (though a hearty Roman Catholic) as a favorer of the
Heretics; who under the protection of the Princes of the Blood increased
mightily in his Reign. He also represented him in particular to be a great
fovorer of the King of Navarre, against whom he himself had a particular ill
will; and whom the People, through the Instigation of the Priests and Jesuits,
did perfectly hate, because he was a Protestant; although he was Primier Prince
of the Blood, (for whom the French commonly have a great Reverence) and by
consequence Heir Apparent, or as a Friend of yours would have said, Heir
Presumptive (for the King was Childless) to the Crown of France. After he had
thus made the credulous People, by the help of the Priests and Jesuits, zealous
for the Defense of their Declining Religion, he drew them to League into
Rebellion against their lawful Sovereign, under a pretense of securing the
same, by removing Evil Counselors from his Person, and obliging him to employ
his Royal Power in suppressing the Protestants; and in particular by declaring
the Heretic King of Navarre (afterward Henry IV.) incapable of succeeding to
the Crown.

For the sake of Peace the King was willing so far to deny himself, as to grant
the two first, but could never be made so false to the Interest of the Royal
Family, as to consent to the last, by changing the Order of Succession to the
Crown, by which his Ancestors had Reigned for One thousand and two hundred
years; and which had been so long established, without any respect to Religion,
by the Salique or Original Laws of France. Hereupon the League (in Imitation,
and after the Pattern of which the Solemn League and Covenant was formed) or
Rebellion grew so high, as to beat the King out of Paris; where the Guisards
had a design to sieze upon his sacred Person, shut him up, like King
Chilperick, in a Monastery, and set up the silly old Cardinal Bourbon, the King
of Navar's Uncle, to Reign in his stead. But the King escaping from Paris,
sheltered himself in Chartres; where, to compose Differences, he issued out
Writs to call together the three Estates (which much resemble our Parliaments)
at Blois. Thither the Deputies or Members repair, some for the King, but far
more for the Cursed League; and therefore the Guisards finding themselves more
potent than the Royalists, insisted almost on nothing else but securing the
Roman Catholic Religion, by declaring the King of Navarre, because an
Heretic, incapable of succeeding to the most Christian Crown.

You see, Cousin, what a parallel there is between those times and ours;
excepting First, That there are no Priests and Jesuits to second such a Design
in England, as there were in France: But to supply that Defect, there may be
found men as fit in all points as they to stir up the People to Discontent and
Rebellion. I mean the same sort of Persons that Preached up the late Bloody
War; who really are the Bastard-brood of the Monastic Emissaries, though they
bear not the names of their Fathers, but (like Bastards) are disowned by those
that begot them. The Seditious Principles Preached and Printed by them in the
late Times, are Evident Proofs of what Race they are come: and as a man may
travel so far West, till at last he come to the same Eastern-point from which
he did set out, so you, Cousin, and your Brethren have gone so far from the
Church of Rome, that you are (some I believe unawares) come thither again; as
is unanswerably proved by Lysimachus Nicanor, in his Letter of Congratulation
to the Kyrk. But Secondly, the Parallel fails in this too, That his Royal
Highness is not a declared Papist, as the King of Navarre was a declared
Protestant; but on the contrary persists in the Communion of the Church of
England, for which his blessed Father died a Martyr. And therefore of the two
our English Guisards are too much to blame, to represent his Royal Highness as
a Papist, which it is so absurd to imagine him to be.

But furthermore, upon supposition he were a declared Papist, the Proposal of
my Lord Chose was very ridiculous, since it did suppose a possibility of
prevailing with his Majesty to disinherit his Royal Brother, who must needs be
so much dearer to him, than the King of Navarre was to Henry III. as he is
nearer in Blood. And for for my own part, I cannot but imagine, at this
distance, that his Majesty, who is a Prince incomparably wiser and juster than
was Henry III. of France, must needs disdain and abhor such a Proposal; which,
were it Enacted, it would enervate the Laws of Succession by which He and His
Ancestors have hitherto Reigned, and give as great a Blow to the English
Monarchy as that which cut off His Royal Father's Head.

I have here forborne to give you an Account of the Tragical End of the Duke of
Guise, which is a Lesson well worth your learning, and may teach all Persons,
so disposed as he was, how unsafe it is to provoke Sovereign Authority; since
the Goodness of the best of Kings, like the infinite Goodness of God himself,
whose Ministers they are, may at length be so injured and affronted, as to be
forced to sharpen it self into Sovereign Vengeance and Justice. And therefore,
Cousin, let me advise you, if not for Conscience, yet for Wraths sake, to have
nothing to do in Blowing up the Flames of Sedition: Nor let your Soul enter
into the secret of my Lord -- though his Interest among the Senators (as you
write) be so very considerable and strong.

You likewise forget your self, in miscalling the Execution of the late Laws by
the odious name of Persecution; which if you can prove to be such, according to
the Scriptural notion of Persecution, viz. infliction of Evil for Righteousness
sake, then will I become your Proselyte, and forsake the Church of England, as
much as I have this Idolatrous Church of Rome.

For no man is persecuted, but either for immediate matters of Divine Worship,
which concern the First Table; or with respect to matters of Morality, or a
Good Life, which concern the Second.

With respect to the First; a man is persecuted either on a negative account,
for not worshipping a False God, as the three Children in Daniel; or for not
worshipping the True in a False way: as St. Paul and the other Apostles were
persecuted by the Pharisees, for not worshipping the True God according to the
Jewish manner after it was abrogated: or as our Forefathers in England, For
not worshipping God and our Savior after the Romish Rites. Or Secondly, On a
positive account, For worshipping the true God in a way that is true; or, to
express it yet more clearly and absolutely in your own terms, For serving of
God: as Daniel was cast into the Lions Den, for praying to God against the
King's Decree.

With respect to the Second; A man is also persecuted on a negative account,
For not doing something, which is in its own nature, or by Gods positive
command, morally evil: as the good Midwives were afraid to be persecuted by
Pharaoh, for not murdering the Hebrew Infants. Or else on a positive account,
For doing some good moral action, which ought in such and such circumstances to
be done: and thus was our blessed Savior persecuted, for opening the eyes of
the blind man, and for healing on the Sabbath Day.

Now these distinctions being premised, tell me in which of these cases you are
persecuted; or, which is all one, for what you are Martyrs. For no man is
persecuted, but as he is persecuted he is a Martyr; and by his sufferings bears
witness to the Truth. With respect to the Second head, you cannot say that you
are persecuted; and therefore let me see whether you are so with respect to the
first. And First, it is plain that you are not brought to suffer for not
worshipping a fall God; and it is likewise as plain, that you do not suffer for
worshipping the true God in a false way. For First, the Laws, whose Execution
you mis-call Persecution, do not punish you for not worshipping God after our
way; or if they did, to prove their Execution to be Persecution, you must First
prove that the Church of England (whose Doctrine is downright against Idolatry
and Superstition) does worship God in an Idolatrous and Superstitious manner;
which, good Cousin, you know can never be proved.

There remains nothing then but to assert, That you are punished for serving
God; or for worshipping God in a way which you are sure is true. That you
worship God in a true way, I verily believe, and could heartily join with you
in other circumstances. But then you are not punished for worshipping God in
that manner; for the same Laws you complain of, allow you to worship God in
what fashion you please; and not only you, but your Family, be it as great as
it will; and Lastly, not only your Family, but Five Persons more: Which
allowance, were you the only Christians in the World, and the Magistrates
Heathens; or, which your Friends are more likely to suggest, were they Papists
or Atheists, is so far from being Persecution, that were you of the temper of
the Primitive Christians, you would esteem it as a great privilege, and,
instead of reviling, thank the kind Magistrate for the same. But then if on the
other hand you be considered (and many good English men, and good Christians
cannot but consider you) as a sort of men, that have formerly raised a Civil
War, and now make Schism in the Church, and Broils in the State, your
punishments you suffer, will be so far from seeming persecution of you as
Christians, that it will rather seem your just Desert, as factious and
turbulent Subjects. And I assure you, that your Brethren in France (whom you
falsely so call, and for whom you pretend so great respect) are so far from
judging you persecuted, that they will not excuse you; but wonder at your
non-submission to the Church, and pity your mistakes, that make you stand out
against the Laws. They that have seen and examined our English Liturgy, which
is Printed at Geneva in French, cannot understand your Notion of Persecution.
And Ministre Claude, the most famous of them all, for Piety and Learning, told
me, in the presence of many others, (after a Discourse, wherein he said all for
you that could be said) that he wondered how the Presbyterians in England could
rend the Peace of the Church, for such little indifferent matters; and that, if
he were in England, he would be of the Episcopal Party, and heartily submit
himself to the Discipline and Government of the Church of England. And if you
would do so too, how happy a thing would this be both for your selves and the
Nation? Or seeing, as you pretend, you cannot, yet at least live peaceably, and
forbear to trouble the World with compassing Sea and Land; that is, by doing
all that you can, like your Fathers of old the Pharisees, to make Proselytes;
when yet you cannot show any sinful condition of communion with the Church of
England, nor prove your way of worship as Apostolical as that of hers; from
which, out of Pride, Interest, or Ignorance, or partly all together, you
dissent. I am sure this would rather become the dissenting Brethren, than to
foment Divisions, raise Parties, betake themselves to the wickedness of men, as
of late to --, and cry up the Kings Prerogative, which they formerly cried
down; which, with many other self-contradictions, confirms me in an opinion you
know I was of before, That in those matters wherein you differ from us, you are
men of no Principles, and know not where to fix.

I have enlarged upon this Theme more than I thought to do at first, because
the Papists here in France complain as loudly as you of the cruelty of the
same, and other of our Laws; and cry out, wherever they come, how their
Brethren have been, and still are persecuted among us; though with this
difference, that in disputing ad hominem their case is far more reasonable and
pleadable than yours. As for you, I protest, I wish that the Laws you complain
of had never been made; and though perhaps I am willing to grant, they are very
hard Laws, considering you as freeborn Subjects of England; yet I will
maintain, that the Execution of them is not Persecution, although you be
considered as the only true Christians in the World. For, as I hinted before,
you have the Liberty in your Houses to profess what Religion you please, and to
worship God in what manner you will; and, for fear your Family should not be a
just Congregation, you may have five more: but, for fear you should do as you
have formerly done, you are not to have five Hundred, or five Thousand: which
Liberty, not only the Primitive Christians, but our own Ancestors, an hundred
years ago, would have called a Blessing, and a Privilege, and have heartily
thanked God and the King for the same. And God grant we may never see that time
in England, when truly tender Consciences will esteem so much Liberty as the
greatest Blessing in the World.

The good Protestants here in France, though their Religion is made an obstacle
to all Statepreferments, though it disable them to sit in the Courts of
Parliaments, (except just so many as serve in the Chamber of Edicts to decide
Controversies between Protestants and Papists) or to have any other Charges of
Judicature, or any high Offices in the Army; though their Numbers are much
diminished; and their Interest weakened, by a Prohibition to marry with Roman
Catholics, and by a Capital Law, which makes it Death to return Protestants
after they have once turned Papists; and though a great number of their Temples
have been demolished (some under a pretense that they were built since the
Edict of Nantes, others that they were built without License, and others that
they were built upon Holy Ground) so that hereby they are forced in very many
places to the grievous inconvenience of going two, three, four, or five Leagues
to Church, if not more: and though all the Places of Strength, where they do
abound, are demolished, and Cittadels are erected to awe them in other Towns,
where they are numerous; though their own particular Hospitals, and all other
perpetual Provisions for their Poor are taken away; and they disabled, either
living or dying, to give any settled Maintenance either to their own Ministers
or People, (as to endowe Churches, build Schools, Colleges, or Hospitals,
etc.) nay, though they are deprived of the benefit of other Hospitals, provided
for the rest of the Subjects; and although their Ministers are forbid to speak
against the Pope, or to Preach against the Romish Religion, with half that
freedom and plainness that you dare speak against the Church of England; or to
Preach in any places but those few appointed by the King; though they are
forbidden to call the Papists in their Sermons by any other name but that of
Catholics; or to make mention of their Religion and Ceremonies without
Reverence and Respect; though they are forbid to call themselves Priests or
Pastors, and have no other Title allowed them, but only Ministres de la
Religion pretendue Reformee; and though it be Enacted, that their Religion
shall be called by no other name in any Public Acts, Registers, etc. Though
they are forbidden to bury their dead in Catholic Churches, or Churchyards,
even where the deceased Person was Patron of the Church, or where his Ancestors
had purchased Burying-places for their Families; Though they are forbid to make
any Public Exhortations, or Prayer, or to sing Psalms at their Burial: Though
they are forbid to Instruct or Condole those of their own Religion in Prisons
or Hospitals; or to Pray with them in a voice so loud as to be heard by the
standers by; though they are forbid to make any Collections of Money among
themselves, but such as are permitted and regulated by the Edicts of the King;
Though they are forbid to Work, or open their Shops on Romish Holy Days, or to
sell Flesh on their Fastingdaies, etc. I say the good Protestants here in
France, notwithstanding all this hard dealing, are yet so far from complaining
of Persecution, that they show themselves thankful both to God and the King for
the Liberty and Indulgence they enjoy. Indeed they will complain, for the
aforesaid Reasons, that their Religion is very much discouraged, and they
themselves hardly used: But Persecution is a Notion that they never think or
speak of, when they discourse of their own condition; being very far, though
not so far as you, from a state of Martyrdom; which consists in a forcible
obligation to suffer, or renounce the Truth. And therefore Cousin, I beseech
you, and conjure you, not to misuse the name of Persecution again. It is a very
sinful way thus to abuse and amuse the Vulgar, by calling things by their wrong
names: and as to this particular, honest and knowing men will be apt to
suspect, that through the name of Persecution, you have a design to make your
Governors pass for Tyrants, and your selves for Martyrs.

To conclude: If this which you call Persecution, be not such indeed, then I
doubt not but they who mis-call it so, that is, all presumptuous or affectedly
gn^orant Schismatics, without bitter pangs of Repentance, will be persecuted
by the God of Peace himself to a sad and endless eternity.

As for the Bill of Comprehension, (if such a thing can be) I heartily wish it
had passed into an Act; for I think it would have been much to the advantage,
and nothing at all to the dishonor of the Church of England, to change or take
away those few Ceremonies, which her self in the 34th Article confesses may be
altered, or removed, according to the exigency of times. Neither, if this were
done, could the Romish Church have the least apparent reason to reproach us for
such a slight alteration; seeing her own Missals and Breviaries have been so
diverse and different in several times and places; and have undergone so many
Emendations, or rather Corruptions, before they were established in the present
form, by the Authority of Pius V. and the Decree of the Council of Trent. But
in the mean time, I would have all good Christians wait in Peace and Patience
till it shall lawfully be done; and by that means our Breach would be perfectly
made up: So that a poor English Traveller would not be tauntingly asked by
every Impertinent Priest here, Whether he were a true Son of the Church, or
Presbyterian, or Independent, or Anabaptist, or Quaker. And I assure you, when
they meet with a man that owns himself a true Son of the Church of England,
they will seem to pity him more than any other; but yet they will hardly
attempt to convert him. But when they meet with one that will own himself of
any other sort, they will be pleased, smile in their sleeves, and set upon him
as a person not far from their Kingdom of God. And I am persuaded, had you seen
or heard as much of their Idolatries, Blasphemies, and Superstitons, as I have
done in one Christmas, one Lent, and one Easter, you would be so far from
doing the Church of England any ill office, that you would rather (like St.
Paul after his conversion) preach against your own Partisans, and thank God
that you lived in a Church reformed from Romish Idolatry and Superstition. And
I cannot but freely confess, that I am since my Travels become ten times a
greater lover of our own Church, and as many times a greater hater and detester
of the Romish Church, than I was before. And therefore I cannot here dissemble
the hearty grief I have conceived, for the great hopes you have, that the
Licenses (as you express it) will be once more authorized by his Majesty, or
the Declaration revived. For as it is that which at first was hammered out by
that late Patron and Idol of the Presbyterians, the Popish Lord Clifford; so
it is that which the Roman Catholics here (especially the Priests) do hope and
wish for as well as you. They desire nothing more than such a Toleration as
that was, knowing that it must needs tend to the Ruin of the Church of
England, which is the principal Butt of all their Envy and Malice; as being the
main support and credit of the Reformed Religion every where, and the only Hedge
against Popery it self in our unfortunate British Isles. We meet with not a few
Priests of several Orders, that have the confidence (in our most familiar
conferences) to tell us, that by the just Judgment of God upon our Church, the
time of her ruin is at hand; the Nation it self being overspread with Schism
and Atheism, and the hearts of the faithful being disposed by the Spirit and
Providence of God to reembrace the holy Catholic Truth. And therefore they
freely confess, that this time of Distraction is their Harvest; and withal
express their intentions and zeal to transport themselves into England at the
critical time of Toleration, that they may be Fellow-laborers with your selves
in that Harvest. They seem to lament as much, and complain as fast, of the
prodigious increase of Schism and Atheism among us, as you are wont to do of
the daily growth of Atheism and Popery. And whilst you both complain alike, and
in the formality of your complaints, both alike reflect upon the Church of
England; it is she only that is the sufferer, and she only that truly laments
the growth, and at the same time sets up banks to hinder the perfect Inundation
of all the three among us. As for Schism among Protestants, you were the first
Fathers, and continue the chief Fautors thereof; all the inferior Sects having
sprung from you, and dividing both from you, and one another, under pretense of
the same Reasons, for which you profess to divide from the Church. And it is
from you, that even the Quakering Sect it self, (the dregs of Schism) have
learned to talk of Illumination, and the Spirit: and the rest of the Sectaries,
in what number soever they be, differ from you no more than the second, third,
or fourth, etc. from the first Book of Euclid. Not that by this comparison I
intend, that you have any such Principles, or Data among your selves, as there
are among Mathematicians; for I am very well assured, that take but any four of
the Presbyterian Demagogues, and they can scarce agree, amongst themselves, in
any four particulars, wherein they differ from the Church of England. And
therefore, if you be not Schismatics, then the Church of England, from which
you separate, and out of which you have gathered Congregations, and Preach and
Administer the Sacraments unto them; I say, if you be not Schismatics, then
our Church must be the Schismatic, in the Controversy between us; and be
justly chargeable with the same Indictment, which she has drawn up against the
Church of Rome. An Assertion, Cousin, which I never knew any other Person,
except one or two, besides your self, have the confidence to aver: and an
Assertion, which no Protestant here in France could hear us yet relate, without
Horror, Impatience, and Disdain. And therefore, if the Reformed Church of
England, from which you wilfully divide, and to which by your Divisions you
cause so much Scandal abroad, and Evil at home, be not a Schismatical Church,
that is, a Church which requires some sinful conditions of Communion; in what a
woeful condition will your unpeaceable seditious spirits appear before the God
of Peace? And how will you answer that, at the Tribunal of his Wisdom and
Justice, which neither your Fathers, nor you could ever yet answer, to those
Instruments of His Glory, Judicious Hooker, and the Venerable Sanderson? But
whether you are Schismatics, or whether you are not, the Separations which you
and your Brood have made from the Church, are the apparent Causes of the growth
of Popery; and both your Separations, and your Superstitious Enthusiastical way
of Worshipping that God, whose People you Emphatically pretend to be, are the
true Causes of that abundant Atheism, which at present makes England an
Astonishment, and a Scandal to Foreign Nations. And if you, or any other of the
Brotherhood, think it strange, that I charge yours, which is the Capital Sect,
with Enthusiasm, or make Superstition, which seems diametrically opposite to
Atheism, the Mother thereof; I offer, upon the Challenge, to make good the
Charge, in both particulars: But in the mean time, to show you how unsafe it
will be to provoke me to that trouble, I advise you to read one or two short
Chapters in the beginning of Mr. Smith's Discourses, concerning these
Distempers of the Soul, and you shall find what I have said, proved with more
Demonstration, than you can gainsay; and with more Plainness and Perspecuity,
than, I am confident, you would wish to see.

But besides the Schism and Enthusiasm, the Bloody Wars, which you formerly
made in the State, under pretense of the Glory of God, and the Reformation of
the Reformed Religion, have given many Inconsiderate men occasion to suspect,
that all Religion, like that of most of your Leaders, is but a Politic Engine,
which men use, to make themselves Popular and Powerful, that they may
afterward act with good color whatsoever their Interest shall suggest. And
furthermore, to consider, That the great Pretenders of the Spirit, and Power of
the Christian Religion, (which with respect to Magistrates teaches nothing but
to obey or suffer) should notwithstanding Preach up Rebellion against their
Rightful Prince, Fight Him from Field to Field, Remove Him from Prison to
Prison, and at last most Barbarously put Him to Death, is such an Absurdity
against the Principles of right Reason, so repugnant to the Laws of our own
Nation, and so inconsistent with the Peaceable Doctrine of the Gospel; that,
besides the Atheists it has made, it has, and ever will constrain men of
honest Principles, and just Resentments, to Persecute you with Satyrs and
Exclamations to the end of the World. I had not here presented that Tragical
Scene of the King's Murder, but that I have had so many unpleasant Occasions
to hear our Nation Reproached with the Scandal and Dishonor of that Inhumane
Fact. Particularly, It was my bad fortune to be at a station in Paris, where
there were met about two hundred Persons, to read the Gazets, at that very same
time, when that of England came full charged with the News of Burning the Pope
in Effigy at London. This Feat did at first surprise that Roman Catholic
concourse of People; but after a little recollection, they ceased to wonder,
saying in every company as we passed along; It is not so strange that the
English Devils should do this, who formerly Murdered their King. And another
time, it was my ill luck also to be at the same place, when the London Gazet
brought us the News, That the House of Lords had taken into consideration the
growth of Atheism in our Nation: Whereupon some French Gentlemen of my
acquaintance seriously enquired of me the Causes of so much Atheism, amongst
such a Thinking and Solid People. I assigned the same Reasons which I have
written above, besides some others, not so fit to be mentioned, as the most
probable Causes thereof. And as I hope I did not misinform them, so I am
confident I did not unjustly charge you in any particular, especially with the
Murder of the King. For there were no Accessaries in the Murder of that
Sacred Person; neither was it the last stroke only that felled the Royal Oak;
but you and the Independents, like the two Sacrilegious Priests of Jupiter, are
equally guilty of the Crime; the one for Binding the direful Victim, and the
other for putting the Knife to his Throat.

But to be short, where I am so unacceptable, I Will conclude my Argument with a
Fable. A Principal Ship, which for many years had been Sovereign of the Seas,
was at last Attacked by a Tempestuous Wind, which the Devil raised, and
notwithstanding all the Help that could be made to save her, was driven by the
force of that malignant Wind, and split upon a Rock. The very same instant she
dashed upon the Rock, the Wind ceased; and being afterward cursed by the
Seamen, for the Wrack of the Royal Charles, (for so the Capital Vessel was
called) answered, You charge me most unjustly, my Friends; It was not I, but
the Rock, as you saw, that split your Ship. The Moral of this Parable is very
obvious; and if the Application thereof, or any thing else that I have written,
may conduce to awaken your Conscience, and reclaim you from Schism, I shall
think my pains well bestowed. But if you, and your seditious Brethren will
still persevere, to assault the Church on one hand, as fast as the Romish
Priests do undermine her on the other, her days are like to be but few and
evil; and except God incline the Heart of our Magistrates to put the Laws in
Execution against them, and find some effectual means to reduce you, you may
live to see her Ruin accomplished, which you both alike desire and expect. How
numerous you are, the World can ghess, and if the Accounts, which we receive
from the Fathers of Intelligence of several Orders, be credible, there are at
least three thousand of them, which find entertainment and success in our
Nation. But in the mean time, till her hour is come, she struggleth against
both, like her Savior against the Pharisees, whose true Disciples in part you
both are; they representing those sworn Enemies of the Gospel, by the Cabala of
their ridiculous and impious Traditions; and you representing them in their
Hypocrisy, Pride, Envy, Evil-speaking, morose and censorious Dispositions,
etc. (which are Sins scarce consistent with Humanity, much less with Grace) as
likewise in observing many Fasts, and making long Prayers, with design not to
serve God, but to delude the People. And therefore I wonder not, that you are
such malignant Enemies to the Church of England, since that Pharisaical spirit,
which reigns so much amongst you, is a wicked Pusillanimous spirit, that
affects to be seen in the Head of Parties, and Dictate amongst the Ignorant;
and loves as much to Rule, as it hates to Obey. But would you once be so
sincere, as to subdue your Pride, lay aside your Prejudice, inform your
Ignorance, and forsake your dearly beloved interest, for the Truth; it would
not be long ere we should see you join with the Church of England, without
troubling our Senators, to bring you in, with an Act of Comprehension. Your
Pride appears in Heading of Parties, and in the Pleasure you are seen to take
in the Multitudes, that run after you; and in your boasting, that without you
the Souls of People would starve for want of knowledge. Your Prejudice is an
effect of your Pride, and discovers it self together with your Ignorance, in
not submitting to those Invincible Reasons which you cannot answer. And as for
your Interest, the greatest Paradox of all, that is evident enough to me, who
have so often heard many of you glorify your selves in the Number and Riches
of your Followers, boast of their Affection to your sacred Persons, and brag of
the great Sums you have collected in your Congregations; which makes the King's
Chapels (as you arrogantly call your Conventicles) better places than most of
the Churches, of which He is Patron. And therefore never complain, that you
live either worse, or at greater uncertainties than you did before. For by your
pretensions to Poverty and Sufferings, and by other unworthy Arts, you have so
wrought your selves into the esteem of your Disciples, that few of them are
either so Covetous, or so Poor, but they will Pinch at home to supply you.
There are several Orders of Franciscans here, who have renounced not only
Parsonages, but all Temporal Estates and Possessions whatsoever; and by their
vain glorious Sanctity and Austerities, they have got (like you) such fast hold
on the Souls of the People, (which is the fastest hold of all) that they can
easily make most of them dispose of their Children, cashier their Servants, and
settle their Estates as they please; and by these Tricks do more effectually
promote the Interest of Rome, than all the Parish Priests within the Pale of
that Church. And really, when I consider what Influence these Sanctimonions and
self-denying Zealots have over all families, in all places where they live; how
hey steal away the Hearts of the People from their Parish Priests, and drain
their Congregations; and how the deluded People had rather give them the worth
of a shilling, than the dues of two pence to their own Cures; it makes me often
run the Parallel between you and them, and think what a Politic and Gainful
Pretense you have got to renounce your Livings, for to secure your Consciences,
and to Preach the Word like the Primitive Apostles; when God knows, it is not
out of love to the People, but to your selves.

And I protest to you, were I a man to be maintained by the Pulpit, and
consulted my Profit more than the Goodness of my Cause, I should take the same
courses that you do; I should rather be Mr. M. than Dr. A. of Plymouth; and
should choose the plentiful Income of that dull Zealot Dr. Manton, before that
of his most Learned and Religious Successor of Covent Garden. But though you
live very well, and better indeed than most of the Ministers of the Church, yet
the mischief, of it is, you are incapable of Dignities; which makes you such
Aerians, and upon all occasions opens your. Throats as wide as Sepulchers,
against the Bishops and the Church. You know what an History of Bishops Mr.
Pryn has wrote, and what a fair Collection the Learned Smec, has taken out of
him; as if when a Bishop is defective, either in Piety, Learning, or the skill
of Government, it were not the deplorable unhappiness, but the fault of the
Church of England. Should an Heathen, or Mahumetan, make such an Historical
Collection of Scandalous Christians, either in this, or former Ages, you would
not be persuaded for all that, to prefer the Alcoran before the Gospel; or the
most exalted Paganism whatsoever, before the Christian Religion. Therefore wise
and sober men will make no Inference but this, from such a malicious
enumeration of Particulars; that corruptions will creep into Government,
notwithstanding all the care that can be used to the contrary; and that by the
favor of Princes (who hear with other men's ears, and often receive undeserved
Characters of men) sometimes Ambitious, sometimes Ignorant, and sometimes
Slothful, Imprudent, or Debauched Persons, will be Preferred to the most
Honorable Dignities in the Church. But this, as often as it happens, is the
misery of the Church of England, which all true Church men lament; though the
men of the short Cloak take all such occasions to expose her to the scorn of
the common People, who judge by Sense, and not by Reason; and who are taught by
you, to make no distinction between the Bishops and the Church. But were all
her Bishops the best Christians, the best Scholars, and the best Governors in
the World; and should the Royal Hand place her Mytres on the Heads of none but
Jewel's, Whitgift's, Andrews's, Hall's, Usher's, Morton's, Taylor's, and
Sanderson's, yet that Unchristian Spirit of Envy and Discontent, which informs
the Non-conformists, would still fly upon her with open mouth, like Beasts
upon the Saints of old condemned to the Amphitheater; and make her, as she has
already been for almost forty years, a Spectacle to God, to Angels, and to Men.
The wicked Lives of Scandalous Bishops and Priests, if there be any such, are
her sad misfortune, but cannot justify the Schism you are guilty of; who are
bound to hear even them, as much as the Jews were bound to hear the Scribes and
Pharisees, those Hypocrites, that sat in Moses's Chair. And in that deplorable
state of the Jewish Church, when the Priests and Prophets were both alike
corrupted, and called by the Holy Spirit, Dumb and greedy Dogs, yet it had been
unlawful to make a separation, and set up other Altars against that which God
(who was their King) had set up. I cannot but mind you of the Schism of
Jeroboam, who by dividing the Church, as God was pleased to divide the Kingdom,
into two parts, made Israel to Sin. But to insist on the Samaritan Secession,
and write all that is necessary to discover and aggravate the damnable Nature
of Schism, would require as much more Paper as I have bestowed, and so make me
as tedious again, as, I fear, I have already been. Besides, it would oblige me
to answer Mr. Hales's Treatise of Schism, with whose leaves you vainly endeavor
to cover your shame: And I had indeed a year ago undertaken that easy task,
but that a Western Gentleman, to whom I discovered my Intentions, told me, That
a Friend of his had already begun that good Work; so that I hope it is Printed
by this time. And if either that or this, or any thing else, a thousand times
better than I am able to write, may prove effectual to reclaim you from Schism;
I shall be as glad, as to see some other of our Friends reformed from
Drunkenness, Swearing, and Uncleanness: which are very grievous and dreadful
Sins, but yet not more damnable in their Nature, nor more destructive to the
Christian Religion, nor more deeply rooted in the Soul of man, than that of
Schism. From which, I pray God, by the Power of his Grace, to Preserve me, and
Reform you, through Jesus Christ our Lord; to whose Protection I commit you,
and rest,

Your most Affectionate Cousin, And humble Servant.
Saumur. May 7. 1674.

