THE LAST SPEECH, Of that Pious and ^ned Divine Mr. JOHN HICKS: Who was
Executed at Glassenbury, October. 1685.
I Suppose the spectators here present expect I should speak something before I
leave this sanguinary stage and pass through my bloody sufferings, by which my
immortal spirit will be speedily transported into an invisible and eternal
world. And I conclude they have different resentments thereof, that some resent
them with much joy with high exaltations and triumphs, others with equal grief
and sorrow: that to the one I am a most pleasant spectale and they behold me
with high complacencye and delight; that to the other I am a mouthfull and
unpleasant one, and that they behold me with no less pittye and compassion:
concerning the first I can say I freely forgive them, and heartily pray that
God most mercifully and graciously, will prevent their mourning through miserye
not only here but to eternity hereafter.

Concerning the other I will say weep for your sins and for the sins of the
Nation, for the highest rebellions that ever were committed against the eternal
God. Lament bitterly for those sins that have been the meritorious cause of the
late terrible judgment, and which I fear will provoke God to break in upon
this Nation with an inundation and overflowing deluge of judgments, which are
far more tremendous and dreadful, and for sympathizeing with me in drinking
this bitter cup appointed for me, I return you most humble and hearty thanks,
and earnstly desire God to flow into and fill your souls with all, celestial
and spiritual consolations.

Some thing I must say before I die to purge and clear my self from some false
accusations laid to my charge as that I was engaged with Capt. Blood in
rescueing of Capt. Mason when he was sent down from London to York to be tried
for high treason, that I was the man that killed the Barber of that City who
traveled with them, and also that I was with him when he stole the Crown. Now
as I am a dyeing man and upon the brinck of a stupendous eternity, the
reallity and truth whereof I firmly believe without any mental reservation or
the least equivocation, I do declare in the presence of the all seeing God that
impartial judge before whom in a little time I must appear, that I never saw,
nor converst with Tho. Blood from the year 1656. till after he had stolen the
Crown which was in the year 1671 or there about in the year 1672. Nor was ever
in the least engaged with him in any of his treasonable plotts or practices.

It Is true I being most injuriously and wrongfully involved in great troubles
of another nature, of which I have given an account to the world in a printed
narrative, and which is notoriously known in the country where then I lived, by
some which were grand enemies to me for my preaching, I was persuaded to apply
my self to Mr. Blood, to procure by his intercession his (...) Majesty's grace
and favor for me. Accordingly he brought me into his Royal presence, whilst I
was in it his Majesty expressed himself with great clemency and mercy toward me
without expressing one word of what I am charged with, after Mr. Blood came
from his Majesty (he continuing a little longer with him then I did) he told me
he had granted me my pardon, which I did most thankfully accept, knowing it
would free me from all penalties and troubles I was obnoxious to, which were
occasioned by my nonconformity. I then engaging him, to take out my pardon, he
told me he would put me into one with several others that had been engaged with
him in several treasonable designs and actions, at which I was troubled
fearing it might be imputed to me thereby, and though I did acquiesce therein
for the present, yet God knows I have often (...) reflected upon it with great
regret and dissatisfaction. If Mr. Blood did inform the late King for this end
to make himself the more considerable, (he endeavoring to bring in as many of
his party as he could to accept their pardon that they might be rendered utterly
unable of Plotting any further mischief against his Person or Government) or
any other, that was engaged with him in any of his treasonable attempts: I
appeal to God in it he has done me an irreparable wrong. Also after the same
manner do I declare that I was never the least engaged with any party in
plotting designing or contriving any treason or rebellion against the late
King, and particularly that I was altogether unconcerned and unacquainted with
that for which the Lord Russel and others suffered; and as much a Stranger to
the last against the present King, till it was ready to be put in Execution and
whereas it was reported of me. That at Tanton I persuaded the late Duke of
Monmouth to assume the title of King, I do as solemnly declare that I saw not
the said Duke, nor had any converse with him till he came to Shipton Mallet
which was 13 days after he landed, and several days after he had been at
Tanton. It is also false that I rode to and fro in the West to persuade men to
go into his Army and rebel against his present Majesty, for I was in the East
Country, when the Duke landed, and from thence I went directly when he was at
Shipton Mallet, not one man accompanying me from thence thither. As I have live
so I dye owning and professing the true reformed Christian commonly (called the
Protestant) Religion, which is founded upon the pure written word of God only,
which I acknowledge likewise to be comprehended in the thirty nine Articles of
the Doctrine of the Church of England. This Religion I have made a rational and
free choice of and have heartly embraced, not only as it protests against all
Paganism and the Mohammedan Religion, but against the corruption of the
Christian especially in its essentials.

And I humble and earnestly pray unto God, that by his infinite wisdom and
almighty power, he would prevent not only the utter extirpation, but the least
diminution thereof, by the grows and prevalency of what is contrary to it,
(in the utter abhorrence whereof as I have lived so now I dye) and for that end
the Lord make the professors of it, to live more up to its principles and
rules, and bring their hearts and conversations more under the Governing power
of the same. I dye also owning my Ministerial Nonconformisty, (for which I have
suffered so much, and which now does obstruct the Kings grace and mercy to be
manifested and extended to me) for as I chose it not (concerning which I now
appeal to God as a dyeing man] from sullennes, or humor, or a factious temper,
or from principles of Education, or for secular interest or worldly advantage,
but purely from the dictates of my own conscience, and as judging it to be the
cause of God, and to have more of divine truth in it, then that which is
contrary thereunto, so now I see no cause to repent of, or to recede and depart
from it, not questioning, but God will own it at the last day of judgment. If
no more had been required after the late Kings restoration, to qualify
Ministers for public preaching, then was after the first Reformation to the
time of Charles the First, probably I might have satisfied my self there with,
and not have scrupled conformity thereto. But the terms and conditions thereof
by a Parliamentary Law in 1662 being made not only new, but so strict and
severe, I could never yet have satisfaction in my own conscience, (after all
endeavouts used) for a compliance therewith and submission thereunto. To say
nothing of the Covenant (which I never took) the renouncing of my ordination
and giving unfeingend assent and consent, have been always to difficult and
hard for me to come up to.

And I do very well remember about 14 years ago entering into a discourse with
Mr. Patrick Sheriden then an Irish Dean (and who was my contemporary in Dublin
College) concerning conformity (which he much endeavored to persuade me to) I
urged the severity of the fore mentioned conditions against it, and after some
debates and reasonings, I told him I did believe they were contrived designedly
and on purpose to keep us out of the Church, and to prevent our public
Ministry, to which he ingeniously replied, he judged it was, for said he a
Bishop in Ireland (whose name I have forgott) told and the very same. But
though I could not wade through and conquer those difficulties yet I censure
not those that have done it, and I believe after all the hottest disputes the
most vehement debates and violent contests betwixt conformists and
conconformists, here, there are of both that will be glorified in heaven
hereafter. According to that 19 Article of the Church of England, (a visible
Church is a congregation of faithful men in the which the pure Word of God is
preached, the Sacraments duly administered according to Christ's ordinance in
all those things that of necessity are requisite to the same) so with such
Churches I have held the most intimate communion, and which such (were I to
live) could hold it as occasion should require.

I would not therefore be so incorporated with any such Church, as to exclude
me from and render me incapable of holding communion with other Churches. I was
never strictly bound up to any form of Ecclesiastical Government, that under
which pure and undefiled Religion does flowrish, that which contenances, and
cherishes real practical holiness, and advances the Kingdom of God in the
World, I can approve of, submit to, and peaeably live under, were I to live.

I do approve of the ancient and present form of civil Government. English
Monarchy, I am fully satisfied with, and I do also declare that it is not
warrantable, for subjects to take up Arms and resist their Lawful and
rightful Sovereign Princes, and therefore had I not been induced by several
things I have read and heard, to belive the late Duke of Monmouth was the
legitimate Son of his Father Charles the Second, I had never gone into his
Army, judging without this I could not be free the guilt of rebellion, which I
always resolved to keep my self clear from, and though his Father denied he was
married to his Mother, I thought it might be answered with this, that Kings and
Princes for State reasons the depth whereof can not be fathomed by their
subjects, may affirm or deny things which without them they would not do, and
make even their natural affections to truckle and stoop thereto. I exhort all
to abhor treasonable plots and practices, to have all rebellion in the highest
detestation, to make the plain text, of Sacred writ their rule to walk by, in
honoring obeying and living in subjection to rightful Kings, and not suddenly
to receive nor to be suddenly impressed with evil reports and defamatious of
them, also not rashly to be the Spreaders and Propagaters of the same. I desire
God to forgive all my enemies and to give me a heart to forgive them, which are
many, some mighty and all most malicious: particularly Barret of Fovent who
betrayed me, and proved so treatherous to James Dun his old and intimate
Friend. I dye grievously afflicted that I should prove the occasion of the
great sufferings of so many persons and families, but this has fallen under
the just and wise ordering of the divine providence, as David's going to
Abimelech for some releif did, when it proved the occasion of his death, and
all the Priests, with the destruction of men women and Children in the City.
But who shall say unto God what do thou. The care of my most dear wife and
many dear children I cast upon God, who I hope will be better then the best of
Husbands unto her, and better then the best of parents unto them. God knows how
just and legal a right my wife has unto her estate, to him therefore I commit
her, to defend her from the violence and oppression of many, particularly of a
most inhumane and, unnatural Brother: but no wonder if he will lay violent
hands upon his Sisters Estate, that laid them so often on his own Father. I dye
a deeply humbled self judging, self condemning sinner, loathing and abhorring
my many and great iniquities, and my self for them, earnestly desiring full
redemption from the bondage of corruption under which I have groaned many
years, longing for a perfect conformity to the most glorious holy God, the
only infinitely pure being, thirsting for a perfect effusion of his image
through all the powers and faculties of my soul, panting after perfect
spiritual light, life and liberty, and a consummated love to my dearest Jesus
the all comprehending good, and to be satisfied with his love for ever, a
vigorous and a vehement zeal for the Protestant Religion, which a belief of the
Dukes legitimacy has involved me in that for which I am condemned. And tho it
has brought me to this ignominious death, yet blessed be God that by sincere
repentance and true faith in the blood of Jesus, there is a passage from it to
a glorious, eternal life, and from those bitter sorrows to the fullness of
sweetest joy that is in his presence, and from those sharp bodily pains to
those most pure pleasures that are at his Right hand for ever more. Blessed be
God that such a death as this cannot prevent and hinder Christ's changing my
vile body and fashoning it according to his most glorious body at the general
resurrection day. I am now going into that world where many dark things shall
be made perfectly manifest and clear, and many doubtful things shall be
resolved, with plenary satisfaction given concerning them, all disputes and
mistakes concerning treason, and schism, shall there be at an end and cease
for ever. Many things that are innocent lawful and laudable, often have foul
marks and black characters stamped and fixed upon them here, but shall be
perfectly purified and fully cleansed from them there, and where at one vieuw
far more shall be known of them, then by all the wrangling debats and eager
disputes, or by reading all polemical books concerning them here. I greatly
deplore and bewail the greedy appetite and unsatiable thirst of some
professing Protestants after the blood of their Brethren, and the high
pleasures they take in the effusion thereof, but what will not men do when they
are judicially blinded, or their secular wordly interest so insensibly
insinuates and winds it self into their Religion, is so twisted and
incorporated wiith, animates and acts it, is the life and soul, the vital form
and power of it, and it is made wholly subservient and subordinate there unto. I
bless God for all my sufferings, and particularly for this last, for the
benefits and fruits of them, by Gods sanctifing them to me, has been very
great: for thereby I have been made more effectually convinced of the vanity of
this world, and of my own sinfullness by nature, and by practice, and to see
that to be sin which I never saw before: to be more throwly humbled for what I
knew to be sin, not only of commission but of omission also: thereby I have
also been brought to a more inward sense and feeling the absolute necessity of
the righteousness of Christ to justify me, and he has been made much more
dear and precious to my soul then ever he was before: hereby my soul has been
refined from the dross of sensuality and wrought into a more heavenly frame,
raised up to a higher pitch of spirituality, and made more to aspire toward
invisible and immortal things: thereby I am made more meek and humble, and to
judge more charitably of others that differ from me in opinion and judgment.
So that though by Gods most righteous judgments I have been apprehended and
most justly and deservedly undergo these sufferings for my sins; yet I hope
they have wrought for me a far more exceeding eternal weight of glory, fitting
and preparing me and making me a better qualified person and subject, and far
more meet to be partaker of the same. Through the grace and strength of God, I
will not purchase my life by the death and blood of my Protestant Brethren,
but will choose rather to dye then to be a betrayer of them. The imperious and
violent assault of this temptation I dreaded more then death it self, blessed
be God therefore that I was not exposed unto und conquered by it, as some have
sadly been. I having such full bodily vigor and strenght and being in such
perfect health, that I know no quality notwithstanding my age predominant in
me, it has made it much more difficalt to dye, then if I had been clogged and
cumbered with infirmity and made to bow and stoop under habitual prevailing
diseases and distempers, gradually worn out there with (which many times makes
men weary of life and to choose death before it) and this in conjunction with
many things (which I forbear to mention) highly gratfull and pleasing unto
sense (which I must leave for ever) strengthens and heightens the difficulty
and begets a greater regret and reluctance in my will to have the earthly
tabernacle of my body dissolved, and my soul dislodged and quit the same. But
now when the black and glumy shades of death do overspread me I can say to the
praise and glory of Gods most free and powerful grace, that faith in some
measure, changing the difficulties into a facility and easines of dying, has
very much subdued the reluctance of my will against it, for it makes future
things present, invisible things, visible, and does realize and substantiate
the same unto me. And as by it I penetrate and pase into eternity, and behold
immersible and immortal things, so hereby blessed be God I have obtained a
greater victory over sense, the world is more crucified unto me and I unto it,
and all the most pleasant delightful things and comforts therein. All finite
fading creature comforts are become minute, small, despicable and contemptible
to me in comparaison hereof, being infinitely contained and comprehended
therein: shall my soull clasp and cling about these perishing things, shall it
cling and be glued to them, shall it be confined and captivated unto what is
kept within the narrow bounds of time, and the lower world, shall it earnestly
desire and thirst after muddy stremes, yea rivers of flesh pleasing good, when
by an eye of faith I can look into the in lesicient and inexhaustable pure
fountain, immense immeasurable Ocean of supreme divine goodness, hoping to
drink there of. To swim and bath my self for ever therein, and when I consider
how long my ears have been bound up to hear innumerable and horrid Oathts,
curses, blasphemies, and my eyes to see the profanation of so many days of
God, and when I behold such an overflowing of flood of most prodigious impiety,
such an inundation of monstrous iniquity, and so much of hell upon earth, and
that there is such a decay of holyzeal, true piety and Christian Religion among
the Professors of it, it has a powerful influence on my soul to reconcile it
more unto death, and make me affectually and from choice to leave this visible
World, to dwell and take up my abode in that which is un seen, and future, for
there shall be nothing but perfect purity and holiness, a sinless state, a
serving of God with all unweariedness and perfection, with highest complacency
and delight, that mortal souls are capable of. There is perfect peace and
concord; there are innumerable company of Angels, and the spirits of just men
made perfect, all fastened together with indissolvable and interruptible chains
of most sweet and pure love, and all continually wrapped up in and transported to
the highest admiration of Gods love, his infinite and comprehensible
excellencys, and perfections singing Hallelujah to him, without ceasing and
Triumphing in his praises for ever and ever. The consideration also that I know
so little of the sublime and profound divine mysteries of the most glorious
mystery of Salvation by Jesus Christ, and that I am so incapable of to fathom
the depth of the providence of God whose ways are in the sea, and his paths in
the deep waters and whose foot steps are unknown, and particularly of the late
most stupendous and amazing one. And that I am so ignorant of the nature of
Angels and Spirits with their offices and operations and of the high and
glorious excellency appropriate and and peculiar to that order, that I am so
little acquainted with the nature of my own soul as at present dwelling with
and united to my body: and as disunited and separated from it, how with out
corporel organs it shall vivaciously and vigourously performs all its proper
functions and offices more strongly and indefatigably serve the Lord more
fervently and abundantly delight in him, every way attain the suprerm end of
its creation and being. This makes me much more willing to dye, that I may have
the knowledge thereof, with innumerable other things that I am now ignorant of
or do but imperfectly know, completed and perfected, and so be made happy, by
a plenitude and fullness of intellectual pleasures, which of all others are most
suitable sweet and satisfing to immortal souls. When I also see that he that
departs from iniquity makes himself a prey, and so many ingulph and plung
themselves into the depth of wickedness, least they should make themselves
odious and vile, (so accounted) which makes them so much to degenerate not
only from Christianity but humanity also, as if they where scarce the
excressence of either, abandoning even that most noble generous heroic spirit,
that has dwelt in many hearthens, who counted it most honorable and glorious
to contend for their countries rights and libertyes, yea to suffer death and the
worst of deaths in defense of the same, and judging them most accursed
execrable horrid vilaines that do so and not only so, but for their own
private advantage, tho many of them inslave their posterity by it, are most
industrious and laborious, most fierce and furious in destroying them, whereby
they are become as unnatural children that seek the ruin of their parents that
begat them and brought them forth, or they that lay violent hands upon them
selves, dashing out there own brains, cutting their own throats, hanging and
drowning themselves ripping up their own bowels. They being in a different
sense but children and members of that body politic they design and attempt
the death and destruction of: and when I know not how long the duration and
continuance of these things shall be, or a conclusion and end by God (who by an
infallible and unerring wisdom governes the World) shall be put there to; why
shall my soul be unwilling to take its flight into the unseen and eternal
World, where no such sordid and impious things (most in congrous unto and
unbecoming nature) shall be seen and found, and where I shall behold no narrow
convulsive contracted souls, that habitually perfer their private before a
public Good. But all most unanimously and equally concentring in one common
universal Good; and where the sighs groans and tears of the afflicted shall be
heard no more for ever. I earnestly exhort all most highly to prise and value
time, diligently to improve it to externity, to be wise seriously and
seasonably, to consider there latter end, for though by the irreparable and
irrevesible Law of Heaven we must all dye, yet we know not how where nor when;
to live with their souls full of solicitude and care, and with the most deep
concernedness, and while you have time and opportunity, means of grace, health
and strenght to make sure of those two great things viz.

1. What merits for you a right and title to eternal life and the future
unchangeable blessedness, and that is the redeemers most precious blood, and
righteousness; and therefore let there be a sincere application and imputation
thereof unto you by believing.

2. That which makes you qualified subjects for it, and that is the great work
of regeneration wrought in your souls, and a being renewed in the Spirit of
your minds, the having the divine nature imprinted on you, a repairing of the
decayed image of God in you; the transformation into his own likeness, whereby
they may mind and Savor more of the things of the Spirit, than the things of
the flesh, celestial and heavenly more then the terrene and earthy: superior
more then inferior things, and here with to have a holy life and conversation
conjoined that results and springs, from the same as fruits from the feeds and
roots, and acts from the habit, let all in order thereunto seriously consider
those few Texts of Sacred Scripture, let them be deeply transcribed upon your
souls, let them be assimulated thereunto, be made the written Epistle, the
lively picture and purtraiture thereof Matthew. 5:8. blessed are the pure in
heart for they shall se God, verse 20. for I say unto you except your
righteousness exceed the rightousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall
in no wise enter into the Kingdom of God, John. 3:3. and Jesus said unto him
except a man be born again he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, 1 Cor.
6: 9. know ye not that the unrighteous shall not enter into the Kingdom of God,
be not deceived neither fornicators nor idolaters nor adulterers and verse 11.
such were some of you but now ye are washed ye are sanctified 5 Gal. 20, 21,
22, 23, 24. James 18. of his own will begat he us with the word of truth that
we should be a kind of first fruits of his creatures, 1 Pet. 1: 23. being born
again no^ of corruptible seed but of incorruptible by the word of God which
lives and abided for ever and 3 Coll. 1, 2. If ye then be risen with Christ,
seek those things which are above, and set your affections on things above, and
not on things on the earth, 5 Gal. 24. and they that aer Christ's have crucified
the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof: 2 Ephesians. 1. and you has be
quickened who were dead in Trespasses and in sins: 2. Revel. 6. Romans 8.1. There
is therefore now no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus etc. 1 Pet.
1: 15. But as he that has called you is holy so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation 4. Ps. 3. But know that the Lord has set a part him that is God
by for him self, I shall mention no more, the Holy Bible abounds with those
texts, which shows what renovation and change of our carnal and corrupt nature
and hearts there must be. with holiness of life and conversation before we can
be capable of a future blessed immortality and of inheriting he Kingdom of God
for ever.


