A VINDICATION OF Some among Our Selves AGAINST THE False Principles OF Dr.
SHERLOCK.

In a Letter to the Doctor, occasioned by the Sermon which he preached at the
Temple-Church, on the 29th of May, 1692.

In which Letter are also contained Reflections on some other of the Doctor's
Sermons, published since he took the Oath.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCXCII.

To the Worshipful the Masters of the Bench of the Inner Temple.
Gentlemen,
IT is the general Opinion of the World, That you desired your Master to
publish the Sermon which he preached before you on the 29th of May, that the
Doctrine he delivered in it might come to public Trial, and excite some among
our selves to give it a public Refutation. Having little to do this long
Vacation, I thought it would help away the time to write my own Reflections upon
it in form of an Answer; and such as it is I humbly present it to you, desiring
no other Favor from you, than that you would please to read it over, if it
escape the Inquisitors of the Press, and happen to get abroad. Your Study and
Profession is the Law, and it is the Defense of Law, and of Justice, which is
founded on Law, that I have undertaken against the Doctor, of whom in the
following Discourse I have here and there given some Account, as well as of his
Principles, that the World may judge of both. Ld. Chancellor Ellesmere in his
Speech touching the Posthati, p. 33.
A great and eminent Lawyer divides the Law of England into Three Parts; the
First of which respects the Church, and it is called, Lex Ecclesiae; the Second
respects the Crown, and is called, Lex Coronae; the Third respects the Subjects
in Common, and it is called, Lex Terrae: And if Providential Possession,
according to your Master's Doctrine, can supersede the second part of the Law,
and contrary to it give an Usurper a Divine Right to the Crown, and all the
Possessions, Authority, and Prerogatives that belong unto it; then I do not see
but it must in like manner supersede the other two parts also; and by
consequence give a Divine Right to the Church of England, if he can recover
Possession of it; and the King himself a Divine Right to the Estates, and other
Rights of the People, if he can get Possession of them. I believe it will not
please the Reverend Doctor to see his Doctrine improved into these
Consequences; not only because they are displeasing to others, but ungrateful
to himself, who has a very tender regard to his own Rights, both as a
Churchman and a Subject, though he make so light of those of the Crown. But,
Gentlemen, I am not here to dispute against him, but by the Dedication of the
following Treatise to testify to the World the great Zeal I have for Law and
Justice, and the great Esteem I have for you, as Professors of the one, and
Patrons of the other; and that I am upon both Accounts,

Gentlemen, Your most obedient Servant.

To the READER.
THE Reader is desired to take Notice, that in the Margin of the following
Discourse

a. Signifies, An Answer to a late Pamphlet, entitled Obedience and Submission
to the present Government demonstrated from Bishop Overall's Convocation-Book,
with a Postscript.

aa. An Answer to Dr. Sherlock's Vindication of the Case of Allegiance due to
Sovereign princes.

aaa. An Answer to a Letter to Dr. Sherlock, written in Vindication of that
part of Josephus's History which gives the Account of Jaddus's Submission to
Alexander, against the Answer to the Piece entitled Obedience and Submission
to the Present Government.

b. The Title of an Usurper after a thorough Settlement examined, in Answer to
Dr. Sherlock's Case of Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers.

c. The Duty of Allegiance settled upon its true Grounds, according to
Scripture, Reason, and the Opinion of the Church, in Answer to a late Book of
Dr. William Sherlock, entitled The Case of Allegiance due to Sovereign Powers,
etc.

d. Dr. Sherlock's Case of Allegiance considered, with some Remarks upon his
Vindication.

e. An Examination of the Arguments drawn from Scripture and Reason in Dr.
Sherlock's Case of Allegiance, and his Vindication of it.

f. s. Dr. Sherlock's Fast Sermon before the Queen.

f. Precept and Providence, etc.

g. Case of Allegiance to a King in Possession.

h. Great Britain's Just Complaints, etc.

In Sect. 13. signifies Reverse.

In the same Sect. signifies Reverses.

xxx. Dr. Sherlock's Sermon preached on the 30th of January before the House of
Commons.

xxix. His Sermon preached in the Temple Church on the 29th. of May.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Reader may be pleased to observe, that this Book, written against Dr.
Sherlock's Sermon preached at the Temple Church on the 29th of May last, is
also a full Answer to the greatest part of Dr. Tillotson's scandalous Sermon
lately preached at Whitehall on the 27th of October, and since published by him
under the Character of John Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

THE CONTENTS.
1. THE Masters of the Bench of the Middle Temple did not concur with the
Masters of the Bench of the Inner Temple, in desiring Dr. Sherlock to print his
Sermon. A Censure of some of his late Sermons. 2. The Disagreement betwixt Dr.
Sherlock in his Case of Allegiance, and in his Sermon preached on the 30th of
January, before the House of Commons. 3. Dr. Sherlock betrayed the Doctrine of
Nonresistance in his Sermon before the House. 4. Dr. Sherlock's new way of
preaching against Rebellion prejudicial to all Governments, especially in loose
and discontented Times. 5. Dr. Sherlock's undecent Flatteries. 6. The
distinction betwixt God's Permission and Appointment the best Cure of Dr.
Sherlock's Amazement at Providence. 7. The Prince of Orange at his landing no
Prince, according to Dr. Sherlock's Principles. He is offended at the Bp. of
London, for the Speech which he made to the Prince at St. James's. He wrote an
Answer to Dr. Burnet's Enquiry into the present State of Affairs; Himself
confuted out of that Answer. 8. Providential Right as tottering a Foundation of
the Monarchy as that of the Power of the People. Dr. Sherlock bewailed the
Silence and Passiveness of the Clergy at the time of the Revolution. How much
he is altered as to his Opinion of Persecution. He put the Bishop of Chichester
upon making his deathbed Declaration. Several of his Sayings. His Profession
or Protestation of Loyalty to her Majesty by the last Judgment, not
reconcilable with his present Principles. 9. Justice as well as Charity and
Fervency necessary to make Prayers acceptable to God. Dr. Patrick's Jewish
Hypocrisy commended. 10, 11, 12. The Reasonings of Dr. Sherlock's Adversaries
not contradictory to the general Sense of Mankind, proved by the Authority of
most learned, wise, and sober Men, especially of our own Nation, containing a
particular account of Dr. Sherlock's former Opinion and Practice, and some
account of his Conversion. The Practice of Men to be tried by Principles; the
great Majority commonly in the wrong in times of Trial and Persecution,
especially in corrupt and loose Ages. 13. Dr. Sherlock's Arguments for praying
for illegal as well as legal Kings exaamined and refuted. His Latria and Dulia
turned upon himself. The Emperor under whom the Apostle wrote, whoever he was,
proved to be a lawful Emperor from the Roman Coins. 14. Dr. Sherlock's
Questions about Certainty plainly answered. A threefold distinction of Estates.
His Questions about Certainty turned upon himself. 15. Dr. Sherlock's undecent
way of Reflecting upon the French King not agreeable to his former Maxim by
which he rebuked Dr. Burnet. An Apology for that King. 16. Dr. Sherlock
upbraiding King James with his misfortunes. How God has upheld and comforted
him in his misfortunes. 17. How parasitically the Doctor has magnified our
late Victory at Sea. A short account of some naval Victories in former times.
18. Dr. Sherlock's former Opinion of our Deliverance. An Apology for those
English Protestants whom he falsely and slanderoussy charges with inviting the
French to conquer us. The true Reason of Dr. Sherlock's present Hatred to the
French; Of Persecution. Dr. Sherlock exhorted to view his own Writings before
he dies. The World expects it from him.
A VINDICATION OF Some among Our Selves AGAINST THE False Principles OF Dr.
SHERLOCK.
SIR,
1. TO justify the Publication of your late Sermon at the Temple, you tell us
in the first Period of the Dedication, that the Reader will perceive it was not
intended for the Press; but if you had told us, that the Reader will perceive
it was not fit for the Press, you had told us a more sensible Truth, which
every ordinary Reader may perceive; but it is not so plain and perceivable a
thing that you did not intend it for the Press; for you know, Sir, that
intentions are very secret things, and the many wretched pieces you have
Printed since you took the Oath, and pitiful Sermons among the rest, make us
call your Non-intentions to print this, as well as your Judgment for printing
it, into question; for the World knows that you have a great share of Love for
your self, and a good Opinion of your own Productions; and whether you only did
not intend, or which is more, did intend not to print it, we cannot believe;
but your own good Opinion of it, as well as that of the Bench, was a great
motive to the Publication, or else the refusal of the Middle Temple Bench to
concur with the desire of that of the Inner Temple, would in prudence have
obliged you to a modest Noncompliance. I assure you, some who bear you no ill
will, think they were much more your Friends in not desiring you to Publish it;
for how well soever it might be liked in Preaching, it appears so ill in Print,
that many Men think the Bench of the Inner Temple, or at least the first makers
of the motion among them, desired you to print it to expose both it and you. I
have very good reason also to believe that some of the Honorable House had
that design in desiring you to print the Sermon which you Preached before them
on the 30th of January last; for one who was at the making of the Order,
despised you for your Flatteries in it, and said, he could not when he heard
it, but think of Mammon in Ben. Johnson's Alchymist, who said, My Flatterers
shall be the pure and gravest of Divines, that I can get for Money: Another
said, he concurred with the Order, because he knew the Sermon would expose you;
and to mention no more, a third said to a Friend, that he was going with the
Order of the House to complement Dr. Sherlock against his own Judgment. Sir, It
is a sad Dilemma that some Men, to speak in your figure, bring the Honorable
House to, by their wretched Sermons, when Order or no Order will expose the
Preacher; and which of the two would have most exposed you, no desire to Print,
or to Print at their desire, any Man that has less fondness for your
performances, than your self, may easily determine.

Case of Alleg. to Sovereign Powers.
2. All the World knows you wrote a Book to prove, that the full Possession of a
Crown gives the Possessor a Divine Right to it by Providence; and that this
Right of Providential Possession ought to take place of Legal Right, and carry
the Subjects Allegiance from the Legal to the Providential King; and it is well
known you chose this Hypothesis, because you did not approve of that of
Abdication, and Vacancy, upon which the Convention proceeded; and yet in this
Sermon to the House, you servilely justify the Revolution upon the Principles
of Abdication and Vacancy, P. 21, 22.
which supersedes your Providencial Right by Possession, as much as that in
your account supersedes a Right by Law. Thus, Sir, we have you in your Sermon
before the House Preaching against your self, and your Reasons in the Case of
Allegiance: for in this you set their Majesty's Right to the Crown on the Basis
of pure Providential Possession; but in that it stands upon the Legal foot of
Abdication, and Vacancy; for whether the Throne was vacant, or not vacant, fell
under the Cognizance of the Estates; they were the sole and proper Judges of
it; and private Subjects, whatever their private Opinions were, were bound to
acquiesce in the decision of the Case, which ought to determine the Consciences
of private Subjects; and yet, as I shall show anon, you were far from
acquiescing in their decision, or having your Conscience determined by it, for
almost two years after it was, as it was determined by them: For so long time
you had not discovered the Fundamental Reasons of Government, which oblige
private Subjects to acquiesce in their decision; nor did the fear of falling
into Anarchy and Confusion yet affect you; nor do I believe you would have
thought on those two Arguments to this day, had you not been to Preach before
the House of Commons, which never did, nor ever will like your Doctrine of
Provdience: But you were to say something which you thought would please them,
and many of them smiled to hear you contradict your self to flatter them, and
despised you for it; and it since came to be a dispute among your Readers,
whether in that Sermon you flattered the Honorable House, or their Majesty's
most.

3. Another Reason why you chose the Hypothesis of Providential Right, was for
the sake of Passive Obedience, which upon that Hypothesis is so cleverly
conveyed, without any contradiction to your Case of Non-Resistance, from the
Legal to the Providential King. This secret I had from one to whom you spoke
freely on that Subject, about the time you were writing your Case of
Allegiance; but in this Sermon, because a great part of the House love not the
Doctrine of Non-resistance, you have betrayed that also, in saying, P. 6.
That you would not dispute the lawfulness of Resisting the King's Authority,
whether it were lawful for the Parliament to take Arms against the King; and
by supposing in the next Paragraph, That it was lawful in a limited Monarchy:
But is this the way of arguing against Resistance, which not long ago was such
a damnable sin, especially on the 30th of January? I protest to you, Dr. should
I hear you speak at this tender rate from the Pulpit against Adultery, I should
think you had a design upon some Ladies in the Congregation, and that you
intended they should understand by you that you thought it no sin. Formerly on
the 30th of January, Resistance was a most damnable sin, and the Doctrine of it
Popish, Diabolical Doctrine, and the sin of the day was the Murder of a King;
but now it seems, Dr. you will not dispute the lawfulness of resisting the
King, it may be lawful for any thing you know to the contrary, even on the
30th of January; the sin of which day now it seems, P. 19.
lies in the Murder of a Good King, who kept the Laws, and was a Zealous Patron
of the Church of England; of a King of such Virtues, as are rarely found in
meaner Persons; nay, which would have adorned an Hermet's Cell: But had he been
a King that had broken the Laws, and stretched his Prerogative to set up an
Ecclesiastical Commission against the Church of England, then the killing of
him had been no Murder, at least no such barbarous Murder: But, Dr. at this
rate of Preaching on the 30th of January, Kings and Queens had need take care
of themselves; for I do not see but they are upon their Behavior, Quam diu
been se gesserint, and do not break the Laws; but if they do so, let them do it
at their peril: xxix p. 21.
For every irregularity in their motions is soon felt, and causes very fatal
Convulsions in the State; or as a much better Subject said by way of Apology
for Charles I. There is no time past, Judge Jenkins in his Works, p. 28.
present, nor will there be time to come, so long as Men manage the Laws, but
the Laws will be broken more or less. -- So, Dr. in your Temple-Sermon to
exhort us to pray for Kings, you tell us, That it is very difficult to govern a
Family, xxix. p. 24, 25, 26.
and that Princes are liable to mistakes like other Men, and that they are
exposed to misinformations by Court-Flatterers, and subject to greater
Temptations than other Men: But, Dr. If it be lawful to take up Arms against
the King in a limited Monarchy, which you were contented to suppose before the
House, and others of your Brethren plainly assert; then God help Kings of such
Monarchies, xxx. p. 23.
especially where the Springs and Fountains of Government are poisoned, and
where the Nation is already divided into Parties, both in Church and State:
Such Kings, be they by Providence only, or Law and Providence together, it
matters not, they had need look to their hits, when their best pretended
Friends are willing to suppose it is lawful to take up Arms against them. All
your Apologies and Panegyricks upon their Majesty's, and Exhortations to pray
for them, can never make them amends for such a supposition; and they must
indeed stand in need of more, and better Prayers than yours, if they have no
better a Title to the Crown than that of Possession, which you have found out
for them; and that too no longer than they keep the Laws.

4. These, Dr. to use your own Language, are very loose Notions of Government
and Obedience, and dangerous at such a time as this, when so many Malcontents
in both Kingdoms complain of the breach of Laws. See h.
If you will go to Scotland, you shall hear two sort of discontented Men
clamor loudly against the Government, the Jacobite Episcoparians, and the
Presbyterians; the latter are so impudent, as to charge King William down right
with the breach of the Original Contract; and the former complain of torturing
Strangers against Law and the Articles of Government; of exercising illegal and
unheard of Severities upon the complying Clergy, worse than Dragooning; of
abolishing Episcopacy, and thereby altering the Constitution of the Government;
and of the Murder and Massacre of a Lord and his Clan in cold blood, after
they had laid down their Arms, and submitted to the Government. And you cannot
be ignorant of the Complaints which are made at home, by restless and
disaffected Spirits, of pretended, Illegal, and Arbitrary Commitments of Men
for High Treason; and, not to mention the Reflections which have been made in
and out of Parliament upon Mr. Ashton's Trial, you cannot but hear what a din
this grumbling and disaffected Faction make of excessive Fines, and Bail;
contrary, as they clamor, to our English Liberties, and the Articles of
Government: And they bring one Example, among others, of a poor Boy, about
thirteen years old, who was Arraigned and Tried at the Old Bailey, and condemned
to the Pillory, and after he endured this Discipline and many other cruel
hardships, was Fined at the Court of the Old Bailey above threescore times more
than he and his Parents are worth. Sir, These things considered, you should
have thundered with your old Zeal, and demonstrations against Resistance, as a
damnable sin, and taught Submission and Obedience to their Majesty's upon the
account of their Office and Character, and not purely upon the account of their
Virtues, as you used to do in former Sermons: And let me tell you, Dr. that the
most effectual way of serving their Majesty's in the Pulpit, and especially on
the 30th of January, is to Preach up the unconditional Duty of Subjects to
Kings as Kings, xxx. p. 23.
whether they be good or bad. This was the Strict Loyalty and Obedience, which
you tell us was so earnestly pressed on the Consciences of Men before the
Revolution, and made the People so passive in it: But by your favor Dr. not so
passive; for, not to put you in mind of the vast numbers in the West and the
North, Mrs. Sherlock her self, sent in a Man and Horse to the assistance of the
Prince of Orange, and whether it was with your Connivance or Approbation, God
and your own Conscience can best tell.

But however that was, this is certain, that it is most for the Interest of
Princes, as well as most becoming Divines, to set the King as a King and not as
an Hero before the People; and to convince their Consciences of the inviolable
Duty which results from their relation to him as Subjects, independent of his
moral Qualities; but the other way of Preaching which you have taken up, serves
only to beget a precarious and doubtful sense of Duty in the People, who, as
your Sermon before the House shows, can soon be made to have the worst Opinion
of the best of Kings.

5. The Sandersons and Hammonds of former times, who guarded the Pulpit from
all suspicion of Flattery, would never have Preached so much in commendation of
their Royal Masters, as you have Preached in the praise of their Majesty's
before their Faces, without any regard to their Modesty, which is undoubtedly
as great as any of their other Virtues. But since you took the Oath, it has
been a great part of your Study and Employment to write Panegyricks on them,
and Satyrs against their Father, whereof the true reason was long since
observed upon another occasion by Aeneus Sylvius, which is this; That the
Providential King in Possession has Bishoprics and Deanries at his disposal,
but the Legal King out of Possession has nothing to bestow.

6. There is yet another passage in your Sermon before the House, which I beg
you to reflect upon, it is in the tenth page, where you say, that it is an
amazing Providence, that God should expose the greatest Example of Piety and
Virtue that had sat upon the English Throne, to such Indignities and
Sufferings. Indeed, Sir, according to your new Doctrine, which denies the
distinction betwixt God's permission and appointment; a Man may be overwhelmed
with amazement to think that God should so expose him; but it is no such matter
of amazement to a Master in Israel to think he should suffer, or permit them to
be so exposed, according to that excellent Doctrine which you formerly taught
in a Sermon entitled, Some seasonable Reflections on the late Plot. There you
tell us in the 11. page, That although God does many times permit things to be
done, (or else no Man could ever be guilty of any sin) yet his forbidding it,
is an argument he does not approve of it, and no Man can reasonably expect
success in Plotting against his Prince, but he who certainly knows, that God
for some wise ends, and hidden reasons will suffer such a villainy to take
effect, which no Man can know without a Revelation. You Printed this Sermon
since you published your Case of Non-resistance, by which you truly proved by
this distinction, that Athaliah and Nuncle Cromwell were not the Ordinance of
God; and unless you fly to this distinction again, you will never get out of
your amazement; but if you retreat to the Sanctuary of this old distinction,
you will be able to unfold the Mystery of Providence, and solve the
difficulties of it in such hard cases as that of the Royal Martyr, where God
for wise Reasons of his own, does only suffer Rebels and Regicides to succeed
in their wicked designs, but he does not approve of what they do, nor declare
by the events of his Providence, that he orders, appoints, or authorizes whot
is done by them. Were that so indeed, as you teach in your Case of Allegiance,
and suppose to be true in your Temple Sermon, a Man might well be amazed, and
perplexed into a Labyrinth of difficulties and absurdities, and, to rid his
mind of them, be tempted rather to think there was no God: But this distinction
removes all perplexities, and sets the mind at ease and freedom: And, Dr. I
appeal to your own Conscience, if it does not often obtrude it self upon your
thoughts, since you disclaimed it; and whether your Understanding, so perplexed
with amazing Providence, is not often ready to embrace it whether you will or
no? Indeed it overthrows the whole Fabric of your Allegiance to their
Majesty's upon the Providential Hypothesis; but your learned Adversaries have
made it good against you, e. from p. 5. to p. 15. b. from p. 32. to p. 39. c.
chapter p. 6. d. from p. 62. to p. 82.
and before you Preach up the Divine Right of Providence again, read the places
in them cited in the Margent, and when you have read them, lay your Hand on
your Heart, if it be not hardened, and repent for having revived an old
repudiated Doctrine, which will prove Antichrist to reign by God's Authority,
and that he is the Auhor of all Successful Wickednesses in the World.

7. When I first began to put Pen to Paper, I did not intend to dwell so long
upon your Sermon before the House, but there are so many loose passages in it,
and so obnoxious to some among our selves, that I cannot but take notice of
them, and show you how they expose you for them. In the justification of the
Prince of Orange's Undertaking, you tell us, That he was no Subject of England:
P. 19.
To which they reply, that you knew this before you took the Oath, and used to
say, that the Prince, though he was not the King's Subject, yet ye was his
Enemy, and that we ought to have aided the King against him as such: And
whereas you tell us, that he was an Independent Prince, they observe, that
according to your Principle of Possession he was no Prince at all, but that the
French King had been long Prince of Orange by a Providential Right. As for what
you say of his Relation to the Crown, and securing the Succession; they tell
you, to expose your weak way of arguing, that Absalom was related to the Crown
of David, that the Crown has suffered much by its Relations, and that the Law
is the best security for the Succession. And then as for the Reflection you
make upon the Greatest Sufferers, who you tell us were well satisfied with the
Prince's undertaking, and could not be persuaded to declare their Abhorrence of
it. They say, if that were true, it did not become you to expose them for it,
who were greatly offended at the Bishop of London for the Speech which he made
to his Highness at St. James's, and who told a great Sufferer, to whom you
complained of his Lordship, that you repented of every pleasing thought you had
of the Prince's coming, and begged God's pardon that you among the rest of the
Clergy had not exhorted the people to assist the King against him. You also
went so far in opposing the Prince, as to print an Answer to Dr. Burnet's
Enquiry into the present State of Affairs, which he wrote to facilitate the
Prince's Access to the Crown. You also wrote an Apology for the Non-Swearers,
which you could not new answer, if it were in print; and yet without
considering that you were one of them, and what Decorum you ought, above all
others, to keep in speaking of them, you bring this malicious Reflection over
again in your first Letter concerning the French Invasion: But there will be an
Answer to it, which will sufficiently vindicate them, and show what a Sycophant
you are; and therefore I shall pass it over here. In the 20th page you
endeavor to excuse those who were more active in the Revolution, undoubtedly
to flatter some of the most active Members, who, you say, At that time while
the King continued with us, thought no more than to obtain a free Parliament;
and then you tell us, That the King would not stand Trial, but disbanded his
Army, withdrew his Person, and lest no Authority behind him. To all which, Dr.
I must beg leave to confront what I find in your Answer to Dr. Burnet's
Enquiry. Sometimes his withdrawing his Person and Seals is a giving up the
Government, p. 5. (as if intermission of Government were a total giving up of
Right,) so that he cannot claim it again if he returns; and yet he grants the
case of present danger, and just fear: This ought not to be pressed too far;
but that it is indecent to suppose that Kings can be subject to fear; that is,
we must not suppose them to be Men, for if they are, fear is an humane Passion.
But he had no just cause of fear: I will not dispute that; but suppose he was
afraid without just cause, Does not fear still make the Action involuntary,
and save the forfeiture of the Crown? and if it does, What difference is there
betwixt his first and second withdrawing? For it seems he apprehends there was
more just cause of fear the second time, and therefore will not lay the
Accusation there, but upon his first going; and yet it is a probable Argument,
that he was afraid at first, because Kings do not use to forsake their
Kingdoms without Fear. But what need of pretending the King's going away, if
the subversion of his Government and Laws dissolved the Government? For it
seems he was no King before he went, nor to be looked upon as a King, but a
Destroyer; so that whether he had gone or staid, the thing had been the same:
But if the King can do no wrong, he can never forfeit his Crown by Male
Administration, at least an ipso facto forfeiture was never heard of in Kings;
it is more reasonable to bring him to a Trial, than to Judge, and Condemn, and
Depose him without Hearing, which is thought hard usage for a Subject: But the
mischief is, they know not how to frame the Indictment, where to find Judges,
and his Peers to try him; which is an Argument our Law knows nothing of trying
Kings, because it has made no provision for it.

8. Your observing Readers laugh at your Confidence, in saying, xxx. p. 22.
That the late Revolution has made no Alterations in the Principles of
Government and Obedience: And to use your own words, Some think your
Providential Right a tottering Foundation for the Monarchy that cannot long
support it, and every jot as tottering as that of the Power of the People,
which you explode; because the People, if they get the Supreme Power of the
King, they will plead Providence for it, and keep it, whether they have
naturally a Superior Power over him or no. In page 23. you say, It was a
wonderful Providence, that the generality of Subjects were merely Passive at
the Revolution: But they say, you used to bemoan the Passiveness of them as
sinful, especially in the Clergy; particularly, you were often heard with
great formality, to recite some words of Dr. Patrick concerning the silence of
the Clergy, which you said, went like Daggers to your Heart. It seems, once
upon a time, you prayed the Dr. to consider what a dishonor the Clergy's
taking the Oath would be to our Religion; to which he replied, that if that
were all, the Honor of our Religion was gone in the silence of the Clergy at
the Prince's Invasion, though some of the Clergy were not so silent as that Dr.
imagined; and when another asked you, how you could forbear at that time to
Preach up the Duty of Active Assistence, as some others had done? You answered
with a show of Tears in your Eyes, that they were happy Men, and striking your
Hand upon your Breast, you wished you had done so too. Page 27. You say, There
is no appearance of illegal Usurpations, no oppression of the Subjects just
Rights, nor pretense of Clamor of Persecution for Conscience take; and yet as
some among us observe, according to your own bafled Hypothesis of Right to
Government, their Majesty's Possession of the Throne is not legal, and by
consequence, how rightful soever you pretend to make it in the Eye of
Providence, it is an Usurpation in the Eye of the Law: And then as for
Persecution for Conscience sake, these Men say, That of all Men it least became
you to assert, That there was no pretense to complain of that, who confidently
said, That the late Revolution was the greatest Scheme of Vilany that ever was
contrived, and not long since had such an high Opinion both of their
Consciences and their Cause, and pretended to believe that they were persecuted
not only for Conscience, but Righteousness sake. They say, they are both the
same they were as when you were one of them, and though you have changed the
Names of them; since you changed your Opinion, yet they think that they still
retain their old Nature, and have as much to say for themselves, as you could
say for them then. Then they say, you took it ill to be told by the Writers of
the Times, That it was not Conscience, but Shame, Peevishness, Stubbornness,
and other causes of prejudice, that made the Non-Swearers stand out: And to
remove this scandalous Imputation from your self and your Brethren, you went on
purpose to the Excellent Bp. of Chichester, to put him upon making his
Deathbed Declaration, at which the Government was so offended; but since you
took the Oath, it is no matter of Conscience, or Difficulty, and it is now
dwindled into a Gnat, nay into Nothing, which was a Cammel before. Methinks you
might remember the great difficulty with which many thousands that took the
Oath took it, and call to mind the lower sense in which they took it, only to
live peaceably, and quietly; and how others took it in this sense, only as a
Temporary Oath: And if so many Men's Consciences would not let them take it, but
in such qualified senses, Why should it not be pure Conscience in these Men to
take it in no sense at all? You know the Secret of Dr. Scot, why he refused the
Bishopric of Chester, it was because his Conscience would not let him take the
Oath of Homage to K. W. and Q. M. and if that Oath was an insuperable
difficulty to an honest and well informed Conscience in him, Why should not the
new Oath of Allegiance be so to these Men, who think thar at least they have a
pretense to complain, that they are persecuted and suffe-for Conscience sake?
They say farther, that any Government may persecute by Law, as well as against
it, and that there is little or no difference between being oppressed and
ruined by unjust Laws, or unjustly against Law. Nay, any Persecution is the
greater they say, for having Law to support it; and that Conscience is
Conscience, whether it suffer against Law by a Tyrant, or by Tyrannical Laws. I
remember there is something to this purpose somewhere in your Case of
Resistance; and then as to the Cause for which these Men suffer, no Man, they
say, had a more full Persuasion of the Justice of it, than your self. They say,
you scarce had patience to hear your best Friends argue against it in favor of
the Oath; that you told Mr. Maur, you cold as soon turn Arian, as take it; and
another Gentleman, That you had considered all that had been written, or could
be said for taking of it; and that you were sure if you should take it, you
should never rest till you had gone to the same place where you took it, and
vomit it up again. You told another, you thought if you should take it, you
should be tempted to destroy your self after you took it; and wondered that the
Government should impose an Oath upon Men's Consciences which would make them
hate it for imposing of it; nay, so confident were you then that you suffered
for Righteousness, that you took the Courage to tell your Murmuring Wife, That
she would lose her Reward for Suffering, but you should have yours; and to
another you said with an Accent that impressed the words upon his Memory, Our
Sufferings, if any thing can, will save the Church, and stand upon Record for
it against the Papists in times to come, and help to atone the displeasure of
God. Nay, you then thought the Justice of your Cause so plain, and the other so
indefensible, that laying one of your Hands upon the other, you said unto a
Person of Quality, These Hands should restore King James, but that my Wife has
tied them up from Writing. And another of your common sayings was, We have a
very good Cause, but lose it for want of a Press. A Man famous for such sayings
concerning the Cause, when you were a Sufferer for it, should have more
Discretion, if not more Respect for his old Brethren, than to go about to rob
them of the Glory of their Sufferings: The Testimony of a good Conscience is
all they have left to support them under their Calamity; and it is very hard to
make the World believe they have no pretense to that; and that there are no
Grievances, P. 23.
unless Monarchy and the Church of England are remaining Grievances. This was
bravely said by Ecebolius for Fifteen Hundred Pounds a Year; but whether there
are Grievances or no Grievances, Suffering for Conscience or no such
Sufferings, these Men are persuaded that it is not only for the Church, but for
the Monarchy and Royal Family that they suffer; and that neither that nor these
can long subsist, nor any lasting Peace or true Loyalty be established among
us, but upon the Moral and Political Principles, for which they are persuaded
they witness a good Confession before God and Men. As for your Principles, they
think them, of all other, the most vile and selfish, and to be detested of all
Sovereign States and Princes, that have any better Title than Possession: For
your Principles allow Subjects, though tied with never so many Oaths, to turn
to an Usurper as fast as he gains Power, before he is settled in the Throne;
and after he is settled in it, by pure force they oblige them to transfer their
whole Allegiance to him; and therefore you deceived her Majesty, when in the
Dedication of your Book of the Last Judgment, you professed to her with all the
sincerity which the Subject requires, That you were her most faithful Subject
and Servant: For a faithful Subject will adhere to his Sovereign in times of
Adversity as well as Prosperity, and serve him when he is out, as well as when
he is in the Throne, with Life, Limb, and Terrene Honor: But your Allegiance
by your Principles, is a Flattering, Shifting, and Time-serving Allegiance,
which you would carry with your Prayers from her Majesty to her greatest
Enemies, and begin to Flatter, and Serve them from the first moment you came
under their Power. Such Faithful, and Obedient Subjects as you, are like to
Summer Flies; you will make a great show and buz for your King in fair Weather,
when the Sun shines, but in Storms and Tempests you will hide your Heads; in
the long Nightime, or Winter of Adversity you will say, If he cannot defend
himself, let him go; and if he go, as many brave Kings have been forced to do,
why then, Doctor, you are not Men of stupid and slavish Loyalty to your old
Master; but like the Gnat in the Fable, you will fly to Court in Swarms, to
caress your new dear Providential Master, and transfer your Allegiance to him
for fear of being Crushed.

9. From your Sermon before the House I beg leave, good Doctor, to make some
Reflections upon your Temple-Church Sermon, in which, as in your Fast-Sermon
before the Queen, you speak the Truth, but not the whole Truth on the Subject
of Prayer, especially of public Prayer, P. 8, 9.
by the Bishop and Ministers, and whole Congregation. You tell us, That P. 9.
Prayers are the most Noble Exercise of Charity, and that they are most
acceptable to God, because they are offered up in the Spirit of Charity. And in
your Fast Sermon you tell us, That P. 26, 27.
Faith and Prayer are more powerful than Arms, and that fervent and importunate
Prayers are the most sure way to Conquer our Enemies, and to prevail with God
for a Blessing upon our Arms. Now, Doctor, all this, as Some observe, was said
a thousand times in the great Rebellion, when the Preachers of the Times made
God a Party to their Wickedness, and ascribed all their Success to Prayer. They
cited Gideon, and Barach, and Samson, and Hezekiah, as you f s p. 26, 27.
do: But then after the Restoration, our Church Divines used to observe, that
Justice, as well as Charity, was necessary to make Prayers acceptable to God,
and that the Fanatic Preachers, though they talked so much of Prayer, and of
Faith, and Charity, and Fervency in Prayer, and produced the Worthies of
Scripture for Examples to show the power of Prayer; yet they never said one
word of Justice, without which Faith in Prayer is but a false Enthusiastical
Persuasion, Fervency Enthusiastical Heat, all pretenses to Charity Hypocrisy:
And Prayers themselves, though never so frequent, or long, but an Abomination to
the Lord. Dr. Patrick is very large on this Subject in his Jewish Hypocrisy,
which I commend to all Men's reading for his sake. In that Discourse he shows
at large how the Spirit of Pharisaisme was long regnant in the Jewish Church,
before the time of the Pharisees, and that it consisted in a Great, but
Hypocritical Zeal for Fasting and Praying, and all Religious Duties; and under
that Cloak to commit Injustice, Rapine, and Oppression, as our Lord observed of
the Pharisees, That they devoured Widows Houses, and for a pretense made long
Prayers. To this purpose our Clergy used generally to preach on Public Fasts
and Thanksgivings; and truly there is so much Hypocrisy regnant in the World,
that they did well in doing so; but now of late, as if Astraea were returned
from Heaven, and the Golden Age restored, we have either nothing, or very
little said of Justice upon Public Fasts and Thanksgivings; of Justice, the
most Difficult as well as Divine Virtue, without which there is no Charity, nor
no acceptance of Prayers, and Intercession for Kings and Kingdoms at the Throne
of Grace. You tell us in your Fast Sermon, That God never delivered the Jews
into the Hands of their Enemies, but when they were guilty of Idolatry: But if
you read the Jewish Hypocrisy, you will find that Injustice, as well as
Idolatry, was a social cause of God's Judgments, and that their Prophets
thundered against that, as much as against this. I am very sensible, Doctor,
that there is not so much Idolatry among us, as there was among the Jews; but
as for Injustice in all its kinds and degrees, it is a reigning sin among us,
and calls for plain and home Reproofs from the Pulpit, as much as any other
sin. Cry aloud and spare not, is now as much as ever the incumbent Duty of the
Clergy. They ought in their Solemn Meetings more especially to tell the People
of their Sin, and Israel of their Transgressions, because they have filled the
Land with Violence, as the Prophet speaks, their Masters House with Violence
and Deceit. Our Fasts and Thanksgivings, Doctor, will stand us in no stead,
'till we begin our Reformation here. You know what is written, Isaiah Chap. 1.
better than I do: O, Doctor, let the Prophet there become your Example on the
Solemn Assemblies! You used to value your self for your singular boldness in
rebuking Vice, and now is the time to exercise that Talent, now is the needful
time to preach up Justice, Judgment, and Righteousness, without respect of
persons; to set your Face like Flint against our Jewish Christians, and tell
them plainly on our Fasts and Thanksgivings, that the best way of Praying, is
to loose the bands of Wickedness, and to let the Oppressed go free. Oh that you
had the Spirit and Tongue of St. John Chrysostom, or the Spirit of Hugh
Latimer, though without John's Eloquence, to tell them plainly what is Right
and Wrong; to tell them as plainly as Tongue is able to express it; as plainly
as John the Baptist told Herod, and in the hearing of the Herodians, That it
was not lawful for him to have his Brother Philip's Wife. Oh, Doctor, when I
can hear you preach with this freedom, against the Hypocrisy of the Times, as
John did against Herod, or our Savior against the Pharisees, among whom there
were so many Herodians; then I will have as high an Opinion of the Prayers of
Bishops and Priests, as you can desire, and think that they will prevail for a
Blessing upon our Arms; but till I can hear them preach at this rate, or
something near it, I shall be apt to fear that the God of Righteousness will
have no delight in their Prayers, because his Eyes are over the Righteous, and
his Ears are open to their Prayers, Liars and Robbers, and Thieves, and
Oppressors, how Great and Sanctimonious soever, may pray unto God, and the most
cunning of them, like the Pharisees, may be more Zealous for Solemnities, and
make a better Figure than their Neighbors in the House of Prayer; but their
most splendid Sacrifices are but Dogs flesh: The Righteous God, though he has
the patience to hear them, he abhors them, and returns their most fervent
Prayers changed into Curses upon their own Heads. Nay, Sir, the most righteous
persons, in your Language, the Patron Saints and Tutelar Angels of the World,
though they pray with never so much Faith and Fervency, and in never so large
and extensive Charity; yet they pray to no purpose, when by mistake they pray
for the success of an unjust Cause or Undertaking, believing of it to be just.
In such a Case the Righteous God, though he may accept their good intentions,
and reward their Faith and Charity; yet he will not hear their mistaken
Prayers. It is against his Essential Justice which is one of his Moral
Attributes, to hear Unrighteous and Immoral Prayers. He may indeed order Events
according to good Men's Unrighteous Desires, but that is for Wise Reasons of
his own, and not upon the account of their Desires, as now in Flanders he has,
giving the French King such amazing Successes; but if he be such a Tyrant as
you describe him to be, then his Successes are not to be ascribed to his good
Subjects Prayers, but to the secret Reasons of Divine Wisdom, which time will
Repeal. So the Herodians, as Scaliger says, Prayed for the Prosperity of
Herod, and kept his Birthday: But, Doctor, neither you nor I believe, that the
Tyrant throve ever the better for a pack of sneaking Court-Rabbies: And so Some
alive, in great Places, prayed for the Prosperity of Cromwell; but it is not
reasonable to believe, that God placed that Villain in the Throne, or kept him
five years in it, at the instance of their unrighteous Prayers, but to make him
a scourge to the Nation for our Sins.

10. I now pass with you from your general Discourse of Prayer to your
particular Directions of praying for Kings, where, to your cost, you have
fallen upon Some among our Selves, for asserting, that by Kings the Apostle
meant only lawful and rightful Kings; and directs only to pray for Kings that
have the Legal Right. In your Fast Sermon, you call them P. 19
Deluded Protestants; and it is a favor you will allow them to be Protestants:
For one of the irregular Bishops lately told his Clergy, That they were acted
by the Jesuits; but in this you point at them by the gentle Innuendo of Some,
and these Men. Some such indeed there are among us, whom in your first Letter
concerning the French Invasion, you tax of Stupid and Slavish Loyalty, and Some
of these Men have baffled you, as much as ever Man was baffled, and made your
Friends blush for you; and wish (as I believe you your self have often done)
that you had never meddled with the Controversy: But, Sir, Though you are
pleased to call them Men, (yet in effect) you make them Monsters, and Madmen,
whose P. 20.
Reasonings contradict the general Sense, and Practice of Mankind in all
Revolutions; and boldly assert with an Air of Confidence peculiar to Dr.
Sherlock, P. 20.
That the Generality of Mankind, and even the most Sober and Considering Men
reject them, as having no solid Foundation in Reason and Nature. Whether that
be so or no, we shall see anon; but at present let us enquire whether their
Opinion contradicts the general sense and practice of Mankind, and even of the
most sober and considering Men; if it do, the general consent of Mankind, or of
the most sober and considering Men, is a great presumption against them; but if
it do not, then give me leave to tell you, that you are not a Man of Stupid and
Slavish, Modesty, but that your Impudence is a Scandal to the Pulpit, and that
you have justly provoked the Templers to say of you, as a Gentleman said to one
of your Sworn Brethren, that they will never again believe a Parson for your
sake. One of your learned Antagonists has observed, b. p. 48.
That you acknowledge St. Chrysostom to be of their Opinion, and he has cited
St. Basil against you for saying expressly, That the Higher Powers mentioned by
the Apostle, were such as attain to the Government by Humane Laws. I hope,
Doctor, you will grant, that these two Fathers were sober, and considering Men,
who understood the general sense of Mankind; and according to this sense, in
which they understood the Apostle, that Author goes on to show that it was the
constant practice of the Primitive Christians to side with that Emperor who had
the Legal Title: And to their practice I will add the Testimony of the Emperor
Justinian, in his Letters to Procop. Caes. de Bello Vandalico, l. 1. c. 7, 8.
Gelimer, King de Facto of the Kingdom of the Vandals in Africa, who deposed
his Cousin Hildericus, between whom and Justinian there was always great
Friendship: But to make you understand the Emperor's Letter to this Usurper the
better, I must acquaint you, Doctor, that Gizericus, the Founder of that
Monarchy, who reigned Thirty Nine years, settled the Succession in his
Posterity upon the Male Descendents according to Seniority; so that he should
always come to the Crown, who was the Eldest among them; and accordingly the
Crown had peaceably descended for four Successions to Hildericus, whom Gelimer
deposed, and shut up in Prison with his Brother's two Sons, who were faithful
to their Uncle. As soon as Justinian heard of it, he wrote to him to this
effect; Thou have acted, Gelimer, against Right and Duty, and contrary to the
Testament of Gizericus, in Imprisoning an Old Man, and thy Kinsman, and the
King of the Vandals, if the Establishment of Gizericus be valid, and deposing
him by force from the Government, to which thou might have lawfully
succeeded. Do not persit in thy Wickedness, nor prefer the Name of a Tyrant
before the Title of a King, which a little time would give thee; but let the
Old Man, who cannot live long, enjoy the Royal Power and Dignity, and do thou
Administer under him, and be content to wait a little while, till thou may
take upon thee the Title of King, acording to the Law of Gizericus, by doing
this thou will please God, and oblige me. This Letter having no effect upon the
Usurper, he wrote again to this purpose. I wrote my former Letter to thee,
hoping thou would not persist to act contrary to my Advice; but since thou
art resolved to keep Possession of the Kingdom, as thou have acquired it, take
what will follow thereupon; only send unto us Hildericus, and Hoemer, whose
Eyes thou have put out, with his Brother Evagees, that they may receive such
Consolation from us, the one for the loss of his Kingdom, and the other for the
loss of his sight, as Men in their Condition are capable of. It is in your
power to do this, if you do it quickly; otherwise the confidence they have in
Us, will oblige Us speedily to help them; nor will it be any infraction of the
Peace which our Predecessors made with Gizericus, for I shall not make War with
one that is his Successor, but avenge the injuries thou have done. But Gelimer
was too Ambitious to make restitution, and therefore Justinian sent his great
General Balsarius to make War upon him in behalf of Hildericus, the lawful
King; but the first thing that Gelimer did after the Landing of Belisarius, was
to Murder Hildericus; but God avenged his blood upon the Usurper, whom
Belisarius after some years War brought Captive to Constantinople, where he
cried out on the way as he was led to the Emperor, Vanity of Vanities, all is
Vanity.

To this Testimony of a Christian Emperor, I shall add another of a famous
Heathen Prince, Lycurgus King of Sparta, who though he came lawfully to the
Possession of the Crown, yet refused to keep it longer than he was allowed by
Law, as appears by the following Story, which you may find in his Life written
by Plutarch in the following words. This Confusion and Disorder continued a
long time in Sparta, which occasioned the death of the King the Father of
Lycurgus, for as he was endeavoring to quell a Riot, in which the Parties were
a fighting, he was stabbed with a Cook's Knife, and left the Kingdom to his
Eldest Son Polydectes; but he too dying soon after, the Right of Succession, as
all Men judged, rested in Lycurgus, and he Reigned until it was perceived,
that the Queen his Sister in Law was with Child: But as soon as this appeared,
he declared, that the Kingdom belonged to her Issue, if it proved a Male, and
that he would administer the Government only as his Guardian and Regent. Soon
after a private offer was made him by the Queen, that she would make her self
miscarry, upon condition he would Marry her, when he was sure of the Crown. He
hated the Woman for this wicked Proposal, yet wisely smothering his resentment,
he did not speak astainst it, but seemed to approve and accept it; but diswaded
her earnestly from making her self miscarry, because it might endanger her
Health, or her Life; assuring her, that himself would take care that the Child,
as soon as it was born, should be taken out of the way. Thus having drawn on
the Queen to the time of her Labor, as soon as he heard she was in Travail, he
sent some to be present and observe the Birth, with order that if it were a
Girl, they should deliver it to the Women, but if a Boy, they should bring it
to him, whatsoever he he happened to be a doing. It happened that the Queen was
delivered of a Boy while he was at Supper with the principal Magistrates, and
his Servants brought the Boy to him as he was at Table; and he taking him into
his Arms, said to those about him, Behold, my Lords of Sparta, here is your
King; and having said this, he laid him down upon the Chair of State, and named
him Charilaus; that is, The Joy of the People, because they were so much
transported with Joy at the Birth of the young Prince, and with Admiration at
the Noble Mind and Justice of Lycurgus; who I fear, Doctor, will rise up in
Judgment against you, and condemn you and your unrighteous Doctrine: For though
he had Providence on his side, as much as ever Prince had; yet he did not think
the Providence of the Gods could give him a Right against the Laws of Nature
and Sparta: And therefore he became a Subject of a Sovereign, and of a King a
Regent; because he could not justly wear a Crown, which by the Law of his
Country became another's, and ceased to be his. And to pass over other
Kingdoms, I will proceed to show that there have been many Wise and Brave Men
of that Opinion in our own: I will begin with the Reign of Stephen, who as
Hoveden says, Invaded the Crown of England like a Tempest, so that all the
Nation was forced to submit to him, as it were in the twinkling of an Eye. He
was, Doctor, as you speak, Recognized for King by the States of the Realm, and
the great Body of the Nation submitted to him, and took the Oath of Allegiance
to him, who himself had taken that Oath to Queen Maud, and Henry her Son; and
yet though he had all the Ensigns of Majesty by Coronation, and was in full
Possession of the Throne, which you call a thorough Settlement; there were many
Gallant Men, who would not acquiess in the Public Judgment of the Nation,
because it was incompetent, and erroneous, but after some time opposed him to
their utmost as an Usurper, although he had Providence on his side. Among these
was Dicerem, nisi adulatio videretur, non imparem fuiss^ Julio Caesari.
Robertus Christiana Pietate insignis. Anno 1139.
Robert, Earl of Gloucester, half Brother to Queen Maud, who (as Malmsbury
says) was the most Learned, Pious, and Valiant Man of his Age. Indeed Robert
with a relucting Conscience, had done Homage conditionally to Stephen, but
though he did it upon condition, he soon recovered himself, and repented of it
and took care Robertus quasi positus in specula Rerum providebat exitum, and ne
de juramento quod fecerat sorori erga Deum and Homines perfidiae notaretur
sedulo cagitabat. Anno 1137.
to act nothing contrary to his Allegiance to Maud; and with the first safe
opportunity Homagio etiam abdicato rationem praeserens, quam injuste id
fecerat, quia and Rex illicite ad Regnum aspiraverat. -- Ipsemet etiam contra
Legem egecisset, qui post Sacramentum quod sorori dedirat, alteri cuilibet, ea
vivente, se manus dare non trubuisset.
sent Messengers to Stephen to tell him, That he renounced his unrigteous Oath
of Homage to him, and that he had acted contrary to Law, in that he was not
ashamed to Swear Homage to any Mortal while his Sister was alive. And
afterward, as I shall show, he could never be brought to turn Subject to
Stephen in the greatest extremity, when they threatened to take away his Life if
he would not. The Historians, who I believe were sober Men, represent Stephen
as a Quamvis ipse jurasset juramentum fidelitatis Imperatrici, and Henrico
filio suo, tamen quasi Tempestas invasit Diadema Regni Angliae. Qui si legitime
Regnum fuisset ingressus -- Hoveden. Qui Rex illicite ad Regnum aspicaverat, --
Malmsbury. Sed dum externam vim propulsat, Domestica petitur, jam manifest Deo
Perjurii poenas ob eo expectente. Polyd. Virg.
Perjured Usurper, and complain of the Perjury of the Times, and say, that it
brought down the Judgment of God upon the Land, Quibus, De propitio, salubriter
actis Rex Angliam and Angliae Pacem recepit, Annis enim jam plarimis sere nudo
Regis nomine insignis tunc recipere vijus est hujus rem nominis, quia tunc
primo, purgata invasionis Tyrannica Macula Legitimi Principis Justitiam inducit.
Nubrigensis says, that he was but a Nominal King till the Pacification or
Agreement made with Henry, and that it was that which made him a Real, Lawful,
and Rightful King. Nay, the Historians observe in what a signal manner the
Judgment of God fell upon the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of
Salisbury, who were the two first that swore Allegiance to him, the former not
surviving a year to an end, and the latter being made a Prisoner by him, was
miserably vexed by him till he died of Grief. Malmsbury tells us, That God made
him an example to Men, not to trust in uncertain Riches, which, says he, Some
Men coveting after, concerning Faith have made Shipwreck. Anno 1138.
He also tells us, that Robert Earl of Gloucester consulted many Religious Men,
to know their Opinion, if he might quit his Allegiance to his Sister: And that
they answered, He could neither live in this World with Honor, nor in
Everlasting Happiness in the World to come, if he acted contrary to the Oath
which he had taken to her. I suppose, Doctor, the Religious Men, whom that
Learned and Wise Prince consulted, as the Guides of his Conscience, were as
good Men and Casuists as that Age afforded; and they being dead, yet speak, and
give Evidence against you, for asserting that the Opinion and Reasonings of
Some among our selves, is against the general sense of Mankind. If Mr. Fuller
in his Church History represents the matter right, all the Arguments which you
and your Brethren used for taking the new Oath of Allegiance, were then used to
justify Swearing Allegiance to Stephen, but Earl Robert, to use your words,
felt not the force of them, he had nothing left him but a Stupid and Slavish
Allegiance to Maud; for when he was promised to be made as great as Stephen,
the Throne only excepted, if he would become his Subject; he made this Answer,
which ( Anno 1143. Non sum mei (inquit) sed alleni juris --
says the Historian) I desire Posterity may know and admire; I am not at my
own disposal, but under the Right of another; but when I shall have power over
my self, I shall do what the reason of the Case shall direct. After this
Answer, Doctor, which he made in defense of his Allegiance to a Queen that
never was Crowned; the Lords, who brought the Message from Stephen to him,
began to threaten him with Imprisonment and Death: And what reply do you think
he made to that? Why, Slave of Allegiance as he was to Maud, he told them with
a serene Countenance, That he feared nothing less. After this, again Stephen
with the Great Lords came in Person to him, but he Ille velut Pelagi rupes
immota.
stood like a Rock against the Waves, protesting to them, that he had espoused
his Sisters Cause, neither out of the prospect of any Worldly advantage, nor
out of hatred to the King, but purely out of Conscience, in consideration of
his Duty and Oath, which the Pope had assured him did tie him to her Obedience.
Thus, Doctor, we see, that God in the most corrupt times, reserves some to bear
witness to Truth, as the Prophet says, Except the Lord of Hosts had left us a
very small remnant, we should have been as Sodom, and like unto Gomorrah. The
unnatural Usurpation of Edward III. was so short before his Father's death,
that there was not time enough for those who abhorred it to signalize their
detestation of it. But however, Doctor, there were Non deerant qui ejus vicem
dolentes summae Principes perfidiae, ac Edoardum Regem ac Isabellam impietatis
criminis notarent -- Aliqui Optimates, Auctore Edmundo Cantii Comite, secreta
passim jam consilia and Sermones delibera^ndo Edoardo una conserre ceperunt.
Polyd. Virg. Ang. Hist. lib. 18.
Some who lamented the injuries that Edward II. had suffered, and were not
afraid openly to reproach his Queen and Son of Impiety and Injustice. Edmund
the Great Earl of Kent, with some other persons, began to Conspire against
them: Which Q. Isabel, (who deserves the name of Jesabel) perceiving, privately
encouraged the Keepers of her Husband to murder him, but his Son coming to
Maturity of Understanding, avenged his blood on Mortimer, his Mother's Minion,
and his Accomplices, whom the Lords of Parliament, with his assent, adjudged
and condemned to be executed as Traitors, for murdering the King after he was
deposed. The Queen her self also had like to have been questioned, and in the
Roll 4 Edw. III. which gives an account of this matter, he is styled by all the
Lords, and the young King himself, their King and Liege Lord. And in the 21 R.
II. N. 64, 65. the Revocation of the Act for the two Spencers Restitution in
the Parliament of 1 Edward III. was repealed, because made at such a time by
King Edw. III. as his Father, being very King, was Living and Imprisoned. These
two Acts of Parliament, Doctor, do not at all agree with your Reasonings for
the Providential King; but they agree most exactly with the Reasonings of Some
Men, which you say, contradicts the general sense of Mankind. For as Mr. Pryn
well observes, they show that Edw. II. was King de jure, or King in the Eye of
the Law, as much after his Deposition as before it; and by consequence that his
Deposition by the Estates, who had no Authority to Depose him, was a void Act;
and if he was very King when he was in Prison, and his Regnant Son's King, and
Liege Lord at the time of his murder, as the aforesaid Acts declare him; then,
Doctor, I fear it will follow that a pure Providential K. in Possession, is no
King at all.

11. But from this Usurpation let us pass to that of Henry IV. who was set up
by Providence, and the Estates of the Realm, who took upon them to depose
Richard II. and place Henry in his Throne. But Henry being conscious to himself
that he wanted Legal Right, though he had all the Right that Providence could
give him; yet not daring to trust to such an airy Tite, nor his false pretenses
of being the right Heir, caused Richard to be murdered; but between his
Deposition and Murder, Thomas Merks Bishop of Carlisle, a Brave and Godly
Prelate, preferring his Duty before his Safety, took the courage to make a
Speech in Parliament, against the Validity of Richard's Deposition, and the
Justice of Henry's Election; and if you please, Doctor, to read this Speech as
it is at large in our Historians, you will find, in spite of all your
prejudice, that he was a very Wise and Considering Man, and entirely of these
Men's Opinion, and produced those Reasons for it which you say, Contradict the
general sense of Mankind in all Revolutions. The first part of his Speech is to
prove, that a King may not be deposed by his Subjects for any imputation of
negligence and Tyranny; and to make this out clearly, he brings an ugly
Arbitrary distinction betwixt Kings in a Popular or Consular State, which
really have not Regal Rights, but are subject to a Superior Power; and Kings in
whom the Sovereign Majesty is, as it formerly was in the Kingdoms of Israel,
and Judea, etc. and now is in the Kingdoms of England, Spain, France, and
Scotland, etc. in which the Sovereignty, or Supreme Authority is in the King.
After this distinction (which Some among us now use) he asserts, that in such
Kingdoms where the Sovereignty is by Law in the King, although the Prince for
his Vices be unprofitable to his Subjects, yea hurtful, yea intolerable; yet
they cannot lawfully harm his Person, or hazard his Power by Judgment, or by
Force; because neither one, nor all the Magistrates have any Authority over him
from whom all Authority is derived, and whose only presence does silence and
suspend all inferior Jurisdictions and Power; and as for force, says he, what
Subject can attempt, assist, or counsel, or conceal Violence against his
Prince, and not incurr the high and heinous Crime of Treason? Then he proceeds
to prove this as you do in your Case of Non-resistance, from Examples of Saul
and Ahab, in the Old Testament, and many Texts of Scripture. Then he proceeds
to answer the great Objection thus: Does the King enjoin Actions contrary to
the Law of God? We must neither wholly Obey, nor violently Resist, but with a
constant courage submit our selves to all manner of Punishment, and show our
subjection by enduring, and not performing. -- Oh how shall the World be
pestered with Tyrants, if Subjects may Rebel upon every pretense of Tyranny?
How many good Princes may be suppressed by those by whom they ought to be
supported? If they Levy a Subsidy or other Taxation, it shall be claimed
Oppression; if they put any to Death for Traitorous attempts against their
Persons, it shall be exclaimed Cruelty; if they do any thing against the lust
and liking of the People, it shall be proclaimed Tyranny. Having showed, as his
words are, that King Richard was deposed without Authority: Then he proceeds to
show that Henry had no Title. First, Not as Heir to Richard, which he
pretended; for then he ought to stay till King Richard was dead; but then if K.
Richard was dead, it was well known there were Descendents from Lionel Duke of
Clarence, whose Offspring had been declared in the High Court of Parliament,
next Successor to the Crown, in case K. Richard should die without Issue.
Secondly, Not by Conquest, because a Subject can have no right of Conquest
against a Sovereign, where the War is Rebellion, and the Victory High Treason.
Nor thirdly, by K. Richard's Resignation, because he made it in Prison where it
was exacted of him by force; and therefore it had no force or validity to bind
him. Nor last of all, by Election, for (says he) we have no Custom that the
People at pleasure should Elect their King, but they are always bound unto him,
who by Right of Blood is Rightful Successor; much less can they make good or
confirm that Title which is before Usurped by violence. Then he says, that the
deposing of Edw. II. (which the Barons produced for an Example to depose
Richard) was no more to be urged, than the Poisoning of K. John, or the
Murdering any other lawful Prince, and that we must live according to Laws, and
not according to Example, and that the Kingdom however then was not taken from
the lawful Successor. Then after saying many other things, he concludes thus;
I have declared my mind concerning this Question in more words than your
Wisdom, yet fewer than the weight of the Cause requires; and boldly conclude,
that we have neither Power nor Policy either to depose King Richard, or to
Elect Duke Henry into his Place; and that K. Richard still remains our
Sovereign Prince, and that it is not lawful for us to give Judgment upon him;
and that the Duke, whom you call King, has more offended against the King and
the Realm, than the King has done against him or us. Thus, Sir, spoke that
Heroic Prelate in the Court of Parliament, and his practice was answerable to
what he spoke: For he chose not the safer, but the juster side, as all good Men
ought to do. He knew while he spoke, that Bonds and Persecutions would attend
him; nevertheless he spoke freely, and after speaking, was committed to Prison,
and after that was crushed with many other brave Men, by the Usurper against
whom they rose up. Afterward about the sixth year of his Reign, Rich. Scroop
A. B. of York, with the L. Maubray Marshal of England, H. Piercy E. of
Northumberland, L. Bardolf, and As I suppose, the Earls of Salisbury,
Huntington, Gloucester, the Lords Clarenden, Roper, with diverse other Knights
and Esquires; and after that the Lord Thomas Piercy Earl of Worcester, and Lord
Henry Piercy, Son and Heir to the Earl of Northumberland.
many others, published an Excommunication and In the first Volume of Fox's
Acts and Monuments in the Reign of H. IV.
Remonstrance, consisting of several Articles, against Henry, which they fixed
upon the doors of Churches and Monasteries to be read of all. It begins thus:

IN THE NAME OF GOD, Amen. Before the Lord Jesus Christ, Judge of the quick and
the dead; We not long since became bound by Oath upon the Sacred Evangelical
Book unto our Sovereign Lord Richard, late King of England, that we as long as
we lived should bear true Allegiance, and Fidelity toward him, and his Heirs
succeeding him in the Kingdom by just Title, Right, and Line according to the
Statutes and custom of this Realm; have here taken unto us certain Articles
subscribed in form following, to be proponed, heard, and tried before the just
Judge, Christ Jesus, and the whole World; but if (which God forbid) by Force,
Fear, or Violence of wicked Persons, we shall be cast in Prison, or by violent
death be prevented, so as in this World we shall not be able to prove the said
Articles as we wish, then we do appeal to the High Celestial Judge, that he
may judge and discern the same in the day of his Supreme Judgment. First, We
depose, say, and except, and intend to prove against Lord Henry Darby, commonly
called King of England, (himself pretending the same, but without all Right and
Title thereunto) and against his Adherents, Fautors, Accomplices, that they have
ever been, are, and will be Traitors, Invaders, and destroyers of God's Church,
and of our Sovereign Lord Richard, late King of England, his Heirs, his
Kingdom, and Commonwealth, as shall hereafter manifestly appear. -- In the
second Article they declare him forsworn, perjured, and excommunicate, for that
he conspired against his Sovereign Lord King Richard. In the fourth they recite
by what wrong, illegal, and false means he exalted himself into the Throne of
the Kingdom; and then describing the miserable State of the Nation, which
followed after his Usurpation, they again pronounce him Perjured and
Excommunicate. In the fifth Article they set forth in what a barbarous and
inhumane manner Henry and his Accomplices imprisoned and murdered K. Richard,
and then cry out, Wherefore O England arise, stand up, and avenge the Cause,
the Death and Injury of thy King and Prince; if thou do not, take this for
certain, that the Righteous God will destroy thee by strange Invasions, and
Foreign Power, and avenge himself on thee for this so horrible an Act. In the
seventh they depose against him for putting to death not only Lords Spiritual,
and other Religious Men, but also diverse of the Lords Temporal there Named; for
which they pronounce him Excommunicate. In the ninth they say, and depose, that
the Realm of England never flourished nor prospered after he Tyrannically took
upon him the Government of it. And in the last they depose and protest for
themselves, and K. Richard and his Heirs, the Clergy, Commonwealth of the whole
Realm, that they intended neither in Word nor Deed, to offend any State of Men
in the Realm, but to prevent the approaching Destruction of it, and beseeching
all Men to favor them and their Designs, whereof the first was, to exalt to
the Kingdom the true and lawful Heir, and him to Crown in Kingly Throne with
the Diadem of England. Upon publishing these Articles, much people resorted to
the Archbishop, but he being circumvented by the Earl of Westmoreland, who
pretended to join with him, dismissed his Forces at his persuasion, upon which
he was immediately made Prisoner, and beheaded at York, with the Earl Marshal,
and diverse York shire Gentlemen and Citizens of York, who had joined with him.
The Earl of Northumberland, and Lord Bardolph escaped, and held out two years
longer before they were crushed by the Usurper; but at last they were both
slain Fighting in the Field against him. You see, Doctor, in this Remonstrance
how the Archbishop, and Lords that joined with him, contrary to the general
sense of Mankind, unking'd this Providential King for want of a Legal Title,
and Remonstrated against him as a Perjured Traitor and Usurper; and when he lay
upon his Deathbed, he himself also began to be of their Opinion, contrary to
the general sense of Mankind, when his guilty Conscience forced him to tell his
Son, That he had no good Title to the Crown; but he, not inferior to his Father
in Ambition, snatched it from his Pillow, and plainly told him, That as he had
got it by the Sword, so by the Sword he would keep it. And in truth, Doctor,
your Title by Providence against Law, is Sword Title, and your Providential
Kings, Sword-Kings; for in all Kingdoms the Sword is King, where their lawful
Prince is not; the Sword or Supreme Force Rules all, and that Supreme Crushing
Force, which by God's permission gets and keeps possession, makes your
Providential Kings.

12. I have hitherto showed you what Opinion many Wise and Considering Men had
of Henry IV. and his Reign for want of Legal Right and Title. And I now proceed
to show the sense that a whole Parliament had of him, and of his Son, and
Grand-Son's Succession, the latter sitting in the Throne. This appears from
Roll. Parl. 39 Henry VI. as it is in Cotton's Abridgement, or rather from the
Record at large, as it is to be seen, as it was lately printed in an Answer, by
a skillful and faithful hand, to The unreasonableness of the new Separation
upon account of the Oaths. This Roll gives an account, how Richard Duke of
York, Father of Edward IV. brought to the Parliament Chamber in writing not a
Petition but a Claim to the Crown, of which Henry had been long fully and
quietly possessed; and his Title, which was only Succession by Birthright,
being fully made appear, it was the Opinion of all the Lords, that it could not
be defeated. That single Title by Proximity of Blood was thought sufficient to
supersede all the patched Titles of Henry, and all that could be said in favor
of him from the Oath of Allegiance which the People had made to him, from
diverse Acts of Parliament, whose Authority was laid against his Title; from the
Entail of the Crown made by the Parliament upon his Father and his Heir; and
lastly from his Grandfather's Claim to the Crown, as right Inheretor from Henry
III. which Richard proved to be false. And here, Doctor, I cannot but observe
unto you, that among all the Pleas which Henry and his Counselors made use of
to defeat Richard's Title, they never thought of your Divine Title from
Providence, being so infatuated as not to attend to the General Sense of
Mankind. Wherefore, Doctor, either your Principles of Government are not the
general Sense of Mankind, or this Providential King, with his Privy Council,
and Great Council in Parliament, were all bewitched, that they could not think
of them to stop the Duke of York's Mouth. He advised with the greatest Divines,
and with the greatest Men both among the Common and Civil Lawyers, and yet not
one of them suggested the Title of Providence, or full Providential Possession;
but had they hit upon it, and urged it, Richard would have answered them as he
did to their Plea taken from their Oaths, (viz.) that God's Commandments, which
prefer Right, and Truth, and Justice, and not the Events of Providence, are the
Rule for them to walk by, and that all Acts of the Estates against Law, Truth
and Justice, are void and of no effect. The same is as true of all Possession
against Law, Truth and Justice, let it come by never such amazing Providence;
and therefore, Doctor, either your Notion of Providential Right, is not
agreeable to the general sense of Mankind, or else Henry and his whole Council
were out of their Wits and common Senses not to perceive it; but, in truth,
Doctor, it became the general Sense of Mankind only since the Victory of the
Boyn made it become yours. From this Judgment of the Parliament 39 Hen. VI. I
send you to the Judgment of another, 1 Edward IV. which after reciting the
Lineal Title of Edward Son of Richard Duke of York, from Lionel Duke of
Clarence, and declaring how Henry Darby did rear War against Richard II.
contrary to his Faith and Allegiance. 2dly. That he took upon him Usurpously
the Crown, and Name of King, King Richard being in Prison and living. 3dly.
That against God's Law, Man's Legiance and Oath of Fidelity, and in a most
unnatural Tyranny he put him to Death: They then declare, That Edward
rightfully amoved Henry VI. from his Occupation, Intrusion and Usurpation of
the Realm; and that he, and no other ought to be their Lord and Sovereign by
God's Law, Man's Law, and the Law of Nature; and that Henry Darby called K.
Hen. IV. his Son called K. Hen. V. and his Son called K. Henry VI. had against
all Law, Conscience, and Custom of the Realm, usurped the Crown, and exercised
the Government by unrighteous Intrusion and Usurpation; and if they did so,
then they had no Providential Divine Right. I must also observe unto you, that
it was in this King's Reign that the distinction between the K. de facto to
signify the Usurper, and the K. de jure to signify the true legal K. was
first used in Parliament; and I appeal to your own Conscience, if it be not yet
feared, whether that be an Arbitrary distinction, and to be XXIX p. 17, 20.
rejected as having no solid Foundation in Reason and Nature. I will maintain,
that it has as much Foundation in Reason and Nature, as that famous
distinction in the Civil Law, betwixt Malae fidei, and Bonae fidei Possessor:
But if your Reasons about Providential Right be true, then this distinction
also must be Arbitrary as to Possession of Kingdoms, because no Man in full
Possession, can be Malae fidei Possessor of a Crown. To these Authorities, let
me add those of the generality of the Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy of the late
Usurpations: They used the same distinction of Powers which you call Arbitrary,
the same reasoning which you call uncertain, and were of the same Opinion,
which you say contradicts the general Sense of Mankind. Dr. Sanderson, whose
Authority will be venerable, and much greater than yours, Praelect. V.
is for that unchangeable Allegiance to the Legal K. out of Possession, which
you most profanely call Stupid and Slavish Allegiance, and in his Censure of
Ashcham, as one of your learned Answerers has observed, charges your Opinion
with the these immoral Consequences. 1. That it evidently tends to the taking
away of all Christian Fortitude and Suffering. 2. To the encouraging of daring
and ambitious Spirits to attempt continual Innovations, with this confidence,
that if they can possess themselves of the Supream-Power, they ought to be
submitted to. 3. To the obstructing unto the Oppressed Party all possible
means, without a Miracle, of recovering his just Right, of which he shall have
been illegally and unjustly dispossessed. And lastly, to the bringing in of
Atheism, and the contempt of God and Religion. The Bishop of St. Asaph was very
sensible of this last Consequence since he took the Oath, for he told the A. --
B. -- with great Gravity and Seriousness, That he could not but admire the
Providence of God that so many took the Oath, and some, among whom (says he)
there are great and considerable Men have refused to take it; for we (says he
to my Lord) who have taken the Oath, have preserved our Religion from Popery,
and you who stand out, preserve it from Atheism: and if they do, Doctor, as you
also once thought, then their Opinion cannot contradict the general Sense that
Mankind have of Right and Wrong. I am sure the old Caviliers had the very same
Sense that these Men to their sorrow have now; for they both called Charles II.
King, and thought him to be so, though he was out of Possession, and out of the
Land too. Nay, they took Commissions from him as King of England, and sought
for him as their King; and not to make him so, as you Sophistically speak in
your p. 27.
first Letter concerning the French Invasion. Nay, the Convention that called
him home, called him in as King, not to make him so; and dated their first
Session in the Twelfth year of his Reign, which, according to your Principles
and Reasonings, was but the First. Mr. Pryn was one of the Members of it, and
his Sense and Opinion was point blank against yours, as you may find at large
in his p. 463. to 498.
Plea for the Lords, and his Concordia Discors; and I cite him because it was
his studied Opinion, and the Practice of his latter years was according to it,
as appears also from a Paragraph or two in his Preface to Cotton's Abridgment,
which I here declare, I produce against no Person nor no Authority but yours.
That all Parliaments and Ambitious Self-seekers in them, who under pretense of
a Public Reformation, Liberty, the Peoples Ease or Welfare, have by indirect
Surmise, Policies, Practices, Force, and new Devices, most Usurped upon the
lawful Prerogatives of their Kings, or the Persons, Lives, Offices, or Estates
of such Nobles, Great Officers, and other persons of a contrary Party, whom
they most dreaded, maligned, and which have imposed new Oaths and Engagements
on the Members to secure, perpetuate, and make irrevocable their own Acts,
Judgments, and unrighteous proceedings, have always proved most Abortive,
Successless, Pernicious to themselves, and the activest Instruments in them;
the Parliaments themselves being commonly totally Repealed, Nulled, and the
Grandees in them Suppressed, Impeached, Condemned, Destroyed as Traitors and
Enemies to the Public, in the very next succeeding Parliaments, or not very
long after. That Kings created, and set up merely by Parliaments, and their own
Power in them, without any true Hereditary Title, have seldom answered the
Lords and Commons Expectations in the Preservation of their just Laws,
Liberties, and Answers to their Petitions; yea, themselves at last branded for
Tyrants, Traitors, Murderers, Usurpers; their Posterities Impeached of High
Treason, and disinherited of the Crown by succeeding Kings and Parliaments, as
you may read at large in the Parliaments of, etc. From these three last
Observations, we may learn, that as Parliaments are the best of all Courts,
Councils, when duly Summoned, Convened, Constituted, Ordered, and kept within
their legal Bounds: So they become the greatest Mischiefs and Grievances to the
Kingdom, when like the Ocean they overflow their Banks, or degenerate and
become, through Sedition, Malice, Fear, or Infatuation by Divine Justice,
Promoters of corrupt sinister Ends, or Accomplishers of the private Designs and
ambitious Interests of particular persons, under the disguise of public
Reformation, Liberty, Safety, and Sentlement.

You see, Doctor, here, how Mr. Pryn distinguishes between legal Kings by
Hereditary Title, and Kings that are not legal; and between Parliaments
Convened and acting legally, from Parliaments that are not so Convened, and do
not so Act: But in your Providential Hypothesis, which must damn all such
distinctions as Groundless and Arbitrary, it is enough that any Man, Jack Cade,
or Oliver Cromwell, be set up for King by the Estates of the Realm, howsoever
Convened and Acting. Once the Estates of this Realm did most illegally call in
a French King, and set him up in the Throne, and swear Fealty to him; and if in
the late designed French Invasion, which if God had thought fit might have
succeeded, they had set up the great Oppressor of the Liberties of Europe;
then, according to your Doctrine, he must have been King, and by your
Principles, and all the seriousness which the Subject of the Last Judgment
requires, you must and would have professed, without any regard to the
Recognitions of their Majesty's right, that you were his most faithful Subject
and Servant.

To this Authority of Mr. Pryn I shall add that of Judge Jenkins, who protested
against the Power of the two Houses, when they had made the King their
Prisoner, and usurped his Sovereign Authority, and had power to crush his
Majesty, and much more any other Man in the Kingdom. Shortly after Judge
Jenkins printed his Protestation, and a Justification of it from Law, in which
he declared he should hold it a great Honor to dye for the honorable and holy
Laws of the Land. It was for the King then and his Authority, that he stood up
against the Powers in being, who were then in your (...), and he asserted
before them, That Allegiance followed the King's natural Person, then Prisoner
at Holmby. And as for the times before him he declared, that all Deposers of
Kings were Traitors, that Henry IV. was an Usurper, and that Kings de facto are
Usurpers, that come in by the Consent of the People. This is the Doctrine of
Judge Jenkins, of famous Memory; but yours, Doctor, is the scandalous Doctrine
of presbyterian Mr. Jenkins, and Mr. Baxter's Holy Commonwealth, as has been
observed by a plain honest Layman, in a Providence and Precept
Book which he wrote against you, and which I believe you can never answer. I
wonder how Dr. Grove, your old Acquaintance, who wrote against Jenkins, takes
it, to have his Reasonings condemned by you, as contrary to the general Sense
of Mankind; they were received with great Applause by all wise and considering
Churchmen, when they were first published, and I do not hear he has retracted
them: And therefore, Doctor, give me leave to make use of his Testimony, among
others, to prove that the Reasonings of Some among our selves are not contrary
to the general Sense of Mankind. To these common Lawyers let me add the
Authority of one Civilian, the learned Sir John Hayward, in his Answer to the
First Part of a Conference concerning Succession, by R. Doleman; and to these
single Authorities that of all the Judges in the famous Case of the Postnati,
which two of your learned d. p. 101. c. p. 37.
Adversaries have cited against you, (viz.) That Allegiance follows the natural
Person of the King, and that Sir Francs Moorts Reports 79.
it is not taken away, though the King is expulsed by Force, and another
usurps. When you were first acquainted with this Opinion of the Judges by a
learned Lawyer, you expressed your Satisfaction with Joy, and talked of printing
the discovery; but since you have taken the Oath their Authority signifies not
a Straw; for you are become the true Son of your Sire Leviathan, who was above
all Authority but his own. To these Lawyers of our own Country I beg leave to
add that of two or three foreign Lawyers, whereof two are Scottish Men, the
learned Craigy, and Sir. George Mackenzy; the former's Opinion is to be seen in
a learned MS. of his, entitled Thomae Cragii de Jure Successionis Regni
Angliae Libriduo, adversus Sophismata Personati Dolemani, quibus non solum Jura
Successionis in Regnis, sed etiam ipsorum Regum Ss. Auctoritatem nititur
evertere. The Opinion of the latter is to be read in his JVS REGVM, or Defense
of the Succession in Scotland, -- and as he wrote in that Book, so he lived and
dyed a faithful Subject, or if you will, Doctor, a stupid Slave of Loyalty;
for he was one of these Men: And it is well for you that he dyed when he did;
for had he survived in Health, you, and some other Writers would, as I have
been informed, have soon heard from him. The third is a Dutch Man of no small
Authority, even Hugo Grotius, who was a wise and considering Man indeed, and
did not use to write Contradictions to the general Sense of Mankind; but yet
he, as you have been told already by a very learned aa. p. 93.
Man, says expressly in contradiction to your Doctrine, De Jar. Bell. and Pac.
l. 1. c. 14.
that it is lawful to kill an Usurper, if it be with the Authority of him that
has the Right to govern, whether that Right be in the King, Senate, or the
People. And to these (says he) we are to reckon the Tutors and Guardians of
young Princes, as Jehoiada was to Joash when he deposed Athaliah. From these
Men, whom you did not know, I proceed to some of your Acquaintance, and I hope,
Doctor, you will not take it ill to hear them speak. The first shall be Dr.
Stillingfleet, now Bp. of Worcester, who is reputed a wise and considering Man,
and Writer, that did not use to write Contradictions to the general Sense of
Mankind; and yet in several places of his Vid. p. 58, 80, 81, 83, 85.
Grand Question he has asserted, that several Acts of Parliament made by
Edward III. in his Father's life time, and by Henry IV. were null and void,
because they were Usurpers, or in your Language Providential, but not Legal
Kings. And in his Sermon before the Commons, November. 13. -- 71. He tells them
that Providence does not found any Right of Dominion, but only shows, that
when God pleases to make use of persons as Scourges, he gives them Success
above their hopes; but Success gives them no Right. The next is Dr. Burnet, who
in the first Part of the History of the Refarmation speaks of Henry IV. as a
Traitor and Usurper, and how doubtfully he speaks of Providence in his Sermon
before the Prince at St. James's, you may remember as well as I. The third is
Dr. Comber, who, as I hear, confesses that he and others went too far; but
however I that think the Doctor as good an Author before as since the
Revolution, will not balk his Authority, especially since he has retracted
nothing publicly; and he says on the Collect for the King, That his Friends
are our Friends, and his Enemies our Enemies; for whoever attempts to smite the
Sheepherd, seeks to destroy the Sheep, and he is a mortal Foe to the whole
Nation. I know nothing so common with Rebels and Usurpers, as to pretend Love
to those they would stir up against their lawful Prince; but it appears to be
Ambition and Covetousness in the latter end; and such Persons design to rise by
the fall of many thousands. Or if Religion be the ground of the Quarrel,
besides our late sad Experience, Reason will tell us, that War and Faction,
Injustice and Cruelty, can never lodge in those Breasts where that pure and
peaceable Quality does dwell. If it be a foreign Prince that opposes our King,
he is a Robber, and unjust, to invade his Neighbor's Rights: If he be a
Subject who rises against his Sovereign, he has renounced Christianity with
his Allegiance, and is to be esteemed a troubler of our Israel: Therefore
whosoever they be that are Enemies to the King, or whatsoever the pretense be,
we wish they may never prosper in that black Impiety of unjust Invasion, or
unchristian Rebellion. How like a Saint, and an excellent Casuist, does the
Doctor write here; but how this agrees with his Speeches, Letters, and Actions,
since the Insurrection at York, Time, and Opportunity of Printing will show.
The fourth is Dr. Tennison, who had occasion to consider your Doctrine, long
before it was yours, in his Book entitled the Creed of Mr. Hobbs examined. In
his Epistle dedicatory to that Book, says he, Mr. Hobbs has framed a Model of
Government pernicious in its consequence to all Nations, and injurious to the
Right of his present Majesty; for he taught the People soon after the Martyrdom
of his Royal Father, that his Title was extinguished when his Adherents were
subdued; and that the Parliament had the Right for this very reason, because it
had Possession. And in Art. 8. p. 156. first Edit. It is not for you to pretend
to Loyalty who place Right in Force, and teach the People to assist the Usurper
with active Compliance against a dispossessed Prince, and not merely to live at
all adventure in his Territories, without owning the Protection by unlawful
Oaths, or by running into Arms against the dethroned Sovereign. And p. 157. I
say then again, that you give Encouragement to Usurpers, and also when Civil
Disorders are on foot, as it happens too frequent in all States, you hereby
move such People as are yet on the side of their lawful Prince, whose Affairs
they see declining, streightway to join themselves to the more prosperous
Party, and help to overturn those Thrones of Sovereignty to which a while
before they prostrated themselves. -- The People thus mis-instructed will
imitate those Idolatrous Heathens, who for some years worshipped a Goddess made
fast unto a Tree; but as soon as the Tree began by Age and Tempest to appear
decaying, they paid no farther devotion to their Deity, neither would they come
within the shadow of the Oak or Image. You see, Doctor, how this Author wrote
then against Hobbs, just as some among Us write now against you; and as well as
you are acquainted with him, yet I believe he would swell as big at you, as at
the sight of any Jacobite, if you should tell him, that the most sober and
considering Men rejected his Reasonings as contradictory to the general sense
of mankind. The last Authority, Doctor, is your Great and Dear Self, who not
long since was a Man of those Reasonings, and that Opinion by which some among
our selves have the impudence, since you were of another Judgment, to
contradict the general sense of Mankind. I shall not trouble you with a review
of your Writings before the Revolution, but take you as you were almost two
years after it, whilst you were under the stupid Dispensation of slavish
Loyalty, nor as yet had discovered the Mysteries of Providence, but were as
zealous as any of these Men to deferd Laws and legal Rights against the Events
of it; but whether factiously or not factiously, as you Vindic. p. 79, 80.
pretend, some matters of Fact will show. I shall not insist on the half Sheet
you published at the sitting down of the Convention, against making the P. of
Orange King; but only observe, that then you supposed the Throne to be full;
and asserted, That the Estates then convened could not give him the Crown,
because it was not theirs to give. A little after this you wrote the Answer to
Dr. Burnet's Enquiry, which I mentioned before, in which you assert, in
opposition to the Doctor, that King James was a King not by governing well, but
by Birth right, and could no more cease to be King by governing ill, than a
Traitor or a Rebel cease to be a Subject: And this you proved from the paternal
Relation of a Father, who never cease to be a Father, how great a Tyrant soever
he be. You also challenged the Doctor there, to show you any Law of God, or our
Country, which upon any Cause dissolves our Allegiance, and asserted, that the
Descent of the Crown must be governed by the Laws of the Land. I must here tell
the Reader, that this Answer of yours was never published, lest he should lose
his labor in enquiring after it; for though it was printed, yet whether at
Xantippe's Instance, or any other Cause of Fear, you suppressed all the Coppies
but two, which happened to get abroad, and one of those fell into my Hands.
After this, on the 8th of April following, you went to a learned Gentleman, to
persuade him not to be present at the Coronation; and though their Majesty's
had been recognized by the Estates, and were then in full Providential
Possession, yet you told him, you had rather take the Oath twenty times than
bear a part in it: But about the beginning of May after you wrote a Discourse
for taking the Oaths, entitled, The Lawfulness of taking the New Oath of
Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary, stated upon the strictest Principles
of Church of England Loyalty; and after you had finished it you sent it, as I
understand by a Letter from the West, to Dr. Bu -- (by which I understand Dr.
Burnet;) but that Discourse plainly supposing the Government to be an
Usurpation, and that Non-resistence was reserved as a Duty to King James, from
whom it could not be suspended, it was not thought fit to be published. This
Book was seen and perused by many, particularly two or three Clergymen at
Tunbridge in August following said they had read it: But to do you Justice,
Doctor, before this you did all you could to suppress it, because it would not
hold; but it was now too late to attempt the suppression of it, for Copies had
got abroad into several Hands, and I have one of them at your Ladies Service,
who I suppose was not against writing of it. Upon Conviction this Paper would
not hold, then you grew very warm against the Oath; for in the latter end of
June, or beginning of July, you affirmed, that the taking of it was not only a
recognizing, but making the P. of Orange King; (as yet then Providence had not
made him so:) adding, that though you could actually forbear assisting King
James, yet you could not swear never to assist him, that being not consistent
with an Acknowledgment of his Right; and that the more you thought of the Oath
the worse you liked it, and would have nothing to do with it; Remember this,
good Doctor, and then consider if it does not become a Man that said and did
such things then to rant and swagger against some among our selves now. It was
now about this time that you were in the highth of your Fevour against the
Government and the Oaths, which discovered it self by many Symptoms, upon
several occasions: When you first heard the News of a Fast, which happened to
be at your House in the Temple, How! a Fast! said you; I Will warrant you we
shall have dainty Prayers: Prayers, said Dr. Sharp, that I am more afraid of
than the Oaths. And what! Must we have Sermons too? I Will give them a Sermon
that they shall not thank me for; and accordingly you did so: Your Text I
remember was, The Lord is a Man of War, the Lord of Hosts is his Name; and then
you preached contrary point blank to what you have since printed; and the drift
of your Discourse was so plainly levelled against the Government, and the
Intention of the day, that you gave great Offense to their Majesty's good
Subjects, who filled the Town with Complaints against you; but you valued not
that, but was pleased with it, delighting to give some among us an account of
what you had preached, and how you had met with them. About this time also you
wrote a Discourse against taking the Oaths, which you showed to a Learned and
Reverend Divine on the 29th of July. I suppose it was your Letter to Dr.
Williams, whose Answer to it you despised, as Stuff that did not deserve a
Reply; though one, who saw it, says you stole your Argument from Jaddus, and
other things out of it, which you have put in your Case of Allegiance. In
August out comes the first part of the History of Passive Obedience, which you
caressed into the World, and were so taken with it, that you went to a very
learned Man, who since became your Antagonist, to pray him to write a Sheet of
Conclusions, not against some, but against other men, upon the Doctrines and
Principles collected in it; and that he might not mistake your design, you left
it in writing with him, and he still has the Original in the following Words,
The Doctrine of Nonresistance and Passive Obedience is founded on an irresible
Authority; consider then what are the Rights of an irresistible Authority, and
what the Duties of Passive Obedience. 1. The Rights of Sovereign and
irresistible Authority are that he cannot forfeit his Crown, that he cannot be
judged or deposed by his Subjects; (and Abdication and Desertion are but other
names for this;) and therefore when once King, he is always so till Death, or
voluntary or legal Resignation. 2. Nonresistence does not only signify not to
fight against the King, but, 1. That upon no pretense we must renounce his
Right. 2. We must never set his Crown upon another's Head. 3. We must not
transfer our Allegiance to another. In this Month also dyed the Bp. of
Chichester, of everlasting Memory, to whom, as a Person of Honor can testify,
you went about four or five days before he dyed, to move him to make his
Declaration. About the same time you sent a Paper to Oxford against taking the
Oath; I have forgot the Title of it, but I remember a passage in it to this
purpose, That as Usurpers seize upon the Lands, and Houses, and Fortifications
of the King for their own use, and turn them to their own Service against Law;
so against Law they seize upon the Laws themselves, and use them against their
first Intention to their own Service, and the destruction of the King and his
faithful Subjects, for whose defense they were made, About the beginning of
September you wrote an Apology for the Nonswearers, which you designed for your
Masterpiece; and in December following a malicious Pamphlet coming out against
the Bishops, entitled A Letter out of the Country, etc. you began an Answer
to it in defense of them; but staying out too long where you wrote it, Mrs.
Satan and Sherlock took you to task, and succeeded so well, as to make you
confess where you had been, and about what, and then it was no great Conquest
to make you send for your Papers by six a Clock next morning, and offer them as
an Holocaust to atone her displeasure. In all this time that you were so warm
and zealous against the Oath, you helped to disperse the few small Pamphlets
that were printed against taking of it, and expressed much trouble, that others
that were larger could not get abroad; particularly you were very zealous for
Printing The Case of Allegiance to a King in Possession, which you then thought
an admirable Piece, and upon all occasions you were wont to express your
Affection and Duty to King James, and your desire for his Return; as by
drinking to his Health and happy Restoration, and at other times by sending up
devout Ejaculations for it, and saying Amen if others did so: And, Sir, your
own Memory and your Conscience can inform you that these are Truths, and no
Inventions; and how they agree with your Preface to your Case of Allegiance,
and the Conclusion of your Vindication of it, let the Readers, and especially
the Lawyers, judge. In that Preface you tell us, that you had stuck in your
former Opinion to this day, had you not been relieved by Bp. Overall's
Convocation-Book: But how did that relieve you? Or when did the pretended
Doctrine in it begin to operate on your Understanding, and remove your former
difficulty? I am sure that it was sent you Sheet by Sheet from the Press, and
had no Operation upon you at the first reading; but happening to lie in the
Bookseller's Shop some time before it was Published, for want of the Preface;
the News of it brought abundance of Clergymen, and others, to read it there,
and some that had taken the Oaths thinking these Passages made for them, they
discovered them, and formed Arguments from them to justfy their own Compliance,
but you despised them for wresting the Words of the Convocation, and used to
observe upon that occasion, how Men would be glad of any pretenses, and catch
at any Twiggs to bear up themselves against their own Consciences. This was in
December before you took the Oaths, and no Body that I ever met with perceived
you to be of any other Opinion 'till after the Victory of the Boyne: For in
that interim you behaved your self among your Brethren, as you had done
formerly, particularly you showed Complacency enough at the Victory which the
French had over us by Sea, in hopes it would hasten another Revolution; and
accordingly taking Horse at a Gentleman's Door, who then thought you deserved a
better; you told him, that you now hoped by Michaelmas to have a better Horse.
This was but a little while before the News of the Boyne Victory came to Town,
and then Doctor it was that Bp. Overall's Book gave you greater Freedom and
Liberty of Thinking, then you first discovered your New Notions, and
Inclinations to your Brethren, then you thought it high time to emancipate your
self from your stupid Church of England Loyalty, and the slavish Principles of
it, the Rights of irresistible Authority, and the Duties of Passive Obedience:
All vanished then upon New Light; for Egeria appeared to you upon the Banks of
the Boyne, and inspired you with New and Freer Notions, and showed you in that
glorious Scene, how your former Reasonings contradicted the General Sense of
Mankind, and had no foundation in Reason or Nature, and revealed unto you a
Divine and safer Principle upon which you might Swear Allegiance, without the
Imputation of Apostasy or renouncing the Doctrine of the Church of England, to
WILHELMVS NASS. ANG. SCOT. HIBER. ADEODATVS AUGUSTUS, and also swear it back
again to King James, if ever he should recover the Throne in a recuperative
War. But to make out your Hypothesis of a Thorough Settlement the better, you
were willing also to have Limerick taken before you took the Oath; and
therefore you wrote to a Friend then at Dublin, to send you word as soon as that
Town was taken, because, as he knew, it concerned you much to know it. But,
Doctor, as you say of the Nature of things that Town was pretty stubborn, and
you were in haste, and could not stay for the Surrender of it; but the new
Settlement was sufficient for your purpose without it, or perhaps the R.R.
Welsh Prophet assured you it would be taken, and that was enough to a willing
and well disposed Mind. And now, Doctor, upon an impartial Review of your
former Principles and Practice, will you seriously tell me, did you not think
your self as wise and considering a Man before you took the Oaths as since? And
could you well have born it, if any Man had then dogmatically told you, that
your Reasonings were uncertain, and that your Opinion was contrary to the
General Sense of Mankind, or that it was rejected by the most sober and
considering Men? Alas! What shall we inferior Mortals and little Writers do,
thus to have Sherlock against Sherlock? Which of the two shall we believe?
Sherlock saying, or Sherlock unsaying what he said, and for what he suffered?
Sherlock confessing, or Sherlock retracting his Confession? Sherlock deprived,
or Sherlock restored, and higher preferred? Sherlock baffling others, or
Sherlock by others miserably baffled? Sherlock with the Generality of Writers,
or Sherlock against the Generality of them? Sherlock with the learned and
venerable Writers of Authority, or Sherlock with a few little fanatical Writers
of no Authority? Sherlock saying and proving, or Sherlock barely saying and
appealing, but not proving what he says? But as the learned Author of the
Reply to your Vindication aa. p. 106, 111. See also p. 11.
has observed, methinks you should have but little Stomach to appeal to the
general Sense of Mankind, to which your fundamental Doctrine, and the Arguments
that support it, are contrary, except John Goodwin and his Fellows be the Sense
of Mankind. And in another a. Postscript.
place he observes, that when he had urged you in his first Book to show any
one approved Author of your side the Controversy, you only produced two, Calvin
and Grotius, against the first of which he tells you there is just Exception,
and that the other is directly against you. And it is now a year since his
Answer came out, and any Man of tolerable Modesty would have produced more and
better Authors on his side, before he had asserted from the Pulpit and the
Press, that his Adversary's Reasonings were rejected by the most sober and
considering Men, and contradicted the general Sense of Mankind. For God's sake,
Doctor, what privilege have you above other Men thus to impose upon the World,
and treat your Adversaries at this rate? Have your new Principles set you free
from the slavish Doctrine of Modesty as well as that of Loyalty? Or have you
acquired the Authority of an Oracle that Mankind is bound to receive Maxims
from you, and to believe without examining what you say? Perhaps you may be
prolocutor the next sitting of the Convocation; or if you have not the Chair,
you will have the next Seat to it; and notwithstanding this Advantage, and so
many London Livings in your Disposal, I desire and challenge you to propose
your Doctrine, and the Reasonings that support it, to the two Houses, to try
whether they will approve or condemn it. Their Authority you will needs allow
to be great and venerable, and I dare appeal to them as Judges of the
Controversy, not doubting but that they will be of the same Mind with the
Convocation at Oxford, where the Doctors and Masters, in July 1683, damned your
Doctrine in the Censure of the following Proposition, which in the Decree runs
in these Words, -- Possession and Strength give a Right to Govern, and Success
in a Cause or Enterprise, proclaims it to be lawful and just; to justify it is
to comply with the Will of God, because it is to follow the Conduct of his
Providence. And then in the Margent over against it, they cite Hobbs, Owen,
Baxter and Jenkins; and in the next Impression I hope they will put your Name
in that glorious Company, to show the Sense of Mankind. I ground my Confidence,
in this Appeal, upon Discourses which I, and others, have had with several
worthy Members of the Convocation, who have been so free as to tell us that
they could not be of your Opinion; nay some of them have told me frankly, that
they abhorred your Principle, and could never have taken the Oath upon it: I
believe you would be angry with them should I tell you their Names; but I do
not know why they may not contradict you, as well as you have contradicted the
Bishop of St. Asaph; for, contrary to his Sermon, entitled God's ways of
disposing Kingdoms, which he preached before the Queen, You, in your
Fast-Sermon preached not long after, before her, in June, the last year, and
printed, as his was, by her Majesty's Special Command, tell us, That God does
not always determine what is right and wrong by the Events of War, for he is
the Sovereign Judge of the World, P. 25.
and may often punish a wicked Nation, by unjust Oppressors, as he did the
Israelites. The good Lord be merciful to the poor Jacobites, who are like never
to be converted at this rate, when one of you so apparently contradicts
another, and each part of the Contradiction has Royal Authority on its side. I
do not say that you designedly contradicted the Bishop, and I had almost said
your self too, for that Proposition seems to look very foul upon your Doctrine
of Providence, and almost needs an Explication; and in good Truth Doctor, the
Sense of Mankind, and the natural Notions, are on the other side of the
Controversy, and if you do not carefully prevent them, they will obtrude upon
you, and carry you to contradict your self, as your Father Hobs did in his
History of the Civil Wars, who before he was aware of it, run into the
Arbitrary distinction betwixt Supreme Strength and Right to govern: For to the
Question, Who had the Supreme Power when there was no Parliament? P. 252.
If by Power (says he) you mean the Right to Govern, no Body had it; but if
you mean the Supreme Strength, that was clearly in Cromwell, who was obeyed as
General of the Forces in England, Scotland and Ireland.

Here, Doctor, I stopped a little to review the Authorities I have brought
against you; and I find, that as a Man who has many Witnesses at a Trial, may
forget to call some; so I have forgot two Testimonies against you, which I
desire may be now heard speak. The first is the Testimony of the Judges and
Peers in Queen Mary's time; and the second is that of the First Parliament of
William and Mary. c. p. 32, 33.
The former, at the Trial of the Duke of Northumberland, made Answer to the
Duke, Querying by way of Plea, Whether a Man acting by the Authority of the
Great Seal, and Order of the Privy Council, could become thereby Guilty of
Treason? That the Great Seal of One that was not Lawful Queen, could give no
Authority nor Indemnity to those that acted on such a Warrant. The latter, in
several of their Acts, as in that for a Poll toward reducing Ireland, 1 Gul.
and Mar, 1 May 1689. and that for the Relief of their Majesty's Protestant
Subjects in Ireland, 1 Gul. and Mar. Jan. 27. 1689. declared the Irish, then
under King James' Possession, and actual Government, to owe their Obedience to
King William, and for breach thereof to be Rebels; though King James had been
solemnly recognized by the Estates of the Realm.

But now, Doctor, after all these Testimonies against you, perhaps you will
reply, that these are only Testimonies, as to the Sense, but not as to the
Practice of Men; whereas you have Asserted the Reasonings of some among our
selves, to be not only against the General Sense, but the General Practice of
Mankind, in all Revolutions, and that this is apparently on your side: But if
you, or any for you, object this against me, I pray you to consider, that the
Practices of Men are to be tried by Principles, and not Principles by the
General Practices of men; for Mankind, Doctor, is a very corrupt Creature, apt
to act against the most acknowledged Principles of Truth and Falsehood, Good and
Evil, which God has engraven on all men's hearts, as the Common Law, or Common
Sense, or Common Notions of all mankind. And as they will act against these
Common Notions, or the Law of Nature, so will they act against the Law of
Grace, or the Notions of revealed Religion; more especially they will act
against both in times of Persecution, when Ease, Safety, Honor, and
Preferment, attend those who take part with Error against Truth, and Wrong
against Right; and Danger, Trouble, Disgrace, and poverty, those who side with
Truth against Error, and Right against Wrong. In such hard Cases, Doctor, few
will choose the Suffering side; but the generality of men will act, not only
against the general Sense of mankind, but against the inward Sense and Checks
of their own Consciences; as in the Idolatrous Reign of Ahab, when Idolatry was
the general practice of the Jews; in the Arrian Reign of Valens, when the
Arrian Doctrine denying Jesus to be true God, was the general profession, and
Arrian Worship the general practice of Christians; Sir Simon Dew's Journal, p.
23.
in the Popish Reign of Queen Mary, when all the Clergy of the Church of
England, but one hundred seventy seven, turned Papists after Popery was
thoroughly settled by Parliament, and recognized by the Estates of the Realm,
and so became the Providential Religion of the Church; so in the late French
Persecution, the generality of Protestants, preferring Ease and Safety before a
good Conscience, turned Converts to Popery against their own Faith and
Principles; and as for those few which did not, the Bp. of Meaux might have
told them, That they had nothing to support them but some uncertain Reasonings
which contradict the general Practice of Mankind in all Revolutions of
Religion. You see, Doctor, what a poor Argument the general Practice of mankind
is in Revolutions, where the great majority will go with the Stream of Power
and Preferment: And therefore we are bid not to follow a multitude to do Evil;
but to stick to Principles against Men's Practices, and the Precepts of natural
and revealed Religion against Men's Examples, be they never so many and great:
For in truth, Doctor, few Men will do their duty in any kind; and therefore
there are but few that will be saved, especially in such an Age of latitude as
this, wherein loose Principles make loose Practices; so that you will find very
few Men of strict, or if you please, Doctor, of stupid and slavish Virtue. In
particular, if you please, to look about, I believe you will find almost as few
men of stupid and slavish Sobriety, or stupid and slavish Chastity, as of
stupid and slavish Loyalty. Nay, if the general Complaints be true, there are
but very few of stupid and slavish Justice and Honesty: For why should a Man of
Honor (as the Cardinal said) be a Slave to his Word, or to his Oath either,
especially of late, Dr. Tillotson's Sermon. of Hell Torments.
since we can hardly tell how to reconcile the eternal Misery of Hell with the
Justice and Goodness of God, who, notwithstanding all his Threatenings of it in
Scripture, is free to do what he pleases. But this, Doctor, does not belong to
you, but to some of those Nine Men, who you told In a Letter to a Friend,
containing some Queries about the New Commission for making Alterations in the
Liturgy, Canons, etc. of the Church of England; sent to the Press by Dr.
Sherlock, and published a little before the first Sitting of the Convocation.
us, not long before you took the Oath, had Latitude enough to conform to a
Church de facto which had Power on its side, and Tenderness and Moderation
enough to part with any thing but their Church Preferments. When you were at
the Writing of that Letter, p 5.
the A. Bp. and other Bishops and Clergymen under Suspension, were as eminent
for a prudent and well tempered Zeal, as for their constant Loyalty; but now
their well tempered Zeal, though not one degree altered from its Temper, is
factious, and their constant Loyalty stupid and slavish Allegiance, and what
else you will hereafter be pleased to call it or them.

13. Having now, I hope, vindicated the Opinions and Reasonings of some among
our selves from Singularity and Novelty, by showing that they do not contradict
the general Sense of Mankind, but are the very Sense of the wisest and best
part of it; I come now to examine what you say, for I cannot call what you say
Arguments against them, p. 15.
who, as you tell the World, withdraw from our Communion, because we pray for
K. William and Q. Mary: but they say, and I fear are able to prove it too, that
it is you that have withdrawn from them and their Communion, and that the
Schism, and the causes of it, is in you and not in them. But to let that pass,
you assert that St. Paul, in your Text, makes no difference of Kings, but that
they do; but I tell you, Sir, that they make as little difference as St. Paul,
for they grant that he commands us to pray for all Kings; but then they say
that the Usurpers of Kingdoms, as long as they remain so, are not Kings, nor
within the Intention of your Text. But you tell us, they say, That St. Paul
means only Lawful and Rightful Kings; it is true, they do say so; but then they
also say, that there are no Kings but what are Lawful or have the Legal Right,
and that all others exercising the Kingly Power in any Kingdom, against Law,
are only called Kings, as Idols are called Idols, but are not true Kings. You
tell us again, the Commandment is general to pray for Kings; and they say so
too: but then they tell you that this does not bind them to pray for Usurpers,
who call themselves Kings, and are so called by those who set them up against
Law, but are not so. But then you think you ask them a very confounding
Question, though they have answered it an hundred times before, (viz.) Whether
there is any such Distinction as this in Scripture, that we must not pray for
all Kings, but only for Legal Kings? To this they answer, that all Kings in
the nature of the thing, and in Scripture intendment, are Legal Kings; as all
Husbands and Wives, in the sense of the Scriptures, are Husbands and Wives by
lawful Wedlock: though an Adulterer may sometimes usurp the Name of a Husband,
as did the pretended Husband of the Samaritan Woman, whom our Savior told her
for that reason was not her Husband. And as the Duty of Wives to their
Husbands, commanded by the Apostle, is in no danger, by asserting that they
must not be subject to any but Rightful Husbands: So neither, to answer your
trifling Question, are Subjects in any danger of being delivered from the Duty,
in your Text, of praying for Kings, by teaching that we must pray for none but
lawful Kings. But then you tell us, that this distinction of lawful Kings, from
Kings that are not lawful p. 17.
is Arbitrary, and that it has no p. 20.
solid Foundation in Reason and Nature; but they have told you over and over,
that it is a Real and no Arbitrary distinction, founded upon the common Notions
of Right and Wrong, Truth and Falsehood; and that it is a distinction not of a
thing from it self (which is Arbitrary) but of a thing from what it is not; and
that it is as necessary for Subjects to make this distinction between Kings, as
for Children and Wives to distinguish betwixt lawful and unlawful Husbands and
Fathers; or Clergymen to distinguish between Canonical and Uncanonical
Bishops; or to distinguish in Religion between the true God and Idols, who are
worshipped in the style of Gods. And therefore to come to your Latria and
Dulia, to which you foolishly compare this distinction, p. 1^.
they return it upon you, and say, that the Scriptures appropriate the
Allegiance of Subjects, of which praying is a part, to lawful Kings; but that
you are more than a Papist in Politics, because you are for giving away not
only Dulia, or half Allegiance, but Latria, or the whole Allegiance, Ibid.
from True to Idol-Kings. And then as for avoiding the Duty of the Fifth
Commandment by the Vow Corban, which you misapply to them, that returns upon
your self: for they have showed you again and again, in their Answers, that
that Commandment directs the Duty of it to true and lawful both natural and
civil Parents, and have made it appear that you are one of the Pharisees, who
have endeavored to make that and other Commandments of none effect, by giving
the Name of Kings to pure Providential Usurpers, though they are no more Kings
by possessing the lawful Kings Throne, than Idols are Gods, by possessing the
Temple of the true God. Idols have all the Ensigns of Divinity, as you say the
other have of Majesty, and by God's own Providence come to be invested with all
the Religious Rights and Ceremonies of the true God, and often happen to be
worshipped and recognized for Gods by the People and Estates of Idolatrous
Realms; but for all that they are but abominable Idols, that ought to be thrown
down, and broken in pieces; and the more cursed and abominable by how much the
more their Worship is like of that of the true God. But you tell us, p. 18.
that there is Reason to conclude that St. Paul spoke of such Kings, [i. e. of
Kings that were set up by the Estates and People, without legal Title,] if we
will allow that he spoke the language of the Age wherein he lived. To which I
answer, That neither the Language of that Age, nor any Age before or since the
Apostle wrote, ever meant such Kings, whenever they spoke of Subjects duty in
Praying for Kings; and that when the Apostle wrote, the Roman Powers, or King
or Emperor then in being, was a Lawful as well as a Providential King; and
that therefore he is to be understood only of lawful Kings. p. 20.
But you on the contrary assert, That he wrote in a time of most violent
Usurpation, when he had reason to distinguish between lawful Kings, and such as
were not lawful; but no Man of less Forehead and Conscience than your self
would have asserted, it after the contrary had been so fully proved against
you: Indeed, had the Emperor, when the Apostle wrote, been an Usurper, you had
said something to purpose; but this you cannot prove, and therefore you only
say it: But had it been true, you might easily have proved it, by showing who
was the claiming injured Party, and to whom the Empire belonged by Law, and
whose Right that unlawful Emperor did usurp. No body will deny but that the
Apostle wrote his Epistle to the Romans, and his first Epistle to Timothy, in
the Reigns of Caligula, Claudius or Nero. But to pass over the Roman
Historians, to which your Answerers appeal to prove they were no Usurpers, I
will here prove from the Roman Coins that they were lawful Princes, upon whom
the Senate and People of the Commonwealth of Rome had conferred the Sovereign
Authority, as Authority, signifies Right as well as Power. Now to prove this I
must advertise you, if you did not know it before, that all Coins in which we
find Suppetunt plane quam plurima ut hae literae S. C. quae in Aereis Nummis
Romanorum, and in Argentis nonnullis leguntur E. X S C. quae Senatus Consulti
Auctoritate Cusos significant. Anton August. Dialog. 1.
S. C. or EXS. C. as also S. P. Q. R. show that they were coined by the special
Order, and Authority of the Senate: And as to their Inscriptions and Devises,
were not left to Discretion of Triumviri monetales, or Masters of the Mint.
Therefore all such Coins, as learned Medallists observe, are of greater
Authority than any Private Historians, as being so many Public Acts of the
Senate, by which they gave as well as declared the Powers which are read in the
Inscriptions of such Coins. I will begin with Caligula, of whom there are many
such Senatarian Coins, which on the Front or of them have S. C. or EXS. C. or
S. P. Q. R. with all his Sovereign Imperatorial Titles. Of the former sort are
these, which about his Head bear the following Inscriptions, CAIUS CAESAR AUG.
GERMANICUS PON. MAX. TR. P. S. C. and CAIUS CAESAR DIVI AUG. PRON. AUG. P. M.
TR. POT. III. P. P. S. C. Of the latter sort are those which have the foresaid
Titles on the Front, and S. C. or S. P. Q. R on the. as that which within an
oken Crown, or Corona Civica, has inscribed S. P. Q. R. P. P. ob. C. S. So
that has S. C. on the in which are stamped the Heads of his three Sisters,
Agripina, Drusilla, and Livia. The of another bearing the former Titles has
the Temple which he dedicated to Angustus, with S. on one side of it, and C. on
the other. And there is another curious piece extant, which has the Head of
Agripina surrounded with this Inscription AGRIPPINAM. F. MAT. C. CAESARIS AUG.
and on the Reverse a Tensa drawn by two Mules, and this Inscription, S. P. Q.
R. MEMORIAE AGRIPPINAE.

Then for Claudius there is a Coin which has this Inscription about his Head,
TI. CLAUDIUS. CAESAR AUG GERM. P. M. TR. P. IMP. P. P. S. C. Another has this
Inscription about his Image, TI. CLAUDIUS CAESAR. AUG. and on P. M. TR. P. IMP.
COS. II. S. C. Another has this Inscription about his Image, T. CLAUDIUS
CAESAR AUG. P. M. TR. P. IMP. P. P. and on SPES AUGUSTA. S. C. Another about
the Head of his Mother has ANTONIA AUGUSTA and on TITUS CLAUDIUS CAESAR AUG.
P. M. S. C. On the of another bearing his Imperial Titles, there is within an
Oken Crown EXSC. OB CIVES SERVATOS. On of another, within an Oken Crown, S. P.
Q. R. P. P. OB C. S Another has CONSTANTINE AUGUSTI S.C. Another SPES AUGUSTA
S. C. And another. in which is stamped the Emperor and the Praetorian Signifer
PRAETOR RECEPT. S. C.

Lastly for Nero. There is one with an Oken Crown bearing this Inscription
about it, NERONI CLAUD. DIVI. F. CAES AUG. GERM. IMP. TR P. and within it EX.
S. C and on AGRIPPINA AUG. DIVI. CLAUD. NERONIS. CAES. MAT. about the Heads of
Nero and Agrippina, looking one upon another. Another with Nero CLAUD. CAES.
AUG. GERM. (...), and on the (...). Another has NERO CAES. AUG. IMP. about his
Image, and on PONT. MAX. TR P. about an Oken Crown, and in it E X. S. C. And as
for the on this Emperor's Coins, one has PONTIF. MAX. TR. P. V. P. P. E X.
S. C. another has PONTIF. MAX. TR. P. VII. COS. IIII. P. P! E X. S. C. Another
PONTIF. MAX. TR. P. X. COS. IIII. P. P. EX. S. C. Another a Pomana Armata, with
a Victoriola on her hand, E X. S. C. Another under a triumphant Arch SC. And
these Coins prove as plainly that these Emperors were lawful and rightful
Emperors, as that of Pompey proves him to have been the lawful Admiral of Rome,
which has this Inscription, POMPEIUS MAGNUS PREFECT. CLAS. ET ORAE MARITIMAE,
which Office he bore, as Historians show us, in the Piratical War. And now,
Doctor, as I have shown from these Coins, that that Emperor, whoever he was,
under whom St. Paul wrote, was a lawful Emperor, or rightful Possessor of the
Emperial Power; so let me ask you one Question: is it needful that I should
distinguish here betwixt true and counterfeit Coins, or not? If not, then it
was much less needful for the Apostle to distinguish between lawful Kings and
Kings that were not lawful, because he wrote under a lawful King, that had no
Competitor at home or abroad to claim or prosecute his Right against him: But
because there are many Cavans or counterfeit Coins, I here distinguish between
them, though I think I need not, and tell you, that I have made use of none but
true Coins: But if you suspect me, you may borrow a litte from the Bp. of St.
Asaph, as you did a little See the learned Answer to the Bishop, aaa.
Chronology about Jaddus from him, and he will help you out in both alike. And in
the mean time, Doctor, take this with you, That your pure Providential King in
Policy, are no better than counterfeit Medals in Antiquity, or Bristol-stones
among Diamonds; they show and glister like Kings, but are not Kings, but
Usurpers: And the distinction between them and Kings, by the help of the Word
lawful or unlawful, is as real and natural as that of the Nummists between real
and forged Medals, or that of the Jewellers between true and false Diamonds, or
that of all the World between true and counterfeit Silver and Gold. It is the
Appearance of Things without Reality that is the Ground of this distinction;
and to discover real from apparent, true from false, and right from wrong in
the moral and natural World, makes these distinctions useful, that otherwise
would be useless; and when Authors do not use them in speaking of Things, they
are supposed to speak of real, true, and right things of every kind, and not of
things of another Nature, that for some show, likeness, or false Pretensions,
are called by their Names. You think you speak finely, when you say it is
matter of Sense to know who is King, because a Man may see who administers the
Government by Regal Authority. But if it be matter of Sense, Doctor, how came
you to lose your Senses so long? And what made you so blind that you could not
see it when other Men did? This shows, Doctor, that it is not matter of Sense,
but of Reason: for Sense can only perceive the supreme external Force that is
administered in any Kingdom; but to discern the Right or Authority to exercise
the supreme Force of Power which makes a King; is the work of Reason; because
Authority is a moral Quality, as has been c. chapter 20.
excellently proved to you, of which Reason and Conscience is Judge. O but
then, say you, it must be a matter of Wit, p. 18.
or Law, or Philosophy, to know who is King. It is so, Doctor; but of no more
Wit, Law, and Philosophy, than every common Understanding has; and no more
than is needful to know who is Husband, Entitled, The Resurrection of Loyalty
and Obedience out of the Grave of Rebellion, by the sacred Force of the Oaths
of Supremacy and Allegiance. Printed for Will. Shears in Bedford- street near
Covent Garden, at the blue Bible, and inscribed to Genesis Monk.
or Master of any Family, or Parson of any Parish, or Mayor of any Corporation.
The World knows (says an excellent little Book) who it is that the Law and
Custom of this Nation states to be the Heir and Successor of the King, even
the eldest Son of the Predecessor. In truth, Doctor, there is no difficulty in
it; there is not a Country Fellow in any Kingdom but knows by what Title the
Crown is held; and in an hereditary Kingdom there is no great need of Wit, or
Law, or Philosophy, to know the Royal Family, and the next Heir in it. But you
have had enough of this in your learned Answerers; and none but a Man that is
desperate, and past blushing, would preach the same Stuff again, P. 19.
especially before such an Audience, when he knew he could not defend what he
said. But you tell us, you will not dispute the Matter; and the Reason is
plain, because you cannot dispute it, though you are one of the Disputers of
this World, your Adversaries having put the Controversy beyond all reasonable
Dispute. But if you will not dispute it, why should you meddle any more with
it? Or is it because you are a great Man, and a great Rabbi, that ought not to
dispute with such little Writers?

14. Well; but though you will not dispute them, yet you will vouchsafe to
chatechise them, Ibid.
and ask them some hard Questions about Certainty: And before I answer for
them, I must beg leave, Doctor, though of late you do not love distinctions, to
distinguish about Certainty, and I hope it is no arbitrary distinction, that
has no Foundation in Reason and Nature. Certainty then, Doctor, is of two
sorts, absolute, of which no doubt can possibly be made, and against which
there lies no Objection; or such, which though it be not free from all doubts
and Objections; yet it is such as the nature of the Thing will bear, and such
as command a firm assent of the Mind, without doubting of the truth of what it
believes. The first is a Mathematical or Metaphysical Certainty, and with this
absolute, mathematical, and metaphysical Certainty, you, and I, and all the
World, are sure that two and two make four, and that a thing cannot be and not
be at the same time. The second is moral Certainty, which results from Reasons
on one side in every Matter and Question, that visibly preponderate the Reasons
on the other, and so commands the Assent of a Man's Understanding, that he has
either no doubt, or very weak ones, of the truth of the thing which he
believes. This indeed is a sort of Certainty inferior to the other; but yet
such a one as you, and I, and all Men, have of most of the things of which we
are certain, as that there was such a Man as Moses; and upon this sort of
Certainty, and no other, we make no doubt of venturing our Lives and Estates in
this World, and our Souls in the next. I presume, Doctor, you will allow this
for a good distinction; and if you do, then, with submission, I must ask you,
Which Certainty do you mean in the Questions you have put to these Men. I dare
say you do not mean the former, for some ill Consequences I need not mention;
but if the latter, then Dr. for once permit one of the little Writers to show
you the Folly and Vanity of this way of arguing in Questions about Certainty,
from a few Questions of the same Nature. Are you certain then, that your Text
is the Words of St. Paul, or that they were written by divine Inspiration? Are
you certain that there are there Persons in the holy Trinity? That there is
such a Continent as America? Or, to jest and argue together, are you certain
that your Priests Orders are valid, that your Marriage with your incomparable
Lady was lawful, or that your Children are your own? The answering these
Questions, Dr. will help to convince you, to what little purpose you put so
many of the same nature about Certainty; however I will answer them in order.

To the first then, they say, that they are as certain that by all Powers, Romans
13.1. the Apostle only means such as have legal Right and Title to Power, as
they are that he expressly teaches, that all Power is of God. But, 2. They also
say, that though they were not so certain, which is not necessary; yet they are
so certain of it, as that they make no doubt of it, and venture their All, here
and hereafter, upon the truth of it. Your second Question, they say, agrees not
with your first, nor with the design of your Sermon: For when you ask them
whether they are as certain that it is unlawful to pray for Kings legally
invested, etc. as they are that the Apostle commands us to pray for Kings; they
say, that according to your Hypothesis the questoin ought to be put of Kings
illegally invested with the Royal Power; and then they answer, that illegal
Kings cannot be legally invested, and as certain that it is as unlawful to pray
for illegal Kings, as they are that the Apostle commands us to pray for Kings,
and all that are in Authority; and likewise add, as before to the Answer of the
first Question. In your third they observe, that you call the lawful King's
Right a supposed Right, whereas the providential King's Right is merely so; but
the lawful King out of Possession has, according to your state of the
Controversy, a real Right to possess, and to recover Possession if he can; and
therefore if they could wonder at you for any thing, they say they should
wonder why you call it a supposed Right: And in order to answer the question,
as they are a distinguishing sort of Men; so they distinguish about Estates of
the Realm, and they say they are of three sorts: 1. Estates that are always
free. 2. Estates that are sometimes free. And, 3. Estates that are never free.
The first are Sovereign Estates, as the Estates of Rome formerly were, and
those of Venice now are, in whom the supreme Authority is lodged, and all
Persons in their Dominions are subject to them, and they are subject unto none.
The second are the Estates of Elective Kingdoms, where there is an Interregnum
of Freedom to choose a new King in, as in Poland, and some other Kingdoms. And
the third are the Estates of Hereditary Kingdoms, where by Law there is no
Interregnum, but the last moment of one King's Reign is the first of another,
and where by consequence all Ranks and Orders of Men are constantly subject,
even as constantly as if they had but one immortal, or never dying King. This
distinction being premised, they answer in Thesi, that they are certain that it
is the Duty of Subjects to adhere to the legal Right, and him that has it, in
opposition to an unlawful King, put into the Throne by subject and unfree
Estates, that have no Authority, Right, or Liberty to make Kings, because the
Law has always Kings ready made for them, to whom they ought to be subject. I
say they are certain, nay as certain that it is the Duty of Subjects, whatever
they suffer by it, to adhere to the legal Right in such a Case, as they are
that it is our duty to pray for Kings. And then to your last Question they
answer, that they are as certain that the Roman Powers or Emperors were legal
and rightful Powers, when the Apostle wrote, as that he commanded the
Christians to be subject to them, and pray for them: For they were placed in
the Throne by free Estates, who had Authority to place them there; but you,
more like a Sophister than a Preacher of Truth, take no notice of this plane
distinction, as if the Estates of all Kingdoms were alike free and Sovereign:
These Men, say you, (p. 18.) will pray for no Kings unless they be legal Kings,
though they have all the Ensigns of Majesty, and are invested with the legal
Authority and Power, with all the legal and customary Rights and Solemnities of
Investiture, and are acknowledged and recognized by the Estates of the Realm.
These are fine words, Dr. but did you never hear of Realms where Kings are
Kings without any Ensigns of Majesty, before the Solemnity of Coronation; of
Realms where the King, quatenus King, never dies, and by consequence where the
Estates are always subject to the King, and have no Interregnum of Freedom; of
Realms where for the aforesaid Reason the King is said to demise when he
departs this Life, and where the King is crowned because he is King, and not
King because he is crowned? Fie, Dr. fie; I am ashamed of your Ignorance, if
you have lived among Lawyers so long, and not know these things, or of
something worse than that, if you knew them, and suppress them because they did
not suit with you Providential Scheme.

I have now, Dr. answered your Questions plainly, and perhaps more plainly than
you desired; but to show you and the Worshipful Bench how much you dare impose
upon them, I must ask you the same questions, the same proper questions about
degrees of Evidence and Certitude, (p. 20.) Come therefore, Dr. sublime,
seraphick, irrefragable Dr. for once vouchsafe to answer a poor little Writer,
who humbly desires to know, 1. Whether you are as certain, that by all Powers
Romans 13.1. the Apostle means Powers that have no legal Right and Title, as well
as Powers that have legal Right and Title and prosecute that Right, as you are
that he expressly teaches that all Power is of God? 2. Whether you are as
certain that it is lawful to pray for unlawful Kings, who have no legal Right
to the Power which they exercise, as you are that the Apostle commands us to
pray for Kings, and all that are in Authority? 3. Whether you are as certain
that it is the Subjects duty to adhere to a supposed Providential Right,
against the Laws of the Realm, and in opposition to the lawful King, and his
Right, as you are that it is our duty to pray for Kings? 4. Are you as certain
that the Roman Powers, when the Apostles wrote, were illegal and usurping
Powers, which you affirm, as you are that St. Paul commanded Christians to be
subject to them, and to pray for them? These, Dr. are your own Questions, and
doubtless you can answer them better than any other Man; but when you think fit
to do so, let me entreat you not to perplex the Controversy of Right and legal
Right, with the Word antecedent, as you have done in your Sermon 4 or 5 times,
merely to amuze your Readers, and fill them with Prejudice against these Men;
as if they would own no Man for King, but such as comes to the Administration
of the Sovereign Power with an antecedent Right. But this, Dr. is a great, and
I fear a wilful mistake of yours; for provided that he that has the actual
Administration of Government has a legal Right to it, it is all one to them
whether it be an antecedent, concomitant, or consequent Right; Right, or legal
Right is the thing that they look after in him that has the Sovereign Power,
and that alone which can lay the Obligation of Obedience upon Men's
Consciences, and command Subjection from them. Sovereign Power, how
providentially soever it is attained, is but Sovereign Force and Tyranny
without it, and to speak in logical Strictness, King is a name of Law and
Right; and as soon as a Man has the Right which the Law gives to Sovereign
Power, he is King; and King no sooner than he has that Right.

I have now answered every thing in your Sermon relating to the Controversy
concerning Kings, and I here declare that I have only defended the Principles
and Reasonings of your Adversaries against you; but if they be mistaken in Law,
and misapply them and this to the wrong Object, let them answer themselves for
their Mistake. My design and business is only to rescue your Text, and that in
Romans 13.1. and the Duties there commanded, from the mere Providential to the
Legal King; but if those Men have so little Wit, Law, or Philosophy, nay, so
little common Sense, as of two Pretenders to the Crown at any time, not to know
which has the legal Title, their Mistake may prove fatal, but I have nothing
to do with that. I am sure, Dr. you have done their Majesty's much Disservice
by awarding the legal Right from them, and giving them instead of it, an airy
Title by Providence, which Athaliah, Absalom, and Cromwell had, and every
prosperous Usurper can pretend to and I am confident had they been rightly
informed of the nature of your Principle; and of that loose and fickle, and
worthless Allegiance which Princes only get by it, they would have had your
Case of Allegiance censured, as it deserves, and instead of preferring you, had
punished you as the underminer of their Throne. I am certain had you wrote and
preached so in any of the former Protestant Raigns, you would have been
severely censured, and punished by the Laws of Church and State; and if, as you
tell us, the Revolution has made no Alteration in Government, it is not yet
too late to bring you to condign Punishment.

15. I thought I should have made an end, but finding some other Passages in
your Sermon, upon which the Reader may expect I should make some Reflections. I
cannot well pass them over. First then I cannot but animadvert upon the great
and undecent Liberty you take of speaking of the FRENCH KING, in this, and
almost all your Sermons; whereas in France that Antichristian Tyrant, as you
modestly call him, will not suffer the greatest of his Clergy to bring so much
as a railing Accusation against their Majesty's, or meddle with their
Administration, as you, and the Bp. of St. Asaph, and I know not how many more,
presume to do with his. But who made you Judges over him? He is God's Minister,
and God's anointed Servant, and who art thou that judge another Man's
Servant? To his own Master he stands or falls. And what have you to do to
impeach him of Tyranny, Persecution, and Oppression? Do you know the reasons of
his Actions, or can you tell what may be said to justify or excuse the worst
thing that he ever did? You told Dr. Burrnet at Ely-house, when he spoke
reproachfully of King James, that Crowned Heads ought not to be so treated; but
now, Dr. you make no difficulty of treating the greatest of Crowned Heads at a
much worse rate, though he is God's ordinance on a double account, both as a
Legal and Providential King. One would think, to read in what a losty and
insolent manner you speak of him, that you were your self IMP. PON. MAX. or
some great Prophet, that had received Commission from Heaven to arraign Kings.
Certainly there is something very extraordinary in you, something very divine,
or very diabolical, that of late you have a Mouth given you speaking
Blasphemies against Kings, and against a King who has as many and great Virtues
as any King in the World, f. s. p. 10, 11, 12.
Persecutor, Oppressor, Enslaver of Men's Bodies and Souls, Tyrant, and
antichristian Tyrant. This, Dr. sounds like the Language of the Beast, not of a
Minister of the Church of England; it runs in the Style of an Excommunication
Bull; and as you are as great as the Pope in your own Opinion, so you have
learnt to huff and hector Kings: But, what! are you thus to take upon you? You
who but the other day were digging in Gravel-lane for Bread, to what an height
are you come from almost nothing, and a Conventicle, to defy Crowned Heads!
But we know from whence all this comes, even from a most servile Spirit, that
cares not what it says or does, so it humor the Times, and please the People:
Of this no man has been more guilty than you, and I will give you and the
World an instance of it. Sometimes Liberty and Indulgence to Dissenters were in
vogue, and sometimes not; and accordingly you watched the Opportunities, and
wrote pro and con on it on both sides: You were for it in your Preface to your
Religious Assemblies, and you were against it in your Answer to Whitby, and
your Reflections upon the Plot; but for it again in your Sermon before the Ld.
Mayor, a little before the Revolution; and I doubt not but another Crisis would
make you once more against it. From this Time-serving and Self-seeking
Principle it comes, that the French K. is made the common place of Satyr in
your and other such Clergy-mens Sermons. He has taken the part of K. James,
and that makes him so great a Tyrant; but had he been against him, and the
Confederate Power for him, then they had been the Tyrants and Oppressors; and
he that is now a Nero, a Dioclesian, had then been a most excellent Prince. How
many Declamations had Dr. Sherlock by this time made for him, and against them,
if he had been our Allie, and his victorious Legions employed in our Service?
Then we had heard again from the Pulpits the old Philippicks against Spain, and
the Inquisition; the Pulpits would have rung then with Invectives against the
Pope, the Emperor, and the Hungarian Persecutions; and we should have been told
again of Amboyna, and all the Injuries and Insults of the Dutch: But as the
Case now stands, nothing must be said against them; the French K. is the only
Antichrist, and all the Tyrants in Europe, a very Devil in humane shape. Well,
Dr. you know many men have made Speeches in praise of the Plague, and Famine,
and Tyrants, and therefore for once let us defend a Paradox, and try what may
be said for Busiris, or rather for the Hercules of France. You tell us he
invades the Liberties of Europe; but I protest that is News to me, for I never
heard before that he made War with Europe. Sweden, Denmark, Poland,
Switzerland, Italy, and Russia, as I take it, are all in Europe; but I hear
them not complain of him for usurping on their Liberties, or pretend to have
any Reprisals to make upon him. Besides, Dr. I am not able to understand what
are the Liberties of Europe, and desire to know where they are, or in what Code
or Charter one may find them. If Europe have any Liberties, it must be a
Community; but I never read of the Community of Europe, though I have of that of
Asia, (which was a Community of 13 Cities in the Proconsular Asia,) both in
Books and Coins. The Community of Asia coined a fine new Medal to the memory of
Germanicus and Drusus, which on the Reverse within a Laurel Crown has (...);
and they also coined Medals in memory of a Temple which they consecrated to
Rome and Augustus, with COM on one side of the Temple, and ASIAE on the other;
but I never read of any thing done by the Community of Europe, and would be
glad to be informed what the Nature and Constitution of it is, where it holds
its Dyets, when it chooses the Europarcha, and in what place its Members or
their Deputies meet: But it may be, Doctor, by the Liberties of Europe you mean
those of the Confederate Part of Europe; and if you do, then, excepting our own
Country, I pray tell me where the People live better, or enjoy greater
Liberties than they do in France. In France truly the common People go in
wooden Shoes, and in most of the foreign Confederate Countries they have the
Liberty to go barefoot; in France they have whole Canvass, or other mean
Clothing, and in many of the Confederate Countries they are half naked; and if
indeed King Lewis were such an Oppressor of Liberties, then the Common People,
and Burghors, and Clergy of the Spanish Netherlands would not so favor him,
and desire to come under his Government, as we are informed they do: The
Spanish Clergy underhand commend him to their People, and the Clergy and
learned men of his own Kingdom admire him; and this shows at least that he is
good to the Clergy, and maintains their Privileges and Revenues; and that,
Doctor, I tell you is maintaining our Religion in their Style as well as ours.
You blame him also for destroying and extirpating his Protestant Subjects; but
would you blame him if he did it because they had a design to destroy and
extirpate him? You formerly said in one of your Sermons, that If the
Consciences of Subjects will serve them to rebel for Religion, Reflections on
the Discovery of the late Plot, p. 15.
it seems a very hard Case, if the Conscience of the Prince must not allow him
to hang them for their Rebellion. And so, Sir, if the Consciences of Subjects
will serve them to extirpate their King; it is very hard, if he comes to the
knowledge of it, that he may not be beforehand with them, and extirpate them.
The French King is no stranger to the Civil Wars of France, he knew what
Principles and Persons had been the cause of most of them; and as sensible as
he is of his own Greatness, yet he knew he was not a Match to Confederate
Enemies without, and Rebels within, at the same time: Wherefore he thought it
for the safety of his Crown and Kingdoms to send the Trumpeters of Rebellion
betimes out of his Kingdom, who since have solicited all the Princes of Europe
against him, and plainly shown, that if they did not know what Spirit they were
of, he did. I must here beg pardon, O ye humble and holy Souls of Ramus,
Charpenter, Moulin, Amyrault, and Bouchart! You indeed were not fighting
Evangelists; but there were few such as you in times past, and fewer of late
among the French Protestants, who would prefer the Cross before the Sword. The
Attempt and Actions of some of them this Summer have justified their King, and
discovered the Secret of his Severity against them, as Monsieur Louvois did
some time since to an English Lord, to whom he appointed a time on purpose to
discourse on that Subject, and then assured him that his Master had discovered
a dangerous Correspondence betwixt his Protestant Subjects and the Dutch, and
that to prevent the ill Consequences of it, had once clapped up a hasty Peace
with them, and found he could not be safe in the next War, whenever that should
happen, unless he first subdued them. The Conversation we have had with them
does confirm this Opinion of their King; they are generally known to be for the
cursed Doctrine of Resistance; and for my part I never heard but of The Author
of a Book, entitled, Traite du Pourvoir absolu des Princes Soveraines, etc.
one of them that was against it: The rest openly avow it, as Jurieux in
Holland, and Allix now Canon of Salisbury, who although he had begged leave of
King James to dedicate a The Title of the Book is, Reflexious sur les Cinque
Livres de Moyse. It was printed at London, 1687 But the Dedication of it bears
date Dec. 12. 1636. In that he declares, that the Favors which his Majesty had
done to th^se of their Nation, who sought for Repose under the shadow of his
Scepter, were so great, and the Manner in which his Majesty had signalized his
Compassion toward them, had had such Effect on the Spirits of his Subjects,
that all the World ought to abhor them, if they had not a lively sense of his
Benefits, and did not endeavor to signaliz^ an Eternal Gratitude to him. Then
he proceeds to make a solemn Protestation in his own name, and the name of his
suffering Countrymen, of a profound Submission to his Majesty's Commands, and
an inviolable fidelity to his Service; acknowledging that he was the greatest
Instrument that God had chosen to protect and comfort (...) in their Miseries,
and that it was to God that they applied themselves in ^ti^ual Obligations of
most ardent Vows for his Prosperity: And in the Conclusion begs leave that his
Majesty would accept the weak Efforts of his Zeal, and permit him to style
himself his Majesty's most humble and most obtain Subject and Servant, P.
Allix. But forgetting all this when the Bishops were in the Tower, he said to
one of his Acquaintance, What do the Temporal Lords mean? Why do they not fly
to (...)?
Book to him, in token of his Gratitude, and the Gratitude of his Countrymen,
for the Protection and the Kindness they had received from him; yet upon the
Revolution he did all he could to suppress the Dedication in which he had set
forth his Majesty's Praises, and railed against him in his distress with all
the Rage that a Tongue could do that was set on fire of Hell. That King was not
ignorant of their Spirit, no more than their own; for when the Bishops
interceded with his Majesty for a Brief in their Behalf, My Lords, said he,
Perhaps if you know these Men as well as I, you would not ask this of me; but
you shall see I am a Christian, and that I can do good to them that hate me.
These Men I know are mine Enemies; but nevertheless I will not only grant them
a Brief, that my People may relieve them, but I will also relieve them my self.
And as he foretold it came to pass; for they listed in great numbers against
him, and helped to drive him out of his Kingdom of Ireland, although, Doctor,
he had your Title of Providence to it, and was recognized by the Estates of the
Realm. This, Doctor, I fear is the Spirit, and these the Principles, generally
speaking, of the Refugees; and this Spirit, and these Principles, of which they
give so many Signs, obliged the King for his own Security to send their
Ministers out of his Kingdom; but he did not send them away empty, he did not
send them to the Galleys, as you know who did. What I have said, Doctor, is
out of justice, and not out of kindness to the French Monarch, I am none of
those that wish he may prevail, and bear all before him like a Torrent; but I
do not like that he should be ignorantly and partially traduced by every soul
mouthed Pulpitier, when were it not for his invincible Mistake in Religion, he
would be thought, even by you, one of the bravest Princes that ever wore a
Crown: Nor have I any ill Will at his Protestant Subjects; I have been as great
a Reliever of them in proportion to my Ability, as any other Man in the
Kingdom, and should be glad to see a Vindication of them, that I might have a
better Opinion of them. I grant the King has persecuted them with very great
Severity, and made havoc of their Church, and am as sorry as you can be for
it, and for the Cause of it; but then are there no persecutors among the
Confederate Princes? Look about you, Doctor; set the Acts, and Edicts, and
Executions of other Princes against his; and then you will find, that other
Protestants besides the French have been dragoon'd, and lost their Estates,
their Lives, their Liberties, and their Country, for Conscience sake. In
short, the French Apologists tell us, that the King persecuted them, because
they intended to persecute him: This their own Consciences can tell them
whether it be true or no; and if it be true, then their destruction is of
themselves, and they have brought down their Ruin upon their own Heads. The
Bishop of St. Asaph, who foretold the Downfall of their King, has now foretold
his Conversion, and their Restitution: It is some Months ago since he foretold
that this would happen within a year; God grant his Prediction may prove true;
it would make his Majesty a Constantine to his People: But yet I fear that
would not satisfy some Men, nor reconcile their ulcerated Minds to him, unless
with the Popish Religion he quitted the Interests of King James. This, Doctor,
is another crowned Head, against whom you love to croak: All your malicious
Speeches and Slanders of him, and particularly those in your first and second
Letter concerning the French Invasion, are filed up in Heaven, and shall be
brought in Evidence against you at the great Day of Judgment, when, without
public and bitter Repentance, you will appear at the left Hand, with Cromwell,
Bradshaw, Cook, Milton, and Thom. Good. win, and be sent with those Worthies of
the Old Cause into your own place. You cannot be content with sober and wise
Men among your Brethren, to say nothing of him; or when you speak, to speak of
him as they do, with Decency and Respect: but you fall upon him as the Mob did
at Feversham, with a brutal Rage, without any Regard to his Royal Name and
Person, or to her Majesty and the Princess, whom you dishonor in reproaching
of him: For let me tell you, Doctor, the Disgrace of the Chief always
terminates in the Clan; and the Men of Honor will tell you, they are bound to
revenge it, as soon as they have the Opportunity.

16. In this Sermon you also upbraid him with his Misfortunes, which no good
Man can think of, without the greatest degree of Compassion, scornfully calling
him the late unfortunate Prince. It is true, Doctor, he is unfortunate; but you
should have remembered what Solon said of Croesus, and that what happens to
Kings may also happen to Divines. You live now in great Prosperity, and State;
but God may yet bring you down: He can when he pleases take off the Wheels of
your Chariot, turn your Silver Candelesticks into Brass, and your Wax Candles
into Tallow, and reduce you even beyond your first principals, yet before you
dye. I wish this may not happen to you, nor none of those who insult over the
Calamities of that unfortunate Prince; but if it do so, remember you saw the
Anguish of his Soul, and had no Pity for him, and then say, therefore if this
Distress come upon us, -- One of the Nine Men, when he heard him pitied, had
the Barbarity to say, Why, what matter is it? He is but a Bastard, St. Alban 's
Bastard; and it is great pity that her Majesty had not been told of it, before
he put on his Lawn Slieves. We commonly say Misfortunes are no Crimes; and
before you upbraid him with them again, remember his Father, the Martyr of the
Church of England, was unfortunate before him, and had this also added to the
rest of his Misfortunes, that he was reviled, and had in derision by such Sons
of the Earth as you. But God supported him by his Grace, and made him more than
Conqueror; and the same God which supported the Father, has also upheld the
Son under his Misfortunes; which let me tell you, had never come upon him, had
you and your Brethren the Clergy done their Duty, as some of them did: And
therefore methinks you should take no pleasure in ripping up his Misfortunes,
which are your Crimes. He was unfortunate in you more than in his Lay Subjects:
You might have saved him, as well as your Religion, if you would have preached
but half as much for him as you did for that; but your general Silence in the
needful time betrayed him to all his Misfortunes, and Now such as you among
your Brethren are very sorry that they are not greater, and mad against the
suffering Remnant, because they do not renounce him in his Misfortunes, and
murmur against God that has preserved him, and laid Help upon one that is
mighty for him; a mighty Prince, who has long maintained more Legions than the
Roman Empire did at the highest Pitch of Greatness, and who perhaps one day,
like Augustus and Trajan, may inscribe upon his Medals coined upon such
glorious Occasions, REX PARTHIS REX ARMENIS DATVS; for God seldom raises
Princes to that Greatness, but he has something extraordinary for them to do.
I must also remind you of another great Blessing, which God, who remembers
Mercy in Judgment has bestowed upon him, and thereby enabled him the better to
bear the loss of his Kingdoms: He has given him of his most virtuous Queen a
Royal See the Observator published Monday Aug. 21. and Wednesday Aug. 23. 1682.
Son and Daughter, by whom I trust the Royal Family will be multiplied into
many Branches, and come to be restored to its ancient Rights and Glory. The
Seed of the Royal Martyr is in them; and I hope it is no Crime to pray, that
God would give them the sure Mercies of David, and let them grow up like tender
Plants before him, in Wisdom, and Stature, and Favor both with God and Man.

17. Another thing, Doctor, I cannot but take notice of, is your Parasuical and
most exorbitant manner of aggrandizing our late Victory at Sea, which increases
that Contempt the World had before of you, and has given just occasion to some
observing men, who have compared your Character of it with that of the Bishop
of St. Asaph and Dr. Scot to affirm, that there was never so much Flattering
heard from the English Pulpits as in these days. In his Thanksgiving Sermon
before the Queen, p. 23.
Dr. Scot in lofty strains says, That it is one of the most glorious and
signal Victories that ever the Sea beheld; and yet afterward tells us how much
their strength was inferior to ours. And you say, that no Story can equal it,
except we compare it to the miraculous Overthrow of Pharaoh, and all his Host
in the red Sea. p. 31.
I profess to you, Doctor, I am no great Historian; but to show you much the
Doctor and you shot above the mark, I will present you with a Summary of a few
Sea Fights, where the Victory has been incomparably greater than this last of
ours.

In the Battle at Salamis, Themistocles with CCCLXXX defeated the Persian Navy,
consisting of MCCC. In the Battle between the Phalacrian Promontory and the
mouth of the River Helicon in Sicily, C. Druillius with a lesser Navy
vanquished the Carthaginian Fleet, consisting of CXXX Sail, of which, besides
those he destroyed, he took L, of which Hannibal, the Admiral's Ship, was one,
and the greatest part of the Carthaginians were also slain. Before this, I
think, Claudius Pulcher, the Consul, fighting with an ill Omen against the
Carthaginians, was defeated, and of CCXX Ships he saved only XXX, the Enemies
having taken and sunk the rest, Twenty thousand being made Captives. Attilus
Regulus and Manlius Volso, in another Sea Fight against Amilcar, took LXX
Vessels, with all their men, and sunk LXIV. And Marcus Aemilius, and Servius
Fulvius, with CCCL. Vessels, routed the Fleet of the Carthaginians, in which
they killed XVM men, and took and sunk CXIV Ships. C. Lutatius Catulus, with no
more than CCC Vessels, routed the Carthaginian Fleet, consisting of CCCC sail;
of which he took L, and sunk LXX; or, as Eutropius writes, he took LXXIII, and
sunk CXXV; took 30000 Prisoners, and slew 13000; after which, the
Carthaginians, who had so bravely disputed the Empire of the Sea, were forced
to sue for Peace; which I do not hear the French King has done yet. But to
take a great leap from Ancient to modern History, at the Famous Battle of
Lepanto, the Christians under the conduct of Don John of Austria, October 7.
1571. defeated the Turkish Fleet, though double in number of Galleys to theirs;
and the particular Account of this great Victory is thus in Knolls's Turkish
History: They took 161 Galleys, with 60 other smaller Vessels, and sunk and
burnt 40 Galleys more. The number of the slain was uncertain, but they were
reckoned about 30000, other Accounts say 25000, and they delivered 1200 Slaves;
and all but with the loss of 7566 men. And within the memory of Man Whitlock's
Memoirs, p. 515, 516.
Blake, in 1652, with 8 Fregats fought 12 Dutch Men of War, sunk 3, and took
the rest. p. 532.
June 1653. the English, without the loss of one Ship, and but with the loss of
126 men, besides General Dean, and one Captain, took 20 Dutch Men of War, 1350
Prisoners, and their whole loss amounted, by their own computation, to 5000
men; among the Ships that were taken were one Viceadmiral, and two
Rearadmirals. August the 1st, 1653. in a sharp Fight between the English and
Dutch, near the Coast of Holland, the English according to General Monk's and
Viceadmial Pen's Account, sunk 30 of their Men of War, and took 1000 Prisoners,
whereof Viceadmiral Id. p. 544.
Evertson was one, and killed about 3000, whereof Id. p. 545.
Vantrump the Admiral was one. The Dutch owned to have lost 27 Men of War in
this Fight, and 6000 men; the English lost but two Ships, and about 250 men.
And in the first Dutch War after the Restoration, the English, under the
Conduct of his Royal Highness the Duke of York, sunk and destroyed 20 of the
Dutch Ships, and blew up Admiral Opdam, with little loss on our side. These few
Instances, Doctor, are enough to show you, that there have been many greater
Victories at Sea, than this last of ours, and I hope they will teach you
hereafter to speak justly and adequately to your Subject, which Longinus makes
one of the Characters of true Eloquence, and I believe it will go a great way
in the Character of a wise and honest man.

18. I cannot also but observe, how many and great things you say of our
Deliverance, page 29, 30. because you thought it no Deleverance not long before
you took the Oath. To use your own Words against you, page 31. you thought it
then a Judgment and Calamity to be so delivered, and like a good Casuist
thought there might be some ways of Deliverance which a good man ought not to
accept of; and some among our selves have heard you speak of Generous and
Heroic Heathens, who have chosen to dye, rather than to deliver themselves by
the Breach of their Oaths. Principles of strict Honesty and Justice went a
great deal farther among them then, than they do now among some Christians;
and, as you in those days would say, they shall rise up in Judgment against
them, and condemn them: For then you could not see Wood for Trees, no more than
those Men, in seeing you could not see this great and blessed Deliverance, nor
understand it; and therefore, Doctor, it did not become you to reflect upon
them who remain in an Error which held you so long captive; your business
should be to convince them, and to provoke them, to overcome them with soft
Words and hard Arguments; but on the contrary you reproach them and revile
them, telling the World, page 32. That they invite the French to conquer them,
and to place a zealous Papist, and arbitrary Prince upon the Throne. Certainly,
Doctor, never man made so many rods for his own back, as you do in all your
Writings on this unhappy Controversy: For how long is it since you would have
rejoiced to see this Prince upon his Throne again, and would have had the
Miracle done, though France or Mahomet had done it? Is he more popish or
arbitrary now than He was then? Or is it not as lawful now as it was then to
make distinction between the King and the Papist, and between the French, as
French, and as the Allies of King James? The Dutch are a People that all the
World knows have done the English forty times more and greater Injuries than
the French have done; and yet we could, when time served, and still do
distinguish between the Dutch as Dutch, and the Dutch as our Friends and
Allies: And by consequence it would be false Logic, and a foul Reflection upon
some, to say that they invited the Dutch to conquer us. Well, but your meaning
is, that you wonder that any English Protestants should invite the French to
place King James in his Throne again: For my part I know no such English
Protestants as invite the French upon any score; but Have you not left King
James the legal Right to the Throne? And do not you allow him to prosecute it,
and recover it if he can? And does not the Law, from which, as you grant, he
has his Right to prosecute and recover, permit him also to seek Aid from the
French, as well as from the Dutch or Spaniards? And I dare say, if these would
bring him in, it would be all one to him, and to you too. Ay, but the French
are Papists: And was not the last Pope but one a Papist? And was not S --
privately sent to him; and did not he send a Nuncio privately hither? And are
not the Spaniards Inquisition-Papists? Or did the French ever do so base a
thing, as to say they were French, and no Christians; or have they not as much
natural Humanity, as any other men? But they are arbitrary Masters: But what
have we to do with them as Masters? And do not those that have to do with
them, find them as good Masters as some find their Neighbors? And come,
Doctor, tell me plainly, would you not accept of Help from the French, if you
stood in need of it? Nay, Would you not only accept of it, but be very glad of
it too? And therefore can you blame your old Master, if he seeks for Help from
France, since you to recover much less than Three Kingdoms would do the same
thing. If he had choice of Assistance you might have some color to blame him
for accepting of French Help, and be angry with those who consider the French
as his Allies. But here, Doctor, lies the Secret of your Displeasure: It is not
the French as French, or any other thing, but as King James's Friends and
Allies, that you and other Men hate them. You are afraid of him, and would
hate the Dutch as well as the French, if they were his Friends: And the reason
why you hate him is not that he is popish or arbitrary, but because if he
recover his Throne you will lose your Chair. This, Doctor, is the hidden but
true Resource of all the Venom you disgorge upon him and the French: You know
you have sinned beyond (...) like the Trumpeter in the In Sir Roger
L'Estrange's Aesop's Fables.
Fable, which with the Reflection upon it I recommend to your (...) could you
have been secured of Pardon, and more Preferment upon his Restoration, I
believe you would never have written your two Letters against the French
Invasion, nor have done the part of Shimei and Milton against him, as you have
lately done. It is observed for your Honor, that neither you nor the other
Pamphietiers preached or published one word against him before our late Victory
over the French Fleet; and I am confident, if they had been victorious, the
World had never seen your Temple Sermon, nor Letters, nor the Pretenses of the
French Invasion examined, by that or any other hand. On the contrary, we should
have had Books and Sermons of another make, and to another Tune, from the same
Quarter, and Apologies for King James, and the most arbitrary of his
Proceedings, upon those very Topics, from which (p. 23, 24, 25, 26.) you show
in three particulars how needful it is to pray for Kings. I would to God,
Doctor, you would seriously read them over again, and apply them to your old
Master; and if you will do so, I heartily pray God, that while you read and so
apply them, he would pour out upon you the Spirit of Prayer and Supplication,
that you may look upon him whom you have pierced, and mourn for him, and all
the Evils you have done against him as one mourns for his only Son.

The last thing I observe is a Contradiction of what you say, p. 27. by what
you say in p. 29. In the former place you truly tell us, That No Prince can
take our Religion from us, if we resolve to keep it; but they may disturb the
Quiet and peaceable Enjoyment of it; which was the state of the Church under
the Heathen and persecuting Emperors. This, Doctor, looks like something
spoken by the Author of Christian Prudence, or one of those Men who distinguish
between Religion and the Externals of Religion, to show the Fallacies and
Dis-ingenuity of others, that will not distinguish between our Religion, and
the Peace, Profit, and Honors, which by Law attend the Profession and
Administration of it. But then you forget your self again, and run into this
modish Fallacy in the latter place, where you tell us, That we owe our Religion
to K. William, which cannot be true, if King James could not take it from us,
as indeed he could not, let him have done the worst you can imagine, if we had
had the Faith and Constancy of the Church under the persecuting Emperors: Had
we followed their blessed Example, no Persecution could have hurt our Religion;
but like the Persecutions in primitive Times, would have made it more august
and venerable, and established it for ever; whereas it is now evil spoken of
for your sakes, and seems to be drawing on to a fatal End in Theism, Atheism,
Schisms, Heresies, and Enthusiasm, and an utter Contempt of the Clergy, of
which you have as much reason to be sensible, as any other Man. But what need I
to observe this Contradiction in you, who have contradicted your self so often,
that it will take up a great part of your Time and Thoughts to (...) view, and
censure your own Writings, and finally (...) what you will stand to, and what
you (...), and what you will have put in the collection of your Works, and what
you will have left out of it. I know this is no acceptable Work to a great and
haughty Writer; but, Doctor, it is a Work necessary to be done; and comfort
gour self with the Example of the great St. Augustine, and set about it
presently, while it is called day, lest the Night come upon you, when you
cannot work. You are bound in Honor and Conscience to do it, and the World
expects it from you, and will censure you when you are dead, if you leave it
undone. Consider therefore, Doctor, which of your contradictory Pieces is fit
to stand in the Collection of your Works, to declare your last Opinion of
things: Must the Old Case of Nonresistence. or the New Case of Allegiance make
part of them? Will you stand by your Discourse concerning the Knowledge of
Jesus Christ, and our Union and Communion with him, and the Defense and
Continuation of that discourse; or will you stand by the Discourse concerning
the Nature, Unity and Communion of the Catholic Church, which Dr. Clegget told
you was a flat Contradiction to the two former, and which you have been told
again and again the Dissenters make ill use of against the Church of England?
Shall your Sermons before, or your Sermons since you took the Oath, make part
of that Collection: By which of your two Faces will you be represented to
Posterity, the Face that looks backward before your Apostasy, or the Face that
looks forward since you Apostatized from your Principles? And will you finally
stand to your Tritheistical Notion of the Trinity, which has so exposed you to
the Arrians and Socinians, or will you retract it? These are things, Doctor,
that will require your most mature and serious Thoughts; and God grant, that
you may so determine about them, as may be most for his Glory, the Honor of
the Church of England, and that of your own Memory in Ages to come. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the Dedication, page 1. line ult. after give insert the Pope. In the
Contents, 7. l. 2. for is r. was, 18. l. 4. for view r. review. In the Book, p.
1. l. 14. after believe dele the Semi colon, p. 2. l. 39. after as it was put a
Comma, p. 5. l. 39. l. by r. in, p. 12. l. 26. r. reveal, l. 29. after for r.
the Prayers of, p. 13. l. 40. r. persist, p. 14. l. 14. r. Belisarius. p. 19.
l. 20. r. Moubray, p. 22. l. 12. for feared r. seared, l. 23. r. will ever be,
p. 34. l. 19. l. Idols r. Gods, and for Kings r. Gods, p. 36. l. 5. r. to the
Discretion, l: 36. r. CONSTANTIAL, p. 37. l. 6, f. Pomana r. Roma, l. 22. r. a
little of his Skill in Coins, p. 38. l. 23. r. dispute with, l. 31. r.
commands, p. 39. l. 22. r. and that they are as.


