A SERMON Preached on the 30th of January: VINDICATING King CHARLES THE MARTYR,
AND THE Keeping of the Day.

By E. H.

Which may serve for an ANSWER To Mr. Stephens's SERMON, Preached on the 30th
of January, before the Honorable House of Commons.

LONDON Printed, and are Sold by I. Nutt, near Stationers' Hall, 1700.

A SERMON Preached on the 30th of January, etc.
1 Kings XXI. 12, 13. They Proclaimed a Fast, and set Naboth on high among the
People.

And there came in two Men, Children of Belial, and sat before him, and the Men
of Belial witnessed against him, even against Naboth, in the Presence of the
People, saying, Naboth did Blaspheme God and the King. Then they carried him
forth out of the City, and Stoned him with Stones, that he Dyed.


Here Is a sad Story in the Text, to bring to our Remembrance this day a more
Tragical and Bemoaned History of a Later Date.

The Bloodshed in the Text, and That of this sad occasion, are too much
Parallel: Naboth's Vineyard made him the only Blasphemer of his City, and fit
to die; he must forfeit his Life, that he may forfeit his Lands: And the
glorious Martyr of this days Celebration must forfeit His Head, that He might
forfeit the Diadem.

Both of them therefore were thought worthy to Die, because worth the Killing.
The greatest Purse is the beloved Prey of the greatest Thieves. The stateliest
Cedar must first feel the Ax: And the Tree with the goodliest, and best grown
Branches, must be soonest Lopt. Thus ourbest Deer must be first Destroyed. And
both fall by the hands of men of Belial: And yet, Both, with the specious and
plausible Formalities of Religion and Justice.

1. Religion. They proclaimed a Fast, sought the Lord, Fasted and Wept; as if
their Tender Consciences durst attempt nothing without Advice first from the
Oracle of Heaven.

2. Justice. They set up a Court of Judicature; and first set Naboth on high
among the People, and then bring in their Evidence, two Men, Children of
Belial, Knights of the Post, (as the like wretches did against our Savior and
our Sovereign) This Man Blasphemed, etc.

Impudent Cruelty! Is not Malice and Murder sufficiently Solemn without the
mockery of Piety and Justice? Is it not enough to Deflower Innocence, but must
Religion be the Pander? Is It not enough to Ensnare the Righteous, but must
Divinity be the Stalking-Horse? Must the Fountain of Light be brought in as an
Accessory to the works of Darkness? Is not the Devil Fiend enough, except he
appear like an Angel of Light? And is nothing but the Glorious Gospel, and the
Cause of GOD, a fit Mask for such Loathsome Deformities? Is this Religion? Is
this the Cause? My Letany must be that of Jacob's, in Detestation of his Bloody
Sons, those Instruments of Cruelty, Oh my Soul, come not into their Secrets;
unto their Assembly, mine Honor, be not thou united, Genesis 49.6.

A doleful Tragedy then is the Text; which begins Speciously, but ends in
Heaviness; begins Gorgeously, but ends in Blood.

For when I read the first words, They proclaimed a Fast, my surprised
Meditations can scarcely credit my Eyes, when they view the last words, They
stoned him with stones; so incongruous is the Consequence. Who can imagine that
Murder should stain the Epilogue, when the Prologue was so gloriously gilded
with Religion?

The words then are nothing else, but the description of a High Court of
Justice, solemnly Erected by Wicked Men, Men of Belial, Celebrated with the
especious Pretext of a Religious Fast, to avouch the Arraignment, and Bloody
Sentence past upon a Guiltless Man: Veiling the Murder with the Vmbrage of
Devotion and Justice, and therefore publicly Solomnized in the presence of the
People; not Covertly, as Richard the Third Murdered his Nephews; but
Impudently, and before the Sun.

Wherein Six Particulars do especially present themselves to our Consideration;
all too suitable (if it had been the will of GOD to the contrary) to the
Bewailed Occasion of this days Remembrance: The Last whereof ought, in our
Method, to be First taken notice of.

I. What was done: A Bloody Murder, They Stoned. II. Upon whom it was done:
Upon an Innocent Man. III. By whom it was done: By Men of Belial. IV. Before
whom it was done: In the presence of the People. V. How it was done: With the
Method and Formalities of Piety and Justice. VI. Why it was done: The pretended
cause was, his Blasphemy: But,
The true Cause is expressed in the sixth and seventh Verses of this Chapter.
Ahab Longed for the pleasant Vineyard, and Jezabel will stay the Longing of
this greedy Cannibal, though it be with Man's Flesh; and quench his covetous
Thirst with a Draught of Blood.

If Naboth had been Poor and Lean, he had escaped amongst the Rascal Herd; but
he was too Fat and Fair-like, to avoid the Shambles of these bloody Butchers.
His fertile Field, like another Golgotha, must be the Price of Blood.

Thus the Pleasant Vineyards, the Tempting Crown Lands, and Bishops-Lands,
exposed the Sacred Person of our Sovereign to the rapacious Jaws of our keener
Wolves. Our Loftiest Mountains were most subject to the Storm.

The Text will furnish us with Three Observations, seasonable for our
Meditations this day. I will speak to each of them, as far as may suit with the
present occasion, which yet will afford us a large field of Discourse.

First, Many times in this Life the Worst Usage does befall the Best of Men.

Here Is no just offense given, yet Naboth must die the death of a Murderer.

Innocence, we see, is no sure Protection; nay, it is sometimes arraigned, when
Villainy goes scot-free, or (it may be) sits on the Bench; as if Astraea's
flight was no Poetical fiction, but a real History; as if there was no Reward
for the Righteous, nor a GOD that judges in the Earth.

Thus Hemlock and the worst of Weeds may outlive a Storm, when the Rose and
Lilly is Deflowred. Manasseth, that Monster of Men, Reigned the longest of any
of the Kings of Judah, yet good Josiah was slain in Battle; and Jeroboam, an
Usurper, lived to see Three Successions in the Throne of Judah.

Many Brutes outlive Men; and many brutish men the best of men. Sure I am, our
worst Ivies flourished, when the Royal Oak, that supported them, was dead.

What shall we say to these things? This strange and uncouth visage of
Providence did so startle the Prophet David, that it almost frighted him out of
his Faith: He knew not what to think on it, but was ready to say, Verily I have
cleansed my Heart in vain, and washed my Hands in Innocence: Because the
Ungodly prospered in the world. Nabal in Plenty, when David was ready to Starve
for want of Bread.

The chief Argument that Cicero produces to prove, That the Jews were not the
People of GOD, is taken from no other Topic, then St. Paul, (who wrote not
long after him) makes use of to the same Hebrews, to prove the contrary; to
wit, Their frequent Afflictions, Heb. 12.6, 7, 8. Whom the Lord loves, He
chasteneth, and scourges every Son, whom He receives. If ye endure
chastening, GOD deals with you, as with Sons: For what Son is be, whom the
Father chasteneth not? But if ye be without chastisement, whereof all (GOD's
Children) are Partakers, then are ye Bastards, and not Sons: Whereas Tully
upbraids the Hebrews with their often Captivity: You may know by their
Miseries, says he, how well GOD loves them. Which, however Ironically by him
spoken, is undoubtedly a great Truth; I am sure, God says so, Amos 3.2. You
only have I known of all the Families of the Earth, therefore will I Punish
you. And again, threatening to throw them off, He tells them, He will throw away
the Rod, and trouble Himself no more with them, Hos. 4.14. I will not punish
your Daughters, when they commit Whoredom; nor your Spouses, when they commit
Iniquity.

The Muscovitish Women are jealous, that their Husbands do not love them, if
they do not beat them a little now and then. I am sure, we may well be Jealous
that GOD loves us not, if He never beats us. So Christ says, Whom I love, I
rebuke, and chasten. Success therefore and Prosperity are no infallible marks
of GOD's Favor to a Cause, or People; if it were, we must Renounce our
Savior, Apostatize from Christianity, and turn Renegadoes to Mahometism.

It Is with a true Christian, as with a Porter; the more he bears, and the
oftener he is burdened, the more is his benefit though the load be heavy. St.
Peter therefore, who had his Back-burthen of Afflictions, esteemed a tempted
and tried Faith, as tried Gold; the hotter the Fire, the purer will be the
Metal: The more fiery a Believers Trial, the more splendid will be his Graces.

The Rustic answered Luther as Profanely as Clownishly, when the good Father
told him in the extremity of his Sickness, That such Chastisements were Gods
Love Tokens: Then (answered he) let Him keep them to Himself for me, or give
them to His best friends. Blessed Beza made a better use of his Sickness at
Paris, which he calls "The cause of his Health, Morbus isle sanitatis meae
principium: That Sickness, says he, made me Well.

It Is often best with the Soul, when it is worst with the Body: Wounds in the
Flesh may prove Vulneratives to the Conscience.

Thus Corrections prove Instructions: We have the Wise Man's word to avouch it;
and he might speak Experimentally; for his Prosperity did him more harm, than
all his Wisdom did him good, Prove. 6.23. Reproofs of Instruction are the way of
Life. Heb. The Corrections of Instructions are the way of Life: For schola
Crucis est schola Lucis; and Adversity the best University.

For two Reasons therefore, (to name no more) The Best of Men may meet with the
Worst of Usage in this Life.

1. Because their Portion is not here to be Paid. For though many times a good
Joseph enjoyes eighty eight Years of Peace and Plenty for his thirteen Years
Imprisonment: Yet these Rewards of a Child of Gods good service, are overplus,
and more than Christ has obliged Himself unto, in His last Will and Testament;
In the World ye shall have Tribulation, that is your lot here, says Christ; but
in Me ye shall have Peace, that is your Portion. Omnis Christianus Crucianus,
Every good Christian must wear a Crucifix. Ecclesia est Haeres Crucis: The
Church can claim Administration of nothing in this World, but Christ's Cross:
Therefore it was that Ignatius, when he came to Encounter the wild Beasts at
Rome, said, Now I begin to be a Christian. And Luther excellently (according to
his Passionate way) expresses himself to this purpose, I protest (says he) GOD
shall not put me off with a Portion in this Life. David makes it the definition
of a Wicked Man, to have his Portion in this World.

Why then Repinest thou, O my Soul! that the Ungodly Prosper in the world, and
dip their Polluted Hands in the Blood of the Innocent? Why art thou cast down,
O my Soul, and why art thou disquieted within me, when the Rod of the Wicked
does rest on the Back of the Righteous? Art thou so Covetous that nothing will
Content thee but Two Heavens! Wicked Men make a shift to be satisfied with
their momentany Delusions, their Bird in Hand, their flitting Pleasures! that
yet take themselves Wings and fly away! And art not thou Contented with the
Permanent Incomes of God, and Christ, and Heaven? Sure thou art not content to
change thy Portion (for such brittle Ware as the World affords) why then not
Content with thy Portion? Greedy Miser! thou would have all, and yet can
Enjoy nothing. It Is so: Well then, good God, continue me thy Peace, and Food
and Raiment, and then I will not Envy Caesar.

2. Because the Best of Men have need of such hard usage, to bring their Sins
to remembrance; to rub off the contracted rust, they must be sometimes Scoured.
David, about to be Expelled from his Kingdoms, gave a better answer to Cursing
Shimei; then at his Return, to Good Mephibosheth. To be a Captive, makes man
pitiful to Captives: Isreal's Bondage should make them liberal to Bondmen,
whereas Liberty and Fullness breeds Forgetfulness; and therefore God will
Exercise his People with a Paroxisme, a fit or two of distress, to be their
Remembrancers. The best Clothes had need some times to be Shaken, or they will
be Dusty.

Lessons set on with a Whipping, are best remembered; and God never Whips his
Children, but when no saying will serve. Ictus piscator sapit; even good Men,
like the Wallnut-Tree, will not be fruitful, except sometimes beaten. Good
David grew almost wild for want of pruning. Psalm. 119.67. Before I was
afflicted I went astray, but now have I kept thy word.

But to Apply this to the present Occasion.
1. This may serve to state our Judgments aright in the construction of Cross
Providence.

I call them Cross-Providences, not that any Providence can possibly be really
cross or adverse, either to a Child of God, or Gods Glory, (who always makes
even and smooth work in conclusion, though he may seem to work with a crooked
Tool) but because it may seem cross to us, through our short and dim-sightedness;
or because they are represented to us by a false Medium, as a Stick half in the
water, that seems crooked, but is not really so; and that you will know, if you
either thrust all the Stick into the water, or pull it out: So when Men see
Gods Dispensations but by halves, they think them cross and crooked, though they
are not really so, and that they will find in the issue. What was more likely
to cross Joseph in his promised Advancement, than to be Sold for a Bond-Slave?
Yet that proved the fittest and readiest means thereto. Thus the Wheels of
Providence, like the Wheels of a Clock, may move counter, yet each Motion
concur to make it go the better.

Let us not therefore charge God foolishly, when he permits a Slave to lash his
Children. He looks on, and will either end our sufferings, or mend us by
suffering. He is no loser that loses a Crown stuffed with Cares, who is thereby
fitted for a Crown of Glory.

Condemn not then a Saint, because God suffers him to be a Martyr. Christ
himself was Crucified, and hansell'd the Cross as well as the Crown; a Crown of
Thorns, as well as a Crown of Immortality.

Shall we give Judas the supremacy amongst the Apostles, because he carried the
Bagg? or enshrine our Bloody Varlets because they got the Bagg? or Christen
Villainy, Murder, and Rapin, because (like Weeds) they throve and prospered,
when our wholesomest Herbs were nipt in the Bud? This would be to Idolize (like
the Ruder Israelites) a Calf, because made up of Golden Earrings.

Prosperity therefore can never avouch Impiety, nor the most fiery Trial brand
the Innocent. 'Twas but Tyrannous Usurpation, though they Murdered the Heir, that
they might Heir his Estate: Have thou Killed, and also taken possession? Is
this Title good in Law? In Gods Law?

Though Impious Men, in their fullness and jollity, may be most mad upon their
villainy, like Lunaticks, when the Moon's at Full, yet is this a Testimonial
that their Heads are Light. Much Success like much Wine, does but the more
Intoxicate. Prosperous Gales often fill the Sails of Pirates, but does not
justify their Piracy, was the Expression of the Royal Martyr.

2. This may likewise inform us, That if the Best of Men may meet with the
Worst of Usage in this Life, then the Best things in this Life, are not the
Best things. If the richest Liveries were the best Love Tokens our Heavenly
Father could give his Children, the Slave should Out-brave the Son. Those that
have turned Judgment into Gall, and Righteousness into Hemlock, may rejoice in
a thing of Naught: So is Prosperity termed, Amos 6.13. And so are those Naughty
Men termed in the Verse foregoing, Amos 6.12.

Men of little Worth then may have the Greatest outward Enjoyments; but those
are, at Best, Enjoyments of little worth. The Honorable Garter cannot cure the
Gout, nor a Crown the Headache; nor a Sound Estate a Wounded Conscience. Even
Crowns (we see this day by woeful Experience) have their Crosses.

Therefore it was that Antigonus called his Diadem, (and did not miscal it)
Vilem Pannum, an unhappy Rag, and he did not Nickname it. And excellently well
did a Noble Monarch express the sentiments he had of his Crown, when he said,
He that knows the Cares with which a Crown is Stuffed, would hardly stoop to take
it off the Ground.

The Chair of State cannot ease the Colic, nor the choicest Dainties the
Toothache: And therefore Thrones upon earth are but Bona Scabelli, God's
Foot-stool-gifts. He reserves the Bona Throni for his deserving Ones: The
greatest Beauties have not always the greatest Dowries.

History tells us that a Good Man being troubled that Phocas the Traitor
reigned at Constantinople, and earnest in Prayer to God to know the reason of
it, had this answer, Because a worse Man could not be found: Which might have
served for a good Answer to us, when the same Riddle of God's strange dealings
puzzled us in the Traitorous Usurpations we Lament this Day. Worse Men, nor more
Bloody Men, nor Impudent Juglers (who Tipped their Tongues with the Gospel, when
their Hands were Dipped in Blood) more abominable Varlets could not be found. Why
did God Whip his choicest Children with Rods of Iron? The answer's plain: Those
Rods of Iron were the fittest Instruments for him to use in that Iron Age of
harder Dispensations; but still they were but Rods of Iron, though Enveloped
through Usurpation with Crowns of Gold: Briars of the Wilderness are the fittest
to make a Scratch, and the Worst of Men most apt for the Worst of Works.

Therefore it is that Saint Bernard well define; Prosperity to be Misericordiam
omnis indignatione crudeliorem, a most Unmerciful Mercy: Such excellent Baubles
as the Children of this World do Fancy, being given many times to the worst of
Men, as Quai^s to the Israelites, not to Feed but Choke them. Who would long
for a fine Suit, that is infected with the Plague? Such Infection attends all
outward Mercies, if Uncleansed, if Unsanctified; and therefore they are not the
Best things.

3. Hence let us see the Inconstancies and Vanity of all Humane Enjoyments: As
in the Text, Naboth in the Morning happy, even to the Envy of a King; and
presently after used like a Murderer, and from Being set on high amongst the
People, is forthwith pulled down, hurried away, and Stoned to Death.

The most Vertical heights under Heaven are the most Vertiginous; do but dizzy
the Brains the more, and subject us to a Fall. There Is nothing therefore so
sure, as that there is nothing sure in this World: Not Crowns nor Scepters, as
this days woeful Advertisement can remind us.

Place not your Confidence then in any sublunary Enjoyments, which are all as
Unconstant as the Moon, seldom looking with One and the same Face.

But let him that stands take heed lest he fall. The Egyptians have known
what Famine is, and yet they have Boasted, that they Enjoyed a piece of Earth
that stood not in need of Heaven.

Yet this glorious Birthright, for all their Vaunting, they were glad to sell
in Joseph's time for a Morsel of Bread (as their Grandsire Esau did his, for a
Mess of Pottage.) So certain it is, that God will make even Atheists confess
that there is nothing certain on this side Heaven.

Of which our blessed Martyr had a Heavenly Sense in those Pathetick and Sacred
Soliloquies: I thank God my Prosperity made me not wholly a Stranger to the
Contemplations of Mortality; Death being an Eclipse which often happens as well
in clear as cloudy days. Corn upon the House Top is the highest, but not the
most lasting.

4. Let us take in Good part the Worst that can befall us. Ye have not yet
resisted unto Blood, says the Apostle; intimating that since better Men then
they, (the Worlds Worthies, of whom the World was not Worthy) had resisted unto
Blood, they had no reason to be troubled, especially since no Temptation had
befallen them, but what was common to Men: And upon serious Thoughts, how can
we have a displeasing Thought under the harshest Pressures, if we consider that
both our Savior and our Sovereign was Buffeted, Spit upon, falsely Accused, and
Slain.

Of such Uses as these, the Children of God have frequent use, in the whole
course of their Lives; either through Gods dismaying dispensations toward
themselves, or their Brethren. Moses hopes were ready to flag, and dispond,
when notwithstanding Gods promise of Deliverance, their Bondage was Increased,
and their Load the Heavier; insomuch as Moses, as meek as he was, Mutinously
seems to Article against God, for breach of Promise, and Challenge him for the
Evil Treatment that Pharab gave them. Wherefore have thou so evil Entreated
this People? Why is it thou have sent me? For since I came to Pharaoh to speak
in they Name, he has done evil to this People; neither have thou delivered thy
People at all.

These dismal Appearances have Scared some into Atheism, though with as pitiful
pretexts of reason, as that of Diagoras; who, because a Plagiary stole one of
his Poems, and Published it in his own Name, fell out with Providence for
seeming to connive at the Felony, by withholding a Thunderbolt; and so bid
Defiance to Heaven, and turned Atheist.

But, Because Sentence against wicked Men is not executed speedily, shall the
Hearts therefore of the Sons of Men be fully set in them to do Evil? No,
certainly; there is no solid reason for it; for as Gods Forbearance is no
Acquittance, so upon an impartial Inquiry we shall find that he little consults
with rational Principles, who suffers his Passion in sinister dispensations to
outrun his Prudence, or his Fears to cut-strip his Faith.

Saint Austin's twenty two Books De civitate De, were purposely writ in
Vindication of Providence permitting (as here in the Text, and in the sorrowful
instance of this day) The Rod of the Wicked to rest upon the Backs of the
Righteous.

Opera Dei sunt in medijs contrarijs, as Luther well observes, God brings about
his own designs (of Glory to himself, and Good to his people) by seemingly
contrary means. Who would have thought that David should have lived to be a
King, (as God had Promised) that had seen the Stripling ready to be devoured by
the Monstrous Giant? yet that was the first Step (as Providence ordered it) by
which he afterward did Climb into the Throne.

Of this Harmony of Providence (though they may seem to Jarre) Plato had a
grateful Sense, when he said, God did always proportion all things according to
the exactness and order of Geometrical Rules.

God does all things regularly, in Weight and Measure, Mood and Figure. The
Grecians therefore call the World Cosmos, a Beauty, from its Lovely Order,
visible in the graceful Airs, and becoming Glances and Appearances of
Providence, in the Creation, Guidance, and Governance of the World.

Therefore if some of the Draughts of Providence seem crooked and irregular (to
which unhallowed thoughts this bewailed occasion might tempt us) yet suspend
your Censures, till the Picture be finished, and then you will see that all those
Interfering Lines concur to make up a perfect Beauty.

For that overruling Hand that brought Light out of Darkness, will bring Good
out of Evil, and order the Worst to the Best, for those that love and fear him,
if they will but have a little patience to stay Gods leisure: God sends thee (it
may be) many Changes, and often turns thee: It is but least thou should be
(like Ephraim) a Cake half baked, unturned; He would have thee baked on both
sides; it is the Prophets expression, Hos. 7.8. And the Prophet David gives it
in as a Pregnant Reason, why wicked Men are so wicked, Psalm. 55.19. Because
they have no Changes, therefore they fear not God: Whereas those of whom the
World was not Worthy, had nothing of the worlds Worth, being destitute,
Afflicted, Tormented; for as Saint Paul says, they had scarce a place to stand
in, no more then their Lord and Master, who had not where to lay his Head.

Hence we may conclude, as also from this days bemoaned instance, that
Affliction is, Innocentiae genius, as Calvin phraseth it, The bad Angel that
dogs Innocence at the heels; This Life being the good Man's House of Correction.

For here God keeps but his Petty Sessions, Punishes many times the least
Offenders, Deferring the Trial and Execution of the grand Delinquents, till the
great Assize.

And who need envy the plentiful feeding of the Fatned Hog, or Stall-fed Ox,
designed for the Shambles? Or the prosperous success of Blood-guilty Men, who
have but a Life-Estate on it at best; though usually Bloody and Deceitful Men do
not live out half their days.

What got the Roman Hero's by all their successful Slaughters, but the same
measure they meted out to others? as our Savior Prophesies, Mat. 7.2.

For of all the Bloody Caesar's, till Constantine the Great, it is truly spoken,
what in God's just Judgments has proved as true to most of those Blood-guilty
Horse-Leaches, concerned in the Murder of our blessed Sovereign, That few, or
none, went down to the Grave in Peace.

There is a Divine Nemesis that usually in this Life haunts Injustice and
Murder, and follows them at the heels, verified upon those unjust Judges, which
our Chronicles mention; Judge Morgan who Condemned the Lady Jane Gray, Judge
Hales, Judge Belknap, who confessed in his Conscience, when he signed the
Sentence, That there wanted nothing but a Hurdle, a Horse, a Halter, and a
Hangman to give him his due; and he afterward had it in full measure, heaped
up, and running over. That I mention not Later Instances, with which your
Memories, upon this occasion can this day sufficiently furnish you; the
Sunshine of Villainous success only Ripening their Sins for the Wine Press of
the wrath of God; on whom was verified that Scripture, Prove. 30.17. The Eye
that mocketh at his Father, (meant of the Father of our Country, as well as
our Natural Fathers) and despises to Obey his Mother, the Ravens of the Valley
shall pick it out, that is, he shall (according to the Law of Moses, Deuteronomy.
21.20.) be put to Death, and his Unburied Carcass be exposed to the Fowls of
the Air, to the Ravens.

The first thing that Ravenous Birds do to Carcases, is to pick out their Eyes.

And he that sheds a tear at such juster Execut ons, does (in this Sense)
justly too forfeit his Eyes.

So true it is in this particular, what was made good upon Ahab, for the
Bloodshed mentioned in the Text, In the place where Dogs licked the Blood of
Naboth; shall Dogs lick thy Blood, even thine.

Thus within a very little while did God Revenge the Blood of Jezreel upon the
house of Jehu, and the Blood of our Blessed Martyr upon his Murderers; who, as
Beasts Crowned for a Sacrifice, were raised to that Usurping height, that they
might be tumbled down with the more dreadful downfall. The Air is most quiet and
serene a little before an Earthquake.

However, though the Revenging stroke of God's Justice should adjourn the juster
Execution of Rapacious Men in this Life, I would be loath to Eat of their
Dainties, to pay their after reckoning.

Lastly, Does the best of Men many times meet with the worst of Usage in this
Life? Then let us make the same good use of the worst of usage, that God
intends us by such Usages; namely, that by being Battered by them, we may be
Bettered by them.

God Grant that the Bitter Doses that England has lately taken, may so Purge
its ill Humors, that its Constitution may be more Sound and Healthful, than
those Valetudinary ill boding Symptoms yet visible in its Face does Promise.

Its Hypocritical Look is but a sad Prognostic; a Mortal Look, as if we might
read Death in its Face: God avert the Crisis, and fatal Paroxisme: Shall I not
visit for these things? Shall not my Soul be Avenged on such a Nation as this?

God's will be done; it may be more Miseries may do us more God, and English
Men (like the Athenians) may look best in Black.

England never looks well, but when in a Weeping Posture. Mourning Habits do
best become her. In their Affliction they will seek me Early. It Is possible we
may then be best, when it is worst with us; and Thrive, like Camomile, the
better for being sat upon. The State of a good Man in this Life, being very
well Emblematically Resemble to that of the Palm Tree, with this Motto,
Depressa Resurgo.

The Weights that are hung upon him makes him Grow the Better.

Indeed no Chastisement for the present seems Joyous, but Grievous;
nevertheless afterward it yields the Peaceable Fruit of Righteousness to
them that are Exercised thereby. What matter though the Storm be Violent, so it
speed us the sooner to our Port? What though you be washed in the Jordan of
Affliction seven times, so you be Cured of your Leprosy? Wormwood is
wholesome, though it be Bitter. He that Sowes in Tears, shall Reap in Joy.

Tears are the best Holy Water to drive away the Devil. It is good for me that
I have been Afflicted, says holy David, repeating his experiences.

Almond Trees are made more Fruitful by driving Nails into them, which lets out
a Noxious Gum, which would otherwise hinder its Fruitfulness. Some such
advantage Saint Paul found by the Pricks in the Flesh; on which account it is
that Saint Austin Triumphs in his, as Scars of Honor; Oh, Felices Tribulos
Tribulationum! Oh, happy Thorns of Tribulation, that lets out my Impostumes!

The Shower of Stones sent St. Stephen faster to Heaven. Enemies may Kill, but
cannot Hurt: And though the Children of Belial deprived our Blessed Martyr of
His Head, they could not Rob Him of His Crown. (To use His own Heavenly Words)
I shall not want Heavy and Envyed Crowns of this World, when My God has
Mercifully Crowned and Consummated His Graces with Glory, and Exchanged the
Shadows of My Earthly Kingdoms among Men, for the Substance of that Heavenly
Kingdom with Himself.

God never strikes down his People, but (as we do a Tennis-Ball upon the
Pavement) that it may Mount and Rebound the higher. Thus he permitted Wicked
Men to strike at, and strike down our Blessed Martyred Sovereign, that he might
Exalt Him in His own Throne, and in the Hearts and Memory of all that are truly
Pious. Pungit, Deinde Vngit. God first let Afflictions close up to the Swords
Point, before he did Anoint him with the Oil of gladness above his Fellows.

The Second Observation is,
THAT the Rabble and Multitude are many times, through Zeal for Religion and
Justice, Guilty of horrid Impieties: As in the Text, (They) Stoned him. Where
the word (They) Concords with the foregoing word (the People) the unjust Judges
Condemn Innocent Naboth in the Presence of the People; and they, the People,
turn Executioners, and hurry him away without any more ado, out of the City,
and Stoned him with Stones, that he Died.

Thus the Rabble in a Tumult, (like Dogs in a chafe) Bite and Bark at their
Masters, and Friends, as well as at their Foes.

All Is alike; as here, Naboth hurt them not, had given no just Offense; but
that is all one, he was Accused for Blasphemy; and they took it for granted to
be true, being Gulled by Politic Statesmen, with the Pretenses of Justice and
Devotion. Thus Zeal Misguided, like a Horse without a Bridle, may run fast
enough, but out of the Way, making more Haste then good Speed: Or, like Fire
out of the Hearth, which usually does harm; Warms not, but Consumes.

Thus Politicians that Plot Rebellion, and Mutiny, do but give out a Religious
Watchword, and the People straight give the Word about, and are up in Arms for
God and his Cause.

Thus when a wicked Grandee begins a Health, some or other of the Rabble will
Pledge it, though it be Blood: As in this woeful instance of the Text and the Day:
Sons of Belial do Strenue Calumniari, accuse falsely and impudently; and Swear
hard, and the People believe them; and cry, as in St. Paul's case, Away with
such a Fellow from the Earth, for it is not fit that he should Live. And why?
They knew not; for the most of them knew not why they were met together;
indocible Crew! that lest Equity and Justice should carry it at a fair hearing,
they stop their Ears, as they did at St. Stephens Trial, and run upon him with
one accord.

Thus did they furiously noise it against our Savior, Crucify Him, Crucify
Him; and though Pontius Pilate, who was more Sober, would have them make a Halt,
and tell first, what Evil has he done? Yet they cried out the more, like an
Impetuous Torrent that swells when it is Damm'd, right or wrong, Let Him be
Crucified, let him be Crucified.

How soon were the Fickle Jews weary of John the Baptist, that at first flocked
to him? All Jerusalem, and all Judea, says the Text, Matthew. 3.5. We'll have a
King, say the People to Samuel; and then presently after, the same People
change their Notes, We have added to our Iniquity this more, in asking us a
King, 1 Samuel 12.19. The present Government is always Grievous to them; like
Weathercocks, who though always mutable, yet always set their Faces against, and
brave that Wind that is most Potent.

The Vulgar, Reuben like, are Unstable as water, and one day cry, Hosanna, to
Christ, and the next day, Crucify Him: In the Morning ready to fall down,
adore, and deifie Paul and Barnabas, Acts 14.18. And in v. 19. Being tickled in
the Ear with another Story, that certain Jews that came from Antioch, They
stoned Paul, and drew him out of the City, supposing he had been dead.

Subtle Usurpers thus, like Jeroboam, make Israel to Sin; and by pretending a
Cheaper way of Devotion, and a nearer cut then going up to Jerusalem, entice
them to worship their Golden Calves in Dan, and Bethel, tho the lowest of the
people be the Priests; and to countenance the Abomination, the Usurper himself
became one of the Priests of the high places.

Thus these impetuous Torrents (like the Tides by the paler Moon) are
Influenced, and led about to and fro, as their pious Sheba's that Head them,
shall Animate and Direct; but are especially Charmed (like Bees, when they are
up in a Swarm) by the tinckling Noise of Reformation and Liberty.

Yet many times when these Swarms are up, no body knows where they will alight,
nor they themselves well; the Fiends sometimes, for want of work, falls upon
the Conjurers that raised them. And it is but just that these Bearwards should
sometimes (for Example sake) be worried by their own Whelps, and they are but
right served; it is Good enough for so Bad a Trade.

'Twas this tumultuous Wildfire that first set our flourishing Kingdom on a
Flame, kindled and blown up by the busy Lungs of fomenting Incendiaries,
little regarding the mischievous Consequences of our Flames, so they might Warm
their own Hands: Nero like, Solacing and Sporting themselves, when the City was
on Fire.

But I am Tired with the unpleasing Thoughts of these Horrors, and shall
therefore put an end to this Discourse of Tumults. God grant our Tumults may be
at an end!

I proceed now to the Third and last Observation, which I especially aimed at,
when I chose this Text, so suitable it is to the present Occasion; and it is
taken from the first and last Words of the Text, compared together; They
proclaimed a Fast, and Stoned him with Stones.

Whence Observe.

That the most black and bloody Villainies are usually Varnished with Religion
and Justice. A Truth that (God knows) needs no Proof to those whose Memories
can furnish them (by this Day's doleful Celebration) with a lamentable
Instance, though I should not mention this in the Text.

The Cry of Religion and Justice, Conscience, and the Cause of God, giving
Hosanna's to one of the bloodiest Butcheries, that the most dismal Night did
ever give Midwifery unto, or the affrighted Sun ever saw.

Making the same use of the Gospel, the Gospel, to compass the barbarous
Designs, as the Jews did of their Temple; exclaiming, The Temple of the Lord,
the Temple of the Lord; which the diviner Prophet called, Lying words, Jer.
7.4. and Suits too well with a Generation of Liars.

This Hypocritical Flourish of the mentioned Jews, not escaping the more prying
Consideration of an Heathen Historian, who, upon this Score, well styled the
Jews Temple, Impiae gentis Arcanum, A Sanctuary of Roguery. Avouching their
malignant Hatred (as the Prophet Isaiah records) with The Lord be glorified,
the Lord be glorified.

The Voice, is the Voice of Jacob, but the Hands! the Hands are the Hands of
Esau.

I shall name but Two special Reasons of this Observation, before I make a
closer Application. And the First is this:

I. Black and Bloody Villainies are commonly Varnished with Religion and
Justice, that the horrid Projects may take the more prosperous Effect: For even
good, and well meaning Men may be proselyted to a Devilish Faction, if the
Conjurers, when they raise it, can make it appear like an Angel of light.

Those Witches of Endor always raising the Devil in the likeness of a Prophet.
For, if the Devil should appear in his own horrid Shape, he would Fright even
those that Study this Black Art.

II. Dismal and Bloody Villainies are Varnished with Religion, that upon
Disappointments, they may not altogether be Disappointed. For, if the
Cockatrice-Egg of Sedition, be not Hatched with the Warmth of a Conventicle,
into the Serpent of Rebellion, then it must pass for a harmless Incubation.
Thus horrid Faux, surpised in his destructive Cells, retains his Vizor, pleads
he is about his Lawful Occasions, means no Harm, not he; may not he and his
Confederates meet in their own hired House? Has the King's Officers no more
Conscience, than to Disturb Honest Men? Thus the old Powder-Plotters, and
Underminers of Church and State; did not want the same Apologies of our modern
Faux 's. So that, tho the Train they have laid, to Blow up at once the Church
and State, do not take, yet they are Shot-free, and Justice-proof by a pious
Charm.

The Man-slayers, which the Prophet Zechariah makes mention of in his time,
Zach. 11.5. used the very same Canting Tone of our men of blood, of a later
date; Blessed be the Lord, blessed be the Lord: And yet in the foregoing Words
of the same Verse, it is recorded, That they Slew the Innocent, and Sold others,
and yet held themselves not Guilty. Read but that Scripture, and you need not
study a Parallel Instance.

So that tho these pious Panders, cannot in the Night of Delusion, Prostitute
their deformed Brats, and monstrous Conceptions, unto the blacker Villainies
they Lust after, and are in Love with, yet the Changeling still retains the
Name of a Babe of Grace, and so may pass, if not for a Beauty, yet for a Saint;
or at least stave off, for fear of doing Violence to Purity, all thoughts of
Searching her for a Witch.

Wandering Vagabonds do thus legitimate their Vagrancy by a Ballad, or Pedling
Trade; which tho it bring not much in, yet it saves their Backs from the Brand
due to Rogues. And tho to Pick men's Pockets be the main Design, yet missing
their Aim, they may Finger some small Pence by a Canting Tone; Looking (like
Watermen) one way, and Rowing another; and yet take it ill, that Men will not
believe they are going Sion-wards, because their Faces are thitherwards. For
the Villainy was no sooner perpetrated, but (as Tamar after she had played her
wicked Prank, resumed the Garment of her Widowhood) they Robed themselves again
with the Old Vestment and Coverlid of Sanctity; hung down the Head like a
Bul-rush; looked Sadly; and, with the Whore in the Proverbs, Wiped their
Mouths, and said, they had done no Wickedness. So that if the Usherage of
Sanctity cannot hand in their black Deformities of Rapine, Blood, and
Sacrilege, which they so much Court; yet it will serve to Fence off the Stroke
of Justice, due to Thieves and Murderers; or at worst, Canonize them for
Saints and Martyrs in the bloody Calendar of their own Crew. But it is well
known, by the Blows they Strike, what they Aim at, tho, at the same time, they
look another way.

These Ishmaels, like Ishmael the Son of Nethaniah, Meditate a Slaughter, tho
they may (as he did, a little before he Slew the Eighty Men) shed a few
Crocodile Tears; the Text says, he came weeping all along as he went, Jer.
41.6. And the next Verse records the Butchery.

But to apply this home to the present Occasion, (for we must not thus have
done with it) we'll see if we can, pull the Vizor of this Faux, and rather Rub
hard to get off the Paint, than that Jezabel should pass for a Beauty, lest we
Sin by Connivance, as did the Church of Thyatira. God grant, that our Lord
Jesus do not Write bitter things against this Nation, for this Sin, as he did
against his beloved Church of Thyatira; and that this Epidemical Sin bring not
upon us another Epidemical Plague, Revel. 2.20. I have a few things against
thee, because thou suffer that woman Jezabel to teach and to seduce my
Servants; to commit Fornication, and to commit Murder, Rapine, and Sacrilege.
I now come to the Application.

1. If dismal and bloody Villainies be commonly Varnished with Religion, then
this may Inform us, That the most plausible Pretexts of Religion are always
Suspicious, since so seldom Sincere.

Christ tells us so of the Puritan Sect amongst the Jews, called Pharisees,
that they might gorge themselves with the tears of Orphans, and devour Widows
Houses, with more ease, and less danger. They went to Prayer, nay, made long
Prayers, as Jezabel did in the Text; prologues the Murder with a Proclamation
for a Religious, Solemn, and Public Fast. I need not tell you, that the
Murderers of our Sovereign writ directly after this copy, tract the same
paths, wrought with the same instruments, and effected the same Cruelty, with
the very same methods of Piety and Justice, Zach. 7.5.6. When ye fasted and
wept every month, did ye all fast unto me? Even unto me? Did you macerate your
Bodies, that your keener Stomachs might take the larger Draught of innocent
Blood?

Thus the Cossacks, a kind of mungrel Christians, barbarous People, and
Bordering upon Muscovy, living wholly upon Rapine, always pray to Christ in the
Morning, to make them Diligent in their Callings, and help them to good Booty:
So the wild Irish never went a Mass-trooping, but with the Auspiciums of a
Pater noster, and Ave Maria.

Thus these grand Rebels in Richard the Second's time, Prefac'd all their
Letters to their Confederates, with whom they held Intelligence in the
Conspiracy, with these Heavenly words, Glory be to God on high, on earth peace,
good will toward men. Strange Confidence! What? Glory to God, when their own
Consciences told them they were Contriving the Ruin of such as the Majesty of
Heaven calls, Gods upon Earth! And, peace on earth, when they were Meditating a
War! And, good will toward men, when they were going about to Cut their
Throats!

This is like Joab's Complement; Art thou in Health, my Brother? And then
follows the Kiss with a Stab.

Pope Alexander VI. was so known a Dissembler in his time, that afterward it
became a Proverb in Rome, When his Holiness Swears, you may Swear it is false.
England may well say, that her Royal Head was then first struck at, when the
Executioners entered into Covenant, more solemnly to Swear its Preservation; as
if the Breaking of former Oaths of Allegiance, could not speak them
sufficiently Perfidious and Disloyal, but they must call Heaven and Earth to
Witness afresh to redoubled Perjuries; or else resolved to Contradict the Truth
of that Scripture in Eccles. 4.12. A threefold cord is not easily broken,
whereas their poor, weak, and tender Consciences, could Snap them with ease,
and make nothing of them.

Cataline begun his Conspiracy with a Covenant and a bloody Sacrament. These
Judas's are then most likely to betray, when they come to salute, Caveatur
osculum Iscarioticum.

The French Proverbially say, when the Spaniard sends them an Ambassador for
Peace, Claude for as, they are certain then they must Fight for it. I could apply
it to as smooth a Tongued Generation; and if not so Subtle, yet they are as
False, and can Play with Oaths, as Monkeys with their Collars, can put them on
and off as they list. Pro Rege, Lege, Grege, was the common Motto in those
days, what they meant by the first Word, this Day's Remembrance does too truly
Admonish us; Is this thy kindness to thy friend? In which religious Treachery,
they did but much resemble that juggling Pope beforementioned, and his Son
Caesar Borgias, of whom it was said, That one never spoke as he thought, and
the other never performed what he spoke.

In this Sense we may say of our Martyred Sovereign, what Seneca speaks of
Caesar at his fall; His pretended Friends, not his Enemies tumbled him down.
And how many Wretches might our glorious Martyr have justly Upbraided with the
same Words that Caesar in his last Words groaned out to his Son Brutus? What!
and thou, my Son, too! Thou, my Subject! Thou that have sworn Allegiance, and
confirmed it again with a Covenant of a later date! Have we not Cause, more
than enough, to use that good Man's Letany, in behalf of our Sovereign and
these Kingdoms, Libera nos ab amicis: From such Friends, good Lord deliver us?

'Twas capital, even amongst the ruder Scythians, if any did Duo peccata
contorquere, make a Pleat of two Sins together; as Lie, and Swear to it. The
most barbarous Nations have Outvied us in Honesty: For, whilst such a Stir was
made to make Room for Religion, good Nature has been justled out; and we have
lost Humanity and Morals. And the very Heathen shall rise up in judgment
against us. The Peripatetick owned more Divinity in his Ethics, where he says,
It is not good for a man to dissent from the Gods, his Father, or his Teacher.

Our new Gospellers, tho they do not walk much like Christians, yet will talk
like them. This lip Religion is so cheap and easy to be come by, that every
Hypocrite can afford to disciple himself thereunto; but, when it comes to Works
of Charity, and to Evidence a true Faith by good Works, then vale lumen amicum;
Gospel Light and he must shake hands, and part.

The greatest Talkers are seldom the greatest Doers. The Damask Rose is more
Fragrant, but not so Cordial as the Red. And those days, whose bloody. Hew will
stain the Chronicle to all Posterity, have yet been Cried up for the
Gospel-days; whereas if we view but the Murders, Sacrilege, and Rapine, which
these Gospellers did perpetrate, we must say, as that Learned Lanacre did,
comparing their straighter and directer Rules, and Gospel-Lines, described in
Christ's Sermon upon the Mount, with those more crooked and perverse Draughts
of the men of his times; Either this is not Gospel, or we are not Gospellers.

Sure I am, that this Day's sad Instance gives us Occasion to put it to the
question, (as of Old to the juggling Jews, that profaned God's holy Name, Ezekiel.
36.20.) Are these the people of the Lord that came forth of his Land? Do you
take his Name in Vain, Motley Christians? Do ye take Christ's Name in Vain?
Such Israelites as these have too much guile in them to be Nathanaels.

More like that Israel (mentioned by the Prophet) which was but an empty Vine,
that only brought forth fruit unto it self. Vox and praeterea nihil, as he said
of the Nightingale, nothing but a Noise. The emptiest Kettle makes the greatest
sound; and the most lewd are usually the most loud. And we may truly reprove
such (in the words of Diogenes, to that vicious Antipater, that bipedum
nequissimus, who wore a white Cloak in token of Innocence) virtutis stragulum
pudefacitis, ye make Religion blush.

To use the words of the Prophet Micah, Do ye build up Zion with blood, and
Religion with iniquity? And yet lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord
among us? No evil can come unto us.

The little attendance on this Day's Celebration in this populous City, who
can, at other times, throng in a Crowd, to the want of Elbow-room, makes me
with grief of heart presume, That the Innocent Blood shed upon this Day, is but
little upon the Hearts, and too little a Grief of Heart to many, that I say not
Ministers, who can not only coldly neglect their Duty herein, without remorse,
but even dare to appear in Public against the Celebration of this necessary
Fast; as if there was now no need of keeping it. These are such whose Fathers
acted this Murder; and they bring their Fathers Guilt upon themselves by
justifying it. Nor is this all, for since the late Revolution, there are some
that in Print have gone about to Defame the Royal Martyr, (and, as it were,
Murder him again) by affirming that he was no Martyr; and that his Pious and
Excellent Meditations, (which, perhaps, next to the Holy Bible, is one of the
best Books in the World) are none of his; but they bear his Portraicture too
much to be Suspected by any honest Man, notwithstanding all that the Spawn of
the Regicides do affirm to the contrary; who have also the Impudence to affirm,
that A King is the Creature of the People; and therefore they may do what they
will with him. Does this look like Repentance for the Innocent Blood that was
shed upon this Day? No surely: These Men cannot find Leisure for this great and
necessary Employ, in solemnly Deprecating that divine Vengeance, which I fear
is yet due to so Impenitent a Crew.

Acts of Grace and Mercy are lost upon such: For, as all truly generous Spirits
do look upon an irreconcilable Implacability as Brutish, and Unmanly, as well
as Unchristian; so an impenitent and stubborn Disobedience (like the Sin of
Witchcraft) is Hellish and Devilish. Errare humanum est, perseverare
Diabolicum. Will ye steal and kill, says the Prophet: [In the Hebrew] Will ye
stealing steal, and murdering murder, and yet come into this house, which is
called by my Name, and say, we are delivered to do all these Abominations?
Procul hinc procul ite prophani. To what purpose is the multitude of your
Sacrifices unto me? says the Lord. When you come to appear before me, who has
required this at your hands, to tread my Courts? Does Piety and Purity prompt
you to Sacrilege? Does your Fear of God keep you from Repentance? Does your
Fear of God keep you from Honoring your King?

This was Becket's Plea; he would submit to his Sovereign with ae salvo honor
Dei: He was Content not to be a Rebel, so that his Allegiance might not
dishonor God. Good man! His Conscience was Tender of God's Glory, but Seared
at the thought of peace on earth, and good will toward men. Is your insatiable
Boulimies not yet Glutted? But must you again Puddle our Waters, that you may
Fish the better? But I have had too much Occasion to Enlarge upon this Head.
I Will name but one Particular more, and come to a Conclusion; and that is, an
Use of Exhortation.

2. That since black and bloody Villainies are usually Varnished with Religion,
let us not mind men's Pretenses, but their Practices. Samuel himself could not
have spoken more Divinely, than did the Devil in his Likeness. How ill does the
Language of Canaan become the Inhabitants of Hell? Peace in the Mouth, and War
in the Heart: As if these Pretenders to the New Jerusalem, did resolve to
avouch their Claim thereunto, by being like the Old Jerusalem, whose Name
signifies Peace, and yet no such Slaughter and Divisions in any City of the
World. Mel in ore verba lactis, fell in cord fraus in factis, as the Psalmist
does English it, Psalm. 55.21.

The Tombstone may have a fair Motto, and specious Outside; but what is
underneath? Blessed be thou of the Lord, says Saul to Samuel, I have kept the
commandment of the Lord, 1 Samuel 15.13, 14, 15. Have thou so? says Samuel, then
What mean this bleating of the Sheep in mine ears, and the lowing of the Oxen
which I hear? Oh, says the Sycophant, they are to sacrifice to the Lord thy
God. So: Are our Pretenders to Love, Loyalty, Obedience and Peace, indeed so
much for Peace, and for performing the Commandments of the Lord? Then what
means that Shimei's Bleating, and Rabshekah's Railing against this blessed
Martyr, which I hear? What means the Rapine, and Sacrilege, (which is so far
from being repented of) that it is again endeavored to be Repeated? Will you
say, It Is to Sacrifice to the Lord your God? Behold to obey is better then
sacrifice, and to hearken then the fat of Rams; for rebellion is as the sin of
witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry.

You may never expect (says our blessed Martyr to his Eldest Son, K. Charles
II. who also found it true) less of Loyalty, Justice, and Humanity, then from
those that engage into a Religious Rebellion; their Interest is made God's,
under the Colors of Piety. Ambitious Policies march not only with greatest
Security, but Applause, as to the Popularity. You may hear from them Jacob's
Voice, but you shall see they have Esau's Hands.

Come, pull off that Bullrush-Coat, it has been worn too long: the Plot is so
stale, that I can scarce think any in this Age, who has not lost his Palate,
can longer Relish it. What Rebels shall be hereafter, must needs be so upon
Malice forethought: the mournful History of those Calamities, that ushered in
this fatal Day, [that Volumn writ in Blood!] let us understand your Meanings,
whatever be your Language, or your Title Page. Those horrid Instruments found
in your Faux's Cellars, unriddle the Meanings of your Meeting, whatever your
Bush does promise. The Whore in the Proverbs began her Sorceries with
Peace Offerings, Prove. 7.14. God is near in your mouth (as the Prophet says)
but far from your Reins. Ye shall not fast as ye do this day, to make your
voice to be heard on high. Is it such a Fast that I have chosen? A day for a
man to afflict his soul? Is it to down bow his head as a bulrush, and to spread
sackcloth and ashes under him? will thou call this a Fast, and an acceptable
day to the Lord? Behold ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the
fist of wickedness.

These Edomites are right father-like, Genesis 27.41. The days of mourning for my
Father are at hand, then will I slay my Brother Jacob. The Days set apart for
the pious Solemnity of his Father's Funeral, was the fittest time for him to
execute his bloody Malice upon his Brother. The Text says, He was detained
before the Lord, 1 Samuel 21.7. Sacris abutitur ut sceleratis mos est.

Thus also does the Edomite, when he meditated the Slaughter of the Priests of
the Lord, which he afterward effected, he was at his Devotions.

This Day reminds us too Evidently, who used the same Methods of Cruelty, and
with whose Royal Blood those eager Horse-Leach's did gorge themselves, after
they had first paid their Devotions, sought the Lord, and Grace once said, they
fell on to their bloody Banquet.

Ignatius blessed God when he was going to Rome to be Martyred, to think that
his Blood should be found among the Worthies, mentitioned Rev. 16. under the
Altar, crying with a loud Voice, How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not
judge, and avenge our Blood on them that dwell on the Earth; and that God
making Inquisition for Blood, would search for the Blood of Righteous Abel, to
the Blood of Barachias, and also down as low as mean Ignatius. And (I will add)
when God sits upon the Grand Inquest for innocent Blood, He will not only
Search as low as mean Ignatius, but righteous Charles, (to the immortal Honor
and Dishonor of our Nation) England's Martyr.

Our Kingdom has been famous over the World, for the first Christian King in
the World, Lucius; for the first Christian Emperor in the World, Constantine
the Great; for the first Reformed Prince, K. Edward VI. and for the first Royal
Martyr for the Church and State, King Charles I. chosing rather to resist to
Blood, then betray the Laws of the Land, the Freedom and Honor of Parliaments,
the Rights of His Crown, the just Liberty of his Subjects, and the true
Christian Religion in its Doctrine, Government, and due Encouragements, to the
greedy Jaws of ravening Wolves. A good Shepherd gives his Life for the Sheep.

Most deservedly therefore, as the Romans did their Emperor Titus, may we
Style him, (without suspicion of flattery) deliciae humani generis, the good
Peoples Darling, an epidemical Cordial: Corculum populi, as Scypio was called,
the Peoples Sweetheart; who was De regione non magis sollicitus quam de
Religione; cared not so much for his own Kingdom as God's; counting it more
Honor. (with the good Emperors, Theodosius and Constantine) to be Christi
vasallam, and membrum Ecclesiae, quam caput Imperii: Christ's Servants, than an
Earthly King; and a Member of the Church, rather than Head of an Empire.

Having cropped the Top of all Virtues, as Pindarus said of Hiero, or as
Vitellius of Cato Major, Homo virtuti simillimus, optimus imperator, orator,
Senator omniumque artium magister, he was as like Virtue as ever one could
look, being an incomparable King, an incomparable Orator, an incomparable
Statesman, and an incomparable Churchman; and if not, the endowments of a
Prophet, yet of a King and Priest, being at all Essays a Master of Art. But in
his juster Praises, though Rhetoric it self should expatiate, she must lose a
Figure, his worth transcending common Hyperboles. The Memory of the just is
blessed, Prove. 10.7.

A great Man good, is greatly good; not only because they are precious by being
rare, (for God knows) we may too often say of Religion (as it was said of
David) The Lords favor thee not, Sam. 29.6. (making it their business Erigere
muros maris quam corrigere mores, to build Manners rather than to mend their
Manners.) But because their good Examples, as well as their bad, are greatly
followed; like great Men, being the Looking-Glasses by which the Rabble dress
themselves; the great Body turning to and fro, and if the Head turn round, the
unwilely bulk will usually wheel for Company.

I love not Encomiums of this Nature; but here to be silent, is to injure
Innocence, and rob a Righteous Man, a Righteous King, and a Glorious Martyr of
his due. God himself calls a worse King, his choice One, Isa. 42.1.

Nemo vir magnus sine afflatu divino unquam fuit, says Cicero, no Man did ever
do or suffer bravely, but by divine Instinct, a Hand lent him from Heaven; and
I think it no boldness to say, (amongst a People that think themselves
reproached, when Charles is vindicated) no Man could do or suffer (with that
Christian Patience, Meckness, and Magnanimity) the Imprisonments, and Tumults,
the Reproaches, and Martyrdom that he did, except God was with him. Oh when
will this Kingdom deserve the title that ( Polidore-Virgil says was once
usually given to it) Regnum Angliae, regnum Dei; Regnum Angliae, regnum
Angelorum; whilst this day tells us, it was Regnum Diabolorum. Plato commends
the Attick Country, in that it was beloved of God, and loved God. Oh that
England might be so too; beloved of God, and love God, and fear God; which is
impossible, if we do not honor the King; so says St. Paul, Romans 13.2. though
cruel Nero had then the power: He that resists the Power is damned; or, (as
our Translation) shall receive to himself Damnation.

A Scripture, that I wonder how those that glory so much in their poring upon
the Scripture, can overlook; or their tender Consciences make a baulk of,
without either Scruple or Remorse. So that we have cause to wish for our
Kingdom, (as Ferus did for the Romish Synagogue) that we had some Moses to take
away our Evils; Non enim unum tantum vitulum, fed multos habemus, non tres
Rebels, Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, fed innumeros. The Israelites had but one
golden Calf, but we have many; they had three grand Rebels, Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram, but we thousands.

As if Rebellion, with all its odious Retinue and Appurtenances, could be
propagated, ex traduce.

Korah, that great Rebel, was a Priest too, one of the Sons of Lew, and one of
the Princes of the Assembly (as Numb. 16.2.) and of all these 250 Princes,
mentioned Numb. 16.2. Men of renown, famous in the Congregation, he was the
chief; (for according to the custom of Egypt, from whence they came, their
Princes were Priests,) yet that would not serve, he will be Chief-Priest or
nothing, aut Caesar aut nullus, as Moses Articles against him, ver. 10. of the
16th of Numb. and to compass his design, he turns Independent Minister, and
sides with the People, that, by these Rounds of the Ladder, he might climb up
to his desired Height. Ambition has no Reins, never knows to make a stop, is
always the Father of Rebellion, though Religion may be the Godfather, and give
it a Name.

Was not Aaron the second Man amongst the new Commonwealths men that came out
of Egypt, yet that is not enough; but he Bandyes with his holy Sister Miriam the
Prophetess against Moses, to get the Supremacy, Numb. 12.1. and to effect this,
first they rip up a Fault committed 40 Years, (contrary to the Law against
strange Wives) in the Marriage of a poor Black-moor Woman, called there an
Ethiopian Woman; the true cause of their discontent breaks forth, Has the
Lord indeed only spoken by Moses, and has he not also spoken by us!

So that it is certain as well as an old Rule, that he that goes about to spy
faults in his Superiors, and blaze them in public to their shame, that Man
certainly is going about to rebel, and pick a quarrel with them: First he
renders them dirty, and then they are fit for nothing but to be rubbed; first
array them in Bear-skins, then sets Dogs upon them to worry them.

There Is a Writ in Law called Ne injuste vexes, vex not any Man unjustly; and
the People of old were forbidden to vex a Stranger; but for a King to be Vexed,
Oppressed, and at last Murdered by his own Subjects, as Barbarously, as
Bloodily, in the midst of his Kingdoms, and in the Strength of his Years, his
Friends and loving Subjects being helpless Spectators, whilst the Caitiffs
reviled him, and triumphed in their unparalleled Massacre at his own Gates, is
a piece of horrid Butchery, as matchless as odious.

And all this with the applause of Justice and Devotion!

Herod, who at one Draught quaff'd the blood of 14000 Infant- Bethlemites, and
his own Sons among the rest, lest the bloody cup should not be a brim-full
potion of Horror; Tyberius, Nero, Caligula, Otho the second, Julian, Commodus
(cunctis Incommodus) Domitian Dioclesian, Charles the 9th of France and all
those Monsters of Men that ever lived, might here (dull Truants in murdering
Proficienties) have gone to School, and learnt new Lectures of Cruelty and
Barbarism.

'Twas an Inhumane speech of Hannibal (if true what is storied of him) that no
Prospect did ever so much delight him, as a Ditch (which he once saw) running
over with Man's blood; But it is too true, that no Sight could please some
Wretches but that of the effusion of an Innocent Man's Blood, yea an Innocent
King's Blood? as if they did make choice of their Bits in their cruel
Boulimy's; The Blood of Goats will soften Adamants, but the precious Royal
blood did not, has not, and (I fear) does not yet (Oh unhallowed Saints!)
molisy your more Adamantine Hearts, and seared Consciences: It Is Just, with God
to give you blood to drink for you are worthy; Satia te sanguine quem sitisti
would be but a due Retaliation; to use David's words, Scatter thou the People
that delight in War. What! Is not your insatiable Thirsts yet satisfied? but as
if the Sins that you have done, were not Scarlet enough, do you yet endeavor,
by more blood, to crimson them to a deeper dye

Nothing would satisfy Faresius (the Pope's Champion) but to ride his Horse up
to the Saddle- skirts in the blood of the Lutherans, and do you cry down the
Pope, and yet avouch the cruelty of the worst of Popes by more dismal Paralells?

Do you make a Jest at Murder, as that Queen Mother of France, who viewing the
fatal Landscape of the dead Carcases of her Protestant Subjects, smiled and
said, It was the handsomest Piece of Tapistry she ever beheld? It Is a sad
Conscience that can Joy at the thoughts of this days Mournful Remembrance
otherwise than from the sense of Godly Sorrow at this days Sad Remembrance; no
good Man can Repent such a Repentance.

Have you no way to be Villainous enough, except ye call Heaven to Witness and
assist at such Unheard of Villainies? Ye Sons of Cain! must ye yet kill your
Brethren, and that for Devotion-sake?

Or, with wicked Herod, Pretend to Worship, Mat. 2.8. when ye Intend to Murder
him? Cur bonificas? why Trimmest thou thy way to seck Love, and why do thou
yet Teach the wicked ones thy Ways? Are you afraid that Dull Posterity should
turn Truants to your skillful Massacres; and not get your bloody Manuscripts by
Heart, that you, even yet (under the notion of Purity) teach the wicked ones
and the Innocent ones your ways? when for all your Gospel- sayings, we know too
well, ye intend to practice no saying in the Gospel, but that in Mat, 21.38.
This is the Heir, come let us kill him, and sieze upon his Inheritance.

How then can thou say, I am polluted? Behold thy way in the Valley (in the
Golgotha to which these once flourishing Kingdoms have been reduced) Let this
Day reprove thee, know what thou have done; For in thy skirts is found the
blood of the Souls of the poor Innocents, Jer. 2.34. I have not sound it upon
secret search but upon all these: yet thou say, Because I am Innocent --
Behold the Revenger of the blood of his Martyrs will yet plead with thee,
because thou say, I am Innocent, Jer. 2.35. Nothing but Death could, under
the Law, expiate Sins committed presumptuously, [ Hebrew] With a High hand,
Numb. 15.30. Such as was this Concatenation of Villainies, that fought neither
with small nor great, but only with the King of Israel: -- Hunc ipsum Petimus,
as that Russian cried who flew the great Gustavus Adolphus.

Oh, Restore, Restore your forfeited Loyalty: Talk not of Reformation of the
Church and State, till you have first reformed your own disobedient and
stubborn hearts; first wash your bloody hands, and gargle your slanderous
Throats, and then you need not blush when you speak of Reformation; 'till this
be done, He is unpardonably credulous that will lend an Ear to your noise of
the Gospel, the Gospel! Good Hearts! It were very pretty if it were not
painted, but in earnest we may say by woeful experience of your Cause, as Salust
says of Amelia, Amelia Orestilla, Praeter formam nihil unquam bonus laudavit;
There Is nothing skin-deep praiseworthy in it; Bull-rush-like, or
Sepulchrelike, or a Rose-tree in Autumn, -- cecidit Rosa, manet Spina, when the
flower is off, how pitifully it looks? Oh quantum haec Niobe!

Oh, then every one that hears me this day upon this occasion of Lamentation,
(rehearsing to us that of Lam. 5.16. The Crown is fallen from our Heads, woe
unto us that we have Sinned) lay your Hands upon your Hearts, and seriously
empannel your Thoughts in this grand Inquest; Have I so much as consented to
the shedding the Blood of this Innocent Martyr; or have I in any-wise approved
of it, or justified those that did it since, though perhaps then unborn? The very
concealment of a Cheat was miraculously punished with Death, Act. 5.10. and yet
the Text does not say that Sapphira consented to it, but only was Privy to it,
ver. 2. and did not do her best to prevent It; sure I am then, this bloody
Butchery must, upon this Account, be filed up for a National Sin, as God has in
Justice scored upon us, for this Blood, many National Plagues, And (if that be
Scripture in Revel. 9.21.) God will yet appear, rendering Vengeance to all such
who have not repented of their Murders, nor of their Sorceries, nor of their
Fornications, nor of their Thefts.

Oh, that you that hear me this Day, may be (as the Posts of the Doors were by
the Blood of the Paschal Lamb, in that day of Slaughter) so Washed (by
unfeigned Contrition) in the Blood of the Lamb, that when the destroying Angel
shall yet make Inquisition for this Royal Blood, he may pass over us!

Talk not of Religion 'till this be Done; Pray no more 'till this be done;
bring no more vain Oblations 'till this be done: For, when ye spread forth your
hands, I will hide mine eyes from you, says the Lord; yea, when ye make many
prayers, I will not hear, your hands are full of blood, Isa. 1.13, 15. But,
deliver us from Blood-guiltiness, O God thou God of our Salvation.

FINIS.

