Scandalum Magnatum: Or the GREAT TRIAL AT Chelmnesford Assizes, Held March 6,
for the County of ESSEX, BETWIXT HENRY Bishop of LONDON, Plantiff, AND EDM.
HICKERINGILL Rector of the Rectory of All Saints in COLCHESTER, Defendant,
FAITHFULLY RELATED.

Together with the Nature of the Writ called SUPPLICAVIT, seldom granted
against any in these Days, more seldom granted against any but common-Rogues,
and common-Barreters, and common-Villains; yet granted against Mr.
Hickeringill: Who was thereupon bound to the Good-Behaviour, at the Court of
King's Bench Westminster, Octab. Pur. xxxiv. R. R.

AS ALSO The Articles sworn against him, by six Proctors of Doctors-Commons;
the Reverend Proctors Names are like-wise (according to the Record in the
Crown-Office) particularized. With large Observations and Reflections upon the
whole.

Published to prevent false Reports.

LONDON, Printed for E. Smith at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhil, 1682.

THE INTRODUCTION
WAS there ever more need than now (to prevent false Reports) when every
Coffee-House Table (instead of a better Carpet) is covered and pestered with
false News?

False Rumors and News (the Epidemical Plague) that our Ancestors were so
careful to prevent, that (as the Laws Oracle, Cook. cap. 39. Institut. 3. tells
us, that) the Law before the Conquest was, That the Author and Spreader of
false Rumors amongst the People had his Tongue cut out, if he redeemed it not
by the estimation of his Head. Int. Leg. Alveredi, cap. 28. If this Law had
been revived, Thompson, Heraclitus and the Observator had much better be
Tongue-ty'd.

For tho Wisemen and Good-Men (in a just scruple of Conscience) scorn to read
such nauseous Ribaldry, in Reverence to that of the Wiseman; (Prove. 17. 4.) A
wicked Doer gives heed to false Lips; and a Liar gives Ear to a naughty
Tongue; knowing that the Resettor is as bad as the Thief, and that the Ear that
loves to hear (is as bad as the Tongue that loves to speak) false News, and
equally Guilty; and he that loves, (as well) as he that makes a Lie, is
ranked amongst Dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murderers and
Idolaters. (Rev. 22. 15.) Yet the depraved Nature of Man is (novitatis avida)
greedy of hearing Tales from the very Cradle; and many Englishmen now, (like
the Athenians, Acts 17. 21.) spend their time in nothing else, but either to
tell or to hear some new-thing.

The Lydians punished these false News-Mongers with Death, as if a Man's
Reputation was as dear to him as his Life, and the Assassinate of a Man's good
Name, was accounted a Murderer.

The Grecians and the French have but one Name or Word to signify the Devil and
(his Son) the Slanderer; (...), Diable, or Devil; who was a Murderer from the
beginning; (that is) a Liar, and the Father of Lies: And to delight in hearing
or reading false and scandalous News, is an Accessory, (which in Murder and all
Assassinations) is equally punished and equally guilty with the Principal.

Prudent Men (though) and Men of Courage (like a Lion, or a right English
Mastiff) stalk and walk on, when little Currs bark at them, answering their
yelping, only with Contempt: Convicia, si irascaris, tua divulgas, spreta
exolescunt, says Tacitus; If you seek to revenge Slanders, you proclaim them
as your own; But if you despise them, they vanish of themselves.

There are but few Bishops like Archbishop Cranmer, who was so much reviled,
that he might have made work enough for the Lawyers, if he would have plied
their Courts with Actions, upon the Statute of Scandal. Magnat. ^ut he chose
rather to win Men with his Goodness, not rendering Evil for Evil, ^^t (so
usually) Good for Evil, that it became a Proverb in those Days, Do my Lord of
Canterbury a Displeasure, and you have him your Friend ever after; that is more
Christian-like, and Bishop-like, than if Men had cause to say, Do my Lord of
(...) a Displeasure, and you have him your Enemy ever after. Sure the World is
near its end, and drawing its last Breath, Charity is so cold now a Days, old
and cold, (God knows!) as for Example, and woeful Experience, Ecce Signum!

The Pressures that this Defendant has undergone since he writ the Naked Truth,
(above a Year ago) are almost insupportable, and enough to make his Back crack,
at least, enough to fright Men from writing or speaking any more Naked-Truths:
It was always so; the great Prophet of old made the same complaint, to small
purpose (God wot) amongst some Men; (Isa. 59. 14, 15.) Judgment is turned away
backward, and Justice stands afar off; for Truth is fallen in the Street, and
Equity cannot enter.

Yea, Truth fails, and he that departs from Iniquity makes himself a Prey;
and the Lord saw it, and it displeased him that there was no Judgment.

How has this Defendant been pestered within this Twelve Months? Four and
twenty great Heads of Barretry preferred against him in the Crown-Office, about
fifty Witnesses subpoena'd to prove them, yet, scarce ten of them sworn, and
some of them that were subpoena'd, professed before they were subpoena'd that
they knew nothing of the Matter, and yet subpoena'd. What? run Men down with a
Noise? Is that such Policy? or, is it Piety? And when the Defendant's Innocence
appeared, and a Verdict to that purpose by the Worthy Jury; yet, afterward How
was he visited and vexed in the Ecclesiastical-Court of Arches, (Henry Bishop
of London Promoter there against him) and for some of the same Barretry too, of
which he had been honorably acquitted?

And when the danger appeared of prosecuting him in that Ecclesiastical-Court
for Barretry (against the Statutes of Praemunire and Provisors) though
Witnesses were sworn to them, yet it was upon second Thoughts adjudg'd unsafe
to insist upon them; and five of the Articles were laid aside (wherewith they
had long made a loud noise) and only five clandestine Marriages insisted upon,
or Marriages without Banes (first published) in time of Divine-Service, (and
how can that be where there is no Divine-Service) but the old Rule, Necessitas
vincit Legem, would not pass Current against a Law of Man, though it proved a
good Dispensation to Holy David against a Law of God: But, in all haste
suspended and silenced he must be, (I do not know when!) whether the
Ecclesiastical Court have Wit in their Anger, and will not do all the harm they
can; or, whether they think there is more in Matrimony than a matter of Money;
or, whether they think it hard to silence a Minister from Preaching the Gospel,
though the Register's had not the nine or ten Shillings (as formerly) from the
Defendant for a Blanck-Licence, whilst scarce a Man in an Age is silenced for
Drunkenness, Ignorance, Laziness, Fornication, or Debauchery; or, whether they
resolve to be merciful in Conclusion, or, (if that be not so probable) whether
they suspend the execution of the Suspension, that the longer the blow is a
heaving it may fall the heavier, I cannot tell; But they. have found the
Defendant work enough this Twelvemonth last past, if he had had no other work,
but to fence and ward off the Blows made at him: Then six Proctors (they) swear
against him Articles in the King's Bench, and procure the Writ of Supplicavit
against him, a Writ seldom granted against any in these Days, (as we are told
by the Complete Solicitor, p. 73, 74.) He says, he remembers that about eight
Years ago, (in the days of Usurpation, for his Book was printed Anno. Dom.
1666.) a troublesome malicious Priest sued one (namely a Supplicavit) against
some of his Neighbors, but he had not heard of any since; and the Parties
craving it should take their Corporal Oath that it is not desired for any
Malice, Hatred, or Envy to the Party (surely if the said six Proctors swore it,
they swore it freely, heartily and clearly!)

Besides, tho it is a Writ rarely granted, yet, when it is granted it is (more)
rarely granted against any but common Rogues, and Villains, common Barretors,
and Man-Catchers; Is there greater Indignity than to be crucified amongst
Thieves and Rogues? It has been the Lot of his Betters, (tho) the Defendant
offered an Affidavit in his behalf, made before Judge Dolben, by three Worthy
Citizens, and desired (with all Humility) that as the Bench had heard of one
side Affidavits against him, that they would please to leave one Ear open, to
hear some Affidavits for him, and some Pleas in his Defense: intending to
insist upon the Statute of 2 Edw. 6. 1. which if it be in force, then the
Ecclesiastical Courts sit not legally, nor can they be called by Names bad
enough; and if that Statute be not in force, then why did the Lord Chief
Justice Pemberton insist upon it so lately at the King's Bench Bar, and also
Mr. Rotherham, for their Client Mr. Weald of Much-Waltham in Essex, about the
time that the last Parliament sat at Westminster, telling the Lord Chief
Justice Scroggs, that he would not urge it warmly (or Words to the like Effect)
because he perceived his Lordship was not prepared at that time to give an
answer to that Statute; or Words to the like Effect: A moot-Case belike then,
and a hard Case to bind a Man to the Good-Behaviour, or threaten him with a
Jaile, when not wiser in the construction of the force of a Statute than the
Lord Chief Justice.

But nothing would be admitted to be pleaded in the Defendants Defense, but
utrum horum (that is not false Latin, whatsoever quisquis is.) Sad choice
(alas!) Bail, or a Jail:
There is no fence against a Flail.
They that will hear but of one Ear here, shall be made to hear on both Ears
one Day (the Day of Judgment.)

And tho Mr. Shepherd (in his Office of a Justice of the Peace, page 83.) says,
that in taking a Recognizance upon a Supplicavit, the ordinary Sum is ten or
twenty Pounds (and difficultly enough (too) to be procured by a poor Rogue, tho
a great Rogue) yet, since the time and Sum is Arbitrary and in the Breast of
the Justices, no less than a hundred Pounds must Mr. Hickeringill be bound in
for affronting the Men of Doctors-Commons, (if the Proctors swore
through-stitch) nay, one of the Bench stood stiffly for 200 Pounds, (that the
Principal should Recognize, but (in that) he was overruled) and four Sureties
in 50 l. apiece; whereas a poor common-Rogue could hardly have procured two
Manucaptors: Ay, Ay; he that will have Honor must sometimes pay for his
Ambition.

But, as if all these troubles were too little for the Defendant (besides the
Weekly Affronts) By the Weekly News-mongers in their Tantivy-Pamphlets, (not to
mention those familiar little friendly Courtships, and Caresses, of Villain,
Rogue, Colchester-Hick -- the great Scribler of the Nation: Daring Not.
Thompson reports him to be convict of Perjury, tho Not. hides his viler Head
for the same, and dare not give an appearance for himself and his Consort to
Mr. Godfrey Woodward Attorney, who has long been prepared for him, if he could
come at him, for villifying and aspersing such a Man as Mr. Hickeringill with
so pernicious and false a Slander, all the Kingdom over.) But these are small
Matters, loss of Reputation, and to be called and accounted a common Rogue,
common Barretor, common Villain; a small matter.

Oh! But in the Neck of all, comes me, (decima unda) the tenth Wave, an Action
of 5000 l. thick, brought by a great Bishop too, of great Interest, great
Power, great Friends, great Parts, great Learning, and great all over; against
a poor Priest, or younger Brother, a Minorite, to Reform him, (if any Body
could tell how) and make him better: Nay, it will be dangerous (this whole long
Year) for Mr. Hickeringill to say, as did the Emperor, at a General Council,
(when at the first setting out and opening thereof, the good Fathers were
gravelled, and at a loss, where (first) to begin to 'mend, the Ecclesiastical
Frame being so horribly out of Frame, a Minoritis, cries one of the great Ones
very politickly: no quoth the Emperor,) rather a Majoritis; let us first begin
to 'mend the great Ones. The Naked Truth, with ease, we tear;
Not, such as Vizor-Masques do wear;
For Vizors sconce and skreen Men here;
But will not always last, I fear.


This famed Trial came on March 8, 1681. at the Nisi prius Bar, before the Lord
Chief Justice, Sir Francis Pemberton; The Jury, by the Sheriff of the County of
Essex, were thus returned; viz. Essex ss. Nomina Jur. inter Henr. Epis. Land.
qui tam, etc. Quer. Et Edmond. Hickeringill, Cler. Defend.

Andreas Jenner de Dunmow Magna, Bar. Ricardus Everard de Waltham Magna, Bar.
Edwardus Smith de Thoydonmount, Bar. Willielmus Appleton de Shenfield, Bar.
Johannes Bramston de Roxwell, Miles Balnei. Marcus Guyon de Coggeshall Magna,
Miles. Johannes Marshal, Miles. Willielmus Maynard de Waltham Stow, Ar.
Willielmus Glascock de Farnham, Ar. Jacobus Milbourn de Dunmow Magna, Ar.
Alexander Prescot de Mountnessing, Ar. Willielmus Pert de ead. Ar. Samuel Hare
de Leigh, Ar. Anthonius Abdey de Kelvedon, Ar. Ricardus Ballet de Hatfield
Broad-Oak, Ar. Johannes Meade de Wenden, Ar. Johannes Tendering de Baddow Magna,
Ar. Willielmus Petre de Stanford Rivers, Ar. Henricus Paschal de Baddow Magna,
Ar. Henricus Humfreys de Westhamingfield, Ar. Ricardus How de Ingate-stone, Ar.
Ricardus Stanes de Alta Ongar, Ar. Aurelius Piercey Wiseman de Wimbish, Ar.
Edwardus Taverner de Canfield, Ar.


None of the Jury were challenged by either side; Most of the Gentlemen (first
named in the Panel) appeared and served; being sworn, a little Council
tremblingly made a shift to read the Heads of the Declaration, viz. The
Declaration in English (faithfully translated out of the Lawyers Latin) was to
this Effect, viz. Trinity Term, xxxiii. R. R. Carol. 2.
HENRY Bishop of London, one of the Prelates of this Realm of England, as well
for our Sovereign Lord the King, as for himself, complains of Edmond
Hickeringill Clerk, in the Custody of the Marshal of the Marshalsea; for that
whereas in the Statute made in the Parliament of King Richard the Second after
the Conquest, at Gloucester, in the Second Year of his Reign, held, amongst
other things, it is Enacted and strictly Charged under great pain, That none
should be so bold as to devise, speak or relate of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls,
Barons, and other Nobles and Great Men of the Realm of England, nor of the
Chancellor, Treasurer or Clerk of the Privy Seal, Steward of the King's House,
Justice of the one Bench or other, nor of any Great Officers of the said Realm,
any false News, Lies, or any such Falsities, whereof any Scandal or Discord
within the said Realm may arise. And whosoever this should do, should incur the
Penalty otherwise thereof ordained, by the Statute of Westminster the First, as
in the said Statute more fully it is contained.

Yet the said Edmond Hickeringill the Statute aforesaid not regarding, nor the
Penalty of the said Statute any ways fearing, but craftily designing the Good
Name, State, Credit, Dignity and Honor of the said Bishop to hurt and blacken,
and him the said Bishop into great Displeasure, Distrust and Discredit of our
said Lord the King that now is, and of the great Men, and great Officers of
this Realm of England, and also of diverse worthy Persons, Subjects of our said
Lord the King that now is, to bring; the fourth day of April, in the three and
thirtieth Year of the Reign of our said Lord the King, at Chelmnesford in the
County of Essex, diverse false News and horrible Lies of the said Henry, then
and yet being Bishop of London, and one of the Prelates of this Realm of
England, in the presence and hearing of diverse of the Subjects of our said Lord
the King, falsely, maliciously, and scandalously devised, spoke, related,
published and proclaimed in these English Words following, viz. The Lord Bishop
of London (meaning himthe said Lord Bishop of London) is a bold daring impudent
Man, for sending some Heads in Divinity to all his Clergy in those parts
(meaning the Clergy within the Diocese of London in those parts) which are
contrary to Law (meaning the Laws of the Realm)

And of his further Malice, the said Edmond afterward, to wit, the said fourth
day of April in the three and thirtieth Year abovesaid, at Chelmnesford in the
said County of Essex, scandalously, and maliciously, and further to defame and
scandalize the said Bishop likewise, devised, spoke, related, published and
proclaimed of the said Henry, then and yet Bishop of London, upon a Discourse of
the said Bishop then and there had, these other false News and horrible Lies,
in these English Words following, that is to say, His Lordship (meaning the
said Henry Lord Bishop of London) is very ignorant.

And the said Edmond further craftily designing not only the good Name, State,
Credit, Dignity and Honor of the said Bishop to hurt and blacken, and him the
said Bishop into further great Displeasure, Distrust and Discredit ^our said
Sovereign Lord the King that now is, and of the great Men, and ^^eat Officers
of this Kingdom of England, and of diverse other worthy Subjects of our said
Lord the King, to bring; but also to cause him to endure the pain and peril of
the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, against Traitors and such Malefactors,
made afterward, to wit the said fourth day of April, in the said three and
thirtieth Year of the Reign of our said Sovereign Lord the King that now is, at
Chelmnesford aforesaid, in the said County, diverse other false News and
horrible Lies of the said Henry, then and yet Bishop of London, and one of the
Prelates of this Realm, in the presence and hearing of diverse of the King's
Subjects, scandalously, falsely, and maliciously devised, spoke, related,
published and declared in these English Words following, viz. I (meaning him
the said Edmond Hickeringill) can prove His Lordship (meaning the said Henry
Lord Bishop of London) to be concerned in the Damnable Plot, (meaning the
Popish Plot to destroy the King, and subvert the Government of this Realm) late
discovered.

By Means of which said several false News and horrible Lies, the said Bishop
is not only hurt and scandalized in his Reputation, Honor and Dignity, and the
said Bishop has lost the Favor, good Opinion and Esteem which our said
Sovereign Lord the King, and other great Men, and Prelates of this Realm before
toward him did bear, and diverse Rumors and Scandals between diverse of the
Nobles of this Realm, and great Men, and other the King's Subjects upon the
Occasion aforesaid, within this Realm are risen and spread abroad, and great
Scandals and Discords by reason of the Premises, between the said Bishop and
others of this Realm are risen, and daily more and more are likely to arise, to
the great disturbance of the Peace and Tranquillity of the Realm, to the
Contempt of our said Lord the King, and great Scandal of the said Bishop, and
against the Form of the said Statute of Richard the Second, to the Bishop's
Damage 5000 l. and therefore he brings this Suit.



Issue -- Non Cul --

This Trial (of so great expectation) came on about nine a Clock in the
Morning, Wednesday the 8th of March, 1681.

To prove the Declaration only one single Witness was produced for the
Plantiff, namely, one Samuel Harris, Clerk.

Witnesses sworn on the behalf of the Defendant, were, The Right Honorable
Edward Earl of Lincoln, Mr. Benjamin Edgar, Mr. Ambrose Flanner, Robert Potter,
Henry Bull, Christopher Hill, and Daniel Howlet; all (except that Noble Earl)
Parishioners of the Parish of St. Buttolph's in Colchester, and present when
the Words were (pretended to be) spoken.

Actions for Words ought to be precisely and punctually proved, and all the
Words together without addition or diminution; otherwise, as the Defendant (who
pleaded his own Cause) told the Court, the Sense must differ, except they be
taken together, with the antecedent and subsequent Discourse, in sensu
conjuncto, not diviso; jointly and not severally: adding, that he had a
thousand times said, that, there is no God; and yet that saying (that looks so
scandalously, Atheistically and Blasphemously, taken disjointed and severally
from the foregoing Words) are really innocent and harmless, and have been
spoken a thousand times by every Man, that has a thousand times read or
repeated Psalm. 14. 1. The Fool has said in his Heart, there is no God.

So also, in infinite Instances, as to say, It is not lawful to love God, nor
to (...) our Neighbor dissemblingly, or hypocritically; take away the last
Words, and (...) looks scandalously and most profanely; but taken altogether,
no harm all, but good and true, and like that of the Apostle, -- Let Love be
without Dissimulation.

The said Harris (Witness for the Plantiff) had got the Words pretty well by
Heart, but yet did not swear them so roundly off, as was expected.

For, (as to the first Words, namely, The Lord Bishop of London is a bold
daring impudent Man, for sending some Heads of Divinity to all his Clergy in
these parts:) he swore them thus, -- namely, The Lord Bishop of London is a
bold daring impudent Man, for sending a Printed Paper, wherein were some Heads
of Divinity which were contrary to Law.

But the Defendant again examining, and bidding him repeat the Words, He said
the Words were -- The Lord Bishop of London is a bold daring impudent Man, for
sending some Heads of Divinity in a Printed Letter which is contrary to Law.

Whereupon the Defendant taking notice and advantage from the difference of the
Expressions and Words, The Judge bid that same Harris to repeat the Words once
more as he would bide by it.

Whereupon, Harris swear that the Words were these -- The Lord Bishop of London
is a bold daring impudent Man, for sending some Heads of Divinity in a Paper
contrary to Law.

There the Mercury was fixed after all its several shapes.

The Words in the second Count, He swore roundly off without any Haesitation;
But the Words in the third Count, he did not swear as they were laid in the
Declaration, and yet without doubt the Declaration was made according to his
single Information; But it pleased God, he did not swear them off so roundly;
for instead of these Words -- I can prove his Lordship to be concerned in the
Damnable Plot (meaning) the Popish Plot; he swore these Words -- I can prove
his Lordship to be concerned in the Horrid Plot against my righteous Name and
Person; and that the Words were spoken by the Defendant without any
intervenient Question, all in one continued Discourse.

Yet the Counsel would gladly have insinuated to the Gentlemen that were sworn,
That the Words should not be taken together, but to make a Pause at Horrid
Plot, as if the next Words, against my righteous Name, did not sufficiently
give the meaning, without any subintelligitur; for who can imagine in sober
sense that a Man means John a Styles, when he expressly says John a Nokes? or,
who can imagine that a Man means a Popish-Plot, when he expressly says, a Horrid
Plot against my righteous Name? etc.

And he and all the Defendants Witnesses argeed in one thing, namely, That not
any Colloquium, Discourse or Mention was made of any Popish Plot, during the
Defendants stay in the Company, that 4th of April, 1681. being Easter-Monday,
at the said Parish-Meeting for the Election of Officers for the said Parish of
St. Buttolph's in Colchester, as their yearly custom was, on every
Easter-Monday.

The said Harris his Testimony was confronted with six honest Witnesses,
substantial Men, who had no design upon the Defendant's Benefice of St.
Buttolphs, (an Appurtenance to his Rectory of All Saints, time out of mind of
Man to the contrary) But the said Harris could not deny, but he had a
Pretension thereunto by a Sequestration granted to him by the Plantiff.

And first Mr. Edgar told the Judge, and those that were sworn, that he was
present all the time from first to last, from the said Harris his coming into
the Room at the said Parish-meeting where Harris found the Defendant; and gave
good attention to all the Discourse that past betwixt the Defendant and the
said Harris all the while they were together, which was not long, the Defendant
soon leaving the Room and departing.

He was ordered to declare the whole Discourse, which he did as follows;
namely, that when the said Harris came into the said Parish-meeting, the fourth
of April last, The Defendant asked the said Harris what Business he had there,
or what he had to do there in his Parish? to whom Harris replied, that he had a
Sequestration of the said Benefice of St. Buttolphs from the Lord Bishop of
London.

To whom the Defendant replied, saying, The Lord Bishop is not infallible, (and
that the Pope is not infallible;) for instance (continued the Defendant.) The
Lord Bishop of London sent a Printed Letter to every one of the Clergy in these
parts, wherein he recommended to them the Observation of the Canons of Forty,
which Canons are disanulled by Law; which Law if the Bishop did not know, it
was his Ignorance; but if he did know it, it was Insolence.

Besides, The Defendant added these Words, The Bishop of London has a prejudice
against me, for I can prove that he was concerned in the Horrid Plot against my
righteous Name and Reputation. In short, all the Defendants Witnesses agreed
with Mr. Edgar's Testimony, and all of them swore positively, that they were
present during the whole Discourse betwixt the said Harris and the Defendant,
that they all gave attention thereunto, and that they did hear and take good
notice of the whole Discourse that past at that time betwixt the Defendant and
the said Harris, and that the Defendant during the whole Discourse, mentioned
not these Words -- The Lord Bishop of London is a bold daring impudent Man; nor
any mention made of any Heads of Divinity, nor these Words, His Lordship is
very ignorant; nor the least mention made of a Popish Plot by any in the Room,
nor any Colloquium of the Popish Plot (laid) in the Declaration; but all agreed
that the Defendant in a continued Discourse, said -- I can prove his Lordship
to be concerned in the Horrid Plot against my righteous Name and Reputation;
but Harris said, against my righteous Name and Person.

And yet the said Harris confessed, that after the Defendant was gone out of
the said Room from the said Meeting, he went alone by himself into another
Room; and writ something, and brought it so written to some of the Company, to
the said Mr. Flanner in particular, and desired him to subscribe to the same;
(this spoke his Malice and Design:) presently after the Defendant was gone
away. But the said Mr. Flanner and the rest held up their Hands (as astonished)
and blessed themselves from him, saying, There was no such Words spoke by the
Defendant; and thereupon Mr. Flanner and Mr. Edgar writ down the Words (as
aforesaid) which were spoken, thinking the Man had some Design against the
Defendant to do him a Mischief, as it appears since, too true; and therefore
they could not but remember the whole Discourse as well as he: at least, all
could tell there was no such Words spoken.

The Preacher was a Prophet when he preached of the Horrid Sin of Mancatching;
It was Jezebel's-way to get Naboth's Vineyard, and his Life to boot; it is often
fatal to have a Vineyard that other Men covet, 1 Kings 21. 15. And it came to
pass, when Jezabel heard that Naboth was dead, that Jezabel said to Ahab,
Arise, take possession of the Vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, which he
refused to give thee for Money, for Naboth is not alive but dead. (Cunning
Harlot!)

And it came to pass when Ahab heard that Naboth was dead, that Ahab rose up to
go down to the Vineyard of Naboth the Jezreellite, to take possession of it.
(But this is a Parenthesis.)

It was good sport to the Bystanders, to hear how the glib-toung'd Counsel did
lay on Tongue against the Defendant, and to improve their little-Evidence-Man:
They did earn their Guinies, to give them their due.

The Lacedominians (a wise People) banished all Hackney-Orators out of their
Dominions, as pernicious to their Commonwealth, because they could (like old
Ladies) paint and bedawb their Wrinckles, could black-patch their Pimples and
Sores, and make them Beauty-Spots.

Candida de nigris and de candentibus atra.

Could disguize the Truth, and cast Dirt and asperse when and where and whom
they list, an Effeminate-Trade; yet for Calumny these Lawyers are usually
outdone by every Fish-Wife and Butter-Quean.

But to go on with the famous Trial, some Men are bound to the Good-Behaviour,
(as the Defendant told Sir George Jeffries, in the midst of his Harrangue,)
wishing that his Tongue also was as fast tied and bound to the Good-Behaviour,
as is the Defendants: And withal, told the Gentlemen that were sworn, that the
less heed was to be given to Sir George's Words, because he was not a Man of
his Word; for that Sir George had promised the last Assizes at Brentwood (a
Year and half ago,) that he would never be retained (nor plead) against the
Defendant, tho any Man should give him an hundred Guinies; no, not against
Curse ye Meroz. --

But comes me out (before the next Assizes) -- the poor Book, called the Naked
Truth -- the Second Part.

And then stand clear from a common-Barretor, the Knight had forgot his Promise
to Curse ye Meroz --

So fickle a Passion is this same thing (called) Love, (as this Defendant now
told him) neither Man nor Woman knows well when they are sure on it; If I were
his Lady I should be jealous of him, (nay, I should) if he were as inconstant
in his Love to me, as he has proved to this Defendant; (I say again) at this
rate his Lady will scarce know when she can be Cock-sure of his Love;
(inconstant Man!) Well, perhaps she may give him a Rowland, for his Oliver;
The Punishment, the usual and just Punishment of a Liquorish Tongue, (a
luscious, wanton, extravagant Tongue is to be plagued with a) liquorish T --
But enough of that at present, I am in his Debt, and I Will certainly pay him off
with
celebrating in Heroic Verse, the Merits of the noisy-Hero and his Lady, to
perpetuate them to all Posterity; Let him shake his Head, and stare with
open-Eyes how he pleases, it is strange if he should not some time or other meet
with his Match; we are told -- -- A Poet should be feared
When angry, like a Comets flaming Beard.
He shall repent his Inconstance, (He shall,) let him do his worst. A time may
come yet, and a Day of Reckoning, God is Righteous, and he usually shows his
Justice in this World, against the greatest Atheists that live Hectoring and
Torying in defiance of him, as if God had forsaken the Earth, and where is the
God of Judgment?

To support the Credit of their little Witness-Man, which they craftily foresaw
would be shrewdly shaken by all the Witnesses, they had provided (ready for the
work) five Clergymen, to adorn the little Black-Coat with five Circingles
more, Men of the same stamp, (and if possible,) swore as boldly and venturously
for him and the Bishop, as Harris himself; and brought for the very nonce.

But Good Sir George Jeffries (that never before had told a Lie at the Bar) if
you will believe him, or any Hackney Breath-sellers, they come not for the sake
of the Guinies, but purely in Devotion to Justice, and love to their Clyent and
his Cause, tho Pro or Con, who comes first to retain them (right or wrong,)
Tongue waggs in the Cause, if it be retained, and if the Angel appear, then the
A -- opens his Mouth, (a very pretty World) nay, many of them do not read their
Breviats 'till the Cause be called, and then with two Eyes, in all haste, they
are busy to spy out Vantages; (poor Clients are well helped up, and what with
an ignorant Jury, or a Pick'd-Jury for that very purpose, (as this was by Order
of the Court of King's Bench, the last day of the last Term, upon the Motion of
Sir Francis Withins, just such another Man.) Poor Countrymen have a fine time
on it, to go to Law as Tinkers mend Kettles, to remedy one hole in their Estate,
they make two; is not this Remedy worse than the Disease?) What? do you think a
Lawyer will tell a Lie?

But the Good Knight, Sir George Jeffries, told a Whisker at this time, when
the said Black-Coats swore so heartily, in Vindication of Harris his
Reputation;
One Mr. Powell swore he had known Harris a Twelvemonth and more, and He never
knew any ill by him; so swore one Mr. Kiddier, and Mr. Grove (I think his Name
was) of London, and so swore also one Thompson, and one Shelton, two Colchester
Ministers.

Look you (my Lord) quoth Sir George, here are Clergymen swear to the
Reputation of the Witness for the Bishop, Clergymen that here come by
accident, and spying them in Court, we make use of them.

Whereupon the Defendant asked the said Colchester-Ministers, Thompson and
Shelton, whether Sir George was a Man to be believed herein, or a Man of his
Word, when he said these Clergymen came by accident, etc. Speak (Sirs) you are
upon your Oaths, Did you come by accident, or for set purpose subpoena'd to
give this Testimony? They answered (for they durst not do no other, being
publicly subpoena'd) That they came on purpose, being subpoena'd.

Then, (Good Sir George) retorted the Defendant, Where is your Veracity, your
Truth good Sir George? But Sir George sat down very angerly, his Mouth was
stopped for once, (Is it not a Wonder!) and the good Gentleman was silenced, his
Welsh-Blood flying into his Face, and answering for him only with a Blush: Nay,
it is well he had the Grace to Blush, he is not much given to it; but this was
put upon him from his own Witnesses, the said Black-Coats, who had all of them
more cause to blush, than Sir George, but they blushed no more than a Black-D
-- Nay, I Will trust such Black-Coats with an Oath, as soon as poorer Men, if
there be a Bishop in the case, and hopes of Favor and Preferment; what? Can
any Man think they will not stretch it for a Bishop, when (one says) they will
ride down Sun and Moon for a Benefice, a Prebendary, or a Dignity.

The Men were true Sons of the Church, and knew the virtue of the Oath of
Canonical Obedience; but unhappily the Defendant snap'd them with one single
Question, and made them all swear (in effect) Tongue thou lie; and contradict
themselves and one another, and all upon Oath too.

The Question put to every one of these Clergymen (who swore so thorowstitch
to Harris his Reputation) was this; namely, Is it not an ill thing in a
Clergyman, and a Vicar (who is sworn to perpetual Residence in his Parish) to
be Non-Resident for three quarters of a Year, minding only the Fleece but not
the Flock?

This gravelled them, for they knew the danger of Perjury, and knew not well
how to avoid it.

And therefore Powel being first asked the Question (and the rest of them after
him, one after another) was at a stand, and knew not what to say.

Let Us have no Pumping, no Pumping, I beseech you good Mr. Powel, answer
directly, (said the Defendant.) Is it not an ill thing for a Minister to be
Non-Resident ever since before Mid-Summer last? Yes, replied he, and they;
(there was no help for it.) Well then, Has not Mr. Harris been non-Resident and
deserted his Flock ever since Mid-summer last? Yes, replied Mr. Powel, and the
rest of them; and yet before they knew no ill thing. But (says Mr. Powel) there
has been some Differences and Contentions about the Parishes of St. Buttolphs
and St. Leonard's in Colchester, which the Bishop gave to Mr. Harris by
Sequestration: But (replied the Defendant.) What is that to Fingringhoe, to
which Vicaridge Harris is Instituted, and Inducted to your knowledge, for you
were present at his Induction, and so was Thompson and Shelton, the other
Witnesses; which all of them confessed, (for they could not avoid it by any
Evasion or Equivocation) only said, there was no Vicarage-House at Fingringhoe;
to whom the Defendant retorted, That it might be a good excuse for not residing
upon his Vicarage, if he resided in any other House of the Parish; but what is
that to his leaving his Flock at the distance of forty Miles, namely, at
London, and taking upon him another Cure and Charge, (as Curate under Mr.
Grove?) and leaving none to supply the place for three quarters of a Year, nor
four Sermons from Mid-summer to Michaelmas; and those preached by a quondam
Logg-river, one Mr. Sills, Rector of Dounyland (a good Rectory) but the Man tho
a Rector, never yet could, nor ever was able so much as to read his Accidence;
yet he that knows not how to supply his own Cure as he ought, must (for
cheapness) mumble (to boot) a little for this prime and single
Episcopal-Witness: (good doings the while!) This it is to be in Favor with a
Prelate, and this it is to incur the Displeasure of a Prelate, and tell bold
Truths; (behold the difference!) The Defendant silenced, stigmatized, belied
and slandered, vilify'd as a Common-Varlet and Common-Barretor, paid off with
Indictments, Informations, Actions and Accusations, in Spiritual Court, in
Temporal Courts, Henry Bishop of London Promoter, Suspensions, Supplicavits,
Excommunications, Fines, outrageous Verdicts, Plots and Complots, Conspiracies
and Horrid Plots to ruin him and his Family, by enriching the Rich Bishop, and
all for what? For a little Naked-Truth. (Sir George Jefferies brought the
Books, and pointed with his Index to the two last Lines of the Black
Nonconformist, namely -- A Bishop say? Thou lie: Him Cornet call
Of the Black-Regiment, that Jayles us all.
The Welsh-man looking merrily at the Defendant, and glaring in his Face;) For
Sir George insisted more to the Jury, concerning the Defendant's Books, and his
writing and speaking against Lordly Prelacy (than upon the Declaration)
producing two Letters writ by the Defendant to the Bishop, wherein he
complained to the Bishop how hardly he was used, (I wish they would Print those
Letters, as well as produce them to the Jury,) as if it were a Sin to groan
when a Man is pinched and tormented: First they make us sigh, and then accuse
us for sighing to ease our Hearts. But first Sir George insisted upon the Title
and Superscription of those Letters (To the Bishop of London) which was
descanted upon (notably) by that Critic in Law, Sir George Jefferies; namely,
this To HENRY Lord Bishop of LONDON
These.

Do you see, Gentlemen, (quoth Sir George) Henry Lord Bishop, no more I Sir,
(quoth he, to the Defendant) It might have become you to have styled him, --
Reverend Father in God -- you have not said -- To the Right Reverend Father in
God, Henry Lord Bishop, etc.

That, quoth Sir George is omitted, and seems to be an Aggravation (at least)
if not another Scandalum Magnatum: nothing but plain Henry Lord Bishop;

A Gentleman of a noble Extract and Pedigree, I hope the Jury will take notice
of this Omission, here is no -- Reverend Father in God.

That is (replied the Defendant) the very Naked-Truth on it, you say right, Sir
George, there is no Reverend Father in God in the case, who denies it!

But, (said the Defendant) I am not innur'd (nor desire to be innur'd) to
Court-Complements; (I think) to say Henry Lord Bishop, is pretty fair for him,
and pretty fair from me.

Sir George makes little or nothing of a Lordship belike; whereas the Bishop of
London's Grandfather William Compton, lived the greatest part of his Life
without the Title of Lordship.

For indeed William Compton (this Bishop's Grandfather) was the first of the
Compton's that ever was an Earl since Adam: And King James created him Earl of
Northampton, (I could tell the Reader how, and for what too) Anno Dom. 1618.
There are thousands alive that remember the Business.

But no doubt, but the Bishop did come of a noble Extract: But if Sir George
had not taken notice of it, the noble Family would have been never the worse;
for when Men are always dung in the Teeth with the same and the same Bastinado,
Self-Preservation makes them stand upon their Guard, and perhaps take the
length on it: and as it happens, this Pedigree (that Sir George did so bluster
with) is not so long neither -- not so long as a Welsh-Pedigree, ap Lewis, ap
George, ap Morgan, ap Taphee, ap Lloyd, is a Pedigree more than twice so long.

But I should have wondered, if the Welsh-man (on this occasion too, you will say)
had not vapour'd with his Extract and Pedigree.

But, to the Business -- Here Is no Reverend Father in God: It Is readily
granted, nor is the Omission a Sin of Omission, it is no Crime; For a younger
Brother to be a Lord that is pretty fair, and more honor than his Grandfather
arrived unto at his Years: For a Man that was but the other day a Cornet in
Captain Compton's Troop in the Earl of Oxford's Regiment (I think) by the
King's Grace to be made a Prelate, and a Lord Bishop, there is no reason in the
World that he or any Body else should take it so in disdain, to be called only
Lord Bishop, since that old Complement (of Popish-Times) namely, Reverend
Father in God, was never given 'till Priests grew abominably and loathsomely
Proud and Ambitious, when Pride and Prelacy came in Fashion.

The Defendant in his Epistle Dedicatory to the Archbishop (to avoid offense)
in his Book called the Black-Non-Conformist, does give that old Father, The
Style -- namely, (the Style that Sir George does so want, and does so stare
about to the Jury, to find it missing) To the Reverend Father in God William,
etc.

But the Bishop of London is (...), newly come to the Faith, as being young in
Years, and a Cornet of Horse within the memory of Youth, and unmarried, and
much a younger Brother to the Defendant, both in Years, in Travels, in Studies,
at the University, in Experience, nay, as a Soldier too; one a Cornet, the
other a Captain, one a great Traveller as the most Gentlemen in England; the
other's greatest Travels is but over the Diocese, in Conferences, Visitations,
to gather Procurations, and unconformable Confirmations not according to Law
(as is proved in the Black-Non-Conformist;) and for the Defendant to have
called one who is (indeed) (only by the King's Grace (as being made a Bishop
and a Doctor) and therefore only) his Senior, but his younger Brother by many
Degrees in all other respects, as aforesaid; if the Defendant had pleased Sir
George's Humor, and had styled him Reverend Father in God, perhaps the Bishop
would have thought the Defendant had jeered him, and then all the Fat had been
in the Fire again, and all in a Flame, the other Action of Scandalum Magnatum.

And let the Bystanders judge, whether it had not been as much for the Bishop's
Honor, if Sir George had never touched upon the Pedigree, but have left it
quiet as he found it; nor yet have star'd about, when he mist the old cogging,
flattering, Hierarchical, and Prelatical Complement (of) Reverend Father in God.

A Complement now worn out at Elbows, and as tattered, trite, and Threadbare,
as -- Your Humble Servant.

And for the noble Pedigree, the Welsh-man had as good have let it alone, (if
it had been possible for a Welsh-man to omit the Occasion;) but the noble
Extract and Pedigree (which no Body does deny) had rested never the worse if he
had suffered it to sleep quietly to all Posterity, without this his Index to
disturb it.

Here Is a flanting-do with these Welsh-men and their Extracts, and their
Pedigree's; and if old Adam or Noah were alive, they would equally love a
Beggar, as one (who is as nigh a Kinsman of their Blood) as the Welsh Knight
himself: Away with this musty, worm-eaten-Heraldry, some by pimping (and
worse,) have got to be Lords; stand clear there from all his Progeny, remember
2 Ric. 2. Sir, we'll Scandalum Magnat. you! do you not honor a Lord, and a
Lord's Son?

A Lord's Son! Can you prove your Words? Now it is the Mode in some Countries,
for Ladies that have Lords, to have also a Gallant, a strong Backed Coachman,
or sweaty Footman, or Groom, (Spindle-shank'd Gentlemen-Ushers (as useless)
being laid aside:) And now it is the Mode, the Court-like Mode, for a Lord that
has a Wife, to keep a Miss -- likewise; That it would puzzle this same little
Harris (who would make no Bones of a probable Oath (but swallow it roundly) to
swear who is a Lord's Son; and yet what a pother Men keep in the World with
their Noble Blood, Noble Blood; when the Surgeon swears, that there is not
one of a hundred Lords (upon trial of Phlebotomy) has so good Blood in his
Veins as the Defendant. In Guinee, therefore, to secure the Blood Royal
infallibly (in the Blood and Family-Royal;) the eldest Son of the King's eldest
Sister does Heir the Crown, not the King's Son; for so there can be no foul
play.

But the said two Letters were read, wherein the Defendant inculcated the
Commands of our Savior to his Disciples, that they should not Lord it over one
another, (as the Princes and Men of the World do:) Look you, (says Sir Francis
Withins) he justifies his speaking against Prelates. (As if it were a Sin to
quote our Savior's own Words!) But especially He and Sir George stormed when
the Defendant said, That Prelacy is condemned, 1 Timothy 5. 21. (...), absque eo
ut unum alteri praeferas; without preferring (or, prelating) one before
another.) Worse and worse, says Mr. Withins, He justifies, here is Scandalum
Magnatum again, an Aggravation Gentlemen, I hope you will remember it in the
Damages. (Ay, Ay, trouble not your Head!) The Jurymen were Wisemen and had
conn'd their Lesson perfectly, and knew their Business and
what to do, as well as Sir Francis could tell them; he might have spared his
Breath to cool his Pottage; or, for the next cause; and yet when his Tongue did
not go, his Hand went, (at every Clause and Period and sometimes at every Word)
lifting up his Hand and then the Cadence, (he had seen the Singingmen how they
act their Prayers.) And when the Words of the Letter were full of heavy
complaints, made to the Bishop by this Defendant, at every Period, or Clause,
-- Hah (quoth Sir Francis:) As when in the Letter the Defendant complains, that
the Bishop of London listened to clandestine Affidavits -- (Hah! quoth Sir
Francis) about the false Accusations of Barretry -- (Hah!) and taken illegally
(Hah --) and out of Court (Hah --) when there was no Cause depending -- (Hah
--) nor any Issue joined -- (Hah --) nor any Cause that was of Ecclesiastical
cognizance -- (Hah --) and sworn by two Bum-lifts -- Martin and Groom, (Hah --)
two Fellows of the basest Conversation -- (Hah --) the former, Martin, whipped
for a Thief, (Hah --) in Sudbury -- (Hah --) and the Record thereof produced,
and proved at the Assizes, by Mr. George Catesby, Town Clerk of Sudbury (Hah --
still quoth Sir Francis:) And that the Fellows swore through an Inch-Board, as
swearing against Records (Hah --) and after his Lordship knew this to be true,
yet He or his Chancellor Sir Tho. Exton, or the Registers -- Morris and Betts,
or all of them, still prosecuted the Defendant as a Common-Barretor -- (Hah --)
and for taking a Bribe for granting an Administration to Thomas Shortland which
they knew by their Register-Books was never granted, and yet (knowing all this)
they suffered this Martin to swear that he brought the Administration from
Chelmnesford, from the Register's-Office of that Couple -- Morris and Betts;
and Groom (their Apparitor, fit Companions in their Spiritual Court) swore he
saw the Administration under Seal of the Court, and granted to Thomas Shortland
by the Defendant, as Surrogate; when they knew all was false as God is true,
and that not the Defendant, but Gilbert Archbishop of Canterbury (in the
Prerogative-Court where the Defendant was never concerned in his Life) and
Marcus Cottle (not Morris, nor Betts Registers) and under the Seal of the
Archbishop: Of such Vexations and Grievances the Defendant humbly complains,
(but smartly and warmly too) in his Letters to the Bishop, and humbly entreats
the Bishop, either to give him reparation for the Damages he has causelessly
been put unto; or, if he would stand upon the Plea of his Innocence and
Justification (that he would please to give this Defendant the Benefit of
righting himself by Law -- (Hah --) And that the said Bishop would be pleased
to wave his Privilege, and give Appearance to the Desendants Attorney Mr.
Coleman -- (Hah --) and come in amongst the rest of the Conspirators and
Plotters against the Defendants righteous Name and Reputation -- (Hah --) And
that all these Mischiefs had their rise from that old inveterate piece of
Malice (Hah --) Sir John Shaw -- (Hah --) who without any lawful Power or
Authority -- (Hah --) had taken clandestine Affidavits (Hah --) in his House
(Hah --) about Barretry (Hah --) depending in the King's Bench -- (Hah --)
where Sir John Shaw had no Authority to give or take an Oath -- (Hah --) in
private -- (Hah --) against the Laws of the Land (Hah --) and made them ready
against the Bishop came down, to set the Bishop to Roil Mr. Hickeringill, whom,
he knew, would not tamely suffer himself and his Reputation to be illegally and
publicly brought in question by any Bishop in Christendom -- (Hah --)

This was the Sum and Substance of those two Letters which the Defendant writ
to the said Bishop, that were never answered, but only (as Men are when they
are pressed to Death,) with -- more Weight -- more Weight --

The Defendant, in vain, opposed the reading of his private Letters, saying it
was not genteel, civil nor manly to produce such Evidence, and nothing to the
present Declaration, and that tho there was nothing in them but what was modest
and true, yet private Letters are, and ought to be sacred in their Privacy, and
that -- (Si liceat parvis componere magna.) King Charles 1. (If it be lawful to
compare great with small) did justly upbraid the Parliament with the Incivility
of publishing his private Letters taken at Naseby, tho there was nothing in
them, (nor in this Defendants Letters) for which any Man need blush, or be
blamed. But this is the Ecclesiastical-Candor; any Method to expose the
Defendant, no Vengeance is great enough, no Fine or Verdict outrageous enough,
to crush one that dares (as the Defendant has) discover the Mystery of Iniquity
Ecclesiastical, in Extortions, illegal Fees, Oppressions, and Courts kept in
dessance of the Statutes of this Realm, Excommunications, Absolutions,
Prophanations, Procurations, Visitations, (namely) Vexations, etc.

There Is a Villain indeed! Plague him, All Hands aloft, all is at Stake, down
goes -- if you do not help; This Fellow is another (Germana illa Bestia quae
non curat Aurum, a) German Beast that regards not Preferment, as the Cardinal
told the Pope when he chid him, because he could not (by tampering with Luther,
and the proffer of Gold, and a Cardinal's Cap) prevail with him, nor take him
off from writing and preaching against the Abominations and Corruptions of the
Church and Churchmen.

Church and Churchmen! Ay, set but the Clergy -- upon a Man, and you need not
set any Dogs upon him to worry him?

Church and Churchmen! Ha! do you know who you speak against? what? Find fault
with Oppressions and Extortions of Ecclesiastical-Courts, with Apparitors,
Registers, Commissaries, and all that Fry of Lay Elders?

Church and Churchmen! Ha! Do you speak against Prelacy? Say that Word again,
say it again before Witness -- Sirrah, Villain, Rogue! How dare you at this
time of day speak Scripture, dangerous Scripture, Scripture against
Statute Law, 2 Rich. 2. 5. which Statute makes a Prelate, (...), Acts 8. 9.
some great One; and you, Sir, would have him, as your Savior and the Gospel
would have him, as lowly as Christ or his Apostles; you, Sir, do you speak
Scripture in a Court of Law? Ha! what do you produce a Bible instead of a
Breviate? Do you plead Gospel against Law? and Christ and his Apostles, in
defiance of Rich. 2?

An Aggravation, an Aggravation, (as Sir Francis Withins said) the Defendant
justifies in a Plea of Non-Culp -- this is rich indeed! These Errors will be
committed when you suffer Parsons to be Pleaders, and plead their own Cause,
and understand not the Punctilio's and Methods of nice-pleading -- very fine!
What suffer Scripture to be quoted instead of Law, and Christ and his Apostles,
instead of Cook and Littleton? for Shame. And yet the Defendant (ignorant Man!)
did not understand the mischief of urging a little Scripture in this Cause
betwixt two Churchmen, and already there decided, namely, that of Christ, St.
Paul, and St. Peter against all Prelacy, Pride, Lordliness and Dominion one
Brother over another, not Lording it over God's Heritage.

But, Christ and St. Paul and St. Peter were poor Men, Silver and Gold had they
none, they were meek, humble, and lowly, and when they were reviled, reviled
not again, nor brought an Action of Scandalum Magnat. nor did Fee a pack of
Lawyers to mouth it, upon an old Statute, made in the time of Popish Prelacy,
and when Antichrist was Rampant, and when the Devil reigned, a time (as the
Defendant told the Court) when the Prelates did all, and all ill; a time when
the Prelates were grand Rebels as ever were in England: For then (in the Reign
of Rich. 2.) was this Statute made, when the Clergy were as very Rebels as Wall
the Priest, Wat. Tyler, or any of that wicked Crew.

It Is true; Henry Spencer Bishop of Norwich, was General for the King both in
England and France (did not Armor disgrace Bishop Henry's Lawn-Sleeves?) The
Bishop of Ely was Lord Chancellor; (Countez, Two.) Tho. Arundel Bishop of
Hereford, (Countez, Three) Lord Treasurer: Nicholas (Abbot of Waltham) Lord
Privy Seal; (Four.) William Archbishop of Canterbury; (Five.) Alexander
Archbishop of York; (Countez, Six.) William Bishop of Winchester; (Seven.) And
Thomas Bishop of Exeter; (Eight.) Good Men and True: (that is a Lie) a Pack of
damnable Villains and Rebels as ever were in England, for taking upon them (by
Commission) to rule the King and Kingdom, and so the Judges concluded that
(Commission of thirteen Persons to rule the King and Kingdom, of which eight
were Prelates, with five Laymen, for fashion-sake, for the Prelates could
out-vote them when they list,) a Devilish Rebellion, abominable Prelates in
Rich. 2d's time, when the Statute of Scandalum Magnatum was made: and struck at
it has been by the last Parliament at Westminster, and others, as a Statute
obsolete, or (in the Judgment of the Wisdom of the Nation, the Honorable House
of Commons) to be repealed; being made in the wicked time aforesaid when the
Devil danced, and Simon Magus vaunted himself to be one of the Magnat, some
Great One, and yet also the Successor of Simon Peter; who was a poor
Fisherman, and a Fisher of Men; not a Pick-Pocket, nor a Promoter of
Lawsuits; nor did he mend his Market by turning Churchman (as some have done,
too well known) but to his dying day was poor and pennyless, having his Faith
and Hope in another World, and being a Disciple of him whose Kingdom is not of
this World.

All this and more the Defendant told the Court, and the Men that were sworn
(for to give the Judge his due) he gave the Defendant sufficient leave, and
leisure for three hours to defend himself against the crafty Suggestions, and
dirty Language thrown at him, on purpose to vilify him with Dirt, which the
Counsel had raked up together; and in two set-Speeches made on purpose, fetched
it far, and not at all to the purpose or to the matter in hand, villifying him
with the Miseries and Vexations with which they had loaded him in the Barretry
and Supplicavit, (as if his Sufferings were his only Crime.) But something they
must say for their Guinies, and for their Lord Prelate, and in hopes of
Preferment, and his Good Word and Recommendation; But the Defendant gave them
such smart, such nimble, and such home Repartees, and (so free from all
Passion, and unmoved) that even his Enemies, and all the Hearers could not but
acknowledge, that as he never spoke more at one time, so he never spoke better
in his Life.

And yet to no more Fruit, than if he had preached (as Saint Bede did) to a heap
of Stones; for the Jury were resolv'd-Men; never Men better tutored, better
culled, and obsequious -- Paedagogue said to his Imps -- Ye'ave con'd your
Lessen well, stroke them o'th'Head,
Call them good Boys, and buy them Ginger-Bread.


There is cunning in Dawbing, and a Cause slenderly witnessed, had need be
well-Jury'd, or else the 2000 l. had not been worth a Gray-Groat; no, not worth
a Brummingham. A plain Country Yeoman has neither Hopes nor Fears at Court
(the wiser and happyer Man he) He is neither fearful a Commission to lose, nor
in hopes of a Commission to get; But values his Oath, his Soul, and his
Conscience above all.

You talk of an Ignoramus-Jury in London, we'll match them in Essex with
Billa-vera-Men; you talk of a Whigg-Jury, we can match them with a Tory-Jury:
Does not the London-Juries Idolize the Men of Doctor's-Commons? Bring
Doctor's-Commons-Men into Essex, and tho most abominable contemners of
Statutes, Oppressors, Extortioners, Buyers and Sellers of Offices, and (they
know all this is true, except their Consciences be hardened) yet let them come
into Essex, and (as the common Strumpet said to the Fellow that called her
Whore, which she knew as well or better than he) you, Sir, Villain, I would
you would prove me a Whore, Sir; Bear Witness -- Neighbors -- Scandal. Magn.
-- he calls me Whore, Scarlet Whore -- bear Witness --

Sir Thomas Exton must be called too, as a Witness, for his Master the Bishop
(a very good Witness said the Judge and the Council) a Man untainted, they
meant unattainted, unconvicted, as yet; a Blot is no Blot 'till it be hit; if I
live it shall be as well as Betts and Morris -- But what had Sir Thomas to do
at a Parish-meeting, in the Parish of St. Buttolphs in Colchester? No, that is
true; But he was not produced as a Witness to prove the Declaration; No, no; a
good reason why, he could not swear, when he was not there; But he was called
to prove some private Discourse that the Defendant had with him, in his private
Chamber, whither the Defendant came (in Doctors Commons, they being old
Acquaintance) and the Defendant desired the said Doctor Exton to mediate an
Accommodation betwixt him and the Bishop, as a common Friend to both; which Sir
Thomas undertook to do, when the Defendant had ingenuously made a private
Confession to him of the truth of the Case, to the very same effect, that the
Defendants Witnesses unanimously swore it; namely, that the Defendant did speak
of a Printed Paper, which the Plantiff sent down to every Clergyman, beginning
with these Words -- Good Brother -- etc. and ending with these Words -- Your
Lo. Brother, H. London.

In which Paper the Bishop recommended to the Clergy the Observation of the 65.
66. and 3. Canons or Constitutions of Forty; (which the Defendant said again in
open Court were so far from being according to Law, that it was Nonsense,
forasmuch as the Constitutions of Forty, have not 65 nor 66 Canons, nor above
eleven, and therefore it was Insolence or Impudence, to lay upon the Clergy
Burdens not to be born, and Duties impossible to be observed; forasmuch as it
is Nonsense to bid them observe the 65 and 66 Canons and 3d of the
Constitutions of Forty; there is not so many, and yet there is enough of those
Lambeth-Canons, which (the Defendant said) do seem to have a mark of
Non-allowance by the 13 Car. 2. 12. For if the Words of that Statute leave
those Canons of 1640, only just in statu quo, then the mentioning the -- not
confirming them, etc. in the said Statute, signifies nothing at all; for so
those Canons would have been (in statu quo) although that Statute had never been
made; which Law, the Defendant said, if the Bishop knew not, it was his
Ignorance; if he did know it, it was Insolence to oppose his Sense and Judgment
to that of the King and Parliament; and to impose impossibilities upon the
Clergy.

And this Defendant confessed again, that those Words he did say, and if the
Bishop be aggrieved thereat, he is at Liberty (if he have not enough of this)
to bring another Action of Scandal. Magnat. if he pleased, but not being the
Words of the Declaration, that, and what Sir Thomas Exton witnessed was nothing
(as the Judge fairly told the Jury) to this present Action.

But this must be said for Sir Thomas Exton, he did his good Will, and no doubt
but he will reap the Thanks for the same, and perhaps be the better for the
Defendants Money (when they can catch it) but no Jusuite could equivocate more
than Sir Thomas did, when he first gave his Evidence against the Defendant upon
Oath.

For he had the Words -- Ignorance -- and Impudence -- spoken of the Bishop;
(which come pretty near to those Words in the Declaration -- Impudent Man --
and Ignorant Man -- but being not the same, could not affect, nor ought not to
affect the Jury (as the Judge honestly told them, and less he could not say) as
to the proof of the Declaration; for the all, the stress, and weight of that,
lay solely and singly upon little Harris his Evidence.

And for that cause, The Defendant neglected Sir Thomas his Evidence, as
impertinent to the matter in hand; but I thank you, -- Latet Anguis in Herba.

When Sir George perceived that the Defendant had (and willingly) slighted it,
and neglected to examine Sir Thomas Exton about the Colloquium and foregoing
Discourse preceding the Words -- Ignorance -- and Impudence -- which when
afterward confessed by Sir Thomas upon the Defendants reexamining him, and
quite altering the Sense) to see, how Sir George (when he thought the Defendant
had done, and said all, and the Plantiffs Counsel claimed the Privilidg (that a
sort of Females claim) of having the last Word,) to see, and hear, I say, how
Sir George and Sir Francis did mouth and open upon it; -- Here is Sir Thomas
Exton (Gentlemen) a Man of untainted Reputation, he speaks in effect the same
thing, and almost the same Words, --

(And yet the Judge had said before, that what Sir Thomas witnessed was nothing
to the proof of the Declaration;) but Sir George spent many Words upon it
notwithstanding -- Whereupon the Defendant interrupted him, (at which he stared
and stormed and fretted at a great rate,) but to little purpose, for the Judge
very mildly, bid the Defendant go on to examine Sir Thomas Exton more strictly,
since they endeavored to make work with his Testimony, (declared Impertinent
to the present Cause now in Question, as aforesaid.) Sir Thomas Exton, (said
the Defendant) was there no Colloquium, no Discourse preceding nor subsequent
to to the Words Ignorance, -- and Impudence? -- Yes; replied Sir Thomas; you
were discoursing of a Printed Paper, and the Statute of 13 Car. 2. 12. which
seems to disallow the Canons of Forty, which Statute (you said) if the Bishop
did not know, it was his Ignorance, but, if he did know the same, it was
Impudence to oppose his Sense and Judgment, to the Judgment of the King and
Parliament.

And herein (when it was almost too late; herein, when he had almost forgot his
Oath, (which so lately he had sworn) to speak the whole Truth, as well as
nothing but the Truth; herein, when the Jury and the Court was possessed and
prejudiced with his Evidence first given of the Words -- Ignorance -- and
Impudence three hours together, then indeed, upon further Examination the Truth
was pumped out of him: Oh! the Policy of this wicked World! Some are wiser than
some, at least some are crafty, wise to do Evil, but to do Good they have no
Knowledge; a Craft that is easily and readily learned; for, any Man, that is not
a very Fool, may soon arrive to be a Knave; tho none but a Fool will be a
Knave; any Fool has Headpiece enough to be a Machiaveilian, if he have so
little Wit as to be a Knave, and so bad a Heart as to be hard, or hardened in
Mischief: For scarcely any Man wants Wit enough (if he have but Wickedness
enough) to be a Knave or perfidious.

Then, the Defendant bid Sir Thomas Exton say, upon his Oath, on what occasion
these Words were spoken to him by the Defendant in private, with him in his
Chamber? -- To which the Doctor then (and not 'till then) replied, That the
Defendant came to him as his old Acquaintance, (but a false Friend to be sure)
that he would use his Interest with the Bishop, to accommodate those Matters;
which honest Office of a Peacemaker Sir Thomas undertook, and promised to give
the Defendant the Bishop's Answer with all convenient speed, the Bishop being
then at his Country House, at Fullham.

Ay; But when the Defendant came again to his Chamber, to hear the Bishop's
Answer, Sir Thomas begun with wrinckled Brows to tell this Defendant, That --
Did he (the Defendant) think that after all the Mischiefs he had done
to the Bishop's Courts (Ay, there, there, it pinched) in his late Books all
the Kingdom over, that the Matter could be taken up with a private Submission
in a parcel of fair and soft Words? Will you (quoth Sir Thomas) publicly and
in Print retract and refute your Books called the Naked-Truth? Who, I? (replied
the Defendant) what? The same Hand that gave the Wound give the Cure? What?
Vulnus opemque tulit? continued Mr. Hickeringill. Nothing like it, quoth Sir
Thomas; No, no, (replied the Defendant) you are high enough already, but I Will
see you all (...) high as Paul's first; whereupon the Defendant departed from
him, for ever parted.

And let all ingenuous Gentlemen judge, how un-Knight-like, ungenteel,
un-Christian, and Inhumane it was in Sir Thomas, to make his Table a Snare; and
to be an Evidence to improve (tho he could not prove) the present Action of
Scandalum Magnatum, from Words ingenuously confessed to him in private as a
Common-Friend and Mediator betwixt the Bishop and the Defendant.

Can any Man imagine, or can it be in the least probable, that any Man should
give more scandalous Words against the Bishop, at the very time, and to the
very Man that undertook to be a Peacemaker? and did not so much as take the
least Exceptions against what was spoken; but went to treat the Bishop to terms
of Accommodation, until the Defendant peremptorily refused to retract, or write
against the Books called the Naked-Truth, the Second Part; in lieu of which
Retraction, the Defendant did write again indeed, but mended the Matter, in the
Black-Non-Conformist; These are the dear, dear Books, that has cost the
Defendant so dear, and must be his Ruin, if combined Clergy-Malice and
Revenge-Ecclesiastical will do the Feat. Barnaby -- Take It for a Warning,
neither write nor speak (as this Defendant has) against the vile Corruptions,
abominable Extortions of the Men of Doctor's-Commons; Hem! Heu! Woe, and Alas!
Devorat Accipiter, vexat censura Columbas.
The Birds of Prey are never vexed,
But the poor Doves must be perplexed.


Or, thus; Make Rome there for the Birds of Prey;
But fright the poor Doves quite away.


Let the Vexations, Citations, Actions, Articles, Promotions, Writs,
Supplicavits, and Oaths of the Ecclesiastical-Men, and Men of Doctor's-Commons
(the only Affidavit-Men against Mr. Hickeringill) be Chronicled to all
Posterity; together with that unconscionable, inhumane and outrageous Fine of
2000 l. by a picked Jury (picked and appointed on set purpose) together with
the Names of the precious Jurymen; and let them pray that the righteous God do
not deal as severely with them and theirs, to their ruin, as they have
unmercifully and unchristianly ruined the Defendant and his Family, Wife and
Children.
God is Just (not only hereafter, but) in this World, wait and see the Finger
of God in this Affair; shall he not avenge his own Elect, tho he bear long with
them? Yea, he will avenge them speedily; he must, he will, to vindicate his
Word, his Gospel, his Christ, and his Apostles, (public Enemies to Prelatical
Pride) against all the Hypocrites that put on Religion, Religion; the Church,
the Church, for a Cloak to their Tantivee-Avarice, and high-flown Ambition.
Good God! Arise, and let thine Enemies be scattered, and let all that hate
thee, flee before thee. A single Arm has done Wonders when upheld by God.

We read indeed, Ephesians. 5. 11. that God gave some Apostles, some Prophets, and
some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, etc.

But who the Devil brought that Man of Sin, that Son of Perdition into the
Church? 2 Timothy 2. 3, 4. that sits in the Temple of God, and opposes, and
exalts himself above all that is called God? (viz. the Magistrate.) Away,
Away, with these carnal millenaries, the Kingdom of Christ is not of this
World, nor the true Apostles and Disciples of Christ ambitious to sit neither
on the Pinnacle of the Temple, nor the Pinnacle of the Palace.

When Bishops begun to be very Rich, then, then, they begun to be highminded
and to trust in uncertain Riches, rather than in (the Words of) the living God,
1 Timothy 6. 17. the Words of our blessed Savior and his Apostles against
Tyrannical and Lordly Prelacy; and when they left the Word, then they to clap
their hands upon the tame Magistrates Sword, if one would not, the other
should; this is the plain Truth on it, and observed by all that observe any
thing. For who heeds their Excommunications, their Suspensions, their
Silencings, their Ecclesiastical Mischiefs, Curses and Anathema's, if it were
not for the old Writ invented first by Popish Prelates, and since and now still
made use of to this day, to eeke out their Spiritual-Weapons, which every Man
can take the length of.

The bloody and numerous Sect of the Donatists in Africa, what Mischief brought
that Heresy to the Christian-World, and all the quarrel arose, because Donatus
(that Diotrephes that loved to have the pre-eminence, 3 Ep. Joh. 9. or, was
ambitious of being a Prelate, as the Original properly signifies) ruffled with
Cecilianus for the Bishopric of Carthage.

Solomon says, from Pride comes Contention; for a Man ambitious to sit perking
upon the Pinnacle of the Temple (the fittest place (the crafty Devil thought) to
insinuate his Temptations upon our blessed Savior) he will endeavor to break
that Man's Neck, that says come down, into the Seat of the Church amongst your
Brethren, where our Savior has placed you; nay, and the (honest) Canons too.

What inhumane Cruelty did the Prelates (in the Council of Constance) exercise
to poor John Wickliff, our Countryman, Rector of Lutterworth in
Leicestershire, and (his Naked-Truth in 45 Articles) that cut them to the very
Hearts, because it cut their Combs for them; and not content with killing him,
after he was buried one and forty years, they caused his Bones to be dug up
(barbarous and cruel Ecclesiastics!) and to be burned (inhumane Divines!) Nay,
That great Advocate for Prelacy (Sir George Jefferies) in this Assizes, took
notice, that of all the Witnesses that swear at the Assizes, the Clergymen, the
-- Clergy tell the strangest Tales, and the most oddely, and most
impertinently, of all other Witnesses, (perhaps it is because they are forced to
preach at the Assizes without Book.)

But of all the Clergy-VVitnesses, never did any thing look so beshrimpen and
appalled as that same little Harris, the Bishop's special Witness; truly the
Man has reason to go snips, and have half of the 2000 l. given in Damages to
the Bishop.

For neither the Bishop, nor any Man alive, had to this day ever heard of those
scandalous Words in the Declaration, if he had not broached them, and been the
Author of them; for after the Defendant was gone, little imagining (as neither
any in the Company) that any Offense was taken, or any Exceptions made, no not
so much as by Harris (the Man-catcher.) The little Blade goes to another Room,
writes what he lists, or what he remembers, (and such a Man had need of a good
Memory) but it is treacherous; and out he brings his own Scandalum Magnatum,
hoping to get some one in the Company to be (if possible) as wicked as his
little Clergyship: But by God's good Providence missing his Aim, away he
trudges, lest he should be called to an account for his own devised Scandals,
and be forced to find the Author; away trudges he, as fast as his wicked Legs
could tremblingly carry him, to that old Piece of Malice, Sir J. S. that has
always an open Heart, as well as open Ears, at a Piece of Mischief against the
Defendant. Harris could scarcely (on this side Hell) have met with a fitter
Tutor, whose Friendship is Artifice and superficial; but his Malice, Revenge,
and Wickedness is natural, innate, deep, as his own, own Self. Nor could any
Present be more welcome to the Bishop (it seems by the consequence) than
Articles against the Man that finds such fault with his illegal Confirmations,
Visitations, Vexations, etc.

Therefore call a Court -- come to the Cabal -- all the Breath-sellers, whose
Trade also is endangered by the wicked Defendant: Search old Statutes, (for the
promoting whereof Empson and Dudley were hanged) vex and ruin (by the Aid of a
good Jury) the Defendant, and his Family; and only for a supposed
Transgression, proved by a slender and self-contradicting Evidence, that swore
three times, and every time varied; and yet (I Will warrant) he had said them
over and over, since last Easter, oftener than he had said his Prayers: but he
was not suffered to swear by Book, tho he prays and preaches all by Book.)

For if (at the first time) he swore the Words true, the other was false and he
a false Varlet, and not to be believed by any Jury, that were not resolved; and
some would not have been suffered to attempt the third time, especially,

1. He was but a single Evidence, and therefore neither the Bishop ought to
have believed him at first, nor the Jury now, swearing against a Presbyter;
because the Holy Scripture (as the Defendant urged) ought to have some respect
and observance, (from a Bishop especially) who is commanded, against
an Elder not (so much as) to receive an Accusation, but under two or three
Witnesses.

2. This little Witness was not to be believed, because point blank contraried
by six substantial Witnesses, who were not negative Witnesses only, but
affirmative and positive: for they did not only swear they did not hear any
such Words, but all jointly and positively affirmed, that they heard the whole
Discourse, heard all the Words, and well remembered them, because Harris (after
the Defendant's departure, not before) going into another Room, and writing
other Words than the Defendant spoke, and bringing them to the rest of the
Company to subscribe, they writ down the true Words whilst fresh in their
Memories, and all turned Abhorrers of so vile a Man, and so wicked a Design:
And all this was upon Oath made appear to the Judge and Jury, by the Oaths of
all the six Witnesses; but no notice was taken of it by the Judge, when he
summed up the Evidence, otherwise than that he honestly said, the Evidence on
both sides was quite contrary one to another, and could not be both true. And
who could imagine, that an unbiased Jury should judge six honest Laymen,
(that had no design but Truth) should swear false, in compliance with a puny
Clergyman, not worthy a Name or Company amongst honest Men, (such Man-catchers
should be avoided by all Men, as Enemies to all Commerce and Conversation) and
such a Fellow too as swears for himself indeed; for he is the Author of the
Scandalum Magnatum, if he could not father his Lies upon the Defendant, as he
has done, thank a good Jury, by special Orders of the Bench to the High Sheriff
himself, to pick them, and empannel them throughout the County. And the
Jurymen for Estates and Quality were well enough, but not one of them any
other than such as know who and who is together; and all or most of them in
Commission and Dependence for their Places and Offices, at the Arbitrament of
--

3. How improbable is it, that the Defendant should put a Dagger into his
Enemy's Hand, the Hand of a Creature that came to take his Benefice from him
and to eat the Bread out of his Mouth?

4. How probable is it that one single Evidence may and must forswear himself
in this Case, when six Men contradict him at the same Time and Minute, soon
after the Words were spoken?

5. How improbable it is, that a Man should truly repeat another Man's
Discourse, that cannot repeat his own Discourse and Words off-Book, in Sermon
or Prayers, or now upon Oath?

6. How improbable it is, that one Man should swear Truth against all the rest
of the Company, who are so positive in what they heard, and then swore unto,
unanimously and constantly, like honest Men, when no Persuasions, no Motives,
no Temptations, could alter them? (for they had all been tampered with, and Mr.
Edgar, Mr. Hill, and Daniel Howlet were subpoena'd for the Plantiff.) But all
would not do to win them for the Bishop's side, and make them face about.

7. Lastly; What Jury alive (except this) could, against the Evidence of so
many substantial Witnesses, credit one single Creature, that was so infamous?

First; For deserting his Flock, that he swore to feed, and was bound by Oath,
by Law of God and Man, Justice, Conscience, Equity, and Christianity, to look
after, and mind the Cure of them, and take the Care and Charge, but neglected
by him three Quarters of a Year together; and whilst the Fleece grows, he is
hired to another Flock, staying till Summer (till the Wool be grown) before he
goes down to clip them.

Secondly; Infamous, because he had forsworn himself before this time, (as the
Right Honorable the Earl of Lincoln there in Court testified upon his Oath.)
When Harris was his Chaplain, and having often broke his Word with the Earl,
and told him many a Lie, he was not willing any more to trust him upon the
Security of his bare Word; whereupon Harris takes up a Greek Testament that lay
upon the Table, and solemnly imprecates, by all the Mercies and Benefits that
he should receive by the Contents of that Holy Book, he would return to the
Earl (at furrhest) on the next Saturday, and so be ready the next day to
officiate, except Sickness prevented.

But the Gentleman came not home till the Tuesday following, and then came with
Tears in his Eyes, that is, (as the Earl upon his Oath explained it) drunk,
maudline-drunk. And the Earl said, it was some considerable time, and not till
his Servants took notice of it to him, that Weeping was the certain Symptom of
his being in Drink; that as other Men rant and tear, and swear when they are
drunk, this little Episcopal Tool always wept when he was drunk. Whereupon the
Earl (one time when he saw him weep) asked him, What ailed him? Harris
answered, That he had a Sister an Apprentice in the Exchange, and that he had
heard sad News of her, namely, that her Mistress and she had quarreled, and
had some hard Words together. Another time he said he wept, because he had an
Uncle lately dead. This was overnight, but the next day, when the Earl asked
him of the Quarrel betwixt his Sister and her Dame, and of the Death of his
Uncle, (at another time) Harris star'd at him, and asked his Lordship, what he
meant by these Matters? for he could not imagine what the Earl should mean by
such Questions; he said (indeed) he had a Sister an Apprentice, he had an
Uncle, but never heard of his Death, nor (at the other time) of the said
Female-Bickering.

And as for the Solemn Oath that he had took and broke, he told the Earl, There
was a Cause for his Stay, for he was in pursuit of a Girl, whom he intended
also to marry, (and he was as good as his Word in that, for this Episcopal
Implement has her (much good may she do him) Body and Bones.

But would any Jury, that were not of Tory-Consciences, credit the single
Testimony of this Bishop's Engine, when (it was proved) that he abandoned all
his Interest that he expected in the Mercies and Benefits of the Gospel, and
the Merits of our blessed Redeemer, for a Fit of Wooing, or in pursuit of a
Wench.

Or, set a profligate Clergyman in competition with six honest, substantial
Laymen, and Men of unstained Honesty and Reputation, except the Tories are
Eagle-sighted, nimble and quick to foresee the Inundation of Popery, that (they
senslesly imagine) is coming, tumbling in apace; (But I hope God will preserve
his Majesty with longer Life than any of his Father's Children; that as he is
the Alpha, he may be the Omega, the last as well as the first of his Father's
Children. Thus I prophesy as I would have it, not (I confess) according to the
Course of Nature, nor according to the bloody Principles and bloody Plots of
Papists, who (as it is undoubtedly known, even by them that ridicule the Popish
Plot) never spare any Prince that is not (at least in Heart) Heretical, and of
whose Inclination they have not good Assurance, longer than they think good, or
can come at him. I say, the Jury possibly were quicker-sighted than other
Mortals, and could foresee the speedy Appearances of approaching Popery, if all
be Gospel, and infallible, that comes from a Clergyman, (tho he be as lewd and
bad as the Irish Friar, Teague O Divelly); but Laymen are not to be believed
against a Clergyman, (this is the Council of Trent, right! just right!) nor to
have the Benefit of the Clergy; You must not expect it, Gentlemen; never look
for it, (you Laymen!) till you come to be hanged. From a Tory-Jury, Good Lord
deliver us: That Is as honest a Letany, as that Letany that used to be read or
sung just before the Mass, I do not mean that Letany, (where is Harris with his
Innuendo? the Popish -- Suffer me to explain my self; do not lie at catch, and
at snap; I do not mean that Letany) wherein was the Suffrage now blotted out,
and thought by the Wise (who think themselves wise enough to make our Prayers
for us in spite of our Teeth) to be omitted, and left out, for fear (no doubt)
of displeasing his Holiness, -- namely, -- From the Bishop of Rome, and all his
vile Enormities, good Lord deliver us.

But since neither the Act of Uniformity, nor the Common Prayer Book, does
license us (as once it, did) to pray so against the Pope^; yet I will take
liberty (without asking leave of an Act of Uniformity, or a
Common Prayer Book,) to pray, -- From a Tory Jury (of forlorn, desperate, and
hardened Consciences) -- Good Lord deliver us. I (once) thought, the Defendant
might have ventured his Life in the hands of this Genteel Jury, one Moiety
Knights, I Will assure you; but (as Coleman said at the Gallows, when his Devil
failed him) There is no Truth in Men. When Power and Interest does but plead
against it, there is no Oath so sacred, but some sort of Judges and Jurymen
will break it without any regard. Ay, ay, the honest Lord Chief Justice Hale is
dead and gone, in his Room (seldom comes a better) came Sir Will. Scroggs, but,
as thought unmeet, discharged; but to mend the Market, (who
comes there?) who comes next? Sir Francis Pemberton, the present Judge in this
Cause.

With whom we will (as he did) conclude this Trial (for I have enough on it, if
you knew all, whatever the Reader has) Sir Francis summing up the Evidence, and
directing the Jury, to this effect, -- namely, --

That this Action was brought by the Bishop of London, against Mr.
Hickeringill, upon the Statute -- (Scandal. Magnat.) for speaking scandalous
Words of his Lordship, and such Words (he told them) as the Defendant himself
ingenuously acknowledged. (Such a Rehearsal transprosed would fright a Man from
ever making an ingenuous Acknowledgment whilst he lived: If a Man be not
submissive, then he is proud and obstinate, and justifies, (an Aggravation, an
Aggravation, as Mr. Withins said) but if he be coming, they will take him of the
Chaps, and make him stand further off; but this is the Policy: The Judge said,
that the Defendant acknowledged) that if he had said the Words modo and forma,
as they are laid in the Declaration, the Jury could not punish him enough.
(This it is to be courtly and complemental, a Man that is not used to it
neither; for really and truly the Words in the Declaration (the Lawyers say)
are not actionable, except the last Innuendo, the Popish Plot, had been proved;
and instead of an Innuendo, Harris swore -- Plot against my righteous Name: It
is besides impossible to be proved by this Declaration, because no preceding
Colloquium is laid; (but this it is to be civil, and to make Concessions,
without which the Judge would have been put to it to have directed the Jury, as
to the Scandal of them, or the Law in that Point. For it is not Scandal. Magnat.
(the Learned say) to say, -- His Lordship is very ignorant, because it is true
of him, (and of wiser Men, and better Men than
Henry Bishop of London) and therefore cannot be Lies, and scandalous, or
within that Statute.

The Bishop of London for Knowledge and Wisdom is not worthy to carry St. Paul's
Books, Cloak, or Parchments after him, if he were alive; and yet that blessed
Apostle (that could cast out Devils with a word) confesses he was very
ignorant, and knew nothing as he ought to know.

But not to insist of Divinity, to come to Philosophy, the wisest Man of
Greece, and the chief of the seven wise Men of Greece, (to whom the Oracle of
Apollo awarded the Golden Tripos) confessed he was so ignorant, that he knew
nothing but only this, namely, he knew that he was very ignorant, or knew
nothing: Hoc tantum scio, quod nihil scio.

It Is Atheism to say, that St. Paul made that ingenuous Confession of his
Ignorance, (in that and many more Places) only in Complement, (as some that are
as proud as Lucifer, or as the Devil can make them, will yet say, -- Your
humble Servant.)

For Shame -- Away with these Scandal. Magnat.'s, and undoing Men and Families
for speaking nothing but the Naked-Truth, and which the Bishop of London
cannot, without blushing refuse to acknowledge that His Lordship is
very Ignorant.

Which, if he does acknowledge, the Defendant and he are agreed in one certain
Naked-Truth.

But if his Lordship does not acknowledge that he is very ignorant, all the
wisemen of Mankind must condemn him, as very ignorant; For none but he that
does not know himself, none (but a Fool) but must know and acknowledge
themselves to be very ignorant: It Is true, the Issue is Non-Culp. because the
Defendant never spoke those Words as they are (modo and forma) laid singly, by
themselves, in the second Count of the Declaration; and all the Witnesses
(except Harris) (nay, Exton the Doctor's Commons Man too) says that the Word
Ignorance had reference to the Law or Statute, of which, tho a Bishop be
ignorant, yet it is no blemish nor scandal to him: Nay, scarce a Bishop in
England understands, or ever read so much Law as the Defendant, yet it is no
Scandal to them, nor disparagement; Nay, Harris himself at last confesses, that
the Ignorance and the Impudence had reference to the Printed Paper and the
Canons of Forty; and therefore these Words -- His Lordship is very Ignorant,
could never (as laid in the second Count singly) be spoken in Manner and Form
as they are laid in the Declaration.

But were the Bishop of London (really and truly) wiser than Solomon, St. Paul,
or Socrates, yet it is as clear as the Sun at Noonday, that he was ignorant in
tanto (whatever he might be in toto;) namely, ignorant in so much, and in that
(which occasioned all this Discourse) namely, in sending Harris with a
Sequestration of the Benefits, and the small Tithes of the Parish of St.
Buttolph's (the place of this Contest, and also the occasion too) in
Colchester; when the said small Tithes and Benefits, nay, all Tithes, both
small and great Tithes, of St. Buttolph's Parish appertain to the Defendant, as
Rector of the Rectory of All Saints, and has been enjoyed by his Predecessors
since the Reign of Henry the 8th, and so to continue for ever, as is more fully
declared page 27. of the Black-Non-Conformist, and therefore it is no Lie, (and
therefore not within the said Statute of Scandal. Magnat.) but a great Truth,
tho a costly one. Truth has been a dear Commodity to this Defendant, but still
it is too true, that the Bishop was very ignorant in sending such a
Sequestration; it had been better for the Defendant by 2000 l. if he had been
wiser, and then this sad occasion had never come: (hard Case!) to be whipped on
another's Back, and taken up at these Years for other Men's Faults; and that
the Bishop should without Law disturb the Defendant's Title to his Freehold,
and then by the help of his Tool and Utensil, and a good Jury, ruin him for
complaining when he is pinched.

The Itch, the Scab, the Morphew, the Boyls, the Uncombs, the Carbuncles, the
Leprosy, the Pimples, (a Pox) and the Nodes, are but Skin-Diseases, and
Deformities coming immediately from the vicious Ros, and Gluten of the third
Concoction; (at third hand, poor par-boyling Function, but it cannot help it)
for the Mischief, the Mischief, the Author and Origin of all this Mischief, is
the first Ventricle, that is erroneous, and out of order.

If the Bishop (the Original Cause of all this Discourse and Stir, in sending
down a Sequestration of the small Tithes of St. Buttolphs (the Defendant's
Freehold) by this same Harris, in hopes to do the Defendant a Mischief or
Displeasure,) had not been mistaken in this his Attempt, these Evils had not
come, they were but the third Concoction, and necessary Consequents of the
bishop's Error. Except some thought perhaps that Mr. Hickeringill is (as
Heraclitus now calls him) an Ass, good for nothing but to be burdened; or,
worse than a Worm, and -- should say -- Prelate come tread me, come, stamp upon
me. I know, such an Ass-like sottishness had been, (as it proves) the wisest
way, because the cheapest way, -- But what Patience can endure to be so nusled?

And so the Word -- Impudent -- if (as it ought) it have reference to that
nonsensical (at least) Imposition, upon the Clergy, and to the Statute; who can
deny but that it is Insolence and Impudence too, for a Bishop so to insult over
the Clergy, as either to recommend to them Articles to observe, which are no
where to be found, or which interfere, or are not warranted by the Statute?

And if the Defendant had not been overruled by a sort of Lawyers, he would
have pleaded the Words, specially as they were spoken, absque hoc, etc. And not
to come upon an Issue Non-Culp. -- against a Fellow that (every Body assured
him) would swear right-down Thump; and yet his Memory failed him, for he could
not for his Life repeat the first Words, right; nor any one time repeat them,
one like another and uniform. But let the World judge, whether any sorry
Witness be not good enough, when a Bishop is Plantiff, and before such a Jury,
and such a -- (God help!) it will not always be thus; Let not the Tory
Pamphleteers ever henceforth prate of an Ignoramus-Jury; Here Is a Billa-vera
Jury (an Essex-Jury to a Proverb) that shall give them half way, and yet
overrun them: (But all this long Parenthesis by the way.) Sir Francis
Pemberton goes on to this Effect, tho not perhaps in the very Words, -- That
the Jury had heard the Defendant's ingenuous Acknowledgment, and that he must
direct them to find good Damages, if they find for the Plantiff; saying that
the Bishop of London is a worthy and learned Bishop, as any in England (that is
a large Place, and a large Word, and a large Comparison; I know not how
the old Archbishop of Canterhury would take it, if he should hear on it;) and
therefore (quoth the Judge) you must vindicate his Lordship's Reputation, and
give good Damages, if you find the Words --

And they are sworn unto, by one that is a Clergyman; he is (said the Judge) a
single Witness (for what Sir Thomas Exton says, (he told them) they must not
take to be any proof of this Declaration) but if they find that this single
Witness swears true, contrary to the other six for the Defendant; (for, he
said, he must say the Evidence is quite contrary one to the other, and cannot
both be true;) then (if they find for the Plantiff) he told them they might
have some respect to Sir Thomas Exton's Evidence in Aggravation of Damages: but
said again, (very honestly) that Sir Thomas proved nothing as to the
Declaration; but told them that Sir Thomas Exton is a Man of unstained
Reputation; the Judge not reflecting in the least, upon the known and constant
Extortions and Corruptions of Doctor's-Commons; nor, taking the least notice of
Dr. Exton's disingenuity, in being a public Evidence in Aggravation, for Words
spoken upon treaty of Submission, and as to a Friend, and without any exception
or disgust, (well liked of, by the Doctor,) at least, unmanly to make his Table
a Snare, except a Man had spoke Treason; (but this is the Candor of an
Ecclesiastical-Lay-Elder, or Lay-Vicar General;) For that is his place, he is
the Bishop of London's Vicar General, the Bishop cannot help it, he has a
Patent for it for his Life, granted by Humphrey late Bishop of London: Good
doings! when our Souls must be Tutored by a Lay-Vicar that cannot preach, but
has got a Patent to send us to the Devil, and (at his good Pleasure) back
again; rare doings! This is the Man of Reputation,) who is (the Judge goes on)
unblemished in his Repute: telling the Jury, that he must say, as to the
Reputation of this single Evidence for the Plantiff (for indeed the Cause
depends wholly upon his single Reputation) and that tho Non-residence be an ill
thing, and that is proved upon him, and cannot be denied; yet a Man may be a
good Witness, tho he do transgress a Statute; none of us (said he) but do
transgress a Statute some time or other. (Note by the way, this is not the same
Direction given at Mr. Rouse's Trial, when for the Breach of a Statute (of
Uniformity) the Dissenters could not be admitted to be Jurymen, (the Black
Nonconformist is good for something yet, for since the publishing of the Black
Nonconformist those new Laws are not repeated;) and if they are by the Breach
of a Statute incapable of giving a Verdict, surely they are much more
incapacitated to give an Evidence. But he goes on -- telling the Jury,
Non-residence is not good, it is an ill thing, (indeed it is) but God forbid
but a Man may be believed upon his Oath, tho he be Non-resident. (And no doubt
on it, it is very true, and so may a Nonconformist also surely, (God forbid
else) and with much more reason: For the one sins (if Nonconformity be such a
Sin) out of Weakness; but this Non-resident (whom the Judge excused) has sinned
three Quarters of a Year wilfully and wickedly; a vast difference! (How many
Blemishes can Episcopal Favor draw a Curtain over, and hide!) And indeed the
Judge (if a Body may say so) mightily mistook (through want of Memory, or
worse) in summing up the Evidence thus to the Jury: for the Defendant did not
examine and force the Clergymen to swear Harris's Non-residence, as thereby
incapable of being a Witness, (as the Judge summed it) the Defendant was never
guilty of such Nonsense and Impertinence, (and therefore the Judge mistook
himself) but the Defendant made the Clergymen (that brought to support Harris
his Credit) to swear his Non-residence, that with their own Tongues they might
swear that they themselves were not Men of Credit, nor sit to be believed, and
therefore more unfit to prop another Man's Credit, that had ruined (for ever)
their own, by swearing contrary things, and impossible to be true; namely, That
they never knew any ill thing by him, and yet they were forced after that to
swear him a Non-resident, that (contrary to his Oath Canonical, and his Duty to
God and his Flock,) had left them to a Log-river, that cannot read his
Accidence, much less supply his own Cure, the said Mr. Sylls. (The
Nonconformists have not got all the Mechanic Preachers, the Church of England
has got some, Log-rivers, Broken Tradesmen, and I know who.) But listen to
the Judge, how he goes on, but takes no notice of what the Earl of Lincoln swore
against Harris, no notice of his forswearing himself for the Company of a
Wench, no notice of his being a Maudlin-Drunkard, no notice of Harris his
Design to ensnare the said Earl out of the Fee-simple of the Manor of
Throckingham, 300 l. per annum, by a Deed writ in Court-hand, which he thought
the Earl could not read, when the Earl intended only to settle the Manor of
Throckingham; and for this piece of Knavery, the Earl swore, that he was
credibly informed, that Harris was to have, if it succeeded, a hundred
Guinnies. Nemo repent fit improbus; No Man can be a great Rogue per saltum,
suddenly; Villainy, like Youth, must have time to grow, gradatim. But the Honest
Judge took no notice of the Villainy sworn against this Harris, and thus
particularized by that Noble Earl, that scarce a Jury in the World would hang a
Dog upon such Evidence. But listen to what the Judge said, to this effect,
telling the Jury that he left it to them. But on the other side, said the Judge,
the Defendant has made indeed a very large Defense, and has told true, that
this Statute of 2 Rich. 2. upon which this Action of Scandal. Magnat. is
brought, was made when Popish Prelates bore a great Sway; but it is not
repealed, (remember that) it is in force, and is not yet repealed. And tho (as
the Defendant has alleged) Religion now is not the same, nor has the same
Head, nor the same Face consequently; yet the Statute is not repealed. The
Defendant has produced six Witnesses, to contradict the Bishop's single
Witness: they do swear contrary one to another, both their Testimonies cannot
be true: They swear, that some of them writ down the Words, upon Mr. Harris his
coming to them to have them subscribe his Paper, which they refused, saying,
soon after the Words were spoken, that the Words were not so spoken by the
Defendant, but so and so, as now they all unanimously still agree in; and if
you believe them, you must find for the Defendant.



Thus have I given the Reader a true Account, and also an ample and full
Account of this Trial (so much talked of) nor have I omitted any one material
Thing, spoken by the Counsel, or the Judge, or given in Evidence, on either
side, but without partiality have given a faithful Account.

But the Jury withdrawing, (and Dinner ready) the Crier adjourned the Court;
but before he had fully cried out his Cry, Hold, hold, cries Sir George
Jefferies, and Sir Francis Withens, to the Crier; and he obeyed: whilst they
whispered to the Judge, and desired him to stay a little longer, for the Jury
would speedily return (they knew their Minds and Resolutions belike) with their
Verdict, thinking and intending to snap the Defendant in Court, and have him
committed to Prison, if they knew how, without Bail, as the Statute enjoins in
the Case, if scandalous Words be found (by the Verdict of Twelve Men) to be
spoken of a Prelate. -- Make Room there -- Take heed, Gentlemen, take warning;
and if you will avoid hard Imprisonment, and 2000 l. and an unmerciful and
cruel Jury, speak not against the Prelate -- not a Word, no, tho it be God's
Word; and therefore make an Index Expurgatorius, and blot out of your Bibles,
Luke 22, 25, 26, 27. and 2 Pet. 5. 2, 3. and 1 Timothy 5. 21. 1 Timothy 3. 3, 6. Acts
20. 29. For these, and many more, condemn a brawling, proud, young, covetous
Action-driver, and Promoter, (tho a
Prelate, so much the worse) condemn all Prelacy that insults over, tyrannizes
over, or lords over the Brethren, and like greedy and grievous Wolves, entering
in, not sparing the Flock; as if the Flock of Christ was made to be eat up, and
devoured, not to be fed; and as if the rich Bishops could not thank God, and be
content with their rich Palaces and Endowments, but they must enrich themselves
with the Tears, Cries, and Groans of the Widow and Orphans; A blessed Time!

But some say, That the Bishop of London intends to build Paul's with this 2000
l. (when he gets it) as far as 2000 l. will go. -- I Will speak more to that in
the following Observations.

But first let us conclude the Trial. The Jury, after some Consultation amongst
themselves, soon agreed upon their Verdict, being soon resolved upon the
Premises, and the Conclusion, (not beforehand surely) but they made no great
Pause upon the Matter; the Case was a clear Case as any thing, not to be
questioned, and about a Trifle -- only -- 5000 l. Damages. Who are you for? a
silly Question not to be named? Who are you for?

For the Defendant, do you say? (a likely matter) when there is a great Bishop,
and Privy-Councellor, and great with the King and Court; For the Defendant? not
a Man (I dare say) was so simple.

What! do you think wise Men do not know which side of their Bread the Butter
lies on?

And yet one of the Defendant's Counsel, (for he had retained Counsel, and
fee'd them again at the Assizes, rather to avoid the Imputation of Penury, than
of any Intent he had to make use of them) came to the Defendant whilst at
Dinner, and whispering him in the Ear, assured him that the private Verdict was
given in, and for the Defendant.

After him came another with the same Errand, whether deceived through
Weakness, or designing to deceive the Defendant through Wickedness, I shall not
determine.

This is certain, the Plot was to inveigle the Defendant into the belief of the
Verdict, which the Defendant did so far believe, (for neither he, nor any
unbiased Men could imagine any other Verdict than for the Defendant; the
Declaration being but stammeringly, uncertainly, variously, and contrarily
repeated by the Episcopal Implement, little Harris; himself proved infamous by
a Noble Peer, (whose Oath not to credit, was the greater Scandal. Magnat. of
the two) and ex abundanti, six substantial Witnesses contradicting that
infamous Engine of Wickedness.) Besides, the Declaration not proved in the
least, namely, that the Scandals were spoken before diverse the King's Subjects:
Here was but one Subject, and he none of the best. And accordingly the
Defendant was treating with his Landlord at the White-Horse, how and with what
suitable Accommodation to treat the Jury, (for that is the Custom belike); but
the Jury were wiser, and expected a better Treat, (for a quite-contrary
Verdict) by a greater Purse.

The Plot was to cajole the Defendant into a good Opinion of the Privy-Verdict,
that so staying in Town, the Adversary might snap him with a Caption, ready cut
and dried, to hale him to Jail. And if they had succeeded in that After-Game,
it had been to them worth ten such Verdicts; for if they had got him into
Lobs-pound for six Months, I do not know but the Stone Doublet might have
lasted him his Lifetime.

But they were not more cunning than he was crafty; and being informed by his
faithful Friends (that could see as far into a Millstone as the best of them)
and as privy as the nasty Verdict was, they scented it: And thereupon the
Defendant, with five more of his Friends, took Horse, and rid for London, where
he now is, giving their Wiles the Go-by, to their great Grief, and will not
appear till he list, in good Time, and when Time shall serve. We'll catch him,
We'll pound him, quoth (Sir Sun) --
My Friends -- it is not to be done.


For a Man that is in safe Harbor to put out to Sea ('till the Storm be over)
argues Folly indeed; the Fool (Solomon says) goes to the Correction of the
Stocks; or, puts his Neck into the Collar.

To abscond for Treason, Murder, Robbery, Felony or Debt, would indeed be
dishonorable to the Author of Naked Truth.

But, (blessed be God,) The Man-Catchers have laid nothing (as yet) to his
Charge, but Words spoken against their pretty-Courts and Prelates, and these
wrested (too) from their true meaning, (as shall be proved hereafter in the
Supplicavit-Business.) If worthy Men, and Men of great Reputation and Renown
may be credited so much as Harris and the six Proctors.

And these accuse the Defendant of nothing but some rash Words; (take them at
the worst) they lay no Crime to his Charge, but such as is common to Men,
especially to Men of the Defendant's Complexion.

For he is a Man subject (above many others) to many Infirmities, somewhat
Cholorick by Nature and Constitution, (which tho he strives (through Grace) to
quell, yet it is hard quite to extirpate Nature.) But if none but such (as never
spoke a rash Word, nor ever spoke worse Words than is laid to the Defendant's
Charge) should cast the first Stone at him, or put him in Jaile, it is hoped he
might safely walk the Streets again, and go to his Grave in Peace.

In the Interim he absconds neither for Debt, Treason nor Felony, (that is a
great Mercy in these shamming-Times) but enjoys the Happiness of walking
incognito (a Happiness that Princes seldom can arrive unto, and because of
their publick-Station are (in vain) ambitious of) and sees and hears what is
done in the World, sees and observes -- sees and takes Notes -- sees, (as in a
Balcony) the bustling Cavalcade in the Streets, and yet not annoyed with the
clamorous and sweaty Crowd; sees and is not seen -- There Is the Pleasure as
well as the Grandieur of Retirement, a Grandieur that great Men may envy, but
incapable to obtain the Felicity, as well as the Safety, the Quiet and the
Security; made the more conformable by Necessity and the gentle hand of God;
(for some good end no doubt) a Retirement happily freed from the Noise and
Business of the World, the bawlings, brawlings and yawlings, the bustle and
ruffle of the Bar and Pulpit, the throng and crowd of vexatious Turmoils and
impertinent Visits; (a Happiness not 'till now enjoyed,) to be buried alive, to
be buried and yet live, in hopes of a joyful arising; to be buried safe from
the poynant Malice of Enemies, (for Envy ceases in the Grave, and they are
malicious to purpose, that envy him this poor-play of -- Hide and Seek -- and
Bo-peep:) and yet alive and brisk still with some Friends, and with his best
Friend on Earth -- His Loyal Consort; the happy Mother of ten lusty Children,
and seven alive still, blessed be God; Heirs enough for his Estate, and Estate
enough for his Heirs, if the Bishop do not make them poor enough -- (God
knows;) at least -- It is to be feared -- Nobleness of Nature is not every
Body's Portion; But God help, however; For the Defendant (if he be wise) will
never beggar himself and his Family, to build Cathedrals for Singing-Boys -- be
as cunning as they can -- And they are subtle -- very subtle -- Ay -- so they
are -- and so might others too, with one quarter of the Power they have in
their Hands; -- Fight on Macduff,
And let him fall that first says, Hold! -- enough.


Before (it came to) Extremity, has not the Defendant studied Peace and pursued
it, once, twice, thrice -- if possible -- And as much as in him lies, (as you
will hear anon) by all the methods and ways of Meekness and Submission, as far
as is consistant with a Man of Honor?

And have they not been inexorable, and like the Meridian-Shadows (of Men
running Northward) which flys the faster, the faster they are pursued? Are
they not inexorable to any Terms, but what is worse than Death, and ill becomes
a Gentleman or a Christian?

Has the Defendant lived fifty Years in the World, and traveled half the Globe
of the Universe, with all the advantages of an ingenuous Education, in studying
Men and Books, and is he yet to seek to know such Men? He knows what is in Man;
knows what is in Men flushed with Power and Interest, and fleshed with Success
and Revenge.

Let them be beaten with their own Rod, which with such Industry, Joy,
Interest, Friends, Power, Glory, and Combination they have so eagerly
contrived: -- The Scabbard's thrown away -- Come on Macduff,
And Coward he that first says -- Hold! -- enough.


Honesty is the best Policy, and so (Machiavellians) will find (to their cost)
in time; and Christianity is the greatest Wisdom; and Persecution, Tyranny,
Oppression, and Extortion the greatest Folly in the World! But, Oh ye Fools!
when will ye be Wise? says Solomon, when will ye be good? Never, never, some
Men will never be good (but like a Spaniel) 'till they be beaten to it, by (the
Mistress of Fools) woeful Experience, and too late.

A little Honesty and Christianity is soon and easily attained unto; and will
do Wonders in Government, and with ease; whereas, (as a Liar had need have a
good Memory, and yet is often put to his Trumps) a Machiavellian, with all his
Quirks, and Shams, and Subornings, and Tricks, is as very a Fool as Pope
Alexander the 6th, and his Son Caesar Borgias, (to whom (the Florentine)
Machiavel, was both Secretary and Tutor in that Black-Art, called
(Maachiavellian) Policy) both of them coming to an ill end and a violent Death,
falling into the very Pit they dug for others, and poisoned with the very
Druggs they prepared for the Italian-Princes, by the just Judgment of the
righteous God -- that sits in Heaven, and laughs (the Atheist) to Scorn -- yea
-- the Lord shall have them in Derision.

And let some Men triumph, crow, and insult, at the Victory they have got by a
little-Tool, and especially (that same special-Jury) and glory that they have
silenced him (the Sin and Shame lie at their Door) stopping his Mouth, because
of cheap-Marriages without a License; and he shall be in his Church of
All Saints
the next Lord's Day, (God willing) and so on, let them do their worst.

No Man that falls by great Power, -- can (possibly) fall more gently -- nor
for less Offenses.

There Is nothing sworn against him, nor laid to his Charge, for which any good
Man, or Man of Honor has cause to blush, and be-ruby his Cheeks.

The Bishop first offends in sending an unwarrantable Sequestration, (there is
the Origin;) and for this occasion, the Defendant suffers and pays 2000 l.
there is the Consequence of that Origin, or Original Sin.

As soon as the Judge had filled his Belly, he returned to the Bench, and some
thought to catch the Defendant, but the Bird was flown.

The Verdict was for the Plantiff, Damage 2000l. And so they said all, being
agreed upon the Business, and their Foreman (Sir Andrew Jenner) their Learned
Speaker, or Spokes-man.

Thus ended this Famous Trial, of which when I have made some Observations;
(for the Torys have not got all the Observator's on their side:) I will give
you an account of that other Ecclesiastical-Engine to batter the Defendant, by
Affidavits sworn by six Ecclesiastical Lay-Persons called Proctors of
Doctor's-Commons: (Ay, there, there the Mischiefs (against the Naked-Truth) are
hatched; They act for Life, at least, for a dirty Livelihood, which seems to
stand on Tip-Toe, tottering, and just upon the go.) And therefore they would
Wire-draw and hook in Westminster Hall (base Indignity!) to prop up their
rotten and tottering Frame, by craving (Forsooth!) from thence Aid, in a Writ
called Supplicavit.

But first, Let us not over-pass this Signal Trial without some Remarks, or
Observations.

OBSERVATIONS Made (by an unknown Hand) Upon the foregoing TRIAL.
FIrst, we will observe the Observations that have been already made of this
noisy Trial by the Tory Pamphleteers.

The Tory Observator is wiser than to trouble himself with disquieting Mr.
Hickeringill, or to abuse himself by nicknaming others, whether out of respect
or sense of Honor, or out of fear of Mr. Hickeringill's smarter Pen, (that
never scratches but when Defendant) we will not determine. But Thompson and
Heraclitus --

How now? Thompson and Heraclitus! Will any Man of Honor stoop so low to take
notice of such contemptible Wretches? Wretches below all scorn! Wretches that
would have no Name but for the Ills they do.

For they (like Erostratus) are ambitious of a Name, by committing unheard of
Villainies, tho they thereby ruin themselves, and an (once stately) Church.

And (without offense be it spoken) it is a Condescension (meritorious) for any
Man to debase himself so much as to take notice of such despicable and forlorn
Bravo's, (the Objects of every honorable and honest Man's Contempt) any
otherwise, or with any other design than (those charitable Visits made to the
Jail, when common Robbers and Murderers are condemned to the Gallows) to
enquire (either) after Goods (by them) stolen; or, by showing them the Evil of
their Ways, bring the condemned Villains to Repentance, before they be hanged.

Which Act of Charity, Humility, and bountiful Condescension, I (now) piously
take upon me, by (thus) observing their Observations. (Nay, the Tories shall
not have all the Observators on their side, the Whigs shall have some; for (to
tell you the naked Truth on it) the politic and pious Tories have bereft me of
better Employment, and very cunningly have given me leisure to (do little else
but) observe their Motions. God reward them according to their Piety, and their
Works, and let them fall into the Pit that with such combined Interest (Cunning
and Power) so industriously they have dug.

And first for Thompson, so vile a Moth, that he is too much honored to be
crushed with the blunt End of my Pen. But I use him here, as he will be used
when he comes (amongst other (condemned) Murderers and Assassinates of Men's
Lives and Reputations) at Tyburn, (namely) -- to tie up and halter the greatest
Rogue first.

Fogh! I have done with him for ever; now (the very first time) I come near
him, no rotten Carcass or Jakes comes nigh him for a Scent; He stinks above
Ground -- most abominably and nauseously, in the Nostrils of all that have not
lost their Senses. His Rogueship being very ignorant, and also such a bold,
daring, impudent Man, for sending some Heads of -- Lies -- in his Printed
Papers -- contrary to Law; whence it will appear, that he is concerned in the
Plot -- the horrid Plot against Mr. Hickeringill's righteous Name and
Reputation, -- belying him all the Kingdom over, as a Man convict of Perjury,
and so assassinates his Honor and Reputation; the only Answer (yet) made (in
defense of the Extortions and Oppressions so impudently continued to this day
in Ecclesiastical Courts, in defiance of the Statutes of this Realm, and
contrary) to the Naked Truth.

I am not able to endure the Carrion any longer, and therefore I leave him to
the Justice of the Nation, and to Mr. Hickeringill's swinging Action against
him, and his pretty Consort; and except he hide his hated Head for ever, he
will be punished for that dangerous and damnable Lie and Slander against the
righteous Name and Reputation of Mr. Hickeringill, in saying, he was convict of
Perjury. Nay, they would convict Mr. Hickeringill of somewhat worse than
Perjury, (I fear) if they could get any Man-catchers, or Teagues O Divelly,
into his Company: nay, there was one Mortlack, a Blacksmith of Colchester,
that asking a Cunning-Lawyer's Advice, what he should swear against Mr.
Hickeringill? Breath-seller replied, -- Can thou not swear Treason against
him? Or, that he is a common Drunkard, or a common Whoremaster, or a common
Swearer? Treason? quoth Mortlack yes I can; In what? (replied Pettyfogger) in
Words or Deeds? Mortlack answered, In Words, Treasonable Words. But Crafty
replied, How long ago? How long is it since you can prove you were in his
Company? and in what place? Mortlack answered, That he heard the Words spoken
in the King's Highway, near Dilbridge, about four Months before that Time,
(for he could not prove that ever he was in Mr. Hickeringill's Company except
that time, when there were also above twenty People more.

Whereupon quoth Crafty, Speak no more then of Treasonable Words, for you will
be hanged for concealing Treason thus long; but what say you to the other?
Mortlack answered, It is too apparent to all that know Mr. Hickeringill, that
he is no common Drunkard, nor common Whoremaster, but -- (he took a great Oath
upon it, saying,) I will swear that he is a common Swearer, and that never a
Word comes out of his Mouth, but an Oath comes out.

And he was as good as his Word, and got two more to swear (the same) along
with him, both of which have with Tears (since) and on their bended Knees,
begged Mr. Hickeringill's Pardon, (that is more than Thompson has done) and he
frankly and generously did forgive them, and they live in Colchester to this
day; but Mortlack is fled for it ever since.

For by the Craft of Sir J. S. before Sir Mundiford Bramston (as Master in
Chancery) the Villains swore to Articles, whereupon a Supplicavit (this Doctors
Common's Supplicavit is not the first, nor the first Supplicavit devised
against him by that Root of Bitterness and Revenge, Sir J. S.) was granted
against him, and bound he was in Chancery, in 20 l. the Principal, and 10 l.
the Manucaptors; and thus was he put to some little Trouble and Charge. And Mr.
Hickeringill stands (to this day) in Chancery (upon Record) a Common-Swearer,
etc. and yet he never swore so much as one rash Oath in his Life. What will not
Malice and Man-catchers swear?

But none that knows Mr. Hickeringill believes them, but knows they are
perjured Villains, and (like this Thompson, or Parson Thompson of Colch -- as
like his Namesake Not -- as one Devil to another) the Scum of Mankind, and so
black in the Mouth with continual Lies and Slanders, (both of them) and
especially against Mr. Hickeringill, that no Recording Ink can paint their
smutty Features dismal or black enough, they are so Hellish and Imp^like, where
I leave them, to discourse with Party-per-pale, half Fool, half Knave;
Half-Fool, or Jester, -- and Half-Knave in Earnest, Heraclitus; what
Observation does he make of this famous Trial?

Busy Heraclitus Number. 59. treating of this Affair (this Ishmael's Hand must be
against every Body, is it not meet that every Man's Hand should be against this
Privy and Masquerade -Assassinate of Men's Reputation? Saying, He (Hick --
Forsooth!) wishes by this time he had made use of an abler Counselor.

No doubt, Tricks and Niceties in Law, are best defeated by Men accustomed to
such Querks and Tricks, the disguize of Truth, and the defeat of many an honest
Cause. These Quirks (the Rabble that use them) are useless in the United
Provinces, where every Man pleads his own Cause; of which the same Sun that
views the first Process, sees the End and Determination before it sleeps in the
Ocean.

Whereas we labor with our nice Pleadings, Quirks and Tricks, Writs of Errors,
Pleas, Rejoynders and Demurrers eternally.

A Man was Indicted -- quia furatus est Equum, because he stole a Horse, (in
Holland he had died for it) but with us the Indictment was quashed for lack of
Form, there wanted (Forsooth the Word) Felonice; and therefore ill. 29. Ass. 45.

A Man was Indicted that he was communis Latro, a common Thief, and the
Indictment was held vicious, because too general -- never coming on to the
particular Proof.

A Man Murdered another, but the Indictment (by the Clerks oversight, or worse,
was only Interfecit) and was quashed for want of the Word Murdravit.

Thousands of Instances might be given of pretty Quirks and Niceties (that are
now made such essential parts of the Law) that he is accounted the Man of Law,
that is most nimble at them, to take a Cause with a -- Why not; Tick-Tack; as
if some design had been to make the Law (like Sives and Cullenders) full of
Holes for the nonce.

But, some may say then -- What shall become of the Vermin, the Locusts and
the Catterpillars, that (like those Plagues of Egypt) eat up evary green thing
in the Land?

How now? Is this good Behavior? Is Sampson bound? or bound with Withs of small
Cords, made on purpose to be broken? Explain your self, who do you mean by the
Vermin, the Locusts and the Caterpillars, that eat up every green thing in the
Land, and is the great plague sore thereof? Who do you mean? Sir.

You, that are so blunt and such a plain Dealer, do you mean those Throngs
about Temple Bar, and Chancery Lane? those Crowds of Pen and Inkhorns? that a
Man can scarce stir there without being justled or run down by them or their
Coaches? Speak out, who do you mean by? the Vermin of the Land, the Locusts,
and the Caterpillars?

Why then, really, truly, and plainly, I call those Locusts, and Caterpillars,
and Vermin, that live on the Sweat of other Men's Brows, and of the sweet
Labor and Industry of the painful Husbandman, and Countryman, who (if they
were not Fools) would agree their Quarrels over a good Fire, and a Pot of Ale,
by the Men of their Neighborhood, (for it must come to that at last, and why
not as well at first?) before the Estate be wasted, time consumed, with
Danceing Attendance to Vermin.

But what shall the Locusts and Caterpillars do? Ask Mr. Wilson, who tells you
in his Description of the new Plantation, called Carolina, that there is good
Air, room enough for the Locusts and Caterpillars, those unprofitable Insects
and Devourers. Room enough for the He Is and She Is, let them go there and work
and Engender; why should not Spiders spin?

And yet (with Heraclitus his good leave) the Defendant did (if it were worth
the mentioning) (in his pleading this Cause) this Tick-tack which might as well
have been kept secret, but that Heraclitus will not be pleased without it:

For the Declaration is only un'Prelat. not un'Magnat. and though the Plantiff
does declare as Episcop-Lond. and un'Prelat, yet (said the Defendant,) it does
not appear (by the Declaration,) that the Plantiff is un'Magnat, and therefore
not within the Statute.

For the Defendant said further, that he had consulted the Records of those
times, whereby the meaning of the Words (Bishop and Prelate) in those days, is
best cleared; and does not find that ever by Prelates or Bishops is meant
Magnates, or le Grantz, or le Seignieurs -- and therefore Scandalum
Praelatorum, nor Scandalum Episcoporum, can possibly by that Statute be meant
Scandalum Magnatum.

25. Edw. 3. The Proceedings and Judgment of Death against Sir William de
Thorp, (Chief Justice) for Bribery, and brought into Parliament, which the King
caused to be read Overtment devent les grantz de Parliament etc. openly before
the Great Men -- coram Magnatibus, that could not be the Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, nor Prelates -- for they were (always withdrawn) in those days, out of
the House of Lords -- in Judgments or Inquest upon Life and Death, as this was,
-- For the Chief Justice was hanged for his Bribery: (right and good reason, --
Cave, cave.)

42. Edw. 3. Sir John de Lee, Steward of the King's House, was charged in
Parliament for several Misdemeanors -- Et Apres manger vindrent les Prelates,
Duc's, Counts, etc. After Dinner came the Prelates, Dukes, Counts, etc. Here
(being but a Misdemeanor) the Prelates were present, it not being in a Question
of Life or Death.

50. Edw. 3. Alice Perrers was accused for Breach of an Ordinance, (so is the
Record, but it was really a Statute, which in those Days was called an
Ordinance) Fait venir devant' les Prelates, and les Seignieurs du Parliament --
Which also was not in a Question of Blood, and therefore the Prelates are
named, as well as the Magnates; or les Seigneurs.

Many Instances of this Nature may be given, wherein Prelates were never
signified by the words, Magnates, le Grants, or le Seignieurs, or Peers: For
they are tried (as all Men ought to be by Magna Charta) per Pares, by their
Peers or Equals; and being tried by their Peers, (that is) Commoners, they
therefore are Commoners, not Peers of the Realm, as the other Magnates, le
Seignieurs, and le Grantz -- are.

And therefore tho the Bishop of London be Magnas, as he is a Privy-Councellor,
and a Great Officer of the Realm; yet the Declaration not mentioning any such
thing, the Defendant urged that it was deficient: but the Judge overrul'd him
therein.

Yet 28. Edw. 3. Roger of Wigmore, Cousin and Heir of Roger Mortimer, Earl of
March, desires that the Attainder made 4. Edw. 3. against the said Mortimer,
might be examined: Et don't le dit Seignieur le Roy vous charge Counts, Barons,
les Piers de son Royalme, etc. The Lord the King charged the Counts, Barons,
and Peers of his Realm, to examine the said Attainder, and give righteous
Judgment.

But if the Prelates were meant by Counts, Barons and Peers, then they also
were to examine the Attainder by that Command of the King: But they had nothing
to do with Attainders, it being against their own Canon Law, and Oath of
Canonical Obedience, as they afterward declared in another Case, to be seen in
the Rolls of Parliament.

5. Edw. 3. In a Parliament called for Breach of the Peace of the Kingdom, away
went the Prelates out of the Parliament, saying, What had they to do with such
Matters? Et les dits Counts, Borones, and autres Grants, per eus mesmes -- And
the Counts, Barons, and other great Men, went by themselves, etc. to consult,
etc.

So in the same Parliament, upon Judgment given against Sir John Gray, for
laying his hand on his Sword in the King's Presence, for which he was
questioned for his Life, (no Bishops nor Prelates being there therefore) yet
the Record says, -- Le Roy charge touts le Countes, Barons, and autre Grantz --
The King charges all the Counts, Barons, and other Great-Men, to consult, etc.
And then he must charge the Prelates too, if he charged all the Great Men, if
the Prelates be Magnates, or les Grantz -- which could not be in a Question of
Blood.

It Is true, the Bishops are a kind of Barons, and so were the Abbots and
Priors, by virtue of the Baronies bestowed upon them by the Charity or blind
Devotion (or for what other reason) by William the Conqueror, etc. who divided
his Conquests all over England into Knights-Fees; and of several Knights-Fees
(laid together) he made Baronies: And some of these Baronies the Laymen got,
but the Clergy (in the Scuffle and Scramble put in (never fear it) for a Share)
and got proportionably, and more; some Lord-Bishops got, and some Lord-Abbots
got, and some Priors.

By virtue of which Baronies they had Votes and Places in the House of Lords.
But one House being not able to hold so many Lords, the King divides his
Baronies into Majores and Minores; the Minors he tript off, but the Bishops,
Abbots, and Priors held it fast till Hen. 8. and then the Lord-Abots and Priors
tripp'd off, (this was a sore Shock to the Prelacy) and only the Bishops (of
all the Prelates in 2 R. 2.) hold it to this Day. And who Parliaments (as at
Bury St. Edmonds, and also as aforesaid 2. Edw. 3.) have been held without the
Prelates; and tho it is declared (before the Dissolution of the Monasteries,
the major Part of the Prelates) in 7. Hen. 8. in Keilway's Reports, p. 184. Dr.
Standishes Case. Les Justices de soi ent que nostre Seigneur le Roy poit asser
bien tener son Parliament per luy, and ses temporal Seignieurs, and per ses
Commons tout sans les spirituals Seignieurs: That our Lord the King may well
hold his Parliament by Himself, and his Temporal Lords, and by his Commons,
without the Spiritual Lords, etc. Yet (by virtue of their Baronies) they have
Right to sit in the House of Peers, tho their Brethren-Prelates (Abbots and
Priors) be outed, and the Privilege of Sitting in the House of Lords does not
now continue (de facto) to those Gentlemen that now enjoy those Baronies which
the Abbots had, with all their Privileges and Immunities, etc.

Of which Privileges and Immunities, etc. this was one, to sit in the House of
Peers, and granted and regranted, in the same manner the Abbots, etc. held
these Baronies. But I do not know de Jure, how far this Immunity does extend,
nor is it my Province to argue it, tho I am possessed of the Barony of the
Priory of Wickes in Essex, to me and my Heirs, with all the Immunities, etc.
and therefore one would think I might claim the Privilege of a Prelate, out of
that old Statute, 2 R. 2. that has caused all this Debate and Debait.

Nay, all Clergymen (that are Rectors) are Prelates; so Lyndwood, a
Doctors-Commons Official, in his Provincials. Con. Otho. sacer Ordo. verb.
illiteratos. Quae Ignonantia multo magis detestanda esset in Episcopo, seu
majori Prelato. If there was a major Prelate, then there was a minor Prelate;
little Men are Men, tho little. -- A hundred Instances I could give, that all
Clergymen that are Rectors are Prelates.

Now if the speaking against any Prelate who is not Magnas, (nor so mentioned
in the Declaration, (as here it is not mentioned that the Plantiff is Magnas)
and if in the Language and Dialect of those Times, the Word Bishops does not
imply Magnates, or les Grants,) then surely all Prelates, and all that have the
Fee-simple of those Lands and Baronies, granted to the King, and his Heirs and
Assigns, by Act of Parliament, and given and regranted to others, together with
all the Immunities and Privileges that the Abbots had and enjoyed by virtue of
those Lands and Baronies, etc. ought to have the Benefit of this Statute of
Scandal. Magnat. qua Prelat. Why they should not enjoy the Privilege of
Prelates in that Act of 2 R. 2. of Scandal. Magnat. and all other Privileges
that ever the Abbots enjoyed by virtue of their Lands and Baronies, being mere
Temporals, (not Gospel nor Spiritual Privileges) I cannot imagine, if the
Bishops do enjoy these Benefits -- qua Prelati, or qua Barons. Howsoever the
other Privilege of sitting in the House of Lords, may be lost, for the long
Intervall or Vacation of not being called thither (time out of mind of Man) by
the King's Writ, be lost, or -- for what other Reason, it is not needful here
to discuss.

For, if the Bishops sit not in the House of Lords purely ex Gratia Regis, but
qua Barons, by reason of their Baronies, then e fortiori, much more may those
Gentlemen that have the Abbot's Baronies, and other Prelate's Baronies, claim
the old Privileges belonging to their Baronies, and for which and other
Immunities they have an Act of Parliament to them and their Heirs: Since
Bishops have not so firm a Tenure of their Baronies, and the Privileges,
Temporalities, and Immunities thereunto belonging, because they hold them ex
Gratia Regis, and for Contempt may lawfully be forfeited, and seized into the
King's Hands: But the Baronies of Us that hold them in Fee-simple, and by Act
of Parliament, (with the Immunities and Privileges anciently belonging to the
Abbot-Prelates, and Prior-Prelates) cannot for such Contempt, ad libitum Regis,
be so forfeited or seized.

Nay, since many Rectors in England have Baronies annexed to their Rectories,
and their Parsonage-House is the Manor-House, where Court Barons are kept to
this day, and the Tenants do their Homage and Fealty, and they are really and
truly Prelates, I see no Reason in Law or Equity, but they may have the Benefit
of this Statute of 2 Rich. 2. of Scandal. Magnat. if it pertain to Prelates,
qua Prelati. And then every little Rector may bring his Action upon this
Statute, Qui tam, etc. for Contempt of his Clergy-ship, and Prelateship; and
then (Hey day!) we shall have a little Pope in every Parish, and a spiritual
Hogen Mogen in every Rectory. -- Hey! then up go we; and then Thompson and
Heraclitus look to it, we'll pay you off for your Nicknames, you had better
have been tongue-ty'd.

And none can give a Reason, why this Defendant should not also have the
Privilege of a Prelate, which his Predecessors had, (the Abbots of Wicks) when
this Statute was made, whose Successor is this Defendant in the Barony, and to
him and his Heirs for ever.

Nay, really, Thompson and Heraclitus, I believe the Defendant is in earnest,
since so much Money as 2000 l. may be ceined out of old Statutes; there are
London Juries, and Middlesex Juries, as well as Essex Juries -- Look to it.

It Is readily granted, that there is a disserence betwixt the Bishop and the
Defendant, as to Riches, etc. But what then? As a Prelate, a poor Prelate has
as much right to his Privileges as the Rich, and more need of it a great deal:
It is hard to pull off Hairs from the bald Crown; or, to rob the Spittle; but
there is no charity, nor reason, to take the few Hairs from the bald Crown to
make a Wigg on, for him that has a good Head of Hair of his own, and needs no
Wigg, nor such superfluous Additaments.

I grant, indeed, Bishops are Prelates and Barons too: So is the Defendant a
little one; and more than so, the Defendant's Barony cannot be seized into the
King's Hands, as the Bishop's may, for Contempt; therefore I called the
Bishops, a sort or kind of Barons.

Not such Barons as the Temporal Lords, who cannot forfeit them to the King,
nor the King cannot seize them for Contempt, as aforesaid; therefore there is a
vast difference betwixt a Baron who is a Peer of the Realm, and a Spiritual
Baron; the one is Magnas natus, born a Peer, and sits in the House of Lords, as
his Birthright and Inheritance; the other is Greatus, and sits ex Gratia
Regis, and may, upon the King's Displeasure, or Contempt, lose his Seat near
the Wool-Packs, and his Baronies and Temporalities forfeited into the King's
Hands.

But, what nonsense is it for Heraclitus to prate, Numb. 59. Jest. says, They
(the Whiggs) clamor and say, the Damages are excessive: (Honestly said for a
Fool or Jester) Why so? (says Earnest, or Sober-sides) I think, and so must
every Man that thinks at all, (in one Doctor's Opinion he might have said) it is
a very cheap pennyworth to that which the honest Man (Honest Man! quoth he!
and a Proctor's Boy? good sense, and Tory-like) had, that pulled off Hick's
(what? plain Hick -- still? no dread of the 2. Rich. 2? Will Men never take
warning, till they be mauled 2000 l. thick? Sure, the Fellow thinks the
Defendant cannot get as good a Jury in London, or Middlesex, as was lately in
Essex. Hicks --) Hat; except the Privileges of the Saintship be as great as
those of the Peerage.

Peerage! The wise Fellow thinks, that Bishops are Peers, and thinks there is no
difference betwixt Words (that are but wind) and Blows, or Assault and
Batteries, and Challengings to fight.

The Bishop is great, Who denies it? But it is not so long ago since the
Defendant being then (as now, (for he is no Changling) Rector of All Saints;
and Cornet Compton quartering in Colchester, I doubt the Defendant being an old
Captain, by Commission from two Kings, of Sweden and Portugal, by Sea and by
Land, would not have thought himself obliged, in good Manners, to give him the
Wall; except he had, as Sir George did, first told of his Pedigree; then
(indeed) then, I grant.

But not a word of this should have been said, but that they come so with their
Comparisons, when the Defendant had told them, (in the first words of the Naked
Truth, Second Part) that he honored Bishops, but did not Idolize them; could
say -- my Lord, but -- not -- my God. But these Hireling Pamphletiers do so
deify them, that they are netled, when Men do not fall down and worship the --

The Distance is great! -- None envies his Lordships greatness; the Distance is
great, the King made it so great as it is, and can as easily make the Distance
less when he list.

But enough of this Folly, (for such I acknowledge it) but -- only that the Wise
Man bids us answer a Fool according to his folly, (that is) beat the Fool at
his own Weapon.

45. Edw. 3. The two Houses join, Counts, Barons and Communes, and represent to
the King, how the Government of the Kingdom had been a long time in the Hands
of the Clergy, (do you see? an old Complaint; they were (Papists indeed, but)
true born Englishmen, and could not tell how to buckle to a Mitre or
Lawn-sleeves; or that Westminster Hall should truckle to Doctor's-Commons, (a
great Indignity, and a shameful!) Purent grant Mischiefs and Damages sont
avenoz, etc. for the great Mischiefs and Damages that came thereby, etc. says
the Parliament-Rolls.

But notwithstanding all this, -- the Prelates baffled both King, Lords, and
Commons, having their Spiritual Weapons eek't out with two Temporal Writs, --
namely, -- de Heretico comburendo, -- the other de Excommunicato capiendo: --
The former (with much ado) is damned to Perdition, for the flames it made in
Smithfield, and all the Kingdom over: the other, de Excommunicato capiendo, --
is yet in force, and fills the Jayls daily with Men Excommunicated; many about
Mony-matters, and Fees, Illegal-Fees, and Oppressions, Extortions, as not
paying the Knave a Groat, etc.

For when the Popish Prelates could not burn any that stood in their way for a
Heretic, yet, as obstinate and contemptuous, they sent him to the Devil, and
then he and the Chancellours, and the King's Bench, and the Sheriffs, got the
poor Soul buried alive in a Jayl, till he dyed, or submitted, and swore future
Obedience to Holy-Church.

Seven Years after this of 25. Edw. 3. the Prelates (having got the whipping
hand) clawed it away, and to stop Men's Mouths from muttering, got this
Statute, 2. Ric. 2. 5.

Nay, (they are as cunning to preserve their Prelacy, as --) for the Holy
Scripture, Christ and his Apostles having declared an Abhorrence of Spiritual
Pride, and Ecclesiastical Tyranny and Oppression, (calling them greedy Dogs,
that can never have enough, and Wolves in Sheep's clothing, not sparing the
Flock, but tearing, rending and devouring it) It concerned them to fly to Force
and Temporal Power for aid of their abominable Hierarchy; and the Magistrate,
See the Declaration of the Middlesex Justices:
(in those days) what for Fear, and what for Folly, what for Preferment, or to
keep Preferment (since there was no other way) gave his Assistance to the Beast
and the false Prophet, (caw me and I Will caw thee:) Rev. 13. 15, 16, 17. And he
had power to give Life unto the Image of the Beast, that the Image of the
Beast, should both speak, and cause that as many as would not worship the Image
of the Beast, should be killed. And he causes all, both small and great, rich
and poor, free and bound, to receive a Mark in their right hand, or in their
foreheads: And that no Man might buy or sell, save he that had the Mark, or the
Name of the Beast, or the number of his Name.

Yet, in 20. Ric. 2. Eighteen Years after this Statute, -- the House of Commons
forgot not that they were Englishmen still, -- and remonstrated to the King,
complaining, -- that he kept so many Bishops about him in his Court, and
advanced them and their Partakers. The King did not (or the Bishops would not
suffer him to) heed his Subject's herein, -- (as aforesaid.)

And (Poor King) it proved his ruin: for after he had lost the hearts of his
People, it was not a few Lawn Sleeves, and flattering Sycophants, and
Parasitical debaucht Courtiers that could guard him from the unjust Arms of
Hen. 4; who had got the Peoples Hearts, only because the lawful King had lost
them, by adhering to an Effeminate debaucht Crew.

Observe the Machiavillian-skill of the Ingineer's, what Masters of Art these
Ecclesiastics (Divine and Lay conjumbled) have commenced in Politics, and all
not worth to them one Louse, after they have beat their Heads together; (for a
piece of cunning let them alone!) when Advocats and Counselors, Civilians or
no Civilians, Lawyers and Divines, Clergy and Lay, ana, The Proctors and
Atturneys, the Pulpit and the Bar, (Breath-sellers all) are in Conjunction
against a poor Whig, to bring him to ruin, to trample on his conquered Corpse,
to insult over his Grave, to drink and cry -- Huzzah! the Enemy is fled, we are
Conquerors, and shall yet (in spite of Fate and the naked Truth) live and rule
the Roast, oppress and extort, make Havoc of of Souls, Bodies and Estates,
hang up or Jayl their Bodies, damn their Souls, beggar their Families, swallow
and grow Fat with their Estates; (not so greedily there, have a care of
choking,) come let us carowze and drench our selves, revell and be drunk with
the Tears of the Widow and Orphans; Huzzah! -- Huzzah --! incomparable Epicures!

Nay, I am told, from a very good Hand, that the good Bishop of London, in
great piety and devotion, intends to dedicate (this 2000 l.) to St. Paul, for a
Deodand; and build up Paul's Ruins here in London with the Defendant's 2000 l.
(as far as 2000 l. will go) Oh! most Exemplary and Episcopal Zeal! worthy his
great Soul and noble Extract, and fit to be chronicled to all Posterity. This
Heroic Charity shall be writ upon his Tomb, where he shall lie in Paul's (when
it is built) nay, he shall lie (as great Men use to lie) in State, and his
Exequies adorned with the magnificence of this grand Exploit, celebrated in
Heroic Verse, answerable to it and his own Grandieur: I am just now (before my
Fancy cool) writing his Epitaph, to be ready for him; we are all mortal.

But yet, the greatest glory of this Achievement, does belong to Inch-board
Harris, that small Hero must come in to the Meeter and Merits, the one half of
the 2000 l. he earned it dear, and swore hard for it, he has more right to it
than any Man alive, except the Jurymen; for the Judge (upon the whole Matter,
with some grains of Allowance to humane Frailty and Temptation) was there or
thereabouts, at least, he was the best of them; a Judge swears to have no
respect of Persons in Judgment, (Oh hard! hard!)

And therefore, I say, though the Glory of the Action, and the Honor of the
Foyl, shall be given to the precious Jurymen alone, (for they only did the
Business, and the most that the Counsel said to the Matter, except Railing and
Ribaldry, against the Defendant, was not very pertinent to the Declaration) for
want of Matter in it, no doubt: yet the whole profit of the Verdict does really
and truly belong to Harris; he gagged his poor Soul for it, let him have it; I
say, it is more than Judas got; he has my Vote for it, and that signifies more
thereunto than all the Votes of all the Men in the World besides; for if I say
-- no -- He never gets a Penny of it, nor all the Prelates in Christendom on
this side the Alps.

Therefore do not blaspheme St. Peter nor St. Paul, by thinking to wheedle them
into the Contract; for they were monyless when alive, and have less need of
2000 l. now they are dead.

God tells us he hates Robbery for a Burnt-Offering; and if Paul's will not be
built, or go on but slowly, God knows, (there is my 35 s. buried (already) I
wish I had it in my Pocket again, for this Trick, the Fool and his Money should
not be so soon parted to help to build a Cathedral, whose Walls must be
cemented with the briny Tears of the Widow and Orphans; and the noise of the
Singing-Men and Singing-Boys drowned with the Groans, Cries and Howlings of Men
distressed and jailed by a Bishop; -- For his great Honor
Another B --
(This should not have been here inserted, for it is part of an Epitaph belike.)

But I Will divert my Reader, and recreate my heavy Fancy, from meditating on the
doleful Cruelties, and tragical Adventures of Ecclesiastical Policy. (Oh! woe!
woe! and alas! that ever a Bishop and his Clerks should be so stony-hearted):
I Will cheer you though, (and my self too, and no more than needs, in this
Confinement and Retirement) with musing on those mischievous Rocks (near the
Isle of Silly, at the Lands-end of England, so fatal to Mariners, and called (I
am in earnest indeed) by Seamen, time out of mind of Man to the contrary) The
Bishop and his Clerks. In a Dialogue betwixt BO-PEEP and TORY.
Bo-peep. THose fatal Rocks (in Sea) that stand
Near th'Isle of Silly, nigh the Land,
(By Mariners so shunned and blamed)
The Bishop and his Clerks are named.
But, prithee (Tory) tell me why
They were so called (for Rythme) truly?

Tory. It was some Whigg first called them so,
Mere Scandalum Magnat. I trow.

Bo. A Whigg, (do say?) that is not so,
Whiggs were not born so long ago.

To. Not Christened (by that Name) you mean.

Bo. Ever since Abel Whiggs have been,
I must confess; By Tory-Cain
Poor Abel persecuted was and slain.
No Tory can this Truth confute,
For Tory-Cain did Persecute,
For Difference in Religion too,
Plagued the Dissenter; (Is It so now?)
For Whiggish Abel was so stout,
He would not cringe, nor face about
To East nor West, nor yet comply
With the Act of Uniformity
Which Cain had made; but did implore
His Makers Mercy, and adore
The best way that he could, and so
As God did best approve on it too;
Not walking in the Way of Cain.
But, his Religion was his Bane,
For Naked-Truth Abel was slain.
But to the Question keep and tell,
Why that Name suits those Rocks so well?

To. Bishop and's Clerks; Call you Rocks so?
(Harris! come here, and swear once mo'e!)
Would you make Bishops stony-hearted?
And have shook hands with Grace and parted?
Or, make them as of Old? when as
Bonner a Friend to Jaylors was?
When Bishops by Canonical Oath
Were bound, (it is the naked-Troth)
By Bonifac. A. Ca. Conc. Lambeth. 45. H. 3. 1260. Conc. Lamb. Sim. Islepe. Ar.
Can. 26. Ed. 3. 1351.
Canon Law to keep a Jayl,
Or two, or sometimes three for fail.

Bo. Hard Hap! When Clerks are made of stone,
And yet a Name Divine dares own.
Who e're (alas!) does come them nigh,
Or, touch upon these Rocks, they die:
Behold yond' Wreck (swims there) I say,
A stately Ship it was this day,
With Flags and Streamers in her trim,
(How pleasant 'twas to see her swim!)
How loftily she loum'd! no sight
E're pleased the Eye with more delight.
To gaze on her some ceased to eat,
With joy forgetting Work and Meat.
A bluff-tall-Ship she was indeed,
But her best Quality was Speed:
No Algerines (swift though they be)
So nimbly cut the Waves as she:
No Friggats e're crus't in the Sea,
But she could bring them to her Lee
At the long-run, both Great and Small
She could with ease weather them all:
No Man of War did ever shame
The Naked-Truth: (that was her Name):
But now she is split, and sunk to boot:
(That the Bishop and his Clerks should do it!)
First, they torment us till we groan!
Then Jayle us (next) because we moan.
Have they not rockie Hearts of Stone?

To. Why do these Rocks so covert lie?
Drowned in their Seas, hid from the Eye,
Men lost, e're they these Rocks espy?

Bo. Poor Widows-sighs does them surround,
And Orphans Tears, 'till they are drowned.



Oh! but say some Prelates, and high-flown Churchmen, are not so stony-hearted,
nor such Tantivies, riding Post to the Devil, and driving Men to Heaven or
Hell, with Switch and Spur, as you think for; But Order is a good thing; and
since the Naked-Truth, and such Books, taxes them so smartly, as if they were
good for little but to be 'mended and reformed, The Ecclesiastical Fabric may
tumble down, (God bless us!)

Robert Grosthead, Bishop of Lincoln, tax't the shameful Abominations of the
Court of Rome, in his Letters to the Pope, that it hindered him from being
Canonized and Sainted, though he deserved a Red Letter better than any Papist
in the Calendar; he was, if it be not (contradictio in adjecto) an honest
Papist; and if the Bishop and his Clerks (of Rome) had not been stony-hearted
and impenetrable, beyond all amendment and polishing, neither Luther, Calvin,
nor the Protestant Name had ever been heard of to this day. By Grosthead's
Counsel Rome had stood,
Had she not vowed never to be good.


Rob. Grosthead, the Author of a great deal of Naked-Truth, flourished (in
spite of the Pope) Anno 1250; and defines -- Heresy (to be) an Opinion taken
and chosen of a Man's own Brain, contrary to Holy Scripture, openly maintained,
and stiffly defended.

This is a true, good, and honest Description of Heresy; and if so, for God's
sake tell me true: If Prelacy be contrary to Scripture, contrary to the holy
Commands of Christ and his Apostles, in plain (not doubtful) Words; and if Men
stiffly maintain it, and openly defend it, (with Actions, Statutes, Suspensions,
Silencings, Curses, Anathema's, Excommunications and Jails) for God's sake who
is the Heretic now?

Tell not me of Statutes, they are void ipso facto as soon as made, if they be
contrary to the Statutes of God and Christ, says the Lord Coke, the Oracle of
the Law, who (tho a Lawyer) was not ashamed to be a Christian.

Away with Hypocrisy and Cheat! It shall, it shall tumble down, and fall on the
Heads, and crush all that shoulder it up, and endeavor to support it: It
shall, I say; I cannot tell you when, but it shall in due Time; they on whom
this Stone shall fall, it shall grind them to Powder. Stay till the Iniquity of
the Amorites be full, and till they have drunk Brimmers full of the Tears of
Widows and Orphans, Huzzah! till they have filled the Jails full of Howlings,
Woe and Lamentation, then down Dagon, down to Hell, for ever down --

It is an infallible Truth, That not only what is contrary to God, and the
Sense and Meaning of his holy Gospel, shall come to naught; but also what is
contrary to the Sense and Meaning, and Desires of the greatest Part of the
Nation, must tumble down, especially when it has no Foundation of Truth or
Honesty, but stands upon frail and rotten Crotches: the next Puff, or great
Wind, -- (stand clear) for down it goes; or the next Calm, when the
Master Builders have Time and Leisure to view it, and find its Danger, and its
Malignity, down it goes --

The House of Lords represent themselves, but the House of Commons are the
Representatives of all the People in England: What therefore the Generality of
the People affect, that, I say, in time shall become a Law. The Honorable
House of Commons have not only struck at this Statute, 2 R. 2. which the
Prelates make such Work with; but the Repeal thereof past the House with
general Approbation, and was committed, and sent up to the Lords for their
Concurrence therein, it stopped there. -- So much for this time.

The Words -- called Scandal. Magnat. -- which must cost this Defendant 2000 l.
are not actionable, taken in sensu conjuncto, (as learned Lawyers say) nor can
the Innuendo in the third Count lie, because he that drew the Declaration
forgot to mention the Colloquium; for if it had (but) been in, no doubt but
Harris would have swore it through and through: what an Oversight was this?
Therefore say some to the Defendant, Bring a Writ of Error next Term, and quash
it, and there is an End of an outrageous Verdict, of a desperatee Jury. Or else
motion for a new Trial, because the Declaration is, That the Words were spoken
before diverse of the King's Subjects, and but one little Subject appeared.

A Writ of Error! Where to be argued? In the Exchequer-Chamber, before all the
Judges.

This is a cunning Way, more Grist to the Mill; as good be in the Clutches of
an unmerciful Prelate, as uninerciful Breath-sellers.

Mr. Chamberlin, Mr. Hollis, Sir John Elliot, etc. that were Jailed for
refusing to pay Customs and Ship Money, in Charles the First's Time, because
there was no Law for the same, (a clear Case); they took this Course, and the
Judges (ten of twelve) gave the Cause against them: they lost their Fees, and
their Cause, and this Defendant gets nothing but Wit.

Exchequer Chamber! He knows a Way worth two on it; he will keep himself
and his Estate out of all their Clutches, keep in Harbor till the Storm blow
over, let it bluster. And to Jail the Defendant, looks like an Inhumanity like
that of some Creditors, that in Cruelty arrest the dead Corpse, -- a Barbartty
of no great Credit to a Bishop, (that, if he do not propagate, at least should
not by Jails and Shams hinder the Propagation of the Gospel) especially not
(how bigg soever any Man is) at this time of Day.

Money, a great deal of Money will Gadbury get, and more than ever the Bishop
will get by this Affair; for,

Flectere qui nequeant Superos, Acheronta movebunt.

The Horary Questions will be, Where the Defendant's Estate is? where his
Lands? where his Goods? where his Moneys? (if any Body could tell; for I
believe the Defendant himself can scarcely tell that) and lastly, Where he
himself is? whether within a Mile of an Oak, or just under the Bishop's Nose?

And when all comes to all, the Inquisitors will but throw good Money after
bad; for the Devil will cheat them, as he did Madam Cellier, both of the Money
and the Sham-plot. And after all -- the Ass-trologer knows no more (by all his
Intelligence with Mercury and the Moon) where the Defendant is, than I do;
perhaps not so well: nor ever shall, till the Time come when Truth is valued
more than Hypocrisy; when Innocence is a sufficient Guard against Power; when
Gospel is preferred before an obsolete worm-eaten Law, made in the Days of
Popish Prelacy; then (and not till then) shall the Defendant appear to their
Shame.

And in the Interim, make them know how deep and smartly a single Pen can
wound, when whetted and made sharp with Truth, and edged by Despair, through
the inveterate Malice (but silly Policy) of unreasonable and wicked Men:
Christo commonstratore non didicerunt, They never learnt this Policy of their
Savior.

This Method is like the Policy of the late Suborners, that would have wheedled
the Man into Perjury, by telling him of two Sorts of Advancement; if one would
not, the other should; if Preferment, and Money, and Gold would not make him
swear Treason against -- then he should be advanced to the Gallows, and Boo --
should swear Treason against him.

Wicked Haman, (that devilish Privy-Councellor to the King Ahasuerus) had
experience of both these Advancements; first, to be a Favorite; and secondly
and lastly, to the Gallows prepared for Mordecai.

This brings to my mind a true Story, and commonly known: There was a great
Man, but he was an Atheist, but (in pretense) a Papist; and being sick on his
Deathbed, he called for two Pictures, that he had provided against such a last
Extremity, and hung one on the one side of his Bed, and the other on the other
side.

One was a Picture of God Almighty, (you may know he was a Papist by that) the
other was the Picture of the Devil, (you may know he was an Atheist by that;)
in the first Picture -- this Motto, -- Si tu non vis, (If thou will not); but
in the Devil's Picture, on the other side his Bed, this Motto -- Iste rogitat,
(Here Is one will.)

Even so, Beloved, like these two Motto's, there is belike, as the Suborners
say, two Sorts of Advancement; one by fair means, the other by foul: As if
Cicero himself, (whose Eloquence is mere Canting, and a set, little pedagogical
way of chanting Words, (by the silly) admired for Oratory above Rhombus
himself) should say, If Money and fair Words will not make you a perjured
Villain, and a Teague O Divelly, then the Gallows take thee, and the foul Fiend.

O the Hypocrisy of some Men's Religion! What have we to do with a Devil in the
likeness of Samuel? the white Devil is the most devilish, the religious Devil;
no Man crosses himself, nor blesses himself from him, nor from the foul Fiend;
when the Suborner prays like a Saint, and when this Son of Perdition, and Devil
incarnate, appears to the World in the likeness of a Prophet, and yet has no
God but his Belly, no Lechery like Revenge, no Food like Man's Blood, no
Recreation like Issuing out Excom. cap -- and filling the Jails, the Royal Seat
of his Soul being in his Belly and Midriff, the Throne of the Belly-God.

Let no Man envy the Gentleman his Employment; for if I had a Dog that was such
a biting, mischievous Curr, and Worry-Sheep, I would hang him. Look him in the
Mouth, do but see there, I told you his Chaps were bloody, he has not licked
his Lips since he told a Lie; for his Religion is mere Cheat, as the King says;
His Voice is Jacob's Voice, but his Hands, his Hands (the bloody Hands of this
Nimrod) look you, Gentlemen, his Hands are the Hands of Esau. Seal those Cap --
there; are you sure they are all sent to the Devil? Yes, Ecce Signum! Then pass
them -- fill the Jails full -- full -- it is done, one cries -- the Devil take
them --; the other cries -- Take them Jailor! -- A glorious Work! Sure the Fool
says in his Heart, There is no God: No, the Devil of Hell is not so devilish
an Atheist: It Is the old Fool, that wishes (and lives as if) there were no God.

Naturalists tell us of Roots called the Mandrakes, in proportion and parts
like a Man and Woman, (for like the Palm Tree, there is difference of Sexes,
Male and Female of them, and these Mandraks are never found in the Earth alone,
but Male and Female together lie, (that is more than some Men do with their
Wives) bedded together in the Ground, from whence it cannot be eradicated and
plucked up by any living Creature, but it proves the Death of that Creature
that does it: Therefore they provide a Dog, good for nothing else, as most sit
for that Office and Employment, first digging about the Mandrakes to facilitate
the Feat, and up come the Mandrakes with a Groan, and down falls the Dog dead,
dead, stark dead; nay, no matter, it is but a Dog.

Compare we true Devotion (in the conscientious discharge of the Duties of
Christianity) and Religion to be this Mandrake, at which the persecuting
Nero's, Dioclesian's, Julian's, etc. the Popish Inquisition, the Prelatical
High Commission, with their Anathema's, and their Capias, and their Constables,
and Jailors, and Executioners, have long been plucking, tugging, and sweating,
and enacting, to eradicate it, that Rome might be made instead thereof, to
plant their own Inventions, conformable and uniformable; to secure their Lordly
spiritual Pride, Tyranny, Covetousness, and Oppression, and Ecclesiastical
Policies and Subtilties, by Capias's and Curses, Acts and Writs against
inoffensive People: Let them alone with their Employment, their Bailiffs and
Bum's, their Officers and Apparitors, their Commissioners and Executioners,
Hangmen and Jailors, and the rest of the Black Regiment; let them alone, it
will be the Death of the Dogs: And --

How now? -- what am I going to write? No near -- (as the Seamen phrase it) --
Starboard your Helm, and keep your Loof -- no near --
Steady your Helm, -- keep her thus -- steady -- there.


I must not say at present what I was going to say, and therefore I Will take off
my Pen, and amuse my self with a Welsh-Man a while, one Mr. Sol. Shaw, a Man
Mr. Hickeringill never saw nor heard of before, who from Monmouth in Wales, (no
worse Place I assure you) sent Mr. Hickeringill this following Letter and
Lines, in a Cover directed to Mr. R. Janeway, in Queens-Head-Alley, London;
which for the Honor of Sir George Jefferies, (her own Country) I will make
bold to print, (if it be but to show, that more Welsh-men than Sir George have
been in Love with Mr. Hickeringill.) But (besides) in my Judgment the Reader,
considering all Circumstances, will think them worthy this lasting Memorandum.
For Mr. Richard Janeway, in Queens-Head-Alley in Paternoster Row, London.
SIR,
THe great distance between me and London, with a long discontinuance from the
City, my Acquaintance being now worn out, and having no Correspondent, has
caused me to direct this unto you, being the Printer of the Naked-Truth; and
though I am a Stanger, I hope you will not take it amiss; if you think it worth
your pains, you may give it to Mr. Hickeringil in print; and when I come to
London, I will return you Thanks.

Candlemass-day, Feb. 2. 1681/2. Your Friend, SOL. SHAWE.


Monmouth, Candlemass-day, Feb. 2. 1681/2. Reverend Sir,
I Have sent you, in the next Page, some Gratulatory Lines upon the reading of
your Naked-Truth, etc. I find your Books, in these parts, to be like Universal
Pills; they have various Operations, and work upon all Bodies Politic one way
or other, by Sweating, Vomiting, Purging, Urin, etc. but generally the People
take them as Cordials, and digest them with a great deal of comfort; for we are
true Britains in the West, and are glad to hear there is one wise Man in the
East; we hope there are more. We are so yoaked with Consistory Collars, that
our Necks are worn bare, and our Withers gauled; and if we offer to winch, or
draw back, we are presently pinched, and such Goads run into our Sides, that we
are forced to go as they please, for they must needs go that the Devil drives:
And though we have but short Pasture on our barren Mountains, and lean Livings in
Wales, that we can but just keep Life and Soul together, yet our fat
Task-master does so exact, that we can scarce keep Skin and Bones together; we
are so poor, we cannot creep; we are so drained in our Purses, that we are no
way able to wage War with the Beast. Our trembling Vicars, Levite-like, conform
to all, and Issachar-like, bear any Burdens that are laid upon their Backs, and
know not how to help themselves. And our poor Churchwardens stand Cap in Hand
to the Worshipful Mr. Archdeacon, the Reverend Doctor and Commissary, and the
Sir Reverence the Register; and are glad they can get off, and be dispatched,
by paying of their Money, (which is a Parish Charge, that grudg to give them
allowance for their Time: And if the Churchwarden offer to speak, the
Archdeacon nods, and the Commissary frowns, and the Register mouths and rails,
and calls them Saucy, threatening them to march from Court to Court, and wait
attendance upon his Ar -- that they are so tired in Body and Spirit, that they
have no heart to their Drudgery; they had rather be of any Office, (Scavengers
to empty Dung) than to be Churchwardens; for they are forced to swear and
forswear themselves, whether they will or no, for it is impossible for them to
keep their Oaths; if they offer to speak, their Mouths are stopped with a Canon
Bullet, a Book of Articles is given them, to present their peaceable Neighbors
by. The Margin does quote several Canons which they cannot read, neither do
they know when or where they were made: Nay, they tell them of unwritten
Traditions, of Customs, and Ancient Usages; and frighten them with high Words,
and snap them up, saying, Take the Book, here is the Guide you must go by, and
Present, or else you are forsworn. And when they make Returns, which is writ by
one or other of their Proctors, for which they give a Shilling, and subscribe,
Omnia been; they will not believe them, but tell them, The Court is informed
otherwise; and put pusling Questions to entangle them, and will not take in
their Presentiments, till they have put in the Names of some of their best
Parishioners, (but they must not be Quakers); and thus the whole Parish is set
in a flame by these Incendiaries; and poor ignorant Creatures, they cannot help
it: If there be any dronish or debauched Clergyman that they complain of, they
cannot be heard; and they understand that some have been proved Profane in
Life, and common speaking, and Heretical and Popish in their public Preaching;
that the High Arches do only check them, and continue them in their Livings; to
the encouragement of Debauchery, and the hazard of the precious Souls of their
Hearers: But if there be but one pious and painful Preacher, the whole inquiry
is after him; What does that Man do? is he conformable in every Point to the
King's Ecclesiastical Laws? and if there be the lest iota or Ceremony omitted
at any time, he is presently suspended, ab Officio and Beneficio; and thus the
Shepherd is smitten, and the Flock scattered. Sir, I have held you too long, I
have been in the Company of the Clergy, where your Books have been mentioned;
and some modest Men have spoken, that there were many things too true: But the
High Hectors have run them down, and railed against your Book and you, saying,
They know not but you may be a Jesuit, (which they never said while you drudged
for them): They say, That a Pillory is more fit for you than a Pulpit, and a
Rope than a Cope: They say, E're long your Mouth will be stopped, they will cut
your Gill, and then Hicker where you will. They have Silver and Gold Spurs,
yours are but Natural, and they will slash you; they will pick out your Eyes,
and crow over you; they will not leave a Feather on your Back, or a Quill to
make you a Pen to scribble with; they will cut your Comb, and your Stones too,
and make a Gelding of you, that you may only serve as a Doorkeeper for their
Nuns, etc. But I shall detain you no longer, but subscribe my self,

Sir, Yours to honor and serve, SOL. SHAWE.
Sir, Your Friends long to hear when the Term will be over, and how it fares
with you.






So much for the Prose, next follows the British Muse, bred on Pernassus, the
Penmenmaur. THy Naked-Truth (brave Hickeringil) out-shines
The glittering Silver, and the golden Shrines
Of great Diana; all her Vanities
Are clearly seen by Naked Verities.
This makes Demetrius, and his crafty Crew,
With Pursevants so hotly to pursue:
For now their Trade is likely to go down,
They cry Diana round about the Town.
The Church, the Church is come into disgrace:
An uproar now is raised in every place.
Confusion is so great, they are in a smother;
Some cry out one thing, some cry out another.
The greatest part know not the reason, why
They Are met together to make Hue and Cry.
O for a Town Clerk the Rabble to allay,
And send the Assembly peaceably away;
For Naked-Truth robs not the Church, but she
Discovers only her Deformity,
Restoring her to Primitiye Beauty.
And when a lawful Convention of State,
Shall meet together, to take thy Relate
Into their serious Consult, 'twill be found
There Is nothing writ, but on a Scripture-ground.
They Will see, that Canon is not Statute Law,
But only like a blazing Wisp of Straw,
To scare the Simple to Conformity,
Against their Conscience, Law and Liberty.
It Is only hissing Wildfire that does singe,
To make Fools unto Ceremonies cringe.
And by this means they will sind a just cause,
To regulate such Arbitrary Laws:
For King and Parliament have not confirmed
Their Canon Laws, therefore they may be mended.
Except unto the Romish Church they fly,
TO uphold confused Babel-Hierarchy.
And this thy Naked-Truth does show as much,
Except they are resolved to be such.
What though thy Naked-Truth by some be blamed?
Yet Naked-Truth will never be ashamed.
And what though thou (like Paul) were formerly,
In Commission by Scribe and Pharisee,
To drudg for them, oppressing some with Fines,
That would not bow and stoop to their Designs!
Yet if thou now converted art, 'tic well;
Thour't in the way to Heaven, they to Hell.
And what though many of the Saints do fear
Thou do dissemble; because they do hear
How thou did persecute the Saints, and hale
Their Persons innocent unto the Jayl!
What though at present they be shy of thee?
Yet thou proceeding in thy Zeal to be
A Convert true, it will rejoice their Hearts,
That God has raised thee to take their parts.
And what though Priests do wait by Writ of Cape? Another Merlin,

Yet by some Basket thou shall have escape.
Their Ruffins sworn to take thy Life away,
By Providence shall miss their hoped Prey.
Though some may question, thinking that thou art,
No true Disciple from thy very Heart;
Yet when it shall be known what thou have writ,
And preached too, thou will be quite acquit.
When by thy Naked-Truth the Church has ease,
It will the Brethren in all places please.
But let me tell thee, Mr. Hickeringill,
Though many Grave Divines approve thy Pill,
Prelates and proud Priests say, thou have no skill.
The Gout, the Strangury, and such Disease,
May, by a Velvet Couch, receive some ease,
And Golden Chariots rocking them does please.
A Body full of Humors, all can tell,
Disgusts that Physic that will them expel;
Because it makes them keek, and vomit up,
Their sweetest Morsels, like a bitter Cup.
Sick Physic they don't like (though that must cure);
This they resolved are not to endure.
Thou purgest Head, the Reins, and Liver too,
Fluxeth the Body, and makes such ado,
That all their Rottenness will be discovered:
They like not this thy way to be recovered;
But will keep rather their Distemper still,
Than Purge and Vomit thus to make them ill.
Diseases foul, Physicians will conceal,
And gross Distempers they will not reveal:
The Credit is the Patient's; Gain's their own;
This thou regardest not, but makes all known;
Though they tormented are, and full of pain,
Yet they have Riches, Profits, Honor, Gain;
And they are courted too, have great Retinues
To wait on them, and they have great Revenues:
Now this they love, and will not change their state,
For all thy Pamphlet-printing, and thy prate.
They say, a Mungrel-Mountebank thou art,
That mounts the Stage, but has no real Art.
Thou runs from Town to Town to show thy Feats,
And vend thy moldy Drugs, which are but Cheats
Thou railst against the Cross, but do purloin,
Picking Men's Pockets both of Cross and Coin.
Thou have no License to be thy Defender,
Therefore against the Law thou art offender.
If this be true, there is ground enough, I trow,
By Scandalum Magnatum to o're-throw,
And bring thee down upon thy bended Knees,
To ask Forgiveness, and to pay thy Fees.
Therefore the Scribes do lay for thee their Snares,
And do consult to take thee unawares.
The Officers of Doctors Commons meet
Together often, and their Heads do beat
What course to take; The Learned Chancellors,
Crafty Civillians, foul-mouthed Registers,
Archdeacons, Surrogates are in a Huff,
The Proctors and Appariters do snuff:
Our Wealth is gone, if we let this alone,
We must with the Irish, cry, Ohone, Ohone.
They all combine, and never will give out,
Until they have given Hickeringill the rout.
Their Cobweb-Canons, and their Lime-twig-Laws,
Thou valuest no more than rotten Straws.
Thou fear not their hollow Pot-gun noise,
Being good for nothing but to fright the Boys.
They therefore now appeal, and crave the aid
Of Statute-Laws, to help them in their Trade.
Look to thy self, they are resolved (now in)
To lose the Saddle, or the Horse to win:
They strive to make Pilat and Herod Friends,
And then the Consistory have their Ends.
Now Velvet Saddl's offered, with Gold Fringe,
Richly adorned with splendid Trappeling;
And when the Saddle's on their Back, they will get
A Snaffel in their Mouths with Iron Bit,
Except God give them Grace, and better Wit.
For when they are mounted, they will spur them on,
Unto their own, and thy destruction. Another Merlin.

It is by this means they support their hope,
To get thy Neck into a Hempen Rope.
(The Cross thou likest not, and will not have)
A Gibbet's good enough for such a Slave.
If they can get the Learned Lawyers in
To take their part, as they now do begin.
This was the way they dealt with Christ (him killed)
And poor St. Paul his Back with stripes was filled.
But it is hoped (that will be forbidden);
For honest Lawyers will not be Priest-ridden:
For they will show no Mercy, switch and ride,
Till they have got unto the Romish side.
Lawyers themselves at last will yoaked be,
Becoming Traitors to their Liberty:
For if the Statute do their Canons draw,
They Will keep the King's Liege-Subjects in such aw,
By raising up a Spanish Inquisition,
Bringing all down to ruin and perdition.
They Will set the Mitre up above the Crown,
And bring all Law, and all Religion down.
O the Confusion that will follow then!
But I forbear, and will hold in my Pen;
And so conclude with England's Letany,
Defend us, Lord, from French and Popery,
And God send thee a safe Delivery.
SOL. SHAW.


We are commanded to -- love the Truth and Peace, well put together; for Truth
seldom meets Peace without, tho it always makes Peace within. Truth seldom gets
in this World external Peace, but never misses internal and eternal Peace.

The Word of Truth, Truth it self, our blessed Savior, and his Apostles, never
failed of inward Peace of Conscience, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, never failed
neither of external Ruffles, and War from without; and therefore he said, He
came not to send Peace on Earth, but a Sword.

It always was so from the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, that War
should be betwixt the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent.

But there can be no Peace (says my God) to the Wicked; neither Peace
external, internal, nor eternal.

For Truth is the Essence of Peace, the Life and Soul of Peace; it ceases to be
Peace, when Truth is absent, and is mere War, Confusion, and Conspiracy.

How I have studied the Way of Truth, let good Men judge; and how I have studied
the Way of Peace, this following Letter to Henry Bishop of London will evince.
And not further to displease Sir George Jefferies, (for I hate this vain
Jangling about Words, and Titles, and Genealogies) as it happens, (the Welsh
Knight will now be pleased, for) the last Letter sent from this Defendant to
the Bishop was as smooth, docile, courtly, and Alamode, as the best Courtier of
them all can write. And that the Defendant (absit invidia verbis) has been as
great a Traveller as St. Taphee, or as that great Welsh-man and Kill-Cow Hero,
(Capt. Jones himself) that said, he had a Privilege or Patent whereby he could
lie by Authority, (wonderful Preferment!) the Welsh-man was proud on it tho.

The Letter verbatim, thus: Viz.

To the Reverend Father in God, Henry Lord Bishop of London, at London -House,
in Aldersgate Street.
May it please your Lordship,
THis is the second humble Address that I have made to your Lordship, that all
Differences, as well as the Action of Scandalum Magnatum, brought against me by
your Lordship, may be amicably composed, before the utmost Extremity be tried.
If I had spoke the Words modo and forma, as they are laid in your Declaration,
I know not whether upon any Submission. your Lordship would find Mercy enough
to remit them. But, my Lord, if you will vouchsafe me a Hearing, with (or
without) your own Witness, or Witnesses, I doubt not, but he or they will
evidence my Innocence, that I never spoke the Words as they are laid, but
without any Interruption or Intermission, in a continued Discourse, I did
explain, and explain, and express what horrid Plot it was, which I said your
Lordship had a hand in, viz. against my righteous Name and Reputation in the
Barretry.

And that those ungrateful Words of -- Impudent, and Ignorant, (which are
odious, if considered abstractly), had reference only to a Discourse we had of
a printed Paper your Lordship recommended to the Clergy of Essex in your last
Visitation, (and amongst other things) the Observation of the Canons of 40, by
Name disallowed by 13. Car. 2. 12.

Which Statute if your Lordship knew not, I said, you were ignorant thereof; or
if you knew it, it was impudent to confront the said Act of King and
Parliament, opposing your Sense against theirs. All which, my Lord, are not
scandalous, taken together, nor against the Statute, if true; but the last
Words were very rashly and irreverently spoken, and I am so far from justifying
the Irreverence and Indecency of the Expressions, (what Provocation soever I
might have) that I will give your Lordship what Satisfaction your Lordship
shall reasonably require, with all Humility and Contrition. And I am the rather
hopeful of the good Success of this my humble Submission, because (I hope) your
Lordship intended nothing else in bringing the Action, but only to bring me to
Acknowledgment of the Irreverence of the Expressions, and not with a design to
enrich your self by any Money of mine, or undoing me and my Family. Yet, my
Lord, I doubt not but to make it appear (if you will admit me) to your
Lordship) that the Action against me is ill laid, and that you wlil certainly
be nonsuited, tho it be no Policy to tell your Lordship how and wherein at
this time of Day: However, it will approve me ingenuous toward your Lordship,
and that I do as industriously avoid a Conquest, as well as all Contest with
your Lordship, and that this Submission proceeds from nobler Principles than
Fear can suggest. But I have had so ill Success in all my former Applications
to your Lordship, that I have but little Faith or Hope in the Success of this;
however nothing on my part shall be wanting to an Accommodation.

And since Almighty God (in Mercy) does not send a Thunderbolt for every rash
Oath, or every irreverent Word against his holy Name; your Lordship, I faintly
hope, will, after his Example, find Mercy and Grace enough to remit,

My Lord, Your Lordship's humble Servant, EDM. HICKERINGIL.


Now let the Reader judge, whether any soft Concession or Submissions can
mollify this sort of Men: Flints will break upon a Feather-Bed; but the Bishop
and his Clerks (near the Isle of Scilly) are harder than Flint, harder than the
Adamant, or the nether Millstone.

What Advantage did Sir Francis Pemberton, the Lord Chief Justice, take at the
Defendant's ingenuous Concessions (which were more than needed) in the Case?

For there are not any Words laid in the Declaration, (if never so true, and
well-prov'd) that are actionable, or within that Statute, but are justifiable
as they were spoken. And upon a Writ of Error, it will appear, (for the Oath of
the Judges is, to have no respect of Persons in Judgment) That the Words in all
the three several Counts are not actionable, nor scandalous; and if so, then
all this Noise is like the Shearing of Hogs, a great Cry, and a little Wool.

To say, His Lordship is very ignorant; it is too true, and if he be wise, he
will confess it, as (aforesaid) St. Paul did, and so Socrates, and all the wise
Men (before or since.) Agur or Solomon, one of them, says, I am more brutish
than any Man, I have not the Understanding of a Man. That Danger is over; the
other is easy.

For to say in sensu conjuncto, nay, in sensu diviso, That his Lordship is a
bold Man: A Soldier should be so, much more when he is a Soldier of Christ,
much more when he mounts so high as to be a Prelate, he had need be bold or
daring, because of the many Oppositions he must expect to encounter; The
Apostle bids us -- stand to our Arms -- and put on the whole Armor of God, and
stand, and when we have done all to stand.

Aristotle and all the Philosophers make Fortitude to be one of the four
Cardinal Virtues; (I never heard it was scandalous before to say a Man is bold
and daring; if it had on the contrary been said) his Lordship is fearful, a
Coward, and then; Then, then indeed the Scandal. magnat. would be greatly
scandalous, and within the Statute; and the Action would well lie; but not to
say, His Lordship is a bold daring Man; though you add a bold, daring, impudent
Man, for sending some Heads of Divinity in a printed Paper contrary to Law.

Is it not Impudence to live in the Practice and Office Episcopal, acting
contrary to those Methods, Rules, and Rubricks commanded in the Statutes by
King and Parliament, and contrary to the Common Prayer Book, and Act of
Uniformity? Yes, you must say -- for a Bishop cannot plead Ignorance, nor
Frailty, for then his Lordship would (indeed be very ignorant.

The Defendant is the Man that will prove, (if any Body have the Face to deny
it, and when Time shall serve) that there is a Bishop within a Mile of an Oak,
that has lived in the Practice and Office Episcopal, acting contrary to those
Methods, Rules, and Rubricks, commanded in the Statute by King and Parliament,
and Common Prayer Book, and Act of Uniformity.

As for Instance: He that confirms all Comers, Hand over Head, without
Exception, without Examination, without Certificate, without knowing that they
are Baptized or Catechis'd; is not this abominable, bold, daring, and impudent?

No great Man (if he be a Subject) is too great for the Law, not too great to
be corrected, reformed, and better taught; not too great for King and
Parliament, and their Statutes: It is Treason to deny this Truth. What? shall
Confirmation, (of which the Papists make a Sacrament, and Protestants make an
Ordinance and Statute Law,) be slubber'd over against the very Design of it? be
slubber'd over, by confirming such as have neither Sureties there, nor any
Witness, nor any Godfather or God-Mother, nor any Minister, to testify that
ever they were baptized? O abominable! What is bold, daring, and impudent, if
this be not? The Canon Law says, Episcopus non potest statuere contra Jura.
Lyndwood in Con. Oath. quid ad ven. v. corrigend.

Then 2 dly; For the Bowings, Noddings to the East, to the Altar, to the
Wax-Candles: Is it not bold and daring, etc. to set up or countenance
Ceremonies, against the King's Laws, and Acts of Uniformity, that were never of
God's making, nor of the King and Parliament's making? Is not this bold,
daring, and abominably impudent?

Then 3dly; To recommend in a printed Paper, Canons for the Clergy to observe,
(the 65, 66, and 3, of the Canons of Forty,) when there never was any such in
the World. And as for Episcopus non potest petere a subditis, nisi probaverit
ea sibi debere per Canones. Con. Othob. domus. etiam Lynd wood Provinc.
these Lambeth Canons, that (to make all the Republics in the World our
Enemies) falsely assert, that Monarchy is Jure divino, by the prime Law of
Nature, and at large confuted in Naked Truth, 2d Part. It was Impudence in the
Clergy to make that first-of-the -Lambeth-Canons at first, and greater
Ignorance; (that a whole Convocation should be no wiser, and yet so bold,
daring, and impudent, as to impose upon the Clergy and Lay People such Untruths
and Falsehoods, as are in that first Article of the Constitutions of Forty) but
strangely bold, daring, and impudent, for any Man at this day to justify,
vindicate, recommend, or defend them.

The Naked Truth, 2d Part, has confuted the Vanity and Ignorance of the
Convocation in that first Article of their Lambeth-Canons, or Constitutions of
Forty, against all Contradiction, and Hosea 4. 6. Because thou have rejected
Knowledge, I also will reject thee, that thou shall be no Priest to me. Hos. 4.
7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Quae Ignorantia multo magis detestanda esset in Episcopo, seu
majori Prelato. Lynd. Con. Otho. Sacer. Ord. verb. illiteratos.
beyond the Skill of all the Bishops and Clergy of England to answer, at least
hitherto; they have slept quietly upon it, and shall a single Bishop, and one of
the youngest Sort too, revive them, and yet cannot justify the very first of
them, which is not the worst of them neither, as is fully and particularly, and
at large proved by the Defendant in his former Works, and condemned by the
great Wisdom of the Nation in an Ordinance.

This it is for Men to stand on the utmost Pinnacle of the Temple, and oversee
and command all others, when a lower Seat of the Church would be as well or
more easily supplied by them.

What Mischief to the Church (in all Ages) has it brought? To make
Boy-Cardinals, and Boy-Bishops, and Novices, great before they be good, and to
command wiser Men than themselves. -- Like Fresh Water, and Courtier-Captains
of Ships, and yet know not Larboard from Starboard, or how to right the Helm,
nay, perhaps can neither box nor (so much as) say their Compass; and yet these
must be Pilots and Governors: it is the Ruin of the Fleet.

Or to set up or prop a Church of Christ with the unsuitable and rotten Props
of Cruelty and Force; as if Christianity destroyed (what it came to amend)
Humanity; or that to be a Christian Governor, is to be an inhumane Devil, good
for nothing but to run up and down, seeking whom he may devour, and worse than
Turks, Jews, Heathens, and Infidels.

It is this Ecclesiastical Policy, that has ruined the most resplendent Empire
of the Christian World, (Spain) not so terrible in her inexhaustible Treasures,
and Indie-Mines, as formerly in her Warlike Hands; yet,

How contemptible now? how depopulated? how despicable to all their Neighbors,
that were so formidable (so latley) to England, and the Christian World? How
did King James court them? and King Charles the First humble himself, in hopes
of an Alliance Historic. Collect. Vol. 1. p. 82.
with Spain? What cringing Letters (upon this Hope) were writ to his Holiness?
what Complements (for I hope they were not in earnest) to Pope Gregory the
15th, (that Wretch)? -- Sanctissime Pater, Beatitudinis vestrae Literas, etc.
Nunquam tanto quo ferimur studio, nunquam tam arcto and tam indissolubili
vinculo, ulli mortalium conjungi cuperemus, cujus odio Religionem
prosequeremur, etc. Vt, sicut omnes unam individuam Trinitatem, and unum
Christum crucifixum confitemur, in unam Fidem coalescamus: Quod ut assequamur,
labores omnes atque vigilias, Regnorum etiam atque Vitae pericula parvi
pendimus, etc.

Bless us! what Promises are here of Propensity to Rome, even to the Hazard of
Life, Kingdoms, and All, in devotion to his Blessedness, (so he is friled) who
will not stir a Step from his Infallibility; one would think, that to have met
him half way, had been Devotion enough in all Conscience, Reason, Scripture,
Law, or Equity; and for such mighty and wise Kings and Princes (too you will say)
as were King James, and King Charles the First, in so (I hope) never to be
again imitated Condescension and Submission. It makes my Heart ache to think
on it, or read the Letters published at length by the indefatigable
Mr. Rushworth, (as before quoted) and all the Pope's Demands signed by the
King and Prince, p. 73. of his Historical Collect. Part 1.

And all this for what? For the Spanish Match. And now Spain is glad to woo,
instead of being wooed; glad to court and address, instead of receiving
Addresses; glad with Gifts, Pensions, (even to the emptying of their
Inexhaustible Treasure) beggar themselves, and keep themselves poor and
pennyless, to keep Cart on Wheels; nay, and all will scarce do neither.

And why? and why?

They are depopulated by the Inquisition, the Severity and Persecution
according to Law tho. And their Trade is decayed, by reason of their foppish
and numerous Holy Days, or Play-days; Families are needy and starved, because
not suffered to work upon the Six Days, whereon God says, thou shall labor. --
That, were it not that the Indian Mines did supply them with merconary
Soldiers, (poor Refuge to trust unto, God knows) they had given up the Ghost
long ago. And now -- do not they gape for Help, or some poor Comfort, (like Men
drawing on, or) at the last Gasp.

Nay, I my self know, (scarce any Man better) that if there were War
betwixt England and Spain, (which few Men desire) in this Conjuncture)
Jamaica, and the Wind-ward Islands alone, are ten Men to one of all the natural
Spaniards in the Indies; and without the help of England, either in Men or
Ships, Money, or Ammunition, could -- I know what -- But -- I Will reserve it to
another Season. I know on what Score -- the brave Raleigh was sacrificed to
Gundamore's Revenge, the Spanish Ambassador.

Yet some Politicians (the Scholars and Disciples of Not. Thomson, L'Estrange,
and Heraclitus,) think that the best Way to keep a Kingdom quiet, is to
depopulate, jail them, beggar them, sham-plot them, -- send them to the Devil,
and the Jail; spoil all Trade, -- discourage all Adventures to Sea -- as if Men
were Dogs, -- and good for nothing but to be hanged. And yet the wise Man found
it true, That Oppression makes a wise Man mad; and with all his Wisdom, and his
Politics, he found (too late) that he was mated and bearded by his own
Servant, and he none of the best neither -- Jeroboam, who taking advantage of
the People's Discontent and Murmurings, (wanting only a Head) to relieve
themselves, soon won eleven of the twelve Tribes from the Fool, that would
listen to no Advice, no Address, but that of the young Courtiers, -- saying, --
My Father made your Yoke heavy, but I will add to your Yoke --: my Father
chastised you with Whips, but I will chastise you with Scorpions. -- My little
Finger shall be thicker than my Father's Loins.

Cunning Fool! and subtle Politician! nay, the Text says, -- 1 King. 12. 15.
that the Cause (why the King hearkened not unto the People) was from the Lord --
for his Ruin --

No wonder then the People grew stark mad (Cruelty and Oppression had made them
so mad; and yet we do not read that Rehoboam nor Solomon oppressed the People,
but that they had a Law on their side to vouch the Whips and the Scorpions too;
(Remember Emson and Dudley!)

No wonder (then) the People run into Rebellion to this day, V. 19. and run
stark mad, and after a foolish Religion too, but they that were made desperate
by bad usage and cruelty (it might be better with them, it could not be worse,
they could but lose their Lives, or their Livings, Lands, Goods, and Liberty
(more dear than Life) and therefore they publicly beat up their Drums to a
Point of War -- and makes the Trumpets -- sound -- To Horse -- To Horse -- Ver.
16. So when all Israel saw that the King hearkened not unto them; the People
answered the King, (to his Head, and to his Face, most irreverently) saying --
What Portion have we in David? Neither have we Inheritance in the Son of Jesse:
To your Tents, O Israel; Now see to thy House -- David. 1 King. 12. 16, 17, 18,
19, 20. This it is, to take no warning, no Counsel, no Advice, but of a sort of
young, unexperienced, huffing, vapouring, sanguinary, blustering, bold daring
Coxcombs, and very ignorant; the poor foolish King found it so (to his cost)
good Man.

And what Mischiefs have come to the Church, to the Nations, to Christianity
and Christendom, by these rash sanguinary ways? (for every thing is most
certainly best preserved, by the same Means and Methods by which it was made;
nor was the Peace of Christianity, nor its Propagation, by Might, nor by Power,
but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts). The World shall have a large and
particular Account thereof, (if Mr. Hickeringill live) and can come at Pen,
Ink, and Paper; of which his Enemies (with all their Policies and Subtilties)
have not had power enough, as yet, to deprive him. --

But will, no doubt, drive on (in the same Road) Jehu-like -- stand and see --
what an old House some Men have a mind to bring over their own Heads -- let
them alone -- you cannot advise them more mischievously to themselves, than to
bid them follow their own Advice, and consult only with their own malice,
hatred, and revenge, cruelty and mischief -- Let them alone -- and give them
scope enough -- go on.

Mr. Hickeringill will also publicly make appear, (if God spare him Life,
Health, and Liberty) particularly and at large, how baneful it has been to the
Church, to make Churchmen and Spiritual Persons, vastly rich, and vastly
powerful in Temporals, (so incongruous and incompatible with the Apostles, the
Gospel, nay, Christ himself, whose Kingdom is not of this World) and who never
encouraged (as some do) but discouraged a worldly, proud, pragmatical Tribe,
overtopping Clergy and Lay, as much as their Cathedrals overtop our Houses:
Though they have endeavored to shut him out of the Pulpit a while, by the help
of an old Statute and a Jury, they have not power to shut the Doors of the
Press, (God be thanked). Luther and Calvin's Reformation of the Idolatries and
Superstitions of Rome, could never have spread (far and wide) if Printing had
not been invented: A few Manuscripts might have been handled about, to some few
particular Persons, and learned Men: But the Tyranny Prelatical, and
Oppressions of Rome, in England, Scotland, Ireland, France, Sweden, Germany,
Denmark, Holland, etc. could never (without a Miracle) have been defeated. But
by the Printing-Press, well employed, by able and Learned Pens, (not scurrilous
News-mongers).

The three aforesaid Crimes, are only personal and singular; but there are
other abominable Crimes, of which the rest are guilty; or, the most of them: Is
not this too Scandalum Magnatum? Of which many Instances may be given; some for
Example:

Namely, Their Connivance, confident and bold permission of all their
Underofficers in their Ecclesiastical Courts, (if not their encouragement,
assistance, and by their Power and Interest, a bold countenance) of the daily,
constant, public, and impudent Extortions and Oppressions of the King's
Subjects, against the Statutes of this Realm, (that limit the just Fees) in
Citations, Probate of Wills, Administrations, etc. nay, against their own
Canon Law, (Council. London. 3. Edw. 3. Anno Dom. 1328.) and against their own
Table of Fees: Wretched, universal, and abominable Impudence! no Name can be
bad enough for this wilful and daring Attempt, and Contempt: What? in God's
Name, are any Prelates greater than the Laws, or too big to be subject to the
King's Laws, or too great to be good? God forbid. No wonder the whole Tribe
unite their Power against the Man, who has courage to charge those things home
upon them, and whom they (therefore) hate, because he is, (and few Men more)
acquainted with their Mysteries of Iniquity, and knows how to charge them home:
No wonder therefore they so much dread him, and do so unite their
Common-Forces, and Joint-Interest, to ruin him, or Jayl him, and so tie up his
Hands, as well as stop his Mouth, by their Ecclesiastical-Canon-Shot, of
Suspensions, Silencings, Excommunications, Curses, and the like Spiritual
-Artillery; they act for Life, (as Men that are drawing on). The Silver-Smiths
cried out -- Great is Diana of the Ephesians: And yet to tell you true, this
chaste Diana, whose Image (as the Priests said) came down from Jupiter; and the
Fools and Bigots believed it, (Tooth and Nail); and the crafty Priests, and the
Shrine-makers, and Silver-Smiths, (false Loons!) they knew that their great
Wealth depended upon the belief on it: no wonder then that they cry, and whoop,
and hallow, (and the Fools and Bigots echoed to the cry which the Shrinemakers
made) -- Great is Diana of the Ephesians; and yet to tell you the Naked-Truth
on it, this chaste Diana was a Common-Huntress and Common-Strumpet and Baggage,
and as arrand a Whore as any in Rome.

Where is there a Clergyman, nowadays, that will say, as of old, Nolo
Episcopari -- I will not Bishop it, (if I might) or would gueld himself (as
some have done) to make themselves incapable of Lawn-sleeves?

No, rather run and ride, with Friends and Relations, Money and Flattery,
Cringing and Foppery, to this Miss, to that Miss, Money and Compliance against
their Consciences, by hook and by crook, have at it; though good Men find how
hard it is for a Rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, much more
difficult for a Rich Man to be a good Churchman.

For they that will be Rich, (1 Timothy 6. 9.) fall into Temptation, and a Snare,
and into many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown Men (yet they venture)
into Destruction and Perdition; For the love of Money is the Root of all Evil,
which while some coveted after, they have been seduced from the Faith, and
pierced themselves through with many sorrows.

20. Rich. 2. The Commons complain to the King, that the King kept so many
Bishops about him in his Court, etc. and advanced them and their Followers. (An
old complaint).

When the Devil tempted our Blessed Savior, showed him the Kingdoms of the
World, and the Glory of them; Mat. 4. 8, 9, 10. Then Jesus said unto him --
Avoid -- Satan.

But how many of our Apostolical Men, (that vaunt themselves Successors of the
Apostles) do say, (as the Apostles did, Acts 6. 2, 4.) It is not meet, that we
should leave the Word of God and serve Tables? But we will give our selves
continually to Prayer, and to the ministry of the Word.

Ay, Ay, that is a good Work, the best Work, and work enough, and the most
proper Work for Apostolical Men. We never read that any Apostle turned
Action-Driver, or Promoter, surrounded with the black Regiment of Aparitors,
Proctors, Hangmen, and Jaylors.

Again, what bold daring impudence is it for them to keep Courts, and not in
the Name and Style of the King, contrary to 2. Edw. 1. if it be in force?

A Statute thought so necessary for the Reformation, and so agreeable to the
King's Supremacy, in the wisdom of our Ancestors, that one would wonder any
good Subject should scruple at its observance, much less live in contempt of it.

It is a Statute lawfully made, and never repealed.

I know what Coke says of it, and wherefore he durst say no more, during the
Tyranny of the High Commission; which High Commission alone, kept off all
punishment from the Transgressors thereof: an extrajudicial Judgment was (once)
given against it.

But where is the Judge will declare against its force, and say in
Westminster Hall that it is repealed?

I grant, in Queen Mary's Reign, all the Statutes against the Pope's Supremacy
are repealed, and her Repeal, is repealed by Queen Elizabeth and King James.

But the Pope's Supremacy continues in France, and yet Process Ecclesiastical
might (if the French King pleased) run in his own Name, and yet the Pope and he
continue very good Friends, and the Pope's Supremacy continue: therefore the
repealing the Statutes made against the Pope's Supremacy, is no repeal of this
Statute; there goes more than general words to repeal a Law, and such a Law.

If this Statute be repealed, Why does not the Judges so declare it? If it be
in force, no Name is bad enough, nor any Punishment on this side Death, for the
wilful and stubborn Transgressors thereof: and it is my wonder, that no Men in
England will put it home, to have it argued, that it may not continue a Snare
to the King's Subjects; for if that Statute had not promised fair, and most
Learned Counselors at Law of the same Opinion, the Contest with Ecclesiastical
Courts had never been continued against them, for any thing, but only because
of their vile Extortions and Oppressions, in high contempt of the Law of God
and Man, braving his Majesty's Laws, his Statutes, their own Canon Laws, their
own Table of Fees, against Justice, Conscience, and Equity; What is Impudence
if this be not? The King may seize their Temporalities for Contempt -- no
wonder they frisk, being so netled; How they strive for Life?

And for the words in the last Count, more need not be said, than that it is
ridiculous to insist upon them; and therefore Sir Fran. Withins said, They
would take a Verdict only for the words in the first Count: For instead of
damnable Plot (meaning) the Popish Plot; their own little single Witness,
Harris, swore against them, namely, Horrid Plot against my Righteous Name and
Person: though that word Person was false too, for instead of Person, it was
Reputation, and so did all the Witnesses agree; never was such a Cause carried,
on the Testimony of so infamous a Man, a Man of so bad Memory, that could not
tell his Tale right twice together, nor twice the same way; and therefore
though he had not been proved infamous, (by that Noble Earl) yet he ought not
to have been believed, against the Testimony of so many substantial Witnesses
(that if they were not crazy) must needs have better Memories than he.

Lastly, He swore for himself, and in revenge, and to get the Defendant's
Benefice.

And yet the precious Jury would not only believe him against so many, but
would not only find the words, that are not actionable in themselves; as has
been proved at large, and beyond all contradiction.

For Men, thus to ruin a Man, and beggar him, to enrich a Rich Man that has
enough already, (one would think) or, at least, as much as he deserves, is so
like the Parable, in 2 Samuel 12. 1, 2, 3, 4. of the Ewe-Lamb, (the poor Man's
whole Substance lost at a clap) that the Jury may thank God that they escape
King David's Threat: For David's Anger, (Ver. 5.) was greatly kindled against
the Man; and he said to Nathan, As the Lord lives, the Man that has done this
thing shall surely die. And he shall restore the Lamb fourfold, (Mark that,
four times 2000 pounds; How much is that? 8000 l.) because he did this thing;
and because he had no pity.

To dishonor God, by a rash Oath, taking his Name in vain, is, but (by our
Law) twelve pence for the temporal Punishment.

And to defame a Prelat, (that in comparison of God is but Worms-meat) shall
the temporal Punishment be no less than Imprisonment, or 2000 l. in Money? Oh
monstrous! The Mercies of the Wicked are Cruelty.

But cruel Men should remember (in time they may have cause to remember) the
wretched End of Empson and Dudley, those grand Pick-pockets, that from the
Breach of old Statutes, and Penalties, did ruin Families.

Sir Richard Baker, p. 247. tells us, that their principal Working was upon
Penal Statutes, (to use his Words,) they considered not whether the Law was
obsolete, or in use; and had ever a Rabble of Promoters, (a brave Employ for a
Person of Honor) and leading Jurors, (mark that too) at their Command. They
lived, and they lived to be hanged for their Pains, after three long Years,
(for so long God suffered them to drink the Tears of Widows and Orphans,
namely, from Anno Dom. 1406, till 1409.) And the Promoters, (mark that too)
Canby, Page, Smith, Derby, Wight, Simson, and Stockton, ('it is fit their loathed
Names should be chronicled to all Posterity, and so shall others too that drive
the same Trade) condemned to the Pillory, and then to ride through the City
with Papers on their Heads, and their Faces toward the Horses-tails. All seven
died strangely in seven Days after, (in Newgate) for very shame.

There Is an End, a wretched End of a Pack of Wretches, packed Jurors, and
Promoters. The Righteous God will hear the Groans and Cries of the Widows and
Orphans, by unreasonable and wicked Men ruined and undone, and will pay off the
stony-hearted Caitiffs (that have lost all Bowels of Humanity and Compassion)
with a Vengeance.

That Atheists may know that there is a God that judges in the Earth, and pays
men in their own Coin. This Adonibezek (too late) acknowledged, when his Thumbs
and great Toes were cut off, (the very same Cruelty which he had inflicted upon
others.) And thus the Merciless, that (without remorse) delight in the Ruin of
a Man and his House, palliating Revenge with an Hypocritical Deodand, to ruin a
Man and his Heritage, when God has rewarded them in their own kind, each of
them over their own Ruins, shall say, with Adonibezek, Judge. 1. 7. As I have
done, so God has requited me.

For Truth has said it, They shall find Judgment without Mercy, who have
showed no Mercy.

Tho this must be said in the behalf of that Jury, (that tho it was reported in
London (before the Trial) what the Issue has proved, yet it is also said,) that
the Jury in so great a Fine, (as 2000 l.) intended nothing therein of Prejudice
to the Defendant, but to bring him to a Submission, in vindication of the
Bishop's Credit, which (how true it is is) Time will discover.

But in truth the Bishop's Reputation had been sufficiently and better
vindicated, if they had given credit to six substantial Witnesses, who
acquitted the Defendant, that the Words in the Declaration were not spoken as
they are laid, rather than to that little Body, who was proved upon Oath to be
so infamous a Person, by that Noble Earl; and by his own Vouchers proved to
have so little regard to his Duty, which he ows to God, to his own Soul, and to
his Parishioners, and to his Oath of Residence in his said Perpetual-Vicarage,
as to leave them utterly, and forsake them, taking another Cure and Flock, and
leaving his own to the Care of one that was lately a silly Log-river, and knows
not well how to discharge his own Cure, nor to read his Accidence. And all
this, when not only all the said Witnesses for the Defendant did swear
negatively, that they did not hear such Words, but positively swore that they
heard the whole Discourse, and writ down the Words immediately upon Harris his
false Recital of them, and his bringing them in Writing to the Witnesses for
them to subscribe, which with abhorrence and astonishment they refused, (the
Defendant being gone out of the Room before, and knowing nothing thereof, and
also gone out of Town) and the Witnesses of their own Accord writing down the
true Words, which they swore to, (and several more of the Company might have
been brought to testify the same); for tho there wanted no Endeavor by all
means (possible) to gain but one Witness to back Harris his Evidence, -- yet
found they none -- At last came one single false Witness, who will (as it is
said) be Indicted thereupon for Perjury for his Pains, and Witnesses,
substantial Witnesses to prove it upon him, let him claw it off as well as he
can, or his Friends to help him. No Man is too great for the Law; such Fellows
must be made Examples of, that swear thorow-stitch, and become false Witnesses,
to get Naboth's Vineyard from him; when it can be done no other way, must it be
done by a single Son of Belial? Naboth had yet the Honor to fall by two Sons
of Belial; Hard Case! Must the Defendant be ruined by one alone, and such an
one, and one so infamous? Nay, there was not only two against Naboth, but also
there was not six positive Witnesses for him, as there was for this Defendant,
to swear positively that they were in Company all the Time, and heard all the
Words, which were not so, but so, and so. And lastly, were this little-Blade of
Fortune rectus in Curia, nor had any Design upon the Defendant's Vineyard, and
never so honest, yet it is against positive Scripture, and God's holy Word, for
the Jury to bring in a Verdict (thereupon) against the Defendant, (as the
Defendant well told them) because against an Elder an Accusation ought not to
be received, but at the Mouth of two or three Witnesses: And neither
Common Law, Statute Law, Civil-Law, Canon Law, no, nor the Bishop (of Rome)
himself can give the Jury a Dispensation against God's holy Word; and that they
will find one Day for so wilful a Sin, and so fairly forewarned thereof by the
Defendant. -- God forgive them! It is ill for Men (that are but Worms-meat) to
sin wilfully, and in defiance of the Holy Will and Word of their Creator.

In the Interim, -- tho the Sabeans and Caldeans ruined Job, yet they were but
Instruments (the Defendant sees the Finger of God therein, and says with Job,)
The Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord.

The World shall find in this World God's righteous Justice, (that is my Faith)
and in this Case particularly, wherein God's Truth is concerned against the
Cruelties, Oppressions, and apparent, bold, and impudent Extortions, and
illegal Fees of the Ecclesiastical Fellows, so unanswerably revealed by the
Defendant, in relief of the Kings Subjects, who are in behalf of their Souls,
(plagued with their Anathema's and Excommunications) in behalf of their Bodies,
(hurried afterward to Jails) in behalf of their Purses, Liberties, and Estates,
so mangled by this Nest (at Doctors-Commons, and all the Kingdom over) by Birds
of the same Feather, that no wonder they flock together to ruin the Man that
will be the Ruin of their wicked Trade; and all the Powers on Earth will not
long uphold them, to live thus as they do, in public and daily defiance of the
King's Laws, in Oppressions, illegal Fees, and Extortions, in open contempt of
the many Statutes made against them, and now in force, if any be in force;
surely they are as much in force, as that of 2 Rich. 2. about Scandal. Magnat.
made when the Prelates (Popish Prelates) were rampant, alas! alas! too rampant;
both Laymen and Clergymen (little Clergymen) were more afraid of them than of
Serpents, Toads, Tigers, or Wolves; and well they might, for those venomous
Creatures, and ravenous Brutes, were less dangerous, less mischievous, and less
fierce and cruel, than those Prelates, when they got a Man at advantage.

Do you mark me? I say, those Prelates, -- do not catch, mind the Colloquium
(before-going) of Popish Prelates, (we are speaking of) Popish Prelates, that
were more mischievous, more inexorable, and hard-hearted, than Snakes, Tigers,
Bears, Dogs, or Wolves, or any other persecuting Worry-Sheep, or cruel
Bloodhounds.

And yet those (mind what I say) Popish Prelates, with all their Suspensions,
Curses, Anathema's, and Excommunications, and such kind of Thunder, were
esteemed by wise Men, even in these Days (saving your Presence, --
Sirreverence) a mere Crack-fart. Pope Paul the Third excommunicated our King
Henry the Eighth, with such a Pope's Bull, that (the Historian says) the like
was never known before nor since. No wonder he bellowed and roared so, (for
take a greedy Ecclesiastic by the Pocket, and hinder his Cheat and Extortions,
(as Hen. 8. did) and you make him roar and bellow like mad, as if you had got
his Hearts-Blood, and all the Joy and Heaven some seem to aim at if we may judge
the Trees by their Fruit) no wonder they drew their spiritual Weapons, and
fling about Curses, Anathema's, Silencings, Suspensions, and grow blacker with
haunting so many Jaylors, Jayles, Bum's, Promoters, Hang-men, as did Pope Paul
the Third.

And notwithstanding all this thundering Ecclesiastical Blast, and foisty
Grepitus, the Emperor Charles the 5th, and Francis the First, the French King,
(two of the greatest Christian Princes then in the World, or that ever were in
the World,) and many more Popish (nay, Italian) Princes and Republics (whilst
Hen. 8. stood excommunicated by the Pope) did confirm their Leagues, and entered
upon new Treaties and Confederations with him.

But I hear that somebody (I Will name nobody) is mightily concerned, saying,
that the Defendant's own Witnesses proved the greatest Scandalum Magnatum
against him, in Words that all of them unanimously swore, namely, -- That the
Defendant said at the same Parish-Meeting, (only they are not, nor could not
well be laid in the Declaration) namely, -- That the Bishop of London is not
infallible, and the Pope is not infallible. But for that, or any thing else
sworn by the Defendant's Witnesses concerning any such scandalous Words, the
Defendant told the Plantiff's Counsel, that if they were aggrieved, they had
their liberty to bring another Action of Scandalum Magnatum, if they had not
enough of this: And perhaps they will think they have enough of such Promotions
in time, when they have leisure (without being drunk with Passion, and a little
over-seen in Malice, and will take time) to cast up their Accounts; and when
they examine what they are out of Purse, and what they have lost in the Opinion
of the World, and are come to themselves, will repent, -- too late repent --

And if they had repented of their Extortions, Pride, Avarice, and Oppressions,
all Men know that it had been better for them; but now the more they stir, the
more they stink.

And if any should be angry at these Words, the Bishop of London is not
infallible, and the Pope is not infallible, and bring a new Action of Scandalum
Magnatum, or Scandal against Prelates, let them know,

The Defendant will not plead (as now) Non-cul -- but justify it by infallible
Instances.

To omit many on this side the Water, and all the great Abominations of Rome,
I Will instance in one Particular, wherein all the Papists shall take my part
(here is a Wonder and a Miracle! a true one) against the Pope himself, namely,
Pope Innocentius, (in his Epistles) asserting (as also did St. Austin) that the
Lord's Supper was equally necessary for Children's Salvation, and to be
received as much and as necessarily as Baptism it self.

Therefore Popes have erred, (in the opinion of the Pope and the Papists at
this day) and St. Austin has erred herein; or else the Papists and Church of
England err in holding the contrary, jointly against St. Austin in the Point.

And if it were not that this Trial gives me occasion to observe to the Reader
these useful Hints, and lucky Hits, I should (as the Reader well may) be by
this time quite weary of it: And also it is resolved they shall have their
Belly-full of Mr. Hickeringill, till they be glutted, and confess, for all
their gaping so greedily with open Mouth, and Teeth, and Fangs, to devour him,
and swallow him up quick, in time they will shut their Mouth, and acknowledge,
that they have enough of him in all Conscience.

Nor will he leave them, nor go (as he hears they design) beyond Sea, a little
Governor in Carolina, etc. No, he has more Work first to do in his Native Soil;
they shall not be so rid of him, nor yet get one Farthing of the 2000 l, except
they can catch it, and they must be very cunning if they can; perhaps they may
(as they have hitherto) throw a great deal of Gare and Pains, Trouble and
Vexation, and good Money after bad.

Malice is like its Father, namely, Tho it go up and down, seeking whom it may
devour, yet (like the Devil also) it is never weary of Mischief, as long as
there is any Glimpse of Hopes to compass it, and accomplish it: though a worse
Hell upon Earth, nor greater Torment can befall them, than to go on, (as they
are willing and eager enough without bidding, and to) proceed -- Halloo!

Thus have I done at present with this mighty Scandalum Magnatum, and the
Defendant's Adversaries have done too, and gone as far as they can; that is, to
make him retire, and give him leisure to observe their Motions, and descant
upon them; that is the worst, and they have done their worst. But out of the
Eater shall come forth Meat, and out of the Strong, sweetness.

And really I do not think that Mr. Hickeringill has so much as a displeasing
Thought, or rising of Heart, against this Providence of God: for it is God's
doings, in the secret methods of his Divine Wisdom; and he best knows, by the
seeming-cross-motions, (as in the Wheels of a Watch or Clock) how to carry on
the Maker's Design, which puzzles none but the ignorant and shortsighted. David
-- speaks experimentally; I have been young, and now am old, yet have I not
seen the Righteous forsaken, nor his Seed begging Bread.

Who would have thought that Joseph's Imprisonment should be the shortest and
nearest way to advance himself, and preserve the Life of the People of God?

Who would have thought, when Job was on the Dunghill, that his latter End
should doubly transcend his Beginning? therefore let us say and pray -- Thy
Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. Naked came I out of my Mothers Job 1.
21, 22.
Womb, and naked shall I return thither: The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken
away, (and yet the cruel Sabaeans, and the ravenous Chaldeans, were the Tools
and Instruments of the Rapine) blessed be the Name of the Lord. In all this Job
sinned not, nor charged God foolishly. Job 1. 21, 22.

Nay, in a greater Trial of his patience than this, (namely, the upbraiding and
Curtain Lecture of his Scolding and discontented Wife) he kept his Ground, Job
2. 9, 10.
and retained his Integrity, and the resignation of his own Will, to the Will
of his Creator; for in all this did not Job sin with his Lips. Job 2. 9, 10.

No Man can blame the Defendant (notwithstanding) that he did so lustily and
copiously defend himself, in showing, to the utmost, the vanity of that futile
Contrivance against him, from such slender words, and so slenderly, all
grounded upon an old Statute made upon Popish Prelacy, were rampant, and were
willing to shelter themselves by force of Statute Law, (which they could and
did make, when and as they list) to fence against the just reproof of all good
Men, ready to open at them, if their Mouths had not thus been stopped; yet the
House of Commons (notwithstanding) were not afraid afterward, 20. R. 2. to
complain against them, in the Name of the Commons of England, and to persuade
the King not to disoblige his People, for the sake of a few Court-Prelats. But
do you think that that unthinking King would hear them? And did not he lose
their Hearts thereby? And did they not all join with an Usurper against him,
that had no Title to the Crown, nor a thousand Men (at Psalm. 33. 16.
first) when he landed.

One says well, Lege Historiam, ne sias Historia: Let us observe the History of
Times past, lest our inconsiderate Actions fill the Chronicles of Times to
come. Let us remember Rehoboam, and Richard -- 2d.

I dare say, the Defendant does not so much as in a wish regret what is past,
for all things shall work together for good, etc. It Is only short-sightedness,
and want of Faith in God, that makes Men stag and despond: Nay, no good thing
will he withold from them that (desire to) walk uprightly.

And what unrighteousness has the malice of the Adversary been able to prove
against Mr. Hickeringill; and yet there are Man-catchers enough that have
perverted his words, which were but due and just Reproofs against a wicked,
foolish, and perverse Generation.

The Defendant has cause (if any other have more cause) to say, with Holy
David, Psalm. 37. 4, 6. My Soul is among Lions; and I lie even among them Psalm.
37. 4, 6.
that are set on fire; and the Sons of Men that are set on fire, whose Teeth
are Spears and Arrows, and their Tongue a sharp Sword: They have prepared a Net
for my steps, my Soul is bowed down: They have dug a Pit before me, in the
midst whereof they are fallen themselves. God shall send Psalm. 37. 3.
from Heaven, and save me from the reproach of him that would swallow me up. He
travaileth with Iniquity, and has conceived Mischief, and brought falsehood.
Hide me secretly, in thy Pavilion, from the strife of Tongues, until this
Tyranny be overpast.

My Enemies (in the Hebrew Man-catchers) would daily swallow me up, Ps. 36. 2,
5.
for they be many that fight against me, oh! thou most High. Every day they
wrest my words, all their thoughts are against me for evil, yet have I not
refrained to declare thy Truth to the great Congregation: and therefore they
gather themselves together, they hide themselves; they mark my steps, when
Psalm. 56. 5, 6.
they wait for my Soul. Psalm. 22. 12, 13, 16, 19, 20, 21, 22. Many Bulls have
Psalm. 22. 12, 13, 16, 19, 20, 21, 22.
compassed me; strong Bulls of Bashan have beset me round. They gaped upon me
with their Mouths; yea, the very abjects gathered themselves against me, making
mouths at me, and ceased not. For Dogs have compassed me; the Assembly of the
Wicked have enclosed me. Deliver my Soul from the Sword; my Darling from the
power of the Dog. Save me from the Lion's Mouth; And then, I will declare thy
Name unto my Brethren: In the midst of the Congregation I will praise thee.

Psalm. 56. 7, 8, 9, 3, 10, 11. Shall they escape by Iniquity? In thine Anger
Psalm. 56. 7, 8, 9, 3, 10, 11.
cast down the People, oh God. Thou tellest my wanderings, put thou my Tears
into thy Bottle: Are they not in thy Book? When I cry unto thee, then shall
mine Enemies turn back: This I know, for God is for me. What time I am afraid,
I will trust in thee. In God will I praise his Word; in the Lord will I praise
his Word. In God have I put my trust, I will not fear what Man can do unto me.
Psalm. 57. 1. In the shadow of thy Wings will I Psalm. 57. 1.
make my Refuge, until these Calamities be overpast.

Psalm. 58. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Break their Teeth, O God, in their Mouths, etc.
Psalm. 58. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
The Righteous shall rejoice when he sees the Vengeance; He shall wash his
Feet in the Blood of the Wicked; so that a Man shall say, verily there is a
Reward for the Righteous; verily there is a God that judges in the Earth.

But of all the whole Book of Psalms, there is not one Psalm better suits his
Condition, or administers more Comfort, than every Verse of Psalm. 94. It was
Psalm. 94.
when David hid himself, and played Bo-peep, 1 Samuel 23. 14, 15. in the
Wilderness of Ziph, in a Wood. He fled not from Goliath, when hand to hand, but
he would not contend with the Power of the King; and yet he did study
Self-preservation (Who can blame him?) against combined malice.

And wherefore were David's Enemies so malicious? not for any fault of mine,
(he says, Psalm. 59. 2, 3.) for, lo, they lie in wait for my Soul, the Mighty
are gathered together against me, not for my Transgression, nor for my Sin, O
Lord! for they compassed him about with words of Hatred, and fought against
him, Psalm. 109. 3. without a cause.

Yet, though they compassed him about, yea, they compassed him about, (yet, he
had Faith to say, Psalm. 118. 11, 12. that though they compassed him about like
Bees, (stinging, stingy, and in Swarms) yet (in Faith) he said, in the Name of
the Lord I will destroy them.

Ay, but when? might some say to David -- When? can you tell us that? for to a
carnal Eye there was little probability of it.

Nay, in the very next Onset, Psalm. 118. 13. Thou have (says he) thrust sore
at me that I might fall, but the Lord helped me.

That whole 118 Psalm, is spoken of Christ and his Kingdom, under the Type of
David, and his Sufferings -- typified, and his Resurrection and Ascension, by
David's Victory at length; then God had delivered him from the hands of all his
Enemies, (it was long first) (he was glad to fly for it first) and from the
Hand of Saul.

But at length, Verse. 22. of that 118 Psalm, the Stone which the Builders
refused, (typified of Christ, and verified also in David) the same is become
the Head of the Corner: This is the Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our
Eyes.

In Mr. Hickeringill's Retirement, his Muse (the Heavenly and only Companion of
his Solitude) composed this Psalm (an Infallible Antidote (if sanctified)
against all Discontent, (the common Plague of Mankind) Sorrows, and Fears; And
which for that purpose he sent (since his Fiery-Tryal) to his most dearly
beloved Wife, to Confirm her, (not to Bishop her) but to strengthen her against
the Bishop's Promotions and Suits; which for the Publick-Good, or Commonweal,
I here publish, viz. THat which disquiets most Poor Mortals here,
Is not the Pains they feel, but what they fear:
And what we fear; Either -- it will not come;
Or else -- sooner may come our fatal Doom,
And free us, lodging us in our Long-Home,
Where neither Bishops nor his Clerks will come
To wrack us any more. Then do not whine,
The present Good or Ill (alone) is thine;
But -- what is in the depth of future Times -- can tell?
Thou Fool! for thou the Morrow know not well;
Nor where thou shal't to morrow be; nor tell
Whether on Earth, (thou wilt be) in Heaven, or Hell.
Let Fools and Knaves then for the Morrow pine,
And fear they know not what, nor can divine:
And let the morrow for its self take care:
Sufficient for the day its Evils are.


But enough of this, (at present, at least) let us in the next place consider
the Doughty Articles, (sworn by six Doctor's-Commons Reverend Fellows, called
Proctors; on which was bottomed, and founded, a Supplicavit) namely;

ARTICLES OF THE Good Behavior, Exhibited in the Court of our Lord the King,
before the King, at Westminster, against Edmond Hickeringill, Rector of
All Saints in Colchester in the County of Essex, Clerk, for several
Misdemeanors by him committed.
Imprimis. THat in Trinity Term last, Articles were Exhibited against the said
Edmund Hickeringill, in the Arches Court of Canterbury, for Clandestine
Marriages at the promotion of Henry Lord Bishop of London, of which high Crimes
he still (...) and he said Edmund Hickeringill, did several Court days make his
(...) said Court, and behaved himself irreverently, and did affront (...) said
Court, and more particularly 20th of Jan. Anno vicessimo tertio of (...) King,
did again make his Appearance in the said Court then held in the common ^^ all
of Doctors-Commons London, by Sir Richard Lloyd Knight, Doctor of Laws, then
sitting judicially in the said Court, with many persons along with him, or
following him to the number of thirty, or twenty Persons as they do verily
believe. Tho. Tillot, Tho Smith, Jur. ad predict primum Articulum Tho. Tyllet.
and Tho. Smith in cur. die predict. Hillar. Anno xxxiiio coram codem Rege.

2. Item. That the said Edmund Hickeringill did on the said twentieth of
January, then and there behave himself in the Court of Arches then sitting, as
aforesaid, very indecently and insolently to the Court, keeping his Hat on, tho
by the Judge of the same Court several times monished to the contrary; and then
the Officer of the said Court by the Judge his Command taking off his Hat, he
put it on again in a contemptuous manner. Tho. Tyllot. Tho. Smith, Cha. Tuckyr,
Jur. ad predict. secundum Articulum Tho. Tyllet, Tho. Smith and Carolus Tuckyr,
in cur. die and Anno supradict.

3. Item, The said Edmund Hickeringill, then very sawcily and impudently
declaring to the Judge of the said Court of Arches, That if the Archbishop
himself was there he would not stand uncovered: Jo. Miller, Tho. Stoker, Char.
Turkry, Jur. id predict. tertium Articulum Johannes Miller, Tho. Stokes and
Carolus Tucker in cur. die and Anno supradict.

4. Item, That the said Edmund Hickeringill in the open Court there, among
other opprobious and abusive Language then used by him to the Court, said it
was no Court by Law, and that they had no power to call him before them; and
that perhaps the Court of Arches might do him a Mischief, but that they never
had done any good, or he used words to that Effect: Tho. Stoker, John Coker,
Jurad predict. quartum Articulum, Tho. Stokes and Johannes Coker, in cur. die
and Anno supradict.

5. Item, That the said Edmund Hickeringill did then in a moct opprobrious
manner, tell the Judge of the said Court, that Toads had Poison in them, but had
an Antidote also; that Vipers had Poison in them, but their Flesh was an
extraordinary Medicine, or to that effect; and that every the vilest or worst
of God's Creatures had something of good in it, saving, that Court, which he
then said never did any good, nor ever would, or to that effect, and that the
Persons, or many of them that came into the said Court of Arches with the said
Edmund Hickeringill, laughed aloud at what the said Hickeringill said, and
followed him out of the said Court with great Noise, and laughed to the great
Disturbance of the said Court: Tho. Smith, John Coker, Jur. ad predict, quintum
Articulum, Tho. Smith, and Johannes Coker, in cur. die and Anno supradict.

In Banco Regis Westminster, Dominus Rex versus Edmund Hickeringill Clericum.
JEremy Ives Cheesmonger and Citizen of London, Joseph Ashhurst Draper and
Citizen of London, and Samuel Wells Mercer and Citizen of London, do depose as
follows, viz. That on the twentieth day of January, in the three and
thirtieth Year of this King, these Deponents were personally present in the
Court (commonly) called the Arches, held in Doctors-Commons London, when Mr.
Edmund Hickeringill, Rector of the Rectory of All Saints in Colchester, made
his Appearance there; and heard the whole Discourse, and saw the Actions and
Demeanours that passed betwixt Sir Richard Lloyd Official there, and the said
Mr. Hickeringill during his stay there; and that the said Sir Richard commanded
the said Mr. Hickeringill to put off his Hat, which he refused to do; whereupon
the said Sir Richard commanded an Officer to take off Mr. Hickeringill's Hat;
which he delayed to do, saying he was afraid that Mr. Hickeringill would have
an Action against him for so doing; but the said Sir Richard again and again
encouraging him, at length he pulled off Mr. Hickeringill's Hat two or three
times, the said Mr. Hickeringill putting it on so often as his Hat was returned
to him, mildly telling the said Sir Richard at the same time, that it was not
Pride, Insolence, nor any design to affront them, that made him then to be
covered, but a sense of his Duty, except they would own their Court to be the
King's Court, and that they sat there by the King's Authority and Commission,
and consequently would make out their Citations, Acts, and Processes in the
Name and Style of the King according to the Statute; and that then (but not
till then) no Man should pay them more Reverence and Respect than He: but the
said Official not asserting their Court to be the King's Court, and as
aforesaid to be kept in the King's Name and Style; and by his Authority, Mr.
Hickeringill would not be uncovered, saying, That it was against the Oath of
Canonical Obedience, against the Oath of Supremacy, against the Canons and the
Statutes, to own any Court Ecclesiastical, but what sat by the King's
Authority and Commission, and acted in the Name and Style of the King: And if
that Court of Arches was only the Archbishop's Court, He the said Mr.
Hickeringill durst not, nor would he be uncovered before the Archbishop
himself if he were present; because it is contrary to their own Canon Law and
the Oath of Canonical Obedience, for a Presbyter to stand bare-headed in
presence of any Bishop: or, he used words to the like effect; Saying, that if
they could argue his Hat off his Head by Statute Law, Canon Law, Civil-Law, or
Common Law, it should be at their Service, and he would stand bare-headed
before them; or, he used words to the like effect. And the said Mr.
Hickeringill during his whole stay there, used no other Actions, nor Speeches
that might give just Offense; unless the said Sir Richard took Offense, when he
at the same time said, That every Creature that God made was good, and had some
good in it; that a Pearl was sometimes found in the Head of a Toad, and the
Toads Flesh is an Antidote against its own Venom; And the best Cordial and
Venice-Treacle is made of the Flesh of the most poysonful, and Italian Vipers.
But (said Mr. Hickeringill) the Mischiefs, Extortions, and Oppressions of the
King's Subjects are apparent and many, and great, and daily committed by you in
defiance of the Statutes: But show but one Good you do, or have done in the
memory of Man, or that any Chronicle, or History mentions to be done by any
Ecclesiastical Court, and then I may acknowledge your Ecclesiastical Fabric to
be of God's making; or he used words to the like effect.

Jur' octav. die Febr. Anno R. R. Caroli secundi, etc. tricessimo quarto coram.
W. DOLBEN. Jer. Ives. Jos. Ashhurst. Samuel Wells.


LET all unbiased men, and honest Citizens (who know these Gentlemen, know
their Quality, their good Reputation) whether it be more probable that they,
who have no livelihood at stake, (by such Affidavits to win, or lose, or wreck
their malice and spleen) men of Conscience and Honor should attest the Truth,
of matter of Fact, the truth whereof above Twenty more substantial Citizens can
(and are ready) if needful to attest: Or, Six Proctors of Doctors Commons,
whose constant use, or rather, abuse, is to cheat and oppress, by injuries and
Extortions in illegal Fees, and contrary to Law.

And whether they are not likely to have impudence enough to wrest a man's words
to a contrary sense, and the worst sense, when they have Impudence enough to
commit daily such said Extortions and Oppressions in illegal Feein defiance of
the Statutes of this Realm.

Nay, how little they regard the Statute of 5 and 6 Edward the 6. and 16th.
made against buying of Places and Offices, shall in good time be made more
apparent.

Yet, nothing would serve Sir Francis Pemberton Chief Justice, and Mr. Justice
Jones, etc. But Mr. Hickeringhil must find Bayl, or go to Jayl; nor would they
suffer any Affidavit to be read in Mr. Hickeringhill's Behalf, the Chief
Justice absolutely refusing it, and saying, I will hear nothing in your
defense, but -- find Bayl or I Will commit you; or words spoke to the like effect.

Sir Francis Pemberton had never bin the Successor of Scroggs, if he had not
given good testimony and assurance that he is a Wise Man, and one that knows
his cue: But as wise as he is, it would have been no blemish to his great
Wisdom to have heard Affidavits and Pleas in Mr. Hickeringhil's Defense,
especially, nothing being attested against him of such pernicious consequence,
and that by Proctors too, whose malice to the Defendant, and inveteracy was so
notorious to every man; it might at least create a Jealousy that the Articles
on which the Supplicavit was founded, might possibly be sworn unto out of heat,
malice, hatred, rage or revenge; nay, most notoriously probably it might be so,
That it is a wonder the Judges (to whom God has given two Ears, and who are
sworn (in the Oath of a Judge) to have no respect of persons in Judgment, (Oh
dreadful Oath! and that which made Judge Hales tremble when he thought thereof,
though he had less cause than others, so to be afraid, for he made Conscience
of his Oath, and neither the whispers of Courtiers nor the Kings private
Letters would he regard in a Cause of Justice) it is a wonder, I say, that since
one single word (added or left out) might alter the sense and meaning of Men's
words, they would suffer no testimony to be heard in behalf of the Defendant.
But against him as many as you please.

And it is the harder measure, because it is usual to delay the sending out the
Writ of Supplicavit (so seldom granted at all) against any man, especially a
Man of Estate; till first he be summoned to show cause (if he can) why
such a Writ should not be granted, and most especially not accustomed to be so
hastily granted against a Divine, and also a man of known and visible
Estate, from which there was no fear he should fly for the penalty of 100
Pound, and all for words too that are not worth a Louse, if they had been
spoken as the Proctors swore them.

But, if they were spoken to the same effect, that the other Gentlemen and
Citizens have attested upon Oath, and the same that several Citizens and
Gentlemen (then and there present) can also attest, then the words are not so
much as saucy, but may safely be spoken in (and to) any lawful Court in
Westminster Hall, upon occasion. Much more, in and to a Court, which, whether
it be a lawful Court is out of Question, if the Statute 2. Edward 6. be in
force, (which no Judge yet ever did take upon him in Westminster Hall to
declare to be Repealed, for Judges are but to declare the Law, not, to make
Laws, nor repeal them, that is the work of a Higher Power.) And if that Statute
be Repealed, it is strange, that Sir Francis Pemberton should so urge that
Statute (as aforesaid) to Sir William Scroggs, so lately upon the Bench, and he
then at the Bar, during the Sessions of the last Parliament at Westminster, Sir
Francis saying, -- That he fore bore to urge it warmly, because he supposed
that his Lordship was not prepared at that time to give that Statute an answer:
or words to the like effect.

Which if he did say, openly at the King's Bench Bar, or words to the like
effect, then it is beyond all Contradiction, that Sir Francis Pemberton (whilst
at the Bar) did question the legality of their Courts Ecclesiastical as now
managed as well, as much, nay more, and more dangerously to them then Mr.
Hickeringill did.

And if it be questioned, whether he did urge the said Statute, 2 Edw. 6. 1.
(as aforesaid) for his Client Mr. Weild of Much-Waltham, the said Mr. Weild,
and also diverse others are ready to attest the Truth thereof; if any body dare
deny so public a Truth.

And let any indifferent, impartial. and unbiast men judge, whether it be not
hard measure to be sent to Jayl (or which is as bad, find Bail) and all about
the decision of a point of Law, so disputable and questionable, that Lawyers of
known and great worth and Learning (without exception) as any other, has urged
that Statute so lately in Westminster Hall, and confessed, that he thought the
Chief Justice was not then prepared to give it an Answer; I wonder what Answer
Sir Francis Pemberton will give it now He is Chief Justice; it may very
probably, nay ought before him to come in question, when so many of the Kings
Subjects are excommunicated in those Ecclesiastical Courts, and Forty Days
after its publication, sent to Jayle,

For if that Statute be in force, the Ecclesiastical Fellows are guilty of a
Praemunire, nay worse, nor can scarcely any name or punishment be great enough
for them; or bad enough.

But, since the said Chief Justice said he would hear no Plea's in the
Defendants Defense, nor suffer any Affidavits to be read or heard in his
Defense -- God Help

To Divert the Reader, I Will here make bold with a Friend; and reprint the last
Verses of the late New Satyr (called the Mushroom) in the Postscript thereof,
namely -- To serve a turn (of State) a Renegade,
(That has his Conscience, God and King betrayed)
Sometimes a base Interpreter is made,
Though he an Atheist be in Masquerade;
And in rich robes (through villainy) arrayed:
Yet, this Apostasy who dare upbraid?
The Villian struts it, and seems not afraid:
Suborners though are shown in Cavilcade;
To publick-wrath may liable be made:
Oh! then the Villain will for all be paid;
Then where is your gay-Apostate Renegade.


I have heard of a certain Prince (not in Utopia, but in Europe) that said, So
long as I can make Bishops and Judges, whom I list, I Will have what Religion and
what Law, I list.

If, He had also said, and what Juries, I list, nay, Essex-Juries, if I list,
He had nickt the business; and instead of saying our Goods, our Estates, our
Lives, our Wives, our Children, our Lands and Liberties are our own, it would
be questionable, whether we might say, our Souls are our own; but (worse than
the Tantivee-Preacher, For He only said) Caesar shall have your Goods, your
Bodies, your Lands, your Children and your Wives, etc. Caesar shall have all,
All is Caesar's, on the outside of your Souls, -- But they belong to God, God
shall have your Souls -- And if he would make his word good, we would clap up
the bargain, immediately, and upon that Condition, that He will make it good,
That God shall have our Souls, -- Let Caesar take our Wives, our Lands, our
Children, our Bodies, nay, our Lives; (and the sooner the better) we shall not
grutch the Exchange.

But Hard, very Hard is Mr. Hickeringill's Case, with these Ecclesiastical
Fellows, who are either very ignorant, or very impudent thus boldly and
daringly to confront the Kings Laws, and shall fare better in Westminster Hall,
then the man that reproves them, yet how industriously has our wise Ancestors
fenc't against these Plagues (of Mankind) Promoters? Turbidum hominum Genus, as
Coke calls them, Instit. l. cap. 88.

18. Eliz. 5. -- 28. Eliz. 5. Jac. 14. In which last about 30 old obsolete
Statutes (Snares with which Promoters caught men) were at once repealed; and
yet says Coke, notwithstanding all these Statutes against Promoters -- Four
mischiefs still remained, I could have told him one more -- that makes Five
mischiefs: but 21. Jac. 28. did some good against this sort of Cattle, who
under the reverend Mantle of Law and Justice instituted for protection of the
Innocent, and the good of the Commonwealth (it is Cokes own words, Inst. l. 3. c.
88.) did vex and depauperize the Subject (will men never take warning?) and
commonly the poorer sort, for malice (mark that) or private ends, and never for
love of Justice.

Shall Honesty and Ingenuity always be out of fashion, and under the Hatches,
and vile tims-serving Slaves (against their own Consciences Slaves) always keep
above Deck?

Where do we live? that pimping, bawdy, scurrilous Poetasters shall impune
Libel the Honorable Peers and Patriots of the Kingdom, and the most glorious
City in the Universe? And as that bold, daring and impudent Hackney-Muse (in
his late Satyr) like a Judge arraigns, cundemns and deprives them of their
Privileges and Immunities (to his utmost) granted and confirmed by so many
Kings and Parliaments, through feigned suggestions of his own -- For thus he
Rhymes -- Customs to steal is such a trivial thing,
That it is their Charter to defraud their King:
All hands unite of every Jarving Sect,
They cheat the Country first, and then infect.
They for Gods cause, their Monarchs dare dethrone.
Our Sacriligious Sects their Guides outgo,
And Kings and Kingly Power would overthrow.


What Is this but to be a Makebate? what is this but to hang men up in effigy,
for fancies of his own making?

What? must we still down of our knees and beg Pardon, and another Act of
Indemnity from every Rascally Pamphleteer, and beggarly Hirelings, that would
fain make our wounds bleed afresh, would gladly trouble the waters that are
quiet, in hopes of good fishing, to make up their Hungry mouths, and greedy
mawes?

Any thing, any method to make the World believe that the Citys Charter is
already forfeited, or, deserves so to be: And then -- money -- more Money --
and put it where? in a Bottomless Bagg that will hold none; you may as well
fill a Sive with water -- as make debaucht Torys rich, whose lusts would
beggar, exhaust and consume the Indies.

Is Libels the way then? nay, to Libel the most Loyal, best disciplined, best
governed, best built, most glorious, most sober, most potent, most rich, and
most populous City of the World?

And this -- by every Sneaking, Rascally, dull, and Insipid Rhithmer and
Pamphleteer; the World is at a fine-pass, when instead of bringing Buckets to
allay, and quence every vile Incendiary, throws weekly sire-balls to kindle (if
possible) our heats into a flame? And instead of curing our distempers and
wounds, or of endeavors to heal our breaches, must men be countenanced to make
them rancor more? Is that the way?

As if they studied (like some Arithmaticians) by the Rule of false Positions,
to gain a conclusion they most wish for, and most especially aim at; namely,
Substraction and Division; But, he that sits in the Heavens has hitherto laughed
them to scorn, and has discovered their sham's, and has had their fallcies in
derision.

The Hire of these Pampleteers may prove (one day) to be (as Tory Hilanders
call their Booty) Black-meal (mock not) when the Mosse-trooping trade breaks
them or their necks.

Search Histories, consult the Past-times, and then tell me, if there can be
worse fools in Nature then some that call themselves Politicians?

How have they been bassled, disappointed and beloved with their own Politic,
Wyles, Shams, and Gimcracks? or could have devised a shorter cut, or a nearer
way to stop their own Wind-pipes, and ruin themselve, and their posteries?
Except they should have made a noose of their own Bedcords; and yet (like
Rogues that are branded) might safely swear that they had got the Law in their
own hands: (more shame for the branded Rogues, to Glory in that that is their
shame, as well as Bane.

But, these are sad and melancholy Contemplations, and therefore to recreate
the Reader, I Will relate a foolish story, or a slory of a fool a Country
-Bumpkin, who having been at London, at his return home his Inquisitive
neighbors ask't him what news at London?

News? (Quoth Hob) I know none but that they say Sir Francis Pemberton is made
Lord chief Justice Scroggs:

Scroggs? with a murrain, cries the neighbors, thou talks like a fool: (or
whether he was Party per pale, as much Knave as Fool, some questioned)

If he had said -- Sir Francis Pemberton had been made Lord Chief Justice Hales
-- the wonder had been the greater; and the nonsense not more unwelcome;
Scroggs? (quoth a) a likely business; Scroggs? and be naught (to him) This it is
to want good breeding: Scroggs and be hanged (to him) for a silly villian?
Scroggs (quoth a) that was discarded or discharged honorably: Scroggs that was
questioned for as much as his life was worth in Parliament? Scroggs? (quoth a)
a Rascally knave or fool (i will warrant him) to talk such nonsense; does not
the fool deserve to have a writ of Supplicavit sent after him to bind him to
the good behavior?

But I know not how to finish these observations, till I have cast away one
look more upon another -- never be good -- Heraclitus, who says this week,
Numb. 59. March. 15. 81. where speaking of Hick -- (as in good manners the
blade is pleased (in familiar-wise) to style the Gentleman he never saw; at
least, never begged his leave (thus) to clip or new coin his name,) in these
words -- Ay cry they, this is brave, that a man must pay but a shilling that
takes the Lords name in vain, but if he do but abuse a Bishop a little, he
shall pay 2000l. And yet it is said Hick -- (again) himself so pleaded his own
cause, but I doubt he finds a great deal of truth in that foreign Proverb --
The Ass -- (it is well it is no worse) that supposes himself a Stag (taking his
ears (I suppose) for Horns) does find, that he is deceived when he is to leap
over a Ditch.

Formerly, they gave him hard-names, such as Knave, Rascal, convicted of
Perjury, The Great Soribler of the Nation (mock not) And now in all have They
make an Ass of him; this is Language most suitable to such Men's Genius and way
of Writings, (which slanders in time they may repent;) But as for his being an
Ass, Is it not too true?

For who but an Ass would write or speak so much plain and naked truth in a
dissembling, Hypocritical and lying Age?

Who but an Ass would discover the extortions and oppresitions wherewith the
Ecclesiastical Fellows load the Kings Subjects, and in hope to ease their
shoulders, be burdened 'till his back crack with actions upon actions,
Promotions, Informations, Supplicavit's, Declarations, Articles, Verdicts,
Libels, Suspensions, Excommunications, Power and Interest?

Nor would the late Essex-Jury have so unmercifully heaped such a heavy load
upon him, but they took him for an Ass; 2000 l. why, if a Minister live the
days of Methusalem it is not to be Collected in Easter-Offerings. 1000 l. is a
Horse-Load they say; if so, then 2000 l. is too much in all conscience to put
upon an Asses back.

Oh! But it is charitably designd for the building of Paul's: if it be; yet the
work of building Cathedrals of Stone upon the ruins of Temples of Bone, or
living-Temples, or (as was said before) to rob Peter to pay Paul; can never be
pleasing to Almighty God.

And thus the Hypocritical Pharisees, for fear their hard hearted ness should
be condemned by all, for suffering their Parents to starve, They made an
Anathema of the Goods they should have had for such Relief, calling it Corban,
Dedicating it to the Church, and the pious Deodand devouerd their charity.

Thus making Charity (without which all Religien is a Cheat and a Bawble) to
give place to a foolish and Hypocritical, as well as impious Devotion.

For my part I wish Mr. Hickeringil was not so overburthen'd, and made an Ass
of; because of such back-burthens of afflictions the Apostle Paul confesses --
We are Fools for Christ's sake, and Truth's sake.

And then however, since Stultorum plena sunt omnia, since Folly is so
Endemical a Disease and Universal, in my Judgment It is as good to be a Fool
for Christ's sake and for Truths sake, as to be (like the weekly News-monger,
and railing Pamphleteer) a fool for the Devils sake, or for the lies sake;
besides the comfort of a good conscience, and a sound mind attends innocence in
the Streights-mouth -- For a great Soul (like Heaven) is Seated high,
And like Olympick-Top does quiet lie
The Middle-Region-storms come not her nigh;
So never to Heaven she seems to mate the Sky,
And with Top-gallant brave the Galaxye.


God Almighty always by some providence either takes off the Load, or (which is
all one) strengthens the back of all that trust in him;

Yet this does not at all excuse the malice, the injustice, and the cruelty of
men.

Which brings to my mind a most excellent Copy of Verses made by the
ingenuous Mr. John Butler of Crouchet-Friars London, and by him presented to
Mr. Hickeringil on the occasion of his sufferings, but Dedicated. To the
Master, Wardens, and Assistants of the Trinity-house, upon that stately useful
Light-house built upon St. Agnes, to discover those dangerous Rocks called the
Bishop and his Clerks.
AFisherman whose nets were torn
By stormy Tempests, and by Sherks,
At last near to the Rocks were born
Called the Bishop and his Clerks.
But who those names did give, and why?
Are Problems none resolved have;
But this is sure, what Ships do try
Their strength against them, find a Grave.
Witness Bows rent, Sides torn, 'Backs broak
Of many Ships that proved a Wrack,
Though made of Iron, and of Oak,
Did by these Rocks asunder crack.
Are Neptunes Clerks, and Bishops such
No mercy from them can be found,
As whosoever does but touch
Upon them, sinks unto the ground?
Or were the Flamens in the time
Of Pagan-worship so renownd
For Cruelties? Was it their crime,
And only theirs? And not since found?
Or did the Bishops who did come
In place, when these were dead, and gone,
Retain their Cruelty (to doom
Men unto ruin,) that not one.
Who touched upon them could evade
Their anger, fury, and their rage,
As if to sink men were their trade
Which they did use from age to age,
Or did some Satyrs who had sinned
And by the Bishops sentenc't were
In Linen white up to be pinnd,
To give these Names together swear?
Or did the Gondeliers who see
Romes Bishop with insulting feet
Tread on great Fredricks neck, that he
In Venice City shame might meet?
For which the Old Doge does every year
With Madam Adriattique, make
A Marriage. And they tell you there,
That for her Lord she does him take.
Or was it they that did behold
Henry the fourth, to seek the Grace,
On his bare feet in Winter cold
Of that proud Pope who hid his face
In Miss Matildas-Lap, till she
Did rub his Ears, and him awake,
That so poor Henry being free,
He other measures then might take?
Or was it Tom Becket in a huff,
With his most right and lawful King,
From whose posteriors came a puff,
That him upon his Knees did bring
After he sainted was for Treason;
Yet then the King unto his shrine
Did barefoot go, against all reason,
And scourged was by filthy Swine.
The Monks which in that Cloister dwelt
Such great disgrace in days of Yore,
The greatest Princes often have felt.
By Prelates; may they never more.
It may be this, or that, or to other
Gave the first rise unto the name,
And cruelties they could not smother,
Did afterward confirm the same.
But that these Rocks no longer may
Be unto Seamen cause of danger,
This Light-house now will show the way
Which may secure any stranger.
It was your Wisdom and your Care,
This rare contrivance to invent,
No Pains, no Charges you did spare
Our Dangers that you might prevent.
Old Strombolo that burns, to light
Seamen unto Messinas Phare,
With Agnes flames that shine so bright,
For usefulness cannot compare.
That future Ages will record,
Who did this Stately Fabric raise;
And to your glory tell abroad
This deed to your immortal Praise.
Come fellow Seamen it is the night
We use clean linen to put on,
He'rs to our Wives; it is a right
Them once a week to think upon,
The Bishops and his Clerks no more
Shall Shipwreck bring as in late years,
And as they used to do of Yore,
Now the light-house of Naked-truth appears.


Men love darkness rather then light, because their Deeds were evil.

For every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes he to the light
lest his Deeds should be discovered: But he that does truth comes to the
light, that his deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought in God, Jo. 3.
19, 20, 21.

By their fruits you shall know them; if they be mischievous, and bring forth
nothing but sharp pricks, then they are Briers, and Thisles, and Thorns, and
nigh unto a curse, whose end is to be burned. -- They loved cursing and
Anathema's so let it come unto them, says Holy David.

Any sober-man would think that a Reasonable man might well enough be contented
(if he were not very Ignorant and very Impudent) to enjoy quietly, the
Pleasures, the Riches, the Honors, the Grandieur and the Pomp that now
(attends Bishops) of so cheap (too) and easy acquest or purchase; and Stately
and Prince-like, as may be temporal and wicked lay-Princes of the Gentiles --
-- nay, as many the Princes and Peers of the Nation (who by Inheritance come by
the same) and Rights to which by Gods Providence, Nature, and Birth they are
born unto; nay, in their City houses for ease, their Country houses for
delight, far Transcending the most Peers of the Realm; one would think (I say)
such Bishops, after so full a Meal, might say Grace. and bless God for his
goodnss to them, and never disturb themselves, nor the Neigbourhood, with being
Promoters, Inventers, Action-drivers, exacters of Penalties and utmost Rigor
of old Statutes, for which crimes Empson and Dudley were hanged.

What an odd sight it is to see Lawn-sleves, surrounded with Procters and
Jaylors, and Apparitors, and Promoters, and Serjants and Bailiffs, Affidavit
men, and hung about with Articles, Writs, Labels, and Libels, Declarations,
Informations, Indictments? and then Proctors and a little Black-Coat at his
elbow (hungry for a living) and ready to swear through-stich, when his own
Interest, and the favor of a Bishop is in the case?

What wanton pride as well as cruelty and hard heartedness to delight in
Visitations, Vexations, when he might well enough content himself (one would
think) with his exceeding many flocks and herds (which the Piety and Charity of
our devout Ancestors, and the cunning and avarice of others, has Monopoliz'd to
them, leaving the poor (now) quite out of their (old and primitive) share
thereof and good right unto';) without the wanton Boulimy and greedy Appetite
after his Neighbors little Ewe-lamb, and all the substance and subsistence of
a man and his house, no though he should pretend to dedicate his Neighbors
little Ewe-Lamb to God, as a Sacrifice, or an Anathema, or a Corban, by grand
Hypocrisy; as if God Almighty did not hate Robbery much more Cruelty (under
color, and by the help of Summum jus, or the rigor of Law) for a Burnt
offering? And if no less will serve the Bishop of London's charity, then to give
2000l. toward the building of Paul's, it is more honor to take it out of his
own numerous flocks and herds (which once the poor had as much Title unto, as
the Rich Prelate, before Avarice and Pride came in fashion-Ecclesiastical) And
not go to rob the Spittle for a deodand and by force or rigor of Law.

I have known a Gentleman, that had one odd humor and you will say, it was a
very ill humor; that after dinner when his Belly was, full of good Victuals,
and Wine, and strong drink; the Fop grew so wanton, and the Ape wasso
mischievously gamesy, and with good cheer half drunk, or so half-Tipsey, that
he so far forgot himself, that instead of saying Grace, he would be pinching
and nipping those that sat nigh, or within his reach, especially (if he had any
old Pique against them) he would nip and pinch, 'till he made all black and
blew, or left the Print of his Nails in their flesh; Ecce Signum:

I Will conclude this essay, with an Epitome of the most considerable Parts and
passages in this long Book) that has swelled beyond the Primitive intention)
and will best serve those (that will not find leisure to read the whole) in
this following-letter, long yet most compendious, most Emphatical, most Humble,
and most Submissive letter, writ by Mr. Hickeringil himself, verbatim,

To the Right Reverend HENRY Lord Bishop of LONDON, at London-Howse.
My Lord,
SO little success has attended all my former Addresses that I am almost
hopeless of this; but understanding that your Lordship expected my application,
no deficiency should be on my part.

Though I must confess, that had it not been for this worthy Gentleman Mr.
Firman, (the Bearer hereof) I was not readily persuaded to write to you.

Because you carry my Letters to your Lawyers for them to pick 'vantages, and
accordingly two of my Letters to your Lordship most disingenuously were read
against me at the Trial, But the Judge told them they were no proof of your
Declaration, yet Sir Francis Withins he made mimick and dumb signs to the Jury
at every word -- nay, my very Books were brought into Court, and Sir George
Jefferyes just such another man (as the woman said (that other-hopeful Council)
he pointed at my Books with his Index, as not knowing what to say against them
without blushing, (of which (yet) he is not very guilty) and only made dumb
shows too, which were not capable of answer or vindication, yet were sufficient
hints to a willing Jury that knew their meaning by their mumping, and their
gaping; and accordingly gave a Verdict (contrary to all men's expectations)
against me, and damages -- 2000 l. (a good round sum, two Horse-loads, and
therefore would break the back of one Horse, no wonder then a single Parson
should shrink or sink under the unconscionable load.)

Yet I understand that this unreasonable Verdict is so pleasing to you, that in
the jollity of devotion you have made it a Deodand; and intends to Dedicate the
Trophee of your Victory toward the building of Paul's.

If so, I fear your Piety is not of the Cabal, or Cabinet-Councel with your
charity; nor will you find that it is pleasing to God to make a man an Offender
for a word, (and no such mighty words neither) if Trump had swore true, for the
wholly acquitted me of the words in the 3d. Count, and yet they were words of
his own making too, of his own single invention, and of his own ordering and
marshalling in the Declaration, and which no flesh alive heard me speak but
himself, as was attested by all the Bystanders, that swore not only
negatively against this Evidence, but positively and contrarily as the Judge
declared; and that they were not so, but so, and so; as they penned them down
(whilst fresh in their memories) when I was gone, and occasioned by Harris his
going into another Room by himself, and writing his own man-catching-shams,
which he brought to the company to subscribe, which with abhorrence and
detestation they all abominated, and both him and his Projects, that (with the
help of a picked, and specially appointed Jury) have been so successful; and
whom you may well thank, or else you had now been in my debt, not I in yours,
nor ever was I in your debt nor beholden to you for a Courtesy (the most
trivial Courtesy) in my life, which I did not requite ten times over, but
mischief you have done not in aboundane, contrary to law.

Indeed, if you had proved your Declaration that the words (first) were spoken
before diverse the Kings Subjects (nay the words in the last Count were not
sworn unto by your own Implement, (though he devised them) but (by cross and
unexpected questions) he was forced to swear against your own and his Innuendo
the Popish Plot, and also swore, instead, of a damnable Plot (which he swore at
first) dwindled it to a Horrid Plot (only) against my righteous name and
person; though there he swore falsely, for my words were -- against my righteous
name and reputation in the Barretry, and the very same words I writ to your
Lordship, and Harris also confessed there was some pause or Comma, but no
interlocution or interruption betwixt the word Plot -- and righteous name --
which yet these Lawyers would have improved, though Harris contradicted them
therein, and himself also.

And as for the other words of ignorance and impudence, you will the rather
remit the rashness and severity of the expression, since your injustice in
sending that illegal Sequestration of the profits of the small Tithes of the
Parish of St. Buttolphs, (to which I was Instituted and Inducted as Rector of
All Saints long before you were quartered in Colchester with your Brother
Compton's Troop.

And therefore, if you do me no good, you did ill causelessly to provoke me, and
in hopes to do me a mischief; you did act illegally, and contrary to Law.

And all this in favor of an infamous Creature, that had not the docility and
exactness of memory that my Parrot has, for if she could not have more
perfectly conn'd and repeated the few words in the Declaration more exactly and
uniformly than he did, and have learned by heart and off-book in half the time
he has had to conne them (and of his own making too) I would pluck off her head.

And do but think impartially with your self what a disparagement it is to your
judgment and skill in men, not only to prefer to your favor such a Creature
before me, but in favor of him, to endeavor by an illegal Sequestration to
wrong me of my right, and so take what is mine and give it to him: you may do
lawfully what you will with your own, but what have you to do (unlawfully) to
take mine from me to give it to him? a Fellow that is not so good as a Chip in
Broth.

I never was nor ever will be ambitious of a Prelates favor if I can but keep
out of their Clutches; and out of harms-way, and keep them from doing me a
mischief, it is all the favor I ever expected, or ever will expect from them;
you will not suffer me quietly to keep my rights to which I am lawfully
instituted, which wrong of yours has occasioned all this stir; thus the
original sin is yours, but the punishment thereof is mine; there is no
conscience nor equity for it though; let me tell you, without incurring your
further displeasure, as hitherto I have, because I durst be so bold as a worm,
namely to turn again, when trod upon by you, against the law of the Land; And
because of saying this truth, and complaining to you for remedy and crying out
and groaning, when you press me unmercifully, as well as illegally; without
Compassion as well as without Law, nay contrary to Law, Therefore you double my
Pressures -- with -- more weight -- more weight. -- First you torment me 'till
I groan,
And then you pinch me, 'cause I moan.


And all this you know to be true, and yet your heart (I fear will be) hardened
as much as ever, because I cannot make false submissions, and confessions of
faults that were occasioned by your own Injustice and causeless revenge, and
default, (to call it no worse)

If such submission or satisfaction as becomes a Gentleman, or a Christian to
pay you, will serve your turn, you shall have them cheerfully and readily, but
base Concessions, against Truth and Honor, all the Prelates in Christendom
(united) shall never extort from me, use what Cruelties you please, or show the
World your skill in Men, your Policy, and solidity of your Judgment and
discerning, in preferring such a Wretch to my Estate, whom I doubt not but
speedily to convict of Perjury, (notwithstanding all the assistance you can
give him) and make an Example of such an Episcopal Tool, of those Ears, that
can hear more than all the listening and attentive Company; and yet so silly,
that he cannot repeat those short words twice together uniformly; who was also
proved infamous, by his endeavor to cheat the Earl of Lincoln, in hopes of an
100 Guinies; and also by his forswearing himself for the company of a Wench,
and by being usually a Maudlin-Drunkard; And this is your Man, (who you have in
your great Care of Souls, in your Judgment and Skill, with so much bustle and
detriment to the Parishioners, preferred not only before me, but to my Rights
in Law.

Well, if nothing but such Counsels still please you -- Then still, go on --
and endeavor the ruin of me and mine; and yet with a Corban or Anathema,
imagine to atone for the unmercifulness; go on -- I say -- thus with a spice of
Devotion, in pretense to please him that hates Robbery for a Burnt Offering,
and would not permit the hire of a Whore, nor the price of a Dog, to enrich or
adorn his Sanctuary -- but go on then -- and under color of Law, or rigor, or
summum jus, make blandishments for Cruelty and Revenge, and cement Paul's with
the briny -Tears of my Widow and Orphans -- when you have buried me in a Jayl;
nay, carouze in their Tears, and cry, Huzza's with jollity and full sayls,
filled with the Sighs and Curses of those you bereave, whilst thus you endear
and honor the Name of a Bishop and Prelat; and by being a Promoter and a
Striker, or Action-Driver, in Temporal in Spiritual Courts, strike thus with
your two-edged Sword, that cuts both ways, and meditate to enrich your self;
or, (to avoid that imputation) design or pretend to build a Temple of Stones
upon the Ruins of (the living Temples of the Holy Ghost, and) Temples of Bones.

This Counsel, (though it is mischievous and fatal to you, and the werst you
can take for your self, your Reputation, and Honor, and Profit too; yet
because pleasing to Malice, Hatred, and Revenge, it is possible you may follow
it; but first judge how suitable it is to your Office and Family) or rather this
honest, sound, honorable and fair Proposal: Namely --

That, since (of this outrageous Verdict) you shall never have a Farthing,
(though you perhaps may throw more good Money against bad) nor any mighty
Credit; because it was the Verdict of a Jury picked for the nonce, and of Men
that held Commissions only ad nutum, and good pleasure of the Court, where you
have great Influence at present. And since all you can get, or shall get -- is
my Bones -- if you can catch them; -- And perhaps you will never catch them, --
nor will I ever fly for it, my Friends and Enemies shall not so be quit of me.
-- But if you do get my Corpse, -- it is but like the arresting of a -- dead
Corpse -- sometimes (but rarely) practiced, and that (only) by inhumane
Creditors -- a barbarity that will ill become Bishops at this time of day, --
how confident soever they be, or may flatter themselves.

Besides, since the Verdict, and also your Prosecution, was expressly against
the Word of God, 1 timothy 5. 19. which commands (you especially) not to receive
an Accusation against an Elder (older than your self) but under two or three
Witnesses: Here was but one, and an infamous one, and a Man keen with
self-Interest and Pretensions to the Profits of my Benefice; though most
illegally, and an Intruder, and could not swear it perfectly neither.

For what Sir Tho. Exton (your other precious Witness) did say, the Judge
declared, it was nothing to the proof of the Declaration; and therefore ought
not to be accounted any thing to sway the Jury, as to finding for the Plantiff,
(whatever or however his Testimony, or my private Letters, might aggravate the
Damages) yet first the Declaration ought to have been well proved, (for it is
not Scandal till communicated) before Men use to talk of Damages: but it was
so far from being well proved, that the (worse than) Parrot, could not say it
uniformly twice together, nor alike.

Nor did your other Witness, Sir Tho. Exton, get more credit amongst all
ingenuous and unprejudiced Men, by making my private Submissions, and what I
spoke in Confession to him, (as an old Friend, and in mediation of Peace, and
an Accommodation) a public Accusation and Aggravation; but, judge you, -- how
inhumane, unchristian -- un-Knight-like, un-Man-like, and ungentile is it for a
Man to be treacherous, and make his Table a Snare? -- a Turk or Bravo (amongst
the Spaniards) that live by killing Men, will yet rather die than be
treacherous, or, betray any Man under color of Friendship.

Many that hug the Treason, hate the Traitor, and will be shy of him; at least,
they ought to avoid him, as an Enemy to all Society, Commerce, and
Conversation, as a Serpent in the Bosom, or a Toad, or any dangerous Villain.

God^ keep all good Men from trusting to the Honor and
Ingenuity-Ecclesiastical, especially that of a Lay-Vicar, (bless us! from the
Hermophrodite! or Church-Monster!) or -- Gray-Fryar, as Sir Thomas Exton,
Doctor Exton is, in one sense.

It was an Exton too, that treacherously and cowardly came behind King Richard
the Second, and murdered him with a back-blow, when his valliant Hands were
busied with three or four Rogues more, (he killed one or two of them tho!)
before that treacherous and cowardly Villain -- Exton -- struck him behind, and
did his Business.

But, I send this to your Lordship, that you may show it to your two doughty
Confidents and Witnesses, and Lawyers (if you please) as formerly; but rather
as an Expedient to acquit your self, with Honor and Profit to you (more than
to my self) from this outrageous Verdict of a picked Jury, singled out by
special Order of the Court of King's Bench, (I shall live to thank them);
which Verdict, (notwithstanding) with all your Interest, Friends, Power, and
Greatness united, shall never be worth one Farthing to you, (I say it) neither
in Money, nor Reputation and Honor:

But, on the contrary, This fair and equal Proposal, shall be both, certain
Profit in hand, and as certain Honor; Namely --

That, considering the Premises, and the outrageous Damages of 2000 l. (if
they had given you 40 s. all the unprejudiced World would blame them on such an
infamous single Evidence, against so many other Witnesses, as well as against
God's Word; and that 40 s. would have been better for you, in Money and
Reputation than the 2000 l.

For, if the Jury, on a stretch, did it to vindicate your Honor and
Reputation, then they are guilty of the greater Scandalum Magnatum, to prize
your Honor but at two Thousand pounds. Thus they have set the price on it, in
full value in their Opinion; for, as for Damages (you sustained) there was
none proved.

The Proposal is this, viz.

I Will pay you, upon dedamand, single Costs, (or, if you have the Conscience
to take it) double Costs, as the Master of the Office shall tax them, (so you
will be sure of something); And I will also give you sufficient Security for
the payment of whatsoever another Jury shall give you upon a New Trial, if the
cause go for you.

Nay, to have an equal and indifferent Jury, I will give you far more Advantage
still; I will consent, that you shall choose what County in England, Essex,
Middlesex, Tork-shire, or where you please, for the Venue, and to try the Cause
in, over again, upon this only condition, that the last Pannels of Juries,
returned the last Assizes, in other Causes, in Nisi Prius, in any County, you
please, or shall choose, to draw any of them by Lot, not looking into them,
'till you (or some for you) have drawn and are fixed: And let the Trial be
managed by what Learned Counsel soever, all England over, and before what Judge
soever best pleases you, and I will have no Assistance in the management, (but
as the last time) God, and my self, and my Witnesses, and the justice of my
Cause.

And, if you will not accept this fair, this honorable, this profitable
Proposal, then consider -- how lost will the Justice of your Cause be in the
Opinion of all Men, nay, even in your own Opinion, if you be afraid to try
another grapple, before an indifferent and equal Jury, not prepossest, not
picked, not packed, not depending upon -- to help you out with it.

And, though you have now given me a Foyl, you had twelve such kind of Men to
help you; but it will abate the good Opinion of your courage, the good Opinion
of the justness of your Cause, even in your own opinion, if you dare not, upon
so fair Terms, let go the catching hold you have got, and take fair hold, when
you may assure your Money, your Costs, your Credit, and your Damages, (all now
desperate) only by playing the Prize over again once more before indifferent
and equal Judges; and you shall have Money of me too for playing the Prize
again, with a naked, single, Priest, friendless, helpless (but) not hopeless,
though you are armed with all your Power, Friends, Riches, (and consequently)
Learned Counsel, High Places, and Interest, and flushed (also) with your late
Victory and Success.

I Will venture all I have in the World upon this Contest, if you will stake an
equal Gage: What? Shall such a Man as I am be run down with one little, single,
ill -thriven, infamous Priest, against God's Holy Word, and so many substantial
Witnesses; nay, a Priest that cannot tell his own Tale off-book, with the
exactness, uniformity and docillity of a Parrot? The World cries shame on it,
and of such a Jury.

Nay, (further) I here promise that I will surcease the prosecution of that
same Harris, in order to convict him of Perjury, 'till (first) this new Trial
be over, he shall have his beggarly Ears a little longer on this condition;
That Is some comfort for this Episcopal Witness.

These are the certain Benefits and Honor you may be assured of, by consenting
to a new Trial: And if you do not consent, I doubt not but the Judges will
grant me a new Trial, whether you will or no, at the Term, upon such
Suggestions as I shall make to them, and upon such Motives as has been
prevalent with them in other Cases; and why I should not have Justice, nay,
their Countenance too, more than vile Extortioners, Oppressors, or their
Abettors and Partakers, I do not understand: I believe I shall live to see the
day, that Judges will value the Oath of a Judge, and have no respect of Persons
in Judgment, though never so great; (Oh! for Judge Hales at this day, and in
this Affair!) or, if they warp, will warp on the right side, and countenance
the innocent Sufferer for telling Men of their Sins, and not warp in
confederacy with the Sinners, and grand Contemners of the King's Laws, who are
very ignorant, or else, bold, daring, and impudent, to act so contrary to Law,
in vile Extortions, etc.

At a fair Hearing, my Lord, you can never justify the Wrongs you have done me,
in despite of his Majesty's Laws, and God's Laws; (where is Mr. Withins with
his dumb shows to give Item hereof?) His dumb shows could not keep him in the
Parliament House from his Knees.

How can you answer the invading of my Legal Rights by an Illegal
Sequestration, contrary to Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right?

How can you answer it, to turn Promoter in the Spiritual Court? Is it for a
Bishop to be a Striker, that is, an Action-Driver or Promoter? and to strike
with his two -edged Sword, and hack and hew both ways? as you have hacked me in
Spiritual Court, and Temporal Courts? Ecce duo gladii! The Popishgloss, says,
Temporal and Spiritual Sword, but what is that to you?

How can you answer it, to vex me in despite of a Praemunire, with Lawsuits,
and Accusations of Barrety, in the Spiritual Courts, (as you have done) in
defiance of the many Statutes of Provisors? Are you above the Law? are you
indeed? we will try that one day: It is no Scandalum Magnatum, to say, that
greater Men than you ever were (or ever shall be) have been glad to kneel, and
submit their sturdy Necks to the Laws of England.

How can you answer it, to vex me in the Spiritual Court for Barretry, in those
very Instances, whereof I have been honorably acquit, upon a fair Hearing in
the Courts of our Lord the King?

How can you answer it, as Promoter, to cite me, and prosecute me, in the Name
of Robert Wiseman, Doctor and Knight, or I know not who, from my Home, my
Employment, my Cure, (that you ought to further, not hinder) and not in the
Name and Style of the King, as enjoined 2. Edw. 6. 1. a Statute that I doubt
not but to make good against you all? and then, what will become of you all?

How can you answer it? when you were, or might be convinced at the King's Head
in Colchester, that Martin and Groom, etc. your Apparitors, who forswore
themselves against me, and against the Ecclesiastical Records and Registries,
still to countenance the Prosecution? And when I was acquit (honorably) still
to vex me again, and turn Promoter to plague me for Crimes (of which I was
proved Innocent, and to vex me in a Court that cannot take cognizance thereof,
and have incurred the danger of a Praemunire, for the vexation you have done me
therein causelessly, and for the illegal Prosecution? for you (as Promoter)
swore Witnesses to those Articles; and cited I was, at your Promotion, to
attend your Motions thereon, at Lexden; Manent alta mente repostum, when time
shall serve, you shall hear on it.

And when you had plagued me almost a Year with these Barretry-Articles, then
they dwindled only to Marriages without Banes, or not paying your Registers, or
your Underofficers Money (as I used to do) for Blanck-Licenses, or marrying too
cheap, this is the worst inconvenience thereof; and I think that I can prove
that I have as much, or more Authority to give Blank-Licences, then your
Lay-Vicar, Doctor Exton, or, your Lay-Registers; (a fine World!) when Matrimony
must be the Benefit of those Gray-Fryars, (instead of the Benefit of the
Clergy) because the Hermophrodites buy their Places, or hire them.

Besides, There is not a Minister in our Town, or (almost) in the whole Country
but does the same, and why do not you turn Promoter against them also, if
Justice be not only the Pretense, but malice, spleen and revenge at the bottom?
why do you make fish of one, and flesh of another? why a Picque at me only? or
is it because none of them had the Wit, or at least, not the Grace, nor
honesty, nor courage to discover the Ecclesiastical Corruptions, which you are
too privy unto, and ought to amend and not boulster them up; I am ashamed ont;
and so may others too in time, and of such grand Partiality.

Besides those poor five couples, which I am accused off, (for marrying without
Banes first published in time of divine-service in the Parish Church or
Churches) is a fault impossible to be avoided; for else the couples could never
have been (Legally and in strictness of Law) married, having no
Parish-Churches, nor any divine-service at that time; and yet your Procters in
the Articles swore they were high crimes.

Oh! (My Lord) would you be willing to be so served; and to be so done by, as
you have done by me (to be plagued, vexed and suspended of your Benefice and
Office three years, for transgressing the Rubric in the Common Prayer Book,
which you so daily transgress (as well as other Statutes) in your Nonconformist
illegal Confirmations, and the like; which in time I can prove upon you, and
not always bear and bear your blows, and be always Defendent.

Or, If I should be such a fool as to give you 2000l. how can you in Conscience
or honor take a penny on it, when you are not damnified a penny? Are men bound
to Repair when there are no Dilapidations? which of your many High Places or
Preferments have you (thereby) lost, either Temporal or Spiritual? what minute
favor of the King have you lost by this Scandal, that had never been heard of,
if Harris had not broacht it?

What displeasure of the King or great men of the Realm have you incurred
hereby? I know not what you may do though, by being Unmerciful, Cruel, or
Hard-Hearted in using your power (quite contrary to the Apostles) and abusing
it and your self -- for Destruction, not Edification; you know not yet how apt
mischief is to rebound, or the Echo to tell tales out of School (as all
Eccho's do) and of its Fathers motions, and ring all the Kingdom over, and make
good the Proverb -- Harm watch, Harm catch -- or how you will answer it, for
your neglect of gathering the King's Tenth's, of fingring hoe; or, not
returning the default, a Peccadillo to your other Crimes in this Letter
minutely mentioned.

The greatest murders (as that of Naboth) was done by form of Law, and two
sons of Belial for false witnesses to prove the Declaration; but my 2000l. must
go upon the Testimony of one Son of Belial; (fie on it let us hear no more on it)
my hap is harder then Naboths: Robbers are neverthetheless Robbers, though they
have a Vizard on.

If you will not consent to a new Trial, upon so profitable, so honorable and
so advantageous Terms, what will men think and say of you? how will their
Jealousies of foul play be Increased, when you dare not let go this catching
hold, and take fair hold before equal Judges; especially since this verdict (as
I am told by substantial witnesses) was discoursed upon the Royal Exchange
before the Assizes, That the Jury would give averdict for the Plantiff, and
2000l. damages. If this be so, This is to hang a man first and judge him
afterward, which (if I prove to be true) how can you or the Judges, in Justice
or Honor refuse a new Trial, that will be so profitable to you, especially if
you conquer: whereas now you will get nothing but my bones, which are old and
will do you more harm then good; you will wish you had not troubled your self
with them; they will prove as fatal to you as you can be fatal and mischievous
to me; (if you do catch them) and it will be some loss of ready money to catch
them; there will be some craft in the catching of them, I Will assure you, with
all your power, and yet I will seldom be a Mile from your house, perhaps just
under your nose, must Men be run down with one single Infamous, Ill-looking,
Interested, Ill-thriven, Revengeful, Beshrimpen, Forgetful, Dull Priest, in
defiance of Gods word, and in defiance of the Testimony of so many honest and
substantial Witnesses, whom no Temptation could corrupt! never think on it, it
cannot, it shall not be; yes! perhaps you may get my Childrens beds from under
them, I know not how stony-hearted you will be; and yet (I do) in part.

Shall you first occasion all this by doing me wrong, and sending the wretch to
usurp my Legal Rights by Virtue (or Vice rather) of your Illegal sequestration?
must I suffer for your mistake and ignorance at least; (if it be no worse) If
it be no worse, it must be through your Ignorance of my Title; and your
prosecuting me for Barretry (as Promoter) in the Spiritual-Court, must be
through your Ignorance of the Law, ignorance of the Statutes of Provisors or
worse then Ignorance, for -- Ignorantia crassa not excusat -- A Bishop and a
Privy Councellor (above all others) cannot, nay, will not be admitted to plead
Ignorance of those Laws that were made on purpose against Prelatical Insolence
and Usurpations; for if your Prosecution was Illegal, blush and repent at
least, and make me Restitution for being Promoter thereof, if Legal, why did
you abandon it and durst not mention it in the Sentence? However, it is
mentioned in the Process, and you shall hear on it all of you, if I live.

Nor can you plead ignorance of the fundamental-Laws and Constitutions of the
Realm, and yet to commend, recommend in Print, and in public discourse (in the
presence of the Mayor and Aldermen of Colchester, at your last Visitation, kept
at the King's -Head Tavern in Colchester, and in presence of diverse other
witnesses and worthy Gentlemen) to seem to justify the Canons, and
Constitutions of forty; nay, the very first and worst of them -- that
(foolishly as well as falsely asserts that) the most High and Sacred Order of
Kings is of Divine-right, being the Ordinance of God himself, Founded in the
Prime-Laws of Nature and clearly established by express Text both of the old
and new Testament; (Right Lambeth -- Archbishop Lauds nowne self!)

The mischievous and bloody consequents of this Doctrine is abundantly
discovered in my 2d. part of Naked-Truth, p. 7. which if you had impartially
read, you and I had been friends not foes: And none of you (yet) did or have
been so hold as to answer it, or attempt to confute, otherwise then by oaths of
Ecclesiastical-fellows, Whispers, Cabals, Pointings, and Dumb-shows of Council
to an apprehensive Jury (to endeavor my ruin and how did you quarrel me at the
same time at your Visitation upon this very contest, shakeing your head, and
saying, now you begun to know me (not for a Tantiviee, even! Curse ye Meroz was
a true Englishman) but said also (and if you had not said it, this Letter
might have been spared) that you never desired ^^ speak more with me; yet you
could turn Promoter against me in the Ecclesiastical Court, and defame me (to a
person of Honor) as a Barreter, and vex me and plague me with Actions upon
Actions (I never was quiet one week since that contest when you said begun to
know me) Articles, Supplicavits, Libels, Informations, Verdict of your
pickt-Jury (much to your Honor) Promotions, etc. But because you said (then)
you begun to know me, you and the world have therefore (since that time) known
me better, and do know you better too, upon that difference betwixt us, the
rise, ground cause and occasion of all our after contests, and therefore you
took my place of Surrogate from me, the next day, for I also began to know you
then and was more joy fully dismissed in hopes that I and the world may know you
better, and publicly renounce these Canons of 40. which you publicly
commended particularly, that (which you then justified) the first Canon
thereof, that same Arch -- Lauds Canon, the Sybthorpian Canon, away with them
for shame! Manwarings Canon; for our difference thereupon is a difference about
this most considerable point (this day) in the Kingdom, a point on which all
English-men's lives, Estates, Liberties, their Children and their Wives, does
depend; a point of difference betwixt me and you and your convocation and Canon
of 40. which not a Tory Jury, but a Parliament had need to decide.

What? Ha? Is it come to this? Is the boil Ripe, that has been so long a
breeding? Is the Push come to a Head? It Is high time to let out the Corruption.

Behold the ghastly Cicatrizes still! or rather wounds which were (I thought)
quite closed, and must men rend and tear them open again Impune?

It Is true, Dr: Laud, Sibthorp and Manwaring got preferment by this Tantivee
(before they durst make it a Canon) principle; Laud was Archbishop and Chief
Minion; But Manwaring recanted in the Parliament House upon Mantoarings
sentence.
his knees with Tears, and was grievously Sentenc't, 4. Carol. 1. 1628. by both
houses of Parliament, to be first imprisoned (the Bishops could not help him,)
during the pleasure of the House. 2. He was fined 1000 pound 1.
(that was not 2000 pound to the King (and yet his offense bordered upon if it
2.
were not quite Treason) and the Original-Rise of my offense, only my dislike
of such villainous and damnable Doctrines. 3. He was to make submission and
acknowledgment of his offenses at the Bar of the House of Commons, 3.
merciful Judges! for the Poison of this Doctrine of Devils afterward
occasioned on one side our late bloody Civil-Wars; and must we recommend and
Justify at this time of day? is it come to that after so much bloodshed? an
aggravation, an aggravation! as Withins said, -- remember 40. and the Canons of
40. as well as 41. or 42. when Arch -- Laud lost his head; and the King and
Kingdom all most ruined, and dare any man publicly be at it again, when His
Majesty has so often declared that he will keep his Oath, his Coronation Oath
inviolably, when so many Addresses has been made to His Majestys thanking him
that he promises that he will not break his Oath, nor rule us arbitrary; but as
(we are) Englishmen and he a good English King; we do not live in Turkey,
Muscovy, nor yet in France; How hastily soever, and furiously some men drive
Slaves and Sycophants that having no Children, no Inheritance nor posterity,
care not how they ruin posterity to get a little present paultry Preferment,
(the price of their slattering Souls) nay, they ruin themselves by these
Principles as well as endeavor to ruin the King and Kingdom; such plaguey
Ear-wiggs ought not to come near the King-ear, for they wrigle in infection
what they can, blessed be God, His Majesty is not capable of such impressions;
no thanks to Earwigs -- (like other men infected with the Plague) they care not
how many they infect, when they themselves have got the Tantivee Sickness, or,
like Devils, care not how many they tempt to damnation, being themselves
condemned (the expression is not harsh, better for men to be cured with Ink
than a Hatchet) You have no better way to acquit your self from Jealousies and
Fears, then by as public an owning of me, as you have publicly vexed me ever
since I spoke against your constitutions of 40.

4. Manwarring was to be suspended for three years (gentle! most gentle!) 4.
and yet his crimes were more mischievous and fatal then to marry people too
cheap or without banes, or without a blank-Licence, (mere Trangum's for want of
other faults, and thus it always is, when men are resolved to find a hole in a
man's Coat, and rather then fail they will make one where there is none, and then
get Procters, Apparitors, and Doctors, and an Episcopal-Tool, to swear in a
willing Court -- Lo here! here is great holes! High Crimes!) whereas
Manwarings-Doctrine and such like Doctrine occasioned the ruin of our
flowrishing Kingdom and Commonwealth.

5. He was disabled to have any Ecclesiastical Dignity or Secular-office, (but
his fine was pardoned by King Charles the first, and the Doctor punished with 5.
the two best livings in England, namely the Rectory of Stampford-Rivers in
Essex, and the Rectory of St. Gyle's in the Fields, and had a dispensation to
hold them both (do not Tantivees know the way to the wood? and the way not to
be plagued with Promoters, Bishops, Articles, Informations, suits,
Supplivavit's, Declarations and outrageous Verdicts, they are wise and know a
way worth two on it; and willing to be of the Religion Mr. Sheriff is off,
especially if the Court do but command him, to single out and especial Jury for
that very purpose and expedition.

6. That he shall be for ever disabled to preach at the Court hereafter: (and
all 6.
such as he, they might well have added (all such Sycophant Preachers might
well be spared, even in Lent, the very Harvest for Court Preachments) all such
Poyson-Sellers, that for mischief might out vye the Poysoners of France.)

But the best on it is our King (blessed be God) does not overmuch heed vain
Pulpiteers, and does but smile when the Bigotly fever makes them talk idly
and prate impertinently (like the Gown Philosopher Phormio, that never saw a
sword drawn in anger, or (if he did) tremblingly knocked his knees together, and
yet the Fop made bold to read militia Lectures to Hanibal -- of the art of War.
--)

No thanks (though) to these well-willers to the Mathematics; though wise Kings
shut their Ears, or smile to hear a pragmatical Coxcomb, or imbost Bygot, who
mounted upon the Stage of the over-topping Pulpit (bless us!)

How liberally he flings about -- Have at all within his reach -- And is as
terrible as a French Minister when he cocks his Beaver, looks grim, and lifts
up his threatning-Arm heaved up and armed with a Geneva-Bible -- Gentlemen --
look to your heads -- look to your Hitts -- do not dop your heads there -- the
man is not in earnest -- Draw-can-Sir means no harm, he may fright Fools and
little Bigots; but can not hurt them.

For his Threats are as inefficacious perhaps as the Bishop's-Benediction --
(of Paris) when the flocking-Beggars beset his Lordships Coach, and begged his
Alms; instead of opening his Purse, though he was close-fisted, he spread his
empty Palms, and laid them gently upon each of their heads, muttering his
set-form of words, and gave them (instead of a cardecu or a farthing (a piece)
which they expected, (to him) (or more readily come by, or always readier at
hand) a cheaper Commodity) His Episcopal-Benediction.

At which disappointment the saucy Beggars told his good Lordship, That if his
Bishoping, or Bishop's -Benediction, had not been in his Lordships good Opinion
the cheaper (if not) the viler Alms of the two, his Lordship would not be so
prodigal of it.

The History does not say, whether they grew stiff in the Knees ever after, as
not willing to kneel on the cold hard Stones, or in the Dirt, any more, for his
Lordships Benediction. -- But the Parisians, and jeering nickering
Shopkeepers, smiled to see the wretches kneel so devoutly for an Alms, and yet
be angry when they thought themselves disappointed and fob'd off with the empty
Benediction of Lawn-Sleeves, (I mean) that Popish Lawn-Sleeves, who smiled in
his Sleeves, and said -- Si populus vult decipi, decipiatur -- as if he should
say -- The World is a great cheat -- The Knaves cheat the foolish Bigots.

But if that Parisian frenchified Bishop had been forced by Law to give a Souce
or a Shilling to every one he so Bishop'd, that as he pretended to both the two
Swords, the Temporal and the Spiritual, to do mischief with, so he might be
forced to both the two Charities, the Temporal and the Spiritual -- to do good
with -- And be constrained by Law to be good in spite of his Teeth, as well as
cruel and mischievous, and to be as honest as the Publican, that said -- Half
my Goods I give unto the Poor; and if I have taken any thing from any Man, by
false Accusation, (mark that) lo! I restore him fourfold: And if the Bishop
had so given the Poor their old Moety, and Primitive share, in his Manors,
Tithes, and Glebes; or, at least, let them go snips with him, in getting a
Shilling for every time, and every Man, Woman, and Child, to whom he so
liberally (higgle-tee-pickle-tee, hand over head) gave his Benediction: I am of
opinion, the Popish Bishops, whatever the Protestant Bishops may, would not
frisk so often about their Diocessess in frequent Visitations, Procurations,
Money, more-mony, Conferences, etc. but rather shut up their Doors, and keep a
big overgrown Porter to keep out the crouding Votaries from such Benediction.

However, the Office of such a Bishop would be (then) good for something, and
they would be (giving Twelve-pence a Blessing) spiritually and temporally
charitable; as now some are (with their two-edged Sword, Spiritual and
Temporal) most troublesome and mischievous, (in France) by Suspensions,
Silenceings, Church Censures, Curses, and Anathema's, and Money -- more Money --
Excommunications, Prisons, Jayls, Hey-day! for an Apostolical Man, alamode de
France!

Come, my Lord -- open the Pulpit Doors of All Saints again to me, (or else
I Will open them my self) which with so much ado you have endeavored to shut,
and exclude me, and bolt me out (if you could tell how) for a Bibble-babble --
marrying too cheap, or not with a Blanck-License (as hundreds others do
uncheck'd) therefore act not in Revenge, nor partially, in devotion to your
Registers, that used you unworthily, (in many Men's Opinions) in making a
Promoter of you, for the accomplishment of their viler and baser Ends: And let
there be no more strife (as Abraham said to Lot) betwixt me and thee, betwixt
my People and thy People, for we are Brethren -- why should we thus quarrel a
days, and thus fall out by the way -- about your Registers, Blanck-Licenses, or
Fees illegal -- or Money? -- And a little Money has (to my knowledge) often taken
up this Dispute with them --: for you know -- Money is all they aim at, that buy
their places, or hire them -- you know it well enough; -- or, if you do not, I
can tell you how, and where, and whom, and when --

And as for your little Harris his Evidence, (if it were true) consider the
first provocation you gave me, through your ignorance of my Title to the
Benefits of the small Tithes of St. Buttolphs; to usurp which from me
illegally, you sent the Creature with your Sequestration; would you be so done
by? or have your Superiors to take from you your Rights, and you must not speak
for your self? and tell them, they are ignorant and mistaken in your Title; or,
if you do -- slap -- says the Usurpur with an Oath upon you, and reports your
words in the worst sense, and another sense than you spoke them.

For Harris has not wit, memory, nor docility, to repeat my words twice
together alike off-book; and must I pay 2000 l. because he wants Wit or Grace?
My Lord, it is hard! you would say your self, if it were your own case.

Why should we make our selves thus the Town-talk, the Kingdoms talk, the chat
of every Ale-bench and Coffee-house?

This might have been -- in time foreseen; -- but you did not know me, when you
said you began to know me; if you had, you would not have ventured to attempt
to -- wrong me of my said Rights, to please ten thousand such as Harris, a
little Minion, that neither you nor the Church can have any credit of, more
than of a little Fucus, good for nothing but to paint your Cheeks with a blush;
and to say too late -- I had not thought. Better late thrive (tho) than never
-- I assure your Lordship (as I did formerly) I have not done half my best,
(that is -- my worst, as you will call it perhaps); and you will find it true,
and the Men of Doctors Commons too, (say) I tell you so; whereas I, as I said
before, do lie on the ground, and can fall no lower, I am shot-free; or, if
with so much advantage of Power, and the outrageous Verdict of your
Pick'd-Jury, you hit my Body, yet you shall never finger my Estate; and my old
Corpse will but make you sick of them, and prove fatal to you, and annoy you, if
you do catch them; extend then your utmost cruelty that your great Power or
Revenge can contribute, yet stony-heartedness will bring no other renown to the
Bishop and his Clerks, except the external blame and fame of being mischievous
to all Posterity, by virtue of a single Oath of an infamous Wretch, that swore
for his own Ends, against all the Bystanders, and believed by a Jury singled
out for the Service, against the Word of God so expressly to the contrary, as
aforesaid; a Bishop should not countenance this; nor is Scandalum Magnatum an
Offense at Common Law, but an Offense only against a Penal Statute, and the
Penalty, Imprisonment (only) 'till the Author be found out -- but the very
words of 2. Rich. 2. are scarce intelligible in the last words; Yet, no
Punishment of the Author is mentioned in the Statutes; and Penal Statutes ought
to be taken strictly -- and not extended to Damages -- (as the Lawyers have
finely spun it out) -- especially when no harm have you received, nor ever
could, if Harris had not broached his own Lies, and fathered his spurious Brats
on me -- and I must be charged with them 2000 l. thick, by false accusation:
Remember Zacheus, Luke 19. 8.

But, not a Penny (upon my word) shall you get, except you will consent, as
aforesaid, to a fair new Trial, by an indifferent Jury, empannell'd in other
Causes, and not picked for this Exploit only.

This is not a Time (my Lord) for Bishops to rule with a Rod of Iron, and break
Men in pieces like a Potters Vessel; Christ and his Apostles did not so.

This method might have done (simply tho) in Queen Mary's days, and in the
Inquisition of Spain, and in England too, when the High-Commission-Court was
up, but the wringing of the Nose brought forth Blood -- and the bloody and
cruel Bishops paid dear for it in conclusion -- Men's Eyes are opened -- It is
not to be done now in England. -- If we may judge at the Minds of the People,
more by the last Parliaments,
than the last Addresses, (which I like well enough of); But were there not as
many, and as numerous Subscriptions to that Usurper, Richard Protector, nay,
more zealous Expressions and Promises?

But when he needed them, not a Man stood by him -- I know the case is vastly
different -- but not different in zealous Promises and Protestations.

But as little Rivulets alter their Motions to follow the great Tide -- and the
Stars obey the motion generally of the Primum Mobile, though they may have some
little excentrick motions of their own: For, whatever the generality of this
Nation does affect or disaffect, it shall become a Law; (it is naked Truth)

Oh! but we have a Law and Act of Uniformity, and must not Laws be put in
Execution? I answer -- No -- not with partiality -- but either hand all or save
all -- either punish all Nonconformists or none -- make not Fish of one, and
Flesh of another -- (say) -- In your Conscience and Honor, is there any
Conscience
or Honor in this Partiality -- Hang it -- It breeds ill Blood -- Shall a
Non-conformist-Bishop send Men to the Devil for Nonconformity? Hey-day --
where live we?

Besides, Cruelty, Severity, and Persecution, does ill become a Protestant
Bishop; the Servant of the Lord should not strive -- but with meekness
instructing (not Jayling, nor Cursing) those that oppose (mark that!)
themselves.

Should they (indeed) Curse them, and Jayl them, and send them to the Devil by
Excommunication, and tossing them to the Magistrate, (as nimbly as if they were
but Tennisballs, and all this Racket about a Moot-case, or, Money matter) by
Significavits, in order to Jayl them? And then the nimble Magistrate tosses
them to the Bishop again?

As the Justices of Middlesex admonish or desire you, in their late printed
Declaration, to deliver Men to Satan by Excommunication, that so (also and
likewise) they may not be capable of suing for their lawful Debts, nor be
Competent Witnesses, nor Jurymen, nor Testators.

This is no Persecution to speak of -- but -- except death -- what is worse? --
Nay, it is worse than Death to be thus used for a Bawble.

Time was when I writ -- Curse ye Meroz -- that I was just of those Men's
scandling. -- And in this particular, had no more wit than Sir George Jefferies
-- who then admired my folly, (for such it was) as all Men admire those things
that sit their own size, their pitch, and their attainment, their honor and
their scantling.

But, I confess, my Lord, at that time, I knew no better, (How does Interest
blind the Eyes of the
wisest?) 'till I considered the Golden Rule of our Savior in this case, of
doing as we would be done unto; And how loath we should be, that the rigor of
Law should be exacted for our Nonconformity, or -- Premunires -- And that
Empson and Dudley were hanged for being so rigerous (against the general sense)
in exacting the penalty of Statutes, in force too: Some Justices (now) admire
this Policy: Hullou! Let them go on -- They got the Law in their own Hand. --

Time was, when I looked upon all Nonconformity, to proceed from Humor,
Frowardness, Self-conceit,
or Design, rather than from tenderness of Conscience (the mock of Atheists
that have none) until I had impartially weighed their Arguments, which I could
never (as yet) meet with any Man that was able to answer; if you can, you
understand more than I.

No, not that Argument of King Charles the First, mentioned just before the
last Verses of my Black Nonconformist -- concerning
Conscience -- God's Throne -- And therefore refrain -- Do not (like the
Giants) attempt to scale Heaven -- the Babel is in vain to boot -- though Pope
and Devil -- High Commission or Inquisition should confederate against
Conscience (God's Throne) it is hard for such Persecuting Readiness to kick
against the Pricks.

Besides the great Friend of Persecutors (innuendo) the aforesaid Devil usually
leaves them (as he does Witches) when he had brought them to the Gallows. --

I do not desire you should, in a sour humor -- turn the Cordial Wine in this
Letter to Vinegar, and cavil
at it, as formerly, and make it my Accuser; but do -- if you have the boldness
-- for I will justify it to a Tittle; and that there is no Scandalum Magnatum
in it, to any but the Wicked, who have most need on it, and therefore much good
may it do them.

There is a Divine Nemesis, a Divine Vengeance (the Heathens could say) that
pursues bloody and cruel Men -- they shall not live out half their days; like
that Heathen Adonibezeck (I shall live to hear them say) As I have done, so God
has required me.

And, my Lord, you have not such Enemies under Heaven (in time you will believe
me) as these Ecclesiastical Fellows that egg you on, and hearten you on to
stalk as their Promoter, for their own little; and baser Ends and Gain, (in
their dear-bought Offices and Places) to these harsh Methods, so below the
dignity of a Bishop -- saying -- What will become of Discipline? what of the
Church? Fie on them!

What care they for Discipline? that (as well as they love Money) coin but
little out of Whores and Rogues, Swearers, Drunkards, Tories, and Blasphemers;
except of a poor Whore now and then -- but Money will redeem or buy off a white
Sheet.

But, if there be a conscientious Nonconformist -- they coin him presently --
or -- if he will not down with his Dust -- and ready Darby -- then curse him
and Jayl him. -- Brave doings! and yet what Wretches in England are greater
contemners of the King's Laws than they? or, greater Oppressors?

And how can you answer it, to talk of Discipline and Excommunication, and be a
Promoter, -- and yet not deliver these Fellows to the Devil, amongst other vile
Sinners? What has the House of Prayer to do with a Den of Thieves?

For shame! for shame! for shame of the World, and speech of People, abhominate
this Partiality, or, pretend to no Discipline at all. The very Heathen Romans
did so hate Partiality, that Brutus sacrificed his Son to Justice: And shall a
Christian, nay, a Protestant, nay, a Protestant Bishop, be guilty of
Partiality?
and draw his two-edged Sword against some Dissenters, and some Non-con's, and
some that marry without Blanck-Licences or Banes, and yet connive at others;
nay, at the impudent contempt of the King's Laws, in Extortions and
Oppressions, and illegal Fees, of his own Servants and Officers just in his
Eye, and under his Nose?

It admits no Answer -- no Cavil to evade it -- A Praemunire is not harsh for
harsh Men, and partial and unjust, cruel Men. Augustus (busy to reform the
State) blushed when a Peasant bid him go home and reform his own House first,
his Wife and Daughters, being the veryest Whores in Rome. Whose Vices? what
Sins? what Oppressions does your Discipline-mongers correct? no, not their own;
good doings the
while -- when Vice corrects Sin -- nay, it does not that neither -- if there
be Friendship, Tory-ship, Tantivee-ship, or Money in the case -- Rare
Discipline! -- Let me hear no more talk of Discipline, except it were better.
Where does one (of all the Whores in England) stand in a white Sheet for lying
in polluted Sheets; are they amicae Curiae.

Besides, Tho to me it seems improbable, that ever Popery should be the
State-Religion, yet it is possible that it may be so, and then -- by this Act
of Uniformity-Principle, we must all be Papists or Mariyrs -- Then I think we
have uniform'd sinely, and have made a sine Scourge for our own Backs -- And
well may the Inquisition-men stop our Mouths with our own Arguments, and
Methods unanswerably, with -- Out of thine now Mouth will I judge thee, thou
wicked Servant --

But, all this while, I had almost forgot our old Friend Mr. Manwaring and his
Sentence -- which was. --

7. That his said Book was worthy to be burnt; and that his Majesty may be
moved to grant a Proclamation to call in the said Books, that they may be all
burnt accordingly, in London, and both the Universities, and for inhibiting the
printing thereof upon a great Penalty.

This was a true English-Parliament -- in 28, and not that of 40, nor 41: 41 as
the rascally-Hireling Pamphleteers thunder it, Slaves like Esau, that vilely
sell their Birthrights. And all the Addressers in
England, can never choose other than true Englishmen to defend their
Liberties, their Lives, their Estates, their Children and their Wives (basely
sold by Pensioners formerly) -- tho the Tantivy-Slaves little deserve such a
Parliament. England is not frenchisied, nor ever will, never think on it,
they will dye (first) a thousand Deaths, if possible: Men may as well talk of --
21, -- and 28, -- and 71, -- or -- 91, as 41. For when we are dead, our
Children will be true freeborn Englishmen (and so dye) if they be not
Bastards.

Now, my Lord, compare the Crimes of the Laudian-Convocation of 40, (for which
you do so stickle, and hate me, and vex me ever since I opposed them) Canon 1.
with the Crimes of Manwaring charged upon him in Parliament by Mr. Rous,
namely, a Plot, and practice to altar and subvert the Frame and Fabric of this
Estate and Commonwealth.

1. In laboring to infuse into the Conscience of his Majesty (Oh! may such
Ear-wigs never now come so near him!) the persuasion of a Power not bounding it
self with Laws (the very Crimes charged against Duke Lauderaale and the E. of
Danby by the Loyal Long-Parliament) they sat never the longer for that tho)
But what cared they? which King James of famous Memory, calls in his Speech to
the Parliament; Tyranny, yea, Tyranny accompaned with Perjury. (where is your
Jus Divinum now, my Lord? and your Prime-Law?) In your Constitutions of -- 40:
See the Articles and Impeachment of Archbishop Laud.

2. In endeavoring to persuade the Conscience of the Subjects, that they are
bound to obey Commands illegal; yea, he damns them for not obeying them (vide
your Can. 1. of 40, to the same tune.)

3. In robbing the Subjects of the Propriety of their Goods, (vid. the
Proceedings twelve Years together, from 28 till 40, whilst Bishop Laud was a
Minion and a Privy-Counsellour) in Loanes (you may call them Gifts, for they
were never repayed, Ship Money, Customs, and such like) If a High-way-man say,
with Sword in hand, Come -- Friend, I must borrow your Purse, we had as good
give it him as be cut.

4. He brands them that will not lose this Propriety with most scandalous
Speeches and odious Titles, to make them both hateful to Prince and People; so
to set a Division between the Head and the Members, and between Members
themselves, (and how like, my Lord, are your Proceedings against me ever since
you (said)
you begun to know me, when I spoke against your Canon and Constitution of 40.
How have I been vexed and plagued ever since, a Martyr for the Publick-weal)
against your Canons of 40, by your Promotions, Citations, Processes
Ecclesiastical, about Fiddle-faddle, Suspensions, Excommunications, except I
would pay a Guinny, (which I did) Suits, Articles, Libels, Actions,
Informations, Whispers to Judges and Great Men, Supplicavits, Informations in
the Crown-Office, Defamations as a Person convicted of Perjury, Declarations,
and now, an outrageous, and convicted Verdict of 2000 l. And yet, (for God's
sake) what one Evil have I done? or, who swears against me, but the for-sworn
Rogues, Groom, and Martin, your Apparitors, six Proctors, Harris and Exton, all
Ecclesiastical Fellows? And yet here is no Plot (belike) against my righteous
Name and Reputation; I never was quiet one whole week together since that fatal
time that your Lordship begun to know me; Know me! for what? for what? for what
you shall know me till I dye, (against your Lambeth-Canons of 40) a true
freeborn Englishman, that has a lusty Posterity, and Estate for my Heirs;
and Heirs for my Estate (if I can but keep it out of your Episcopal-Gripes) and
I Will gage all I have (cheerfully) upon this Quarrel and Difference, the true
cause of all our Differences ever since, and more fit to be decided by a
Parliament, than a Tory Jury, picked and singled out. If I had said, as you
said, and as the Convocation of 40 said, and as the Poor Clergy (then present)
durst do no other than say, It had been 2000 l. in my way, and a better penny,
the Canons of 40. with a Curse and mischief attending them. But no Bribes can
tempt me, nor Fears appale me; as the Cardinal told the Pope of Luther when he
refused a Cardinals Cap, -- Germana illa bestia non curat aurum: Therefore keep
your Gifts to your self, and your Threats too, and reserve your High Places and
Preferments for Tantivies, I am none; nor for Threat or Money to be made a
Slave, or a Traitor to the Fundamental Laws and Constitutions of this Kingdom;
and this, as Mr. Rouse styled it, to the Speaker without Rebuke, This State and
Commonwealth; not unlimited and absolute Monarchy, but bounded within Laws;
not by prime Law of Nature, nor by express Texts of Holy Scripture, as falsely,
Can. 1. of your Constit. 40. but by human Bargain, Compact and Stipulation,
contracted and agreed unto betwixt the King and his People.

5. To the same end, not much unlike to Faux and his Fellows, he seeks to blow
up Parliaments, and Parliamentary Powers. God grant there be no such Vilanies
alive at this day! No such privy Earwiggs -- nor therein Successors of Laud.
One would think a Bible should better become Bishops, than unhinging of
Governments and Fundamental Laws, that the Sycophanis have no skill in, thus --
unlike Apostolical-Men -- and leaving the Word of God to serve Tables: Acts 6.
2, 4. nay, leaving it to do Mischief and get the Kingdom's Curse, and sometimes
a Block for their Pains, and unsuitable Albtro-Episcopal Mischief. Hamlet, King
of Denmark, was poisoned and killed, by Poison poured into his Ears as he lay
carelessly and securely, and supinely sleeping by his false Friends and
Sychophants. We are told this day by Not. Tompson's Intelligence [Numb. 134.]
that John Wolf [I do not know whether your Lordship ever heard of him or no]
that notorious Pick-pocket, when he was [on Saturday Feb. 18 Instant] at
Salisbury, drawn to Eexcution, confessed that he had picked Pockets at St.
James's Chapel, at the time of receiving the Sacrament, etc. God bless us from
Church-Pick-Pockets! Amen.

Thus [saith Mr. Rouse to the Speaker] you have heard the Voice of the wicked
one -- Judas (quid dabetis?) what will you give me? [two good Livings and
Preferment and Favor, Tantivie] And I will betray this State, Kingdom, and
Commonwealth.

And observe how Manwaring nickt the time for rendering this damnable Doctrine,
namely -- in the Heart of the Loan, and printed in the Term that ended in a
Remittitur. So that you might guess [saith he] there might be a double Plot --
[namely -- at Westminster Hall as well as in the Pulpit at White-Hall] by the
Law -- and Conscience to set on fire the Frame and Estate of this
Commonwealth, was Mr. Manwaring -- [just such another Man as he that justifies
the Canons and Constitutions of 40? well -- he got Preferment by it, but it was
his ruin,] as well as the like Doctrines the ruin of this Kingdom and
Commonwealth.

And by his Divinity [saith Mr. Rouse] he [Manwaring] would destroy both King
and Kingdom: [mark that] the King, for there can be no greater Mischief, than
to put the Opinion of Diety -- [whose Will is a Law] into his Ears: [yet how
ignorantly and impudently, by that Lambeth-Synod, attempted in that Can: 1. of
the Constitutions of 40, from, falsely pretended express Divine Scripture: Will
Men never take warning?

For if [continues Mr. Rous] from the King's Ears, it should have passed to his
Heart, it had been Mortal: you know how Herod perished: [I may add, you know
how King Hamlet perished and died by this Ear-Poyson] Will Men never take
warning?

King Alexander the Great, well answered his Sycophant Courtiers, that Diefied
him -- He that empties my Close-stool, is not of your Opinion; nor did the
Wenches that lay with Jupiter and Hercules think them to be Gods; or, but very
lustful, beastly, Goatish Gods. Jupiter appeared to Io more like a Bull than a
God.

Now [continues Mr. Rous] this Man [Manwaring] gives Participation of
Omnipotence to Kings: tho a Part may seem to quality, yet all does seem again
to fill up that Qualification, and very dangerously, if we remember, that God
says of himself, I am a jealous God.

He goes about to destroy this Kingdom and Commonwealth by his Divinity. But
do we find in Scripture such a destroying-Divinity? [yes, yes, if we believe a
whole Synod, and believe the Constitutions of 40, my Lord, mischievous Canons
of 40, I may well say, and so may all mine, and this poor Kingdom too, ruined
and undone by such Synchophant-Tantivee-Doctrines.] Surely I find there [namely
in Scripture continues Mr. Rous] that God, is the God of Order, and not of
Confusion -- and that the Son of God came to save, [mark that -- my Lord] and
not to destroy. By which it seems he has not his Divinity [mark that too -- my
Lord] from God, not from the Son of God -- And that we may be sure he went to
Hell for his Divinity, he names sundry Jesuits and Friars, with whom he has
consulted (mark that too) and traded for his Divinity. But not to be-ly Hell it
self; the Jesuits are honester than He [mark that too] for if he had not
brought more Hell unto them, then he found with them, he had not found this
Divinity in them, which he has brought forth; yea, in his Quotations he has
used those Shifts and Falsehoods, for which Boys are to be whipped [mark that
too] in Schools, and yet by them he thinks to carry the Cause or a Kingdom,
[mark that too, my Lord] you see the Ground and Occasion of this -- Difference
betwixt your Lordship and my self [begun in the Presence of Mayor and Aldermen
of Colchester] is not private Piques, but an adjudged Case long ago -- in many
Parliaments, and called in 1628, in Parliament, The Case of a Kingdom; and so
it is, and will be -- See the Book called, The Loyalty of the last
Long-Parliament -- wherein, tho there was a long Bill of Pensioners (who may
yet live to be hanged, for it is far worse than robbing by the Highway) said
to be found amongst them, such as the Treasurer had gratified with two hundred
thirty one thousand six hundred and two Pounds in two Years time -- (Oh
liberal! on a poor Kingdom's Stock, and so empty an Exchequer -- as the Widows
and Orphans howl!) Yet the major part of the Parliament did, and for ever will
continue true Englishmen to the ancient Constitution and Frame of --
Government, and the Fundamental Laws -- (the Scoff of Tories and Tantivies.)

This Loyal Long-Parliament plainly told the King in their Address against Duke
Lauderdale -- Feb. 23. -- 75. (not 41 nor 40.) that he was abused -- saying --
Some Persons in great Employment under your Majesty, have fomented Designs
contrary to the Interest of your Majesty, and People, intending to deprive us
of our Ancient Rights and Liberties, that thereby they might the more easily
introduce the Popish Religion, and an Arbitrary Form of Government (well
coupled in troth -- Papist and Tantivie -- together) to the ruin and
destruction of the whole Kingdom, etc. (then particularizing) The Duke of
Lauderdale, did publicly affirm in the Presence of your Majesty sitting in
Council (I am apt to think your Lordship heard him) and before diverse of your
Majesty's Subjects then attending, that your Majesty's Edicts ought to be
obeyed -- for your Majesty's Edicts are equal with Laws, and ought to be
observed in the first place. -- Thereby justifying the said Declaration (of
March 15, 71.) and the Proceedings thereupon, and declaring his Inclinations to
Arbitrary Councels, in terror of your Majesty's good Subjects.

They conclude thus -- We do therefore in all Humility implore your Sacred
Majesty -- That for the ease of the Hearts of your People, who are possessed with
extreme Grief and Sorrow to see your Majesty thus abused and the Kingdom
endangered; that your Majesty would graciously be pleased to remove the said
Duke of Lauderdale from all his Employments, -- etc.

Wherein, if his Majesty has gratified his People to ease their Hearts from the
said Terror, your Lordship knows better than I.

And in their Addresses against the King's Declaration of Indulgence -- they
tell his Majesty plainly, but with all Humility -- That Penal Statutes in
Matters Ecclesiastical (mark that) cannot be suspended but by Act of Parliament
-- and yet some Judges have been of another Opinion, (I know who, and where,
and when, when time shall serve.)

And tho his Majesty tell them in answer -- That they question his Power in
Ecclesiastics, which he finds not done in the Reign of any of his Ancestors.

And in fine -- His Majesty did desert the misinformations of Earwigs, and
adhered (as most safe) to his great Council of Parliament, and did cancel that
Declaration -- (notwithstanding the suggested-Power in Ecclesiastics) and
declared it should be no President for the future. Let no man dare make any
such suggestions for the future, and may such Earwigs also be banished to any
part of Earth, or into the Earth -- rather than thus to plague a King and
Kingdom at this rate, in all Ages, and vex and grieve his Sacred Majesty and
his Parliaments -- what a pother and a do have Parliaments had with these
Tantivies in all Ages? And how ruinous and ruful were the Consequents -- I know
not whither you -- my Lord, can remember, But -- I can, by woeful experiment --
you said you begun to know me -- now you know me better, and I know you in part
-- I hope I shall know you better; the only design of this Letter --

I wish Synods, and Lambeth Convocations, and Bishops would keep to their
Bibles, and mind their own business (work enough, in conscience, for 1000
Bishops in England if they would stoop to be Conformists to the Act of
Uniformity, and more than a thousand Bishops can legally perform, if there were
so many in England (for there was a greater number in a far less spot of ground
in Africa, Contemporaries with S. Austin the Bishop of little Hippo, that was
never so big as Islington) which is not impossible; nay -- if we had a thousand
Bishops in England they could not at all do -- the confirming work alone -- let
alone the Work in the House of Lords, and at the Councel-Board, and their
promotions at Doctors Commons, and there Actions, Suites, and Declarations and
Libels, as Action-drivers and Promoters, and Visitations, and vexations) of
ruinous consequence to the Projectors as well as to the Kingdom) such as the
Tantivie Doctrine of Manwaring and little Laud -- that had better minded his
Book, his excellent Book against Fisher -- then to turn Politick-Engineer, and
Master-Gunner in planting of Canons against the Fundamental Laws, that such
Tantivies are not skilled in -- but if they read but of a King in Scripture,
though it be Rehoboam, (that Fool) or Caesar (that Heathen) then Heysday! --
for the Pulpit -- or the Synod -- Hey for Lambeth and the Canons of 40.

But, you will say, what have I to do (a Priest also) with these State-matters'

To which I answer. 1. These State-matters) improperly or foolishly handled by
your Tantivee-Archbishop Laud, and your Tantivees (Bishops that would have
been) Sybthorp and Manwaring) and by your Tantivee Canon. 1 of the
Constitutions of 40 was by you justified in your public Visitation, and before
the Mayor hnd Aldermen of Colchester, and the greatest part of the Gentlemen of
the Town and Clergy of that Precinct; and for you boldly to recommend or
justify this Tantivie-Canon 1 of the Constitutions of -- 40 -- I know not
whether all the Clergy you have, or any Friend in England would have thus
adventured -- suo periculo -- to awake you out of this Tantivee-dream -- in
which, as in the old disease (the Plague of Englishmen, and of Englishmen
only) called Suder Anglicus, or the English-sweating-sickness, if you sleep in
it, it is mortal, if you had a hundred thousand lives; and I think you are
beholden to me, above all mankind, him that you have thus vexed above all
mankind, for nothing but the cause -- the cause of the Kingdom -- the cause --
and Fundamaentl-Laws, scoff't at and derided by none but drunken Tories, and
Sack-posset-Tantiviees that cry -- brother -- let me pledge thee -- Brother
Sybthorp, Brother Two Livings Brother Manwaring, Brother Arch-Laud; they will
be loath to follow him though at the long run, and latter end -- But it is that
we must all come to -- If we be Tantivees -- therefore as you love your self,
my Lord, and me -- Let me hear no more -- in my part of Essex -- any more
Commendations, Justifications, Aggravations, or Recommendations, of this
ignorant Synod, and Tantivee-Convocation -- of Lambeth -- in their
Constitutions of -- 40 -- nor of any such Synod-men, that were never lick't
into Form-Political; let them tell Sacred Stories of God and Christ -- I but no
more Politic Canons of -- 40. against the Fundamental Laws -- if you love me,
or my betters, (innuendo) your Lordship for one.

2. This Politick-Lecture of State-matters begun by you and your Lambeth-Synod
has been a Plaguyvexation to our Kings and Parliaments in all Ages -- read the
History of the Barons Wars in King John's Reign -- Hen. 2. Hen. 3. The Edwards
-- The Richard's, the Henry's -- I had almost said -- The Charle's. By what I
have said, you read the said Bickerings in the Reigns of King Charles I. and
our present Sovereign King Charles the II, and His Loyal House of Commons, then
which never any King was more Happy than He in that -- yet (though) chosen in a
time of Languishing Expectation, after the Prosits and Benefits of a King
(which we had too long wanted) they were Englishmen still -- And he is an Ass
that expects a fitter juncture or more auspicious Election -- for the choice of
Parliament to carry on any Designs but what are Catholic, and according to the
Good Old Cause -- I mean the Fundamental Laws -- which not a few swearing and
beggarly Pamphleting Tories, and unthinking and very impudent Tantivees, and
withal very ignorant, are able to defeat, though they draw down their Canons of
40 -- which I thought had been nailed and damned, and ram'd 40. years ago, by
the Tories Themselves and Tantivees to whom they proved so fatal -- will men
never take warning? must Parliaments always be plagued with these Earwiggs and
Tantivees? Flaterers and Court Sycophants, and Blesphemous Insinuators of
Divinity into Humanity by a most Atheistical Invention of a New Hypostatical
Union -- But the Holy Trinity admits no Partners, though the Priests teach us,
or inculcate never so villanously, traitorously, falsely, illegally,
unscripturely, irrationally, or blasphemously. It is a high shame, that is the
truth on'c, that such Tantivee-Doctrines should thrive -- and such as stand up
for the Ancient Laws and Liberties must suffer above all others: it is a shame,
power should be thus abused (like a silk worm) to ruin and consume its self to
bedeck worse Vermin -- it is a shame -- I will not venture to say any more --
but draw a Curtain over some men's shame, because I will not show -- all --
their Nakedness -- I forbear -- my Lord I have done -- And leave you to think
sadly to think (and with sorrow (I hope) and repentance too) for justifying
this first Canon of the Constitutions of 40. those Chequer-works of different
Hue -- black and white -- good and bad -- especially the First of them -- nigro
carbene notamur -- let you and I remember that First fatal Canon of the 1. of
the Constitutions of 40. that has been so mortal already, and will still prove
(without very timely and immediate Repentance) baneful to one of us, or rueful
to both of us, or to this Kingdom, State, and Commonwealth.

But still you will object -- what have I to do to discuss these State-matters,
sit chiefly for a Parliament?

I answer -- That you have given the occasion (the sad occasion) It now becomes
me, and becomes necessary what before had been as impertinent as for a Bishop
or Synod-man to meddle in the State Affairs.

But 2. Do you compare my Skill or Learning or Vndeastanding in Laws and
State-matters -- with mere Cassock men, mere Synod-men, that never yet were
lick't into other Form or Fashion, than their own Tantivee Will and Inclination
-- undisciplined, unrefin'd in Judgment, by the study of the Law of the Land,
the study of men, and the Laws and Tempers and Constitutions of Foreign
Kingdoms, more whereof I have seen than some Tantivee Circingles ever read off
(in Heylin's Geography, if they have it) And do you compare my
Knowledg-Salt-water-Souldiers Knowledge in State-matters, Do you compare us that
have been Soldiers (at least on this side the Water in times of Peace) with
mere Cassockmen? I Hope there is no Compare, at least the Comparison is as
odious, as groundless.

But, I had almost forgot the Provost of Eaton, where I left him (Mr. Rous to
the Speaker) saying --

For a Conclusion, to give you the true Character of this man (Dr. Edward
Manwaring) whom I never saw, I will show it you by one whom I know to be
contrary to him -- Samuel -- (we know all to be a true Prophet, now we read of
Samuel -- that he writ the Law of the Kingdom in a Book, and laid it up before
the Lord. And this he did as Mr. Manwarings own Authors affirms -- That the
King may know what to command, and the People what to obey.

But, Mr. Manwaring, finding the Law of this Kingdom written in Books, tears it
in pieces, and that in the presence of the Lord (right Tantivee) in a Pulpit,
that the King may not know what to command, nor the People what to obey.

Thus Mr. Manwaring being contrary to a true Prophet, must needs be a false
One, and the Judgment of a false Prophet (mark that) belongs to him.

I have showed you an evil Tree, that brings forth evil fruit, and now it
rests for you to determine, whether the following sentence shall follow, cut it
down, and cast it into the fire.

Thus have you seen, my Lord, what a Pother and a do, these Clergymen have made
in the Kingdom, how Parliaments have been plagued with these Tantivee-Jehu's,
(nay Kings most of all, and themselves also) the Rash Phaeton's setting the
world in a flame by ambitiously mounting and driving switch and spur, Gallop
and Tantivee in a Chariot they have Pride to mount, but no skill to drive,
sindging and burning themselves to boot in flames of their own kindling.

In your next Visitation, I hope, we shall hear no more of these Canons and
Constitutions of -- 40 -- I wish it for my own sake, that would avoid all
occasions of Contests, Differences, Suits and Disputes with all men, more
especially with you, but I wish it also more for your own sake, you will most
repent it in Conclusion, if it take Air, and be noised abroad so loud, till it
come to the Ears of the King and Parliament, (when we got one) His Majesty has
promis't his Subjects frequent Parliaments; the Fundamental Laws; which
whosoever attempts to undermine, and liker another Faux, to blow up, it will be
his ruin, and fall heavy on his head.

Better leave no Lands, no Fields to our Heirs, than Akeldama's only, or Fields
of Blood; or else in base Tenure, at the Will of the Lord -- much worse, at the
mercy of every Court Sycophant that may well beg us and our Estates for Fools,
if we be willing to part with our Fundamental Laws for Manwaring's Sycophantry,
or, your so magnified Can. 1. of the Constitutions of -- 40.

And, in your next Visitation, not my Sufferings will so far daunt the
English-Clergy, but that they will remember, they are Englishmen, not Scots,
nor Irish Tories, nor Lambeth Canon-men, especially when their Eyes are a
little more opened with more Naked-Truth -- for Magna est veritas and
praevalebit; Men will not long be blinded (under pretense of Loyalty) to abuse
the King, the Constitutions of the Kingdom and themselves and their
Posterities; nor be willing to bold their Liberties, their Estates, their
Lives, their Wives and their Livings ad nutum Episcopi, no, nor ad libitum
Regis, but ad libitum Legis. Oh vile Slaves! willing by cowardly Pedantry or
ambitious Sycophantry to be Hoodwink't, and led by the Nose to a certain
Precipice and ruin, or, to have a Ring put through their Nose, and led about
like Bears for Sport, or, Collars about their Necks, because enameled perhaps,
or made of Silver -- and snapping and biteing and snarling at him above all
others that would take the Collars off, wnuld unringle them, would unhoodwink
the blind-men Buffs in spite of their Teeth: I Will do it, I am resolved, let
them snarle and bite -- poor hearts -- it is their nature -- they cannot help
it, nor can I in reason expect other requital of my Charity, I know them, the
men and their Communication -- the men and their innate envy, and peevish
revenge: In time, they will grow better, when prejudice and passion makes them
not forget that they are Englishmen (not Irish-men) Christians, (not Bigots)
and willing to be governed by our ancient English Constitutions and Laws (not
the Manwaring and Laud's Canons and Constitutions of -- 40.)

Have we, with so much ado, been puzzling all this while, these 40 Years, and
are we not yet got over the Lambeth-Canons and Constitutions of 40? must the
Church and Kingdom twice be split on the same Rock? some men endeavor it might
and main; or else the Loyal Long-Parliament were not the Happy House of Commons
(as the King styles them) at least not happy in their Intelligence, if they
struck so violently (without sufficient Reason) against Duke Lauderdail and the
Earl of Danby, for this very cause of the Kingdom, The Good Old Cause) (without
a Sarcasm) Good for the King and Kingdom, the best and surest, if not the only
way to make the King and Kingdom happy, safe and pleasantly united, against
which (the old and true foundation and principle) none ever yet attempted, but
it proved his ruin, bringing the Old House over his Head.

And when you have impartially weighed the mischiefs that have attended these
new Sybthorpian Doctrines, Manwaring and Dr. Lauds false Canon of -- 40. you
and I shall never more quarrel, nay, let us now shake hands, enter the Ring
again, and try the other touch in a New Trial, or, let us shake hands, and be
friends, and on Condition you be so Good Natured as to remit this
Unconscionable and Outrageous Verdict I to show my Good Nature, in requital
will Remit the Injuries aforesaid, the Original Sin that has tainted the
Consequent Differences and Contests, I hope I have in this Long Letter given
your Lordship such sufficient satisfaction about the Canons of 40 -- the
vanity, the Mischief and Falsehood especially of the 1. Canon thereof that, like
eager Disputants, we shall end just where we began, and yet, both be wiser and
better, and the Kingdom too, for this Contest, and then this Outrageous and
Unconscionable and Unreasonable Verdict will have a Happy Issue, in either
Curing the St. Anthonies Fire Heat and Tantivee-Flame, that has not only
endamaged Me, but Endangered the Peace of the Kingdom, if we believe the late
Long and Loyal Parliament, or if not convert, at least convict and rise up in
Judgment against those Erostratus's, that get great Titles by setting the
Church on Fire again by such Tantivee-Heats as produced and brought forth that
destructive-Canon 1. of the Constitutions of 40 and burnt a fine Church.

Yet some tell me, that all this Long Letter is but labor in vain, that you
are set upon a Will and Revenge, and whom you once hate you know not how to
Remit, but I have other hopes: surely I do not wash a Blackamore, nor preach
thus long a Sermon to as little purpose as Saint Bede when he preached to a heap
of Stones, or, as if I were preaching to the Rocks, near Silly, called The
Bishop and his Clerks, you cannot be so Stony-hearted I think: but, either you
will Remit the Verdict and be friends, or accept of those Honorable and
profitable Proposals which I hear make you of a New-Tryal: and if you will do
neither, the World shall know it, that they may judge betwixt you and me, and
my Six substantial Witnesses, and your single, interessed Witness, that swears
for his own ends, to get me out of my Rights, which you have unlawfully
endeavored to invade by an Illegal sequestration, the cause of the words
betwixt us: and the Canons of 40 the cause and first occasion of your
displeasure against me, which made you so willing in defiance of (1 Timothy 5.
19.) Gods Holy Word to receive an accusation, nay, and prosecute it too, upon
the single Testimony of an in famous wretch, who wants the necessary
accoutrement of a Liar, a good Memory, whom I have begun to prosecute for the
Perjury: I hope you will not still countenance him against such a Man as I am,
I have also prosecuted for Perjury your other Apparitors, Groom, Martin, and
your six Procters of Doctors-Commons: blush for them, help them not for for
shame -- (I hope) no -- noli prosequi nay I am advised to make an attaint
against the Jury.

I have in this Letter, made very sharp Reflections and corroding Epithites, of
the Laudian-Faction and Tantivee-Principle; It is not rashly done, but upon
good Advice, such spreading Cancers and dangerous cannot be corrected, checked,
nor cured without Precipitate Corrosives. For this Lambeth Divinity ruins
Humanity, Polity, and Policy.

We do not live in Muscovy (where John Valevodsky (I believe I do not write it
right) the Muscovy-Duke and Emperor of Russia, Tyrannically laid a Tribute
(upon the people) of several bushels of living Fleas and (in default) an
outrageous Fine and arbitrry.

If it had been bushels of dead Fleas, I believe I knew where he might have
been fitted the last Summer but Fleas have a skittish Property, and are sooner
killed than jail'd, or put into pound, except they be dealt with as the Spanish
Friar dealt with the Musquetoes of the Bay of Campeachy in America, namely, he
Excommunicated them, and then every body knows it is not very far to the Jail
or pound.

The Tyrant had as good have seized their Lands, their Liberties, their Lives
and their Wives, without the Ceremony of Bushels of Fleas; only to pick a
quarrel -- For so the Tyrannical Bashaws of Egypt at this day, bring thither a
Ship load of Tin, and without the Philosopher's Stone, turns it immediately to
a Ship load of Silver, by sending to every man, according to his Estate, a
quantity of Tin, commanding them to send him, the like quantity of Silver, and
so the Bargain is made; or, if they do not like the Bargain, a Mute goes along
with the Janissaries, and does the men's business with a Bowstring, if they do
not cheat them, and save them the Labor by making use of his own Bed-Cords,
before they come nigh when he first hears they are coming and knows their
Errand Tyranny needs no Ceremony, but a long Sword.

These arbitrary Cruelties are common in Turkey, Muscovy, and a little (I fear)
in France, and the Priests make them believe they have a Jus Divinum, and
express Texts of Alcoran (in English) holy Scripture for all; But the Canons of
40. are not yet Canonical, my Lord, nor ever shall if I can help it, though you
prosecute me with all the united Power, privy Whispers, Affidavits, Verdicts,
Articles, Libels, Supplicavits, Informations, Declarations, Suspensions,
Silencings, Jails, and Bails, or your severest weapon, namely, (what the Friar
frighted the Flys with) Excommunications.

But I have by this fair Proposal so profitable to you acquit my self in the
Judgment of all Ingenuous men; for if it be profit, or my money you seek, that
I will secure, if you recover by an indifferent Jury; if Honor, that is better
secured, by this Proposal: for it can be no Honor to you, if you dare not try
the cause before (not a pitckt Jury for the nonce) but such a Jury as is
indifferently returned upon other Trials.

And if nothing will prevail with you but you will keep the catching hold you have
got, nor listen to any thing but revenge, revenge, except I make dishonorable
and base Submissions, then Scabbard! be gone -- fight on -- be bold,

And let him fall that first says -- hold,


I believe you do not read my Books, for if you had impartially weighed the
7th. Page of Naked Truth second part. second Edition, I should have been more
in your books then the Canons and Constitutions forty. read 21 Hen. 8. 13. or
Acts. 6. 2. 4. against Spiritual-Apostolical-persons meddling with temporal
Councels and Employments, disdain not to bedrawn out of a Pit with rags -- and
do by me as you would be done by, when time shall serve; for these contests are
but a kind of hot-cockles, there will be no sport if we do not lie down in our
turns; especially when I prophesy so right, why, and how, and who it is that
smote me.

Neither despise nor reject with scorn the good Admonitions in this Letter; if
I had not loved you well, and better than you deserve at my hands, I would not
have bestowed so much pains upon you.

But there is seldom a greater Plague attending Greatness than the flattery of
their own judgments and conceits, as well as the flattery of Sycophants
without; but what nonsense is it?

The King can make a man a Knight, but he cannot make the Knight one jot the
wiser or more learmed (he may be the poorer) for his Title: The King can make a
Bishop, but all the Kings in Christendom cannot with the Lord convey Learning
and Wisdom, but usually less; for a Lord-Bishop has more Diversions from his
Studies and Books, by attending Councils, and Parliaments, and Confirmations,
and Procurations, and Visitations, Promotions, Suits and vexations, that it is
next to impossible that he can study so much as a Country Vicar.

Robert Grotshead, Bishop of Lincoln, writ a Letter Monitory to the Pope, and
the distance betwixt them two was was far greater than betwixt your Lordship
and my self; nay, Abbot Bernard chid Pope Eugenius, and called him all to
naught; -- The World is the better for these Letters though Pope Eugenius was
hardened in wickedness, and incorrigible, till the Council of Constance took him
in hand convened him before them, imprisoned and unpop't the Old Gentleman, a^
an Adulterer, Sodomite, Symoniacks, etc.

I am sure of one good event of this Letter, namely I have acquit my self in my
own Conscience that I have thus studied the way of Peace as well as Truth --
and by my fair proposal for a new Trial; But if you reject it you get nothing
but my Bones when you catch them; but the Honor will be mine, in that you will
seem to be convicted in your own Conscience, that if I have fair play, I must
worst you, having six to one against you, six honest Witnesses to one little
infamous one -- that has not the docility or memory of a Parrot or Magotte-Pye.

For all men that have any briskishness of Spirit are herein like Tennis-Balls,
which you may safely handle and play with, nay, toss and bandy too sometimes;
but if nothing will serve your turn but with violence to throw them right down,
or downright, it is odds, if they do not rebound, and hit you in the face with
eagerness answerable to the impetuosity.

And if no other Councils but what are violent, will reach your Ears and Heart
-- go on -- In time you will find (as to Tennis) I will return your very best
with Excellent design, and perhaps into your hazard -- or -- hit the hazard of
your Partners and Partakers; nay, I will write your Epitath, that in memory of
your conquest, and how obtained, shall outlast your tomb, and Celebrate your
name and fame to Posterity; though I cannot say, but it might have been more
honorable to you to sport with Flora (as now do you) at (...), then to be a
Promoter (by my Pen Recorded for) a Promoter.

For every thing has two handles, if a Prudent man cannot hold it by one, he
can certainly hold it by the other -- nay; even when he falls he falls but like
a dye, which slur'd or cog'd or thrown which way you will, always rests on a
true side and right bottom; it is true I suffer, but the Original sins was
yours, in that illegal sequestration, and the justifying that first and worst
Canon of the Constitutions of Forty.

Thus am I whipped upon others backs that deserves the lash more then my self:
sometimes you hold up to the men of Doctors Commons (as Promoter) and they
slash me with suspensions, Excommunication; and sometimes they take turn and
hold me up to you by swearing against me, and then you swing'd me with
Supplicavit, Affidavits, Outrageous Verdicts; between you both, I have had a
good time out, I thank you (with twelve men to help you) paid me off to some
tune at -- Chelmesford.

Now if you would be but as good to me as you were to the men of
Doctors-Commons, the Employment would be less Drudgery, and more honorable) as
being a piece of Justice for which the Nation would call you blessed -- namely
-- that you would turn Promoter or Informer against them for their many and
impudent, daily exetortions and oppressions of the Kings Subjects 'till they
groan again -- or, if that will not please you -- do but hold them up to me --
see how I Will make them frisk again -- yet -- a little nearer -- yet nearer --
let me but have them within my reach, And I will so chastise them, that the
whole Kingdom shall joy in me.

But I confess to your Lorship I do not like the sport, I had rather be quiet,
if you and they would suffer me to rest,

My Lord, Your Lordships (humble as well as) Humbled SERVANT Edm: Hickeringill
POSTSCRIPT.
SINCE I writ this, I missing of Mr. Firman, (whom I never saw) -- carried this
Letter My self intending to present it, as well as write it, with my own hand
-- but your Porter and Maid (all the family I could find at London-house) told
me that you kept not Hospitality there, but was gone to your Country House, for
this Summer, I know not how well to get it to your hands, nor how, nor when I
shall have your answer, I going home to morrow, and therefore have Ordered it
to be Printed, hoping that way it will not miscarry, (whatever the Manuscript
may do) which I have this day sent to you by the Porter.

And yet both may miscarry, for I could never yet find that you did ever read
my Letters, except to Cavil at them, and produce my very Apologies as evidence
against me; for my part I know not how to deal with you, you are too cunning
for me, (I am sure) too powerful

And when the quarrel first began about this Tantivee, Heylins, Manwarings,
Sybthorp, Lauds principle and Canon, you did so espouse the cause against me
and the good old cause and was so angry, that before the Mayor and Aldermen of
Colchester (if you could have disgraced me thereby) you passionately said --
that you never desired more to talk with me.

For, (I confess) I was pretty warm upon you for your Lambeth-Canons, and you
(...) not have netled me worse than to fright me (with what the late
Loyal-long-Parliament in their said Address to his Majesty confessed to be a
terror to them, and grief of heart to His Majesty's Subjects) to hear of a
Manwaring, a Heylin, a Laud, a Syhthorp, rediviv'd, or their Canons or
Principles so destructive to the Fundamental Laws or The Good Old Cause.

But you are so seldom Resident at London (the great Episcopal Workhouse for a
Bishop of London's Presence and Residence) and at Fulham the greatest part of
the year, That if you would admit a conference with me (which would be good for
both of us) yet I know not how to obtain it, except I go to Fulham, which is
out of my way (and so will be) till you come to London, where the perpetual
Residence of a Bishop of London is absolutely necessary, (especially, since the
New-Buildings have almost doubled your Diocese) That if you had nothing to do
there, but only to Bishop or Confirm All Saints and All Souls therein, if you
were as High and Great (and I believe you are now past (the Age of) growing,
but if you were now as great) as the Giant Bryareus that had 100 hands, they
would all be too little for the performance of (one single Episcopal Badge) the
Confirmation in the Common Prayer Book.

Nor does the Rubric say, that Men are bound to take a pair of Oars, and go by
Water to Fulham to be confirmed -- as if men were dipped with the Error
Anabaptistical, and thought it necessary to go to Heaven by Water, (more then
needs.)

Surely, you came lately from reading the Eucomiums given to Laud by that blind
(in a double-Sence) that old Tantivee-Bard -- Peter Heylin, upon that
Archbishop, and I would not have you (whom I love so well) to be so ambitious
as to desire to be his Successor, (though) to follow his steps: I hope you will
be wiser before you come to the Grave; they are dangerous steps for you --
believe Me.




The CONCLUSION.
THIS Letter is the Quintessence and Epitome of the whole Book, and may (for a
shift) serve those that will not or cannot find leisure to read the whole Book,
and though writ raptim, and in haste, yet (though I say it that should not say
it) worthy for the matter to be writ in Letters of Gold, and transmitted to all
Posterity; the Subject is so Good, so seasonable, and so needful to be handled.

For however it happen to work doubtfully upon Teagues and Irish-Tories, and
slavish prostituted and Hackney-Pamphleteers; (whose only Religion is their
Gain) yet I doubt not but it has sufficient Virtue in it to Convert all English
Tories and Tantivees, that are not sworn-slaves, and make them perfect WHIGGS:
whose Numbers increase daily (they are never the fewer for me and this Contest
with the Bishop) and multiply wonderfully; and so will still, when things are
well-consider'd, and impartially-weighed, according to our ancient, Honorable,
safe, and most excellent English Frame, and Constitution of Government; Our
Kings are Kings of France, but (God forbid) they should be like the French
King; then indeed (as the Tantivee-Preacher ratled it) our very Souls would not
be our own, nor (scarcely) would God be suffered quietly to enjoy them, as his
share, but All would be Caesar's, our Estates, our Libertiet, our Children, our
Lands, our Lives and our Wives; And then, what shall we have? nay, what shall
God have? If All be Caesar's? such Tantivee-Fops and senceless Preaching-Sots
deserve to be hanged, and till some of them be so served, or, made Exampels of,
we shall never be freed of these ENGLISH Incendiaries; (Tory-Pulpiteers, and
Tory Pamphleteers) but be ruined (twice in an Age) with one and the same
Plagues and Pests. And work (as Negroes do in Barbados) by day for their
Masters, and at night lie with their Wives to get slaves for their Masters too:
And is it not better to have no Charters, no Privileges, then to serve a weary
Apprentyship and give Money to boot, for our Freedom, and yet hold them by no
surer Tenure, then till a Courtier be displeased, or wants Money? And as for
Ecclesiastical Courts, if 16 Car. 1. 11. be in force, and was never repealed,
and that the 13 Car. 2. 12. (repealing 17 Car. 1.) can never be construed to
Repeal, 16 Car. 1.

Then what force have they or Power toward, impose or inflict any pain,
penalty, etc. nor did they, or durst they inflict any pain or penalty (as loath
to venture 100 l. for every offense) nor did they censure any, till 13 Car. 2.
12. repealed 17 Car. 1. 11. but if it did not repeal 16 Car. 1. 11. as it is
evident upon the Parliament Roll, it is 16 Car. 1. 11. that repeals the branch
of 1 Eliz. -- I think they have brought their Hogs to a Fine Market, and stand
liable for all the mischief they have done, to Souls, to Bodies, and to Bones.

I believe some in the Parliament (at least did intend) to repeal 16 Car. 1.
11. but if it be (as it is a great mistake) it is fatal, and not to be
remedied, but by a PARLIAMENT,
and if ever they should be so bold and daring as to inflict any penalty upon
me -- have at them for the 100.l.

Besides, I doubt not but 1 Edw. 6. 2. is in force; for though it is repealed
by 1 Mar. 2. yet that 1 Mar. 2. is repealed by 1 Jacob. 25. and Samson is
unbound again Remoto Impedimento Revivescit; and herewith agrees the Book-Case
in 15. Ed. 3. tit. Petition Placit. 2. Coke mag. chart, 686.

It Is true that 4: Jacob two questions were moved, first whether any Bishops
made especially since the first day of that first Sessions of Parliament. 1
Jacob. were lawful or no.

2. Whether the Proceedings in the Ecclesiastical-Courts, being made under the
name Style and Seal of the Bishop were warranted by Law?

The Chief Justices agreed that 1 Edw. 6. 2. was in force -- for though the Act
1. Eliz. 1. Revive the 25. Hen. 8. 20. Which Empowers Bishops to Act as
formerly, (and consequently or obliquely the 1 Ed. 6. 2. is struck at) yet can
any man in his right wits imagine that it is either true or safe, that a
Statute should be repealed obliquely, and by consequence without the least
thought thereof in the Legislators? this would be of most dangerous
consequence. But the Legislators could not think of repealing that which was
actually and expressly at that time repealed already by 1. Mar. 2. nor of
repealing the Ed. 6. 2. by 1. and 2. Phil. and Mar. 8. which was repealed
already by 1 Mar. and 1. 2. Phil. Mar. that does not repeal 1 Ed. 6. 2. by name
and consequents will not do, nor inferences, this is tricks and wiredrawing, to
defeat a Statute Law by finess or nicety of Wit, or Lawyers-Criticisms. And
therefore there is no need of flying to 1 Eliz. 1. for the repeal af 1. 2.
Phil. Mar. 8. yet the Judges generally extrajudicially were of another opinion.

The case deserves the Resolution of the Judges in open-Court, or in a
Parliament, or both; an extrajudicial Judgment then has been in Jan 4 and 1
July 1637 and the Judges gave their opinions as the Bishops best liked, (Dr.
Laud especially) but the same Judges also to please him, were for the Legallity
of Ship Money, and customs (unsettled by Parliament) see Appendix of Dr.
Godolphins Abridgment of Laws. and Coke Instit. C. 2. p. 685. 686. the Lord
Coke was overawed by the High Commission Court, now the Law is not in awe,
though the Gentleman that gives this Narrative of the said Trial did not take
it in shorthand (he that has so vast a memory shall not need) nor yet is
willing to be known to be the Author of these observations; not that there is a
a word or line in this book that he is not prompt, and at hand and (to choose)
willing to justify, if any dare be so bold, daring and impudent, or so very
ignorant as to oppose these profitable and well known truths, backed with the
Gospel and the Law; Ha? Let me have no grumbling -- you may Whisper, Point,
make Dumb-shows and Signs; but -- I will have no grumbling aloud. But he is not
willing to put his Name to this Book as Author, yet nevertheless (according to
the Common-Custome of Learned Authors that Preface their works with their own
Pictures or Effigies (they shall not need neither, some of them are not so
handsom^, no more then the course face of this Blunt Author) Nevertheless the
Author (to humor the Common vanity) gave me leave to give you part of his
Effigies, or a halfe-face of him, portrayed as follows (not in his first but
last Page of his book) (if you be Oediposses) you may soon unriddle the
aenigma; the Author has a soul so great -- I Will say no more on it -- but as for
his fancy and invention the whole Creation is so immediately at its beck, that
(like Chambers to be let ready furnished) it never wants apt Epithites,
Metaphors, or Expressions to Elucidate the thoughts of his weightier matter and
judgment. But (which are seldom pairs in one man) his memory (Ay, that, that
same -- his Memory) like the French King, seizes all it can lay hold off, right
or wrong: or like the men that drive the Commons, impounds all that comes to
hand -- or, like a Drag Net, it sweeps all, and retains All, the Good, the Bad,
but what its better Judgment purposely waves and throws away, or like a
Sergeant, a Bum, a Snap, a Trap, or a right English-Mastive never lets go its
hold, except the piece come out, when it has once laid hold; and married,
coupled or matched with a Body so perfect a Slave to the greater Soul, that it
never tyres or plays the Jade when set at work sometimes unmercifully and most
Tyrannically used, and yet the willing Slave, like good Horses, keeps it is self
in Good Case, tight and in good plight, and for a Sinner, if it were not
sometimes Priest-ridden, or rid with the spiritual Incubus, or nightmare, I
say, for so great a Sinner -- well to Live-Plump and fat -desiderantur caetera.

Thus have I with a Pen, not Pencil drawn the Authors-Picture; and there is in
some men's Styles as in Faces and Features, such peculiar Idioties and
distinguishing Airs from all others, that it is needless to write the
Authors-name (as was, over dull painting, accustomed of old) -- This is Cock,
This a Bull.

For the notoriety is as easy and remarkable, as a Picked Jury, or a Tory
Sheriff, or a Hunted Deer, that may indeed (endeavoring shelter) a while be
concealed amongst the Crowd, but any easy Sagacity may single him out from the
Common Herd.

But do not you, (ye weekly Libellers and dirty Pamphleteers!) Do not you
profane any more this Effigies; especially Trusty Roger, Mr. Observator!
tremble at aspersion, least the Villainous Attempt you made against the Printers
Widow, (now Mr D -- s Wife) rise up in Judgment against you, to her unspotted
Honor, and your strange and unheard of Villainy, look to it -- And d^re not to
bring your Works of Darkness to Light, The modest Gentlewoman, which your
Goatship would have profaned, is yet alive to attest your Villainy, though you
promised her, that, if she would consent to your Goatship, or Towzers Heat
(above the rage of Dog days) you would, being then Press-Master, permit her to
Print all the Quakers Books and Unlicensed Pamphlets -- only she should lay
them aside before your coming to make a search, of which you would give her
timely notice. Ah! Villainy -- to make the Kings Favor and Trust in Trusty
Roger, A PIMP to Trusty Rogers Goatish Lust; Oh Tantivees -- blush at your
Observator, do not hereafter (ye Reading Don's of the Pulpit!) do not hereafter
take matter out of his Weekly Pamphlets for your Reading Lectures in a
Country-Church -- blush at your Whory, Roary, Scory, Tory Observator; of which,
Mr. Observator, I cannot but, in kindness to you, make this Observation, to
check, if possible) your profane Billingsgate; as if you were -- sworn
Seavinger as well as Pensioner to the Tories and Tantivees -- but I spare you
at present -- However deface not This Pourtrayture -- This is no Common
Effigies, nor every man's share -- This is not the Face of an Hermophrodite or
Lay-Vicar (false and base, as treacherous and low -- Exton -- What? prefer the
Favor of a Bishop before Hickeringill? It is a Sin to cast dirt upon this
Medal: But if any silly Tory or unthinking Tantivee be so Foolhardy, he knows
he may, in just Requital, expext (but that they are not worthy) a Whiggish
MVSHROOM.

FINIS.

