A SPEECH Without-DOORS: OR SOME Modest Inquiries Humbly Proposed to The RIGHT
HONORABLE THE Convention of Estates, Assembled at WESTMINSTER, Jan. 22. 1688/9.

CONCERNING, I. Bigotism, or Religious Madness. II. Tests, and the Present Test
in Particular. III. Penal Laws in Matters of Religion. IV. The Necessity of
Changing and Recanting our Opinions in Religion. V. Restraint of the Press.


By EDM. HICKERINGILL, Rector of the Rectory of All Saints in Colchester.

LONDON, Printed by George Larkin, at the Two Swans without Bishopsgate.
MDCLXXXIX.

To the Illustrious, Right Honorable, and Honorable, The Convention of
Estates, Assembled at WESTMINSTER, Jan. 22. 1688.
Illustrious, Right Honorable, and Honorable,
FOr as much as you are Esteemed (by the whole Body of the People) the wisest
and honestest, and therefore the most able and proper) Healers of our present
Breaches and Distractions, so you cannot better approve your selves such, than
by the best Testimonal thereof (that Possibly can be, viz.) Moderation: For no
Extremes last long.

When Passion, Pride, and Self-Interest (the boldest and worst of Usurpers) do
come to be the Domineering and Prevailing-Party, then Right Reason (and
consequently true Religion and Justice) are deposed and dethroned, and then
comes Confusion and every evil work.

There never can be (nor ever were) more than two sorts of Politicians in
Christendom: The one thinks Justice, Piety, and Honesty the best Policy, as our
blessed Savior, the Apostles, and all Christians that follow their steps.

The other makes use of Justice and Religion too (sometimes) but no further
than they serve his Politic turn, his worldly greatness and glory; (which if
Justice and Christian Religion will not bring to him, then he tries what
Oppression and Superstition will do: For this Brute (as if he had the Soul of a
Beast, and not an Immortal Soul) never looks up to Heaven, nor takes his
measures from him that Made and Rules the World and the Kingdom of men, and
gives it to whomsoever he will; but calculates all his Plots to the Glory of
this World, and terminates them in this life: And if his Plots and the Devil
^ail him, like Achitophet, he does (or is ready to) hang himself; or like that
Brute, the King (Nebuc^^adnezzar) driven from his People, and turned to Grass,
like a Brute as he was, until he knew that the Most High R^leth in the Kingdoms
of men, and and gives them to whomsoever he will.

Our Savior says his Kingdom is not of this World; when therefore we pray, Thy
Kingdom come, we ought not to wish, much less endeavor, that Antichrist's
Kingdom should come. But in carrying on True and Pure Religion and the Gospel,
we ought to content our selves with such Engines wherewith Christ and the
Apostles propagated the same, all the World over, three hundred years before
Constantine was born.

Nor ought we to follow the Antichristian steps of the Pope or Turk. For
Antichrist, or the man of Sin, are surely nouns of multitude, accumulative
words, and signify those that carry on a Superstition contrary to Christ's
Religion; they are Antichrist, or against Christ; and they that sit in the
Temple of God, (God's Throne) commanding Souls and Consciences, as if they were
Gods; they are limbs of that man of sin; which shall fall, by the Finger of God.

Which Finger of God was never more apparently and miraculously seen, than in
this late Revolution, which is like a Resurrection from the Dead; Dead, I say,
(for both we, and our irreconcilable Adversaries had past the Sentence of
Death upon us, unreprievable without a Miracle;) And whoever treads in the
Antichristian steps and Policies of the Man of Sin, by Propagating the Gospel
with force of Arms, can they expect other than to stand or fall with such ill
Company? But as our Riders are changed, we hope also to have our heavy Burdens,
and unreasonable Loads taken off. For, by force chiefly Antichristian Mahomet
made Converts, with his Alcoran (or Bible) in one hand, and his Sword in the
other, (with this motto) If one will not do, the other shall.

And thus the Most Christian Turk makes Converts, with Constables, Hangmen,
Jaylors, Penal Laws, Tests, and Troops of Dragoons. Will the bolder English
never be wiser than to follow French-Fashions? Shall nothing be the mode here,
(no, not in Religion neither,) but what is A-la-mode de Francois?

Never had any Englishmen a greater Trust put upon them, nor a greater Power
put into their hands, than is put into yours this day, in this extraordinary,
rare, necessary (and therefore) Just Convention.

You have virtually in you, the power of all the Laws, and all the Kings and
Parliaments that ever were, or ever shall be again in England to the worlds
End; because, it is in your Breasts, to save, destroy, continue or abrogate
them, or any of them, arbitrarily at your good pleasure.

It becomes not me to determine positively, whether the Monarchy be dissolved
by the Kings d^parture, throwing up the Reins of Government, and will Guide no
longer, quitting the Helm of Empire, and leaving the ship (once more) to the
mercy of the Waves, to sink or Swim; refusing to call Parliaments (the only
Scourge of Evil Courcellors) and in whom jonytly, with himself, was lodged the
Ligislative Power: Or, Whether the General Revolt had taken from him the Power
of Guidance, forfeited by Maladministration of the Executive Power of the
Laws: Or, whether also the Invading of the Legislative Power by erecting a
Dispensing Power, which seems, in effect, but a New Name for a New Legislative
Power.

The Executive Power of our Laws was (by our late Constitution) lodged in the
King alone, (as the Sole Power of the Militia, making Alliances, Judges,
Sheriffs, etc.) a Burden (thought to be) too heavy for any single Shoulder, and
has occasioned two or three general Revolts, and Expulsions of the Monarchs in
the three last Raigns; for the Males Administration thereof (as was at least
pretended) together with other sad Consequences, too dismal to be remembered
here, and too lately done to be forgot; nor need we mention the many and
general Revolts in our Forefathers times, during all the Unhappy Raigns since
William the First; all of them arising from the same occasion.

Yet, will it not well become your Wisdoms, quaerere vias antiquas, to keep to
the old frame of Government, Monarchical; (with what limits of the Executive
Power you shall please;) and (as near as may be with any convenience) to the
old line too, and next Heir?

Not only, because a more awful Deference and Veneration is paid to (what is
anciently) the Royal Family; than to any Vpstart Family; but because the Finger
of God seems to point out, and direct to that Incomparable and Blessed Branch
(thereof) which God has made so strong for his own Self; and the chief
Instrument in the Hand of the Almighty, for our Salvation from Popery and
Slavery.

Nothing (here hinted at) is to inform your Wiser Judgments, that knows much
more of this already, (far be such Vanity from me!) But to stir up your
Affections, and to be One of your Humble Remembrancers.

For every man is now (or never) concerned to put to his helping Hand at this
Dead Life, and you concerned to accept kindly the Service (even of the Weakest)
at least, surely the least you can do, is to thank them for their Love and good
Will, though no otherwise serviceable unto you.

Besides, A Slip now may be fatal; or (at best) not so cureable hereafter as
now; and as is more particularly insisted on in the Conclusion of this Treatise.

I well know, that in this Crisis, every Politic Noddle is pregnant with
Projects, and never at rest, till it be delivered of his Minerva, which perhaps
proves a Maggot. Yet, if what is now said, be evidenced beyond all
Contradiction and Confutation other than (the old Antichristian Engine) a Jayl
be pleased to protect the Author from such Unchristian, Vn-Scholar-like, and
Unreasonable Confutation, until these Inquiries be oppugned with the only
proper weapons, in Spiritual matters, Holy Scripture and Right Reason.

My Lords (the present Bishops, for the generality of them) have approved
themselves (in this juncture) not only most excellent Englishmen, but excellent
Christians, notwithstanding the Now-Church-of- England's-Doctrine of Passive
Obedience; (without exception) and the only Weapon-salve of Prayers and Tears
(a good Doctrine for him indeed that is uppermost right or wrong); and finding
the necessity of Recanting the same; some of them (at least) have in good time
betaken themselves to a keener weapon; and the rest (and those) the best of
them, are willing to come to a temper.

Whereby they do by Implication confess a too feavourish and hot distemper
(that has been) it is now time, to come to the cooler and milder Galaxye (or
milkye way) the only Way to Heaven.

And if any thing, in these modest Inquiries, may tend to our Cure, no moderate
Church of England- man can possibly be offended, except they are past cure and
past 'mending; to such we have nothing to say, but to write, Lord have mercy --
upon their Doors.

Not only the welbeing, but the being of these Nations, depend much upon the
success of this most August, and most Honorable Convention, which has so many
(and those so great) Friends and Enemies.

And is it not now high time to enlarge our Interest, and widen the Church of
England's Pale, and not exclude (out of the Church and the Privileges of it)
the better half of the Nation? Is not this Piety? Nay, Is not this true wisdom
and honest Policy? Now, (now I say) when the Irreconcilable Enemies of our
Holy Religion are (by cruel and bloody Confederacy) bandied and knotted
together, to destroy us and our Religion Root and Branch?

Britain was never conquered but by her self. How? By her divided Parties,
says Tacitus, (the best Roman Historian of the Romish Conquest over Britain)
smiling, Dum singuli pugnabant, omnes victi.

Is it not now therefore time to open the Church-doors as wide as Christ and
his Holy Apostles opened them? Shall Filthyluere, Pride or Malice shut them up,
whilst monopolized to a few that share all the Gains, though the Poor Dissenter
must partake the hazard and the Pains, in our Common Defense? Even Private
Soldiers fight coldly, without any Pay, or any hopes of Reward, in the Booty,
after Victory.

Very excellent men (as it happens, which seldom happens in such a Constitution
of a Church) are now uppermost. But surely we are not obliged to believe all
that they say who happen to be uppermost, only because they are uppermost.

For, though at present we have (for the generality of our Fathers in the
Church) at this time very good men, yet sometimes the very Froth and Skum may
be uppermost.

And therefore if some errors in our Church, both peradventure in Doctrine as
well as Discipline, be humbly inquired into, (if they appear upon moderate
deliberation to be Errors) must we continue in them, or curse our selves to an
eternal continuance therein, or (as in the Office of Commination in the
Common Prayer Book) say, Amen, still, (so be it Amen,) Is it not better to say,
Amend, Amend?

For this Cause the Author humbly hopes that you will pardon the nice formality
of Printing this without an Imprimatur, which cannot in any likelihood be
obtained from the present Licensers, if any thing here thwart their Interest,
and spoil their Trade.

To your Unbyassed and Impartial Reasons therefore, the Author humbly appeals;
And what Book or Author would desire to live, if cast and condemned by such
Judges? And who dare condemn, whom your better Judgments think meet to save?

These following Essays are most seasonable, as to the subject matter inquired
into: But, if for want of dexterity, they be ill handled, yet be pleased not to
discourage this well-meant and humble attempt (here laid at your Feet) since
(at worst) it may serve for a Prompter to put better Heads in mind, and to set
better Tongues at work to discourse the point more accurately within your
Walls, which is now only A Speech without-Doors, by

Your Ready Servant, E. Hickeringil.

SECT. I. Of Bigotism, or Religious Madness.
A Bigot? What Is that? It Is a Spiritual Narcissus; a Self-conceited Religious
Coxcomb, that falling in love with the shadows and Whimses, Opinions and
Imaginations of his own dear Crazy Skull, in matters of Religion; Espouses them
to that height of Dotage, that he will Bustle and fight like mad, and in the
Quarrel wilingly dye a silly Martyr too; at least, will freely venture Life and
Limb, Goods and Lands (though he had Kingdoms to stake) yet neither knowing why
nor wherefore.

For this Spiritual Bankrupt takes up all his stock of Religion upon Trust, and
at all adventures, without ground or reason, other then Education, or some
wilder chance, and therefore believes a Lie as eagerly and firmly as the
greatest Truth, and had been a Mohammedan, if born in Turkey; a Papist, Moor or
Jew, if born in Portugal, and an Infidel in China.

If this Spiritual Lunatic wants Power and Authority, he plays his Religious
Pranks and Freaques only in apish Tricks and devout Mimickry, skiping perhaps
from the Shop board to the Pulpit, where the mad Ape makes such Faces and
Grimaces, quoting of Holy Scripture, and Commenting thereupon, as Frenzically,
impertinently and Fanatically, as Olivers Porter in Bedlam; and if a stranger
(that is not used to it) should spy him there, he might Swear, and safely too
(in the words of Hosea) The Prophet is a fool, and the Spiritual man is mad, or
(more properly and according to the original) The man of the Spirit is mad; and
being crazed with a notion (like Archimedes) runs skiping about, Crying,
Eureka, Eureka, I have it, I have found it; when nothing is found but the soft
place in his head.

But if Magistracy and Authority shall happen at any time to be possessed with
this mad spirit of Superstitious Lunacy: Then for Propagation nothing less will
serve then to increase and multiply this spurious Issue (and Bastard Minerva of
their Priest-ridden Brayns) amongst all their Inferiors and Dependants;
Imposing Creed and Faith, as Magisterially as great Athanasius himself, making
believers and Faith by Statute Law, Cannon-Law; which they must and shall
believe in spite of their hearts, or else by Penal Laws take what follows,
Curses and Anathema, Fire and Faggot, as least, Hell and Damnation, Fines and
Imprisonments; but, Put up thy dagger, Bigot!

Does not Antichrist thus set up the Abomination of Desolation in the holy
place (the Chymera's of his Noddle in the Temple of God) where he sits,
commanding Faith and Consciences,) as Peremtorily and Infallibly as if he were
God; breathing Vengeance, and spitting Fire at all that oppose him, and like a
distracted Indian Bigot, running a Mack at all Mankind, till he kill (or be
killed by) all that stand in his way.

Thus the Bigoted Spaniard converted the Indies with a long Tuck; and thus the
hair-brained French in Bloody Devotion to Popedom (of Two Millions of
Heretics) Confuted and Extirpated Two hundred Thousand of them, and made
Eighteen Hundred Thousand new Converts, with Troops of Dragoons.

Possessed with this Evil Spirit of Bigotisme and devout Phrenzy, King Manassah
Sacrificed his Son to Moloch in the Flames; And King Phillip of Spain gave up
his Son to be Murdered in the Bloody Inquesition, upon suspicion of
Lutheranism: And what Spirit possessed our Neighbor Nation, when no man was
Suffered to buy or sell, or give meat or drink or other Comfort to any whom
holy Church had Excommunicated? Nay, at home here -- How now? No more; Hold
there: Come not near.

It is as safe to Kennel with a mad Bull-dog, or with the Lions in the Tower,
or cohabit with a Madman in Bedlam, as with a Zealous and Furious Bigot; there
is no living with him or near him, except he be muzled, fettered or chained;
for if he break loose, all the sober part of mankind are concerned to join
hands in their own defense; and in Self-Preservation to tie him up.

And if I have here made a Whip of small Cords to lash this Tom of Bedlam out
of the Church where he has made such havoc and disturbance with his magot; it
is but in order to his cure, by gentle stripes to bring him (if possible) to
his wits again, and to reason.

Reason (I say) which is the Souls best Sentinel, which should carefully
examine every thing before it enter, strictly challenging (not who but) what
comes there.

Nothing is more frequently inculcated in Scripture, than Examine your selves,
prove your own selves, try the Spirits whether they are of God: but for want of
this, Popery, Priestcraft, and Bigotism has been the Inveterate and Old Disease
of Christendom; for Popery and Priestcraft always preached up Ignorance, as the
only Mother (and so it is) of Bigotism and silly Devotion: Samson must first
have his Eyes put out, before he can be managed to make sport.

I am sensible, that I treat of a Subject that is seldom or never handled in
this method, and of a Distemper, that will make the madmen rage the more;
there is witchcrast in this frenzy, they are so bewitched as to be in love with
their Disease and will, like other Lunaticks (to choose) fall upon the
Physician, above all others, if he attempt to cure them.

But is it not a Lunacy beyond the wild fury of Bedlam, that Protestants should
now think of new farbushing and whetting the Penal Laws against Dissenters to
their Placet's, arbitrary and wilful Impositions in doubtful and trivial
matters, Lana caprina, and Bar them out of the Church and State (their
Birthrights as Men and Christians) with Tests (designed at first only against
the irreconcilable Enemies of our Religion) and (when the Oath of Supremacy
alone will do the feat) straitning the Church of England to a few, (is it that
they alone may monopolize all the Preferments in Church and State) when all the
Wisdom, Piety and Policy in the World cries aloud to widen the Churches Pale
and enlarge her Interest, now, now especially, when the Common Enemy has drawn
a Sword never to be sheathed but in our Throats? Shall Abraham and Lot, Genesis
13.7. be at strife between themselves about trifles, when the Canaanite and
Perizzite is ready to Land? Is it not yet time to loose the hands of
wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, to let the Oppressed go free, and to
break every (Insolent and Bigoted) Yoke? Isai. 58.6. Read seriously Romans 14.
the whole Chapter is an approved Cure, for Dogmatical and Pragmatical Bigotism.
We read in Scripture, that all Christians should endeavor to keep the Unity of
the Spirit in the Bond of Peace; but where do we read that any Christians did,
or ought to Compel Uniformity, as the Bond of Peace?

But, Hold -- may some say, and have a care; whilst you speak against Bigoted
Impositions, do you not transgress the 39 Articles of the Church of England;
that says, The Church has Power to Impose Rites and Ceremonies?

I answer, That it is time enough to answer that, when you have read what is
said concerning the same here, in the second and Third Section; and also when
any good Body (that can tell) will tell what, and who is this same Church of
England? Who is the Head of it this day? And what Language does a Head speak,
when it is separated from, and not United with, nor of the same Complexion,
Nutriment, and Constitution with the Body?

Ay! But grant that what you say here be Truth, yet a grave Author says, That
all Truths are not to be spoken at all times.

And (Grave Author might to as wise purpose add) therefore all Truths are not
to be spoken at any time, when you touch the sore place: No, no, they will
always (then) kick; you will please them at no time.

Thus Gypsees cant, and would gravely persuade us to shut our Eyes and not
discover their juggling Tricks, wink till ours, or our Friends Pockets be picked;
and then we shall have a License to discover the Naked Truth; Ay, Ay! (Dear
Gravity) but then it is too late.

Thus the old Gentleman that was resolved to dye a Bachelor, silenced his
Friends when they proposed a Match for him in his Youth; Oh no, quoth he, It is
not seasonable, it is too soon to marry; but, when they reiterated the same
Proposal to him in his decrepit age, answers, Now you speak too late; so that
what men like not, is at no time seasonable; they will always quarrel with the
time.

Are not things now, just now, upon the Hinge? Is not this time like the third
and last time of Publishing the Banes of Matrimony? Either now Speak, or else
forever hereafter hold your Peace.

Reason (man's chiefest Light) shines bright enough in many mad men on one side
of the skull, when it is benighted on the other side of the Pericranium, and
crazed with a notion on that side the head: Many madmen in Bedlam will talk
rationally enough, on any subject, except that which first beclouded their
Reason; but then, when you touch upon that sore place, they rave:

Thus, it is reported of a madman that would talk most sensiby in all matters,
except when he saw or discourst of a Ship (for he was crazed by loosing his
Estate by Shipwreck) fancying that all men's Ships that came laden and
well-fraught into the Port, were his own; and was as really overjoyed, when the
Rich Cargoes came home, as if they had truly been his own.

His dear Friends, (pitying his distraction) got him cured, whether he would or
no: Whereupon coming to his Right Mind, he thus thanked his Friends for their
love to him -- Pol me Periistis, amici! you have undone me, Dear Friends! and
beggared me; yet he lost nothing but his Wild Fancy; surely, he was madder for
saying so, than he was before.

But, to apply it; If any Church-of-England man, puffed up with Bigotism and
mad-conceit of the Purity of what some call Church-of-England, both in Doctrine
and Discipline; and (like the whimsical Church of Laodicea) fancying that she
is Rich, and increased in Goods, and has need of nothing; and I (amongst
others) like a true Friend, endeavor to cure him of this Wild Fancy, and
dispel the Cloud that shadowed Right Reason, giving him to understand, beyond
all contradiction, and as clear as day, how and wherein, both in Doctrine and
Discipline, she is wretched, and miserable, poor, and blind, and naked.

That so, she may betake her self to wise Councels, and get Gold tried in the
Fire (that her Hay and Stubble being burnt up, (for she must pass through
Purgatory here, and through the Furnace,) that she may be rich; and White
Raiment to cover the shame of her nakedness, that it may no longer appear; and
anoint the Eyes of our dim Mother, with Eye Salve that she may see the better:
Will any (in their wits) blame a true Son of the Church for his love and
kindness to his pur-blind Mother; which is his Duty? And say, in her name --
Pol me Peristi mi Fili: Verily, verily, you have undone me, dear Son! Surely,
such a mad and unreasonable exclamation would speak her to be incurable, and
would aggravate the Distraction.

SECT. II. Of TESTS, and the Present Test in Particular.
A Test! what is that? It Is a Touchstone to try what Metal any thing is of; and
is as necessary for every Man, every Housekeeper, every Body-Politick, every
Church or State, as is a Touchstone to a Goldsmith, there is no living well
without it.

A Test is of absolute necessity for every man always to carry about him, to
try himself and others; to try both his own and other men's Opinions, Words,
Works and Ways, whether they be right; since all is not Gold that glisters.

A Test is necessary for every Housekeeper that wants a Servant, a Guest, an
Apprentice, a Journey-man, a Bailiff, a Steward, a Friend, or the like; for
though such a Person is recommended, as is in all things fit for his turn,
except only that he is a Papist; (who is obliged to hold (or else he is no
Papist) that the Decrees of Pope and General Council conjoined are infallible,
and particularly, that Bloody Decree of the Council of Constance, that (nulla
fides servant cum hereticis) no faith is to be kept with a Heretic, that is,
no Faith, Oath, or Promise is binding, if it be made to one that is no Papist.

For Papists (like the Jews,) (the basest and most inhospitable People under
Heaven (except Papists) look upon all that are not of their Religion, as Dogs;
nay, the worst of Dogs, good for nothing, but to be proselyted, or knocked in the
head; either to be turned to their Religion, or turned out of the World; not
that every Papist thinks so, but by their Religion they are obliged so to
believe. For which Cause Tacitus calls the Jews, erudelissima and vilissima
servientium pars, the bloodiest and basest Slaves in all the Roman Empire:
Therefore the Jews Test is, Is be a Jew? And the Papists Test (as at this day
in Ireland and France) is shortly this only, Is he a Papist? If it be answered
(when closeted) No, no; then turn him out; let him not be trusted, either with
Arms, a Red coat, or any Office of Trust, or Benefit; bar the Door, exclude
him, shut him out, or perhaps kill him, where they are strong, and not afraid
of their own Throats; for if they be the weaker Party (as in some Cantons in
Switzerland) there they are for liberty of Conscience; but go but over the next
Hills (the Alps) into Piedment, where the Papist is ten to one, then, the word
is, (Peter!) kill and eat.

This makes the World join hands against the Jew and Papist, either they
totally keep them out with Tests made for that purpose, or confine them to a
certain habit, or to a certain Street, or Place (as Dukes-place) to inhabit;
(as we deal with the Feracious and Bloody Tigers and Lions in the Tower) keep
them (we do, but) in a grate; keep them fast, and have a watchful eye over
them, as you love your lives; for they are inhospitable, and Common Enemies to
mankind; stand upon your guard then, keep off, and out of their Claws, except
you pare their Nails.

For this Cause there was so many Penal-Laws and Tests made against Papists, in
the Reigns of the four last Kings; (which (by the way) has sinely been turned
against Protestant-dissenters, who were out of these Statutes, because out of
the meaning of those Statutes) oh! the dexterity of a Jesuit! when in
conjunction with one of his own complexion and face, saving that this Latter
looks not altogether so Sanguine, because a Protestant-Persecutor!

But, will some say, this present Test (of making all men take the Sacrament,
and certify the same, has done notable service against the Papists, in these
times; and therefore though some Dissenters be kept out for Company, it is no
great matter.

But is it lawful then to do Evil, that Good may come thereby? Is not this that
wicked Principle, that with one mind and one mouth we decry and blame in the
Jesuit? Or is it lawful to maintain our Religion or Church by prophane-means,
and by mocking of God? Who would not hate a Religion and Church, that cannot be
kept up without blasphemy, and sinful methods?

But, will some say, God forbid! We never did, nor ever will keep up a Church
by such ungodliness: Then listen, what we have done already in imposing this
said Present Test, of making an Earthly Door, or Political Door-bar of the
Holy, Spiritual, and Heavenly Sacrament of the Lord Jesus.

The Present Test is the more suspiciously Profane, and to be abominated by all
true Christians, because it is said to be the Project of a Politician, that was
always reckoned to have more wit than grace; more of Machiavel than of Christ:
And who made Religion and the blessed Sacraments Politick-tools, and that was
all, at least the chief use he made of Religion, and said (if he be not belied,
that) That was all that Religion was good for; well said Machiavel!

A more undoubted instance of his Profaness cannot Well be given, than in this
present Test; Is it not profane, and most abominable, if the Learned and Pious
Gr^^tus and Dr. Hammond, and other Interpreters of greatest vogue amongst us,
do give us the true, genuine, rational and pious meaning thereof, in their
Comments upon, 1 Cor. 11.29. saying, That to eat and drink unworthily (anaxios)
is to eat and drink unsutably or unmeetly to the end, design and Institution of
the Blessed Sacrament; (so we are commanded to walk worthy (axios) of the
Gospel, that is sutably to the Gospel;) Then he that eats and drinks
unmeetly, namely, to the end and Institution of the Sacrament (not that he may
get Christ, but a Gown, a Sword, a Place or Preferment, making a Test of the
Blessed Sacrament, making Christ (who is the only Door and the only Way to
High Places in Heaven, the only Door to High Places on Earth, making the Bread
of Life, the only way to fill the lean Bellies of a Man and his Family with
Bakers Bread; He that Eats and Drinks thus unmeetly, Eats and Drinks
his own Damnation.

A sad Choice, to Starve here, or be Damned hereafter; nay, some that have
often taken it worthily or meetly, are not always fit in Three Months to take
it Worthily, then take your choice to Starve or be Damned: What a Temptation is
here to damn even a Conformist? What a Temptation to Blasphemy, Atheism, and
mocking of God? Is not this as bold a Stinting the Grace of God, to come within
three Months time? Just like the Canon that enjoins the Sacrament -- However at
Easter? What fit or unfit? What right or wrong? Yes, starve in a Goal, or Eat
and Drink your own Damnation: Oh! Abomination in a Church of Christians! Nay a
Church of Protestants, and a Protestant Nation! Have we not still (as we
formerly had) some ( Quid pro quo's, amongst us) Papists in Masquerade? Papists
with a Protestant Vizor, and Church of England's Vizor on? Turn up his Masque,
let us see. But God will not (long) be mocked with Political Tricks? It is
dangerous Playing our Politic Pranks with Edge-Tools: And is there no way to
bar the Earthly Doors, but with Heavenly Edge-Tools? Have a care of cutting thy
Fingers, Machiavel! Must the Laws made against Popish Recusants always be made
of use against Protestant Recusants, who are out of the Reason of them?

But can any Nation subsist without a Test, a Fence, and a Barred Door to keep
out the common Enemy thereof?

No, I answer, No; There Is none but Fools will neglect their Fence: But the
Oath of Supremacy (a long-try'd and approved Test, and making the Declaration
against Transubstantiation, enjoined 25 Car. 2. c 2. and 30 Car. 2. c. 2.) has
and will do that Feat.

Oh! But Protestant Dissenters then will come in; and get their Birthrights in
Church and State as well as we: Surely there is a way to bar the Door against
our Enemies, and yet let in our Friends; except we think the House will not
hold us all, or (rather) not feed us all. Ay! Is that it? If it pinch there,
Zeal against Popery is but a Sconce, and a Vizard drawn over the ugly Face of
Covetousness and Self Ends. When Boys are scrambling in a Room for Nuts and
Apples, those that are in Possession, and upon the Place, and got in, will be
sure to Bar the Doors and keep out others, especially such as are active and
nimbler than themselves; Ay, they are the Wiser, you will say.

But where is the Honesty all this while? Where Is the Piety? Nay, where is the
Wisdom? And where is the Policy?

For if the lucky Scramblers be beset, or set upon, with bloody High-way-men,
as they carry away their Booty; would they not be glad that those they barred
out, should assist them? Yes surely, for who ever denied a Dissenter the Peril,
the Hazard and the Pains, so that we go away with the Gains? But is there any
Equity or Conscience in all this? Has not a certain Nation (in our Time) been
hazarded a Third Time, by Patriots that have been Priest-ridden; Bigoted and
Nuzled to maintain Priestcraft, and Compulsion to Uniformity in Religion? Who
dislikes it? But how? What upon Compulsion? Uniformity by force of Arms? It
has been found an Idle, Vain, Wicked, Bloody, Bigoted Popish, Antichristian,
and Impossible Attempt, in all Ages, in all Nations. The old Rule was, In
Necessariis Vnitas, in Adiaphoris Libertas, in Vtrijsque Charitas; Unity in
things Necessary, Liberty in Indifferent Things, in Both Charity.

For 'till all men be of one size, one feature, one complexion and face, it is
impossible they should be Uniform; nay, God and Nature seem to delight in
Variety: But vain man, mad with self-love, Opinionatry and Bigotism, would
compel all men to be of his own Dimensions and Seize, whereas there are
scarce two Men to be found in the World alike.

This Folly proceeds from a Vulgar Error that ^ops have Espoused, namely, that
there can be no Unity without Uniformity; and when they pray to God, (as they
ought) to make us all of one Mind, and one Mouth; if by one Mouth, they mean
their own Mouth, then they are Bigoted with an Opinion of their own
Infallibity, and are no Church-of-England-Men in that particular.

Alas, alas, we are commanded to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of
Peace, but that may be done without Uniformity; there is scarcely two Brethren
in the World alike and Uniform, yet they may live in Unity, and love like
Brethren.

Can men be wise that value the keeping of their Trinckets above their Lives,
and above the Peace and Welfare of the Church and Protestant Religion? And why
should not a Protestant Church be as large and wide as to hold all Prot^stants.

Come, come; let them have a Care that they do not hold up the Price of their
Trinckets at too dear a rate; lest they slip their Market, and be glad to part
with them ever long, for an Old Song; and seriously read Isa. 14. from Verse 4.
to Verse 15. Bless us! Cannot men live and let live, (even) let those live that
have not so many Brains, nor so good Eyes as themselves? Though they are not
one Mouth with you, nor so wide a Mouth and Swallow, they are as God made them
as well as you; and though they see not so well as they should, they see as
well as they can; to their own Master they stand and fall.

What Rational Man in the World (if his Reason be Judge, and not Dethroned and
Deposed; Benighted and Eclipsed with Passion, Self-interest, Self-conceit, and
the like) but must say. That it is very meet that we should do to others, as we
would that others in like Circumstances should do to us?

It Is possible (for what has been may be again) that the Old Test may be (many
Ages hence) Renewed, (which barred the Church Doors, and the Doors of Preserment
in Church and State, Excluding all from being Churchmen, Judges, Justices,
Mayors, Aldermen, etc. that would not leave worshipping of God according to the
Common Prayer Book; would not thou (thou Weapon'd-Vniformity Bigot!) Exclaim
(at least grumble) at such a Test?

But with what reason can thou grumble? Except thou conclude, that Church of
England is infallible, (in spite of her own 39 Articles to the contrary) or,
except thou art not content to take such measure as now thou metest to others,
that are as Pious and Learned as thy self: Where is the Justice of such
Grumbling? Thou art for Uniformity, one Mind and one Mouth, so are all Rational
Men; but thou art also for Weapon'd Uniformity, that is unreasonable and
unscriptural, and unapostolical; and also because of another little thing
(called) Impossibility: It is not to be done by Sword or Gun, Tests or Penal
Laws. Have we not been trying Conclusions and Experiments about it in the Body
Politic, many years, even to the Consumption of the Body Politics? And who
has got any thing by it, saving a few Priests? But we must always be tampering
with ungodly, unreasonable and Antichristian Physic, only to enrich the
Physician, and keep up his Practice, and his Hand in Ure; Do we de claim
against Arbitrary Power and Tyranny, and yet suffer such Tests to take away our
Birthrights? Queen Mary's Fives consumed the Heats between Con and Noncon!
when in Prison together, they shook Hands and were Friends.

Ay, says Bigot, most true; therefore we would have them like us. Uniform and
of one Mouth, meaning, that every Mouth should be alike, and one with his Wide
Mouth.

But suppose that Little Mouth (let that be his Name) stretches, and stretches
his Mouth, that so it may be Uniform, and like to Great Mouth, and cannot do it
for his Heart and Blood: (by Scripture-Rule, He that is strong should stoop,
and bear the Infirmities of the weak, and condescend (and to keep my Allegory)
Wide Mouth should meet Little Mouth half way, contracting his large Gape and
Swallow, that so they may be of one Mouth) But what cares some Men for
Scripture?

If that will not do, what do you say to Reason? Is it reasonable, that if
Little Mouth should happen to get into the Saddle, and get the Staff in his
Hand, (and thou be dismounted for Arbitrary Government, wilful, and
un-scriptural, and unreasonable Impositions and Oppressions, would thou think
it reasonable) that he should pare and cut, and pinch thy Wade Mouth, to the
scantling of his Narrow Chaps?

If not, then out of thine own (Wide) mouth will I judge thee, thou wicked
Servant! Should not thou have Compassion on thy Fellow Servants, (like thy
self, erroneous) as thou would have him, or Almighty God, have Pity on thee?
To our Comfort God sees; and he that is higher than the Highest, regards,
and there are Higher than they, Eccles. 5.8.

But will some say, though it be a Test suspiciously Profane, (if any Holy
thing in the World can be profaned) by making Religion and the Sacraments (the
most Venerable and Sacred of all the Parts or Offices in Religion) Tools and
Tricks of State; yet this Test has done good Service against the Common Enemy,
the irreconcilable Enemies of our Religion: It has kept out the Papist from
Offices in Church and State, Navy and Army.

Never, (I answer) it never did keep out any Papist, nor any but Dissenters;
yet if all this should be as true, as it is evidently false, yet this Test is
not justifiable, because we may not lay an evident Temptation of stumbling in
our Brothers way, to make him fall; nor do Evil that good may come thereon; (as
aforesaid) nor thus keep up Gods Church? What is the bringing the Abomination
of Desolation into the Holy Place, but making Holy things, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, a Drudge and Slave to Machiavel? (O Profanation abominable!) Must the
blessed Sacrament of Divine Love, his Institution (made on purpose to
Incorporate us with him, and one with another in Divine Love) be the only
Entrance and means to let us in to a Body Politic or Corporation, or into the
Door of Preferment? Sacra Sacris, and Sacri Sacris, was the Old Rule.

Wickedness may make a man unfit to be employed in the State; but is it not
profane to make the blessed Sacrament a Political Engine or Qualification, to
let a Man into Money and Mammon; but we cannot thus serve two Masters, ( God
and Mammon.)

Besides, I deny, that this Test of the Sacrament did any good at any time, in
keeping so much as one Papist out of any Office, Employment or Preferment,
either in Church or State.

And if this be true, then Hatred against Popery is but a Color wherewith
Hypocrisy paints the ugly Face and Deformity of Hatred and Malice against
Dissenters, (that have not so wide a Swallow as themselves) with the pretense
of Uniformity and Zeal against Popery.

Otherwise, why did this Test-Bill pass so readily, and the Exclusion-Bill
thrown out without a Conference, which is not usual? There may be many good
Reasons, which I will not now inquire into. But was it Loyalty and a Religious
Awe, to hurt no man in his Goods and Birth right upon the score of Religion?
That Is impossible to be a Reason that prevailed with those Lords and Gentlemen
that stood to their Arms and Power, till the King was divested of both, which
are His Birthright now (at this day) as much, nay, more than at the time of
the Exclusion-Bill: (for no man that spoke best, and most against the
Exclusion-Bill, did touch upon that String, namely, that the King and
Parliament cannot dispose of the Crown of England; (for fear (I supose) of the
Penalty mentioned in the Statute of Queen Elizabeth to that purpose;) And to
repeat the words of that most Excellent Speaker in the House of Commons; If
there were a Lion in the Lobby, shall it be still a Question amongst Wise men,
Whether it were better to keep him out, (now he is out,) or to open the Door
and let him in, and then bind him?

Some wise men chose the latter, and if God had not been miraculously kind to
us (to show his Grace and Finger) when some thought we had neglected the means,
if the Lion had proved a Rampant Lion, or had had a Lion's Heart, and the
Cruelty of a Lion, there might have been Scratching Work; and Thousands had
(ever this) followed those (otherwise) Incomparable Patriots, Essex, Russel,
Sidney, and Cornish, etc. for who has not had a Hand upon his Hilt, to Fight
the King's Guards, (his Irish Soldiers) when the word was, They are a coming?
Whereas the Lord Russel was condemned for being only in the Room, where there
was some discourse of Surprising the Kings Guards. But we must leave these
things to him that judges Righteously; The Iniquity of the Amorites was not
then full: Popery was not drunk enough with Blood. The Papists have for a
hundred years last past, been kept out of the Government, and have been Exluded
all Offices Ecclesiastical, Civil and Military, by that Ancient and Honest
Test, (namely, in Renouncing the Pope and all his Evil Works, by the Oath of
Supremacy, which our present King (King James II.) by his Dispensing Power
vacated, in the first place, as being a Long-approved and sufficient Bar and
Bulwark to keep out Popery in the four last preceding Reigns. It is also as
true, that as he left no stone unturned that lay in the way of bringing in
Popery, so he was necessitatid therefore (also) to set aside and disponce with
this New Test, which did inflict grievous Penalties upon them that durst or did
venture in, without taking it: But, they had all been kept out to this day, and
were kept out an hundred years before, and could not therefore need his
Dispensing Power, until he let them in (two years before) by Dispensing with
the Oath of Supremacy, A Test, that perhaps had been still thought sufficient,
if this Test had not jumpt right with some men's Malice, that hated Protestant
Dissenters as much, if not more than Papists.

Indeed I grant, That the King by that Gracious Indulgence, gained the
Dissenters, and thereby lost the Love of High-Church-men, who were as quiet and
gentle as Lambs, and Loyal as Heart could wish, when he dispensed with that
great and approved Test, the Oath of Supremacy, (for two long years together)
whilst he permitted them, and maintained them and their Penal Laws against
Dissenters.

But when he put out his Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, (the Magna
Charta that God (the only King of Consciences) has given to all Mankind) would
some Men so much as read the Indulgence, which His Majesty (the best Act that
ever he did in his Life) both in Piety, (and Policy too; for it has been the
Life of Trade in Holland, and the Penal Laws (or Inquisition,) their
Dis-peopling, and Destruction of Trade and Riches in Flanders,) as God's Deputy
Re-inforc'd and Ordained? No, no! Though expressly enjoined in the Rubric of
the Common-Prayer-Books! What Combination? What Bandying against it? And
perhaps for good Reasons: But have they scrupled to read (and make Prayers for)
worse things (that I say not) Impostures? Or, was it because it was Evil, as to
the Matter? None had the Face to say so: But, Evil as to the Form of
Dispensing, because not done in Form of Law; namely, not Repealed by the same
Power that Enacted it; which Reason, perhaps is a good Reason, but how could it
be more a Reason now in this Case, then it was when he Dispensed with the Oath
of Supremacy? Which was as much against Law as this Dispensation; and yet,
whilst he maintained the Church of England to Prosecute Dissenters with their
Excommunications, Capias's, Fines and Imprisonments; they were hushed, and
Serene, and as loyal as could be, Preaching up Passive Obedience, (Prayers and
Tears) as the only Weapons of a Christian, Groaning under the Oppression of
Superiors, during all the long time that they were uppermost, and felt no
Smart.

The Patriarch of Constantinople is as great an Enemy to Popery, as any Prelate
or Layman amongst us; yet he holds more ridiculous and unaccountable Errors
than the Papists, and enslaves the poor Greeks as tyrannically, as the Pope
does enslave his Italian Papists? What are the poor Greeks the better for this
Bulwark against the Pope and Popery? The Patriarch scorns to kiss the Pope's
Toe, and to be Tenant at will to the Pope, or to hold his Patriarchate of him,
or under him, and Preaches and Writes against Popish Errors, but holds the poor
Greeks to as bad Errors: And is not the Pope on the other side the Water, as
Fierce, Dogmatical, and Pragmatical a Bigot, in forcing the poor Greeks to
believe as he believes, and to be as Vniformable and Conformable to his
Trinckets and Ceremonies, as the Pope (with his Inquisition) in Italy? What
good does Graecia get by such a Bulwark against Popery, when Pope and Popery
cannot possibly make their Condition much worse then it is? A true Christian
Protestant should protest against, and abominate Popery of the New, as well as
of the Old Edition; and should keep close to the Apostolical and Primitive Rule
of Charity, in ease of Nonconformity.

There were Dissenters in the Church of Philippi, (as now amongst us) so many
Men, to many different Minds; so many Men, so many different Features, perhaps
in doubtful Matters of Faith; and some had better Eyes and Brains, Hearts and
Legs, than others; and therefore had different Apprehensions, Opinions and
Seize: Now, What shall be done in this Case, was the Question? All pressed
forward toward the Mark of the Prize of the High-Calling of God in Christ
Jesus: Phil. 3.14. But some lagg'd behind, as is usual in a Race; (to which the
Apostle aludes Ver. 13.) Now the Question is, What should be done with these
that lagg'd behind, and cannot come up so near the Mark as we? Burn them,
Consume them with Fire from Heaven or Earth, (says zealous James and John) and
the Papists; Or, shall we spur them up with Penal Laws, or Excommunicate them,
and then Goal them? No; Ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of, says
Christ: And St. Paul in the 15th verse of that 3d Chapter of the Philippians;
If any Man be otherwise minded, (or be a Dissenter, of another Opinion, then
make use, of what Remedy? Of your Wrath? Your Passion? Your Penal Laws and
Tests? No, no; wait God's Leisure; make use of your Charity, rather than Wrath;
of your Patience, rather than Passion; leave him to the King, to whom alone
Conscience belongs; for if any man be a Nonconformist, or otherwise minded) God
shall Reveal even this unto him: He did not bid them (do, as some spiritual
Watchmen now do,) call the Corporal, call the Constable.

So that indeed, Antichristian weapons and Christ's weapons are vastly
different, quite of another Shape, Form, and Fashion, and made of quite
contrary Stuff and Matter.

Christ and his Holy Apostles converted the World, not with Earthly, Carnal,
and Political Tests and Penal Laws; and are we Wiser than they? Did they borrow
any of the Magistrates Weapons, or Weapons (like Mabomet) from the Arms of
Flesh? No, they are purely Spiritual, Heavenly and Divine.

God did forbid (in the Old Law) the wearing of Lindsey-Wolsey; or the yoaking
of an Ox and an Ass together, not without a Mystery: Almighty God and Christ
(under the Gospel especially) hating the Chaos of mingling Heaven and Earth
together, jumbling carnal and spiritual Tools in Hodge-podge; they will not
mingle will, they cannot possibly Incorporate, nor carry on one main End, and
one only Design.

For, if ye have bitter Envying and Strife in your Hearts (striving with carnal
Tools, carnal Weapons, carnal Laws, and carnal Tests,) this Wisdom descends
not from above, but is (fetched from Hell, and is therefore) Earthly, Sensual,
Devilish.

But the Wisdom that is from above, is first pure, (so should the Holy
Sacraments be pure, and unmixed with carnal Polices) then Peaceable, Gentle,
and easy to be entreated, etc. (binding men to the Peace and good Behavior,
not permitting them to stickle with carnal Weapons against Men of different
Opinions in matters of mere Religion) but commanding us, if possible, and as
much as lies in us, to live peaceably with all men; surely it is possible, nay
easy in this Case, most easy.

All? Yes; if they be Men, our Brethren (as being Sons of Adam) though not of
our Religion, nor of our size and pitch, nor of our Features and Complexion,
though of different Religion, or of no Religion, yet they are Men; (and where
God makes no Exception, how dare we make Exceptions?) Since we are obliged to
have a Charity as Universal as Mankind, and to live peaceably with all men?

If this be Gospel, what becomes of our Tests and Penal Laws? All our Lawyers
are agreed, that all Statutes are Null and Ipso facto, void in themselves, if
they be contrary to the Laws of God, and Laws of Nature, or Right Reason.

And this present Test (though Enacted by ten thousand Parliaments) is never
the more justifiable, because it is a profane Temptation even to Conformists,
(sometimes,) and to Nonconformists at all times, to take their choice, (choose
them whether,) either to starve here, or (at least) be kept out of their
Birthrights as men and Christians; or else, to Eat and Drink it unmeetly, to
the Holy End, Design, and Institution of that blessed Sacrament; (which was not
Political, Carnal, and Worldly, but Pure, Spiritual, Heavenly and Divine; and
therefore to Eat and Drink, for a Political Test, and State Policy, is to Eat
and Drink it Unworthily and Vnmeetly; and therefore Men so Eating and Drinking
it, Eat and Drink their own Damnation. Away with it for Shame! Let it not be
such a Scandal to our Holy Protestant Religion.

SECT. III. Of Penal Laws in Matters of mere Religion.
MAny people cry up the Church of England, and drink healths to the Prosperity
of the Church of England! And yet neither know what makes a true Church of
Christ, nor who are this same thing (of some men's making or marring) called the
Church.

What constitutes a true Church but true Doctrine, and true Sa^raments,
according to plain Scriptures? The Discipline is left to discretion. For, I
suppose we are all agreed, that this or that form of Church Government, is not
Jure Divino. King Charles I. (a great Episcopal-man) yet denied that Bishops
(as we have them) are Jure Divino, (other than as Priests, or Presbyters and
Bishops, are one and the same thing, and undistinguished in many places of
Scripture; but yet that wise King held them, not to be contra jus Divinum, not
contrary to Gods Law, that is (I suppose) when they feed the Flocks, not
Lording it over God's Heritage, as if they had Dominion over our Faith (which
even the Apostles renounced) imposing what they believe, and their seize,
upon us to believe, whether we can or no, or else Anathematize, Goal, and
Imprison them, and lot them lie there till they starve and dye: What comfort is
it with so much struggling to keep out an Italian Bishop, Romish cruelty, Fire
and Faggot (that soon dispatches men out of their pain,) and still to keep
something like it: Nay, a worse, if to lie in Prison (after Excommunication)
and there to starve and dye a lingering death, (like Crucifixion) feeling a
thousand deaths, he and his Family; and all this for not paying the Register,
or taking the Churchwardens Oath, or the Holy Sacrament at Easter; neither of
which the persons durst do for fear of Damnation: Then take your choice, Death
or Damnation, a lingering Death, Crucifying them, and making them and their poor
Families feel many deaths; And is this amendment? I hope our Bishops will now
recant these violent and carnal weapons, since several of them have done it
already, promising to be willing to come to a temper (in their Petition to the
King) And thereby confessing that they had been too hot and distempered before;
and yet even, at this day I am afraid, that some men are only against Carnal
Weapons, Prophane-Tests and Penal Laws; not because they like them not, but
because they see they cannot hold them; the Genius of the Nation being
universally against such a Wildfire Church.

St. Paul defind all carnal Weapons in his Spiritual Warfare: The Weapons of
our Warfare are not Carnal but Spiritual.

Indeed he stood up stoutly in defense of the Privilege of his Birthright,
when that was invaded by Arbitrary Government, Tyranny and Oppression; and
therefore, for Remedy, St. Paul sent for an honest General and his Army, to
come to his Rescue; and his Excellency, Claudius Lycias (after St. Paul had
given him to understand that he was a Roman, and wronged of his Birthright)
came with an Army and delivered him out of the hands of his Oppressors, having
understood the matter of wrong. Act. 23.27. Act. 22.29.

Then good night, Church of England, if the Jailer do not help it, will some
say; and so say I, good night! And happiness to her and long life; for the
Gates of Hell (Hadou, of the Grave) shall never prevail against the true
Church; that is, the Church shall never have a Grave, it shall never dye, but
to the Worlds end, there shall be some always that believe in, and confess the
Lord Jesus, Son of the living God.

The Doctrine of the Church of England (which is Confirmed by Act of
Parliament) is contained in the Comman Prayer Book, and also in the 39
Articles, and in the Homilies that are set out, or shall be set out by
Authority.

This last is a deep one, He must have a wide Swallow that has an implicit
Faith and believes as the Church believes; when that same Church in whom he
does believe, confesses the truth, namely, that she may Err, or teach what is
not truth? Now would I in all Humility and Modesty put this sober Query,

Query 1. How can a Man subscribe to the Doctrine in Homilies that shall be put
out (except he have a Popish Implicit Faith, to believe as the Church believes)
before he knows what Doctrinal Homilies Authority will put forth? And such
Authority that has perhaps Erred in Doctrinal points already put forth by
Authority, or by their own Confession, may Err. as well as the Church of Rome,
Antioch, Jerusalem, etc. that have Erred already, as the 39 Articles
ingeniously and modestly confess?

Query 2. It is worth a modest Inquiry, and now most seasonable to Inquire (
now I say, when things are come to a full stop, and in the fairest and most
probable way to settle upon a lasting Foundation) Is it now high time modestly
to Inquire, who is the Judge of matters of Faith which all Christian
Protestants ( a new Name only for the old Apostolical and Primitive Christian)
ought to obey in pain of the Jayle h^re, and Damnation hereafter, if he persist
in his Diss^nt and Nonconformity thereunto; though some Bigots call it a wicked
Error.

This is a saucy Question, will some say: But (I Answer) that he that says so,
is an Impudent Blasphemer against the holy Ghost: whom, I only Echo, for the
holy Ghost, by the holy Apostle (St. Paul) puts this very Question, Romans 14.4.
Who art thou that Judge another Man's Servant? To his own Master he stands
or falls: Yea, he shall be holden up, for God is able to make him stand.

Then from that 4th Verse, the Apostle proceeds to state some cases, wherein
Christians were not Uniform, neither needed to be Uniform, as being therein a
Royal Priesthood, and Privileged Kings, exempt from humane Punishment,
Judgment, Impositions, Correction, or Condemnation, as being accountable for
their Opinions finally to God only, Romans 14.11.

Whence he Concludes with this Apostolical Canon (that to all intents and
purposes, repeals, makes void, and disanulls all humane Canons, Impositions or
Acts of Uniformity in matters of Faith, or in Imposing their own Seize
and Creeds upon all others) saying, Let us not therefore Judge one another any
more, but judge rather that no man put a Stumbling Block (Scandal) or occasion
to fall in his Brothers way.

Romans 15.1. But let the Strong bear the Infirmities of the Weak, and not please
themselves; with their own Bigoted Notions, laying heavy burdens, and grievous
to be born, which they themselves (in their Sins of Commission without Rule,
Wilful, Idle and unaccountable Ceremonies) will not touch with one of their
Fingers: But is there any Conscience that the Weak should bear the Infirmities
of the strong? In Defiance and Rancounter to that said Text, Romans 15.1.

From all which Premises does it not clearly follow, and may we not Conclude.

Conclusion I. 1. That God is the only King of Consciences, as King Charles I.
of Pious Memory concludes, saying, Who am I, (Eik. Basil.) that I should Invade
God's Throne, the only King of Consciences?

Wherefore did Lucifer become a Devil? He aspired to God's Throne, and would be
like him.

Wherefore is that Wicked Wretch (in 2 Thessalonians. 2.) that must and shall fall)
called the Man of Sin? But because he attempts God's Throne, sitting in the
Temple of God, imposing his own Faith, Opinions, Creeds and Canons, (tail'd
with a Firebrand, an Anathema, a Curse) against all Nonconformists, when he
himself also is the greatest Nonconformist; but keep most unjustly and
unsufferably, both false Weights, and false Measures, one to buy by, and
another to s^ll by as shall be shown unanswerably by and by.

May we not therefore without any the least Suspicion of Sawciness put this
sober Question again, Who art thou that judge another Man's Servant? What is
thy Name? Is it Lucifer? Is it Antichrist or Man of Sin? Is that thy Name? Thou
that like another God, sit there Domineering over Men's Faith, Lording it
over God's Heritage; God's Dominion, who is the only Kardiagnostos, or Searcher
of Hearts and Consciences, where thou can take no Cognizance, if thou would
judge?

Who art thou, I say? Art thou a God, commanding the Waves, and saying,
Hitherto shall thou go, and no further, and here shall thy Proud Waves be
stayed? Art thou the Hercules-Pillars, or Hercules with his Club? Art thou the
Ne Plus ultra in Religion?

In Nomine Domini, What art thou? And where is thy Commission, thy Authority?
And who gave thee this Authority to do these Things?

Our blessed Savior commands us to call no Man Father, no Man Master upon
Earth; that is, not implicitly jurare in Verba Magistri, to believe just as
our Masters, (our Fathers) believe, because Faith is not the Gift of a Synod,
of a Convocation, of a Council, but is the Gift of God: And never was there
Peace in the Christian Church, since Councils, and Synods, and Bishops, and
Parliaments and Kings took upon them to make Acts of Uniformity, Impositions of
Faith and Creeds, Cursing and Imprisoning, and sometimes Burning and Starving
all Gain sayers; but by what Commission?

Is not this as irrational as that Cannon, and Decree of the Egyptian Priests,
commanding all men on Pain of Fine and Imprisonment, to Believe that their two
Gods ( Isis and Osyris) never had been Men, when all the Country knew to the
contrary? And some of them well remembered them and had Eat and Drank with them?
Most Excellent Bigotism!

The first general Council of Nice had shamefully erred but for Paphnutius, a
poor Dissenter, a One-ey'd Man that saw more than they all, and fet them to
rights; and brought all the Bishops to a better Sight and Understanding.

The greatest General Council that ever was in the Christian World, was called
and convocated at Ariminum; seven hundred and odd Bishops, twice as many
Laun-sleeves as was at Constantine's first great Council: And they all
unanimously concluded against the Divinity of the second Person of the Holy
Trinity! Goodly Sleeves for a Man to pin his Faith upon!

Athanasins that was such a Stickler with his Creed, (that now bears his Name
in the Common Prayer Book) Beginning and Ending with an Anathema, to all that do
not believe just as he does; what got he by this Dogmatical Imposition of his
Faith upon all other Christians? A Nickname, the Age he lived in (very
ungratefully some say) called him Sathanasius.

Is it not enough for us to believe as our blessed Savior says, that his
Father is greater than he, and yet that he is one with his Father, God in
Christ, and Christ in God, and Christ in Believers, that they also may be one
with both?

But where do we read in Scripture, that Christ is God of God, very God of very
God? What language is this? The Father Uncreate, the Son Uncreate, the Holy
Ghost Uncreate, and yet they are not Three Uncreate, but One Uncreate: We are
not Arrians, but surely the Holy Ghost in Scripture, has found sufficient
Words, and the Holy Scripture and Apostles Creed, is a sufficient Rule of
Faith; and surely was sufficient to carry a man to Heaven three hundred years
before Athanasius was born, and three hundred years before the Nicene and
Constantinopolitan-Creed was invented; and 1400 years before that Packt
Convention at Trent, patched up with Nominal Lord Bishops, that were Shepherds
without a Flock, yet had as good a Vote as the best: Is it not sad that men
must starve and die, because they obey not such frothy Men (like Froth and
Scum) because uppermost? Is it not a Lamentation, and shall be for a
Lamentation, that all Christian Men must be forced to see with other men's
Eyes, and to believe by Proxy, and obey Blindfold, and also swallow (like
Crammed Capons) all that is put down their Throats?

Is not this Mahomet-like, who carried his Bible (his Alcoran) in one Hand, and
his Sword in the other, saying, if the first will not do, the other shall?

We are all as good Church-of-England-Men as the uppermost Men, we hope; Is it
not enough for us (Church-of- England Men) to be Humble Seekers, and confess,
with the 39 Articles, that we mar err; and consequently, it is unaccountable to
impose our Errors on others, and then back our Errors with Penal Laws; or to
impose Creeds in other Words than the Holy Ghosts Words, Scripture Words, which
if Ambiguous, let us leave men to their own Master to stand or fall; to their
own Judgments to Consent or Dissent, and never make these Impositions of Creeds
an occasion of Scandal, or a Stumbling Block in our Brothers way, to make him
fall.

Will men still urge an Act of Uniformity, which they themselves keep not; made
by a King, that this present King has published (whatsoever he was in his Life)
a Papist at his Death, and made by a Parliament, distinguished by (a Name
Eternally Infamous) the Pensioners Parliament, from the multitude of Judas's
that sold their, and their King and Countries Consciences, betrayed their
Master by cheating His Exchequer, going S^ips with him in his Revenue, and like
Ambo-Dexter-Lawyers, took Fees on both sides, took Money of the Country to be
faithful to their Interest, and then rook'd or robbed the Exchequer, to betray
the Country that entrusted them? O abominable Perfidy! Never to be forgotten
nor forgiven, till a Brand be set upon them to mark them out to all Posterity,
for an Example of Treachery; and till they truly repent, which cannot be
without Restitution.

Shall a fellow be hanged for taking a Purse of Five Pounds value by the
Highway? And shall they go Vnpunish'd, that do not only betray their Trust;
but rob the King and the Country too? Learned Lawyers have found Treason in it?

If they had not been Purified by the House of Peers, and well Poised by the
honest Patriots in the House of Commons, what mischief might they not have done?

Sometimes we read of the Church of Philippi, Ephesus, Galatia, Thessalonia,
etc. There a National, there a City-Church, and sometimes we read of the Church
in thy House; all true Churches, both the greater and the lesser. So that the
Church of England, are all the Faithful Christians in England, and ought not to
be Vn-Church'd, though they differ in smaller Ceremonies or greater Matters;
for in the Church of Corinth, some denied the greatest Fundamental in Divinity,
1 Cor. 15.12, 13, 14, 15. without which all Preaching, Praying, Sacraments,
etc. are Null, Vold, and of no Effect, viz. The Resurrection of the Dead; and
yet they were in the Church, and no Apostolical Decree to Excommunicate them,
or Cast them out.

How Unjustifiable then is it to Excommunicate a Believer, because he Refuses
to Take the Churchwardens Oath or Sacrament; or, for not Conforming to some
Imposition of Trivial Concern?

Are not they that thus Excommunicate, the Schismatics, by laying a Scandal in
their Brothers way, to make him fall, Romans 15.13. and then by an Unchristian
Capias; to Imprison him, till Iris Purse help him out?

And a Protestants Absolution (after all) costs Ten times more Money, then is
demanded by the Popish-Priests, in their Authentic and Printed Table of Fees,
for Adultery or Incest, etc.

So that what Ease is it to a Protestant that lies starving in a Goal (after he
has stood Excommunicated 40 days) that it is not the Common Enemy has undone
him, but a Protestant-Friend? Not the Brishop of Rome, but one at home: If my
Purse, my Liberty, or my Goods be taken from me, it is a Cold Comfort to ease my
Heart with this Melancholy Contemplation, that my Countryman, a Protestant did
it, and not an Italian Priest; or, to escape the Romish-Fire and Faggot, or
Bloody M^ss^cres, (that soon puts us out of Pain) and yet be Crucified alive in
a J^yle, a Man and his House? Never do we read in Holy Scripture of a
Convocation of Clergymen, that took upon themselves an Authority to make
Canons, and lay Impositions upon the L^^ity, (no, not when even all the Chief
Apostles were met in Synod, (at that only Synod that holy Scripture speaks of)
at Jerusalem) without the consent of the Lay-Brothers: Acts 15.23.

And even (there) were not an innumerable company of Impositions and Canons.;
Not so much as one Imposition of Creeds to be believed: Nor any one Anathema,
or Curse, or Penal Law denounced against Dissenters. Yet they had the presence
of the Infallable Spirit of Truth, (which the Church of England does not in the
least pretend to) and even then also enjoined only a few necessary things. Act^
15.28.

And if either Church of Rome, or Church of England had not a Bigoted and
Priestridden Arm of Flesh, wherewith to Fight Nonconformity; and would be
content with such Weapons as Christ and his holy Apostles thought sufficient;
they might Anathamize, and Curse, till their Hearts should ache, before any Wise
and Rational Christian would believe as they believe, only because they
believed it: Who gave them Dominion over our Faith and Consciences? What
Authority have they to Lord it over Gods Heritage, (the Layity? There, 1 Pet.
5.3. called Gods Clergy) especially since, as shall be shown hereafter, they
have Erred already, both in Doctrine and Discipline. That late Doctrine of
Passive Obedience they now Smile at, and some of them, together with all
English Protestants, have Actually Recanted, Repented of, and Forsaken; or else
we had sinned against the great Law of Nature, Self-Preservation! Must we Pray
against Arbitrary Government and Oppression, and not use the means? May we not
pay men in their own Coin, and give them as good as they bring? May we not
repel vim vi? Force with Force?

This Doctrine of Passive Obedience is poyut-blanck against the 39 Articles of
the Church of England; which Curses all that dares deny, That it is Lawful to
serve in the Wars? And if any War be Lawful, a Defensive War (in defending
Ours, or our Neighbors Lives, Houses Goods, or Rights, as Men and Christians)
is (by all agreed to be) the most Lawful War, because it is of absolute
necessity. For what has God and Nature furnished Men with Eyes, and Courageous
Hearts, and strong Arms? To keep our Arms in our Pockets till our Throats be
Cut? We beg your Pardon. Mr. Passiv^ Obedience! Or if you will not give us
Pardon, sell it to us, as you do other Absolutions.

SECT. IV. Of the Necessity of Changing and Recanting our Opinions in Religion.
IF any man ( Pope or Mahomet) say he has no Sin, he is a Liar, and the Truth
is not in him; (says St. John) Then how is it possible for a Man to go to
Heaven, except he Recant and R^pent; for Heaven is filled with ^0 glorified
Saints, except R^canters.

No Book in the World is Faultless and Infallible (except the Holy Bible) for
either Matter or Manner of Expression, or du^ Taming the thing, or some other
Circumstance; it has some Errors or Faults in it.

And if this be true, then every Author that writes a Book, ought to Recant the
same, if he be a true Christian; I mean, the Errors committed therein; for I
never heard of any Christian Man (as yet) that ever was so like the Father of
Lies, as (...) desire that any Body would Recant the Truth's contained in his
Ways, Books, or Works; The Truth will shift for its self (in spite of all
Opposition) at long run; but the Errors (of which no Man nor Book is free)
ought to be Re^^nted, and publicly too, (if required) yea, as publicly as the
Books that have been Public.

St. Augustine has a large Recantation, and a Heavenly one, in Print, called,
His Books of Confessions; so the Learned and Excellent B^z^ and a Man (worth
them all) St. Paul. Confessing and Recanting his Persecuting Spirit.

It is not in any Mortal Man's Power, to be free from Sin or Error; Homo sum
and Humanum a me nibil alienum puto, at Humanum est Errare; was an old and too
true a Proverb; If we be Mortals, we are subject to (...); and then if we be
Christians, or hope for Mercy, we must Recant: For though we may Err, (the
Frail^y of our Vaderstandings) yet we need not be guilty of Heresy or
Obstinacy in B^ro^, (the fault of our Wills.)

Thus the Church of England makes us all Recant publicly in the Church twice a
Day, in sober sadness, if we do not Dissemble, saying. We have left undone
these things which we ought to have done; and we have done those things which
we ought not to have done; and there is no Health in us.

The most Learned and Elaborate Authors in our Age need no other Confutation of
their humane Frailties and Errors, than their own Contradicting-Books; his
pretty to show, (if it more worth the while) how the Dean gives the Parson the
Lie; and the Archdeacon, the Bishop; and how desperately they stabb
themselves, and are Felones de se, (in some sense;) if a Lie deserves a stab,
they need, to other Dagger than their own, which is enough to abate the Hussing
Pride of the greatest S^hollars, and Noblest Souls amongst us, as well as to
Mortify the Bigot, that is so full, and puff up with his present Notion.

Nay, Parliaments, Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and House of Commons, have
Recanted, publicly bewailing, begging Pardon, and asking forgiveness of the
Popes Nuntio (Cardinal Pool) on bended Knees; (when frighted with the
Apprehensions of Queen Mary's Smithfield-F^res) and which is worst of all, did
for fear also Recant God's Truth; at least, they Recanted what the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and House of Commons had about six years before, by
Statute Law, Declared to be Gods Truth; 2 and 3 Edw. 6. c. 1. and made by the
Aid of the Holy Ghost; (surely you will say then, that must be the Bible which
they recanted! And so one would think indeed; but it was a far Inferior
Business, viz. only) the Common Prayer Book, saying, 1, and 2. Phil and Mar. c.
8. Seeing by the goodness of God our own Errors, have knowledged the same to
the said most Reverend Father, (Cardinal Pool, the Popes Legate) Therefore, We
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons Assembled in this present
Parliament, Representing the whole Body of the Realm of ENGLAND, etc. Do
Declare our selves very sorry, and Rep^ntant (Poor Hearts!) of the Schism and
Disobedience, etc. against the Sea Apostolic, etc.

And all this Recantation, the Bishops and Parliament, (when the times turned)
Re^ant again about five years after, in 1 Elig. 1. Resuming again this same
Common-Peayer-Book, and setting up a High-Commission-Court, etc. which was for
Cruelties and Oppressions, Condemned by (17 Car. 1.2.)

And when the King and Parliament were offended, because Bishops were too
busy, or too much busied in Temporal Employments, Powers and Authorities; they
were Disabled by (17 Car. 1.27.) but made Capable again, by (13 Car. 2.2.

What Variation of the Compass is here? What Turnings and Windings, and
Returnings again? Then Facing about as you were; (of which I might give many
hundreds of Instances) let this suffice for England.

And if we cross the Seas, and make a Progress to Rome to the Infallible Chair,
we shall find that even that too, stands as unsteady, or more unsteady than any
other; In proof whereof, I Will have no other Vouchers than Papists and
Cardinals; and for Cleanliness sake give but a small Touch at the dirty Work.

Was not the Bones of Pope Formosus dug up by the Pope his Successor, his
Decrees Rescinded, and the poor Dead Pope thrown into Tyber for a Heretic, not
worthy of Christian Burial, etc? Platina, Theodore. 197. and John 10.897. tells
us. That Pope Theodore II. made Null and Void the Decrees of Romanus. And did
not Pope John X. do as much for him? I care not which was in the Right; it
suffices my present purpose to show, That one of the Infallible Don's did Err,
and was Fallible.

And does not Cardinal Baronius ( ad an. 900) on this Score, cry out, Alas! For
Shame and Sorrow, that so many Monsters (a horrible thing to see) should mount
that Chair, which deserves (Sir) Reverence of Angels?

Was not Pope Bennet IX. made Pope at twelve years of Age, by the means of his
Father the Marquess of Tuseta, and could not so much as read Mass? And
afterward skilled in nothing but the Black Art, by which the Letcher (as
Cardinal Benno affirms,) enticed pretty Wenches into the Woods, and there
Debanch'd them: Well might Cardinal Barronius (ad An. 1033.) call him, The
Shame of the Romish Church, Ecclesiae Opprobrium.

Does not Luithrand (lib. 2. c. 3.) tell us, That the Council of Lateran did
Depose Pope John XII? First, for Ordaining Deacons in a Stable: Secondly, For
making Boys (but ten years of Age) Bishops. Thirdly, For Praying to the Devil
to help him (when he was at Dice) to a lucky Throw. Fourthly, For making his
House (the L^teran-Palace) a Common Stews. Fifthly, For lying with Stephana,
his own Fathers Whore. Sixthly, For Drinking a Health to the Devil.

Does not Platina ( Silvest. 2. An. 998.) tell us. That Pope Sylvester II. made
a Bargain with the Devil, to give him Body and Soul, upon two Conditions;
First, That the Devil would help him into the Infallible Chair: Secondly, That
he should never die but in Jerusalem; whither he was resolved never to come.
The Contract thus made, the Devil helped him to the Popedom; Pontificatum,
adjurante Diabolo consecutus est, hac tamen lege, ut post Mortem totus illius
esset. But the Devil was as crafty as a Jesuice, for he cheated, with an
Equivocation, the Pope himself, who Died horribly, ( C. Malmesbur. 2.10.)
whilst he was saying Mass in Rome, in the Church, called Jerusalem.

I might fill Volumns with these Instances, to show that even Popes ought to
change and Recant, if ever they hope to be Saved; for there are no good Men
here on Earth, nor Glorified Saints in Heaven. except Recanters! Honest
Parliaments have Recanted, St. Peter, St. Paul, St. Augustine, Beza, and all
Honest Men, have Recanted: And must not all good Protestants then come into the
Fashion of all good Men in Heaven and Earth?

SECT. V. Of the Restraint of the PRINTING-PRESS.
PRinting, though reckoned amongst the New Inventions, is now become an Old
Trade in London, and has begot one or two more Trades; the Book-sellor and
Stationer, which are all Incorporated into a Body-Politick; called, The Company
of Stationers; no despicable nor mean Company (or Hall) in this splendid City;
one Stationer was enough for a City, before Printing came up; and of
Booksellers there were none, but Scriveners.

But, now they are become the Numerous Issue of the Press; and enabled to make
Bylaws for the Regulating their Trade; which is their Livelihood: And the
Question is, Whether it be reasonable and lawful to hinder them of their
Livelihood, of their Trade, under pretense of Publique-good, by shutting up
the Press, and stopping their Trade, by excluding all that have not a Pass,
(and some say you may with as much reason Exclude all men from the
Kings-High-Way, the Birth-light of every Englisk-man, or stop their Mouths and
starve them) except they bring a Pass Signed by Sir Roger, the Bishops
Chaplain, or the like; to permit them to Earn their Livings?

There Is an Act of Parliament for it you will say; and for that Trick. I say,
I Will determine nothing positively against it.

But, Acts of Parliament are not like the Laws of the Medes and Persians, which
cannot be altered. The Egyptian Priests told Herodotus that the Sun had
changed it is course four times within the last Preceding Eleven thousand and
odd years; an Era, as long before Adam, as since.

But, if the Sun change it is course sometimes, and the Moon often times, and
Parliaments change their Acts sometimes twice in Ten Years, as aforesaid; then
surely this Act for Restraint of the Press (without the License of the Bishops
Chaplain or Sir Roger, etc.) is not immutable.

The Arguments to keep the Press-doors shut, center all in this. That a Liberty
thereof, without the Pass of a License, may prove pernicious not only to
private men, but to the Public, to the Church, to the State.

Libels will fly about to wound men's Reputations; and, which is a consideration
of greater weight. The Church and State may thus be shot at and mounded, and
yet like shooting with White Powder, the Wound is felt, but none knows whence
the Bullets came.

This is an Inconvenience; but, if this be all, the Argument is fallacious:
For, as in other Trades, things that are rare, dear and hard to come by, are
the readiest Commodity; so also in the Booksellers Trade, no Books vend so
nimbly, as those that are sold (by Stealth as it were) and want Imprimaturs.

This Restraint by Licensers will not prevent the flying Pamphlets and
Reputation-Wounders; we may well say, it will not, because by Experience it is
found it never did.

But, if the By-Law already made by the Stationers Company, were Enacted by
Parliament, with some additions, all the Inconveniences of Restraining the
Press from Printing the best Books, (because it is perh^ps against the Diana of
Mr. Licenser, or the Craft by which he gets his Wealth) will be prevented; and
all the Reputation-Wounders will be discovered, and without further Proof,
brought to Cendign Punishment: Namely, A Law, that every Author's and Printer's
Name, and their several places of Residence, and the man's Name for whom they
were Printed, and who Publishes and Vends them, be Printed in the Title Page of
every Book or Pamphlet; And that such Printed Names shall be a sufficient
Evidence, as if under their own Hand-Writting; provided it be proved by
Witnesses and Writing, that the Author gave order for it (and that the Printer
(there named) did really Print the same:) And that it shall be Felony, (or some
Crime or Punishment) to Print any Book or Pamphlet in other manner; or to Print
false Names: Or with what other Proviso's the Wisdom of a Parliament shall
think meet.

The Pope indeed has some Reason to Restrain all Printing, without his
Approbation License, or Instruction; because it is very meet and right so to
do; granting his Infallibility, An Index Expurgatorius is a necessary and just
Consequence thereof.

But, Church of England, that disclaims all such Impudent pretense; what Reason
can she give to be the only Doorkeeper to the Press, except she could also get
an Act of Parliament that it shall not be Lawful hereafter for God Almighty to
open any man's Understanding clearer, nor to give him better Eyes then the
Licenser.

For, How many Excellent Books, both in Divinity and Humanity, are Suppressed,
because they are excellent, and too good to get an Imprimatur?

This made the Great Duke of Buckingham say, That the Clergy have but one Vote;
for the Inseriour Clergy generally think themselves notably sharp-sighted in
Affairs, if they can but look up to the Top of the Church-Steeple, and see how
the Cock stands; and as the Wind blows, many of them sometimes Conform
themselves.

Thus Haggards listen to the Huntsmans Halloo and Horn, but seldom put their
Noses to the Ground to examine the Scent; For which the Huntsman Whips them
smartly sometimes, yet it is all one.

No men are greater Vassals then small Clergymen, or at least more Oppressed
with unreasonable Assents and Consents, in spite of Mathematics, and illegal
Procurations, Synodals, etc. even when there is no Synod, no Visitation, etc.
yet (poor Hearts) they out with their Purse, and pay the Bishops Silver, and
the Rich Archdeacons Silver, though some of them Pawa the Pewter-Dish for it;
and yet for all this V^ssallage, some of them does not so much as Whimper,
Groan, nor Complain, nor Vote otherwise then (as the Word is Ecchoed amongst
them) though at such a time as this, when a Parliament can help us.

Thus have I seen a Stepmother Whip the Child till it Roar again, and then
take it up again and Whip it for Roaring; and then make it go down on its
Knees, ask Forgiveness, Kiss the Rod; threatening to give it twice as much if it
tell it is Father: But come on it what will, I will say -- God help, the while.

Has any man in the World any other or better Commission to Preach, then what
Christ gave his Disciples? (Mat. 28.19.) namely, To go and teach, and make all
Nations Disciples by Baptizing them; and he will be with such to the end of the
World; not with those Individual Apostles (who are dead) but their Successors
(Lawfully ordained) to ^ue end of the World.

Let any man show me a Reason if he can, why a Presbyter Lawfully ordained, and
therefore Commissionated by Christ to Teach all Nations, etc. should need any
other License? And is not teaching in Print from the Press, the same or better,
and of more general and universal benefit to all-men, and all Nations, then the
narrow Pulpit, though it stand aloft?

And dare any Christian prefer the Worth of an Act of Parliament, before the
Words of God and our Lord Jesus, who has commanded all Men to let their Light
so shine before Men, that they may see their good Works, (in Print, the most
Excellent, Universal, and Charitable Good Works in the World, if they be
agreeable to Holy Scripture, and right Reason) and glorify their Father which
is in Heaven, without leave or License?

Does not our Law Books say, That all Statutes are Ipso facto, Void, if against
the Common Law, ( viz. the Light of Reason, or Law of Nature) or against the
Law of God?

But it is against the Common Law to take away, or Obstruct any Man's Trade or
Birthright, (as Printing is to many Men) when the Public, the State and the
Church, and every private Man's Reputation, may be better and sufficiently
Ensured by other Ways?

Is there not a Positive Law of Christ to all Christians; not to hide their
T^l^^^ in a Napkin, (though the Licensers for Self-Interest, will not give us
an Imprimatur to improve it?)

Is there not a Plain-Law of Christ, That we should not put our Light under a
Bushel, but on a Candlestick, that all that come in may see the Light? The
Liberty of the Pulpit, Bench or Press, are the Golden Candlesticks; the
Self-ended Imprimatur's very Wooden Ones, (God knows) if this little Treatise
cannot be Gainsaid nor Confuted, but by the Jailer?

Is there not a Positive Law of Christ; Not to quench the Spirit? And shall any
Unchristian Law quench it, for Self Ends, and because they are so mad as to
shut their Eyes, and scorn to amend, or be cured by a charitable Hand, that is
willing to do it for God's sake, and not for any other Fee?

Since then there is a Positive Law of Christ to let our Light so shine before
men, that they may see our Good and Charitable Works, (in Print to choose) that
Pater Noster (which is in Heaven) may be Glorified; Then let us give to Caesar
the things that are Caesar's; but let us not rob God, to give unto Caesar the
things that are Gods Peculiars and Property.

And what Honest Protestant would not think it much more Honor to be God's
Advocate, (in such a Book as this, (as little as it is,) Pseading Gods Cause,
his Right and Bole Dominion over Consciences, than by Invading Liberty of
Conscience (Gods Throne) to arrive to the highest Preserments, (the Effect of
Favor (many times) or some wilder Chance?)

And now have I done with the Five Chapters which are all Uniform and of a
P^ece; there went but the Sacars (or Sections) between them, for Methods sake.

The CONCLUSION.
AND now (Most Excellent Patriots!) I Will Conclude with the Honest Confession of
a Popish Priest, Cardinal Cajetan, (in his Comm^ntaries upon Mat. 5.13.) Ye are
the Salt of the Earth, but if the Salt has lost its Savor, etc. And just as he
was Writing upon that Text, the French Soldiers had broke into Rome, ( May 6.
1527) and used the Clergy (above all others) most scurvily and abominably.

Whereupon, (says he) Evanuimus, ac ad nibilum Vtiles, nisi ad Externas
Ceremonias, Externague bona, etc. We the Prelates of Rome, do now by woeful
Experience, find the Truth of this Scripture this day, being become, not only a
Laughing Stock, but a Prey (not to Insidels, but) to Christians, by God's most
righteous Judgment; because we, who by our Functions should have been the Salt
of the Earth, had lost our Savor, and were good for little but looking after
Ceremonies, and the Revenues of the Church: Hence it is, that together with us,
this whole City comes to be trodden under foot this day.

Episcopacy in England (for ought we know to the contrary) is as Ancient as our
Christianity in England; and the Common Prayer Book (as to the generality of
it) may serve the Turn (it was made for) well enough; yet it appears to be made
by no other Aid of the Holy Ghost, than other Prayer-Books in Print, if so much.

Both of these main Pillars of our Church are miserably Dilapidated and out of
frame, from top to bottom; yet not so ghastly, but they may by You, be well
enough repaired, without pulling down.

If this be accounted a Slander cast upon Mother Church, or that any be so
blind, as not to see what is so plain and obvious to every considering Eye,
that is not blinded with her Dowry; (like that young Gallant, who being
demanded why he would Wed such an Old Woman, though she was very Rich,
(studying what he should see in her to Vmbrage the fondness of his Embraces)
answered, that he could not but love her very Wrinkles.

Which Wrinckles, I had rather M^sque over and cover, than discover; I hate the
ungrateful Work; except I be called upon to Prove my Words, and to show her
Nakedness and Distempers, through her whole Constitution: It is so far out of
frame, that it is a wonder to me, that it has stood so well, and so long.

But you may easily repair her Breaches, which I am ready to prove have
distracted these Nations, these fifty years and more, and of such absolute
Necessity to be mended, that no man hereafter (high or low) shall give his
Assent and Consent, (as all we Clergymen have done) under our Hands; except we
Wink when we Write, and Subscribe Blindfold, in spite of our Knowledge and
Consciences, and in spite of Mathematics.

And what a shame is it, that Clergymen from the Highest to the lowest, shall
be forced (as now) to starve, or Subscribe to an Untruth, or Iniquity, because
Established by a Law, (the Act of Uniformity?) that condsiering how, and when
it was made, it is a Miracle to me, that they had not got P^pery as well
Established by a Law, but that the Major Part of that Pensioners Parliament
were honest English Protestants.

But if after all this, some Achitophel, some Machiavilian, who has got more
Power than Grace, will confute me only, (as the Council of Constance confuted
those two Excellent Protestants (as aforesaid) only with a Jayl: He will in the
end prove himself to be a true Achitophel, (as the Name signifies in the Hebrew
Tongue) Cosen-German to a Fool.

And may glory a while (and but a while, I hope) as the French King does, that
in making new Converts, and upholding his Religion; His Dragoons and his
Jaylors are his best Breachers.

If so; then, most Noble Healers of our Breaches! Let not Protestants hereafter
be permitted to force your Subjects (who have entrusted you with Power) to the
sad Choice (which Papists glory in) namely, To Use the Cross, or Bear the
Cross; stretch your Consciences, or stretch a Halter; Bow or we will Break your
Necks, or Starve you in a Jayle

But I humbly say -- If here I have spoke Evil, bear Witness of the Evil; but,
if well, why smitest thou me through Envy? Envy, that Rancour, Rust and Canker
of Man's Soul (that like the Wood Worm) Eats up and Devours its Parent that
breeds it and feeds it.

Nay, for the sm^ting work too, I am very willing to submit my Skull to be
stoned to Death for any the least Error in this Treatise committed, upon
condition, that he only that is free from Error cast the first Stone at me.

I do not much Tremble at this Frank and Free Offer, though I be Confronted
with (the Present Pope) Old Innocent Himself, or any of his Bishops.

COLCHESTER,
January. 17. 1688/7.
FINIS.
Errata. In the Epistle, Page 3. Line 28. for Males Administration, read
Maladministration. Page 4. Line 28. for su^^, read such.


