The Lay-Clergy: OR, The Lay-Elder. In a Short ESSAY IN ANSWER To this QVERY;
Whether it be Lawful for Persons in Holy Orders to Exercise Temporal Offices,
Honors, Jurisdictions and Authorities.

With Arguments and Objections on both sides, Poyz'd, and Indifferently Weighed.

Man! who made me a Judge, or a Divider over you?

Luke 12.14. By Edm. Hickeringil, Rector of the Rectory of All Saints in
Colchester.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in Jewen-Street, 1695.

The Lay-Clergy: OR, The Lay-Elder. BEING An ESSAY Upon this Question, Quer.
Whether it be Lawful for Persons in Holy Orders, to Exercise and Enjoy Temporal
Offices, Honors, Jurisdictions, and Authorities?
INterest, which (by bribing men's Judgments) rules the World, ought to have
neither place nor vote in those that write or read, Judge or Determine this
Question.

Self-interest sometimes does (as it always should) give place to right
Reasoning and Truth; but, usually, the Bowl follows the Byas, right or wrong;
so does our Judgments, Wills and Affections commonly lean to the Swell'd-side,
biased with Profit and Honor.

Thus Avarice and Ambition in Clergymen, are apt to tempt them to worldly
undertakings, temporal affairs and employments, unsuitable to their Coats, and
unbecoming their Holy Profession; all which are Restrained and Prohibited in
several particular Cases by the Canon Law, and Statute Law, especially by that
Statute made for that purpose, 21. Hen. 8.13.

Yet, neither that Statute, nor any other Law, now in force, reaches at any
Prohibition of Temporal Jurisdictions and Authorities to be exercised by
Spiritual Persons, restraining them only from Farming and Merchandising, except
in some cases, and for their own necessaries; for Clergymen alone were Lord
Chancellors, Masters of the Rolls, Lord Treasurers, etc. long after that
Statute was made.

But, on the contrary, Envy and Avarice in the Laity, are apt to make a
Monopoly of all Temporal Offices and Honors, Privileges, Pre-eminence and
Authorities to themselves alone, excluding the Clergy; but by what Law, Divine
or Human, by what Reason, Justice or Equity, shall now here be impartially
enquired.

And to that purpose I will recite the strongest Arguments and Objections that
have been urged against Clergy-mens Exercising Temporal Jurisdictions and
Authorities, with Answers thereunto.

Obj. 1. First, Some have objected that All-mighty God does not bless Affairs
of State in the Hands of Churchmen, witness (say they) these grand
miscarriages in Government, when Archbishop Laud was chief Minister of State
to King Chalres I.

Ans. It must be confessed, that in a fatal Hour (after the Duke of Buckingham
(chief Minion and Favorite to King Charles I.) was stabbed at Ports-mouth,
Anno. 1630.) succeeded Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, unhappy for himself,
more unhappy for the King and Kingdom.

Errors in Government at that time, and more especially during Laud's
Ministration, were too palpable for me now to palliate, much less to conceal.

No Parliament called for 13 long and weary years (from 3. Car. 1. to 16. Car.
1. weary indeed) by Encroachments and Oppressions in the Stannary-Courts,
recanted (too late) and acknowledged, confessed and redressed in the Statute,
17. Car. 1.15. Shipmony recanted and declared unlawful, 17. Car. 1.14.
High-Commission-Court, exercised to the great and insufferable wrong, and
oppression of the Kings Subjects (the very words of the Statute) annulled and
made void for ever, by 17. Car. 1.11.

The Star Chamber Court, (the proceedings, censures and decrees whereof were
found (too late) to be an intolerable burden to the Subject, and the means to
introduce Arbitrary Power and Government, in despite of Magna Charta, the
Petition of Right, and other good Laws) pulled down and absolutely Revoked and
made void by 17. Car. 1.10.

Free Quarter, illegal Impisonment, (of Members of Parliament for daring to
speak their minds in the House, by ascertaining the Ancient Laws, and bewailing
the Grievances of the Subject) Loanes, Coat and Conduct-mony, and other
Enormities, under which the People groaned, and which I list not here to
particularise, were all laid at Archbishop Laud's door, I confess, and charged
not (so much) as the Vices of the man, but the Viciousness of his Holy
Profession, in undertaking so grand a Post and Station, not so unsuitable to
his Parts and Accomplishments, as a man; but to his Sacred Orders, as a Divine:
As if God did not bless Temporal Affairs in the hands of Spiritual Persons.

And so many warm Speeches were made to that purpose in the Parliament, in
1640, and 41. That at length they produced and brought forth that Statute, 17.
Car. 1.27. Entitled, An Act for disabling all Persons in Holy Orders to
exercise any temporal Jurisdiction or Authority.

None pratled more of Magna Charta, than the Speechmakers in that Parliament;
and none made a greater Nose of Wax of it: More especially and particularly in
that Statute that Disables all persons in Holy Orders from exercising Temporal
Jurisdictions: Thus they razed the Foundations, took away the grand Groundsel
of the House of Lords, The First of the three Estates of this Realm; no wonder
then if all the House of Lords tumbled down soon after; the House of Commons
also not continuing very long after; so dangerous it is to pull away the
Groundsels, and main Pillars.

Did not the Prelates (for they did all in all in those Times) not only get
Magna Charta Enacted, but preserved the same from the Violation and
Encroachments that should be made upon it (that is) with the weapons of those
times, by Damning all to the Pit of Hell that durst infringe Magna Charta; I
mean, as far and deep into the Pit of Hell as Bell, Book and Candle could send
such Violaters of Magna Charta.

The first Branch whereof grants and confirms that the Church of England shall
be free, and shall have all her whole rights and liberties inviolable. In King
Charles I. his Reign (before that fatal Statute, 17. Car. 1.27.8. so contrary
to Magna Charta, was made) the ferment went high, no wonder then that the
mobility did run a madding, when Oppressions will make the Nobility and Wise
men mad; nor did they recover their wits but by Phlebotomy in a furious
intestine and Bloody-Civil-war: and when their Veins were well emptied and
their Pockets too, the People came to themselves, and became compos mentis,
their own man again, acknowledging their mistakes all along in foolishly
charging the miscarriages in the Government, upon the Profession of one of the
Chief Ministers of State; (Archbishop Laud.)

For if they had not all been crazed with a notion in the soft place of their
Heads, was not the Argument as strong and rational to disable all Laymen from
Exercising any Temporal Jurisdictions, because all the said miscarriages were
first begun and carried on by Laymen, viz. Buckingham and Strafford; in so
much that King Charles I. that loved them both well enough (or too well) and
went along with them, acknowledged that he did not think Strafford fit to
exercise the place of an High-Constable; Archbishop Laud did but Lackey it
after those, and followed their steps, for the way was trac't before him; for
long before Laud's Ministration King Charles I. twice in Parliament uttered
that distastful Sentence, that gave such Umbrage and disgust to the Parliament,
and to the whole Kingdom, and proved of most fatal and bloody Consequence, in
the ensuing Civil Wars: for no people in the World have been more jealous of
their Liberties, and more apprehensive or alarmed at any threatening presages
of Arbitrary Government, than the English; such was that unfeasonable and
distastful Sentence -- In that King's Speech. -- I owe the Account of my
Actions to God only. --

And the Common-Text for the Manwarings and the Court-Sycophants of those times
was Psalm. 51.4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned and done this Evil in thy
sight. Whence they concluded and inferred, that no King could sin against any
but God alone.

Strange Logic, more strange Divinity, to draw an universal conclusion from
particular Premises, that, because King David said that in the matter of Vriah
the Hittite, he sinned against God only, therefore neither he in any other
matter or particular, nor any other King in any particular could sin against
any but God only.

Surely, David, in that particular, sinned against more than God only; for he
sinned against his own Conscience, and his Coronation Oath, and the Duty of a
King, which is to be a Shepherd, not a Wolf, and was set up for Edification,
not destruction of the People of God; also he sinned against Vriab's Life, and
his Wives Chastity in tempting and debauching her; also he sinned against the
Generation of God's Children, made Religion evil spoken of, and made the
Enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, as 2 Samuel 12.12. But Archbishop Laud had
more ingenuity than to make that Construction of the word only; for only there
is interpreted by the following words -- in thy sight; which are exegetical of
the word -- only; (that is to say) As Nathan said unto him, 2 Samuel 12.14. thou
did it (the Murder and the Adultery) secretly; David was cunning in his
bloody ways and lustful ways; he called not witnesses of his Adultery, none
knew but his Confidents and Pimps, sworn to secrecy; and the Murder was more
secret, for he killed by the sword of his Enemies, the sword of the Children of
Ammon; so that against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy
sight; It is plain that David only meant, that he had done that evil only
before God, only in his sight, none else were privy to it, or knew of it; at
least, he thought so, and so did Nathan, thou did it secretly, says he, so
cunningly did contrive it, that none but God only should know of that sin.

Besides, only, may (as in Psalm. 62.4. and in many other places of Holy
Scripture) be taken for especially or Chiefly; against thee especially, against
thee chiefly have I sinned.

Sure I am, none but Parasites, can imagine that a wretchedly-sinful King is not
a sinner, cannot offend against any but God. If a King, as King David did, make
his subject a Cuckold, does he therein sin against, or offend against none but
God? Must not the Cuckold be at all concerned because his Horns were of a
King's making? What Divinity is this?

Flatterers and Sicophants are the worst of Poysoners; but King Charles I. was
thus cajoll'd long before Laud came into vogue.

But, indeed, are King's accountable to God only? I had thought that no King
can for his Heart exempt himself from the Judge within him, his Conscience;
which if wounded and awake, it will keep him from sleep, as it did poor King
David; this Judge put him upon the Rack, and made him roar again, breaking his
Bones, Psalm. 51.8. So true it is -- A wounded Spirit who can bear? This Judge
was such a Terror to Cain, that it made him a Vagabond, and to run away with
himself, he knew not whither, nor could overrun his Judge and Executioner, for
he carried them along with him (as Murderers do) most terribly, in the very
Breast; so that Judas, rather than endure it, Hanged himself. Oh wretched
Sycophants! To encourage a King to sin, because he is Accountable to God only
at the day of Death, and the day of Judgment.

As if he (the Rock of Israel) that told King David, 2 Samuel 23.3. That he that
rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God; Should be Answered --
must? Must be Just? Is there a necessity for it? must is not for Kings, they
are not accountable to any but God, they can sin against God, and against God
only; and he reckons not till the day of Death, or the day of Judgment.

But, I believe, King David (and some other Kings that I could think of) found
a more early day of reckoning, than the day of Judgment; and tho they and their
Flatterers might put far from them the evil day, yet they could not put it
away; yet in foro humano, a King is not accountable.

But, waving the Impiety, where is the Policy? By such expressions, to make the
People Jealous and afraid of approaching Tyranny and Arbitrary Government?

The Kings of England usually have had their Speeches well examined in Council,
before they have spoken them in open Parliament. I make no Apology for such
language, so offensive to the People, only I say Laud is not to be blamed for
the same; for the Venom was destill'd into the King's Ear, before he had the
King's Ear; and if it was otherwise, what fence, reason or Justice is there,
for one Clergy-man's failings, to lay the blame upon all persons in Holy Orders?

This would be as ridiculous and unjust, as if all the Layety should suffer for
the sins of the Duke of Buckingham and Earl of Strafford, of whose miscarriages
in Government, as an Evil Counselor, King Charles I. was so sensible (tho
always too late) that he did publicly avow before Strafford's Death, that he
did not think him a Man fit for so much as the place of an High-Constable: Was
it Archbishop Laud too, that was guilty of being an Evil-Privy-Councellor,
When K. Carles I. uttered the like alarming Expressions? Such as these, about
imprisoning the Earl of Arundel, saying, in the House of Lords -- My Lords! I
do not (by this) mean to show the Power of a King by Diminishing your
Privileges, etc. At which both Houses were strangely affrighted; for the words
Implied, that he thought he had such a Power, as King to diminish their
Privileges, if he listed; whereas they thought that they held their
Privileges per Legem Terrae, not ad Libitum Regis; by the Law of the Land, and
not the Arbitrary list or will of any man living: Such Doctrines may go down in
Turkey and France, they will not yet pass current in England, such was that
other like ill-advised expression -- of that King, namely, -- But as for
Tunnage and Poundage it is a thing I cannot want; necessarily implying, that if
they would not give it him by Law, he would take it by force (as he did
afterward, and was as good as his word in that) taking it without Law. Less I
could not well say in answer to this Objection, that must be confessed to be
unanswerable otherwise, than by acknowledging the miscarriages in Government to
be true, and too palpable, for they were felt sufficiently; but that Laymen,
not Clergymen had then the Administration of affairs, both in the
Privy-Councel, and Cabinet; injuriously therefore were such failings imputed to
Laud, and more injuriously to make all men of his Profession, nay, the very
Profession it self, to be guilty of his crimes? This is (as Logicians term it)
non causa pro causa. To ascribe the treachery of Judas to all the Disciples.
Yet, such was the Logic of those mad times in 1640, and 1641. and the same mad
Infection still spreads its self, amongst prejudiced, and unthinking men.

Of which sort the number was much greater than now a days, or else sure those
sleighty Arguments and Objections (against Clergy-men's exercising temporal
Jurisdictions) could not have prevailed so far as to be formed into an Act of
Parliament.

But men (even yet) are apt enough to be inclined to any thing that promotes
their own interest, or pleases their fancies, how ridiculous soever.

Nevertheless, soon after the Restoration and Return of King Charles II. in
the first Free, Free- Parliament begun at Westminster, May 8, 1661. The First
Act they made was for safety of his Majesty's Person, and Government. And the
Second Act, viz. 13. Car. 2.2. was for safety of the two Houses of Parliament
and the three Estates of this Realm (Lords Spiritual, Lords Temporal, and the
Commons) by replacing the ancient Groundsel which had been so fatally, and with
such bloody Consequences taken away by that rash Act, made 17. Car. 1.27.
whereby all persons in Holy Orders were disabled from exercising any Temporal
Jurisdiction or Authority; therefore the said Act was thereby from thenceforth
repealed, annulled and made void to all intents and purposes whatsoever (to
give you the very words of the said Act) for that the said Act had made several
alterations prejudicial to the Constitution and ancient Rights of Parliament,
and contrary to the Laws of this Land, and is by experience (woeful experience,
the only Mistress of Fools) found otherwise inconvenient.

In the next place, let us consider the subtle Arguments, and knotty Reasonings
that went smoothly and currantly down with those whose appetites were prepared
to relish and receive them, in those easy times that were mistaken in the
Causes of Misgovernment; charging the faileurs and miscarriage during Laud's
Ministration, to the Vice of his Profession (as a Spiritual Person, and in Holy
Orders) therefore vicious and unhappy in him, which would not so have been in a
Layman. And that God All-mighty blessed this, and blasted the other.

But such dreams never happen to any but men unacquainted with History, and
with the Temper of former times, and of our own.

To instance only in the Contemporaries of Archbishop Laud; was there ever an
honester Privy-Concellor than Archbishop Abbot? Or that gave the King wiser or
better Counsel than he, if the King would have hearkened? Was there ever a wiser
Statesman and Lord Chancellor than Williams Bishop of Lincoln? Or that managed
that Place with greater prudence or success; he made his way, though he always
rowed against the stream, wind and tide against him, Buckingham and Laud. Was
there ever an honester or more wise and frugal Lord Treasurer, than Bishop
Juxten, his Enemies (the Rump-Parliament) being Judges, and after they had with
prying Eyes examined his Books of Accounts?

Therefore it is as ridiculous as unjust to make all Clergymen suffer for one
man's offense, and attribute the miscarriages of the Man to the Profession,
that as Andrew Marvel says, if they keep to their Bibles, make the best
Statesmen in the World: And surely they are as likely to keep to their Bibles,
and have been as Wise and Honest Statesmen as any other Men, of what Profession
soever.

For, alas! Laud did not Lead but Follow those bad methods and steps, of
raising Money without the Peoples consont in Parliament; of calling no
Parliament to redress Grievances, under which no People ever groaned more; so
that those Minions and chief Ministers of State were afraid of Parliaments,
afraid to be called to account, and more than one Parliament was disfolv'd for
calling Buckingham to Account; insomuch, that the ills which those Ministers
had done, could not be safe, but by attempting greater.

King James I. (from the 7th to the 18th year of his Reign (11. years) had not
one Parliament; and then, all that was done in that Parliament, was but the old
business,) the Mony-business) and an Act of Indemnity; of which, as the
Favorites had most need, so they promoted the same.

King Charles I. never called but three Parliaments all his whole Reign, which
lasted almost 24. years, and the last Parliament he called, outlasted him, at
least, the Rump of it.

And it is observable, that neither King Charles I. nor King James I. ever
parted with a Parliament with smooth Foreheads, dissolving them in a rage, and
sending them home with wrinkled Brows, on all sides; which sowred the Blood,
turned it to Choler; so that (after such long Intervals of Parliament) when
they met again, they Vented it in a Rage, and (like Haman) for the affront of
one Mordecai, they would he revenged of the whole Tribe, and therefore made
that Act, which as aforefaid, disabled all persons in Holy Orders from the
exercise of any temporal Jurisdiction. To Effect which, let us listen, in the
next place, to their Wise Reasonings.

Obj. 2. The next great Argument against Clergy-men's exercising Temporal
Authorities, was taken from Holy Scriptures, and from the Example and words of
our blessed Savior, Luke 12.14. When a man came to him, and desired him to
speak to his Brother, that he should divide the Inheritance with him.

To which the Blessed Jesus replied -- Man! who made me a Judge, or a divider
over you?

Now (quoth they) Is the Disciple above his Master, or the Servant above his
Lord? If the Master disclaimes the temporal poral Office of a Judge, or
Magistrate; how comes his Disciples to claim the same, and by what Authority?
Has the Man more power than the Master?

Ans. I Answer, That they that swallow such stuff as this, must do it without
chewing.

For such a construction and improvement of that Text, Disrobes all
Lay-magistrates, as well as Clergy-Magistrates, except the Lay-Magistrates
renounce their Christianity, and the Service of Christ.

For I was in good hopes that all the Judges, Parliamentmen, Justices of Peace,
and Magistrates in England are and were Disciples of Christ, and his Servants,
as well and as much as Clergymen; St. Peter call's the Laymen to whom he
writes -- The Servants of God. And St. Paul more particularly styles the
Magistrate, The Minister, (or Servant) of God.

It is no disgrace for the King's Writ to run in the style that Moses his
Precipe's and Commands did run -- Josh. 8.31. Moses the Servant of the Lord
commanded, etc.

We must have none but Pagans and Heathens, Atheists and Debauchees for Kings
and Magistrates, if we exclude all the Disciples and Servants of Christ; for
one and all; exclude one, exclude all; and for the same Reasons.

Besides, the distinction of Laymen and Clergymen, are names of Distinction
that God never made, but quite contrary; those that we call Lay People, are
more especially called Clergy, or God's Flock, or God's Lot, or God's
Inheritance, 1 Pet. 5.2, 3. where St. Peter (whom we call a Clergyman)
Commands the Bishops, Elders, or Priests (whom we also call Clergymen) to feed
the Flock of God, and not to Lord it over God's Clergy, or God's Inheritance,
(viz.) over them which we contrarily call Laymen; And the Statute Hen. 8.21,
13. calls -- Lay fee. Pride and Popery first made this Distinction, making an
Impropriation of the name Clergy, or God's-lot to the Divines, who called
themselves also Spiritual Persons, and Ecclesiastical Persons, and Churchmen;
as if God had no Churchmen but Cassock-men, nor any Saints, but such as are in
Holy Orders?

And what I pray is entering into Holy Orders? Other than being Commissioned or
Authorized to do such and such Acts, by men of authority so to Ordain, thus the
King Ordains Judges and Justices by Commission; Judges Ordains Gentlemen in the
Country to Represent themselves in many cases by taking Fines, Depositions,
etc. By Commission too, or Dedimus Potestatem, The King Ordains, or orders the
Dean and Chapter to Elect A. B. to be a Bishop. The Conge deslyer is a
mandamus. The Patron Orders or Ordains, or appoints a man to such a Benefice;
if the Bishop do not accordingly give him Institution, a Writ of Quare Impedit
lies against him, so that the Bishop in such cases can neither will nor choose;
but if the person Presented be Literatus, and according to the late Acts of
Parliament (in Holy Orders) which we call Ordination; but really and truly, the
Presentation is the Ordination or Order that Entitles him with the Bishops
Institution to jus ad rem; and in course the Archdeancon's Induction gives him
Livery and Seizin, or jus in re and Possession.

All this is called Holy Orders, and so Prayers and hearing the Word, are
called Holy matters and Holy things, because they more immediately relate to
Communion with God; but I understand not how Prayers in a Clergyman is more
Holy than Prayers in a Layman; nor how Preaching is more Sacred than Hearing.
It is all God's Service, and they that exercise the same, are his immediate
Servants, one as much as another, if their Faith and Devotion be equal.

Obj. But why did not Christ accept the Temporal Office and Honor of being a
Judge?

I answer by another question, why is not every man you meet a Judge, and an
Award's man, to decide and determine all your Controversies?

Your Answer must be the same with mine to the said Quaere, namely, He never
had a Commission, a Dedimus Potestatem, an Authority to make such an Award, to
divide or decide any such Inheritance or controversy; as neither had Jesus
Christ in the Days of his Humiliation, for that he came to suffer for the sins
of the World; he could have been born of a Queen, but he chose to be Born of a
Poor Woman, in a poorer Equipage than any, and as he was born poor, even so he
lived, and so he dyed; and it was necessary (as it was Proyhecyed of him) that
he should be a man of Sorrows and acquainted with Grief, despised and rejected
of men, oppressed and afflicted, he was brought as a Lamb to the Slaughter, for
it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief, making his Soul an
Offering for Sin, etc.

Now observe the Vanity of these Rump Orators, and Logicians; would you
Christian Magistrates and Ministers of Christ be above, or better than your
Master? He was poor and had not an House of his own to hide his head in;
neither would you, if you be his true Disciples and Servants, for the Servant
is not greater than his Lord; you should be poor as your Master.

All this fine Rhetoric (if any were so silly to use it) did not prevail with
St. John, to part with his Estate, his House or his Home; our blessed Savior
on the Cross took notice of it, and therefore recommended his Mother to his
Care, and Provision; and from that very hour that beloved Disciple carried her
to his own home: It was well he had a Home, and to put it to so good an use, it
was more than his Master had, who had not so much as the Birds have (...) Nest,
an Home, some men will be Interpreters of Holy Writ, and consider
nocircumstances, which alter the (...).

There was a time when Christ sent his Disciples out without purse or scrip,
and barefoot; that is, in the time of his Humiliation: But when that was
accomplished, or upon Finishing, he gives them new Orders, Luke 22.35, 36. But
now, says Christ, He that has a purse let him take it, and likewise his
scrip; and he that has no sword, let him sell his Garment and buy one.

Whereby they had a plainer Commission to wear a Sword than to wear a Cassock:
And to want this, rather than, that.

Another brisk Orator and Logician in that Parliament (against Clergy-men's
exercising temporal Jurisdiction) argues thus.

Obj. 3. From 2 Timothy 2.4. No man that warreth,

Answ. Clergymen more than to all other Christians? No Man, no good
Christian-man (...), implicatur, is entangled in the Affairs of this Life: It
is not so well Translated, as commonly, entangles himself; but is entangled;
it is a passive, not an active word, and spoken of them, Qui tricis and laqueis
quibusdam implicantur; that are snared or fettered with or in the things of
this Life; caught by the Foot, so that they cannot go.

It is a word used by St. Peter, 2 Pet. 2.20. concerning such as are once
Converted, and have thereby escaped the snares and pollutions of the World, and
are again entangled, or snared. So that St. Paul to Timothy only advises, that
no man, no good Christian man that has escaped the snares and pollutions of
the World, should again be entangled and ensnared therein; no, God forbid: It
is just like that of our blessed Saviors Prayer, John 17.15. I pray not that
thou should take them out of the World, but that thou should keep them
from the Evil.

And all this is but the Daty, and should be the endeavor of every good
Christian, tho he live in the World, yet to keep himself unspotted from the
World.

Agur's Prayer, Prove. 30.8. is excellent to this purpose, give me neither
Riches nor Poverty, feed me with Food convenient for me, lest I be full and
deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? Or, lest I be poor and steal, and take the
name of my God in Vain: Great Riches are a Temptation and a Share, apt to
entangle them in Pride, and make Gold their God: Great Poverty is a Temptation
and a snare too, apt to tempt men to steal, oppress, take bribes, etc. Not, but
that a Rich Man may be an Oppressor, a Cheat, a Thief, a taker of Bribes: Not,
but that a poor man too may be poor and proud, and make Mammon his God: But the
usual Temptations that attend great Riches are Pride, and confidence in Riches:
And the usual Temptations that attend great Poverty, is Cheating, Stealing, and
other unlawful Pollutions that are in the world.

Now what is become of our Argument? No man that Warreth, no Christian Man that
would please God who has chosen him to be a Soldier, should be entangled, and
to his utmost he should take care that he be not entangled in and with the
Snares, and Pollutions of the World.

They that thus apply this Text to the Clergy alone (which belongs to all
Christians) would exempt themselves from being obliged to look to themselves
that they be not Polluted with the World, tho they live in it: As if none but
Clergymen were obliged to be good men, Spiritual men, and good Churchmen, and
Disciples of Christ.

St. Peter was a Spiritual Person, and an Apostle and Fisher of men, but still
kept to the old Trade of Fishing, to maintain his Body.

So St. Paul, as he was born a Freeman of Rome, he stands up for his
Birthright, when Invaded; and calls to the Roman Army, to help him against 40.
Cutthroats that had sworn that they would be the Death of him.

Therefore taking care of a man's Life and Livelihood (a duty indispensable
except a man be felo de se) is so far from being a Snare or Entanglement; that
it is expressly Commanded by the Laws Divine as well as Human: The Laws of God,
the Law of Nature, and Law of the Land.

If any thing be an Entanglement, or a snare to hinder a man in his Heavenly
Race, one would think a Wife should as likely be such a Clog, as a Place of
Honor or Profit; but that is so far from it, that it is expressly made a
qualification of a Bishop, that he be the Husband of one Wife, as St. Peter
was, and as St. Paul said he had Power (...), a License to Marry when he listed.

Obj. 4. Topic (whence these Orators did raise the Arguments against
Clergy-men's intermedling with Temporal Offices and Honors) is taken from Acts
6.2. It is not reason, say the twelve Apostles, That we should leave the word
of God and serve Tables.

Ans. This has less of Sense to your purpose,

The Greek-Converts or Christians murmured, because there was not that care
taken for their Poor, as was for the Jewish-Christians; wherefore the Apostles
caused seven Churchwardens or Deacons, or Overseers for the Poor, to be chosen
for that Work: Every Member of the Church cannot be the Head, nor Eye, some
have gifts inferior, as the Hands and Feet, all are useful for the Body; this
hinders not but the chief Heads and Eyes of the Church may give directions, and
have an Eye to the Poor, and to see that the Feet and Hands do their Office.

Obj. 5. Cor. 2.16. who is sufficient for those things?

Answ. Who is sufficient? I answer, None are sufficient; What then? Must we
despair, lie down and Die? No, no, we must do as we can, though we cannot do
all we should?

The Duty of a Minister of Christ is no where in sewer words more fully
recommended and described than in 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. Feed the Flock of God
(called in the 3d. v. as I said before) the Clergy.

Our English word, Feed, does but speak by halves, the meaning of the Greek
word, (...), Rule and Feed the Flock: So St. Paul commands the Hebrews to pay
Obedience to their Rulers, Pastors, Teachers, that watch for their Souls, Heb.
13.17.

Not but that a good Magistrate, a good Judge may be a good Preacher (and many a
good Sermon have I heard from the Bench (in some Judge his Charge there) as well
as from the Pulpit.)

The Elders and Pastors are positively Commissionated and Commanded in 1 Cor.
6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. to be Judges in all matters of Law or Controversy that can
happen betwixt one Christian and another: And so at this day all Christendom
over the Teachers are also Lawyers and Chancellours, and Masters of the Rolls,
etc. and the Lawyers may Preach too, if they be Gifted and Ordained thereto.

Obj. Writ, Reg. 187.6. which among other things has these words, Non est
consonum quod ille qui Salubri Statui animarum and piis operibus continue
deservit, ad insistendum in secularibus negotiis compellatur.

Ans. this Writ of Privilege, if he be chosen a Churchwarden, Constable,
Scavinger, or any other place, which he does not like, he shall be excused by
this Writ of Privilege; if he please: Non Compellatur; he shall not against
his good liking serve. So shall now an Apothecary be excused and discharged
from such troublesome Offices; but, he is at his choice, he may serve if he
please; the Law does not incapacitate him, but is made in his favor; Is not
the Life more than Meat, and the Body than Raiment? Therefore the Law only
takes care that they who are more immediately concerned in taking care for the
Soul, the Life, or the Body of Man, shall be at leisure to attend the great
work, and shall not be forced to attend the less, to the hindrance of what is
more necessary.

But what is this to the question? For there are many Authorities and
Jurisdictions Temporal, as that of a Justice of Peace, Privy-Councellour, etc.
wherein a Clergyman can better Rule and Feed the Flock, than those, who though
never so able and accomplished for the place, cannot do the good they would to
their Flock, for want of Temporal Power, Jurisdiction and Authority.

Obj. 7. Oh! But this hinders his Preaching?

Ans. 1. In answer there-unto, I first say,

2. Is there now a days such need of Preaching of Piety, as there is of the
Practice of Piety? There are few so silly, but they know their Duty, and those
that do not, may have Preaching enough, store of Preaching, in the Pulpit, in
the Press, Sermons, Sermons!

The truth on it is, Sermons are of great use to Feed the Flock, but not of more
use than Discipline to Rule the Flock, which is equally a Duty: A Justice of
Peace shall make ten times fewer Swearers and Cursers and Damners in a Parish
than twenty Preachers; But, of late times, Preaching has justled all other
Duties almost out of the Church, as if Prayers and Sacraments (by which men
have the most immediate Communion with God) were but the Parenthesis of our
Religion; and our sense of Religion sufficiently preserved, tho they be omitted
and left out.

Obj. 8. Again, it was objected, gives a Prohibition to his Apostles, Luke
22.25. lest his Disciples exercise Lordship, and aim at Dominion, as do the
Princes of the Gentiles; and the Apostle Peter Commands the Elders not to Lord
it over God's-Clergy; and Diotrephes is blamed for seeking pre-eminence.

Answ. Levellers; and may as well be used to Level all Christian men, and make
an equality of all Honors and Estates in the State as well as the Church:
Drive it Home, as they would, and it Levels all Christian Princes, Judges and
Magistrates in the State, as well as the Church: For all Christians are, or
should be Disciples and Servants of Christ; whereas our Blessed Savior in the
foresaid Prohibition, Levels not all Orders of men, but only Pride and
Ambition; he would abate their Pride, restrain their Malice, and mortify their
Avarice and Ambition.

A great Prince, a great Statesman, a great Prelate should be Humble, loving
and kind to his fellow Creatures; their greatest Honor is Humility, and the
greatest Humility of Inferiors consists in Honoring all men, especially the
King.

Nay, Servants (who are under the yoke) would cause the Gospel to be
Blasphemed, if they do not count their Masters worthy of all Honors, 1 Timothy
6.1. The Holy Scriptures then are the Magna Charta to conserve Orders and
Respects amongst Christians, not to Level and Confound all degrees and
Qualities to an Equality.

Obj. Spiritual Persons are not fitted and qualified by their Education for
Temporal Offices, and Honors.

Answ. no such unqualified Persons be called to such Places, Offices, and
Trusts: But none in England (be it spoken without exception or offense) have
had more liberal and ingenuous Education than some of the Clergy, improved not
only by Study, but Travel; and are Learned in the Knowledge of Men, as well as
Books, and in the Laws of God and the King: Who are more likely to be improved
in all manner of Learning, than such as have been Students all the days of
their Lives? Who likely to be more accomplished, as to Conversation and
Business, than such as have always kept the choicest Company?

Nay, some of them are of as good and noble Families as any other Gentlemen,
and is a man less a Man, less a Gentleman, less a Knight, or Nobleman, by being
a more immediate Servant of God?

By being a Spiritual Person does he undress himself and lay aside his Body,
wherefore then must he needs divest himself of all care for the Body?

St. Peter never exerted more fiery Zeal than when Ananias and Saphira turned
Church Robbers, by purloyning that Temporal Estate and Riches, which was indeed
once their own; and Sacrilegiously picking the Churches Pocket of what was
Devoted, and might have otherwise lawfully been kept in their own Pockets.

Is a good man the most unsit to be a great man? I had thought that he had been
more fit to serve his Country faithfully, the more Faithfully he had served his
God.

Moses his frequent Communion with God made him not only more able, but
consequently more capable to govern the People? And Samuel had no pretense to
the Throne, till he was the more qualified to be a Judge over men, after some
Discourse betwixt God and him.

Nor was David the less (but the better) King by being the Prophet David; nor
his Son Solomon less, but more wise by being Ecclesiastes or the Preacher.

Was Isaiah less a Prince, and less of the Blood Royal by being a Prophet of
God?

Nay, all Nations that ever I saw, or heard of, pay the greatest respects to
the Priesthood?

What greater King in all Africa at this day than Proster John (that is to say)
Presbyter John or Priest-John? The Egyptians, and so the Ancient Hebrews, by
one and the same word signified Priest and Prince, Genesis 41.45. Potipherah;
Priest of Ou (in the Margent) Prince of Ou; I say, all Nations (except our
Britain, since the late confusions) have thought no Station too good or too
great for their Priests; both Civil and Barbarous Nations gave thus much to
Religion; and what Nation is there in Christendom, Turkey, or Heathenism,
wherein Men in Holy Orders are not a Constitutive and Essential Part of the
Government?

Popish Priests (whom the ignorant Papists believe to be able to make a God)
must needs be not only Respected but Adored. But Protestant Ministers in Holy
Orders, can never, without as great a Miracle, be kept from Contempt, and given
to Hospitality, if they be kept poor by the many Impropriations now
appropriated to the Crown and great Men (which once belonged to the Clergy) and
now they shall be stripped too of all Temporal Offices and Honors (their just
due by the Laws of Nature, of God, and of the Realm) as those enjoyed by them
you call Laymen. Bishops have their Baronies jure Humano; who denies it? No
Barons have other Right; the Law of the Land is their Birthright, of which
when by the Heats and rage of the late Dog Days time, they were madly deprived,
what was the Consequence, but the Ruin and Confusion of all men's Birthrights?

It must be confessed, that Envy, pure Envy made Sir Francis Bacon, Lord Verulam
(when Lord Chancellor of England (one of the First and Worst Lord
Chancellours, of a Layman, that ever had the Custody of the Great Seal of
England) by shameful Briberies, for which he lost it) say, (when it was told
him that a poor Clergyman waited to speak with him below stairs;) Let him come
up (quoth he) for I love to see a poor Clergyman.

There are, no doubt, very many that have had the same love for the Clergy,
they love to see them Poor; they love to see a poor Clergyman.

The Lord Chancellors Ancient Title is Clericus Primae sedis, Clerk of the
first Form; Clerk, not Clark (a name now commonly given to every Scribler, and
Lawyers Clark) but Clerk, from (...), Clergyman, or the Lord's lot: I know, as
before, that Pride and Self-conceit monopoliz'd this name (unjustly) to men in
Orders, but it has obtained by custom to signify Spiritual persons; be it so,
not the Law of God, nor the Language of Holy Scripture, but only Ordination,
Presentation, or the Kings's. Commission, makes the Distinction at this Day.

The famous Dr. Done was a favorite Lay-Courtier when King James gave him his
Hand to Kiss, in assurance that he should be Dean of Paul's; he afterward was
Ordained Deacon and Priest; and well became his Spiritual sunction

I know no Law that hinders grave and sober Lawyers to be Ordained Elders of
the Church; nor why Elders of the Church may not (if qualified) be Elders in
the State.

Sacred Places, sacred Persons, sacred Churches, and Holy Lands, were only so
called because they were Consecrated or made over, and Dedicated to God for his
more immediate service.

But, in these, as in all other gists, bargains and Sales, there goes two words
to the Bargain, or gift, viz. The consent of the Bargainer and the Bargainee;
the Donorand the Donee.

Now, when, and where, and how did All-mighty God ever discover that he
accepted these gifts? Especially in those times of Popery, when most of those
Deo dands were by superstitutious men given or consecrated to God?

For 1st. The Sacred Things and Holy Lands so Dedicated, could not properly be
called Gifts to God, because they were usually Extortious, forced through
Superstition, and extorted from Devout Sick Men and Dying Men, in Expiation for
their former wicked and lewd Lives; Thus, by Commutation to escape the pains of
an imaginary Purgatory, Redeeming the Penalty of their Debaucheries, with their
Purses and Lands.

These, the crafty Priests from that time forward, called Holy Lands,
Church Lands, or the Liberties and Franchises of Holy Church; But, Protestants
and all Rational Men (whose Judgments warp not through silly and imbibed
Superstitions) call these Commutations of Penance. Holy Cheats.

And (it is probable) God All-mighty calls them so, and says, who requires
these things at your hands? To bring the Price of a Whore, or a Dog into the
House of the Lord, by scaring and frighting poor silly men out of their Lands,
their Moneys, and their little Wits, with that old gainful Bugbear and useful
scarecrow, Purgatory.

An High-way-man is Hanged for saying, with Pistol in hand -- Deliver your
Purse; but these Holy Pick-pockets are rewarded and applauded for saying,
Purgatory, Purgatory, Deliver your Purse.

Then, with an impudent and whores forehead, making the Holy God an Accessory,
a party, and consenting to those Holy Cheats.

And if the Popes themselves, their Cardinals, and Priests did believe these
Frauds to be really Sacred, God's Right, and God's Lot, they would never have
consented to the Sacriledg by alienating them, and converting them to Saecular
uses, and a Lay-fee, as formerly they had been.

But Cardinal Woolsey and the Pope understood one another, when Woolsey (to
satisfy his Ambition) prevailed with the Pope, for a good round Bribe (for the
Pope's Wheels seldom move well without greazing) and got a License to dissolve
many little Monasteries, Nunneries and Friaries, and to convert them into
moneys, to purchase and Build himself a Name, by erecting therewith those two
famous Fabrics and Foundations, at Ipswich and Oxford; the former, his
Birthplace, the latter, the place of his Education.

With design to Eternize his Fame and Name (a most needless project!) for the
known Whoredoms and Debaucheries of that Butcher's Son of Ipswich are
sufficient Chronicles to perpetuate the filthy memory of such an Erostratus.

However, this Indulgence of the Pope (to alienate Church Lands) opened the
Eyes of King Hen. 8. and his Parliament' and let them see that the Pope and
Cardinals did not believe that such sacred Church Lands and Tithes were so
perpetually Consecrated and given to God, but that they might, to gratify their
own Avarice and Woolsey's Ambition, without any scruple of Conscience, be
converted to worldly uses again, and become (as they were in the beginning) a
Lay-fee.

For the King and Parliament perceived (and yet they were Papists, purblind
with Superstitions) that the Laity had been most abominably gulled of their
Lands, at that extravagant rate, that the Church Lands were more than a third
part of the Kingdom; which caused so many Statutes of Mortmain, as in Magna
Charta, cap. 36. and many more since that time.

So that, of all Affections, with which the Soul of Man is possessed,
Superstition seems to be the most powerful and Violent; it opens the griping
hand of the most Covetous Miser; it tears out all Natural Affection from the
Bowels of the most tender Parent; witness Phillip of Spain that Sacrificed his
dearest Son to the Bloody Inquisition, as of old such Bigots Sacrificed their
Children to Moloch; it Sanctifies and Hallowes all Murder and Villainy; it
humbles the most Ambitious Potentate; witness Hen. II. of England; for
personage, none more proper, stout and aimable, for Armies and Victories so
powerful and successful, yet he gave his back to the smiters, and was whipped by
the shaven Crowns (the Monks of Canterbury) 'till the Blood run down his Royal
Back, in superstitious Expiation of the Death of a proud Prelatical Rebel,
Becket, whose shrine was an hundred times more rich, and more Devotion paid to
his Altar, than to that of the Blessed Jesus, such is the force of mad Bigotry
and Superstition.

But that mist broke up in a great measure when the light broke out in the
Reign of Hen. VIII. the contemporary of Martin Luther, and John Calvin; in so
much that the word Sacriledg, Sacriledg (with which the Wily Priests had done
Wonders to Enrich themselves, and Beggar the Kingdom) had lost the greatest
part of its Bugbear-force and Terror.

Which was happy for this Kingdom; for if the crafty Priests had prosper'd a
little longer in their Holy Frauds, all England had long e're this been St.
Peter's Patrimony; the Church of England had not been in the Kingdom; but the
Kingdom in the Church, the Clergy (that at first came out of the Laity, had
long e're this devoured (as the Papists say they do) their Maker and Creator.

But it was Priestly and Antichristian Pride alone that made the Clergy such
Cormorants, and then to distinguish themselves from the Laity, and be a
distinct body of themselves, setting themselves above all that is called God,
the Lay-magistrate; But such distinction of Lay and Clergy, is a stranger to
the Language of Holy Scripture, and to the sentiments of right Reasoning.

Was not St. Peter a Clergyman? And yet he Exhorts the Pastors of the Church
to feed the Clergy, or God's-lot and Flock, viz. The Laity, as we improperly
term them, as was said before, for Clergy is their Christian-Name.

Search the Scripture, and you shall always find that by Church of God, is
meant the Laity with their Pastor's at the Head of them; quite contrary, our
Ancient Statutes (Penned by Popish-Priests) by Holy Church, and all her
Liberties and Franchises, mean only the Clergy, forsooth, excluding the Laity;
but I say, Laity and Clergy, Lay-fee, and Church lands, are distinguishing
Terms that God never made, and is the sole Invention of Antichristian Pride.

And so long as these two words -- Church and State are kept in vogue, as if
they were two Bodies, two distinct Corporations, they will always be clashing
and quarrelling in their Interests, and drive on several Designs and Projects;
of which we may say as of two Ships that sailing contrary ways meet in the
Ocean, Si collidimur, frangimur, if we clash one against another, we shall
split one another; but they are not two, but one, and Lay-Clergy is but one
word, and what God has joined together, let not wicked man put asunder.

This Unity of Persons (Clergy and Lay) takes away all distinctions of Lands,
as Church Lands, and Lay-fees, which King H. 8. and his Parliament begun
practically to understand, when they took the Church Lands (which the Popelings
Superstition had Monopoliz'd to the Clergy alone, robbing the State) and made
them Crown Lands. For to the Crown all Deodands appertain, and I will justify
it against all the Bigots, that they were Lawfully disposed of by Act of
Parliament, which in England is the only thing that distinguishes and
ascertains all men's Properties and Liberties, and places all Lawful Landmarks.

Nature makes no distinction of meum and tuum, for Property and Right in the
Kingdom, is only ascertained, and known by the Law of the Land.

But, 2dly. How can God be robbed, except it can be proved that those
Church Lands were his, and that he (who hates Robbery for a Burnt-Offering) did
ever accept thereof? How can it be proved that his word was one of the two
words that went to the bargain, when such Holy-lands, and Sacred Persons were
Dedicated to him? Tithes and Offerings were God's Lot, under the Law; of which
he might have been robbed, not so under the Gospel. Sacred they were only in
the use, whilst well employed in the more immediate service of God, Divine
Service; but the Character is not indelible, they cease to be so, when the good
and right use ceases, or turns to an Abuse, and never were accepted by God,
that we know of, or ever were acknowledged to be God's peculiar, especially
when purchased by Superstitious craft, robbery and fraud; for it is written,
Let no man go beyond (out-wit) or defraud his Brother in any matter, for the
Lord is the Avenger of all such.

The Magistrate is God's Deputy, and the Avenger, and in England he has done
his Duty, in Redeeming these superstitious Church Lands, reducing them to the
State, (their ancient Channel) and who art thou that dare to gainsay this
Minister of God to thee for good? Demas was Ordained, but what became of the
Indelible Character, when he turned an Apostate-Priest in the Ido!-Temple at
Thessalonica?

Julian (the Emperor) was once in Holy Orders, and given or ordained or
devoted to God; but, if God had accepted the gift, he had not afterward, by
his Apostasy, given himself to the Devil: but where is the Indelible Character
all this while, so much boasted of by the Papists, and so much prated of by
some Protestants?

Our Holy Religion is of its own store rich enough, without borrowing from
Hypocritical dresses, or groundless and vain Pretenses.

Moses the chief Magistrate Ordained his Elder Brother Aaron Chief Priest, and
Nature wrought in him, so that he preferred all his own Family and Tribe
(Ordaining all the Tribe of Levi, fit or unfit, even before they were Born) to
be Clergymen to the World's end; and gave them not only great Gleabes, but the
Tenth (whereas Levi was at most but the twelfth part of the other Tribes) even
of all their Labor and Increase; the eleven Tribes drudg'd hard to make the
Tribe of Levi easy, I do not say, Lazy.

But under the Gospel there are no such entailed Ordinations, nor a
Clergy-Tribe; the Laity and Clergy are now all of one Flesh; and they ought to
be all of one mind, which can never be, whilst they are distinct corporations,
either in Fact, or Name.

Even under the Law, the chief Magistrate King Solomon deemed it no Sacriledg
to degrade and deprive the High Priest Abiathar, and Ordained and Installed in
his room one of his own Favorites.

Nay, Moses could not so monopolize the Priest's Office, and Church-Benefices
and Benefits to his own Tribe, but other Tribes put in for a warm share long
before Jeroboam's time; one of the House of Judah was an Interloper, and got
Ordination, Judge. 17.7. So that, neither the Church Affairs were Administered
only by the Tribe of Levi, nor the chief Administration and Government in the
State was confined to the Tribe of Judah (as King David's good nature and
kindness to his own Tribe did design it) for King David's project lasted not
three Generations, Judah was the Royal Family during the Reigns of David and
Solomon, but the Scepter departed from Judah (by the Revolt of ten of the
Tribes) in the Reign of that impolitick Prince, Rehoboam, and an Ephraimite
Reigned in Jeroboam; who had the Art, or King-Craft to cajole the people, who
must be pleased, or else their King's Crown sits neither easy nor fast upon his
head; Jeroboam had the knack of it, whilst silly and Rash Rehoboam was
Abdicated; what portion (say the people) have we in David, neither have we
inheritance in the Son of Jesse, To your Tents, Oh Israel! now see to thine
House, David.

Thus we see, that even under the Occonomy of the Old Testament neither Offices
in the Church nor State were confined to One Set of Men, much less to such a
distinct Tribe of Levi, or Churchmen, distinguished and characterized from
other men; no, not so much as in Habit, Garb or Name.

For St. Peter (a Fisherman) was a Fisherman still, even after he was a
Preacher and Fisher of men; and I doubt not but he wore a Fisher-man's Habit,
Clothes and Garb suitable to his Trade, as did St. Paul and the rest.

Nor were Magistrates excluded from Degrading, Ordaining or Commissionating
Churchmen, and Depriving them likewise; making Churchmen Statesmen, and vice
versa, Statesmen Churchmen, Ministers of the Church and State, or Servants to
the State; for they are not (as I said before) two distinct Bodies, two
distinct Corporations, but the Church is a Member and part of the State; It was
only Popish Pride and Antichristian Prelacy that advanced the Mitre above the
Crown. And all our aucient Statutes (made in the Unhappy Reign of Popery) run
in one strain, as if the Church of England was adistinct Body from the Kingdom
of England.

Thus the first Chapter of Magna Charta grants, That the Church of England
shall be free, and shall have Her whole Rights and Liberties inviolable; and 3
Rich. 2.1. That Holy Church have and wholly enjoy Her Franchises and Liberties,
by the manner she as has had, etc.

What a do is here to maintain this She? This She (Holy Church) can never be
meant to be the same Body with the He (the State) for which cause the old
Statutes often mention the Lay-Fec in opposition and distinction to
Church Lands.

But it was never-well with the King and Kingdom of England, when this She
strove to wear the Britches, and kept a Purse and Cupboard by her Self alone,
peculiar and independent of the He, the King.

For in the days of yore, when Popery (or Antichristianism) was rampant above
all that is called God (the Magistrate) our King could not, durst not hang a
Murderer or Traitor if he were a Clergyman or Churchman, 'till Holy Church
was pleased to Depose, Disrobe, and unclergy the Traitor or Murderer.

And if the King and State had never so much need of Money, not a Farthing
durst they Assess this same She Holy Church in pain of Excommunication; (a
terrible Bug in those days, tho Solomon said, The curse that is causeless shall
not come) and in pain of Transgressing Magna Charta, except She her self
consented to such Assessment, in Convocation; for which cause Parliaments and
Convocations were usually Contemporaries; So also are they now, from Custom
rather than use, Convocations being now little more than a mere formality; the
King and Parliament make bold to pass such Royal Aids into Acts, without asking
the consent, or so much as consulting the Convocation Houses, no not so much as
in matters of Religion, little or no notice being taken of them. For Noblemen
and Gentlemen are now Book-learn'd, and generally may entitle themselves to (K.
Hen. the first's cognomination) Beau-Clerks: And the benefit of the Clergy (in
Felon's Convict) is now by Common Law and Statute Law granted in common to
Laymen, who also have the mercy of the Book; and as the Laymen are capable of
the benefit of the Clergy, why not also of the Benefices of the Clergy, if the
King Ordain or Commissionate them? So also Clergymen are capable of any Benefit
in the State, if the King Ordain or Commission them thereunto; even as they
usually are Commissionated in all other kingdoms of the World, whether
Christians or Turks, Jews or Gentiles.

And every man that is capable may justly to himself adopt the Motto of Julius
Caesar (who was Pope of Rome, and Roman Emperor, both Pontifex Maximus and
Imperatour, High Priest in the Church, and General and Dictator in the State,
as famous for his Sermons and Orations, as for his Bastails and Conquests, as
Eloquent as Valiant, renowned for the sharpness of his Pen, as his Pyke, both
for the Word and Sword) ex utroque

If a man be able for both, he is capable of both; this is the common consent
of all Nations, and therefore ought (in Cicero's Opinion) to be esteemed The
Law of Nature, which is never contrary to the Law of God. Omni in re Consensio
Omnium Gentium lex naturae putanda est.

All the Lawyers in Israel and Judah were Divines, and all their Divines
Lawyers; and so it is at this day, in all those vast Territories where Mahomet
anism does obtain, and which spreads more Land (in these three best Inhabited
Parts of the World, Europe, Asia, and Africa) than Christianity and Gentilism
both put together.

But to come nearer home, Leges Angliae were of old truly styled Leges Dei; the
Laws of England are called the Laws of God, not only because they are (for the
most part) extracted out of holy-writ, but because they are the Long-approved
dictates of right Reason, the only Image of God, in which man was Created; And
can it be improper for a Divine to be well-skill'd in the most lively Draughts
of his Maker's likeness?

The gross or supine ignorance of our English Laws and Constitutions gave vent
to those Flaguy-Doctrines of Non-resistance and Absolute and Arbitrary
Government (after the mode of France) in Loanes, Free Quarter, Shipmony, etc.
during the unhapy Ministry of Buckingham, Strafford and Laud, that countenanced
those two Court-Parasites and Ear-wigs (Mountague and Manwaring) who poisoned
the Ears of Charles I. with such infectious Doctrines that proved to be so
fatal to the King and three Kingdoms. It Is true, indeed, both Mountaigne and
Manwaring were doomed and condemned for the same in open Parliament, Sentenced
and Fined, and made incapable of all Ecclesiastical Benefices and Promotions.

But the Parliament was no sooner dissolved, but they were (both of them)
punished with two Fat Bishoprics, but of fatal consequence.

For duckoy'd and drilled on with such like hopes of Preferment, a numerous
crowd of Tories and Tantivees, in the three late Reigns, trod in Manwaring's
steps in hopes thereby of Manwaring's Fate.

Which (yet) was not worth the aspiring unto, for he did not long enjoy the
Fruits of his Court-Sycophantry; but dyed poor and an Heterodox-Divine, because
he was not an Orthodox-Lawyer. And was therefore condemned by the Parliament as
unfit for the Church, because he was so ignorant of the Laws of the Land, (a
fault unpardonable in a Divine of the Church of England, who wants the one half
of his Trade, or Profession, and is not complete Master of his Art, without
good knowledge in the Laws Municipal.)

Thus have I shown, That the Lay-Clergy is but one goodword, and a Lay-Elder
(in this sense) no Centaur, but (though a great rarity) The most Accomplished
Divine, and able for (and therefore capable of) Secular Authorities, and of
both Provinces; or (if you please) or rather (if the King please) they make but
one good Province.

But whether, such a Divine thinks it expedient to accept thereof, is a Second
Question.

For he is accounted the wisest Divine (at least) one that best consults his
own welfare and repose, who withdraws himself from the Crowd and Bustle of this
silly World betimes, before he be so far engaged that all Return is
impracticable, and no fair way left for an honorable and safe retreat.

It is easy to get into Place, not so easy to stay in, but much more difficult,
when plunged in, to scramble out.

The Conclusion.
Pro Captu Lectoris habent sua fata Libelli. Books have their fates, they hit,
they miss;
Just as the Reader's Palate is;
And what does one man's Gusto please,
Is to another a Disease.


Or, in Burlesque, thus, Each Book has several fates, Videlicet,
Even as the Readers please to relish it.


Thus have I, gentle Reader, with good and honest design, endeavored to
demolish that Partition Wall (betwixt Church and State, Layety and Clergy)
erected by Popish and Prelatical pride, making the Church and Churchmen a Body
and Corporation distinct from the State, and driving on several and opposite
Ends and Designs; whereas they should be United and go hand in hand; or rather
are indeed one and the same (or ought to be so) in a Christian State: As the
King is head of the State, so is he also recognized to be the Head of the
Church, 26. Hen. 8.1. What? Two Bodies to one head? Out upon it; it is Monstrous;
I cannot abide to see it.

And herein, if I have not pleased thee, I have done my endeavor, and therein
have pleased my self.

And if I be in an Error, it is one of the most harmless in these mad times,
wherein -- Quis non molitur inepte?
Nullum magnum Ingenium sine mixtura dementioe.
A Worm or Magot (in the Head
Of the most subtle man) is bred.
Wisemen (at some odd hours) we see,
Have some short fits of Lunacy;
And every skull (all must confess)
Has a soft place in it, more or less.


FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Letter written by Sir DVNCOMB COLCHESTER a little before his Death;
containing his Remarkable Instance (which Letter was read publicly by his
order, in the Parish Churches of Michael-Dean and Westbury) is now Published,
with other late instances of that Nature. All which are annexed to Mr. TVRNER's
Essay upon the Works of Creation and Providence, lately published: To this
ESSAY is added a SCHEME of the History of Remarkable Providence (now preparing
for the Press.) As also a large SPECIMEN of that Work. Price bound 2 s. -- Both
Printed for John Dunton, at the Raven in Jewen-street. And may also be had of
Edm. Richardson near the Poultrey-Church.

If any Ministers VVidow, or other person, have any Library, or parcel of books
to dispose of, if they will send a Catalogue of them, or notice where they are,
to John Dunton, at the Raven in Jewen-street, they shall have ready money for
them, to the full of what they are worth.


