Ravillac Redivivus, BEING A NARRATIVE Of the late TRIAL of MR. JAMES MITCHEL A
Conventicle-Preacher, Who was Executed the 18th of January last, for an attempt
which he made on the Sacred Person of the Archbishop of St. ANDREWS.

To which is Annexed, An Account of the TRIAL of that most wicked Pharisee
Major THOMAS WEIR, who was Executed for Adultery, Incest and Bestiality.

In which Are many Observable Passages, especially relating to the present
Affairs of Church and State.

In a Letter from a Scottish to an English Gentleman.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, 1678.

SIR,
I Received your Letter, wherein you charge me with unkindness for having
neglected to Write unto you for the last six months; and you also tell me, you
cannot imagine what has made me so silent all this while, that others have
sent their Correspondents in England so many Letters of Scottish News. But what
you seem to make an aggravation of my fault, I must Retort upon you in my own
Defense, and tell you plainly, that being a Person incapable to Write
certainties in State-matters, and too honest to Write lies, I could not prevail
with my self to follow the ill example of many of my Contrymen, whereof some
maliciously Wrote their own Forgeries, and some out of weakness their
Jealousies, and Fears, and all pretending to understand not only what were, but
what would be the Intrigues of Halyrud-House, filled their Muddiman-letters
with their own Inventions, instead of real Truth.

The Reports which these Instruments of Mischief sent to London, rebounded as
quickly hither again; and considering how foolishly some, and how maliciously
others of their Stories were contrived, I cannot but sigh for the unhappiness
of my Country, where these Coiners and Dispersers of false News, like the
false Prophets in the Kingdom of Israel, are a National judgment, and a
grievous Plague both to Church and State.

Therefore, let me prevail with you for the time to come, to give as little
credit to the flying Reports, which are sent from our Country, as I do to those
which are sent from yours; and that we may both grow wiser by other men's
Follies, and take surer measures in our future Correspondence, give me leave to
propose, that we Write nothing hereafter; but matters of Fact, and consine our
selves to relate such useful, and worthy Contingencies, as might become an
Historian of his own Age. By observing this rule, we shall keep our selves
within the safe bounds of Prudence, and Duty, and profit one another by our
mutual Correspendence, without abusing the credulity of the Vulgar, or injuring
the Ministers of public Affairs.

Wherefore, that I may put my own advice into practice, and be a good example
to my own rule, the Subject of this Letter shall be a faithful Narrative of the
Trial, Condemnation, and Execution of one of our Presbyterian Preachers, who
made an attempt on the Sacred Person of the Archbishop of St. Andrews in the
month of July, 1668. The Story is very comprehensive, and will invite me to
speak of many particular things, and persons, and it will be difficult for me
to pass through it all without touching a little upon public Affairs, in doing
of which, I shall endeavor to perform the part of a faithful Historian, in
keeping to my rule of Writing nothing but matter of Fact.

I have already fixed the beginning of this Story in the month of July, 1668.
But the execrable wretch resolved to do the Fact two years before he did it,
and languish'd all the time for want of an opportunity to execute his inhumane
design. At last, having observed, that the Lord Primate used always to go about
this Town in his Coach, he resolved to Pistol him in it; and accordingly on
Saturday of the foresaid month discharged a Pistol, laden with three Bullets
at him, which were intercepted by the arm of the Lord Bishop of Orkney, who at
the same instant was getting into his Graces Coach: As soon as he had shot, he
walked fast away, and as he crossed the Street, the Primate got a view of his
face. He was not immediately pursued; which gave him opportunity to escape into
the House of one Ferguson an ejected Minister, which being in an obscure place
of the Town, he had prepared for a retreat, in case he could get safe thither.

There having disguised himself by putting on a Periwig, and changing his
Clothes, he immediately went into the Street again, and made as great a bussel
as any in the throng to find out the Assassin, who had shot at the Primate,
and, as he hoped, had killed him in his Coach. He was known by none in the
crowd, but by three of his Confederates, who had come to Town on purpose to
assist him in his bloody design.

Their Designations, or Titles were Barscob, Mandroget, and Major Lermouth, who
had been Ringleaders in the Rebellion at Pentland-Hills in the year 1668. The
Assassin joined himself with these three; and after a Consultation what they
should do for their further security, they unanimously resolved to retire into
the Garden of Sir Archibald Primrose, the now Justice General, or to speak in
your Phrase, the Lord Chief Justice; who had for many years the misfortune to
be esteemed a favourer, and encourager of the Fanatical Faction, though it be
hard to imagine how a man that has gotten so great an Estate by the Kings
Royal Bounty, should have so much favor for the worst of His Subjects, unless
he has lost all sense of Gratitude and Honor.

Certain it is, that there are such Monsters of Disloyalty, and Ingratitude in
the World; and as certain it is, (though he be not one of them) that the credit
he has with that party encouraged this Murnival of Rebels, and Murderers to
shelter themselves the following night within his Precincts, rather than any
other Man's in this populous Town. But the Morning approaching, they thought it
safer to quit the Town, and the other three conducting Mr. James Mitchel (for
that is the name of this abominable Man) he made a final escape by their
assistance, and was never after seen in this Country, till the latter end of
1673. In this Interval betwixt July, 68. and the latter end of 73. he had
rambled through Holland, England, and Ireland; from whence he returned to his
Country, resolved (as it seems) to assassin the Primate again. Not long after
his return he married, and repaired with his Wife to Edinburgh, presuming, that
after more than five years absence, he might live incognito here, at least so
long, till he could find another opportunity to execute his bloody design. In
order to which, he hired a Shop within a door or two of the Primate's Lodgings,
where his Wife pretended to sell Tobacco, and Brandy, and such like things.

But he had not long frequented there, before he was discovered, and
apprehended upon suspicion; and when he was taken (which was on the same day of
the Week, and in the same place where he had formerly stood to commit the fact)
there were two Pistols found about him, in size, and shape like that which the
Primate saw him hold in his hand, immediately after he had shot at his Grace;
and upon search, they were also found to be charged with three bullets each.
Being apprehended by Sir William Sharp, he was immediately brought to his
Brother the Primate's Lodgings; and though a great crowd had pressed in after
him, yet his Grace knew him at first sight from all the rest, (such a deep
impression the transient view he got of him, after the shot, had made upon him)
and going straight up to him without any hesitation, he said unto him, You,
Sir, are the Man; upon which the Wretch trembled, and grew pale.

Not long after, he was convened before the Privy Council, and the Duke of
Lauderdale his Majesty's High Commissioner then sitting in Council; but he
would confess nothing before them; which made the Right Honorable Board depute
a Committee for his farther examination; before which he freely confessed the
fact, and afterward acknowledged and signed his Confession before the King's
High Commissioner sitting in Council, with the Lord Halton the Treasurer
Deputy, the Earl of Rothes Lord Chancellor, and some others of the Council
subscribed as Witnesses; and this Paper was brought at his Trial against him as
a judicial confession of his crime.

After this examination of him before His Majesty's High Commissioner sitting
in Council (which happened in February, 1674.) he was put upon his Trial in the
Criminal Court. But after his Libel, which your Law calls the Indictment, was
read, he denied it, and retracted the confession; which he had freely made
without any promise of pardon before the High Commissioner, and the Council;
upon which Sir John Nisbet His Majesty's Advocate (who, notwithstanding his
fair pretentions to the Church, either loves or fears the Fanatical Faction too
much) seemed very much surpised, and desisted immediately from his
prosecution, desiring the Judges to Adjourn the Court, and from that time would
never pursue the murderous Villain again, although he was obliged by his Office
to do it, as well as by the Archbishop; who in Causa Sanguinis would not
pursue him himself. The Judges also at that time had no great Stomach to sit
upon the Trial of this bloody Saint: So that the Privy Council were forced to
send him Prisoner to the Basse (a Rock in the Forth, where I wish all his
Brethren were) where he continued till the latter end of last December, when
the Privy Council sent for him to be tried again.

About this time it was rumored about Town, and Country, that the Whigs (for
so we call Fanatics) designed to take off both the Archbishops, and some other
Bishops by assassination; and likewise vehement suspicions, and presumptions
were found, that they had the like design on other eminent Persons, who were
most concerned, and resolved to see them reduced to order and obedience. And
therefore the Council thought it expedient, to prevent such barbarous attempts,
and secure the Lives of His Majesty's faithful Ministers, to bring Mr. Mitchel
to public Justice, that the Remonstrator-Presbyterians of our Country might
see, what their Clements and Ravillacs were to expect.

Since the Duke of Lauderdale came last hither, Sir John Nisbett resigned his
Charge, and his Majesty put Sir George Machenzy, a Learned, and Worthy
Gentleman into his place; who in obedience to the order of the Privy Council,
pursued this common enemy of Mankind, with a Courage, and Zeal, that became
such a gallant Man, and a good Christian; although he foresaw, he must for ever
disoblige that implacapable party, which has sworn to extirpate Episcopacy
here.

You may easily judge with what deliberation, and caution this miscreants
Process was made: Seeing his Trial was dependant four days; for he was
arraigned on Monday the seventh of January in the Morning, and received not
Sentence till the following Thursday at two in the Afternoon. As the Privy
Council were very just, so were they exceeding merciful to this inhumane Man:
for at the instance of his Majesty's Advocate, they commanded Sir George
Lockhart, one of the best Lawyers of this Nation, to be of his Counsel, and had
he been the greatest Subject of the three Kingdoms, his cause could not have
been more strenuously defended, nor his Process made with more care.

The first day was spent in reading the Libel, and discussing some preparatory
doubts, necessary to be determined by an Interlocutory sentence, before the
Assize, which you call the Jury, could be impannell'd, and the Witnesses sworn.
The doubts were three. First, whether that confession, which the Panel (for so
we call the Prisoner at the Bar,) made before the King's High Commissioner, and
the Privy Council sitting in Council were Judicial or Extrajudicial? The second
was, whether if this Confession should be made appear to upon hopes, or promise
of pardon, it should not serve for the Pannels exculpation? And the third was,
whether by a certain Act of Parliament made for the security of his Majesty's
Privy Counselors, and Officers, the attempted assassinage of the Primate, who
was, and is, a Privy Counselor, were Capital, or no? All which preliminaries
the Judges deliberated upon, and debated among themselves on Tuesday, and on
Wednesday following pronounced their Interlocutory in the affirmative upon the
several heads.

You may perceive by the terms wherein I am forced to couch the Narrative of
his Trial, that we have much of the Civil Law. Indeed it is the Duck de usu,
and autorit. leg. Civ. l. 2. c. 10.
Common Law of our Country, and takes place in all cases that cannot be
determined by our Statute, or Consuetudinary Laws. I know very well you
understand nothing of it, but yet your Reason cannot but suggest unto you, that
an Interlocutory is opposite to a definitive sentence; and that this is nothing
but the final doom consisting in the condemnation or absolution of the
Criminal: So the other is a decision of such incident, and emergent matters of
Law as intervene betwixt the beginning an end of the cause. Lancelot. instit.
juris. Canon. l. 3. Tit. 15. Paragr. 1.

But to return to my Narrative, after the Interlocutory was pronounced, the
Jury was impannell'd, and the Witnesses sworn, some of whose depositions I
shall set down as I heard them, and I think, I shall never forget them, as long
as I can remember my Name.

The Keeper of the Tolbooth's Son, (for so we call the Prison here) depon'd,
that having asked the Panel, how he could do such a Barbarous Action in cold
blood against a man, that had never done him wrong? he answered, That it was
not done in cold blood; for the blood of the Saints was reeking yet at the
Cross in Edinburgh. By the Saints he meant the Rebels at Pentland-hills in
1666, one of which he himself had been, and some Principals whereof, that were
taken in the Field, had been Executed about two years before at the Cross in
Edinburgh.

The Lord Bishop of Galloway (whom no good Churchman here ought to mention
without honor, and respect) having first asserted the privilege that is
granted to Bishops to have their depositions taken at home according to the
Civil, and Canon Law, and protested that his Obedience to the Court should be
no prejudice to that privilege, depon'd, that having asked the Prisoner what
moved him to make such a bloody attempt on an innocent man? he answered, That
he did it, because he apprehended him to be an Enemy to the People of God.

The Lord Halton deposed, that having asked him how he durst be so wicked, as
to do such an execrable Fact? he answered, That he did it because the
Archbishop was an Enemy to the Godly people of the West.

Furthermore the Lord Chancellor, and the Lord Halton, testified upon Oath (for
with us the greatest Peers must be sworn) that he owned the Confession produced
in the Court before the Privy Council, and acknowledged their names, which were
subscribed under it, and the Panel could not deny his.

These Depositions being taken, there was no way left to save the Pannels neck,
but by making it appear that he had made this Confession upon promise, or hopes
of Pardon, and therefore his Advocats desired, that the Lord Chancellor might
be called to declare upon Oath, if he did not encourage him to confess upon
Promise, or Oath to endeavor to secure him, life, and limb, as he alleged his
Lordship did. But he declared upon the great Oath he had taken, that he never
made any such Promise, or Oath unto him; and the Duke of Lauderdale, and the
Lord Halton being also called to Depone upon that particular testified, that
they never knew that the Lord Chancellor or any other had encouraged him to
make that Confession upon hopes, or promise of Pardon, which if it could have
been legally proved, he must have been absolved.

The impudent Villain likewise desired the Lords Justitiary (whom before I
called the Judges in your style) that the Primate himself might be cited into
the Court to declare upon Oath, if he did not encourage him to confess upon a
promise to endeavor to procure his Pardon; to which being sworn he answered,
that immediately after his apprehension he took him aside to discourse with him
in private, where he did assure him he forgave him, and would endeavor to save
him from public Justice, if he would confess the Fact; but that upon this
encouragement, he would make no Confession, nor ever after offered any to him;
so that though he still forgave him, yet he did not conceive himself bound to
endeavor his preservation after more than five years obstination in his Crime.

There were many other Witnesses ready to depone, of which there was no need.
One of them could have testified, that he heard him say, that he would do the
Fact, if it were to be done again; and another could have depon'd, that he
heard him say: let me but shoot at him again, and i will be content to be hanged,
if I miss. The Jury, which consisted of Fifteen Gentlemen, unanimously found
him guilty; and when sentence was pronounced, that he should be carried to the
common place of Execution, and there be hanged, he told the Justitiary Lords,
that he took it as from God, but not from them.

Since he was condemned, he desired that some Conventicle-Ministers that are
imprisoned with him, might be admitted to give him Comfort, and obstinately
refused the assistance of the Ministers of our Church. However one of them went
to him to remind him of the Murder he was guilty of in the eyes of God, though
he suffered him not to effectuate his design. But instead of making any
impression upon his hardened heart, or receiving common acknowledgments for his
good will, he received nothing from him but reproaches, being told by him that
he was a Murderer of Souls, and had the blood of Souls to answer for, with many
more rude and Enthusiastic expressions, which would be too long to relate.

He was a lean hollow-cheek'd man, of a truculent Countenance, and had the air
of an Assassin as much as a man could have. He came with his Periwig powdered
to the Bar, and behaved himself there, with as much assurance, as men devoted
to do mischief by their Principles and Complexion resolve beforehand always to
do.

As for his original, it is so obscure, that the mean Proletarian condition of
his Parents affords no notice of his birth. And as for his Education after he
had passed through the subsidiary part of Learning, he was sent to the College
of Edinburgh in the time of the late Usurpation; where he made very small
Progress in any part of good Literature, but applied himself to the reading of
such silly Fanatical Books, as were fit for his narrow capacity, and
Enthusiastical temper; So, that the acquired, or artificial part of Fanaticism
(which Whigs call Grace) being added to his Nature, he might qualify himself
for Employment, and Reputation, especially, among the
Remonstrator-Presbyterians, who were then the the principal part of the Kirk.
This Faction, especially in the West, was advanced so far toward Enthusiasm,
that they despised and suspected men of Learning, and Sense, and began to look
upon it as a stinting of the Spirit to spend any study or time in preparing
themselves to Preach. The people especially were so possessed with this
opinion, that if they came to know, that their Ministers preconceiv'd, much
more penned their Sermons in their Studys, they thought it a sufficient ground
of withdrawing from them, as believing it utterly impossible to receive any
spiritual benefit from such carnal Sermons, as were composed by the help of
Study, and Books.

Among these people it was, that Mitchel designed to Teach, and Preach, and
therefore after he was graduated Master, (which is here at the end of four
years) he applied himself to the Study of Popular Divinity under Mr. David
Dickson, a great Apostle of the Solemn League and Covenant, under whom he
continued his method of Reading modern Fanatical Pamphlets, that he might be an
able Workman, and completely furnished with all those Canting affected Phrases,
which discriminate a Spiritual from a Carnal Preacher among our Presbyterians,
and are Music, and Charms to their. Enthusiastical Ears. And that he might add
the Practical to the Speculative part of Fanaticism, and be perfectly Master of
his Trade, he frequented those private Meetings, where Conferences, Prayers,
and Sermons were spoken in that Dialect, and where Tone, Grimace, and
Gesticulations are far more powerful than all the true Learning and Eloquence
in the World.

Having acted sometime in these Nurseries of Enthusiasm, he thought himself fit
for any Ecclesiastical Employment, and therefore offered himself to be tried by
the Presbytery of Dalkeith, who rejected him for insufficiency, as some yet
alive can testify to the World.

After this repulse he began to project some other way of living and was
shortly after recommended to the Lord of Dundas, to be Pedagogue to his
Children, and Domestic Chaplain for saying extemporary Prayers. He passed
sometime in this Family for a guifted, and very Holy young man, till some of
the Servants observed an extraordinary familiarity betwixt him, and a young
Woman, who was the old Gardeners Wife. Being possessed with this suspicion,
they observed him the more, and one night as they were watching, they saw his
Mistress go to his Chamber, which was a Summer House built on the Garden wall.
The Key as it happened was left on the outside of the door, which one of those
that watched observing, gently locked the door upon them, and immediately ran to
call his Master, who came to the Garden to see what would be the event. After
they had been as long as they pleased together, at last Hortensia comes to go
out; who to her great confusion finding the door locked, steps back to the
Adulterer, who, fearing that she should be taken with him, immediately let her
down the Garden wall, by the help of his Shirt, she hanging at one end, and he
holding the other as naked as when he was born. His Patron all this while
beheld him like a filthy Priapus upon the Garden wall, and the next day in
great indignation discharged him of his service and house: I suppose this is
one of his particular and private sins, which you will find him hereafter
confessing in his Speech, deserved a worse death than he endured.

Afterward he came to Edinburgh, where he lived some years in a Widows house,
called Mrs. Grissald Whitford, who dwelt in the Cow-gate, and with whom that
dishonor of Mankind Major Weir was boarded at the same time. By his
Conversation, it may be presumed, that Mitchel improved much in the art of
Hypocrisy, and drunk in more deeply those Murderous and Treasonable
Principles, which he afterward practiced in the whole course of his life, and
justified at his death. Now began he to Converse with the most Bigot Zealots
against Auhority, to frequent and hold Conventicles to Preach up the Covenant,
and to the utmost of his power to promote the Schism, which was begun in the
Church. By these practices he much endeared himself to his Tutor Major Weir,
who recommended him for a Chaplain to a Fanatical Family, the Lady whereof was
Neice to Sir Arch. Johnston Lord of Wareston, one of the most furious Rebels
against the late blessed King, and greatest complyers with the late Usurpation
in the Three Kingdoms, and whom you may remember to have been President of the
Committee of Safety; for all which accumulated Treasons he was executed here in
1663.

During his abode in this Family, broke out the Rebellion of the Fanatics in
1666. He no sooner heard of it, but joined with the Robels, who were defeated
at Pentland-hills; Though Mr. Welsh (as it is reported) during the Fight,
prayed with up-lifted hands to the Lord of Hosts against Amalek (as his Spirit
moved him to miscall the Royal Forces) and had his hands stayed up by some of
his Brethren, as Moses had his by Aaron and Hur Mr. Mitchel had the Fortune to
escape from the Field, but was afterward proclaimed Traitor, with many other
principal Actors in the Rebellion, and afterward excepted by name in His
Majesty's Gracious Proclamation of Pardon, that he might receive no benefit
thereby. From this time he skulked about, and sheltered himself among the
Rebellious Saints of the Brotherhood, till the Devil tempted him to Assassin
the Lord Primate, for which he has expiated by his blood.

Among others of his excellent qualifications, I have told you what an utter
Ignoramus he was; I cannot forbear to tell you further, that Welsh, and Arnot,
and all the rest of them are full as illiterate as he, and that their
insuperable ignorance in Divine and Humane Learning is the Mother of their
Murdering Zeal. Indeed all the late Troubles upon the account of Episcopacy are
chiefly to be ascribed to the shameful ignorance of Protestant Divines in
Ecclesiastical Antiquity, who looking no further back into the History of
Religion, than the time of the Reformation, and some of them not so far, did
either hate Episcopacy as an Usurpation, or else looked upon it as a mere human
Constitution, and so could not have that particular Veneration for it, that was
due to an Apostolical Ordinance so visibly founded in the Scriptures, and which
was the sole invariable Government of Gods Universal Church for above 1500
years.

Of this, that excellent man Mr. Henderson, was a deplorable example, who
though he was a man of great Temper, and Prudence, and very Learned in his way,
yet want of Antiquity, of which he was so ignorant, was the unhappy cause, why
he engaged for the Covenant against the King, and the Church. Had he spent but
half so many hours in that, as he did in the study of other things, he had
never moved so excentrically to the Church, nor done those things, for which he
expiated with tears before His late blessed Majesty at Newcastle, afterward
spending the short remainder of his life in a sorrowful Penitential Retirement;
for which he grew suspected by his Brethren of the Covenant, who called him
Apostat from the Cause. There are many persons yet alive, who can testify this
to be true; which may teach all Divines, how dangerous it is for them to live
in ignorance of Ecclesiastical Antiquity, which is so easily acquired, and so
useful to be known. That comprehensive Genius Mr. Calvin, wanted nothing but
this to make him as Orthodox, and Consummate a Divine as ever was in the Church
of God: for had he been but half as well versed in the more Primitive
Ecclesiastical Writers, as he was in St. Augustine, he had never coined the
notion of a Lay-elder, defended the Horrible Decree, or been exposed for so
many absurdities by meek In defens lib. de offic. Pij viri.
Cassander's Pen.

But to conclude this Digression with Mr. Henderson, there were very few among
our Covenanting-ministers comparable to him for Prudence and Learning, and yet
even the lowermost Form of our former Presbyterians were Great men in
comparison to these of the Remonstrator Faction, who are all burning Zeal, but
no knowledge, as you will perceive, not only by the sequel of this Story, but
this Letter of an ignorant Minister, that lately Revolted from our Church.

SIR,
I Received your Letter of the 15th of July, wherein you say That on the first
Wednesday of August, you are to have a Presbytery (you ought to have termed it
a meeting of the Exercise) and on the second Wednesday of August, a Provincial
meeting with your Bishop of Rothesay; and once for all I desire you may take
this for an absolute Answer. First, That God has of a long time been dealing
with my Conscience, but especially since October last, when I was called to Mul
for Electing Mr. Andrew Wood Bishop (I confess his want of the Irish language
did stick with me, besides many other things as well now as before, about the
Election of Mr. James Ramsey, and all of you, save one, did then profess, that
they did stick with you also, though now you have swallowed down that Pill with
many more) and that in such an Extraordinary dreadful, and terrible manner, for
my engaging to Prelacy, and a Lordly Government over the Church of Christ
(contrary to which there lie so many ties, and obligations on this Land) that
with the Grace of God I would not adventure to abide the terror of the Lord for
all the stipends, and preferments in Europe. And truly the worst I wish to you,
or any Prelate in Britain, or Ireland, or their adherents is, that they may
have as sound a yokeing with their Consciences, as I have had, if they be not
incorrigible Enemies of Christ. Next, upon serious search of the word of God,
and of Antiquity, I am the more confirmed in my Resolution. Blondellus,
Salmatius, Gerson, Bucer, yea the whole current of Primitive Fathers,
especially Smectymnuus, have vindicated Presbytery against the whole World. I
want not many more solid Reasons to add, only I suppose I could never be
satisfied in them, and, therefore I forbear.

To conclude, I do here before God, and the whole World profess my disowning of
Lordly Prelacy, as it is now Established in our Land, which I was once most
fully engaged into, and my firm and resolute adherence to the Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and Government of the Church of Scotland, as it was
professed in this Nation, from the year of our Lord 205. and downward for the
space of 230 years, and then since the year 1580. till the year 1610. and then
from the year 1638. till the year 1661. and from thence downwards by many Godly
in these three Lands, till this very day is; and more particularly to the
point, that Government of Christ's Church by an equality, and parity of Pastors,
and Ministers, all of them with one shoulder carrying on the work of the Lord,
and exercising the Keys of Order, and Jurisdiction, Doctrine and Discipline in
Communi, according to due Order, and feeding the flock of God, not as being
Lords of Gods Heritage, but ensamples to the flock: yea, I do here (with all
the Lords faithful Servants and Witnesses in these three Lands, both in the
present, and some former Generations, and with all the Lords Witnessing, and
Suffering Servants and people, that have heen, or now are in this Land, or
present Generation) confess and bear my Witness, and Testimony, the cause of
God, and work of Reformation so much as was attained thereof, how afflicted,
and born down now soever, and to the confessions of Faith of the Church of
Scotland, and of the three Kingdoms, and to the rational, and trinational
Covenant, and that I do rather choose to suffer affliction with the poor
suffering people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a season,
esteeming the reproaches for Christ greater riches than all the pleasures, and
preferments in the World. I desire you with your Brethren to consider those
Scriptures, and take them home to you: Isa. 66. 5. Zachary 11. 5. John 16. 2,
3. John 9. 1, 10. Remember your worthy Bedfellow, that is this day I hope in
glory, shall bear Witness against you. Farewell for ever Lordly Prelacy, for I
had never a joyful hour since I engaged therein; and welcome welcome my dear
Lord Jesus Christ, I embrace thee with the arms of my Soul, and thy Cross. I
profess this, confess thee bearing my Testimony to thee, and thy persecuted
Truth, and by thy blood, and the word of thy Testimony, and not loving my life
unto the death, I hope to overcome.

Cambre-Ile August 6. 1677. Sic subscribit, Alex. Symer Minister of the Gospel
at Cambre.

Unless you are versed in our Historian Buchanan, you will wonder, why this
Learned Antiquarian should assert, That the Government of our Church was
Presbyterian from the first Plantation of the Gospel in 205. or rather 203.
till the arrival of Palladius in the middle of the Fifth Century. You must know
therefore that all the Authority our Presbyterians have for this assertion is
from Buchanan, that furious Enemy of Bishops, who in the Fifth Book of his
History, writes that the Church in the aforesaid time was not governed by
Bishops, but by the Monks or Culdees; which were it true, as it is false, would
prove that the Government of the Church in that interval was not
Presbyteterian, but perfectly Laical, seeing it was long after that time that
Monks were admitted among the Clergy; and permitted to meddle with Church
affairs. But you may find a larger confutation of this groundless assertion of
Buchanan in Archbishop Spotswoods History, in the seven first Pages of the
First Book.

But to continue my Narrative of Mr. Mitchel, I proceed to acquaint you with
other memorable things, that happened between his Condemnation, and Execution,
which was on Friday, the 18. of January last, in the Grass-market, about Three
of the Clock in the Afternoon.

Some time before the execution, the Reverend Mr. Annand Dean of Edinburgh, not
discouraged with the unthankful returns one of his Brethren had received from
the Malefactor before, out of his tender compassion to his Soul, wrote him a
very affectionate, and pious Letter, wherein he endeavored to show him from
the Gospel, how contrary his Principles and Practices were to the Doctrine of
Christianity, and exhorted him to Repentance for that Un-christian attempt, by
which he designed to take away the Life of one Sacred Person, and grievously
wounded another, etc. to all which he returned this Answer.

SIR,
I Received yours, and since my time is very short, and so very precious, I can
only thank you for your Civility, and Affection whether real or pretended; and
I tell you, I truly close with all the precepts of the Gospel to Love, and
Peace, and therefore pray I both for Mr. Sharp, and you. But knowing both Mr.
Sharp's Wickedness, and my own sincerity, and the Lord's Holy Sovereignty to
use his Creatures as he pleases, I can only refer the manifestation of my Fact
to the day of God's Righteous and Universal Judgment, praying heartily, that
God may have mercy on you, and open your eyes to see both the wickedness of all
your ways, and of your Godless insulting over an unjustly condemned dying Man,
and grant unto you repentance, and remission of your sins. I am in this your
well-wisher,

James Mitchel.


The Dean in his Letter urged an excellent argument to convince him, that the
impulse, which was upon him so many years to assassin the Primate, could not
come from God, like the Impulse of Phineas, and the Zealots, because he failed
in the attempt; which never any person did* or could do, that was moved by God
to do an Heroic Act. But, you see, the blind Pseudo-Zealot takes no notice of
this Argument in his Answer; wherein to show what an implacable enemy he was to
the Office, as well as the Person of the Archbishop, he mentions his Grace not
by his Character, but by his Name.

Having been told in the Prison, that he would not be permitted to speak to the
People before his Execution, he transcribed several Copies of his intended
Speech; whereof one was found in his Pocket, and taken from him before he was
carried out to Execution. It is long, and the former part containing nothing
but Libellous reflections on the Privy Council, the Justiciary Lords, and the
King's Advocate, I shall content my self to send you a transcript of the latter.

I Acknowledge my particular and private sins have been such as have merited a
worse Death unto me; but I dye in the hope of the merits of Jesus Christ, to be
freed from those Eternal punishments due to me for sin. Yet I am confident,
that God does not plead with me in this place, for my private and particular
sins, but that I am brought here that the Work of God might be made manifest,
and for the Trial of Faith, John 9. 3. 1 Pet. 1. 7. and that I may be a witness
for his despised Truth, and interest in this Land, who am called to seal the
same with my Blood. And I wish heartily that this my poor Life may put an end
to the persecution of the true Members of Christ in this Kingdom, so much
actuate by these perfidious Prelates; and in opposition to whom, and in
testimony of the Cause of Christ, I at this time willingly lay down my Life,
and bless my God that he has thought me so much worthy to do the same for his
Glory, and Interest. Finally, concerning a Christian Duty in a singular
extraordinary case, and my particular Judgment concerning both Church and
State, it is evidently declared, and manifested more fully elsewhere. So
farewell all Earthly enjoyments, and welcome Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, into
whose hands I commend my spirit. As to that particular Christian duty in an
extraordinary case, and his Judgment concerning Church and State manifested
elsewhere, he means a larger blasphemous Libel, which he left behind him,
wherein he endeavors to justify his fact. It is very long, but yet I beseech
you to read it over, and if you have not read Naphthali, nor Jus Populi
vindicatum, which is a Reply to the Answer, which the Bishop of Orkney, whom
this miscreant wounded, made to Naphthali; I am confident, you must be
surpised with horror, and astonishmment, to see such Un-christian Doctrines
come from a Christian Pen. Yet the Primitive Churches never received the
Apostolic Epistles with greater veneration, than the Members of our
Field-Congregations receive such discourses as this; nor can any Churchman
respect any ancient Ecclesiastical Writer half so much as they adore Naphthali,
which is written in the Defense of the Rebellion in 1666. and wherein this
horrid man's attempt upon the Primate is commended for an Heroical Act; and that
cursed Book, with Lex, Rex, Jus populi vindicatum and Mr. Rutherfords Letters
are the Fathers and Counsels of our Fife, and Western Whigs.

I have here subjoyned the Account of my self, principles and foresaid
practices as they were set down in a Letter to a Friend, and another
Declaration both written by me, when first Conveened before the Lords Justices,
in the year, 1674.
The Copy of my Letter, Edinburgh Tolbuith, February the 16th, 1674.
SIR,
ME (who may justly call my self the least of all Saints, and the chiefest of
all Sinners) has Christ his Son our Lord called, to be a Witness for his
destroyed Truth and trampled on Interest, by this Wicked Blasphemous and
God-contemning Generation, and against all their other perfidious Wickednesses.
Sir, I say the confidence I have in your real Friendship and love to Christ,
his Truth, People, Interest and Cause, has encouraged me, to write to you,
hoping that you will not misconstruct, nor take advantage of my Infirmities and
Weakness; you have heard of my Indictment, which I take up in these two
particulars. First, (as they term it) Rebellion and Treason, anent which I
answered to my Lord Chancellor, that it was no Rebellion, but a Duty which
every one was bound to have performed, in joining with that party; And in the
year 1656. Mr. Robert Lightonne, being the Primate of the College of Edinburgh
before our Laureation, tendered to us the national Covenant, and solemn League
and Covenant, which upon mature Deliberation, I found nothing in them, but a
short compend of the Moral Law only, obliging us to our Duty toward God and
Men in their several Stations; and I finding that our then banished Kings
Interest lay wholly included therein, viz. Both the Oath of Coronation,
Allegiance, etc. And they being the then tessera of all Loyalty. And, My Lord,
it was well known that then many were taking the Tender, and forswearing
Charles Stewarts Parliament, and House of Lords, I then subscribed them both.
The doing of which, My Lord Chancellor, would have stood me at no less rate, if
alls well known, then this my present adhering and prosecuting the ends thereof
does now; And when I was questioned, what then I called Rebellion; I answered,
That it is, Ezra. 7. 26. And whosoever will not do the Law of thy God, and of
the King, etc. But being questioned by the Commissioner before the Council
there anent; I answered, as I said to My Lord Chancellor before, in the year
1656. Mr. Robert Lightonne being then Primate of the College of Edinburgh,
before our Laureation, he tendered to us the national Covenant, and solemn
League and Covenant; where he stopped me, saying, I wade you are come here to
give a Testimony; and then being demanded what I called Rebellion, if it was
not Rebellion to oppose His Majesty's Forces in the face, to which I answered,
My Lord Commissioner, if it please your Grace, I humbly conceive, that they
should have been with us, meaning that it was the Duty of those Forces, to have
joined with us, according to the national Covenant; at which answer I perceived
him to storm. But says he, I hear that you have been over Seas, with whom did
you Converse there? Answer, with my Merchant, My Lord. But says he, with whom
in particular? with one John Michel, a Cousin of mine, says he, I have heard
tell of him, he is a Factor in Rotterdam, to which I conceded; But says he,
did you not Converse with Mr. Levingston? and such as he? To which I answered,
My Lord Commissioner, I Conversed with our banished Ministers, to which he
replied, banished Ministers, banished Traitors; he will speak Treason at the very
Bar. Then he answered himself, saying, but they would call the shooting at the
Bishop an Heroic Act; To which I answered, That I never told them of any such
thing. Question, But, where did you see James Wallace last? Answ. Toward the
borders of Germany some year ago. Quest. But what ailed you at my Lord St.
Andrews here? pointing at him with his finger. Answ. My Lord Commissioner, the
grievous oppression and horrid Bloodshed of my Brethren, and the eager pursuit
after my own Blood, as it appears this day to your Grace, and to all His
Majesty's Honorable Council; after which he commanded to take me away, that
they might see what next to do with me.

The second is, the shooting that shot, intended against the Bishop of St.
Andrews, whereby the Bishop of Orkney was hurt; to which I answered, My Lord
Chancellor in private, viz. That I looked upon him to be the main Instigator of
all the Oppression and Bloodshed of my Brethren, that followed thereupon, and
the continual pursuing after my own, and, My Lord Chancellor, as it was
credibly reported to us (the truth of which your Lordship knows better than we)
that he kept up His Majesty's Letter, inhibiting any more blood to be shed
upon that account, until the last Ten were Executed, and I being a Soldier,
not having laid down Arms, but being still upon my own Defense, and having no
other quarrel nor aim at any man, but according to my own apprehension of him,
and that as I hope in sincerity, without fixing either my self or any one upon
the Covenant it self, and as it may be understood, by many thousand of the
faithful; besides the prosecuting of the ends of the same Covenant, which was
and is in that part the overthrow of Prelates and Prelacy; and I being a
declared Enemy to him upon that account, and he to me in like manner, so I
never found my self obliged, either by the Law of God, or Nature, to set a
Centry at his door, for his safety; But as he was always ready to take his
advantage of me, as it now appears, so I of him when opportunity offered;
Moreover, we being in no terms of Capitulation, but on the contrary, I by his
Instigation being excluded from all Grace and Favor, thought it my duty to
pursue him on all occasions. Also, My Lord, Sir William Sharp making his
Apology, anent his unhandsome cheating way, when he took me under a pretext to
have spoken with me, about some other matter, (I not knowing him until Five or
Six of his Brothers, and his own Servants were laying fast hold on me, they
being armed of purpose) he desired that I would excuse him, seeing what he had
done was upon his Brothers account; which excuse, My Lord, I easily admitted
of, seeing that he thought himself obliged to do what he did without Law or
Order, in the behalf of his Brother; much more was I obliged to do what I did,
in behalf of many Brethren, whose Oppression was so great, and whose Blood he
had caused shed in such abundance; Moreover, he insisting in his bloody
Murders, as witness the wounding of Mr. Bruce at his taking of his Emissaries,
some few days before that fell out concerning himself; now if by any means in
taking him away, I could have put a stop to the then current Persecution: Thus
far I have truly resumed what past.

But this answer to the second part of the Indictment, may be thought by some
to be a step out of the ordinary way, wherefore I shall offer these things
following, to your Consideration, viz. That passage, Deuteronomy. 13. 9. Where to me
it is manifest, That the Seducer or Inticer to Worship false Gods, is to be put
to death by the hands of those whom he seeks to turn away from the Lord,
especially by the hand of the Witnesses, whereof I am one; as it appears, Deuteronomy.
13. 9. which precept I humbly conceive to be Moral, and not merely Judicial,
and that it is not at all Ceremonial or Levitical, but as every Moral precept
is Universal as to the extent of place, so also as to the extent of time and
persons; upon which command, Sir, I do really think that Phinehas acted in
taking away the Midianitish Whore, and him whom she had seduced, Numb. 25. 6.
Also that Elijah by virtue of that precept, gave Commandment to the people to
destroy Baals Priests, contrary to the mind of the seducing Magistrate, who was
not only remiss and negligent in executing Justice, but became a Protector and
Defender of the Seducers: Then and in that Case, I suppose the Christians duty
not to be very dark. Moreover, we see what the people of Israel did 2 Chronicles.
31. 1. They destroyed Idolatry, not only in Judah, where the King concurred,
but in Ephraim and Manas^eh, where the King himself was an Idolater; and
surely, what all the people were bound to do, as their duty by the Law of God,
every one was bound to do it, to the uttermost of their power, and capacity.
And as it is, Ezekiel. 13. 3. Where the Seducers Father and his Mother shall put
him to death; I take this to be meant of the Christian Magistrate. But when he
is withdrawn by the Seducer from the exercise of his Office, and Duty, and he is
become utterly remiss and negligent in putting the Seducer to death, according
to Gods express Law; which is not to be expected of him (for their be should do
Justice upon himself) but is become a Protector and Defender of the Idolater,
then I doubt not, but it does become the Duty of every Christian, to the
uttermost of his power and capacity, to destroy and cut off both Idolatry and
Idolaters. Yea these presumtuously-murthering Prelates ought to be killed by
the avenger of blood, when he meets them; by the express Law of God, seeing
the thing is manifestly true, Numb. 25. 21. and not have liberty to flee to
such Cities of Refuge, as the vain pretext of lawful Authority. But they should
be taken even from the Horns of such Altars, and be put to death. Moreover,
what is spoken of concerning Amalek, upon the account, that he designed and
resolved the extirpation of the Lords People and Truth, who are his Throne,
upon which he puts forth his hand, and because he took occasion against them,
Exodus 17. 15. Numb. 24. 20. He endeavoring that God should not have a people
to have served him, according to his revealed will, upon the Earth; and if he
could have effectuated his design, they should not have lived, who would not
serve and worship him, and his Idol Gods; And for the better effectuating of
this his design, he took occasion against them when they were weary, in coming
out of Egypt, Deuteronomy. 25. 17, 18. And the reason there annexed is, That he feared
not God. Now, because I know Bishops both will and do say, That what they did
against those of the Lords people, whom they murdered, they did by Law and
Authority, but what I did, was contrary to both. Answer, The King himself, and
all the Estates of the Land, and every individual person therein, both were,
and are obliged, by the Oath of God upon them, to have by force of Arms
extirpted perjured Prelates, and Prelacy, and in doing thereof, to have
defended one another with their lives and fortunes, the Covenants being engaged
into, upon these terms, viz. After Supplications, Remonstrations,
Protestations, and all other lawful means have been used, now for that effect,
as the last remedy, we take up Arms, upon which conditions the Nobility, and
all the representatives of the Nation, according to the national and Solemn
League and Covenant, gave to our King both the Sword and Scepter, and set the
Crown upon his head; and he accordingly received them, according to these
Sacred Oaths and Promises, and swore by the everliving God to use and improve
them for the end aforesaid; and especially, in order to the performing of this
Article, viz. The extirpation and overthrow of Prelates and Prelacy: and now
the want of what Authority do they mean or speak of? truly I know not, except
it be the Authority of their aggregation of new Gods, of whom they have their
gain, life and standing, viz. Chemosh or Bachus, which with drunken Moab,
delighted to dwell within dark Cells, and Ashteroth and Venus, whom they
worship in the Female kind, because of their Adulteries and Whoredoms; at also
Milchom or Molech, which signifies a Tyrannical King or a Devil, if they will
have it so, in whose arms and power they put their young Infants and Posterity
to be burnt and destroyed, according to his Lust and Pleasure, Amos 5. 26.
Psalm. 116. 37. and that Mammon, which they delight to worship daily together
with their own bellies, whose glory is their shame, who mind earthly things,
whose end will be destruction, except they repent, which there is little
probability of, Psalm. 3. 19. to which, if we may add their abominable Pride and
Blasphemous perjury, then their Gods will be equal in number to the Whore their
Mother, from whom they have their being, strength and standing, and from the
Devil their Father, who was a Deceiver, Liar, Murderer from the beginning: and
now seeing the Prelates possess whatsoever their Gods Chemosh, etc. gives them
to possess, then why should not we possess what the Lord our God gives us to
possess, viz. His eternal Truths manifested to us, in his revealed Will, and
keep and defend the same, from all Innovations, Corruptions and Traditions of
his or our Adversaries, defend our lives, Laws and Liberties out of the hands
of our Usurping Enemies, Jud. 11. 24. for sure I am, that God once dispossessed
the Prelates and Malignants of all these, and should they again possess them,
through our defect, God forbid. But the like of this work, our Murdering
Prelates like not; who plead like the Whore their Mother for passive Obedience,
and that all the Lords people, who may not comply with your Idolatries, should
lay down their necks to their bloody Axes; with whom too, too many of our
Hypocritical time-serving and perfidious Professors do agree, who would rather
abide with Ruben amongst the Sheepfolds, than Jeopard either life or fortune in
the help of the Lord against the Mighty, but do not consider the bitter curse
pronounced by the Angel of the Lord against Meros, to which he immediately
subjoyns a blessing upon Jael the Wife of Hebar the Kenite: others excuse
themselves thus, viz. Vengeance is mine, and I will re-pay, but so the Throne
and Judgment is the Lords, and by this they would take away the use and office
of Magistracy, which erroneous principle I detest; for God even in the working
of Miracles, viz. in dividing the Red Sea, Exodus 14. 16. he commanded Moses to
stretch forth his Rod, and Christ when he opened the blind Man's eyes, makes
use of clay and of spittle; though indeed, I mean not of any who were willing
to have helped, but wanted opportunity, yet there are many peevish time-serving
Professors, who resolve they shall never suffer so long as they have either
Soul or Conscience, to morgage; providing that they may save them from
suffering: and if it will not do their business, it seems (that before they
suffer) they resolve to sell out at the ground. Now, Sir, I have neither
mis-interpreted Scripture, nor mis-applyed it, inregard of the Persons here
hinted at, nor been wrong in the end, which ought to be the glory of God, and
the good of his Church and People. Then I think that some Persons might forhear
to scourge me so sore with their Tongues, while I am not yet condemned by the
common enemy, and my bearing of some things reported by some behind my back,
has occasioned my writing to you at this time. O Sir! be entreated to pray to
the Lord in my behalf, that he would be pleased out of his Mercy and Goodness,
to save me from sinning under suffering, in this hour and power of darkness;
for my Soul is pressed in me, in the search betwixt sin and duty, viz. least I
should be too niggard and sparing of life, when God calls for it; and upon
the other hand, least I should be too Prodigal and lavish of it, in not using
all legal defenses, in preserving of it; and many things of the like Nature. I
am in a strait, O Lord, undertake thou for me. Sir, I hope you will excuse me,
in sending you these indistinct and irregular lines, when you consider my
present condition; Sir, believe, I would many times, when I am before them,
think a Scaffold a sweet retirement, least they should cheap and deceive me; in
making me, either to stain the declarative Glory of God, my own Conscience, or
his People and Interest, in wronging of them, either by opening of the
Adversaries mouths against them, or in letting loose their hand upon them;
henceforth let the Adversary either say or do what they can, yet the Righteous
will hold on their way, and he who has clean hands will be stronger and
stronger, Job. 17. 9. But he that says unto the Wicked, Thou art Righteous,
him shall the People Curse, Nations shall abhor him, Prove. 24. 24. Farewell in
the Lord.

POSTSCRIPT.
IT is acknowledged by all rational Royalists, that it is lawful for any
private Person to kill an Usurper, or Tyrant, sine titulo; and to kill Irish
Robbers, and Tories, or the like; and to kill Boars, Wolves, and such devouring
Beasts; because the good of this action does not redound to the Person himself
only, but to the whole Commonwealth; and the Person acting incurrs the danger
himself alone: The Second Part of The Cloud of Witnesses, page 60. Mr. Knoxe
has these express words; For God, says he, had not only given me Knowledge,
and a Tongue, to make known the Impiety of the Idol, but had given me credit
with many who would have put in execution God's Judgments, if I would only
have consented thereto. But so careful was I of common Tranquillity, and so loath
was I to offend some, that in secret conference with zealous Men, I traveled
rather to slacken that fervency, God had kindled in them, than to animate or
encourage them, to put their hands to the Lord's Work, wherein I acknowledge my
self to have done most wickedly; and from the bottom of my heart I do ask my
God pardon, that I did not what in me lay, to have suppressed that Idol in the
beginning. But O! how far are the Men in our time from such convictions! whose
work it is to put out any spark of Life or Zeal, which appears in any Person,
against Idolatry and Idol of our times. Now let Men, whether Foes, or Friends,
carp or quarrel never so much, yet the purpose and determination of God will
not be disappointed, in living Witnesses against this mis-believing Generation,
viz. that he is both als powerful, and willing, to deliver one, or more of his
People trusting in him, yea, and that there is no restraint unto the Lord, to
save by many, or by few, 1 Samuel 14. 6. If any be obedient to the voice of his
Commandments, although success does not always follow thereupon, more than it
did to Israel, Jos. 7. 12. against the City of Ai, because there was an Achan
in the Camp, and alas there are many Achans in the Camp of our Israel, which
cause the Lord's People to fall daily before their enemies; and which makes all
their endeavors unsuccessful: I mean, the hidden time-serving Hypocrites and
Murmurers, who have preferred their backs and bellies, to the Interest of God,
and their hearts still desirous to return to Egypt: I say, until such Rebels be
purged and dye, we can have little expectation to prosper, in any enterprise or
undertaking; for they have both betrayed and mis-believed God, notwithstanding
of all his Miracles which he did of old, and which he has done in our days, for
his people, and before their eyes; yet they are so far gone back in a course of
Apostasy and compliance with the Canaanites of our times, and are become so
brutishly ignorant, of the express Law of God, and are such enemies thereto,
that they do rather concur with the said Canaanites, Judge. 6. 25. to have
Gideon put to death for performing his duty, conform to the express command of
God, than either to study thereof themselves, or give obedience thereto. But if
it be objected, that Gideon had an express command from God, for throwing down
of Baal's Altar, and for cutting down of the Grove, and destroying of the
Midianites. Answer, Indeed he had an express command of God for his
encouragement, but he had no new command from God, save that which was expressly
enjoined upon all the Israelites, by virtue of which every one was obliged to
have done what he did, without any such message from God, Deuteronomy. 7. 2, 3, 15.
and who are readier with Judas (before they incurr danger or loss) to send
three thousand Men to bring Sampson bound to the Philistines, than to have sent
him ten of his assistance against the common enemy; concerning the truth of
which we have gotten many sad experiments. But, however I hope, that what has
been said, shall occasion a further cognition of, and a more serious search
into these forementioned truths, than has been for a long time bypast.

That, albeit I have here singly declared my own motives and reasons, for that
attempt, and shooting; wherein, I then had, and now have peace, and hope to
find acceptance of God, according to the multitude of his Mercies, to such as
seek and fear him in sincerity; yet, I will not take on me absolutely, and in
every respect, to justify or assert, that it is my own deliberate and fixed
principle; let be that it is justified by, and is the principle of the
Nonconforming Presbyterian Party of the Church of Scotland, of which I have
the honor and happiness to be one, the unworthyest of many: Nay, if I should
say so of them, I would be found a Liar against the Truth, for I adventured on
it, upon my own pure, and proper motion, without the instigation of any, yea
without the privacy of that party; whom therefore I earnestly desire, that none
may charge with, and if any shall, I do with the greatest confidence averr,
that they deal with them most unjustly; I have, I say again, in the simplicity
of my heart, with candor and ingenuity, becoming a dying Man, and a Christian,
believing that he must be made manifest before the Tribunal of Christ, and
there receive according to the things done in the body, whether they be good or
evil, given an account of the reasons and motives, poussing and pressing me on
to it; wherein I had quietness of mind in the time, and have still to this
present hour; hoping that as he is Sovereign Lord over all Creatures, and may
use any of them as Instruments to whatsoever his Pleasure is; and that, as I
say, I did take and do still look upon the motion, as from himself; so he will
accept of my sincerity in it, and one day, both bring forth his own and my
Righteousness as the Light.

FINIS.



I Suppose, some will be desirous to know what has brought me to this place of
suffering; to which I have no other Answer than that which Elijah gave, when
threatened with death by Jezebel, 1 Kings 19. 14. I have been very jealous for
the Lord God of Hosts, because the Children of Israel have forsaken thy
Covenant, thrown down thine Altars, and true Worship, and slain his Prophets,
and Ministers: And they seek my Life to take it away.

With all my Heart and Soul, I own, and adhere to the work of Reformation, as
it was begun and carried on in this Kingdom, according to the Word of God, and
the National Covenant, and the Solemn League and Covenant; as it was settled
amongst us in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government, by general
Assemblies, Synods, Presbyteries, Kirk-Sessions, and the Peoples Just Power to
choose and call their own lawful Pastors; and I do declare, that I judge
Patronage to be a Popish Right, and an usurpation in the House of God.

I do believe, and am persuaded, that Magistracy is an Ordinance appointed of
God, as well under the New Testament as it was under the Old; and that
whosoever resists the lawful Magistrate in the exercise of his lawful Power,
resists the Ordinan^^ and appointment of God, Romans 13. 3. For he is God's
Minister to you for thy good, and in doing good thou needs not be afraid of
him, 1 Pet. 2. 12. We must obey the lawful Magistrate for Conscience sake,
Deuteronomy. 17. 15, 16, 17. The lawful Magistrate must be a Man qualified according
to God's appointment, and not according to the Peoples Lust and Pleasure, least
in the end he should prove to them a Prince of Sodom, and a Governor of
Gomorrah, whom God in his Righteousness should appoint for their Judgment, and
establish for their correction; he must be one of thy Brethren, and not the
Face of a Stranger; he must not make himself strong by multiplying of Horses,
to the end he may compel the Lord's People to rebel against the Lord's express
command; Nor Jeroboam like, compel the people to any course of Apostasy; he
must not multiply Wives to himself, and much less Whores, nor marry an
Idolatrous Wife like Jezabel, 1 Kings 16. 31. Nor be covetous, in multiplying
to himself Silver or Gold; he must be a diligent Student of the Law of the
Lord, all the days of his Life, that he turn neither to the Right Hand, nor to
the Left Hand therefrom, but must judge the People accordingly; otherways,
neither he, nor his Children can expect to prolong their days, 2 Samuel 23. 3. He
must not be a Son of Belial without or above order, and Law, whom a Man cannot
touch except he be fenced with Iron, for such shall all be pressed away; For
(says David) he that rules over Men must be just, ruling in the Fear of the
Lord, etc. But if a Man simulating himself to be thus qualified, and
thereafter, when he has strengthened himself upon the Throne, shall abjure and
sacrifice his Oath and Covenant, both to God and his Subjects, and shall
transgress the Law and Commandment of the Lord, (who has given the Magistrate
only one accumulative Power, to promove, protect, and defend God's Laws, Truth
and People, from being corrupted, violated, or any ways damnified; and for that
end he has received both his Place and his Power from God, and Men, for he
has not received of the Lord an obstructive, destructive, or privative Power;
for (as has been said) the people can give no Right, nor Power to any Man, but
what is according to God's appointment, least they should incurr the sad
Challenge from God, Hosea 8. 4. They have set up Kings, but not by me; they
have made Princes, but I knew it not. For in chapter 10. v. 3. Israel there is
brought in confessing their fault, and they denied they had a King, because he
was not such as God had appointed, and said, what should a King do to them,
seeing he had partly by force, and partly by fraud, withdrawn them from the
fear and obedience which they ought to God, and to his Law, and had seduced and
compelled them to Idolatry, and worshipping of false gods: and if the
Magistrate being in Power, shall overturn the Covenant-work of God, his Truth
and Interests, the Fundamental and Municipal Laws of the Land, and moreover by
a settled Parliament, according to his own mind, and for his own use and ends,
they as the peoples representatives, do by Acts Rescissory rescind all Acts of
laudable lawful Parliaments, Committee of States, or Councils, wherein were
contained or comprehended any mutual Bond, Obligation, Covenant, or Contract
betwixt the Prince or People, he having divested himself of any legal Right he
could have or pretend over such a People, and they being in Statu quo Prius,
and none having Right to rule over them without their own consent (...) the
aforesaid Magistrate shall then again Usurp and Invade his Peoples Lives,
Religions, Liberties, and Laws, and make even simple supplicating of him crimes
of Treason, contrary to the dictates of Nature, and he by armed emissaries, and
by his Arbitrary Power carried on by the Sword in their hands, compel the
Lord's People to relinquish and to forsake the true Religion and Worship of
God, and make a surrender of both their Soul, Conscience, Lives, Laws,
Liberties, and embrace a false Religion, and Will Worship, and engage to serve
and worship false and Idol gods at his pleasure: for thus all that is dear and
near to a people being in the extremity of hazard; now it necessarily followed
to be the duty of such people, or any part of them, to take up Arms in defense
of their Lives, Laws, Religion, and Liberties, and of their Posterity, that
they may not be left in such an intolerable bondage, and as they would not be
accounted guilty of bringing God's Wrath upon the whole Land, Jer. 22, 2, 3.
Hear the Word of the Lord, O King of Judah, etc. Thou and thy Servants, and the
People that enter in by these Gates, execute Judgment and Righteousness, and
deliver the oppressed out of the hand of the oppressor, Chap. 37. 2. But
neither he, nor the Servants, nor the People of the Land hearkened to the
Prophet Jeremiah, until Wrath from the Lord consumed them all; Now had it not
been the Peoples duty, to have executed Judgment and Righteousness, and to
have delivered the oppressed out of the hands of the oppressor; Zedekiah and
his Servants (which I think was meaned by the Nobility and Princes) proving
deficient, in order to the performing of their duty, it necessarily follows,
to be the Peoples duty; For if it had not been their duty, it had not been
their sin to have omitted it; But here we see it is as well charged home, to be
the peoples sin, as to be the sin of the King, or the sin of his Nobles; But,
say some, who shall he Judge in such cases; to which I answer, that the Law of
God is the only Supreme and Infallible Judge, in all such cases; for what other
Judge is, when two Kings or Monarchs falls out in War, neither of them being
Subject to any other Judge; but some profane and brutishly Ignorant malignant
says, that this or that ignorant fellow, or hussy, take upon them to determine
what the Law of God says in such cases: I answer, neither this, nor that
ignorant fellow, or hussy, nor yet this, or that Ignorant, Profane, Wicked, or
Perfidious Prince or Princess, is capable to be Judge, Deuteronomy. 30. 11. For this
Commandment which I command thee this day, it is not hidden from thee, neither
is it far off, verse 12. It is not in Heaven, that thou should say, Who
shall go up for us to Heaven and bring it to us, that we may hear it and do it,
etc. neither is it beyond the Sea, etc. but the word is very near unto thee, in
thy Mouth and in thy Heart that thou may do it; And in this case I do appeal
to any Man of a sober Wit and Judgment; seeing the Secrets of the Lord are
with them that fear him, Psalm. 25. 14. And seeing evil Men understand not
Judgment, but they that seek the Lord understand all things, Prove. 28. 5. For
they know not how to do Right, who store up Robbery in their Palaces, Amos 3.
10. who is most capable to judge, what the Law of God determines, in all such
matter; Artaxerxes a great Monarch commanded, that whatsoever is commanded of
the God of Heaven, that it should be diligently done, for the house of the God
of Heaven, for why should there be Wrath upon the King and his Sons, Ezra 7.
23. But O how many Men at this time of the Sons of Belial, contrary to what is
here spoken of, screw up those who are above them to so high a Pinnacle, and an
illimitated and Arbitrary Power, far above what either the Law of God, or the
Law of Nature will admit of for this very end and purpose, that they may glory
in the works of their own hands, and that he whom they have thus set up, and to
whom they have made a surrender of both Credit, Conscience, and common Honesty,
may return unto them a Power over others, who are under them, by putting Swords
in the hands of bloody Cutthroats; who are raised and kept up for that
effect, to keep and bring into an Egyptian Bondage, the Persons, Lives, Laws,
Liberties, yea even the Souls and Consciences of the Lord's People; The which
Power, I declare, to be diabolical, profane, and blasphemous, and Pharoah-like
to say, Who is the Lord that they should obey him, Exodus 5. 2. Now seeing both
the Throne and the Judgment is the Lords, then O blessed and happy Magistrate,
who rules and governs his Subjects, keeping in a straight Line of
subordination to God's Law, and Statutes, for in so doing, who may say to him
what do thou? Prove. and O happy and blessed people thus Governed, Deuteronomy. 4. 8.
And what Nation is there so great, that has Statutes and Judgments so
Righteous, as all this Law which I set before you this day. But O the
Blasphemous perjuries, and Wickedness of this Apostate Generation, whom no
Bands, Obligations, nor Covenants can bind, except these spoken in the 149
Psalm. 8. But shall they thus break the Covenant, and escape and be delivered.
Ezekiel. 17. 15, 18. As if the Lords hand and power could not reach them, to
inflict just and due punishment upon them which commit such things. I do detest
and abhor that woeful Indulgence and Incroachment, and Usurpation on the Crown
and Prerogatives Royal of our Lord Jesus Christ (at least in the givers
thereof) howbeit, I have very much Love, Charity and Affection to many who have
embraced the same, for I do really think, that they have been outwitted in
that matter, and have not wickedly departed from following the Lord; yet I hope
they shall get their Souls for a prey in the day of the Lord, although they may
suffer loss, in building such Hay and Stuble upon the Rock Christ Jesus, when
that their work shall be burnt up by the fire of his Jealousy.

I protest before God, Angels, and men, against all these Acts of Parliament or
Council, which are against and derogative to the work of God, and Reformation,
and carrying on of the same, according as we are engaged and sworn in these
holy bands of the National Covenant, and solemn League and Covenant; I abhor
the shedding of the blood of the Lords people, for their adhering to the same,
and the peoples guarding such in Prison houses and at Scaffolds unto their
death; whom both by the Oath of God upon them, and by the eminent and laudable
Laws of the Land, and by the Law of Nature they were obliged to have defended
to the uttermost of their lives and fortunes; It being most well known, that
such as were put to death, had committed no Crime, but on the contrary had
performed a Duty, which they were as much obliged to have performed as these,
if the guarders had been as faithful to God and man as the Pannels were.

Likewise I protest against their Banishment, Imprisonment, or Finings, or
Confinements, and against all the hardships and perplexities of whatsoever
kind, which they have been put to, through the Iniquity of the times; So that
we may justly with our predecessors say, That our Persecutors have devoured us,
and have Crushed us, have emptied us, swallowed us up like a Dragon, and have
filled their bellies with our Delicates, and have cast us out, 5 Jer. 34. For
which cause, God gave a charge to prepare Instruments for the overthrow and
destruction of such Persecutors, v. the 12. Because it was the Vengeance of the
Lord and of his Temple, so shall our Remnant who outlive these Persecutors, say
v. 35. The violence done to me and my flesh, be upon Babylon, and my blood be
upon the Inhabitants of Chaldea; let wrath from the Lord pursue them, for their
blood and violence in their persons and Estates, and their strength, wherein
they conside, and in their friends and favorites, who have consulted and
contrived within their wicked Courses. I hope the time is drawing nigh, and
that the joints of their Loins is loosing, their knees are beginning to smite
one against another, Dan. 5. 6. and the handwriting begins to be pourtrayed
upon the wall, because they have not considered what God did to their
Predecessors, for their Idolatrous Pride and Wickedness; although they knew it,
yet they are become more insolent in Idolatry and Wickedness, and daring
against God than ever their Forefathers presumed to be, in meddling with the
Vessels and Materials of Gods house, and with the Crown and Kingly Office of
Christ Jesus, and have appropriate them to their own Idolatrous ends and uses,
21. 22. Therefore, when the forbished Sword of the Lords Indignation and
Justice breaks forth to devour, which it may do; before the dark night of
these dreadful Dispensations pass over, then shall the time-serving Hypocrites
of this Generation begin to their untimely Prayers, viz. Hills and Mountains
fall upon them, to hide them from the face of the Righteous Judge, for who may
abide the day of his coming, for Executing of Vengeance on his Adversaries. In
that day the man shall be accused who keeps back his Sword from blood, and
who does the work of the Lord deceitfully, Jer. 48. 10. Yea happy shall he be
that takes this Cursed Malignant, and prelatical brood, and dasheth them
against the Stones; yea happy shall he be that rewards them as they have
served us, Psalm. 137. For this honor have all his Saints, the high Praises of
God in their mouth, and a two edged Sword in their hand, to execute Vengeance
upon the Heathen, Psalm. 149.

Having thus delivered my self in the points that I have mentioned, I only add
to what I have said, that I do only own these things as my own Judgment in
these great and Important matters, not willing that any thing wherein others
may differ from me, should be looked upon ^s the principles and persuasion of
that party whereto I adhere; And I obtest that no man be so Diabolick and
Profane, as to charge this upon any of my persuasion, it being but my own, in
which I hope, God has approven me, and whom God Justifies, who dare Condemn?

Now, if the Lord, in his wife and overruling Providence, bring me to the end
of my Pilgrimage, and to my long looked for and desired Happiness; let him take
his own way and time, in bringing me to it: And in the mean while, O my Soul,
sing thou this Song, Spring up O Well of this Happiness and Salvation, of all
this eternal Hope and Consolation, and whilst thou art burdened with this clog
of a clay Tabernacle, dig thou deep in it, by Faith, Patience, Hope and
Charity, and withal the Instruments which God has given thee; dig in it both
by precepts and promises, dig carefully, and dig continually, ay and till thou
come to the Source and head of the Fountain himself, from whence the waters of
Life flow forth; dig until thou come to the Assembly of the first born, when
this Song is most suitably sung to the Praise and Glory of the rich Mercy and
free Grace of this fountain of Life; O my Soul follow (in all this digging) the
Direction of the great Lawgiver; so shall thou prosper in all thy taking of
pains; O happy Nobles and Princes of Israel, who were admitted to the sight,
and to the Song, to the pains and to the profit, which none of the mixed
multitude of Murmurers were admitted to, because of their unbelief, Numb. 21.
17. And O Father of Mercy, while I am tossed upon the turbulent Seas of
manifold troubles, grant that thy presence may be with me, and that thy
Everlasting arms may be underneath me, to support me, for sure I am, Moses thy
Servant had good reason to be importunate in this suit, Exodus 32. 2. compared
with 14. and 15. v. Chap. 34. 9. Seeing no less could furnish him with fresh
supplies in the work he was about. O let thy presence be with me, and then my
Soul shall dig, and sing, and sing, and dig through times of trouble into
Eternal Rest, where I shall be admitted to behold the Rock Christ, out of whom
flows the pure Fountain and River of Life and Happiness, which I may drink
and not be damnified through the assaults of Satan, or the invasions of sin, or
of a wicked world any more; now according to thy promise, Mat. 10. 19. Out of
thy Fatherly Mercy, grant present help, supply and direction in this time of
trouble, seeing it is not in man that walks, to direct his own steps, Jer.
10. 23. and though it be a hard thing rightly to distinguish betwixt Sin and
Duty; yet thy Law, thy Word and thy Truth which are quick and powerful,
dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and is a director of the thoughts, and thy
Law gives light, Psalm. 119. 105. Psalm. 32. 8. For thy Testimonies, O Lord, are
sure, making wise the simple, Psalm. 19. 7. For thou alone can make all thy
Dispensations prove profitable, in order to the purging away of Sin, even when
they seem to be destructive, Esa. 27. 9. especially, when thou intends them not
for destruction, but for trial, Deuteronomy. 8. 2, 16. and for further Humiliation,
for thou, O Lord, have led me for many years, through a barren and wearisome
Wilderness, to the end, that thou may work thy work of Mortification in me,
although, if it had seemed good unto thee, thou could have brought me into
the Land of Promise and Rest a nearer way, Exodus 13. 17. For thou by hardships,
many a time hides Pride from men, and sealest up their instruction, that thou
may deliver his Soul from the Pit, and that his life may see the light, Job.
33. 17. And although thou, O Lord, should send me the back tract, and tenor
of my Life, to seek my Souls comforts, and encouragements from thence; yet I
have no cause to complain of hard dealing from thy hand, seeing it is thy
ordinary way with some of thy people, Psalm. 42. 6. O God, my Soul is cast down
within me, therefore will I remember thee from the Land of Jordan, and from the
Hill Hermon, etc. Yea the last time he brought me to the Banqueting House, and
made love his Banner over me (amongst the cold High-land Hills beside Kipper,
Nov. 1673.) he remembered his former kindnesses toward me; but withal he spoke
it in mine Ear, that there was a tempestuous storm to meet me in the Face,
which I behooved to go through with the strength of that Provision, 1 Kings 19.
7. And now, O my Soul, seeing it is his ordinary way and method with thee, to
send a shower, and a sunblink, and again a sunblink and shower; therefore, keep
thou silent to God, and murmr not, fret not, be not disquieted, be still, and
be content, seeing all my Persecutors can do either by fraud, or force, can
neither alter the Nature or kind of my sufferings, on add so much as a degree
thereto, neither lengthen out the time of them for a moment, Matthew 10. 29.
Exodus 12. 41. All Pharoahs Power could not keep Israel one Night longer in
Egypt, therefore it is my duty to study with Paul, Philippians 4. 11, 12.
Whatsoever State I am in, therewith to be content; and say, Should the Earth be
forsaken, and the Rock be removed out of its place for me? Job. 18. 4. should
God alter the course of his Providence for me, in which there is such an
efficacy as to carry all things to the proper and appointed end: what an
irresistible power? and that I may be found in him, not as having my own
Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of
Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith, Phil. 3. 9. 10. and to
resign up unto God my will and affections, to be disposed as he pleases, and
to say with fear, humility, and reverence, O Father, not my Will, but thine be
done; and whether I live or dye, I may be the Lords, that through his Mercy and
Grace, I may attain to his approbation, viz. Well done good and faithful
Servant, who has hitherto sent his Angel, and shut the Lions Mouth that they
have not hurt me, Dan. 6. 22. and who has so shut the eyes of my Persecutors
with a Sodomitish blindness, that hitherto they could not find out the way, how
to break in upon me; and I hope, he will in due time bring me out of the fiery
Furnace, and shall not through his Grace, suffer the smell thereof to be found
upon me; and if not, yet I never held it to be my duty, to worship this rotten
and stinking Idol of Jealousy, which these Nations have set up, who have
killed both the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and have persecuted us,
These. 1. 15. For thou, O Lord, have not abhorred nor despised my afflictions,
when I was afflicted, neither have thou hid thy Face from me, but when I cried
unto thee thou heardest me, Ps. 22. 24. Now, O Lord God, thou have made the
Heaven, and the Earth by thy great Power, and stretched out Arm, Jer. 32. 17.
Bring thou me at length to a happy arrival within the Gates of the New
Jerusalem, where no unclean thing can come; that my praise may be of thee in
the great Congregation. And although as Job says, 10. 17. That, thou, O Lord,
have delivered me to the ungodly, and have turned me over into the hands of the
wicked, yet by this, I know, that thou, O Lord favourest me, because mine
Enemies do not triumph over me; when I stand in Judgment, thou O Lord, did
not condemn; and if it pleases thee, thou will not leave me in their hands,
Ps. 41. 11. Ps. 37. 33. But can bring up my Life from the Pit of Corruption,
Jonah 2. 6. And seeing I have not preferred, nor sought after mine own things,
but thy Honor and Glory, the Good, Liberty, and Safety of thy Church and
People, although I may be now mis-constructed by many; yet at length, I hope,
thou Lord, will make my Light break forth as the Morning, and my Righteousness
as the Noonday, and that Shame and Darkness shall cover all who are
Adversaries to my Righteous cause; For thou Lord art the Shield of my help, and
the Sword of my excellency, and my Enemies shall be found Liars, Amen, yea and
Amen.

James Mitchel.


IN some parts of this Villainous Paper you find the Author discoursing like a
Jesuit, in some like an Enthusiast, and in many places like both. And from the
beginning to the end of it he argues from the supposed validity of the judicial
Law, which God gave the Isralites, not as their God, but as their Political
Sovereign, and which they on the other hand received from his infinite Majesty,
not on a Moral Account, as his rational Creatures, or the Sons of Adam, or
Noah; but upon the account of the civil Relation they had to him as Subjects,
or his people in a Political sense. For the Jewish Government, as all their
Writers agree, was a Theocratical Constitution, or the Temporal Kingdom of God;
who was pleased to become Jehovah-Stator, and dwell among them in a visible
external manner: in so much that the Judges, and Kings, were but his
High-commissioners, and Viceroys, who were chosen, and deposed by him at his
pleasure, and like Moses, and Joshua his first two Generals, could neither make
War, nor Peace, nor undertake any State-matter of great moment, without first
asking Counsel of the Lord.

Sometimes he answered them by Messengers, or Prophets; sometimes by Dreams and
Visions, but most commonly in the time betwixt Moses, and the Captivity, by
Urim and Thummim, which was a Political Oracle, appointed on purpose for the
Judges, Kings, or Generals, or the whole Congregation to consult in matters of
State and War. But our Savior, who came to break down the wall of partition
betwixt the Gentiles and the Jews, threw his Fathers enclosure into the Common
again, and put an end to his Political Government over the Jews. Who had they
embraced Christianity, and continued in their Country, as one entire people to
this day, would not have been obliged by their specific Judgments, and
Statutes, wherein their Civil, Criminal, and Military Laws consist. No, the
whole design of the Gospel is so inconsistent with the Jewish Economy, that it
is impossible for Christians to observe some, ridiculous to observe others, and
impious again to observe others of their judicial Laws. Of the last sort are
all those which God gave the Jews; as Carnifices Gentium, or Executioners of
his Wrath upon the Seven Idolatrous incorrigible Nations, as likewise all those
Capital Acts against Idolatry, as High Treason to his Government, and
inconsistent with the design he had to be King, as well as God of the Jews,
whom he set up as a light among the Gentiles, and secured them by those great
severities from falling into Demonolatry, which was the Catholic Religion of
the World.

This was the general Opinion of all Christians, till the Romanists began to
argue by false Analogy from things and persons in the Jewish, to things and
persons under the Christian Dispensation, and from them it was, that the
Presbyterians first of all learned to defend Murders, Assassinations,
Rebellions and Massacres, as you see this Villain has done.

Pope Adrian the Sixth moved the Princes of Germany to cut off Luther, and the
Lutherans, because (forsooth) God cast Corah and his Company down into Hell,
and commanded, that all those should be put to death that would not obey the
High Priest. And as Davila relates in the Ninth book of his History, the Pope
compared the Duke of Guise, that Patron of the cursed League, to Judas
Maccabeus, and the Jesuits complimented him with the name of Gideon, and bid
him go on, and prosper in the name of God. According to which damnable notion
of false Zealotry, when they Consecrate an Assassin (as Hospinian has proved
they sometimes do) to Murder an Heretic Prince, they Solemnly Consecrate him
to the work of the Lord in such a like form as this. Thou Elect Son of God,
take here the Sword of Gideon, the Sword of Jeptha, the Sword of Sampson, the
Sword of David, the Sword of the Maccabees, go, and be of good courage, and the
Lord strengthen thy Arm. Can any thing be more like Mr. Mitchels Justification
than this? would not one think his Soul had entered into that secret of the
Jesuits, seeing he has not acted only like one of their Assassins, but
written his Apology with their poisoned Ink. If Father Brown the Jesuit, that
Preached among them so many years, had penned it, could it have savoured
stronger of the Society of Jesus, or become such an Author better than it does?
He boasted on his deathbed at Ingestonbrigges, that he had Preached as down
right Popery in our Field-conventicle, as ever he had Preached in Rome it self;
and had he been the Author of this Paper, he might have also boasted, to the
comfort of his departing Soul, that he had written as true a Papistical
Pamphlet, as ever was written in the Romish Church. I think there is great
presumption to assert, that the Father might help to indoctrinate Mitchel in
this Mystery of Iniquity; but if he did not, yet both he and the Author of
Naphthali might invent these Doctrines without consulting Jesuits, seeing it
is the Cabala of their own Sect.

For this way of arguing to do mischief from the judicial Law, was the Logic
of our most Primitive Presbyterians, which has ever since caused so much ruin
and blood.

For in the Convention at Edinburgh Jan. 1560. for Ratification of a new form
of Church-Policy, it was Enacted, that all Monuments and Places of Idolatry, by
name Chapels, Cathedral Churches, and Colleges, should be suppressed;
whereupon through the instigation of John Knox ensued (says my Spotsw. etc. in
Anno, 1560. L. 3.
Author) a pitiful Vastation of Churches, and Church-buildings, so that the
Libraries nor Church-registers, nor Sepulchers of the dead were spared. And
some ill advised Preachers (says he) did animate the People in their Barbarous
proceedings, crying out, that places, where Idols had been worshipped, ought by
the Law of God to be destroyed, and that the sparing of them was the reserving
of things execrable; as if (he subjoyns) the commandment given to Israel for
destroying the places where the Canaanites did worship their false Gods, had
been a Warrant for them to do the same. Can. 62.
I confess the Council of Carthage in the time of Honorius decreed, that the
Emperors should be Petitioned to raze the Temples, and destroy the Relics of
Heathen Idols; but it was because in Maritime, and other places of Afrique,
Idolatry was yet professed in them, and not from any sense of Duty incumbent
upon them from the Mosaic Law. For that as well as the Latin and Greek Churches
had converted the Temples of Idols into the Churches of Christ; but as for the
supernumerary useless company of them, which remained as Snares, and Monuments
of the Dominion which the Devil had had in the World, they thought it both for
the honor and interest of Christianity, that they should be taken away.

In the following year, 1561. although Queen Mary had agreed with the Council,
That She should have her own Service in Her own Chapel, yet the next day, when
the Spotsw. etc. L. 4. An. 1561.
Tapers were carried through the Court, a Zealot of Mr. Mitchel's Principles
fell upon him that bore them, and broke them all in pieces, and had not the
Tumult been timely suppressed by some moderate Spirits abominable Barbarites
had ensued; for some maintained, that if right were done, Her Majesty's Priests
should have been slain, according to Gods Law against Idolaters. It would be
endless to trace these Principles down from the time of the Original
Presbyterians to these unhappy days; you may see enough of them in the
Parliament Sermons, and innumerable other Pamphlets of the late times. How
often did the late Presbyterian Preachers Commend the House of Commons for
their Zeal, and ransack the old Testament for examples and precepts to persuade
the giddy Vulgar, that the Rebels fought the Lords Battles, and that their
cause was his? How often did they compare the most active of them to Gideon,
Samson and Phineas, and complement the worthies of the late long Parliament in
England, as Gregory the 15th Complimented the last King of France, when he
raised an Army for the extirpation of the Protestants, in the Glorious name of
the Lord of Hosts. Did not that darling of the Faction, Mr. Calamy, in the
bloody Speech which he made in 43. at the Guildhall of London to the Citizens,
(to persuade them to contribute largely toward the bringing in of our Scottish
Army) justify himself from the objection of his own tender Conscience, that he
being a Minister of the Gospel should stir them up to make War; by taking an
Apology from Numb. 10. and Deuteronomy. 20. where God ordained, that the Sons of Aaron
the Priests should sound the Alarm with the Silver Trumpets, and that the
Priest should make a Speech to encourage the people going out to Battle to
fight for the Lord of Hosts. So that Naphthali, Nehushtan, and Mitchels Papers
are but the last improvement of the Presbyterian Logic and Zeal, which makes
our Conventicle-Preachers ride about with Guards, like petty Princes, and their
followers, more like Soldiers than Christians, come Armed by Thousands into the
Field.

They are now arrived at the highest pitch of Enthusiasm and Bigotry, and are
as ready upon all occasions, to do as much for the Spiritual Crown of Christ,
which they think inconsistent with the Mitre; as the Men of the Fifth Monarchy
principles, are ready to do for the Temporal Kingdom of Jesus. So that if God
in his good Providence had not sent down the Duke of Lauderdale among us to
prevent the storms that were ready to arise; in all human probability, this
Kingdom had been involved in such a violent Rebellion, as could not have been
quelled without extrinsecal force. His Grace came hither without any prospect
of trouble; and the incredible numbers of Nobility, and Gentry, that thronged
to meet him several days Journey on English ground, were enough to make him
presume that all would be quiet and serene. But he had not been many days among
us, when he was surpised with the news of great insolences, and disorders
caused by the Field-Conventicles in the West.

Now to make you understand what Wind blew up that secret flame, and how those
evil principles probably came to be put into fermentation, I must lead you back
to the year 1674. when some, whose discontents far exceeded their causes, under
the old pretense of redressing grievances, did design something else, and
thereby almost rendered the Parliament useless for the public ends, for which
it was called.

The Duke of Lauderdale was then His Majesty's High Commissioner, and there was
not one real grievance, of which he himself did not propose the removal; nor
any one pretended, concerning which he was not willing to treat: and if it were
found to be really such, to have it redressed in an orderly, fair, and legal
manner, according to the fundamental constitutions of the house. But this would
not satisfy their discontents (which enough demonstrates, that something else
was designed besides the removal of grievances) whereupon his Grace returning
to Court to give an account of affairs to his Royal Master, such great
confusions appeared among us, as naturally follow palliated discontents. Then
did Welsh, and other declared Traitors, take the confidence to Preach openly in
Fife, and Tiveot-dale, which before had been orderly places; and there they
were entertained and encouraged to debauch the People from their Duty to the
King, and the Church. And if these bold attempts, and disorderly practices had
not then been timely quelled by his Grace's care, and conduct, it is easy to
Divine to what eminent hazard, our Peace, and Government had been exposed.

Whether our Fanatics were then underhand encouraged to commit these
insolences, by designing malcontents time, the revealer of secrets may show;
but it is beyond all peradventure, that scandalous and unseasonable divisions
caused by nothing, but envy, and discontent, did then animate, and embolden
them to these turbulent practices; and therefore it seems not improbable, that
the same discontented party envying the Duke his glorious reception, and the
just esteem he has with his Prince, and intending to frustrate his best
counsels, and endeavors for preserving this, and by consequence the Kingdom of
England in Peace; have now conjured up the Fanatical Spirit again, to act in
more insolent irregularities, than at any time heretofore. But let the cause be
what it will, the Conventicles were never so numerous and frequent, as they now
began, and sometime after continued to be in Fife, Clidsdale, Tiveot-dale,
Galloway, Sterling shire, and Carrict; the last of which Shires had always been
peaceable, and orderly till now, when they all conspired to invade the public
peace. At these Field-Conventicles would meet sometimes 5. or 6. thousand,
sometimes eight or nine thousand at a time, as many of which as were fit to
bear Arms, and could provide them, never failed to come appointed into the
Field. For this reason our Laws and Proclamations style these Field-meetings
Rendezvouzes of Rebellion, which is as modest a Name as they can deserve. For
most of the principle Preachers among them, as Welsh and Arnott, are either
attainted or declared Traitors, and were actors in the Rebellion of 66. and the
Harangues (for I will not call them Sermons) which they make to the People,
tend to nothing, but to make them rebel, and possess them with hatred against
the King, and the Church. In October last at Sanchil in Carrict, Mr. Welsh,
attended with seven or eight seditious Preachers, made a preachment to the
principal division of a multitude upwards of 7000. people, upon St. John 11.
34. 35. In this Preachment among much other Treasonable stuff he spoke these
words. The King, the Nobles, and the Prelates, are sure the Murderers of
Christ, and then sitting down in his chair, he said, Oh People, I will be
silent. Speak O People, and tell me what good the King has done since his
home-coming; yea has he not done all the mischief a Tyrant could do --? At
another Conventicle not long after, he spoke thus, or to this purpose; That he
was confident, that God would yet assert the cause of Pentland- hills, in spite
of the Curates (for so they call the Orthodox Ministers) and their Masters the
Prelates, and in spite of the Prelates, and their Master the King, and in spite
of the King, and his Master the Devil.

But to proceed, at these Field-Meetings they administered the Solemn League and
Covenant to the People; and made them swear never to hear the Orthodox
Ministers more: and in a most Popish manner, gave them the Sacrament thereupon.
They also kept Classical Meetings, where they ordained Ignorant, and Factious
striplings, and by an unparalled Act of Schism, took the Confidence to
re-ordain one Mr. John Cuningham, who was formerly ordained Presbyter by the
late Lord Bishop of Galloway; and likewise presumed to receive the Hypocritical
Confessions, and Repentance of such as they had persuaded, or suborned to
confess the great sin of joining in Worship with our Church. They admitted
ruling Elders in several Precincts, and with incomparable Impudence proceeded
to Institute, and induct Preachers of their Tribe, both into vacant and full
Churches; according to Mr. Mitchel's Judgment, who asserts in his Apology,
that every Parish ought to choose its Preacher, and that Patronage is but a
Popish Rite. They also confiding in their numbers, proceeded in manifest
contempt of Authority to erect Preaching-Houses; particularly in Carrict, and
Galloway, where Persons of no mean Quality and Interest, harbored and caressed
those great Apostles of the Cause Welsh and Arnott; who ride about these
disaffected Shires in great State, and Security, with Guards consisting of
forty, fifty, or greater numbers of Horse. From these Insolences they
proceeded to invade the Houses, and menace the Persons of some Orthodox
Ministers, whom Mr. Welsh declared either in a Conventicle, or Presbytery,
somewhere in Carrict, that it was a lawful to kill, as for the Israelites to
kill the Canaanites, if they complained to the Men (for so he called the
Magistrates) in Power. These outrages so frighted the Orthodox Clergy, that
many Ministers forsook their charges; and some of our Bishops, who lived in
those distracted corners, were forced for their security, to repair to this
Town. Thus all things seemed to run into confusion; and if excellent methods
had not been used to prevent the sequel of such dangerous beginnings; the
faction by this time had grown into a formed party, and disputed the Cause,
with an Army in the Field.

The first thing the Privy Council did, was to issue out Proclamations for the
execution of the Laws against these Conventicles; and to use all means possible
for seizing the Persons of Welsh, and Arnott, and other seditious Preachers:
but the former were rendered ineffectual, the Heritable Sheriff, and Bailiffs,
and other Officers of the seditious districts refusing to act; and the latter
could not be brought to effect, because the Preachers are always so strongly
guarded in public; and in private shelter themselves with such superstitious
adorers of their holy persons, as none of the proposed rewards can tempt to
betray. Disorders thus continuing, the Council acquainted His Majesty with the
dangers they threatened, and humbly moved him to send speedy Orders, that a
considerable number of his Irish Troops should march to the maritime Borders
next adjacent to Galloway, and the Western Shires, to be ready for
Transportation if occasion required. His Majesty, who was long since acquainted
with the Spirit and Principles of our Remonstrator-Presbyterians, in compliance
with the wholesome advice of his Privy Council, immediately ordered, that a
well-appointed Party, of about 3000. Horse and Foot, should be sent under the
conduct of the Loyal, and Valiant Viscount of Granard, our Countryman, to
quarter upon the Maritime Borders, and to march at the command of the Privy
Council here. This particular care of His Majesty, and the approach of the
Forces, did very much surprise the Fanatical party, who were made to believe by
the malcontents, that the Duke had no interest at Court, nor was capable to
procure any extrinsical assistance, although they should rebel. The Irish
Forces being arrived upon the Coasts, the Council were resolved to try what
fair and gentle means would do; and thereupon directed Letters to the Heritors
(whom you call Landlords) of Air, and Ren^rew, to know if they would undertake
by their own power to reduce these disorders, having the King's Authority for
that effect. The Heritors met in a full Assembly, and after two days
consultation returned Answer by three Noble Lords, whom the Council had sent to
attend them, that they could not undertake by their own Power to keep the
Country free from Conventicles, or any disorders that might ensue thereupon.

You must know that our Landlords have far more Authority over their Tenants,
than yours; insomuch, that in the most disaffected places, there are no
Conventicles, where the Heritors, and Superiors use their private Authority to
keep the people constant to the Church. All the World here knows, that there is
not a more Fanatical shire in this Kingdom than Murray; and yet by the single
Authority, and Interest of that most Loyal and deserving person the Earl of
Murray, it is kept in as perfect Order and Obedience, as if there were no
Conventicles in the World. But, as for the aforesaid shires, the Council
expected no such answer from them, because they of all others have had most
indulgence, as having Nonconformist Ministers legally settled in very many
Churches among them; which one would think, if that party had any Reason,
Modesty, or Conscience, might have kept them from troubling the public Peace.
Therefore the Council having received such an unreasonable answer from the
Heritors of these more indulged shires, concluded what returns they might
expect from others; and therefore began now to think it was high time to reduce
them to their duty by force. Whereupon, knowing that the body of this Kingdom
was Loyal, they resolved rather to reduce the Fanatics by our own intrinsical
power, than to call in His Majesty's Irish Forces, unless there should be
absolute need. Wherefore, to the Kings standing Forces, they added the Militia
of the most Loyal County of Angus, and admitted the Auxiliary Forces, which
several Loyal Lords that have Interest, and Authority in the Highlands, did
proffer to raise out of their Vassals, and Dependents for His Majesty's special
Service in this critical exigence of Affairs. And by His Majesty's special
Approbation and Command, they were all united into one Army, under the Conduct
of the most Valiant and Loyal Earl of Lin Lithgaw, who toward the latter end
of last Jan. marched into the Western shires.

And that all things might be transacted in a fair, legal, and orderly manner;
there is also sent along with the Army a Committee of the Privy Council,
consisting of Eleven Right Honorable persons, who are invested with sufficient
power, Civil, and Criminal, to punish all sorts of Offenders, and are now
steddily pursuing those great ends for which they were sent thither. There Is a
strict Correspondence betwixt them, and the Privy Council, to whom they send
frequent accounts of their Proceedings, and from whom they receive such
measures, and directions, as may most conduce to reduce and secure those
disorderly shires. To which purpose in the first place, they proceed to disarm
them, causing all suspected persons to deliver their Arms (whereof great
Provision was made) to their respective Sheriffs upon Oath, who are to deliver
them to the Major General, and to be sent by him to His Majesty's Garrisons.
They have likewise order to plant Garrisons in what places soever they shall
think fit, and have proceeded to do Execution on the new built Meeting Houses,
those Temples of Baal Berith, by Commanding that they should be pulled down,
and that their Materials should be burnt. They are likewise to tender a Bond to
be taken by all Heritors, wherein, as Masters of Families, they are to be bound
for themselves, their Wives, Children and Servants, and, as Landlords, for
their Tenants and Cottagers, that they shall not go to Conventicles, nor
receive, or supply Conventicle-ministers, but live orderly in Obedience to the
Law; so that if their Wives, or any of their Children or Servants Transgress,
they will be bound to undergo the legal Penalties for them. But in case their
Tenants or Cottagers Transgress, they will be bound to present them to Justice,
or turn them off their Tenements, or else to be liable to the Penalties they
shall incur.

The form of this Bond, or civil Anticovenant, was drawn up by the Privy
Council, and is as follows:
I under subscribing do faithfully bind, and oblige me, That I, my Wife,
Bairns, and Servants respectively, shall no ways be present at any
Conventicles, and disorderly Meetings in time coming, but shall live orderly in
Obedience to the Law, under the Penalties contained in the Acts of Parliament
made there anent. As also, I bind and oblige me, that my whole Tenants, and
Cotters respectively, their Wives, Bairns, and Servants shall likewise refrain,
and abstain from the said Conventicles, and other illegal Meetings not
Authorized by the Law, and that they shall live orderly in Obedience to the
Law. And further, that I, nor they shall recept supply, or Commune with
forfeited persons, intercommuned Ministers, or Vagrant Preachers, but shall do
our utmost endeavor to apprehend their persons. And in case my said Tenants,
Corters, and their foresaids shall Contravene; I shall take, or apprehend any
person, or persons guilty thereof, and present them to the Judge Ordinar, that
they may be Fined, or Imprisoned therefore, as is provided in the Acts of
Parliament made there anent. Otherwise I shall remove them, and their Families
from off my ground. And if I shall fail herein, I shall be liable to such
Penalties as the said Delinquents have incurred by the Laws, consenting to the
Registration hereof in the Books of His Majesty's Privy Council, or Books of
any other Judges competent, that Letters and Executorials may be direct
hereupon in form as Effeirs and Constitutes my Procurators.

This is the tenor of the Bond; and least the force thereof should be eluded,
the Privy Council have declared, That every Heritor, that shall receive into
his Lands, or Service any Tenants, or Servants of any other Heritor, without a
Certificate from him, or the Minister of the Parish where they lived, that they
lived orderly, as to this matter, shall be subject, to such Fines as the Privy
Council shall think fit to inflict to punish them for their Crime, and repair
the damage that shall accrue to the Heritor, or Master whose Tenants or
Servants they did receive. All the Lords of the Privy Council, and the Judges
(whom we call the Senators of the College of Justice) together with the
Advocates Writers, and all others belonging to the Society of the Lawyers, have
taken this Bond, as also the Lords of the Exchequer, and the Justitiary Lords,
which is a very prevalent example, and little doubt is made, but the generality
of the Subjects of the Nation will cheerfully sign it; as being so beneficial
to Authority, and so proper an expedient to recover the common people into
their Wits. And it cannot possibly give the least umbrage of scruple to the
Conscience of the most weak, or peevish Dissenter; being nothing but a purely
civil alternative Obligation, to do what the Law requires, or submit to the
Penalties therein contained. Perhaps it may seem strange in England, that a
Landlord should be bound in this manner for his Tenants; but there is nothing
more reasonable, and customary here; because our Heritors have such a despotic
power over their Tenants, as you cannot well imagine, unless you had lived here.

And in case any persons shall finally refuse to take this Bond (as some Fife,
and Western Gentlemen have made difficulty at it) The Privy Council (according
to the legal and uncontroverted Practice of that Board in all ages) has
ordained, that Letters shall be directed to them, to charge them forthwith to
give in Security to His Majesty's Privy Council, that They, their Wives,
Children, Tenants, and Servants, shall keep His Majesty's Peace, and
particularly that they shall not go to Conventicles, nor harbor Rebels, nor
intercommuned persons, and that they shall keep the Persons, Families, and
Goods of their Regular Ministers harmless, under the double of every man's
valued yearly Rent, if he have any, ^or of such Penalties as shall be thought
Convenient by His Majesty's Council, or their Committee, if they have none;
which if they shall refuse to do within Six days next after the charge, they
are to be declared His Majesty's Rebels (as the manner is here) with the sound
of an Horn.

To conclude, the Committee is to proceed to the condign Censuring of such, as
shall appear upon proof to have harbored Welsh, or Arnott, or other
intercommuned persons, and such also as have invited, or convocated the silly
people unto the Field-Assemblies, under pretense of hearing Sermons, and such
as contributed by Money, Work, or Materials to build the new Samaritan
Synagogues; two of which the Earl of Cassels was commanded to demolish in
Catrict, as was his duty to have done before.

All this has been done under the wise Conduct of the Duke of Lauderdale, to
whose presence among us, next under God, this poor Church, and Kingdom are
redevable, that they have been preserved from Confusion, and blood. And I
question nor, but his Vigorous endeavors to suppress this Schism (the like
whereof in all respects was never yet heard of in any Age, or Nation) have by
this time effectually. Confuted all the lying reports that were sent into
England by our men of Schism, and Faction, with a design to render him odious
in our Neighbor Country, and discredit his administration here.

But I beg Mr. Mitchels, and your pardon, for leaving him so long. I could not
forbear to intersert this account of his Western Brethren, whose Confessor he
lived, and whose Martyr he died. I Will now return to visit him again, and leave
him no more, till I see him in his Grave.

In the interval betwixt his condemnation, and execution, he seldom spoke of
his approaching Death, but as of a Martyrdom or Murder; and gloried that he
was accounted worthy to suffer for Christ. This is the style of his short
Speech, and the frequent Visits, Papers and Messages that he received from the
Brotherhood to dye with Courage in the Cause, and to seal the Truth, that is,
the Covenant, with his Blood; together with the frequent debauches which he
made with Ale, Wine, and Brandy, contributed very much to heighten his
obstination, and make him insensible of his crime.

You cannot imagine how much the Fanatics of all parts were concerned about
him. From the West, a private message was sent to the Archbishop, to assure his
Grace, that if Mr. James Mitchel were hanged, another should not fail to
execute his design. His Majesty's Advocate, who pursued him, received a
threatening anonymous Letter, and the common talk of this Town was, that Mr.
James Mitchel's Blood should be revenged upon the whole Order; and truly I
doubt not, but if all the Fathers of our Church, and all the Clergy under them
had but one Neck, that there are at least 300. Covenanted Mitchels behind, that
would strive to cut it off.

In the Year, 1668. when he made the attempt, the Fanatical Party made a sport
of it; and as if the ruin of the Church were sure to follow upon it, many fair
pretenders, that out of compliance to Authority, had hitherto given our Bishops
that particular veneration that was due to their Character, began now to slight
them, and would scarce give them that common respect which was due to other
Men. The like change was observed upon the late insolences of the Whigs in the
West, the respect of our Bishops, and Episcopal Clergy, began visibly to decay,
and some that were then in a condition to do the Faction a kindness, had the
confidence to say, that they knew no reason there was to oppose the
inclinations of the people, to support about a dozen Men.

And while this Martyr of Iniquity lay in Goal, the mouths of our Fanatics
were full of railing against the Bishops; and the Rascality, who are often
taught to speak the sense of greater Persons, were heard to say, that it were
better the Primate should be hanged than he. In the Octave betwixt his
sentence, and execution, he received, as I was credibly informed, 400. Dollars
in private gifts, which was interpreted by the Party for the particular care
that God had of him, who never sees the Righteous forsaken, nor his Seed
begging their bread.

The day before his Execution he sent to the Provost, or Mayor of Edinburgh, to
desire a Stage larger than ordinary, because he had a great number of Friends,
that intended to appear at his Execution in Mourning: but his Lordship was more
honest, and prudent than to grant the vainglorious Villain his desire. When he
was upon the Ladder, he called the Psalm to be sung, which if you do not
remember, I desire you before you proceed, to consult. When the Psalm was
ended, he took out of his Psalm Book two Copies of his intended Speech, which
he threw among the people, for there had he put them to elude the search. After
his Body was cut down, it was conveyed to Magdalen Chapel, from whence it
was carried to Burial in great Pomp, being attended with at least 40. Mourners,
whereof the Justice General's Gentleman was one. It Is reported also that the
Herse-cloth was of Velvet, but certain it is, it was more than ordinary brave.

The Evening before his Execution, Information was brought to the Provost, that
the Women of Edinburgh (I mean the Fanatical part of them) had entered into a
conspiracy to rescue him between the Prison and the Gallows; which obliged his
Lordship to provide extraordinary Guards, capable to prevent any such design.
This Information was well grounded, if it were not true, for there was never
seen such an appearance of that Sex at any Execution, as was at his, where a
Body of at least seven hundred Sisters stood together almost in Rank and Eile.

The next Morning after his Execution there were several Copies of his Speech,
and several Libellous Verses put up in several places of the City, one Copy
whereof made by some Fanatic Poetaster, and fixed upon the great Cross, I here
send you, with an Answer in another Column, which was made about two or three
days after, by a better Poet, and better principled Man.

Deploratio Mortis Jacobi Mitchel.
HEu quo jura ruunt? and siccine candida Virtus,
Et Recti dicessit amor? tibi Scotia multas
Perfida Gens parat insidias, rituque Profano
Polluit Impietas sacraria; membra piorum
Ah truncata jacent; qui sacri faedera pacti
Non ausi violare; fidei rectique tenaces
Perstiterant; quo tantaruunt perjuria? Quassam
Funditus an tentant Solymam convellere, magni
Gens secura Dei, speciosaque Templa Sionis
Diruere, obductis involvens cuncta tenebris?
Quo ruit Impietas? vanas sic ibit in auras
Pacta fides? Perjura manus coit omnis in unum
In scelus horrendum; saevos feritate Leones
Mittit in Occasum, suscepta ut faedera Regni
Deleat, and Christi praedetur ovile; cupido
Namque tenet lucri nunquam satiata, nefandum
Prob Scelus! an Pharias miseri remeamus ad oras?
Anne iterum nostrae sic Relligionis habenas
Papa Reget? nunquam ne aderit Deus ultor, inulti
Dum pereunt justi, dextraque ultrice furorem
Comprimet? hunc rabiosa lupi non terruit ira.
Fraudibus occultis, odiisque immanibus annos
Quatuor afflictum, non caeco carcere clausum
Uincula terrebant, vinclis cruciatus in arctis
Perstitit, exiliique tulit mala cuncta, reductus
Jeis rigidum perpessus obit; quis caetera nescit.
Epitaphium ejusdem, ubi ipse introducitur loquens.
Quo vesana ruit gens, and vis effera praeceps?
Quo ruit impietas, and sine lege furor?
Rebus an intrepidis constantia victa fatiscit?
An metuit vanas men's labefacta minas?
In te fixa Deus mea spes, te intentus anhelo,
Intrepidus carpam te duce mortis iter
Saevus at iste lupus, quia men's intelligit, inde
Se sciat in magnum tela movere Deum.
Finis.
Quo autem modo hactenus mortuo (cui soli Epitaphium ex vi vocis debetur)
carpendum sit mortis iter, confaederatis fratribus problema esto.

Congratulatio de morte Jacobi Mitchel Parricidae.
IN te jura cadunt, quia a te candida Virtus
Et Recti dicessit amor; tibi Scotia paenas
Perfida Grex! meritas parat: ah quae more profano
Faedasti Christi sacraria, membra piorum
Tu trunctata dabas, tu sacri faedera pacti
Ausu novo violare; fidei rectique tena^s
Exilio mulctans; tua sic perjuria quassam
Tent abant Solymam convellere funditus, alti
Grex secura Dei! Speciosaque Templa Sionis
Diruis, obductis involvens cuncta tenebris.
Huc ruit impietas, tenues sic ivit in auras
Pacta fides; perjura manus coit omnis in unum
In scelus horrendum; saevos feritate Leones
Mittit ab Occasu, suscepta ut faedera Regni
Deleat, and Christi praedetur ovile; Cupido
Namque tenet lucri nunquam satiata, nefandum
Proh Scelus! in Pharias remeavimus oras,
Atque iterum nostrae sic Relligionis habenas
Papa regebat; adest nunc, nunc Deus ultor, inulti
Ne pereant justi, dextraque ultrice ^urorem
Comprimet. Hunc Divina lupum non terruit ira,
Fraudibus occultis odiisque immanibus actum;
Grassantem rabie, solitaeque cupidine caedis.
Horruit ejectum Patria peregrinus, at aequum
O coelum! exilii postquam mala tanta tulisset,
Tormenta in Patria atque homicidae vincla parantur;
Tandem perstringunt sccleratum vincula collum.
Exitus hic dignus tam prodigialibus ausis.
Jus aequum perpessus obit; sed caetera nescit,
Aeternos quisquis nondum damnatur ad ignes.
Finis.
Epitaphium ejusdem, ubi ipse ab inferno introducitur loquens.
Quo vesana ruis Grex, and vis effera praeceps?
Quo ruis impietas, and sine lege furor?
Heu mea sero nimis constantia victa fatiscit,
Sera, sed atroci faenore paena venit.
Jam Coelo extorri terror Deus ipse; coquenda
Dum manus in Stygio Sanguinolenta lacu.
Christi si quis adhuc lupus expugnator Ovilis,
Se sciat in magnum tela movere Deum.
Finis.
Iisdem pene verbis convellitur quibus adstruitur impietas. Ambros.

There was also a severe Satyr in Scottish made in revenge to the many Libels,
which the Fanatics scattered about Town upon this occasion. I got a Copy of
it, which I here present unto you, Entitled as it was to the Memory of Mr.
James Mitchel.
O-Y-ES O-y-es Covenanters
Filthy, Cruel, lying Ranters
Come here, and see your murdering Martyr
Sent to Hell in the Hangmans Garter;
Your sealing Witnesses we hear
Are Mr. James Mitchel, and Major Weir:
One with his hand, but had no pith,
The Other your Wives know well wherewith,
Which makes them sigh, and sighing say,
Welsh can but Preach, but Weir could pray.
It Is this that all Religion shames,
To give Hells Vices Heavenly names.
Then Devils, then cast off your Masks,
Murder, and Whoredom are your Tasks,
Which you to all the World proclaim,
Boasting, and glorying in your shame,
And say your Covenant does allow
This, Maugre your Baptismal vow,
And that the holy Oath does bind you
To leave such holy Seed behind you.
For at, and after your long prayers,
You lie together pairs by pairs,
And every private Meeting Place,
Is a Bawdy House of Grace;
You show it is your loving Natures,
To be sweet fellow-feeling Creatures.
But to profane your Holy Order
With Incest, Buggery, and Murder,
Is plainly to proclaim you Devils,
And horrid Crimes to be no evils.
Mas James Mitchel lay four year
In Grissald's house with Major Weir,
And from his Ghostly Father learns
To lie with Women, and get no Barns,
The Mystery of the Tribe, a Trick
Makes all the Women mad Fanatic,
And now they both in Hell are met,
Where for your Company they wait.
Then fill your measure, and post on
To your deserved Damnation.
Go Whore, and Bugger, Kill and Pray,
Till every Dog shall have his day;
Or go together to Hell in Troops,
Else strive for new Grasse-market-loops.
He that Whores best, and Murders most,
Of him the Sect shall always boast.
And put him, as they have put Mas James
Among their Saints, and Martyrs Names.
YOu see the Latin Verses take notice of the West, as a place above all others
of this Kingdom, wherein Fanaticism most abounds. This must needs awaken your
curiosity to enquire from what magnetism it is, that our Conventicle-preachers
have acquired such a strong verticity to that point. Truly, the reason is the
same for which yours haunt London, and the most opulent Towns, and Countys of
England, even the Riches of the place; for where the Silver is, there are the
Suisses, where the Carcass is, there are these Vulturs gathered together.
There Is a necessity laid upon them to Preach the Gospel there; yea, woe unto
them if they Preach it not in Fife and the West, where so many Rich Traders,
and Heritors live. But as for the Highlands, and other poorer Countys, they
have no Christian compassion for them, but let them live and dye in Ignorance
and Idolatry; because their Souls are not so precious for want of Silver and
Gold. I remember when I was at London in 76. I heard a famous
Conventicle-minister say, That if it were not for the Non-conforming-ministers,
thousands of Souls in that populous City would starve for want of the Word. I
very much wondered to hear him say so; considering how many hundred Sermons
were Preached every week by the Orthodox Ministers, and the best I thought,
that ever I had heard. But being the next day in some Company, which was
discoursing about Conventicles, one or two of them began to tell of the great
store of Money the Conventicle-preachers had in the Banks, and how some of them
kept their Coaches, and he believed it would not be long er'e their Wives kept
their Chairs. Then I began to understand the reason of the great care those
Gentlemen had to feed the Souls of the good Citizens; and was very glad that to
keep a Coach was no longer a sign of Prelatical Pride. When I returned home, I
told our Whigs, that the Non-conformist-ministers of London began to keep
Coaches, but the greatest part of them would not believe me; and those that
did, said with sighs, they were sorry, that there were Diotrepheses among them,
that loved the preeminence, and that God would have a controversy with them
for their Prelatical Pride. The like I have seen in a Preface to a Presbyterian
Treatise of Divinity, Printed about that time, wherein the anonymous Author
(whose name I have been told) complains of the Prelatical Spirit, that began to
show it self among the Non-conforming-ministers; whereof some living in great
Plenty, and State, contemned others who were poor, and whose lot was fallen in
places, where Persecution did abound.

In the Scottish, which you will call the English Verses, you see the Poet
upbraids their Baptismal Vow with the Covenant; not, as I conceive, upon the
common account, as another Poet may do, but because it is the frequent practice
of our Whig-preachers to Baptize the Children of their Disciples into the
Solemn League and Covenant, as well as into the Covenant of Grace. He also
takes notice of the intimate Familiarity betwixt Mr. Mitchel, and Major Weir;
and unless you will be at the pains to read the life of the latter, as well as
the former, you will never be able to understand the Satyr, nor know whether the
Satyrists indignation be just, or unjust. He promise you beforehand, That the
Narrative shall affect you both with Wonder, and Indignation; though for the
honor of our Nature, and Religion, I wish no such stories were extant in the
World. Nay confident I am, that when you have considered it in all the
circumstances that attend it, you will say, that he who is the subject thereof,
was one of the most prodigious sinners that ever was extant of humane race. For
there is nothing in History comparable to him, nor I hope will ever be; and had
not our blessed Savior told us, that Men may be so wicked, as to sin beyond
forgiveness, I could scarce have believed that any Man, much less a Christian,
could have committed uncleanness in all specieses, with Women, Devils, and
Beasts.

But such a Monster was this Pharisee, of whom I am going to give you an
account; which is partly taken out of the public Register of our criminal
Court, and where that cannot relieve me, from common fame, the notoreity of the
things related, or the Authority of Persons of known Integrity, and great
Reputation in the World.

He was born, and bred in the Western parts of this Kingdom; which, as it
appears from the preceding Narrative, has ever been the most Fanatical part
of our Country, and most disaffected to the King, and the Church. There he was
early prepossessed with the principles of Schism, and Rebellion, which he
showed upon all occasions, particularly in the beginning of the late Rebellion,
wherein he was a forward stickler, and by his extraordinary zeal for the Cause,
raised himself to a greater command in some Troop, or Company, than Men of his
mean Original use to arrive unto here. About the Year 1649. he had the great
trust of the Guards of this City committed unto him under the quality of Major,
and from that time, to the day of his Infamous Death, was always called by the
Name of Major Weir. He behaved himself in this Office with great cruelty, and
insolence toward the Loyal party, being very active in discovering and
apprehending the Cavaliers, and bringing them to be arraigned, and tried for
their Lives. He used to insult and triumph over them in their miseries, and
persecute them with all manner of Sarcasms and Reproaches, when they were led
out like Victims to public Execution; as many yet alive can testify to the
World. In particular, the barbarous Villain treated the Heroic Marquess of
Montrosse, with all imaginable insolence, and inhumanity, when he lay in
Prison, making his very calamities an Argument, that God, as well as Man, had
forsaken him, and calling him Dog, Atheist, Traitor, Apostate, Excommunicate
Wretch, and many more such intolerable Names. This cruel manner after which he
used to outrage the poor Royalists, passed among the people for extraordinary
zeal; and made them consider him as a singular Worthy whom God had raised up to
support the Cause. He studied the Art of Dissimulation, and Hypocrisy, always
affecting a formal gravity, and demureness in his looks, and deportment; and
employing a vast and tenacious memory, which God had given him, in getting
without Book such words, and phrases of the Holy Scriptures, as might serve
best in all companies to make him pass for an Holy and gifted Man. He had
acquired a particular gracefulness in whining and sighing, above any of the
sacred Clan, and had learned to deliver himself upon all serious occasions in a
far more ravishing accent than any of their Ministers could attain unto. By
these and other Hypocritical Arts he had got such a name for sanctity, and
devotion, that happy was the Man with whom he would converse, and blessed was
the Family in which he would vouchsafe to pray.

For he pretended to pray only in the Families of such as were Saints of the
highest Form; insomuch, that the Brethren and Sisters of these Precincts would
shrive who should have him to exercise in their Houses, and of those that lived
at a greater distance, some would come forty or fifty miles to have the
happiness to hear him pray. He had indeed, but by what assistance will be seen
hereafter, a wonderful fluency in extemporary Prayer, and what through
Enthusiastical phrases, and what through Ecstasies, and raptures, into which he
would appear transported, he made the amazed people presume he was acted by the
Spirit of God. Besides praying, he used to exhort, and bless the Families in
which he prayed; but he never undertook to Preach in them, for fear of invading
the Ministerial Province; which certainly would have offended the Kirk.

After this manner, and in this mighty reputation he lived till the Year 1670.
which was the 70th. year of his Age. When like the Tyrant Tiberius, after so
many Murders, and sorts of unnatural Lusts, he was no longer able to endure
the remorse of his awakened conscience, but to ease the inquietudes of his
guilty mind, was forced to accuse himself; which he first of all did among
those of his own party, and desired them to bring him to public Justice to
expiate for his abominable crimes. But they considering what a confounding
scandal, and dishonor the Hypocrisy of such an eminent Professor would
reflect upon the whole Sect, did with all possible care and industry strive to
conceal the Major's condition, which they did for several months; till one of
their own Ministers, whom they esteemed more forward than wise, revealed the
secret to the Lord Abbotshall, then Provost of Edinburgh, who judging humane
Nature incapable of such horrid crimes, as the Minister told him the Major had
confessed, concluded he was fallen into a phrenzy, or high degree of
melancholy, and therefore courteously sent some Physicians of his own
persuasion and acquaintance to visit him, and Physic him for his distempered
Brain. But the Physicians returning to the Provost, assured him, that the Major
was in good health, and that he was free of Hypocondriack Distempers, and had
as sound intellectuals as ever he had had, and that they believed his Distemper
was only an exulcerated Conscience, which could not be eased till he was
brought to condign punishment, as with cryings, and roarings he desired to be.
Afterward the Provost for his further satisfaction sent some
Conventicle-Ministers, to enquire into his condition, and make a report
thereof; who finding it impossible to disguise the matter, which now was
Town-talk, told his Lordship that the Major was not affected with melancholy;
but that the terrors of God which were upon his Soul, urged him to confess,
and accuse himself. The Provost thereupon began to conclude, that he had good
grounds to take public notice of this affair; and therefore without further
enquiry sent the guards of the City to seize upon the Major, and his Sister,
who was involved in his confessions, and carry them both to the public Goal.
There they were visited by Persons of all Sorts and Qualities, Clergymen,
Laymen, Physicians, Lawyers, Conforming, and Nonconforming Ministers, who all
flocked thither to see this Monster, and discourse with him about his horrible
crimes.

They had not been long in Prison before they were brought to Trial, which was
on the ninth day of April, in the aforesaid year, 1670. They were tried before
that Learned Civilian Mr. William Murray, and Mr. John Prestoune Advocates, who
were made Judges by Commission for that time. They were pursued by his
Majesty's last Advocate, Sir John Nisbett, and the Jury by which they were
tried, was Gideon Shaw, Stationer; James Penderer, Vintner; James Thomson,
Felt-maker; Robert Brown, Stationer; James Brown, Felt-maker; Robert Johnston,
Skinner; John Clighorn, Merchant; with many more sufficient Citizens of
Edinburgh; most of which, together with the greater part of the Witnesses
hereafter mentioned, are yet alive.

The Court being set, the Majors Libel was read, the sum of which was contained
in these four particulars. Primo, That he entised and attempted to defile his
German Sister, Jane Weir, when she was but ten years old, or thereabout, and
that he lay with her when she was sixteen years old, while they both dwelt in
Family with their Father; and afterward had frequent carnal dealing with her
in the House of Wicket-Shaw in her younger years; and lastly, that after she
was 40. years old, he lived in a state of Incest with her, in his house at
Edinburgh, where they dwelt together many years.

Secundo, That he committed Incest with Margaret Bourden, Daughter to Mein, his
Deceased Wife.

Tertio, That he committed frequent Adulteries, during the Life of his said
Wife, both with married, and unmarried Women, and particularly with Bessy
Weems, his Servant Maid, whom he kept in his House for the space of twenty
years, during which time he lay with her as familiarly as if she had been his
Wife.

Quarto, That to his Fornications, Adulteries, and Incests, he proceeded to add
the unnatural Sin of Beastiality in lying with Mares, and Cows; particularly in
polluting himself with a Mare, upon which he rode into the West Country, near
New Mills. All which crimes particularized in manner aforesaid, he acknowledged
judicially at the Bar.

The sum of Jane his Sisters Libel is reducible to these two Heads. First to
the charge of Incest, which she committed with her Brother; and Secondly, to
the charge of Sorcery, and Witchcraft, but most especially of consulting
Witches, Necromancers, and Devils; and yet more particularly for keeping, and
conversing with a Familiar Spirit, while she lived at Dalkeith, which used to
spin extraordinary quantities of Yarn for her, in a shorter time than three or
four Women could have done the same. All which she judicially confessed in the
Face of the Court.

Then they proceeded to swear the Witnesses, which the Lord Advocate called for
further probation against them both. Of these John Oliphant, Wiliam Johnston,
and Archibald Hamilton, Bailies, i. e. Aldermen of Edinburgh depon'd, that on
the Monday preceding the Majors Arraignment, he did freely confess, and declare
unto them, that he had committed frequent Incests with his Sister Jane; diverse
Fornications, and Adulteries with other Persons; and Beastiality with a Mare,
and a Cow. Master John Sinclar, a Conventicle-Minister depon'd, that the day
before his Trial he freely confessed unto him, that he was guilty of Adultery,
Incest, and Bestiality, and that his Sister had often been taken out of Bed
from him: whereupn asking him if he had ever seen the Devil, he answered, that
he had felt him in the dark. But as to his conversation with the Devil, the
Deponent might have declared more; for he had confessed to him and many others,
particularly to the Lord Bishop of Galloway, then Minister of Edinburgh, that
he had lain with the Devil in the shape of a beautiful Woman.

Margaret Weir, Wife to Alexander Weir, Bookseller in Edinburgh, testified,
that when she was of the Age of 27. years, or thereabouts, she found the Major
her Brother, and her Sister Jane, lying together in the Barn at Wicket-Shaw,
and that they were both naked in the bed together, and that she was above him,
and that the Bed did shake, and that she heard some scandalous Language between
them in particular, that her Sister said, she was confident she should prove
with Child. Furthermore, she Deponed that Catherine Cooper a Servant of the
Majors, told her, that he had layn with Margaret Bourdon his Wives Daughter, so
that she would stay no longer in the House.

Anne Wife to James Simpson, Book-binder in Edinburgh, declared, That on Monday
preceding, and that day in the morning, that he confessed to her he had
committed Incest with his Sister Jane, and Margaret Bourdon his Wives Daughter;
as likewise bestiality with a Mare in the West Country, and that he had
carnally conversed with his Maidservant Bessy Weems for two and twenty years.

Mr. Archibald Nisbett, Writer to the Signet, declared, That in the year 51 or
52. it was reported in the Country, that the Panel had committed Bestiality
with a Mare near New Mills, and that he heard it reported the same day, in
which it was said he did the Fact. Mr. John Alexander of Leith deponed the
same, and said he was then but half a mile from the place. After these
depositions, the Major being examined about his act of Bestiality; declared,
That a Gentleman having given him a Mare, he rode upon her into the West
Country to see some Friends, and dealt carnally with her near New Mills, and
that a Woman saw him in the Act, and complained of him to Mr. John Nave the
Minister of New Mills; at whose instance he was brought back to the place by
some Soldiers, but was there dismissed for want of further probation. And
further being asked about the time, he answered, That to the best of his
remembrance it was when the Lords, Gentlemen, and Heritors were taken by the
English at Elliot.

As for probation against Jane Weir, the Lord Advocate insisted on her own
Declaration, and all the Depositions, in which as a party she was involved. And
being asked if she knew any thing concerning the Correspondence that was said
to be betwixt the Devil, and her Brother; she declared, that she had a long
time been jealous of it, but was not certain; and that six or seven years
before she had found a mark upon his shoulder, like that which is called the
Devils mark, at which she was sore afraid.

The Process being thus ended, the Jury did unanimously find the Major guilty
of Incest with his Sister, and Bestiality with a Mare, and a Cow, and found him
guilty of Adultery, and Fornication by a plurality of Votes. They also
unanimously brought in Jane guilty of Incest with her Brother; whereupon the
Deputed Judges Sentenced him to be strangled at a Stake betwixt Edinburgh and
Leith, on Monday following, the 11th of April, and (...) Body to be burnt to
Ashes; and condemned her to be hanged on the Tuesday following in the
Grass-market of Edinburgh.

Thus far have I given you a juridical Account of the detestable crimes of this
Hypocritical Monstrous Man; I now proceed to acquaint you with other
particulars, no less surprising than the former; which upon strict enquiry I
have reason to believe to be as true, as those that are judicially proved.

When they were seized, she desired the Guards to keep him from laying hold on
a certain Staff, which, she said, if he chanced to get into his hand, he would
certainly drive them all out of doors, notwithstanding all the resistance they
could make. This Magical Staff was all of one piece, with a crooked head of
Thorn-wood, she said he received it of the Devil, and did many wonderful things
with it; particularly that he used to lean upon it in his Hypocritical prayers,
and after they were committed, she still desired it might be kept from him;
because if he were once Master of it again, he would certainly grow obdurate,
and retract the Confessions which he had so publicly made. Apollonius Thyaneus
had such a Magical Staff as this, which I believe was a Sacramental Symbol
which the Devil gave to the Major, and the Court had some such apprehensions of
it, for it was ordered by the Judges to be burnt with his Body.

She also confessed in Prison, that she and her Brother had made a compact with
the Devil; and that on the 7th of September. 1648. they were both Transported
from Edinburgh to Musselborough, and back again, in a Coach and six Horses,
which seemed all of fire, and that the Devil then told the Major of the defeat
of our Army at Preston in England; which he confidently reported in most of its
circumstances several days before the news had arrived here. This Prediction
did much increase the high opinion the People began to have of him, and served
him to make them believe, that like Moses, he had been with God in the Mount,
and had a Spirit of Prophecy, as well as of Prayer. But as for her self, she
said, she never received any other benefit by her Commerce with the Devil, than
a constant supply of an extraordinary quantity of yarn, which she was sure (she
said) to find ready for her upon the Spindle, what ever business she had been
about.

Besides the Bestialities which the Major judicially acknowledged he had
committed with the Mare, and Cow, he confessed he had done the same
Abominations with three Species more; and the Woman that delated him for the
Fact near New Mills, was by order of the Magistrates of Lanerk whipped through
the Town by the hand of the Common Hangman, as a slanderer of such an eminent
Holy man.

The Fornications, and Adulteries which this (...) (as Buggerers are called by
the Council of Ancyra) Committed with the most Sanctimonious, Can. 16.
and Zealous Women of the Sect, are too numerous to be related here. He had got
himself the Privilege, under a pretense of Praying and Exhortation, to go to
their Houses, and into their Bed-chambers when he pleased; and it was his
practice to visit married Women at such times especially as their Husbands were
from home: One especially, who lived in the Street called the West-bow in
Edinburgh, he had several times solicited in her Husbands absence to gratify
his unclean desires; till at last wearied out with his importunity, she told
him how much she abhorred his design, and charged him never to come more to her
House. Upon this he forbore to visit her for some time, till one night, when
she was undressed and ready to step into Bed, the Major suddenly appears
standing by her, at which she was so extreemly frighted, that she fell into a
swoun; she had no sooner recovered, but the Major endeavored to comfort, and
assure her, and confirm her against that strange surprise; and renewing his
addresses, he Tempted her with many Arguments, and filthy Speeches, and
Gesticulations, telling her he had taken that marvelous way of appearing in
private with her, on purpose to secure her Reputation; that he would go out of
her House in a manner as invisible as he came in. But she by this time having
recovered her usual courage and strength, pushed him off with violence, and
cried out for help to her Maid, upon which he immediately disappeared. The
Windows, and Doors were all close shut; and I make little doubt, but his
Coachman to the fiery Coach conveyed him in and out through the Chimney, or
perhaps by the Door, which the cursed Familiar might open and shut again, as
well as the Angel of the Lord did unlock, and lock the Prison Door, wherein the
Apostles were put.

As for the miserable Woman, she was never well after this Magical manner of
Address, which the lustful Satyr made unto her; but immediately fell into a
deep Melancholy, which ended in a languishing Sickness, whereof not many weeks
after she died; and when she was upon her death Bed, she declared this strange
Story to many persons yet alive, of great Integrity, Wisdom, and Fame.

I have already told you what an active Rebel this Multiform Sinner was; but I
forgot to tell you, that he was an eminent Promoter of the Western
Remonstrance, in the year. 1650. To these principles he stuck as close, as to
the Devil himself; insomuch, that when the Government of our Church was
restored, he avowedly renounced the Communion of it, and endeavored to widen
the Schism to the utmost of his power. He could not so much as endure to look
upon an Orthodox Minister, but when he met any of them in the Streets, he would
pull his Hat over his eyes in a Pharisaical kind of indignation, and contempt.

While he was in Prison, he acknowledged his Hypocrisy, by which he had
deluded men, and mocked God; declaring, that in all his life he had never
prayed to God in private, nor had any power to speak when he attempted to do
it; although he had such an extraordinary and charming utterance in his solemn
Conventicle-prayers. He also confessed, that he never bowed his knee to God at
his own, or other men's Prayers; which exactly agrees with his Sisters Relation,
of his leaning at his Prayers on his Magical Staff, and none of his own party
can remember that at any Devotion, even when he seemed most Rapturous, they
ever saw him kneel. Nay, furthermore, he confessed, which I cannot mention
without horror, that his fluency in Prayer, by which he ravished the People,
proceeded from the assistance of the Devil; who, he said, helped him to the
words and phrases in which he expressed himself. This has given several men
several ways of Conjecture how it could be done. Some who knew him better than
I ever had the unhappiness to do, are of opinion that he was the Praying-Oracle
of the Devil, out of whom he personally spoke. The reason which they allege
for their conjecture is, that sometimes the sound of his Voice, like the sight
of Spirits, had something unnatural in it, as if it had not been formed by the
Organs of Speech.

Others think it reasonable to believe, That he saw all the words, and
expressions in his Prayer successively written by the Devil in the air. But
upon enquiry, I find that he, like most of the Extemporarians, commonly Prayed
with his eyes, shut; which if it be true, this Hypothesis will never be able to
solve those Diabolical Phenomenon in the Air.

Some again think, that the words and expressions of his Prayer were
represented by the Devil upon the Stage of his Fancy, after the same manner, as
when a man dreams he reads such a Letter, or Book. But he never was affected
with any Consternations, Tremblings, or Abreptions of mind, which both in true,
and false Prophets were the constant effects of such strong and violent
impressions, as were required to exhibit such unwonted representations upon the
Imagination: nor after his long Prayers were ended were his natural strength or
Spirits exhausted, as, if his Devotion had been Visionary, they must have been.

Others therefore considering him as an Apostate from God, and as a Vassal and
Apostle of the Devil, think it very agreeable to Divinity to assert, that he
was immediately, but yet without much violence, inspired by the Devil, and
helped by him both in the Conception and utterance of his Prayers. This they
conceive the Evil Spirit might do, like an assistant form, by impregnating his
Fancy with Enthusiastical conceptions, and thereby rendering his Imagination
very turgent, and ready to swell above its banks; which being done by the
immediate Operation of the Evil Spirit, the wretched (...) could not fail to
burst forth in flumine Orationis, or a full Torrent of Prayer; and likewise be
affected with such moderate Raptures, as yet left him in a condition to
understand what he said. Furthermore, to prevent all possible objections, they
say, That if God suffered the Devil to counterfeit Prophetical Visions, or the
true Spirit of Prophecy under the Law, then they know no reason why it should
be thought inconsistent with his goodness, or disagreable to his infinite
wisdom, to permit him under the Gospel, to counterfeit Inspiration, or the true
Spirit of Prayer. But for my own part, had not the Monster himself ascribed his
fluency in Devotion to the assistance of the Devil, I should have wholly
ascribed it to the vigor of his own Enthusiastical Imagination, without any
Foreign Force. For not only his fluency in Prayer, but the moderate Raptures,
and little extatic fits, into which he was Transported, are explicable by the
natural power of unassisted Imagination, as I could make it out by many
examples; and where a natural cause alone is sufficient to account for any
effect, I am always sparing to join with it a supernatural Cause.

All the while he was in Prison, he lay under violent apprehension of the heavy
Wrath of God, which put him into that which is properly called Despair; a
Despair which made him hate God, and desist from Duty to him, and with which
the Damned Souls in Hell are reasonably supposed to be constantly affected. In
this sense he was desperate, and therefore would admit neither Church, nor
Conventicle-ministers to pray for him, or discourse with him about the infinite
mercy of God, and the possibility of the forgiveness of his Sins. Much less
could he endure to be exhorted to repent, or be brought to entertain any
thoughts of Repentance, telling all the World, that he had sinned himself
beyond all possibility of Repentance, and Pardon; that he was already damned,
that he was sure his Condemnation to Eternal burnings was already pronounced in
Heaven, and that the united Prayers of all the Saints in Heaven, and Earth
would be vain, and insignificant, if they were offered to God in his behalf. So
that when some charitable Ministers of the City, by name the present Bishop of
Galloway, and present Dean of Edinburgh, were resolved to Pray before him for
his Repentance, and Pardon, against his consent, he was with much difficulty
withheld from interrupting of them in their devotions, and the posture he put
himself in when they began to pray, was to lie upon his Bed in a most stupid
manner, with his Mouth wide open; and when Prayers were ended, being asked if
he had heard them and attended to them, he told them, They were very
troublesome, and cruel to him, and that he neither heard their devotion, nor
cared for it, nor could be the better for all the Prayers that Men or Angels
could offer up to Heaven upon his account.

It was his Interest to believe there was no God; and therefore to ease the
torments of his mind, he attempted now and then to comfort, and flatter up
himself into this absurd belief. For he was sometimes observed to speak very
doubtfully about his existence; in particular to say, that if it were not for
the terrors which he found tormenting him within, he should scarce believe
there was a God.

Being with great tenderness and compassion besought by one of the
City-Ministers, that he would not so resolvedly destroy himself, by despairing
of God's Mercy, which upon Repentance had been granted to Murderers,
Adulterers, Sodomists, Bestialists, nay, to those that had denied Christ; he
replied in anger, Trouble me no more with your beseeching of me to Repent, for
I know my sentence of damnation is already sealed in Heaven; and I feel my self
so hardened within, that if I might obtain Pardon of God, and all the Glories of
Heaven for a single wish that I had not committed the sins, with the sense
whereof I am so tormented, yet I could not prevail with my self to make that
single wish. And were your Soul in my Soul's stead, you would find your
exhortations impertinent, and troublesome, for I find nothing within me but
blackness and darkness, Brimstone, and burning to the bottom of Hell. I have
been told by very credible Persons, that the Body of this unclean Beast gave
manifest tokens of its impurity, as soon as it began to be heated by the
Flames; and certain it is, that after it was burnt, a report was presently sent
from hence to the Brethren in the West, that the Malefactor, who was burnt for
such execrable crimes, was not Major Weir, but another Person who exactly
resembled him, and whom the wicked Prelates and Curates had bribed to personate
the Godly Major, (who was said to be gone with a contribution to the exiled
Brethren in Holland) and call himself by his name. This report was believed in
the West, for several Months, till time discovered that the Major was no more.

As for Jane, this incarnate Devils Sister, she was very insensible of her
great sins, and was so far from remorse of conscience for them, and despairing
of the mercy of God, as she did, that she presumed too much upon it; placing a
great deal of confidence in her constant adherence to the Covenant, which she
called in her Brother Mitchel's style, the Cause and Interest of Christ. She
confessed indeed, as he did, that her sins deserved a worse death than she was
condemned to dye; but she never showed her self in the least concerned for what
might ensue after death. When she was upon the Ladder she bespoke the people in
the following words, I see a great crowd of People come hither to day to behold
a poor old miserable Creatures Death, but I trow there be few among you, who
are weeping and mourning for the broken Covenant; and having so spoken, she
threw her self in greater have off the Ladder, than a Person should have done,
who was no better prepared for another World.

I could tell you many more remarkable stories of our Fanatic Zealots, that
have been put to death for lying with Beasts, and other unnatural crimes. One
not many years since was put to death at Sterling, for committing uncleanness
with five Individual, among which there were four species of irrational
Animals; and immediately before his Execution, the unclean Wretch protested
against the Prelates, and boasted of his constant zeal for the Covenant; and so
without declaring any detestations of his crimes, or desiring the people to
pray for him, went off with all assurance into the other World. I should not
have related any of these stories, with reflection on the Schismatical party,
but that nine parts in ten of the horrid sins, such as Witchcraft, Bestiality,
and Incest, are found among them; which has occasioned a Proverbial Sarcasm in
our Language against them, that the Whigs ga to Heaven a Gate of their own.
This is no Hyperbole, but a plain Historical Truth, which our Judges can
testify, and which may be confirmed by the Registers of our criminal Courts.

And then as for Adulteries, and Fornications, those common failings of these
Pharisees; there are more of them committed, and more Bastards born within
their Country, the Western Holy Land than in all our Nation besides. This is
evident, from comparing the Parish-Registers, and the Registers of the
Presbyterys or Rural Deaneries of those Shires, with the rest of the Parish,
and Presbytery Registers in every Diocese of the Church. Not very long since in
a Parish within the Presbytery of Paseley, there were no fewer than 17. Whigs,
who did public Penance for Fornications and Adulteries, at one time. The
Parish is very disaffected; so that on that Lord's Day, wherein this Herd of
Goats did stand in the Seat of Public Repentance; there were but two Regular
Persons, besides the Minister and Precentor in the Church. I know you are
already wondering, that Fanatical Sinners will do Penance in the Kirk, which is
as serious, and solemn a piece of Worship, as any belongs to the Service of God.

Therefore to unriddle the Paradox unto you, be pleased to take notice, That if
any Fornicator, Adulterer, etc. contumaciously refuse to submit to
Church-Censure, his Majesty's Advocat is to pursue him before the Supreme
Judicature, or Lords of the Session; who upon Evidence of his Contumacy, issue
out Order for having him declared the King's Rebel; that is to be solemnly
denounced an Outlaw, with the sound of an Horn. After the Horning, (for so we
call the Denunciation) Letters of Caption, are direct against him; so that if
he be taken, he must be put in Prison; and although he be not, he forfeits his
Personal, and the Annual Revenues of his real Estate, and becomes altogether
(...), as Theophilus the Greek Civilian calls Slaves, and Minors, and all that
are Civilly dead. Hence an Outlaw is almost in the same Condition with us, as
Deportatus in Insulam, was among the Romans; he is incapable of all Civil
Employments; he has no Head in Law: He can make no Will, or Testament of his
own; nor receive any Benefit by any other Man's. So that our Whigs, (like
yours, who will be Married by the Common Prayer) choose rather to mock God, and
offend their tender Consciences sometimes, than forfeit their Liberty, and
Estates.

I am very well satisfied in my own Conscience that I have done nothing against
the strictest Rules of Christian Charity, in discovering the impious
Principles, and Practices of this Sect: I have done it upon the same grounds
and motives, that the Ancient Fathers published the Wicked Lives and Opinions,
of the more primitive Heretics; particularly of the Gnostics, who were the
Archetype of our Whigs: And the Parallel in most Particulars runs so exact
between them, that I cannot abstain from comparing them together.

First then as the Gnostics were so called from (...), or Knowledge; falsely so
called, and boasted, that they were the most Knowing; although they really were
the most Ignorant of the Christian Religion of any Sect in the World: So our
Whigs style themselves the Knowing Christians; and look upon us, who adhere to
the Church, but as ignorant, silly, formal People, that understand not Gospel
Mysteries, but are spoiled after the Tradition of Men, after the Rudiments of
the World, and not after Christ. Secondly, As the Gnostics pretended to
understand the Scriptures better than all other Christians; and yet did most
absurdly and blasphemously interpret them, as Epiphan. has showed in many
particulars: So our Whigs pretend to this gui^t, as their own peculiar Talent;
and yet interpret the Word of God as absurdly, to make it comply with their
wicked Opinions; as the Gnostics did to make it countenance theirs. Mr.
Mitchel's Papers are full proof of this Charge, besides the Books I mentioned
before. Thirdly, As the Gnostics spoke (...), or mighty high things of Simon
Magus, equalling him with God. So our Whigs speak big-swelling words, of
Baal-berith, or the Solemn League and Covenant; to which they ridiculously
apply, whatsoever is said of the Covenant of Grace, which God made with
Abraham; and of that Political Covenant which he made with the Jews; and of the
counterpart of it; which the Jews, or any of their Kings made, and renewed with
God; baptizing their Children into it, as into the Covenant of the Gospel, and
making it the cause, and Interest and Truth of Christ.

In the fourth place, As the Gnostics pretended to be Christians; and yet in
many things complied with the wicked Jews, and joined with them in raising
Persecution against the Church: so our Whigs pretend to be the purest
Protestants in the World; and yet in many things are real Papists, and now join
most cordially with them to overthrow both our and your Church; which the
Papists, acknowledge to be the strongest Bulwarks against themselves, that are
in the Protestant World.

In the fifth place, as the Gnostics contumeliously used the Apostles and
Presbyters of the Primitive Church, hating them with the Malice of Cain, and
gainsaying them among the People after the impudent manner of Corah, and
opposing them, as Jannes and Jambres, did Moses and Aaron: so our Whigs treat
our reverend Clergy, with all imaginable contempt and barbarity; hating our
Bishops with a mortal hatred, calling their Government an Usurpation over God's
Heritage; and rail at his Majesty, and all other Magistrates that support them;
binding and re-binding themselves by a solemn Oath, to extirpate the
Apostolical Function, though in doing of it they should shed an Ocean of
Protestant Blood.

To proceed, as the Gnostics were raging Waves of the Sea, i.e. a fierce,
tumultuous, and troublesome people; so are the Whigs; As they despised
Dominions and spoke evil of Dignities, so do the Whigs; as they were
murmurerers and complainers, so are the Whigs, who by their Principles can
never be satisfied with any concessions, nor obliged by any favors; but must
murmur and complain against Moses, and Aaron as long as there is a King, and
Bishops in the Land.

Furthermore, as the Gnostics scorned and despised the Orthodox Christians,
and separated from them, calling them Carnal, but themselves Spiritual men; and
yet were Sensualists, defilers of the Flesh, and like the Sodomites and
Gomorrheans, given to unnatural Lusts: So our modern Pharisees scorn us,
calling us Carnal, or at the best, but moral men, and while they pretend to be
Holier than the People that adhere to the Church, they fall into all sorts of
impurities to the great scandal of the Protestant name. I could run the
parallel in more particulars, but I remember I am writing a Letter, wherein a
man is not bound to exhaust his Subject but rather to hint, than to write. And
I need not suggest unto you, that I am not so uncharitable, as to conclude
every individual among our Whigs in this comparative Character, for doubtless,
there are many well meaning people among them, but you must understand me so,
as our Savior is to be understood, where he describes the general Hypocrisy
of the Pharisees, among whom notwithstanding were many sincere, and Pious men.

In this sense, it was that St. Paul charged the whole Nation of the Cretians,
with the Character of one of their Old Poets, That they were Liars, evils
Beasts, and slow Bellies; and for my own part, I believe that among the
Gnostics themselves, there were a considerable number that lived free from
those portentous Sins, with which St. Jude, and Epiphanius charges the Sect.

I Am now drawing near the end of this tedious Historical Letter, in which I
hope I have made you ample amends for my six months silence, for which you
chid me again in your second Letter, which I received by this days Post. You
also tell me in it what Tragical Stories are reported at London, concerning the
present unhappiness of this Kingdom, and the Tyrannical Administration of
Affairs therein. In particular you say, it is reported by some of our own
Countrymen, that the Nation is enslaved, that there is nothing among us but
Plunderings, Burnings, Murders, Ravishing of Women, and all other sorts of
devastation, which has made considerable persons fly the Country, particularly
D. H. who, I assure you came to Town from his own House but three or four days
ago. You also tell me, there are reports of a secret correspondence, betwixt
the Duke of Lauderdale, and the Viscount of Granard on the Maritime borders,
whose real design, they say it is, to advance the Presbyterian interest, all
that has already been done under his Graces conduct against them, being
nothing but for show, and pretext. I need but desire you to recollect, what I
have already written concerning the occasion of our present Disorders, and the
Faction, that supports the Schism to make you Divine from what Original these
lying Stories proceed, and for what end they disperse them about the World.

I imagine by this time you are very weary, but though you be, you must put
your self to the Penance, I always enjoin you to read my Letters once for the
Authors sake, as well as for your own. You know I came to England the last time
upon no other account, but to learn the Language, and promised to keep
correspondence with you upon this condition, that you would make remarks upon
my Letters, and faithfully Admonish me of all the Scoticisms, or all the Words,
and Phrases that are not current English therein. I confess I have a great
Veneration for our own and the Northern English Language, upon the account of
the Preface to Mr. Liles Saxon Monuments.
Anglo-Saxon, to which they are so nearly allied; but yet I think it prudence
to observe that rule in Macrobius Loquere cum praesentibus verbis praeteritis
moribus vive. And therefore am as ambitious to write modern English, as any
Gascon, or Provencal can be to write the modern French.

You may communicate this Letter to as many of your Friends as you please; but
you must take care to conceal my name, least if it be known, I pass for an
Enemy to the People of God; and thereupon another Mitchel send me out of the
World for a Canaanite or Egyptian with a brace of Bullets, or a Durke. The
Narratives, I humbly conceive, are very profitable to be known: one of them
affords an excellent example of counterfeit zeal, and the other of Hypocrisy,
or Pharisaism; which from the beginning of things has always been the most
powerful Engine, which the Corahs of all Ages, and Nations have used to draw
the multitude into Faction, and Schism. Besides, the knowledge of these things
will move all good Christians to pity the miserable condition of our Church,
and to pray for her both to God, and the King, and likewise undeceive all
ingenuous Spirits, that have had the unhappiness to be misguided by the false
Informations which our Fanatics send to yours. There is a more strict, and
Mysterious correspondence betwixt them, than the present pains, in which I
write, will permit me to relate. But by that time I come next to London, I
shall be able to discover the Cabala unto you, which I shall better talk in
half an hour, than write in many days. In the mean time let us love, honor,
and remember one another with pleasure and respect: let us pray for the
improvement of our Church, the preservation of yours, and serve them both in
our several stations to the utmost of our power.

I have no more to add, but to desire you to remember that my Style is
Advocate, and not Counselor at Law; there is almost none here knows what that
Title means; So that the Postmaster kept your last Letter a week, before he
could imagine it was directed to

Edinburgh, March the 5th 1677. Your most Faithful, and Obedient Servant.

FINIS.

