THE Righteous Judge. A SERMON PREACHED At Hertford-Assize, March 10. 1682.

By Edward Hickes, D.D.

PSALM. 145.17. The Lord is Righteous in all his Ways, and Holy in all his
Works.

LONDON, Printed for Benj. Took, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCLXXXII.

To the Right Worshipful Sir NICHOLAS MILLER, Knight. High Sheriff of the
County of Hertford. Justice of the Peace, and one of his Majesty's Deputy
Lieutenants for the said County.
Honored SIR,
I Never pretended to be good at any thing; of this I am sure, I am now bad at
Limning; my old Pencil, and decayed Colors will not do; and besides, I have no
daring hand, so that should I offer at a Picture I should wrong the Person.
Really Sir, It is the sense of my own Weakness that frights me from attempting
to celebrate your Worth: and the Truth is, it is in vain to light a Candle
before the Sun; it is lost Labor to praise him whom all admire; it is ill
spent pains to gild a Diamond, or paint a Ruby red.

This I can truly say, That since I had the Happiness to know you, I have had
an Ambition to serve you, and 'twas that which made me not dispute, but readily
obey your Commands, when I understood you designed me for the Pulpit the last
Assize. What I then preached, I am (by unanswerable Importunity) even forced
(much against my own Genius) to print.

Censures I expect to meet with, (why should I think to fare better than my
Betters?) but I shall not much regard them; for my Comfort is, that no one can
have meaner Thoughts of me than I have of my self, and being already on the
Ground I can fall no lower than the Grave; which, by reason of my many
Indispositions, I daily expect. That your worthy self, your truly virtuous
Lady, and the two young Gentlemen, your hopeful Sons, may have all the
Happiness that Heaven can give both here and hereafter, is the hearty Prayer of

Buckland, March 29. 1682. (Honored Sir) Your most obliged Servant, E. Hickes.

THE Righteous Judge.
GENESIS 18. v. 25. pars ult. Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do Right?


IN this Chapter the Sacred History sets before us an amicable Congress and
Conference between the Lord and Abraham: the great God, dissimulata majestate,
veiling his Majesty under a humane Shape, with two attendant Angels in the like
form, gives him a friendly visit, re-assures to him that high Mercy
beforementioned, a Son, a Son by Sarah, a Son of Promise and of Blessing, in
whose Offspring all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed; And withal,
being upon an Expedition of Judgment, the overthrow of Sodom, he acquaints him
with his Purpose and Process therein. In this Discovery the Lord

1. Consults for his own Glory; he reveals his Design to his Servant, who would
diligently and duly observe and improve it, would be a faithful Register and
Relator of it: The Lord does his wonderful Works that they may be remembered,
Psalm. 3.4. The World is much mistaking or oblivious of God's Judgments; those
dreadful of late among us, yea still incumbent, are but Wonders for a few days:
We are apt to forget the Smart so soon as the Rod is from our Backs.

2. God has here a Trial and Task for Abraham's Graces, his Charity, his
Compassion, his Faith, O quanta justi fiducia, imo O quanta animi compassio!

1. His deep Compassion stirs up in him the Spirit of Supplication; when he
hears of destroying he falls a deprecating; Though Sodom were exceeding wicked,
yet he cannot behold the Ruin of it without Remorse. When God casts abroad the
Thunder of his Vengeance, how can we but tremble at it though it touch not us?
It is a sign of a savage Spirit to look upon Executions with Delight, though of
Malefactors or Enemies. And if it be an Office beseeming a Saint, and grateful
to God, to intercede for a Sodom, who would not lay out all his Intersses in
Heaven, and draw out his Soul to the utmost for a Sion? Abraham's principal
drift and care was for the righteous supposed to be in Sodom, for them he
buckles and bestirs himself, that they might not be involved in that direful
Calamity; and for their sakes he begs, if not a total Exemption, yet a
protraction or mitigation of the Judgment to the whole.

2. Consider how nobly his Faith works and acts it self in his wrestling with
God: He closes with him, and comes in upon him with reiterated Instances,
humble Importunity, that will brook no denial. When he has got something of
God, he does (as I may so say) incroach upon his Concessions, and must have
more: He brings down God from fifty to ten, and that gradatim in six several
steps of descent. It Is impossible for us to outbid Gods Bounty by our cravings,
when they are right and ordinate: his Condescensions will be as large as our
Ascensions, when they are most elevated; the more we ask, the more he grants
still, yea he does and gives exceedingly abundantly above all that we can ask
or think.

Why Abraham went not beneath the number of Ten cannot be determined;
Conjectures of Jewish Authors are light, because (say they) there were Eight in
the Ark, which saved not the old World from drowning; and with them Ten is the
least number to make up a Congregation, under which there could be no
Church-Assembly amongst them.

It Is certain, though God does not stint himself to a proportion, for such a
number of just ones to spare such a multitude of wicked ones; yet (as we may
conclude from Abraham's Petitions and Gods Concessions) for the righteous sake,
though but a few, temporal Indulgence is afforded to the vast heaps of the
wicked. This is well observed by S. Ambrose, Vides quantus murus sit patriae
vir justus, etc. You see what a Wall a righteous, a good man is to his Country,
etc.

But to proceed, the main Medium or Argument of persuasion used and urged by
Abraham to prevail with God, to spare those Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah, is
drawn ab aequo, from just and right. God delights to be minded of his
Attributes, his Glory; to be put in mind of his Mercy, his Faithfulness, his
Justice, as here.

The force of the Argument is knit up close together in the few words of my
Text. From the Hypothesis, the particular instance or case of Justice, Not to
slay the righteous with the wicked, to make the righteous as the wicked, the
Holy Man ascends to the Thesis, the general Assertion of Gods Justice; Thou art
Judge of all, thou must do justly: Shall not the Judge of all the earth do
rigbt?

In the words you may be pleased to abserve, I. The Matter. II. The Manner of
their Expression.


First, In the Matter or Substance are observable, 1. A Title of Office given
to God, Judge. 2. The Extent of his Jurisdiction, All the earth. 3. The Justice
of his Administration, Do right.


1. Here Is a Judge, and among men, Judex est jus dicens, a Judge is a person
sentencing or pronouncing Law; our Judge is jus constituens, (...), the
Lawgiver, the Lawmakers, as well as the Law-dispenser.

2. Here Is an universal Judge, Judge of all the earth. Earth does not so much
denote the round heap on which we tread, as the Inhabitants that live and walk
on it, Men; neither may we take the term of Universality as exclusive, All the
earth, and no more; Heaven and Hell are under the same Dition. God is Judge of
Men and Devils, quick and dead, good and bad; all must pass his Judgment of
Discussion, and receive a Sentence either of Absolution or Condemnation.

3. Therefore here is a just Judge; shall not such a Judge do right? Particular
or subordinate Judges are accountable to their Superiors; this Judge only
does all, and what he will, and ows Account to none. In inferior Judges
Justice is, Virtus executiva and ministrans, it serves and executes the Laws;
in the supreme it is Architectonica, imperans and praecipiens quod justum est;
it founds, and forms, and prescribes what is just. If by the Philosophers
description a Man-judge must be (...), Jus Animatum, Souled or Living Justice;
much more must God the Judge be infinite, everliving, everlasting justice, yea
norma justitiae, the absolute rule, the total sum, the entire essence of
justice. And being such a Judge, shall he not exercise or do right?

And what is that? To adjudicate and distribute aequalia aequalibus, in an
equality of proportion to give to all what belongs to them, to manage and
dispose all persons, things, and passages, according to the righteousness which
is in himself and his own will.

Secondly, the Phraseology, or manner of Enuntiation of the words, is not to be
omitted; it is Expostulatory by way of Interrogation, it is Interrogatio
Affirmantis. The Question carries in it the weight of a vehement Affirmation,
Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? Yes he shall, he must, he will,
he cannot but do right. See here;

It is an infallible grand Truth, That God the universal infinite Judge, is
most righteous in all his doings and dispensations.

If the Earth should be silent or perverse in hiding or blemishing this Truth,
the Heavens will speak it out; they will declare Gods righteousness, and say,
God is Judge himself, judex ipse, or as some render it, judex sum, the judge,
or the judge in chief, Psalm. 50.6. The best of men have been large and loud in
celebrating of Divine Righteousness: Moses with some of his last breath, which
savours most strongly of Heaven, sings it out sweetly, Deu 32.4. He is the rock
(strong and immutable) his work is perfect (whatever he does, he does it purely
and fully, without default or defect) all his ways are judgment; a God of
truth, and without iniquity, just and right is he. And with him tunes the
Sweet-Singer of Israel in several places of his sacred Hymns; take one instead
of many, Psalm. 145.17. The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all
his works. Ways are his dispositions, Works his doings. In all of these from
the first to the last, from the greatest to the least, righteousness and
holiness perspicuously shine forth and bear sway. But what need I heap up
Scriptures, as if it were difficult to persuade your consent to this truth:
Surely they who do not now believe it, will one day fee to their smart and
confusion, that God is just.

Yet give me leave to lay down two grounds of proof to render this more evident
to you, and to set it home upon your Spirits.

First, in our Judge there are all the Properties that may speak him righteous.
There are three principal requisites in a just Judge; Zelus rectitudinis,
Potestas, and Prudentia; Zeal of right, Power, and Prudence. These are truly
and eminently in God.

1. In God is a Zeal, a strong Propension and Affection to right and justice.
The righteous God loves righteousness, Psalm. 11.7. It suits his nature,
pleases his heart, corresponds to his will, advances his glory. All the world
therefore cannot biass or bend him besides the straight line of righteousness.

Fabritius among the Romans was famous for justice. Pyrrhus would fain have won
him to his Party; to that end one day he offered him heaps of Treasure, on the
next he brought him into a room where a huge Elephant was hid behind the
Hangings. On a sudden the Curtain was drawn, the Elephant appeared, and smote
the man on the head with his Trunk. With an unchanged Countenance he told
Pyrrhus, Yesterday thy Gold did not move me, nor to day thy Beast. Oh for such
men nowadays! It Is much to find this in a man; but neither Flatteries nor
Frowns, nor any respects whatsoever, can move the Lord from the love and
practice of Justice.

2. In God there is Authoritative Power; who dares deny or question his
Sovereignty? All power is primitively in him, and derivatively from him. Kings,
though they be men's Sovereigns, yet are they Gods Subjects. He is God of Gods,
and Lord of Lords; a great God, a mighty, a terrible, and therefore regards
not persons, nor takes rewards; but executes judgment exactly, Deuteronomy. 10.18.
Arise, O God, judge the earth (says David, Psalm. 82.7.) for thou inheritest
all nations. Whoever has the Nations, God owns them, they are his propriety.
Usurpation seldom or never goes without maladministration; but Right and
Mght-meeting in God to the full, dispose him to absolute and exact Justice.

3. In God is all-seeing unerring Wisdom; he clearly and certainly discerns all
persons and cases: not a Creature can creep out of his sight. All things are
naked and open to the eyes of him with whom we have to do, Heb 4.13. not only
uncloathed, but unskinned; (...), the word is borrowed (say some) from
Wrestlers, who take their Adversaries by the Neck, cast them on their Back, and
so their Faces are upward, and their Dimensions discernible. Others think the
term to be taken from Anatomists, who strip off the Skin, open the Bulk, look
into the Bowels, into the Intrals, etc. So narrowly and thoroughly does our God
search us. He is a most prudent, piercing, quick-sighted Judge; His eyes
behold, his eyelids try the children of men, Psalm. 11 4. He has Eyes beholding
ten thousand times clearer than the Sun, from eternity, and every moment having
before him all Generals at once, Eyelids contracted and diving into the closest
and narrowest particulars.

Power without Prudence is brutish Force, prone to be injurious; but our God
is great in counsel, as well as mighty in works, Jer. 32.19. and therefore
completely apted to be a righteous Judge.

Secondly, the high things that God has to discern, dispose, and do,
necessarily require a perfect righteousness to manage them. God's doings or
dispensations toward the Creature are threefold, viz. Providential, Gracious,
and Judiciary.

1. The charge of all things for their being, continuance, and disposition,
lies wholly on the head and hands of Divine Providence. And what but absolute
infinite Justice can sway and order such a charge! Men that rule over men must
be just, otherwise Confusion and Ruin will break in like a Deluge. Justice is
the stability of Thrones, the basis of Commonwealths, the cement of Societies,
the heart and life of public and personal good. And if God were not most just
that rules over all, the Earth could not stand, nor the Heavens move, nor the
Sun shine, nor the Universe subsist a moment. For ever (O Lord) thy word is
settled in Heaven; thy commanding, ruling Word; thy faithfulness is to all
generations. Here Is Uprightness commensurate to the Rule, as large and lasting
as that. And for an experimental proof of this, the very Earth gives it,
abiding in thy Establishment, and all thine Ordinances; thy Laws of Providence
continue to this day, for all are thy Servants, Psalm. 119.89. The vast household
of the Creatures regulated in such an admirable decorum, show that they have a
righteous Master.

2. In all gracious dealings God is and must be most righteous. He will not
lose nor abate an atom of justice in the multitude of his mercies. The Lord who
is merciful, gracious, long-suffering, abundant in goodness and truth, will by
no means clear the guilty, washes out every spot of our guilt in the blood of
his Son; in him receives full satisfaction, to the strictest demands of his
justice on our behalf. It Is the main stay of our Faith and Comfort, that God
sets forth and accepts Christ a Propitiation, and so declares his
righteousness, as well as his grace, in the remission of fins, is just in
justifying Believers, Romans 3.25, 26. is faithful and just in forgiving, 1 John
19.

3. Gods judgments past, present, and to come, particular and universal,
require and show him righteous. He is known to be so by the judgments he
executes, Psalm. 9.16. If he were not righteous in taking vengeance, how could
he judge the world? Romans 3.5, 6. If we will but open our eyes, we may see the
vengeance visibly just and dreadful, and say, Verily he is a God that judges
in the earth. O the stupendous equity of Gods retaliating justice! how does it
pay Sinners in their kind! plaguing Drunkenness with rage, Adultery with
rottenness of bone, staining the glory of Pride, and pouring contempt upon the
Honorable of the Earth! But if we could look further to that great day,
wherein he has appointed to judge the World in righteousness, by him whom he
has ordained; could we seriously set before our view that great white Throne,
and him that sits upon it, from whose face the Earth and the Heaven shall flee
away, before whom small and great shall stand, and receive a righteous doom out
of the Books, the faithful Records of Heaven, Rev 20. ult. we may conclude
certainly such a Judge shall do right.

The Truth is clear you see, and it will be very useful if we can im prove it
aright.

1. It may serve to vindicate God; it is a sad Case when poor Mortals must plead
for God. Bad men are apt to conceit that God is incuriosus and quasi negligens
humanorum actuum, Salv. regardless or neglective of humane Affairs, yea scarce
equal in his Ways, when they transcend their Sense, or cross their Humors,
Interesses or Ends: and some of the best have been staggered and perplexed,
when in outward Events they see that befalling good men which they hold proper
to the Wicked, and e contra. It was thus with the Author of the 73 Psalm. per
totum, with Jer. 12.1. Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee,
(says he) he does well to yield! the Victory before hand to God in the Dispute;
yet let me talk with thee of thy Judgments; yet he thinks the matter may come
to a modest Parley: Wherefore does the way of the Wicked prosper? Wherefore are
all they happy that deal very treacherously? And why is the Desert of the
Wicked so often the Lot of the Just?

To stop the Mouth of the one, and to satisfy the Scruples of the other, let
me lay before you these Considerations.

1. God is just in things that we cannot see nor sound. His Righteousness is
like the great Mountains; firm and stable, when his Judgments are a great Deep
not to be measured, Psalm. 36.6. His way is in the Sea, his Path in the great
Waters, his Foot steps are not known, Psalm 77. 19. yet then most pure and
regular. I have heard, that in a Contest between a great Nobleman and a
learned-Judge of this Nation, the Judge urged Law; the Nobleman said, I
thought your Laws had been consonant to Reason; yes (replied the Judge) so they
are, they are made up of the Quintessence of Reason, but that comes not within
the compass of every Cap. Must you see Sense and Reason of your own in gods
Doings, or else dispute the Justice of them, Hear Salvian, Summa sasticed est
Voluntas Dei The Will of God is the top of Justice, and his Wisdom the rule of
it: neither is any thing unjust that God does, -- Quia capere vim divinae
justicae, homo non valet (to use his own Words) because Man cannot comprehend
the scope and force of God in it. Learn we therefore to stoop, and tremble, and
admire what we cannot fathom.

2. God is just in all the Shuffles and seeming Confusions in the world; He
has his way in the Whirlwind and the Storm, Naum 1.3. The stormy Wind fulfills
his Will, Psalm. 148 8. What so turbulent, tumultuous, unruly as the Storm, yet
that varies not an hair, a tittle for the Bounds of divine Command? Things that
seem immethodical and disorderly to us, are most comely in God's Eye and
Disposal. A Tradesman has the richest Market when his Wares are drawn out and
scattered about the Shop, he knows how and when to put them into their places:
so are there largest Acoruements to the glory of Divine Wisdom, Power, and
Justice, in the variety and strangness of events and passages; all which God
holds in his hand, weighs in his balance guides with his eye, and has his
times of restitution, when he will set all right and in their proper places,
Act. 3.21.

3. God is just in men's in justice. Executioners are commonly the basest of the
people, and the Hangman ofttimes deseryes the Halter, as much as he that
suffers under him; yet that does not derogate from the justice of the Law or
Judge. Why boastest thou thy self in mischief, O mighty man? the goodness of
God endures contiuually, Psalm 52.1 Let men be never fo insolent in mischief,
God is constant in goodness he is faithful and just in that wherein they are
false and injurious. The best Antidote against ^oison and Pestilential
Diseases, is made of the flesh of Vipers; and has not God the art (think you)
to extract Honor to his Name, and Healing to the Nation, out of the rankest
venom of wicked men.

4. God is just; and so to be acknowledged in things that are most adverse to
us. We are sinners, and therefore must justify God when he speaks, and clear
him when he judges, though it be against our selves, Psalm. 51.4. I know, O
Lord, that thy judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulness have
afflicted, Psalm. 119.75. Hypocrites will praise Gods justice when it plagues
others; and never blame his severity, whilst it touches not their own skin. We
should be the sharpest Censors of our selves, and then we will assert Gods
faith fullness in our heaviest afflictions. Indeed we are apt to grumble against
God, when we suffer hard things in the world, unworthily and in juriously as we
conceive: But in that the best of men and causes go so much to the worst, in
the world, it is a manifest token of the righteous judgment of God, who sways
all for the present, and will rectific all in due time for the good of his
people, 2. These. 1.5.

5. God is ever just, but the discoveries and executions of his justice he
reserves in his power for his own time. We are too hasty with him, and because
judgment is not speedily executed think it will never come. But will ye
reproach a Workman as if he were a Bungler, whilst he is hewing and squaring
his pieces? Stay till the whole be framed and put together, and then the
Artifice with appear. The China Clay, of which those curious brittle Trifles
are composed, they say is molded in one Age, and made up in another, and will
you not give the Lord leave (with whom a thousand years are but as one day) to
take his own time about his own glorious Works.?

2. this may serve to confound the wicked. Imagine what horror possesses the
shackled Malefactors, conscious to themselves of capital crimes, when they hear
of the Judges coming. It is said Foelix trembled when he heard S. Paul preach
of judgment to come. Tremble ye sinners, behold here your Judge!

And of all sinners these have most reason to tremble.

1. Great over grown, unruly sinners, that outbrave their fellow Mortals, and
are too big to be dealt with by men; here is a Judge can hamper them, at whose
Bar they must hold up the hand stand naked and shivering, as well as the vilest
Wretch that crawls on the earth. They can then have no advantage of a Jury to
secure them, there will beno doublt of the Evidence, no question but the Bill
of Indictment will be be found, and Sentence pass accordingly.

2. Injurious violent sinners, Birds of Prey, ravenous Beasts. Read their doom
Psalm. 5,6. The wicked (and of all wicked ones, them that love violence, the
Lord hates with his Soul See his special Indignation against them; his dealing
with them will discover his Affection to them; Upon them he will rain snares
Rain] There Is the inevitableness of the Judgment; as soon can the Earth shrink
from the descending Showers, as they from deserved Vengeance. Snares] there is
unexpected Surpriz^ Fire and Brimstone] there is the sharpness of the tortured
an horrible Tempest] there is Hellish terror all this the portion of their Cup]
as proper to the as the Meat they eat, the Drink they pour down their Throats.

3 Enormous disorderly Sinners, that heap up sins without number or measure;
that Bankrupt-like when they are once over shoes, run into evil over head and
ears, never casting up an account or payment. Let them know that God keeps
account, though they do not, catalogues every act and circumstance, and will
one day set all in order, in full weight and tale, before their eyes, as they
are now before his own, Psalm. 50.21.

4 Cunning Sinners, that over or color Abominations, as if God could not see
Secrets, search Hearts, sift Persons and Causes to the bottom, distinguish
truth from sshapes, though never so specious; as if they would impose upon
their Judge by false pleas or fair pretenses. As Soon can they hinder the Sun
from shining upon the face of the Earth, by the inter position of their Hand.
No, no; their own deceitfulness will prove their own ruin, and the issue of
their cunning will be, that they will steal craftily into everlasting misery.

5 Secure Sinners, that think God like themselves, regardless whilst silent;
that do cubile sternere, potius quam tribunal erigere; in their conceits rather
make a Bed for God to sleep on, than erect a Seat for Judgment. It Is most
certain, that the damnation of such slumbers not, 2. Pet. 2.3.

In a word; All impenitent Sinners that remain in an unreconciled state,
obnoxious to Gods revenging justice, may be as men Thunder-smitten by this
truth. For,

1. Here Is your Judge, before whose face you must appear to render a full
account of all things done in the flesh, and that in a cloar, solemn, glorious
way. ^ou shall not be beheaded in prison, drowned in a Well, smothered in a
Bed, made away in a corner, perish in silence; God takes care as for the
execution, so the revelation of his righteous judgment, Romans 2.5.

Consider his proceedings toward Sodom; he inquires, charges, finds guilty,
and then executes, so that the World rings of it. This is Similitudo futuri
judieii, Isid A little resemblance of the great Judgment. When the Lots, the
faithful ones of God, shall be conveyed to the Mountains the everlasting Hills;
the wicked shall be swallowed up into those black Flames, that dead Sea from
whence there is no redemption.

2. In all this, feverity there is nothing but Justice. The Judge does you
right, gives, you your due, renders to you according to your demerits; this is
your Wages, ((...), Soldiers Pays) proper for your Work to Men and Angels will
appland the right ousnesa and God will be eternally glorified in taking the
Vengeance, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8, 9, 10.

3. This Doctrine of Divine Righteousness gives direction to them that are
entrusted with Government and Judgment among men, here is the best of Paterns
for them, God the Judge, the best of Rules, to do right.

And blessed be God, that we have no just cause to complain of public wrong.
Have we not our Religion, Laws, Lives, Liberties, and Properties fecured to us?
What do we want, which any Nation under the cope of Heaven can wish for? Happy
we, did we but know our happiness.

Have we not a King so clement, so merciful, that some have been ready to
think, that his mency to others has proved injutious to himself? A second
Titus (as he has been called) who never willingly sent away any suitor sad or
discontented from him, and under whom the Unfortunate fall gently.

What Laws more good and equitable than ours? What more wholesome and helping,
if duly executed? Ancient Lawmakers derived the Pedigree of their Laws from
their-Gods. Lycurgus fathered his upon Apolle at Delphos. Numa pretended his to
the Nymph Ageria. If we had Laws dropped out of Heaven, they would do us no good
without execution.

I might go on, and instance in every particular, (if the time would permit me)
and show that we have all the Elements of Felicity; but our unhappiness is,
that we cannot form them to our own content.

Some there are who find fault with every thing, because they will be satisfied
with nothing.

Religion is pretended, but Piety in many appears to be no more than Carnal
Policy, and in some a misguided Zele for the Interest of their own Party.

Some men are so bewildered, so lost in the mists of their Opinions, and smoke
of their passions, that the Light they boast of prove^ no better than an Ignis
fatuus to lead them out of the way, and into the Ditch of Ruin and Destruction.

Some cry out of Persecution, when men are Sufferers merely because they are
evil doers.

How many are there whose Music confists in Discord? They pretend to love
Truth, and yet hate Peace. Like Salamanders they delight to live in the flames,
and are never better pleased, than when they are warming themselves by a Fire
of their own kindling.

At the time of the Battle at Trasimenum, between Hannibal and the Romans,
there was such an Earthquake as overthrew a great part of most of the Cities in
Italy; yet not one of the Fighters that were at it in the heart of the Country
felt the Motion. Men are so fiercely intent on their own Interesses and
Quarrels, that they are quite senfless of public Hazards and Ruins.

But these things are an apter Subject for Tears than Words; here the Eye may
be more liberal in its dropping Language, than the Tongue in most fluent
Eloquution.

I dare not stay you any longer from the weighty public Affairs; in a word
then,

Lastly, feeing there is such a Judge, a Judge of all, that does and will do
right, before whose Face we must all shortly appear: Let us supplicate our
Judge, make him our Friend, agree with our Adversary quickly in the way, pass
our Accounts betimes, assure Reconciliation in the Blood of the Covenant,
engage Gods righteousness as well as his mercy for our good by believing: and
then the Judge will plead our Cause, right our Wrongs, clear up our Integrity,
quiet our Spirits, and crown our Patience. When the Faces of all wicked ones
shall gather blackness, when they shall implore the pity of Mountains and Rocks
to fall upon them, and hide them from the presence of him that fitteth on the
Throne; then shall we stand acquitted and accepted; we shall have boldness in
that day.

Which the Lord of his infinite mercy grant, and that for the merits of his
dear Son and our blessed Savior Jesus Christ; to whom with the Father and Holy
Ghost, be all Honor and Adoration henceforth and for ever. Amen.

F I N I S.

