A DISCOURSE OF THE EXCELLENCY OF THE Heavenly Substance.

WHICH IS Useful for the Present, and so may be for Future Times.

And every one that has forsaken Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father,
or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands, for my Names sake, shall receive an
hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life.

Mat. 19.29. LONDON, Printed in the Year 1673.

AN EPISTLE TO ALL, Both in England and Wales, that have been spoiled of their
Goods, before, or since March 25. last; or that may thus suffer for that
Religion which has its Foundations only laid in Divine Institutions.
CHRISTIAN FRIENDS,
It Is not necessary that you (or the World) should know the Author of the
ensuing Treatise; who is desirous for several reasons (not to be mentioned) to
conceal his Name. It may suffice that he shall be known at the day of Judgment,
when he hopes ^ith boldness, and confidence through ^he Merits of his Redeemer
to own this ^ork.

Whilst others Dedicate their Books to Princes, and Nobles, to obtain their
Patronage, and to acquire their Favor, or to procure some Profit, and
Advantage to themselves thereby: (though too often to attain their ends,
contract the guilt of most sordid adulations) I thought fit to Dedicate this to
you: How poor and despicable soever you be in the world, yet your owning and
defending it, shall be judged by me an honor sufficient put upon it, and it is
all the profit I shall expect from it; for I have not propounded to my self any
emollument or advantage by the publishing thereof.

When I heard how barbarously, and inhumanely you were used; that you who are
Protestants should suffer more by those that pretend to be of the Reformed
Religion than Papists do, or then in some places, Protestants do by Papists
(who rarelly are defective in Cruelty) it prevailed with me to write what I
judged might be seasonable in some degree, for your support and comfort, and to
enable you unto a patient toleration of your deploreable oppressions.

Though many have writ well, and substantially of sufferings in the general;
yet I know none that have treated of this Particular Subject (except in some
Collateral way) which now I do. For had it been already done, I should not have
engaged therein; judging my self unable to add (by way of supplement, or
amendment) to the work of any other.

I wish this work had come into the world more filled and polished, and that it
were so elaborate that none might dislike it. But as when a man is exceeding
hungry, and thirsty, course Bread, and impure Liquors are better then none; so
this Conjuncture, when so many are exposed to such cruel rapine, and such great
havoc made of their Goods (that it may be difficult without succumbency, and
sinking to stand under the burden; or with a sedate, and composed temper of
mind to bear the same) a few truths (though crudely, and indigestedly
delivered) concerning the most Excellent Substance in another world may be
better than none, both for their Consolation, and Sustentation

What I have done, had in a very little time both its Conception and Birth,
which makes it more without Form; and it may be, expose me to severe Censures
for too much rashness, and inconsiderateness. But being Alarmed by so many
Cries of Wrong, Injustice, and Cruelty (such as most Heathens would abhor) that
you labor and groan under, I was resolved to incur the danger thereof, rather
than take much time for its Cultivation, or to send it better accomplished, and
accoultred into the world; least while the Cordial was too long a preparing,
too many Spirits might languish and faint.

What Common Equity (such as universal humane Reason consents to) is in the
Late Act against Conventicles; and how agreeable it is to the Fundamental Laws
of our Nation, and the Laws of the Supreme Legislator (God himself) shall one
day be known, when all Disputes, and Controversies concerning the same shall be
concluded, and have an eternal Period put thereunto. But you suffer not
according to the strictest rigor of that Law only, but far beyond it, and
indeed in a way very often most Contra-legal, and excentrick to all Law; many
Instances whereof might be collected together, and exposed to public view, to
let the World know, how much his Majesty's peaceable Subjects, only for
worshipping God according to his Word, are made a prey to the boundless
Avorice, and unlimited malice of many Justices of the Peace, and beggarly
Informers, encouraged by them.

Some of you have had your standing Corn, some your dwelling Houses, your Work
Tools, your wearing Apparel; yea your very food seized, and destain'd. Some of
you have had your Houses rifled, and emptyed of all that you were possessed of,
leaving you neither Bed, Stool, Chair, Pot, Pan, or Spoon, etc.

Many of you have been fined for others that are not poor, and when destresses
have been Levied upon your Goods, they have been most unreasonable, by many
degrees in worth exceeding your Fines, and then sold at an under value; as
Cows, and Bullocks for 2 s. 6 d. and Sheep for 12 d, 6 d, and ^ d. a piece:
many of you have had your Doors, with great force and violence, broken open to
take Destress, though the Act against Cnventicles does not Authorize, and
Warrant Officers to do. All which (with many more things that might be
enumerated, and specified) are sufficient to demonstrate to the world how
injuriously, and mercilessly, you are dealt with.

This is the Aggravation of your affliction, and makes the burden thereof more
ponderous and heavy, that when you become Complainants you can have no redress,
or relief. If you appeal to the General Sessions, there your Judges (as the
major part) are both Enemies, and parties concerned; and what Juries ar a,
woeful experience tells you. If you Sue at Commom Law, you usually find great
addition made to your pressures. All sorts of Officers are usually your violent
and impetuous opposers. Grand-juries, and Petty-juries (if your concerns lie
before them) are commonly your implacable Enemies, and are strongly resolved to
ruin and destroy you: So that with the Prophet you may complain (after all
endeavors to have right) That Justice stands a far off, and Equity cannot
enter, Isa. 59.14. And with the Poet, -- terras Astraea reliquit.

From whence all this wrong, and violence proceeds you well know. Were the
Crown as cruel as the Mitre no doubt, not only your Estates, but your Lives
would be taken from you: which shows how little it partakes of the Divine
Nature whilst it sports it self, and laughs at the miseries of the innocent,
and is continually contriving their Destruction.

What shall you do in these doleful Circumstances but look up unto Heaven, and
derive joy from that Substance which is invisible, and immortal there. And
whilst your persecuting Adversaries are not ashamed scoffingly to say (when
they have made great havoc of, and most unmercifully torn away your estates
from you)* Take now joyfully the spoiling of your Goods. Perridiculus erat
Julianus ille Apostata, qum hunc locu^ exagitans, quaerere^num centum etiam
Uxores habitur^ essent Christiani. Beza in Loc.
(As that grand Apostate Julian said to the Primitive Christians, as a
dishonorable reflection upon Mat. 19.29. Have you an hundred Wives, etc. (when
he had deprived them of those outward comforts) Let them see and know that you
can do it.

What you have suffered (which God in his infinite Mercies pardon them for)
from those that boast themselves to be of the Church of England, and glory in
that denomination exclusively of all others (to whom that Scripture may be most
aptly, and properly applied, Isa. 66.5. -- Your Brethren that hated you, that
cast you out for my Names sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified; but he shall
appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed.) you know; but what you may
suffer frow those that are of the Church of Rome you know not. Expect, and
prepare for fiery trials from them, endure and conquer them all from the
fore-views of the future immortal Glory, from the prospect of this Heavenly
Substance. Let it encourage to take jayfully, not only the spoiling of your
Goods, but your Lives also, if God call you to it.

I never expect that those that are such incompassionate and mercyless
Persecutors of you now (whatever Sphere they move in, whether Magestratical or
Sacerdotal, or have a much lower station) will be persecuted with you for
Divine Truth. It Is very probable that persecuting Protestants will (when it is
conducive and subservient to their Interest) prove persecuting Papists. But yet
I hope that many of the Church of England (whose laudable Calmness, and
Moderation is known, and whom I believe to be seriously Religious, and
principally mind and intend the Salvation of their Souls) will suffer the loss
of all things with you, rather than comply with the Romish Superstitions, and
Heretical Doctrines. The ensuing Discourse is not Calculated only for these
present days wherein you suffer, but for the future, wherein both you (who are
dissenters in some things from them) and they may equally be concerned.

Though the immediate, and direct intention of this Treatise is for those that
are, or may be impoverished for Religions sake, yet it may be of use likewise
to all Gods Children, who by some cross afflicting Providence (and not by
their wickedness) are reduced to a low condition in the World. That as the
Prophet Habbakkuk says, chapter 3.17. Although (in respect of them) the Fig Tree
shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vines: the Labor of the
Olive shall fail, and the Fields shall yield no meat; the Flock shall be cut
off from the Fold, and there shall be no Herds in the Stalls. Yet their hearts
may be supported, and comforted from the expectation of this Better and
Enduring Substance Poverty, like an Armed Man comes both into the City and
Country, and many of the Heirs of Heaven are involved, in this Common
Calamity. God teaches them by his Providence every day, that Riches are
uncertain things, as his sacred Word tells us, 1 Timothy 6.17. and shows them good
reason for that expostulation of his, Prove. 25.5. Will thou set thine eyes upon
that which is not? for Riches certainly make themselves wings, and fly away as
an Eagle toward Heaven. And seeing this is become such a Common, and General
Experience, how strongly, and powerfully should it invite and persuade all that
hope for the Treasures of Eternity, to advance and raise up their Souls to a
fixed view, and frequently to revolve the serious thoughts thereof in them,
that they may be solaced and refreshed therewith.

I earnestly wish that the ensuing Discourse may be a Spring of Joy, a Breast
of Consolation, a pregnant Honeycomb of Sweetness to all your Souls and mine
(which has, I bless God, in some measure, often been relieved by it) for which
he shall pray to Almighty God, who has suffered in various kinds, and to high
degrees, and who am still your Fellow-Sufferer for that, which I do not in the
least doubt in the most Terrible-joyful-day of the last Judgment, will appear
to be the verity of Heaven, frr that Truth which is the Off-srring of the most
Veracious God, even the Truth as it is in Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 4.21.

I have not the Confidence to recommend this Treatise to the reading and
perusal of men that are of refined Reason, of Sublimated Intellect, of Acute
Wits, and Profound Judgments, of Enlarged, and Comprehensive Capacities: It Is
only fitted and accommodated to the Vulgar and Common: yet I desire such would
seriously study the Text that is the Foundation of it out of the teeming Womb
whereof this weak imperfect Infant is taken, that they would penetrate into its
Bowels, that they would by a most serious, and industrious investigation, and
search, find out the Heavenly Mine, and Rich Treasure that is in it; that
hereby they may be brought to disesteem all Earthly Treasure in Comparison
thereof, and may get their Affectiens weaned from all mertal, and earthly
Good-things, and may live as those that are Mortifyed, and Crucified to this
dying, deceitful World.

I know there are many Ministers in these Nations who have suffered the loss of
their Goods (not for a sullen peevish humor as many are pleased to charg them
severely with, and caluminate them for) but for Conscience sake; and I
acknowledge these men much more Worthy and Learned than my self, and that their
Parts and Abilities would have fabriated a much more curious and amiable Piece
(for the honor of that Cause for which they suffer) than this is, and I
heartily wish some one of them had seasonably done, that so it might have come
abroad into the world in a better dress, with fewer defects, and imperfections,
less crude and immature, and so might have been food suited to the most
Critical, Curious and Generous Palates. That it is not embellished and enriched
with the Gold of Learned Men's Mines, renderd delectable and pleasant with many
of their Flowers, that it is not beautified with the Ornaments of various
Readings out of Fathers and Schoolmen, and Classick Authors, the many
Avocations that I have had from my Studies to my great grief) must make an
Apology, and plead excuse, having not known for above ten years (by reason of
almost constant and uncessant storms I have been tossed and hurried up and down
with, though blessed be God not for Wickedness scarce what it is to converse
with my Books, and yet I am scarce arrived at declining years, or come to
withering and wrinkling Old Age. But however, if any of these faithful Servants
of Jesus Christ shall honor me so far as to cast an eye upon my imbecil
Labors, or read them through, I earnestly wish God Almighty may bless the same
to them, and make (as many times he does weak means) effectual to accomplish a
most high, and noble end (subordinate to the Glory of himself) viz. their
steady, invariable, and uninterrupted course, and motions in the way of truth
and Holiness (wherein I am fully satisfied they are) that their Retrocessions
and Defections from so good and honorable a Cause may be prevented
notwitstanding the highest degree, and longest duration of their Trials and
Troubles.

I know some may scornfully, and scoffingly say, what need is there for these
Nonconformists to read such a Subject for their encouragement; What have they
lost? do they not live better, and more plentifully than ever they did? This is
usual and frequent language diffused through England, and other places: to
which it may briefly be replied, there is no thanks due to those that assert it
for the same. Have not they, and their party taken the most effectual course,
and means they could to starve, and famish those above mentioned? They showed
them not so much mercy as was showed to them in the late times of Usurpation:
For they tear away all from them, allowing them not the fifths of their
Benefices, (as then was, whether small or great) not suffering them to teach
School, to get bread for their Wives and Children; not to live in, or come
within five miles of a Corporation, or place where they had preached, to cut
them off from all relief; not to Preach privately to their Friends (by one Law
if they were above five, by another if above four, and above the Age of 16. the
Iron Yoke whereof many have sufficiently felt) a Cruelty they felt not under
the Government of those, it is acknowledged were Tyrants and Usurpers: For
several of them had their Conventicles (some whereof consisted of considerable
Numbers, witness the Canary House in the Strand, privately and peaceably. It Is
Notoriously known that those very men who in those times were ejected for most
Enormous Scandals, as Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Swearing, Sabbath-breaking, and
for Ignorance a large Catalogue whereof can be yet produced) had more mercy and
favor showed them, than these men that cannot be proved guilty of any such
things, nor were they the Crimes laid to their charge, for which they were
laid aside. It Is known, and can be proved that several of the more sober
Episcopal Ministers, or if you will (as they term themselves) Priests, though
they were cast out of one Benefice, they were put into the possession of
another, and that sometimes of equal profits, and if not so, yet what did afford
them a present Livelihood, and Substance. It can never be proved (tho it is
frequently asserted) that this merciless and bowelless usage is Lex talionis,
the Law of Retaliation, for such Laws were never made against them, as have
been (by their procurement, and wherein they greatly rejoice) against these.
And if there were any such Laws then, they were either good or evil; if they
were good, why do they condemn them; if they were evil, why do they imitate
them?

If it be said that such Priests, and some that were accounted Fathers of the
Church, begged in those times their bread, had scarce clothes to cover their
Nakedness, and shelter them from the Storms and Cold, traveled up and down a
foot, and had scarce beds to lie upon, and that some of them dyed for want;
whereas the Nonconformists are full fed, their Cheeks are plump (though few, or
none of their Noses be very red and fiery, their Faces (except what is
occasioned by natural infirmities and distempers) of a deep Scarlet dye, or
look most formidablly as if they were washed and steept in the Sanguine juice,
or blood of the Grape) their Aspects and looks brisk and lively, they wear good
Clothes, and ride good Horses To this it may be replied, that one Reason why
many of them were reduced to such scarcity and want, was their intemperance,
their excessive drinking, being sworn Slaves to Pots of good Ale, and Bottles
of Wine and indeed most of what they got was Sacrificed sometimes to Bacchus,
and sometimes to Venus (which two will devour and drink up an Ocean of
Treasure, and consume vast Mountains of Gold and Silver) but those that were
not guilty of such bestial lives and conversations, but were men of great
Sobriety and Civility, and yet suffered such want; it shows that God did not
take that care of them that now he does of others, and that there is not so
much Religion (which makes men's bowels tender, and their Charity diffusive and
extensive) to be found among the Sons and Daughters of the Church, as among
those that are dissenters from her, and too frequently (though injuriously)
branded with Schism.

But however plentifully now they live, was this by an eye of sense, and reason
foreseen when they voluntarily left their livelyhoods and Benefices rather than
make Naufrage, and Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience. Certainly they did
not then consult with flesh and blood, or act like men whose Souls are under
the Dominion of their Senses, for these would strenuously argue, and plead
against their practice, against their Nonconformity, telling them the many
difficulties and straits and hardships they must expose themselves to pass
through, and make their lives miserable and wretched with. Unsanctified Reason
(which always opposes the Interest of God in the world when abstracted from a
man's own) would never plead for this, or pass an Approbative judgment upon it.
Such Questions would be put thereby, and by unbelief, if thou laiest down thy
Ministry, and leavest thy Parsonage, or Vic^rage, etc. how will thou subsist,
how will thy Wife and Children be maintained and provided for; or how will thy
Children be fashionably bred, and well educated? thou have no estate, thou art
not before hand with the world, there are no probable ways in view how thou
should be supplied with thy daily bread. I have known these things
frequently urged by Friends and Relations, to make many Ministers Conform, who
could not be conquered thereby, but most Heroickly and resolutely resisted the
temptation. And that such carnal reasonings must in all probability be in most
Nonconformists, appears from the Confessions of several that this was the
ground of their Conformity. They knew not how they and their Families should be
maintained without it, or if they did not what would become of their Wives and
Children and witness for one Man D. of (...) in De^

If I mistake ^^t, the^ ^are near 300 Ministers in England and Wales (...), and
^j^cted out of their Living and deprived of Maintanance ^n one day, and the
great st^p^rt of these by ^ar were Married (...) and young men, and wi^^^
be^^g^d. who had (...) Children, and not grown up, and provided for in the
world their Wives the ^^ing and pro^^eck (...) most of them had no (...) nor
larg^ stocks of Money, most of them lived in Country (...) and ab^^nd (...) of
them were in one Count^y (...) if (...) not mistaken in (...) above in (...) in
the little County of (...) Now consider ^^em in all the (...) ^ces, what could
(...) are (...) them as an encouragement to None informity; what was there
visible to ground and bottom their hopes upon that they should be either
^^^vided for at all, or better than when they had their public Maintenance. If
it: be said that they hoped to find many Friends, it must be said of them as of
Abraham in another case, Romans 4.18. that against hope, they believed in hope.

That God has raised them on many Friends is certainly true what does this
prove, but that though they be ejected, and cast out by imcompassionate men,
yet they are not rejected and cast out by God; and if it be not an infallible
Demonstration, yet it is a good Argument to prove that their cause is
well-pleasing unto, and approved of by God; that it has the strength of
Divinity in it.

What shall we think of that Religion that flourishes in the midst of flames,
and the highest oppositions, that the more fe^ere Laws be multiplied against
it, the more it lifts up its head with Triumph, the more it dilates and spreads
it self. Long and great Persecutions have at last discomfeited and suppressed
Errors, and Heresies; but Truth after all has prevailed, and appeared to the
opposing world; and like the Sun after a short Eclipse, or some black Vizard,
and dark vailing cloud cast over his Face, has effulg'd and shined forth with
greater Beauty and Glory, and pou^ed forth more plentifully his brightest
Beams. We know that in the late times Prelatism, and a Ceremonial Religion
could not stand before Humane Power, and Penal Laws (though nothing so severe,
nor so many as are now made against that Thing, and that Religion which has
been branded, and stigmatized with the most odious Nicknames) how did they
fall before them, like Dagon before the Ark: how quickly did they shrink into
nothing, and disappear; seemed to be annihilated, or at least exanimated; and
like some smaller Animals (that lie as dead in the Winter, till they feel the
power of the Vernal Sun, and its vivifying and enlivening heat) did those
things lie dead in the cold winter of Adversity, and so continued till the
benign Rays and Influences of Regal Authority (at his Majesty's happy
Restoration) did reanimate, and inspire them with a new life; which if they
were but once suspended, we should quickly see them dye again. They can only
live in the warm Sunshine of his Majesty's Royal Favor: Let that be withdrawn,
and the Civil Power set against them, and they will soon be liveless, and so
deeply buried in the Grave of Oblivion, and Contempt, as never to have a
Resurrection to any Grandeur, or Glory more.

Though it is Confessed that many Nonconformists are bountifully provided for;
especially such as live in Wealthy and Populous Cities, Corporations and Towns,
where they have larg Congregations to Preach to; or if they be debarred from
this, yet lose not their hearts and respects (and I wish such may not too
little Sympathize with others, and have too few and slender compassionate
resentments of their low conditions, look too loftily and superciliously and
disdainfully upon them, be of too Magisterial a de-deportment toward them; or
grudg too much their Neighborhood, and coming to live (when necessitated
thereunto) where they do. If God see such Ambition, Pride, and Selfishness
among, and so much of Prelatical Spirit pearking up in Nonconformists he may
make them yet pass through a hotter fire to refine them, and prepare a narrower
and finer sieve to fist them with.) I say, though this be so, yet there are
many (and Men of great Worth both for Learning and Piety) that have been, and
yet are much pincht with poverty, are reduced to great Straits and dolorous
wants, exposed unto which yet blessed be God they stoutly, and resolutely
endure) great hardships: and yet the sewie^ complain not so much as many
Conformists, who have some of them ^00 (...). 300 l. per Annum, etc. who (as
they say) run into Debt, cannot make both ends meet; and some of them are now,
and then jogging along unto, and taking up their residence in some Goal, for
not paying to a very man what they ow him. Somet^^^ they are haunted (as with
evil Spirits, and Friends of Hell) with the ^^de and boisterous Bailiffs which
affright them more than Hobgoblings in the night, who make them sober, and good
Husbands (and perhaps keep them in their studies) against their wills, and for
a long time by reason of those Diligent and Hawk-ey'd Attendants, they, are
made so happy as not to go to Gods House, and not so miserable as not to go to
an Alehouse, that Joan may fill them the other Jugg. But these afflictions and
troubles, I do not here the poorest Nonconformists meet with. Sometimes not
only the inferior, but the dignified Clergy complain they want money,
notwithstanding their great Revenues and large In-comes, while the poorest
Nonconformists are not querulous, but still and silent, (being contented with
and thankful unto God for that modicum, that little which they have) what is the
Reason of this, but besides that which is natural their toping, their
exhausting and emptying of Bottles of Sack and Claret till 10 or 12 a Clock at
Night, and sometimes longer, their ingurgitating and swallowing down so much
Wine, and strong Liquors too frequently to Ebriation, their Luxury, and
Profuseness, their Courting now and then a Madam (who must be generously and
nobly treated, and who because she is Morally light, must be made Physically
heavy; their Complementing, in a private recess, some pretty Miss, (who though
a beautiful, yet a chargeable Creature; for these are the Insatiably voracious
Barathrams, the deep Ditches and Pits that absorp and swallow up all; the Idols
that devour whatever is sacrificed to them, whose flaming lust consumes more
treasure and wealth than all (especially the late) most violent eruptions of
Aetna's fiery subterranean Furnace, or all the fires that have wasted and
destroyed Houses, Ships, and Cities, since the Creation of the World, or fire
was first kindled upon Earth.) Their only close and comfortable importance; I
say besides that which is natural, the want of the secret blessing of the
Almighty, that sacred Text in Job 20.22. being verified and fulfilled signally
in them; In the fullness of their sufficiency they are in straits; while the
others by the Danation of his blessing, in the midst of straits have what is
sufficient for them. As the Apostle says, in 2 Cor. 6.10. As having nothing,
yet possessing all things. No doubt those that talk so much of the
Non-Conformists living so well, grudg them the bread they eat, and some of them
are filled with malice, and madness that they are not starved: An eminent
instance hereof, we have in a Bishop, who when he went his Visitation in his
Diocese, was very inquisitive to know how the Non-Conformists were maintained,
and who supplied them? In pursuance of his end, he employed several to search
it out. One of them when he was upon the scent, not being able to understand
where the Game did lie, comes to a Minister (whose learning and parts are
sufficiently known in the Country where he lives) to be informed of this thing,
declaring to him that he was commanded so to do by the Bishop? To whom the
Minister replies, come, and I will show thee how I live: Look into this Pot and
see a piece of good Beef boiling, go and tell the Bishop I live by eating such
good Beef.

Whether the Non-Conformists have more or less, blessed be the Self-sufficient,
and All-sufficient Jehovah, that they stand not to the mercies of their Enemies
for their present sustenance, and comforts: Let his Name be magnified and
celebrated for ever: Let Heaven and Earth be filled with his Praises: Let
sacrifices of thanksgiving be continually offered up, and songs of the highest
gratitude and thankfulness continually poured forth unto him; that they are not
necessitated to beg their bread from door to door, and especially at the doors
of their Enemies, (some whereof have heretofore begged their bread at theirs)
and are not complaining and crying out for want of bread, and no friends to
supply them with it.

I do not doubt but the same Principle of Religion which at first (when they
could have no rational prospect of a livelihood and subsistence in the world)
obliged them unto, and engaged them in the way of Nonconformity, does still,
as another soul, act the Generality of them unto perpetual and constantly
progressive Motions, a steady and resolute perseverance therein, and produce an
invincible and inflexible noncompliance with (till they see better grounds,
and clearer reason for the contrary than yet they have done) an apprehended
error and evil.

All the Nonconforming Party are not men of sneaking and sordid Spirits, some
are as highly and truly generous and noble, as those that do most debase and
vilify them; and it is very irksome and ungrateful unto such to live after an
Eleemosynary manner, dependently upon others, which too frequently prostitutes
and exposes them to a contemptuous and slighting carriage of some even among
their own Party, very unbecoming and unsuitable to the notions of their
Function, which God never appointed to be either constituted or supported by
riches, or to be built upon some lofty (though quickly deprest and levelled)
Mountain and Pyramid of worldly dignities and Grandeurs, or the highest
coacervation of any earthly fading Glories. I know the Consideration of this
has been more a temptation to some of them to conform, than all their other
sufferings, or any avaritious greedy desire to accumulate and heap up these
lower perishing Treasures, but the consideration of their auty to God, the fear
of displeasing and dishonoring him, the resignation of their Wills, not only
to his preceptive, but providential Will to be disposed of by him, and provided
for in such a way as he in his infinite and unerring Wisdom thinks best and
fittest for them, has efficaciously attemper'd and framed their spirits
hereto, and wrought a complacential acquicscence in the same, whereby they
still conquer the Temptation.

But to close up this Discourse (which I suppose is not pleasing to the Palate,
nor grateful to the Gusto of every one) would we be satisfied with some
rational account how these Non-conformists came with so much Promptitude and
Readiness, with so much Alacrity and Cheerfulness to forsake their Benefices
and present Livelyhoods; when Sense and carnal Reason could make no discovery
of, and way wherein they should be provided for: I shall only briefly offer
this; that as they were men that had Preached up frequently, and zealously pressed
and urged others to live by Faith (a life so vilysied and contemned by, and
unknown (as to its excellency and usefulness) unto many, yea the far greatest
part of the World) so that they would hereby give a clear demonstration that
they could live upon their own Doctrine, that they were no strangers to this
most sweet and sure, and noble conquering life. That they have their own souls
principled with that faith which is The Substance of things hoped for, and the
evidence of things not seen. That they can fixedly depend upon, and confidently
trust the infinitely who knows how, the Almighty, and All-sufficient, who can
and is able, the most merciful and faithful God who will certainly take care
of, and provide for them. By this Faith can they suck in the exuberant
sweetness of his most precious promises. And would you farther know how they
came to find so many bountiful Friends and Benefactors; I may tell you: one
reason is Gods blessing his Word and Doctrine which they Preach, making it take
place in the hearts of so many which begets a fervent and pure love toward
them; and likewise His Truth, which obliges him so eminently to fulfill that
Promise (which is worth more than all the Crowns, and Kingdoms in the world)
Mat. 19.29. with many others that are their choicest and chiefest Cordials, as
Psalm. 3 ^^, 19, 34. Psalm. 33.18, 19. Job 5.22. At destruction and famine shall
thou laugh. Heb. 13.5. -- for he said I will never leave thee nor forsake thee.

Now I hope that you to whom I Dedicate this Discourse (many of you being a
poor and an afflicted people as the Prophet speaks, Zeph. 3.12.) as you will
rejoice in the spoiling of your Goods from the consideration of this excellent
Heavenly Substance, so you will live above, and not be discouraged with the
opprobries and obloquies, the insolences and insultations of all your Enemies.
That whatever be their most con^itiating language, dirty detractations,
dishonorable reflections, scornful and disdainful conculcations of your Good
Name, you will not value them. How little should Rhetorical Railery, the
Extracts and Quintescence of Billinsgate, trash and trumpery; the froth and
foam of the black-soul-mouth'd Female Scolds there, sucked in and spewed up
again with all the envenomed Darts of Apostatical Malice (the best Ornaments of
many Books the Authors whereof are the Degenerate Off springs of pious Parents)
signify to those who have the lively hope of this Substance, in the possession
whereof they shall be Crowned with immortal Honor.

Possibly after your present sufferings you may have a Calm; a lucid Interval;
some Sun shine, some intermission of your pains and grievances: But though this
should be so, yet look and prepare for Storms and Tempests; black and dismaying
clouds and darkness; a return with double rage and fury of your Torments. You
have not yet resisted unto blood for Truth. God grant both you and I by this
Better, and Enduring Substance may be so fortifyed and encouraged to be
faithful to the Death, that according to Gods Promise, Rev. 2.10. we may by him
have given to us, the ever-flowrishing, and flourishing Crown of Life: for
which I bow my knees unto the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Farewell.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 15. read Emolument. p. 3. l. 22. r. So in. p. 4. l. 14. dele be.
p. 7. l. 15. r. as to. p. 14. l. 4. r. Intellects. p. 15. l. 10. r. fabricated.
l. 14. r. done it. p. 16. l. 20. r. make them. p. 22. l. 17. r. and pass. p.
24. l. 30. and 40. p. 25. l. 14. r. cast off. p. 26. l. 6. r. victorious. p.
28. l. 10. dele and. p. 34. l. 5. for Notions. r. Honor. p. 35. l. 6. r. for
and. and l. 13. dele that. p. last l. 19. r. flowring for flourishing.

Page 1. in the Orig. read (...). p. 5. l. 10. r. sciebant. l. 11. dele Beza.
p. 10. l. 2. r. with ravening. p. 13. l. 15. r. obnoxij. p. 14. l. 11. r.
Pl^onasm. l. 25. (...). l. 28. r. (...). p. 15. l. 12. r. (...). p. 17. l. 13.
r. debilitated. p. 19. l 11. r. the, p 25. l. 25. r. (...). p. 29. l. 9. r.
precipitations. l 12. r. ^ior. p. 30. l. 13. r. that. p. 13. l. 25. r. their
souls. p. 33. l. 17. r. feellingly for believingly. l. 29. r. life. p. 34. l.
1. r. through. l. 7. r. Assimilated. l. 13. r. helping. p. 38. l. 9. r.
Saciety. p. 43. l. 7. r. or. p. 44. l. 5. r. (...). p. 45. l. 3. r. (...). p.
48. l. 12. r. there often is. p. 56. l. 6. r. exulting. p. 66. l. 11. r.
mediately. l. 19. r. mediate. p. 71. l. 17. r. visive. p. 74. l. 2. r. sweet.
p. 81. l. 2. r. holiness. l. 3. dele to be. p. 83. l. 5. r. that for their. p.
84. l. 20. r. infinitely. p. 99. l. 9. for mortal. r. moral. l. 30. r.
Caucasus. p. 192. l. 22. r. have to. p. 101. l. 30. add all. p. 102. l. 3. r.
but most of them. p. 104. l. 9. r. valuable. l. 10. dele which. p. 106. l. 8.
r. each. p. 119. l. 1. r. this for they. p. 143. l 5. r. Attaining. p. 152. l.
17. r. Zenith. p. 262. l. 1. r. will for. p. 163. l. 29. add to his yuonger
Sons. p. 165. l. 1. r. and nature. p. 166. l. 8. r. to lose for Christ. l. 12.
r. exiguous. p. 161. l. 12. r. Praelibations. p. 102. l. 16. r. they will. l.
18. r. for him. p. 193. l. 4. r. Providence. p. 168. l. 5. r. language. p.
199. l. r. or would you. l. 18. r. were more. p. 202. l. 30. add thou must let
it go. p. 203. l. 16. dele God. p. 205. l. last. r. declaratively.

A DISCOURSE OF THE EXCELLENCY OF THE HEAVENLY SUBSTANCE.
-- (...). Orig.

HEB. 10.34. -- And took joyfully the spoiling of your Goods, knowing in your
selves that ye have in Heaven a better and an enduring Substance.

The Introduction to the Text.
THere is some Controversy about the Author of this Epistle: Some have ascribed
it to Barnabas, some to Luke, others to Clement; but generally it is agreed,
and received that Paul was the Author of it. Both because all Ancient Greek
Writers, and also diverse Latin, have constantly acknowledged it, as also the
Superscriptions of the Greek Testaments hold forth this Title. And many learned
Divines who have been curious, and laborious in their investigation and search;
affirm that all Greek Copies (save one) bear this Inscripiion. That Paul was
the Writer of this Epistle, does farther appear by comparing Heb. 13.19. with 2 Timothy 4.16, 17. whereby it seems he wrote it to the Hebrews from Rome; when
after his first defense before the Emperor Nero, he had received hope of his
releasment: and then thought shortly to come again to Jerusalem with Timothy,
to visit them; unto which Visit, this Epistle seems to be a prologue, and
preparation. And the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 3.15. testifies that the Apostle
Paul had written to the Jews, unto whom he writes; which cannot with any
probability be understood of any other Epistle but this. But suppose we had not
an unquestionable, and an indubitable certainty of the Writer of this Epistle;
yet we have such a certainty, that it is Divinely Canonical; both from it is
consentaneousness, and congruity, with other parts of the sacred Scriptures;
and also from the effulgency, and beaming forth of an Heavenly Authority in it:
every line sparkling, and being pregnant with Divinity; which is sufficient to
command from us a firm credence and belief of the same.

The Author of this Epistle, writes it to the Jews, (who having received the
Gospel, continued in Judea before their dispersion) whom he calls Hebrews,
because they were descended from Abraham, who is called an Hebrew, Genesis 14.13.
either from Eber (because those who descended from him kept the ancient
Language, and true Religion of Heber, therefore he rather than any of his
Ancestors of the Posterity of Eber, was called an Hebrew) or from the Hebrew
word (Gneber) signifying a passage, English Annos.
because he passed over the River Euphrates coming out of Caldea into Canaan.
Synop. Criticorum.
The Jews loved to be called by this Name, 2 Cor. 11.22. Phil. 3.5. wherefore
the Apostle also gives them the same. Or as some think he calls them Hebrews to
distinguish betwixt those Jews which dwelt at Jerusalem, and in the
circumjacent places, who still used the Hebrew or Syriack tongue, called
therefore Hebrews, and those who dwelt among the Greeks, called therefore
Greecians. Thus they are distinguished Acts 6.1. The Latin Translation has
Greecorum, but says Drus. de Praet. l. 5. in locum, Graeciensium potius. Nam
Graecorum, id est (...). Judaei sic distinguebantur, Judaei Palestim, qui hic
Ebraei vocantur, (...), and (...), qui hic Hellenistae five Graecienses. Hi
Graeca Biblia in Synagogis legebant, and Graece sciebanticam peculiari dialecto
utentes, quam Hellenisteam vocant, cujus frequens mentio in his libris, Beza.
Fallitur enim vir doctus qui Hellenistas hoc loco diei putat genere quidem
profanos, sed in Judaeorum gentem per circumcisionem adscitos. Tales enim
nusquam (...) quod sciam, sed ubique Proselyti nuncupantur, and quia hoc nomen
latin patet (nam quamvis advenam significat) addere solet justitiae aut filius
foederis, ut dictum est.

The occasion of writing this Divine, and learned Epistle to the Hebrews, was a
proclivity, and propensity (which he observed, if not in all, yet in a great,
and considerable part of them) to Apostatize and fall from the faith of Christ,
into their former Judaism, by reason of those storms of persecutions which
violently, and impetuously did beat upon, and assault them: And which did arise
from their own Countrymen and Natives, the unconverted Jews. The Apostle having
intelligence, if not a certain proof, of those vacillations, and fluctuations
of mind which they manifested by reason of those raging Seas of sufferings
which they were tossed upon; and fearing least they should by the present
boisterous tempests of their implacable Persecutors violent rage, and virulent
fury, be driven back to their old Ceremonial, and Judaical worship (as a safe
harbor to retire to) he strenuously in this Epistle labors to corroborate,
and confirm them in that Faith which they had been receptive of, and to excite
them to stand fast in it: That they might be like the immovable Rocks in the
midst of the tempestuous Sea, when furious waves, and enraged billows with the
utmost of their strength attaque, and dash themselves against them.

The Apostles mind was very intent, and operous, his thoughts most solicitous,
how to prevent their dangerous tergiversations, and retrograde motions in the
ways of truth. Subservient and conducible to this grand design, and noble end,
he urges, and produces diverse most nervous and convincing Arguments, from the
eminency and excellency of Christ's Nature, Person and Offices, especially his
Priestly Office, above that of Aarons, from the first Chap. to the 9th verse. of
the 10th Chap. And having performed that work with such undeniable clearness
and evictions, he advances, and proceeds to exhort them to a fixedness, and
stedfastness in this propounded Doctrine, notwithstanding their fierce, and
fiery trials, and tribulations, verse 23. of this Chap. to make which more
deeply impressive, he produces a new argument from the danger of Apostasy;
showing how tremendous and terrible it is, that so if arguments drawn from the
excellency of the former things would not prevail with them, and be cogent
enough to hold fast the profession of their faith, and stand their ground, the
consideration of the dreadfulness of the latter might. This you have from the
26. to the 32. ver. where he urges a third Argument (beyond which I shall not
pass) for their peseverance, viz. what they had already suffered in their
minority of the Christian Religion, and Faith; even at their first
entertainment, and reception thereof, as soon as the bright beams of Gospel
light were darted into them. Says the Apostle did you converted Hebrews, when
you were such Babes and Children, endure so great a fight, and such wrestlings
of afflictions ((...). so is the Orig.) whereby Satan thought to overthrow your
Faith: Could you then keep firm footing, and stand your ground? did such
Heroic Spirits then possess you? was your resolution, courage, and magnanimity
then so insuperable? was your puissance then such that you could conquer? How
much more does it become you now that you are grown up to a more adult state,
and manhood, to have, and do this, firmly to stand to that Faith which you have
so long prosessed. Your souls should now be much more invigorated and
strengthened to receive the most wrathful Charge, and fierce Attaques of your
Enemies. Without shrinking to stand before all the Batteries of Hell: Without
flinching or fainting, to bear up against, and break through all the most
blustering tempests in the world; that so at last you may win and wear the
Crown of Eternal Life, and Immortal Glory, and arrive safe at the most placid
Port, and calm Haven of everlasting Rest.

Have you already been before Beasts in the public Shows, or have you been
placed, and showed upon Theaters, and Stages? (...), Orig. See the Dutch Annot.
upon the place. So Beza, Calvin, Piscator, and many others Interpreters.
or in the Synagogues, and Judgment-Halls, shamefully to be made a spectacle,
scorned and laughed at, verse. 33. Endure this still. Were you companions, and
had communion with those that were so used? (that is, by your compassion,
brotherly help, and assistance which you afforded to them; as also by adjoining
your selves to them) not being discouraged by their afflictions, nor dismayed
at their bitter colluctations, and conflicts with all obloquies, calumniations,
and miseries, be so still.

Have you owned me suffering for the same Faith, and Truth? even when I was in
bonds, by which you did endanger your own Liberty? then dread not now, Chains,
and a Prison so much, verse. 34.

Have you with all alacrity, and cheerfulness, yea with exalting joy, seen, and
suffered the hands of violence to tear away with all immanity, and merciless
cruelty your goods, your estates? rifling your houses? dispossessing you of you
proper inheritances? and making themselves Lords and Masters of the same,
whereby you that were rich, are made poor, that were full, are now empty, and
subjected to the painful pinches of disgraceful, and contemptible poverty? And
has all this been undergone from a deep and serious consideration of a better,
and more enduring substance in Heaven? the plenary and compensating reward of
this, and all your sufferings? Then how reasonable is it that you should endure
such (yea and greater troubles if called thereunto) still? Cast not away
therefore your confidence which has great recompense of reward, verse. 35. Thus
in this Paraphrastical way I am come to the Text, which contains two parts.

1. The Hebrews suffering; you took joyfully the spoiling of your goods.

2. The ground and reason thereof, and their encouragements thereunto; knowing
in you selves that you have in Heaven a better, and an enduring substance. In
the first of these we have,

1. The kind, and nature of their sufferings, or the matter thereof, the
spoiling of thiir goods, Rapina dicitur cum quis quid a^ altero, per vim, ac
injuriam sibi rapit cotque usurput. Zanch.
(...). the word in the Original signifies a ravenous, voracious spoiling, Mat.
23.25. Luke 11.39. the same word is there translated Extortion, which is with
much violence and injustice, to tear, or take away a thing, and to do it
ravening. These Plunderers, and spoilers came like so many Harpies and
devouring Wolves, or greedy Tigers, and hungry Lions, degenerating from all
laudable humanity, to swallow up, and tear away their estates; showing nothing
but the height of of ferocity, cruelty, and barbarity, as Persecutors use to
do, when they can enrich themselves with the estates of the Saints and faithful
Servants of God.

2. The manner of their suffering, (...) with joy, or joyfully. They did
joyfully resent such a loss, such injury and wrong. Their souls were not sunk
into an Abyss, nor plunged into a gulf of sorrow: their spirits were not
absorp'd, or swallowed up of grief; their hearts were not put to pain, nor
wounded hereby. Here were no sighs, nor groans poured forth, or extorted from
them. Succumbency, and sincking under the present burden, and pressure they
were unacquainted with, and strangers to. They did not lose nor part with their
Estates (as Phaltiel did with Michael, when David sent for her, 2 Samuel 3.15,
16, 17.) weeping, and mourning. Nor as L^ts Wise parted with her pleasant
house, and accommodations in unclean Sodom, sad and dejected (as we may
conclude by her sinful retrospection, with the dreadful punishment of the
fact.) Nor as a Merchant in a storm parts with his treasure, when thrown
overboard into the tumultuating Sea, with waves of sorrow breaking in upon his
trembling heart, overflowing, and overwhelming the same. These Christians for
their great losses had no cloudy Aspects, no Sadness, nor Melancholy was
visible, or could be read in their looks. Their Countenances were not fallen,
nor did they bewray, or discover a dejectedness of mind, or any inward
perturbations of spirit, neither were they the Index of any passionate
concussions, and commotions or disorders in their souls. Such was their holy,
and spiritual gallantry that for these losses they could not undergo, and
suffer such a debasement, as to admit of violent inquietudes to possess, and
tyranize over them, nor to be set upon a rack of torturing diffident fears,
corroding and gnawing cares, how they, their Wives, and Children should be
provided for, and subsist for the future in the world. They were not blear-eyed
with weeping; No drops did distill, much less did floods, and cataracts of
brinish, and beauty-withering tears gush and fall from their eyes, unless
issuing, and streaming from an inward fountain of sweetest joy. There was no
wayling, nor wringing of hands; crying out, Woe is us! We are undone, we are
undone. Such Exclamations, and Lamentations, the serene sedate composed temper
of their spirits would not admit of. The Heavens are not more clear, nor their
Aspect, and face more amiable, and beautiful to behold, when the Sun shines
forth in its Altitude and greatest strength, and displays all its lofty and
supereminent Glory, and Majesty; thereby disipating, and scattering the mists,
chasing away, and putting to flight the envious clouds which would diminish,
and darken the same; than their hearts, and faces were free from all
contracting, and wrinkling discontent. Such sufferings could not be causative
of one Paralysis, or Convulsion in their Spirits. They were so strengthened,
Neh. 8.10. expanded, and dilated with joy, that such trepidations and shakings,
such Spasms and contractions they were not capable of.

It would have caused an ecstasy (and no doubt was very astonishing to their
Enemies) to behold how the inward unseen joy of their hearts was demonstrated
by most visible pleasant smiles (a clear evidence of a holy scorn, and contempt
of the malicious oppression of persecuting Enemies) wherewith their faces did
shine, and an admirable luster was set upon them, while there was a Cannabal
devoration of their Estates.

The Apostle here speaks of their joy, as if all sorrow were excluded.
Certainly if they had, or did conceive any, they scarce felt it, their joy was
so great that it did swallow it up, and overtop it. Says Calvin upon the
word. Non dubium est, quin ut homines erant affectibus obnoxijs, moerorem illis
attulerit bonorum suorum jactura. Verum talis fuit little tristitia, quae
gaudium hoc, de quo loquitur Apostolus, non impediret: quia paupertas inter res
adversus censetur: bonorum direptio in se considerata, dolor eos tangebat; sed
cum altius respicirent, gaudij materiam concipiebant, quo illud quic quid erat
doloris leniebatur. Sic enim sensus nostros coelestis remunera^a^irnis aspectu,
a mundo obduci convenit. Neque aliud dico quam quod experinatur pij omnes: and
certe laeti amplectim^r quod persuasi sumus cessurum nobis in salutem. Hunc
autem proeuldub to sensum habent filij Dei de certaminibus, quae pro Christi
gloria suscipiunt. Itaque nunquam in illis dolor obruendis ita praevalet
carnis affectus, quin erectis in Caelum mentibus, emergant in spirituale
gaudium. They were like to the Apostles in Act. 5.40, 41. that when they were
beaten, rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer for the Name of
Christ. Or like Paul himself in 2 Cor. 7.4. they were filled with joy, they
were exceeding joyful, or did, according to the Orig. superabound with joy:
(...).
they had a Pleonism thereof. They answered that Command of our Savior, Mat.
5.11, 12. (...) the former word signifies simply to rejoice, but the latter is
more Emphatical, and therefore rendered, be exceeding glad. Ex (...) vald^, and
(...) salio, ex ulto, gestio tripudio.
It signifies such a joy as we use to express by outward signs in the body, as
skipping, leaping, dancing; or as if they were resolved the temper of their
minds, and their deportment should be consonant to our Saviors Command, Luke
6.22, 23. (...) Leap for joy: let your hearts leap, and spring within you for
joy, like the Babe in Elizabeth's womb (...) proprie dicuntur lascivientes
pecades: translatitie ijs tribnitur qui prae gaudij abundantia non possunt se
continere, quin varios gestus edant, hinc, and illinc subsilientes. Beza
Brugen. in Har. Evang. It signifies such a leaping as wanton Cattle use, and
thence is taken to express such a rejoicing, as so affects one that he cannot
but leap for joy. Thus they were like men surprised with abundance of joy at
some sudden and unexpected glad tiding that makes them to dance and leap
again. They were like to the Wise men in the East, who when they saw the Star
that directed them to Christ, (...), Matthew. 2.10. (which is an Attick Elegancy)
rejoiced with exceeding great joy. Thus much for the manner of their suffering.
Oh! that Christians could suffer the spoiling of their goods so now.

2. In the ground and reason of their so suffering (Translated, knowing in your
selves that you have in Heaven a better, and and an enduring Substance; but it
is according to the Orig. knowing that you have in your selves, a better
substance in the heavens, and abiding, or a better, and abiding substance in
the heavens. So the Dutch Translation. So Calv. Beza, Piscator, and others.) we
have,

1. An act, which is Intellectual, Knowing. The highest, and greatest good in
the world is productive of joy no farther than it is known. There is a natural,
and necessary connection betwixt these two; and therefore it was requisite that
the good here spoken of should be known by them; for had they been ignorant of
it, they could not possibly have derived any comfor or consolation from it.

2. We have the object of this Act. Not any toy or trifle; not any minute, and
inconsiderable good; but grand and magnificent; most momentous, and weighty:
it is a substance, a better substance, one in heaven, and abiding. (Such a
Rhetorical climax, and gradation is here) It Is a substance, as if the goods
they lost were but shadows, if compared herewith. A substance therefore better
than they. It Is a substance in heaven which is not without its Emphasis, (of
which more hereafter) it is likewise permanent, and in this respect also better
than the other which is fleeting, and fading. This exact and curious
description of the object is given by the Apostle you see.

1. Absolutely, a Substance. This it must be, we cannot rationally supose they
could part joyfully with what is counted Substance in, and by the world (like
the Dog in the Fable) for that which is but a shadow, and has no reality in
it; or is but an insignificant image of a real good. Sensual Souls, and
earthly-minded men who are most concerned to please their brutish flesh; and
gratify their senses; while they neglect, are unconcerned, and insolicitous
for the happiness of their immortal spirits; they indeed eagerly pursue shadows
that fly from them; and fly from a real substance (even the supreme good) that
does pursue them, and would gladly be elected, and chosen by them. But
Heaven-born-souls have not their reason so debilitated, and dethroned, nor can
be guilty of such monstrous madness, and prodigious folly. Those that are
divinely illuminated cannot ly under such gross mistakes concerning their true,
and adaequate happiness, or conceive false and delusive Idea's of the same.

2. Comparatively, a better Substance. As always good, either real, or apparent
is the object of a man's love, desire, and choice; so it is an apprehended at
least, if not a certainly known Meliority of good, (either under a specific,
or gradual consideration) that induces and prevails with us to choose it
before another, and to show our preference of it, by parting with the other in
corrivalship for the same. When two good things are judged exactly to be equal,
and a preponderation, (when they are weighed in the balance of our judgments,
can be ascribed to neither of them) then the same right reason that does
dictate to us at first, and bring us under its regal and powerful commands to
choose good before evil; tells us likewise it is as good and convenient for us
to keep, and adhere to what we are for present in possession of, as to part
with it for that which does no way excel, or can challeng a superiority to it.
Had not then these goods that the Hebrews suffered a rapacious direption, and
plundering of be^n inferior to this heavenly Substance, they might justly, and
deservedly been stigmatized, and branded eternally with the most infamous
folly. Yea, and had not the latter as far surmounted, and surpassed the former;
as the bright, and beautiful heavens do the dull-complexion'd and
melancholy-look'd earth, with all opacous terrestrial bodies, they might with
good reason have been made the objects of all men's scorn, and derision: for
what wise man will leave his present Substance, and Comfort in his Native
Country, for any in a foreign, and far remote one, unless there be a very
great disproportion betwixt them as to all excellency and worth, and it be very
much for his advantage. But says the Text, they knew they had a better
Substance.

3. Locally, by an an Hypotyposis is this substance described; it is in the
Heavens; that we may know certainly where it is, and what its matchless worth,
and excellency is. When our Savior would recommend to our choice the best
Treasure, that we are capable of possessing, he tells us it is in Heaven, Mat.
6.20. and these intense desires of the Soul are rightly terminated when the
supreme object thereof is a Country that is heavenly, Heb. 11.16. of which more
hereafter. This likewise highly commends their wisdom that they would let go,
and part with terrene treasures for heavenly; and indeed no man is truly wise
but he that does it, Mat. 13.45, 46. says Piscator upon the very words in the
text to this very purpose: Quibus verbis simul eorum sapientiam collaudat, ut
qui majoris boni consequendi causa, aequo animo jacturam fecerint minoris.
Etenim bona coelestia terrenis long potiora sunt. Men that embrace, and are
most strongly tenacious of an earthly substance, when they should with disdain
and contempt cast it away for the heavenly, make themselves no wiser than Ixion
(who according to the Poetical fiction) instead of formose and beautiful Juno,
embraced, and hugged a deformed and ill-favored Cloud: And discover no more
true wisdom than Children (whose Reason moves but in the lowest Sphere) while
they prefer some Pebble-stones or Painted-glass, before the most bright Orient
Pearls, the richest Jewels, and purest Gold.

4. By a most noble and peculiar Property, enduring or abiding. Such is the
quality of this Celestial Substance, that this is an adjunct inseparable from
it; which is farther demonstrated what a highly rational Act, this of the
Hebrews was. This (...) must be understood of a constant eternal duration, of
the immercessibility, and never-fading nature of this Substance, not being
subject to moth, nor rust, nor thieves, nor hands of violence, nor any such
consuming, devouring, and wasting things. It Is a Substance from its own Nature
and essential constitution incapable of corruption; it is always flouring, and
flourishing, it is verdure, and greenness never fades. It Is enduring is to
everlasting life, like the me at that our Savior speaks of in John 6.27. It Is
the same with the Crown of life Rev. 2.10. the incorruptible inheritance. 1
Pet. 1.4. the house not made with hands eternally in the heavens. 2 Cor. 5.1.
the City that has foundations, whose builder and maker is God, Heb. 11.16.
This stands opposed to those other goods which they lost, and all earthly goods
whatsoever, that are fluxous and evanid; that have a mortal dying nature, and
disposition in them, and which the worm of vanity does so quickly wear, and
wast away.

3. The Assurance that they had of a right and title to this Object; to this
better, and permanent heavenly Substance. Knowing in your selves that you have,
etc. It Is not knowing simply and speculatively that there was such a Substance;
but knowing in themselves that they had it. (...). which the Dutch Annot.
Translate more exactly, knowing that you have in your selves. that is to say,
in the hope which is in you. Calvin with some others, Translate the words only,
knowing that you have, Scientes vos habere, following some Greek Copies, which
have only (...), in the accusative case, ut quisciatis vos habere. Quam
posteriorem lectionem secutus est vetus Latinus Interpres, nec ego improbo
quamvis duorum codicum Authoritate nitatur, says Beza. Some Greek Copies have
it (...), without the Proposition, and with this does the Translation of Junius
and Tremel. seem to accord, and correspond, which is this, Quoniam scitis quod
est vobis Possessio in Coelis, etc. But Piscator adheres to our Greek, and
translates it, Vt qui sciretis vos habere apud vos, etc. Beza in his Commentary
upon the place speaks thus, Neque redundat (...), id est, apud vos, and quasi
intra vos, cum fide ac spe jam nunc possideamus quod in Coelis est nobis
repositum. Read the words what way we please, and they prove some assurance
that the Hebrews had a full right to this more excellent heavenly Substance.
But (...) (aptly translated, knowing in your selves, or that you have in your
selves) carries the greatest Emphasis, and more important signification in it.
For the production of such a triumphant joy as is here spoken of either some
measure and degree of assurance that they had a right to a higher good, than
that which they were deprived of, was needful; or hope with very great vigor,
and vivacity acted, and exercised about this its proper object. For though a
more faint, and languid hope of such a good (I mean that hope which is heart,
and life purifying, 1 John 3.3. which is the genuine offspring of the spirit
of God, and product of Divine power in the soul, Romans 15.13.) efficaciously
makes a soul willing to part with all outward and earthly comforts, and
patiently, undergo the spoiling of all inferior worldly goods for the sake of
Christ. Yet I think it must be a more strong hope (a hope more highly elevated,
and plumed, and that is able upon its unwearied wings to bear up the soul that
it does possess, and inhabit, above all the storms of these lower Regions) that
can make it thus joyfully to do the same; of which more hereafter. Having thus
opened the Text, explained, and paraphrased a little upon every part, and
particular thereof; I shall sum up, and resolve all into one general
Proposition of Divine Truth, or Doctrinal Conclusion which takes in all the
Terms that are in this Portion of Scripture.

Prop. That those who know in themselves that they have a better Substance than
is here upon earth, and enduring in Heaven; should and will take joyfully the
spoiling of their goods for the sake of the pure instituted Worship of God, and
Doctrine of the Gospel: or if you will, for that Doctrine of the Faith of Jesus
Christ, because the Apostle mentions that in verse. 23. Hold fast the profession
of your Faith, which is objective, and not subjective Faith: that is that
Doctrine of Christ and his Gospel which is to be believed; which is the same
that we are Commanded to contend earnestly for, Jude 3. (...), Contend as
Wrestlers, and Combatants do for Victory, as they were wont to strive in the
Olympic Games instituted by Hercules for the honor of Jupiter. The Verb being
compounded has a greater significancy in it. The simple word signifies,
certamina proposita, qualia sunt inter Athletas sed compositio illustior est,
and significat certare cum summo studio. Aret.
viz. the exerting and putting forth all our vigor and strength to hold fast
this faith whatever way of suffering we be engaged in. All Goods, the whole
World must go for it if we had it, rather than part with, or from it. It was
for this Faith, and the pure Worship of Christ, that these Hebrews had suffered
so much already. In prosecution of this Doctrine according as the parts of it
lie in order.

1. I shall show what it is to know. 2. What it is which we must know in our
selves. 3. Discourse, and treat distinctly of the thing known. 4. Enquire how
it comes to be known. 5. Discover what it is to take joyfully the spoiling of
goods for such a thing when thus known. 6. Apply the whole in several
particulars.
1. I shall show what it is here to know. Though this has various
acceptations, and is of a large, extensive signification in Scripture, yet I
shall name no more than what I conceive may be the proper sense and meaning of
the Term here. Seeing God has made Man so noble a Creature, and dignified him
above the whole visible Creation, by that intellective, and rational faculty
which his soul is endued with. And because God has likewise appointed the same
to have the steerage, conduct, and government of the soul, to which all other
faculties must do obeisance, and must follow, and wait on as their Captain, and
Leader: in so much that the will it self (which is only appropriated to
reasonable Nature) cannot without the dictactes, and informations hereof make
any choice becoming a man, or an immortal Soul: for though it may have many
appetitions, inclinations, and likewise aversations to good, or evil (I mean
Physical, and Natural) yet are they all but sensitive if they do not (...), or
be not in some measure according to the Rules of right Reason; for this is that
which makes all the volitions of the Soul, laudable, and honorable: the (...)
thereof being properly (...), a desire upon reason, or rational understanding,
and knowledge. Hence not only in the holy Scriptures, but in profane Authors,
this supreme faculty of the soul is put for all tho rest, and expresses the
exercises of them by which the soul is capable of happiness; as choosing,
loving, desiring, delighting, etc. and so here we must determine that it
signifies more than a mere simple, naked notion, or speculation, to make way
for this real, and solid joy. As

1. It signifies a certain understanding, such as conquers, and removes all
haesitatitations, doubtful, and fluctuating opinions; it implies such an
understanding that is a resultancy from a full, pregnant proof, and clear
demonstration of the real existence, and verity of the thing it self. Thus to
know in Scripture, is sometimes to know certainly, Judge. 18.5. Jer. 10.23. John
8.32. Judge. 6.37. 1 King. 2.42. 2 King. 10.10. Job 19.25. for had the Hebrews
not thus known the Heavenly Substance, but in the least had doubted of it; they
could not have rejoiced as they did. They had therefore such a certain knowledge
of it as did beget a true, and through persuasion: for that is the sense
likewise of some of the former Scriptures.

2. Serious Consideration when the soul is brought solidly, and judiciously to
weigh in it self, and ponder what the nature and quality of a thing is, how
advantageous, and beneficial, or how noxious, and hurtful it will be to it,
then it knows aright, Psalm. 90.11. Who knows the power of thine anger? Some
make the meaning of it to be, Who seriously considers it? Hos. 2.8. She did not
know that I gave her Corn, and Oil, and Wine, and multiplied her Silver and
Gold: that is, she did not take it into consideration; she did not allow her
thoughts time enough to work upon, and ponder this; to oblige her to obey and
fear the Lord. For of a mere nesciency, or ignorance it cannot be understood.
So to know in the words of the text, and in the proposition they afford, is to
be ruminating and considering, with the greatest composedness, and steddiness
of mind, and fixedness of spirit what this Heavenly Substance is: what is its
intrinsic work, and excellency. For the more profound, and deep consideration
any man has of the good he knows, the more joy and comfort he receives from
it; as on the contrary, the more a man considers of any evil that befalls him
which he knows, the more it racks, and tortures his mind, and causes greater,
heart-piercing, and breaking, sorrows. Had not these Hebrews been much in
pondering what a full, and ample reward this Substance in Heaven would be for
all their losses, and troubles, (so as to cause a reckoning, or counting with
the Apostle in Romans 8.18. (...), which is more than thinking, even by
ratiocination, and argumentation to conclude, and determine that all sufferings
of this present time, are not worthy to be laid in the balance with it,) they
could not possibly have rejoiced as they did when they were so cruelly and
injuriously spoiled of their Goods. Most men in the Christian world lose this
eternal Substance, this future immortal Glory for not being seriously, and
fixedly considerate how far all their present gain can be from compensating
such a loss. And very few, if any, would they but weigh aright, the vast
disproportion that is betwixt their present earthly shadows and this most
substantial blessedness, would ever turn their backs on Christ, or Naufragate,
and make Shipwreck of the Faith, to secure the former, and hereby deprive
themselves to eternity of the latter. Most men that live within the call of the
Gospel, and the offers, and tenders of Grace by it, perish for ever by reason
of their incogitancy, and inconsiderations. It Is Consideration that makes the
^eepest impression upon the Soul, that is most influential, and persuasive unto
pract^ce. Whatever knowledge therefore men have of God, his Laws, the
Revelations of his Will, the future Glory, the Gospel Terms, and Conditions
upon which they must be saved, if this be wanting, it never prevents their
precipitatious into sin, and the gulf of guilt, their Apostacies from God, and
his truth, and so consequentially neither their eternal ruin, and damnation.
To be wise therefore, to understand, and consider, are concatenated, and ^ink'd
together as a sovereign Remedy, and Antidote against a man's mis-spending his
most precious time, and his Souls everlasting death, and destruction, Deuteronomy.
32.29. O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would
consider their latter end. Had the Hebrews known never so much of this better
Substance, and had not been brought thereby to a steady consideration of its
worth, they would have been far from rejoicing when impoverished, and divested
of their present Comforts for the sake of Christ.

3. A firm Belief that this Heavenly Substance is, what the Soul knows, and
considers it to be: such a Belief as is most strong and invincible
notwithstanding all the Arguments the World, the Flesh, and the Devil can bring
against it. Thus to believe, and know are terms synonimous in Scripture, and
signify one and the same thing, John 11.24. I know, that is, I believe. If the
Hebrews had wanted such a Faith they could not have so rejoiced; for no man is
farther made glad with any good than he believes what its reality, worth, and
excellency is. For men then to know this Substance in Heaven is insuperably to
believe not only what it is, that it exists there; but that it is what God has
revealed, and reported it to be: and without such a Belief there can neither be
a right rejoicing when we suffer, nor a perseverance (approved of, and
acceptable to God) in our suffering for him. If once Faith be foiled and
conquered, a Christian quickly gives over fighting, and suffering: then instead
of forsaking the world, there will be a forsaking of God, and Christ. All
Defections, and Apostacies result from unbelief, as the root, Heb. 7.12. Take
heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in
departing from the living God, (...), in turning Apostates, or forsaking, and
quitting the ways of God, that our motions heavenwards, and to the full
fruition of God himself, should be invariable and progressive in. Had all
Professors that Faith which does most firmly and invincibly believe the reality
of the future Glory; and that penetrates, and pierces into Heaven, and
Eternity, through all dark interposing clouds here below, giving the soul a
view, and prospect of the same, realizing, and substantiating it as present to
it, Heb. 11.1. I say, had all Professors such a Faith, not one of them to save
an Estate, an Inheritance, a Treasure in this world, (although it consisted of
all Imperial Crowns, and Kingdoms) would ever deny the Truth (I mean totally
and finally) and disown the pure Worship, and Doctrine of Jesus Christ, or turn
away from that most absolute, and perfect Rule of Righteousness which Divine
Laws do Constitute, 1 John 5.4. Heb. 11.24, 25, 26. but would rejoycingly, and
triumphantly persevere to suffer for these high and precious things; that the
eternal salvation of his soul depends upon.

4. To know is to be assured, if not fully, yet in some degree, and measure,
that this better and permanent Substance shall be ours. The Hebrews knew, that
is, as was showed in the opening of the words before, they were assured that
they had such a Substance. A well grounded assurance of Heaven, though it be
not absolutely perfect, will make those Souls where it is very cheerfully, and
joyfully to suffer. And to know, and to be assured in Scripture sometimes for
sense, and signification, are the same, 2 Cor. 5.2. For we know, i. e. we have
an assurance that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we
have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternally in the Heavens.
and this the Hebrews knew, i. e. of this they had an assurance, when their
earthly habitations were taken from them: but having spoken something to this
already, I will not ampliate, and enlarge the discourse here any farther.

5. What is it that we must know in our selves? this, as has been showed in
the opening of the words, is not without its Emphasis, two things then it seems
to import; the one whereof has been in part spoken to.

1. A lively hope of possessing this Substance according to such a knowledge,
consideration, belief, and assurance, 1 Pet. 1.3. By knowledge Christians
reflect upon their hope, from whence springs their joy. There is a natural
connection betwixt these two, as betwixt the Streams and the Fountain, the
Beams and the Sun, which flow from the same, Romans 5.8. Romans 12.12. Rejoicing in
the hope of the glory of God. Though Good be not in actual possession, yet so
long as it is an object of hope, proportionably to the apprehended worth of that
good, and the strength of that hope is still our joy. Hope is unexpressibly
useful to a religious soul in respect of comfort when she grounds her self upon
Eternity, and upon an Assured futurity which we are promised in the holy
Scriptures, and not upon that uncertain futurity which amuseth most men, and at
last deceives all. They that thus know in themselves, know experimentally, and
believingly what the sweet benign influences of hope (while it has this
enduring Substance for its objects) are upon their Souls.

2. Something inherent, and wrought in them, upon which all the other are
grounded. To know in our selves, is to have or find in our selves that which
may be a sure ground for us infallibly to conclude from, that we have this
Substance, which is better, and abiding in Heaven. As a vital Principle of
Grace, or a Principle of spiritual lite ruling, and governing the soul, and
acting it toward God, the through change of our Natures, and regeneration of
our Spirits, the transforming energy, and virtue of the spirit of God to have
past upon our souls: the deep impressions of a divine nature thereupon whereby
we are assimulated, and made like to God. Whosoever has not his hope and
expectation of an heavenly blessedness built, and bottomed upon this, does but
deceive himself, and will find his hope to prove abortive, and his expectation
most miserably, and deplorably frustrated in the end. Mat. 5.8. Blessed are the
pure in heart, for they shall see God. Col. 1.27. Which is Christ in you, the
hope of Glory. This is that we must know and find in our selves, before we can
challeng a right and title unto, and conclude that this immortal Substance
belongs to us; and shall certainly be possessed by us. To know in our selves
seems consonant to that, 1 John 5.10. He that believes in the Son of God has
the witness in himself. Which is not only (if there be any such thing) that
witness, and testimony of the Holy Ghost in a more immediate way, but an
inherent Principle of Grace, and Holiness, first powerfully planted, and
wrought by the spirit of God in the soul; and then halping, and enabling the
soul to reflect upon it, and find it out; and after this, to draw right and
comfortable conclusions from the same, which stand as a witness, and evidence
in our souls, that we have a right to all that future Glory, and felicity, that
such a changing renewing Principle does adapt and qualify us for, and render us
capable of. And if I may allude to that which is spoken of our Savior in the
very same words, John 6.61. thereby expressing his omnisciency, knowing in
himself, it will illustrate this to be the sense thereof; for how did Christ
know in himself; Col. 2.9. but by that fullness of the Godhead that dwelt in
him, (...) bodily, that is personally or substantially: As he was God he had
Omnisciency in him, and so he knew in himself, by his own in-dwelling Divinity,
or Godhead. So to know in our selves, is to know by some in-dwelling Purity,
and Holiness in our Souls, that we have this better Substance. Yet I will not
possitively determine this to be the proper signification of the words. I only
declare my own apprehension, and sentiment thereof without imposing upon any,
but shall leave every one to their own judgment.

3. I proceed now to discourse, and distinctly to treat of the thing known; A
Substance, with those other things it is amplyfied by, which have been already
in part explained: but I shall now give a more particular account of them. And,

1. I shall begin with the Substance spoken of. (...), which word is used by
most Greek Authors in the same le^s^.
The word in the Original signifies Bona, Facultates, Wealth, Goods,
Possessions, which we frequently call Substance; and hence a Rich Man is called
a Substantial Man. Substance is sometimes taken for the essence, or being of
any thing; and is no more than Ens, subsisting of it self, but then it is not
expressed by (...), but (...) (though in some Authors this word also signifies
Riches) sometimes Substance signifies persona, a person endowed with reason,
and is the same with that which the Schoolmen call Suppositum, and is used by
Theologists in the explication of the Holy Trinity, and the two Natures of the
Lord Jesus Christ in one Person; and then its set forth by the word (...), Heb.
1.3. which is translated subsistentia, one that does subsist of himself: but
this Substance is of another Nature, and otherwise to be considered, even as
something that stands opposed to the Goods that Believers may be, and often are
spoiled of in this world: Therefore must be Goods of an higher and more
excellent Nature. It Is some Substance that is not a simple Ens, or naked being,
but that which can greatly enrich the Soul, and become its Wealth, and
Treasure. In it then we have an involution of two things.

1. Reality. It shall not prove a fools Paradise, a dreamed enjoyment: As a
poor man that dreams he wallows, and tumbles in wealth, and is accumulating the
treasures of the earth; or as an hungry man, that dreams he is feasted and fed
with luxurious dainties, has Sardanapalus's sumptuous fare; is eating the most
delicious meats, and drinking the most generous, pure, and sparkling Wines; or
like an ignoble, and base person, that dreams he wears a Princes Crown; that he
is set upon a Regal Throne, sways an Imperial Scepter, Commands, and Governs
Kingdoms, and is advanced to the highest pitch, and pinnacle of worldly Power,
and Pomp: But when all these awake, Alas! they find all those things are but
lusorious dreams, there is no reality in them; and so they vanish leaving them
all pensive, and sad at so miserable a disappointment. But this is a Substance,
a real thing, or Good indeed; that the suffering Saints know they have. Vain
toys and trifles, froth and foam, bubbles and shadows, and such deluding
dreams do not constitute the same, the Joys, and Pleasures the Saints shall
have such an exuberancy of the Honor, and the Glory they shall be crowned with
to Eternity, shall not be pageant, and umbratil, but most substantial; God
promises nothing unto them but what is real.

2. Sati^ly, and the fullest Satisfaction it does afford. Wind may fill the
belly, or stomach of a man; but it is substantial Meat that must satisfy them;
and make their constant cravings, and painful gnawings to cease. This then
being Substance, it is that which shall fully satisfy their souls, being an
edaequate, commensurate happiness both to their Nature as immaterial, and
immortal, and also to their capacity which is so immense, and vastly larg. It
is that which God has so exactly accommodated hereunto, that it shall be their
central felicity for ever, which in the full fruition, and possession thereof
shall afford such plenary satisfaction to their Souls, that their volitions,
and desires for any other earthly Substance, Good, and Comfort, shall not only
be allayed, and moderated, but totally extinguished. This is that indeed which
supersedes the souls chase after all other delights, and felicities. The
substantial joy in Heaven, Vt plenam illam laetitiam exprimat Propheta utitur
plurali numero Laetitiarum, ut una sit iustar omnium, and in se comprehendat
veram omnem laetandi materiam omne laeti^iarum genus, and earum copiosissimam
abundantiam. Rivet in Locum.
therefore is called a plenitude, a fullness, Psalm. 16.11. When once the Soul
comes to swim, and bath it self in that immense, immeasurable Sea of sweetest,
celestial pleasures, and everlasting consolations; and to be swallowed up in
the infinite, unbounded Ocean of the supreme Good: then certainly it shall know
no more what it is to pant after, to thirst, and long for any rest, and
happiness whatsoever. If Divine Grace in its imperfect measures, and degrees,
give so great, and solid satisfaction to an immortal spirit that is principled
with it in this world that it shall never thirst more, John 4.14. neither
through Necessity, not for variety, as one says, (S. S. in his Immanuel) after
any other thing, shall not rove, and rang up and down in the world in
unfixedness, and suspense, to seek for satisfaction and rest: if such a soul
never be uncertain, or unsatisfied more as to its supreme object and main
happiness; if hereby all its restless fluctuations, and aestuations; all its
tossings and ragings for want of a chief Good, shall cease so much: How sedate,
and calm must it be? to what a complacential rest must it be brought, when it is
put into the full enjoyment of this Substance (which a perfection of Grace is
so great a part of.) This is that it shall ultimately and unchangeably
acquiesce in.

2. It Is a Substance in Heaven. This is not any visible Heaven whose influences
reach our bodies, and other creatures here upon earth; but the Heaven that is
invisible to a corporeal eye, though assisted with the help of all Mathematical
Telescopes. It Is the Heaven where God is most eminenntly present, where there
is the most conspicuous effulgency of his Glory; where, as it were he keeps his
Imperial Court, and has his special Favorites about him, Isa. 66.1. Heaven is
my Throne, and the Earth is my footstool. It Is that Heaven where Christ
Reigns; The Angels shine in Glory, and all the Saints are Crowned and
Enthroned. Such a Heaven there is where God more especially dwells, (though in
respect of the Immensity of his Essence he is present in all places, and
bounded, or circumscribed with none.) and where all the Saints shall be
congregated together, to receive the reward of their faithful service to God;
and all their sufferings for him. It is called in 1 King. 8.27. the Heaven of
Heavens, the most vast expanded Heaven, which environs, and compasses about
all the other Heavens, and is the most spacious place that ever was Created.
Its called therefore the Heaven of Heavens for amplification sake, and to set
forth the Imensity of God which it cannot contain. The Third Heaven is a simple
and shining body, Created immediately of God to be the T^^one of his special
Presence, and of the gracious manifestations of his Pe^^^tions, and the
Habitation of the Blessed, both Angels and Men.
It Is called the Third Heaven in 2 Cor. 12.2. which is the Not from its heat,
but from its resplendency and most pleasant light. The Third Heaven we have
only from the Scripture, Heathenish Philosophers were ignorant of it.
Empyreal Heaven, far above the Aereal, in which the Fowls flying are called
the Fowls of Heaven, Mat. 6.26. (...), and above the Siderial, in which the
Lights are called Stars of Heaven, Genesis 15.5. It Is that which is uppermost of
all in which the Angels residing are called the Angels in Heaven, Mat. 24.36.
This is that then which in Scripture is called the Highest Heaven, Luke 2.14.
(...), in Coelis Altissimis, as Eeza translates it, or rather interprets it,
the Highest Heavens, Mat. 21.9. We have the same (for it is usual with the
Greeks to put Adjectives without their Substantives, as one shall find in the
most elegant Authors among them, Xenephon and others; and this is frequent in
the New Testament, Mat. 10.42. (...) where is understood (...)) As the Heaven
signifies that which is above us; when it is Local, and carries in it a Notation
of Altitude; so this Heaven is not inferior to any, but superior to all other
Heavens. Although God be Omnipotent, and cannot be said to be in a place either
Definitive, as finite incorporeal Substances may, or Circumscriptive, as all
corporeal Substances are: yet seeing, both according to reason, and his own
most sacred Revelations (which are all most highly Rational, though some of
them be superior to our Reason.) there must be some peculiar place, where there
are most admirable, and ravishing Emications, and beamings forth of his most
bright shining Excellencies, and absolute Perfection: which are the great part
of that Objective Glory the Angels behold, and are united to, and which all the
Saints shall by the completion, and perfection of Holiness be fitted to bear,
and also made capable of an union with, and which is the ineffable, and
incomprehensible Beatifical Vision, Mat. 5.8. 1 John 3.2. Psalm. 17.15. And this
place must have a Superiority to all other places, which, seeing it is called
Heaven, it must be above all other Heavens; else it would hold no congruity nor
sutableness to the Grandeur of his own Majesty (inferior, and subject to which
is all other Majesty, that is but a very dark resemblance of the same.) We find
that according to all Political order, and Oeconomical disposure, those persons
that are of greatest Eminency and worth either by birth, or descent, or by true
Virtue, Education (which does most really nobilitate and dignify a person) and
Offices (relating to their distinct and proper objects) have still the highest
places assigned them, and deservedly challenge a precedence before, and
superiority to others. And this is only Analogical unto, and derivative from
that God who is supereminent, and likewise clearly demonstrative what is due to
him as his most just Right and Prerogative. Height is that which (...) and by
way of eminency is approprietated to God, Isa. 57.15. and therefore every
finite created being, the higher it is, the more in that respect, it resembles
God, and is denominated, and accounted more excellent from thence, than another
creature, or being of the same species and kind. Hence in Scripture, tall
Trees, and high Mountains are called Mountains of God, (...). Sept. Psalm. 36.6.
Thy Righteousness is like the great Mountains, Heb. Mountains of God. Psalm.
104.16. The Trees of the Lord are full of Sap, that is, the goodly and tall
Trees, such as the Cedars are that he immediately after speaks of. The very
Heathens by the light of Nature had a knowledge of this Truth (so agreeable is
it to the reason of Man) as they did distinguish between their Gods as Majores,
and Minores: so their greater Gods were supposed to inhabit an higher place, or
Court, and the other to be below them. And as Jupiter was their chiefest God,
so the highest Palace, and Heaven was made proper, and peculiar to him. Thus he
is spoken of by the Latin Poet Ovid. lib. 1 Metamorph. fab. 6. Olympus by the
P^ets (it being a very high hill) was taken for Heaven, vel quasi (...) tanta
ejus altitudine ut pedes ascendentium non possunt consp^ci vel quasi (...) quod
illic oculi frigore vitiuntur, vel quasi, (...); totus Lucidus and Iympidus:
and so both for its Altitude and Clearness made Jupiters Heaven.
as descending from above in these words, Summo delabor Olympo; so when he
describes him sitting in Counsel among the other Gods, advances him above them
in these words, Celsior ipse loco; so by the Greek Poet (...) Hesiod. Now
although by sense we know not where this place is, as not being exposed to the
view thereof, yet from all this, and much more that might be said to prove it,
we may collect, and conclude, that such a place there is, and that it is above
all others, and in this place is this Substance said to be. I have been larger
upon this than some perhaps will judge pertinent, and necessary; but the reason
why I am so, is because so many either from Principles of Atheism that is in
them (though they do not profess it) or because they are Entheusiastically
infatuated, most absurdly, and irrationally assert (and are very industrious to
propagate such an opinion) that there is no Local Heaven, and that God is not
to be enjoyed more in one place than in another. The affirming this Substance
to be in Heaven implies, and includes these following particulars.

1. The certainty of its possession. It Is no Poetical fiction or fable; it is no
Romantic Vtopia, but so certainly as there is a Heaven (than which nothing is
more certain) so certainly is there this most substantial blessedness to be
enjoyed by the Saints. Certainly, and Reality are distinct, A good may be real,
but yet not certain, because that respects either our knowledge, or enjoyment of
it, or both. To say it is a Substance as has been already showed, proves the
reality of the Saints felicity, but to say it is in Heaven, expresses the
certainty of an enjoyment, 1 Pet. 1.4. If a man say to his Friend and
Favorite, I will bestow upon thee a Treasure that affords some comfort, and is
a considerable demonstration of kindness; but it is not exclusive of all
doubts: for the question may still be put; how shall I come by it? and where is
it? But if the Reply be, go to such a Chamber, or Chest, here is the Key that
opens it, take it into your possession, then it is certain it shall be his upon
supposition it is a real Treasure, a Substance indeed, and the person be serious
when he makes such an offer, and promise. Now the Children of God do not only
know that they have a Substance, and Treasure, but they know the very place
where it is, they know where to find it, and take possession of it, it is
certain and sure to them; they have the word of a faithful God for it.

2. The furutity of it. Here is no posseson of it, it is not attainable in this
life. God does not intend a perfect happiness for his Saints here upon earth;
or that they shall have no better, and higher blessedness than what is to be
enjoyed in this world. Here they are not to be rewarded fully for their
sufferings, and losses for righteousness and Religions sake. But here they must
expect a constant succession of troubles, and trials, like the Waves of the
Ocean following speedily one another; and an uninterrupted Series of
Afflictions, Crosses, and Sorrows. No constant Calm, nor serene state is to be
expected for the faithful Servants of God in these lower Regions: Storms will
arise, and continue till they come to the Harbors mouth; they will accompany
them to their very Arrival at the Haven of everlasting Rest, Act. 14.22. Here
they live by hope, the object whereof is not a present, but a future good, Romans
8.24. and not such a good whose futurity is in time, but eternity, 1 Cor.
15.19. While Gods Children are in this world they are Minors, like Heirs under
age that must not take possession of their Inheritance, it is reserved in Heaven
for them, 1 Pet. 1.4. They have much laid up under hope, but little in hand;
the highest, and greatest things under expectation, but little in possession.
Their Substance is as a Reversion after this life. Their right and title
thereunto is clear, and made sure; but till they come to die, God says not, go
up and possess the good Land. God indeed sometimes for Cordials, and
counter-comforts when they have their bitter cups to drink, and their fainting
fits approaching, gives them some praegustations, and fore-tasts of the immixt
sweetnesses of Heaven, and a delightful ravishing prospect and fore-view of its
Glory, and Blessedness, a distillation thereof often is of some few drops from
the overflowing Ocean, and a secret influx of some lesser Rivolets from the
everflowing, Chrystiline fountain of joy, upon their Spirits. Sometimes they
have their first fruits, but the full harvest, and perfection of all is Heaven
it self, which is future and to come.

3. The Invisibility of it to outward sense. This Heaven not being exposed to
the view of sense, this Substance which is in it cannot be seen: if the Cabinet
be not visible, the Jewels in it cannot be beheld. God will not have the Saints
inestimable, and chiefest Treasure to be seen, and discerned by their bodily
eyes, but by the spiritual enlightened eye of Faith, which it is the proper
object of. The sufferings of the Saints would not be so highly laudable, and
commendable, could they by external sense see the glorious reward that they
must fetch their encouragment from, to endure the same. God will have their
Spirits steeled, and strengthened; their Souls fortifyed; their hearts
enboldned, and raised to an high pitch of invincible Magnanimity, from an
invisible crown; and all for the trial and exercise of Faith; the sweet, and
sure, and noble life whereof, he intends (as he has enjoynd it by an
irrepealable Law) they shall live, while they are the Inhabitants of this lower
World. The Apostle in 2 Cor. 5.7. tell us they must not live by sight but by
Faith, God promises them great things; his promises as the Apostle says, 2
Pet. 1.4. Are exceeding great, and precious, so they are subjectively, and in
respect of the matter thereof. And God will prove and try who among the many
thousands that profess themselves to be Christians; will take his word, and
trust him firmly; and fixedly; and immoveably depend thereupon. And who by a
belief of the certainty, and the excellency of good that is only promised, at
so great a distance and not seen, can leave, and quit cheerfully, and joyfully
a good that is present, and conquers things visible by the sight of things
invisible. Did all that profess themselves Believers really live by Faith, then
none would in a day of temptation faint, and finally fall away, Heb. 10.38. Now
the just shall live by Faith; which implies small perseverance, for it is stands
opposed to drawing back, which the want of Faith is the cause of, and all a
Christians Conquests over the World, are ascribed to Faith, 1 John 5.4. The
Reason of this is, because Faith (which ultimately resolves it self into the
Authority, and veracity of divine Revelations and Promises) makes what is
invisible as visible to the Soul. It Is of such an evidencing Nature, and
property, and does so substantiate, and bring into a real existence, that
eternal felicity which is the object of the Saints hope; that it has a most
powerful influence upon the Soul to abandon, and forsake all visible, and
finite good, and the highest terene Felicities, and worldly Enjoyments that
come in competition with the same, Heb. 11.1. Now Faith is the substance of
things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen. The word (...)
translated substance signifies the making things so really to subsist, as
begets a wonderful unshaken confidence in the soul. So it is rendered in the 2
Cor. 9.4. 2 Cor. 11.17. It signifies sometimes a Basis or Foondation, which
does not only subsist of it self, but supports, and upholds other things, so
it is the ground, and Basis of a Christians hope (...).
it signifies a firm, Metaphora ducta a venatoribus qui feram dicuntur, (...)
cum came constanter expectant and irrututem fortiter excipiunt.
and settled persuasion of the mind, the most constant expectation of the Soul.
The sum of what it signifies is this, that it makes the invisible Celestial
happiness so visible, and so really to subsist before, and unto the Soul, that
it affords most true, and solid matter of confident glorying to it, and makes
it imperterritous and undaunted. The other word (...) translated eviaence,
signifies such evidence as results from most convincing demonstration, such as
gives ^mple satisfaction to the Soul, resolving That is, whether there is a
future happiness and reward for well-doing and suffering yea, or no.
all it is ^oubts, and removing all ^'s fears. Now seeing ^aith does all this,
it is no ^onder though the Coe^e^stial substance be invisible, that the Saints
^ho have it, can with triumphant Joys ^art with all their wordly comforts for
the ^ke of Christ, that they may enjoy the same. The Apostle further shows us
that things not seen, are so clearly seen and looked upon by believing; that the
Soul is kept from fainting, and sinking under the most ponderous Pressures, and
mountainous loads of Troubles; and the most crushing burdens of all Crosses,
and Calamities, 2 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18. This made Moses to endure so resolutely
and courageously Heb. 11.27. To see what is not seen; to have that visible
which is invisible, is a strange Paradox, yea and seems to imply a gross
contradiction to sensual Souls, and earthly minded men. It Is a mystery they
cannot plum, or fathom the depth of. If at any time notionally, or by the
report of others they speak, and discourse of it, it is but as a blind man does
of the beauty, and brightness of Sun, and Moon, and Stars, which is invisible
to him: but to believing Souls, that are not immerst in sensuality, and buried
in the Earth, but have a Spiritual Visive faculty, suited and proportioned to a
Spiritual object, it is as clear a truth as any thing, that is most demonstrable
in Nature. Yea its more clear, and certain then many things are by ocular
demonstration, because the bodily Eye is capable of deception, and has many
times a fallacy put upon it, which Faith is never liable to; because it depends
upon the word, and promise of the unerringly, infallibly wise, and faithful
God. The Enemies of pure, and undefiled Religion, and the divinely instituted,
and authorized worship of God (whose Souls lie under the Dominion of their
Senses) and many carnal Hypocritical Professors (in whose hearts Earth, and not
Heaven is most regnant, the World, and inferior good, and not God, the Supreme
good, has the prevailing, and predominant interest) they wonder at the
imprudence of those, and highly censure, and accuse them of the grossest, and
most ridiculous folly, that will hazard, and part with their Estates, and
Spontaneously, and eligibly make themselves poor for the Gospel sake (as these
Hebrews did) rather then to possess all Earthly Treasures without it. They
think them (for so doing) deprived of all Sense and Reason, strangly
insatuated, or under some great delusion (that calls for pity and
commiseration) or that too much Religion has made them delirious. For as no
man in his right Wits will refuse Riches when they court him to an acceptance;
so they judge none but a Fool, unless he be forced, will part with them. These
men (who always make their Consciences subservient to their interest, and are
resolved to walk no further in the way to Heaven, then it is plain and smooth,
and may consist with the case of the Flesh and the Security of their
Possessions) admire, and adore the depths of their own Wisdom, and Prudence (as
they call it) out of which they can draw subtle distinctions as they list, to
baffle the^ own Consciences for awhile, and to silence, and still the clamours
thereof when they do awake in this World. And indeed they judge all men Fools,
that cannot distinguish themselves out of Heaven; either to get or improve, or
keep an estate hereupon Earth. But were this most substantial blessedness
conspicable, and could it be steddily beheld with their Eyes; yea, had they but
the least transient view, and smallest momentary glimps thereof, they would
then be astonished, and confounded at their own monstrous sottishness, and
matchless folly, to adventure the losing of the same, for such an unsatisfying
trifle as an earthly Estate, and Treasure is; and would no less admire the
wisdom of true Believers in the choice, which they have made. But although no
such view, and sight they shall be honored with; neither will God take such a
course to convince them of these things; yet when they come into another World,
where this Heavenly substance shall be visible to them, that they may know, and
feel how great their loss is, (when they meet with an eternal separation from
the same) and have their misery highly aggravated thereby; then they will
confess that living by Faith was the highest point of true wisdom; then shall
they know to their everlasting shame, and sorrow that the Eye of Faith
(formerly despised, and derided by them) could penetrate, and look through the
thickest Clouds of miseries, and the most black midnight darkness of
Calamities, into the highest Celestial Regions, to view that glory, and
blessedness which is there, but to all other eyes invisible. Then shall they
befool themselves and form a furious Reflection upon their former madness, begin
to tear, and torment themselves; as it is in 5. Chapter of Wisdom. from Ver. 1.
to 14. Then shall the Righteous stand in great boldness, before the Face of
such as have tormented him, and taken away his labors. When they see him, they
shall be vexed with horrible fear, and shall be amazed for his wonderful
deliverance. And shall change their minds, and sigh for grief of mind: Say
within themselves; this is He Whom we sometimes had in derision, and in a
Parable of Reproach. We Fools thought his life madness, and his end without
honor. How is He counted among the Children of God, and his Portion is among
the Saints? Therefore we have erred from the way of Truth; and the light of
Righteousness has not shined in us, and the Son of understanding rose not upon
us. We wearied our selves in the way of wickedness and destruction; yea, we
have gone through Deserts, where there lay no way: But as for the way of the
Lord, we have not known it. What has Pride profited us? or what good has
Riches with our vanting brought us? All those things are passed away like a
shadow, and as a Post that hasted by. And as a Ship that passes over the Waves
of the Water, which when it is gone by, the trace thereof cannot be found:
Neither the Path way of the Keel in the Waves. Or as when a Bird has flown
through the Air, there is no token of her way to be found, but the light Air
being beaten with the stroke of her Wings, and parted with the violent noise
and motion of them, is passed through, and therein afterward no sign where she
went is to be found. Or like as when an Arrow is shot at a Mark, it parts the
Air, which immediately comes together again: So that a Man cannot know where
it went through Even so in like manner, as soon as we were born, began to draw
to our end, and had no sign of virtue to show: but were consumed in our own
wickedness.

4. The Security and safety of it: It Is that which neither force, nor fraud,
power, nor policy can deprive them of; the hands of violence cannot reach it;
it is said to be in Heaven; so 1 Pet. c. 4. to be reserved there. The word (...)
signifies sometimes sollicitously to keep something, lest it should be lost and
taken away by others, Matthew. 23.3. John 8.55. 1 John 5.18. Thus is this
heavenly substance kept that it cannot be taken away, by the most mortal and
immortal enemies the Saints have. Heaven is a place that neither humane, nor
Diabolical power can besiege and storm, Matthew. 6. v. 20. It Is never liable to
violence nor spoil; and in that respect stands opposed to, and far surpasses
all terrene treasures: Many are born, and have a real right to an earthly
substance, but never come to possess it, being either defrauded, or by
oppressing power most injuriously deprived of the same. But this substance is
obnoxious to no such thing. Although many times Persecutors, with prodigious
voraciousness, and greediness, and with the greatest barbarity and ferocity,
swallow up (as their prey) the estates, and all the outward comforts of Gods
children; Yet however in this they may rejoice, and it may be sufficient to put
their pious souls into an exulting posture; to consider how they have a
substance in Heaven. Suppose plundering Sabeans, and spoiling Caldeans, come to
a man's house, and by violence take away his Lumber stuff, and some less
considerable goods; yet this begets scarce any discomposure of mind, so long as
his Jewels, his Silver, and Gold, his principal Treasure, is safe and secure.
So when persevering Saints are spoiled of their earthly Goods, it should
produce no commotions nor disquietudes in their souls; seeing their principal
and chief substance, their choicest treasure, is in safe custody, guarded by
all the heavenly host; and encompassed with the omnipotent Power of God, which
is more for it is security than the highest and strongest walls of brass and
marble. Who will be dejected, or drowned in sorrow, to lose the streams, when he
has the fountain? or who will be pensive and sad, to lose the Candlelight, or
lesser Lamps, when he has the light of the Sun, the principal Lamp of Heaven.

5. The delectability of it: It must be a substance affording the most
incomparably delicious pleasures. For what delights can be wanting to a
substance in Heaven, which is a notation of all absolute perfection? Bartons,
and Manors, and all earthly Inheritances, are highly commended, and are the
more valuable from their pleasant situations. How pleasantly situated then must
this substance and inheritance be, which is in Heaven? It Is neither in the
pleasant plain of Jordan, Genesis 13.10. nor in the Land of Goshen, Genesis 47 6. nor
in the Land of Canaan that overflowed with milk and honey, Lev. 20.24. nor in
the Garden of Eden, nor in any earthly Paradise, but in Heaven; where the most
blessed God shines forth in his Glory. What then can be wanting to make it most
delectable to the glorified Saints, who must be the eternal inhabitants of
Heaven? But here let no man mistake me, as if I meant Mohammedan amaenities and
delights (which I fear too many professed Christians have corresponding, and
agreeing Notions with the Turks of) which differs not spicifically, but
gradually from what they enjoy here upon earth, and so make it nothing else,
but a plenitude of sensual pleasures, or flesh-pleasing good and delights in a
higher measure: (I might quote much out of Mahomets Alchoran to this purpose,
but one passage shall serve for all, which is this: I will cause those that
have believed in God, and have performed good works, to enter into Gardens
wherein flow many Rivers, where they shall dwell eternally with most beautiful
Women. I will give them the shade of Paradise, Page 52. in the Chapter of
Women, written at Medina: Thus here and in other places also, we find the
Beatitude which Mahomet promises to the faithful keepers of his Laws, is
accommodated to their flesh and senses, which I forbear to mention, because it
would be too far a digression) For I intend no other but what are Intellectual
and spiritual, which are the noblest and sweetest Pleasures, most exactly
accommodated to the understanding, and all the powers and capacities of an
Immortal Soul: The nearer the streams are to the Fountain, the purer and
sweeter they are. In Heaven the Saints shall have all their joys, or most of
them immediately from the fullest fountain, God himself; which will make them
infinitely more recreating to their minds, ravishing and reviving to their
souls and spirits. See Mr. Baxters Saints Rest, Page 84, 85. more largely
treating of this particular.
Their pleasures shall not be conveyed to them through any unclean Channels, nor
shall they in the use of means and ordinances be brought to them; neither shall
they have them at the first, second, or third hand, etc. as they have in this
world whereby they become more mixed, and less delicious; but they shall be as
that pure River of Water of Life, clear as Crystal, proceeding out of the
Throne of God, and of the Lamb, Rev. 22.1.2. They shall see God face to face,
and stand continually in his presence; and so their comforts must flow more
immediately from himself. Psalm. 16. In thy presence there is fullness of joy,
and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

What sensitive Pleasures shall be in Heaven is very dubious; and more
Questions may be put concerning them than can be easily and readily resolved;
yet it is certain, external senses shall not be delighted as they are here upon
earth. All coitive and venereal pleasures shall cease, and such as are in a
grosser sense fleshly, and some of the senses shall cease likewise, whose Being
implies their Use, and whose Use supposes our present state of Imperfection;
For seeing in Heaven the Saints Beings shall not be maintained in the use of
means, as eating, and drinking, the Taste must cease; but if there continue any
use of some other external senses in Heaven, which must have objects to delight
them, they will differ vastly from what they are now in our mortal state, while
we dwell in these houses of clay, and earthly tottering tabernacles, whose
foundation is in the dust. Job 4.19. 2 Cor. 5.1. For the change that our Bodies
(and so our Senses proportionably thereunto) shall undergo is inconceivable,
and unexpressible. Flesh and blood, as now it is, cannot be capable of an
H^avenly state; in which sense are those words to be understood, Flesh and
blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15.50. It must first be
refined, and made spiritual, incorruptible, and immortal, 1 Cor. 15.52, 53.
Such a Qualitative, though not a substantial mutation it shall undergo: for at
the Resurrection all the infirm qualities of the Saints bodies, by which they
are incapable of bearing the Majesty, and Glory of God in Heaven, shall be
removed. Phil. 3. ver. 21. (...) est transfigu^are, in aliam figuram and sormam
Convertere, Cornel. a Lap.
Who shall change ((...), which properly signifies to transfigurate, shall
convert them into another figure or form) our vile body ((...), this body of
vileness, baseness, and abjection, an Hebraism, which is very emphatical, and
very frequent in the New Testament, it may supply the superlative degree for
our most vile, and abject body as it may be translated our body of misery, and
afflictions, (this body that all Calamities prey upon, gradually consume and
waste and at last resolve into the Dust, for the word in this sense is used by
the Sep. Genesis 29.31. (...), Psa. 25.18.
(...) 2 K. 14.26.) that it may be fashioned, ((...) that it may be made
conformable unto) like unto his glorious body ((...) his body of glory, another
Heb. that is, his most glorious, or glorified body) So then their Bodies shall
not be those frail diseased, socord and sluggish lumps of Flesh and Dirt,
those Bags of Phlegm, that they continually carry about with them here upon
Earth. But as the Ore that is cast into the Fire a Stone, comes forth, a very
bright, and pure Metal, which is called Gold, between which two there is an
exceeding great difference, so shall the Bodies of the Saints rise out of their
Graves and enter Heaven, with such impassibility and clarity, with such
agility, and subtilty, as is not now to be comprehended by us. And if the
Saints Bodies be thus changed we may rationally conclude the change of the
senses shall be commensurate, and equal to the same. And as they shall hereby
be advanced, and their capacity and vivacity be amplified and enlarged; so
shall they have an happiness, and delights adequate thereunto: And though we
know not what these senses shall be, yet we call them seeing, and hearing; but
what shall be seen and heard as beautiful and delightful, that we cannot tell.
But certainly the pulchritude and fairness, the beauty, and brightness of Sun,
Moon, and Stars, and all the Lamps of Heaven, with all the formose objects in
the world; yea, could we suppose all the admired and adored beauties that have
been, are, or shall be seen, collected, and united into one body, or made to
concenter in one person, and sparkle forth in one face, and whatever
amiableness is diffused through the whole creation, were made to meet, and
become all visible at one view in any one single object; and our eyes dazzled,
and overpowered at the emission and efflux of its beams, yet all would be but a
very dark representation, a very imperfect miserable glimmering of that bright
shining Sun of immortal glory, and the incomprehensi^le Beauty of the Face of
God, that the Eyes of the glorified Saints shall be strengthened to behold.
It Is true, a full proper, and immediate sight of the immense divine essence
there cannot be, for that being infinite cannot be comprehended by a visine
faculty, 1 Timothy 6.16. Col. 1.15. 1 Timothy 17.
which is but finite (as finite objects may, whose splendour does not over power
its strength) and it being likewise an increated immaterial, and spiritual
object, so it must be invisible to a corporeal Eye, for it is sight being united
to the object, by the help of the sensible Species, i. e. the similitudes or
Image of the object, the divine Essence cannot be visible to it, because it is
impossible for a thing created to represent that which is increated; as a
created Species to represent an increated object, or a material Species an
immaterial object, and to assert the contrary would be to make the divine
Essence a created being, for then there would be some other similitude of it,
something as could represent it as the proper likeness thereof.

This is the Reason why that clear sight of God, which is called the Beatifical
Vision (because it makes the Seer blessed) is principally intellectual, and
thus the Saints in glory are said to see the divine Essence, according to Matt.
5.7. 1 John 3.1. We shall see him as he is, 1 Cor. 13.12. but now we see
through a Glass darkly, but then Face to Face (that is now we see immediately,
but then we shall see immediately, so that the great object seen now and then,
is the same) Psalm. 17.15. As for me I will behold thy Face, etc. Rev. 22.4.
Mat. 18.10. In Heaven the Angels do always behold the Face of my Father. This
beatifical Vision is such a sight of God, as is opposite to the sight of Faith,
2 Cor. 5.7. that sight then being immediate, the sight of him in the state of
blessedness (as the Antithesis in that respect to the other) will be immediate.
By this, shall the Soul see divine the Essence apprehensively (according to
it is finite created, but then enlarged and perfected capacity of the
understanding) so as it cannot proceed further in point of knowledge concerning
God, or that great Question What God is. But though this felicitating Vision be
principally that of the Soul, yet the Scripture seems to hold forth that so
much of the divine glory shall beam forth to the glorified corporeal Eye to
behold, as such a Creature is capable of, for delighting it in a most wonderful
ravishing manner; for the Divine essence being an Arbitrary, and voluntary
Glass, he may according to his good pleasure manifest more or less of such a
visible glory, to the Eyes of Saints in Heaven. And why may there not be such a
corporeal Vision, or ocular Veiw of the Face of God in this sense, seeing Jacob
had it (though in a lower degree because his mortal state would not bear such a
sight as is proper to a state immortal) upon Earth, Genesis 33.30. I have seen,
says he, God, Face to Face, though it was not God's Essence that was
discernable at that time, yet, besides that humane form, and shape that God
appeared in (and which at first might make him think it was but a man,) before
he left Jacob, (besides his solemn blessing him) it is very probable he gave
some demonstration of his Divinity, which it is likely was by some glorious
appearance, or resplendent, and bright manifestation of himself (so much as he
was then capable of bearing) to his Eye sight, this made him say I have seen
God Face to Face, and yet my life is preserved. Such a sight Moses and Aaron,
etc, had of God in the Exodus 24. v. 10. And they saw the God of Israel: how? by
the effulgency and shining forth of some glory, and brightness which was
obvious to their sense, by which they might perceive that God was present in an
especial, and extraordinary manner, this appears by what follows. And there was
under his Feet as it were a paved work of a Saphir Stone (which is a Stone of a
very clear Sky color) and as it were the body of Heaven in it is clearness, or
in it is brightness, Exodus 33.18. Moses supplicates God that he would show him
his glory, show me thy glory, which is not to be understood of God's essence
(which no doubt he knew to be invisible) but his divine glory. While God was
speaking with him by a sensible Voice, his presence was over-shadowed with some
Cloud, or darkness, so that this glory did not appear and therefore now he
desired either the removal of the interposing Cloud, or that his glory might
break through it to be objected to his sense. God in the 19. verse. replies to
this Petition thus. I will make my goodness pass before thee, that is I my self
will pass before thee and with my self all my goodness, and glory, but seeing
it is too much for thee to comprehend, it shall therefore pass, and not stay
for thee to gaze upon, it shall pass before, or by thee that thou may see a
shadow of it behind. That which Moses was so desirous to see, was the Divine
glory fully manifested, and displayed; now God tells him that this state of
defiled infirmity, and mortallity was not capable of (...); therefore God
promises to help the imperfection and dimness of sight, by the ^tion of his
Ear, as follows, I will proclaim my name, i. e. my nature. Now that Moses
might know that God was not unkind to him, while he denied to gratify his
request, he tells him plainly in the 20. v. He could not see his Face without
the peril, and hazard of his life. And he said thou can not see my Face,
(which is not only to be understood of God's spiritual Majesty, which is
altogether invisible, but likewise, if not principally in this place of that
brightness and glory which accompanies his presence, and that he is clothed
with as with a Garment.) For there shall none see me, and live. From these
words the principal objection may be raised, against any ocular views, or
corporeal Visions of God in Heaven: For seeing in Heaven the Saints shall have
their humane nature, and not cease to be men, how can they see any thing of him
there, more than here, and live. To which it may be replied, that either such a
Vision of God is not in this life, but in the other, that if a man would see
God, he must first die, and then he shall see (as it were) face to face; and so
the sense of the words is this; No man while he lives in a mortal condition
here upon earth, can see my face: which interpretation I do not approve of
(because it contradicts other Scriptures already spoken to and explained)
without another, which is; That the full manifestations of my glory are too
much for man's infirmity to bear, and apprehend: Thus for man to see me, would
so astonish him, as to make him a dead man, Rev. 1.16, 17. Dan. 10.8, 9. This
is that glory which Moses desired to see, which God tells him he was not
capable of beholding, as he was a mere mortal man. But yet it is clear from
verse. 23. that God did manifest so much of his glory to him as was sufficient
for his discerning, and for his desire. When he says thou shall see my
back-parts, he speaks here as if he appeared in humane shape at this time, who
though he hid his glory from Moses his eyes (as if an hand had been spread over
his face to cover him) while he passed before him, yet was he privileged with
a glimpse of his glory coming after, behind he might see him as in a shadow.
And it is probable when Moses came down from Mount Sinai, (where he had been
forty days, and forty nights without food, with God) with a shining luster upon
his face, it was from a reflection of a divine glory and splendour upon it, which
he was in some considerable degree enabled and strengthened to behold, Exodus
34.28, 29, 30. We find that in the Mount, when Christ was transfigur'd, Matthew.
17.2.9.2. and his face and countenance irradiated with celestial glory, yet
those Disciples which were with him, had ocular views of it, though in respect
of their mortal condition they could scarce bear and endure the sparkling rays
thereof, but seem to be astonished, while wonderfully ravished and delighted
with the same. Now if the eye of God's Saints have had such glympses of Divine
Glory upon earth, what clearer and fuller view will they have thereof in
heaven, when their visible faculty and organ of sight shall be unspeakably
invigorated, and made a thousand degrees more pure, and piercing, more acute
and quick than now it is: And if a small beam, or glympse thereof was so
delectable to Peter, John, and James, that were with Christ in the Mount that
they were loath to leave it, but were very desirous to take up their abode
there; how infinitely more pleasant and ravishing will those more open, and
ample manifestations of Glory be? and though we cannot determine what the
measures thereof will be, yet we may conclude it will infinitely more surpass
the most amiable, and Loves-most powerful attractive objects upon earth, than
either the Morning or Meridian Sun, that minute and little light, that acts the
part of an Hypocrite in a Glowworm.

We may rationally suppose likewise, that the sight of Christ, as he is man,
with all the inherent celestial qualities of his most glorious body, will
render heaven a place full of delectableness. This must be the next object to
the Beatifical Vision it self. To have the fullness of the Godhead, that which
dwells in him bodily, Col. 2.9. radiating, as it were, through his
transparent body, must afford excessive delights to the beholder. That Glory of
the Manhood, which is out of measure (that is respectively, in regard of us who
are unable to measure it) must be a most lovely object to behold. To see that
Christ whose visage was marred more than any man, and his form more than the
Sons of men, Isa. 52.14. whom the Jews could see no beauty in, that they should
desire him, Isa. 53.2. Who was despised, and rejected of men, a man of sorrows,
and acquainted with grief, and who was not esteemed by men, Isa. 53.3. Who has
born our griefs, and carried our sorrows, who was wounded for our
transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities: upon whom was the chastisement
of our peace, and with whose stripes we are healed, Isa. 53.4, 5. Him who was
spit upon, and buffited, Matthew. 26.67. Who endured an eructation of all
obloquies, and evomition of all blasphemies upon him, who was every way most
opprobriously and contumiliously used; Who was scourged and whipped, Matthew.
27.26. Who when he was in the prime and flower of his youth, had his beauty so
much withered and decayed, and his body so much macera^ed through want, and
poverty, and variety of sorrows, as if wrinckling and surrowing old age had
overtaken and seized upon him, or did very nearly approach him, Joh. 8.57.
Whose innocent and pure soul was put into so great an agony, that he swear as
it were great drops of blood, falling down to the ground, Luke 22.44. which
made him say, his soul was exceeding sorrowful, even unto death, Matthew. 26.38.
(...), encompassed and besieged round about, beset with sorrows. And to
conclude this, to see him after that most low state of his Humiliation, having,
when he was born, a Manger for his Cradle; crowned with thorns (as a sign of
the greatest contempt) and after all this condemned and executed upon the
Cross; crucified for the greater contempt between two Thieves, most scornfully
there insulted over, having his sides pierced with the spear, to let forth a
pure stream of his most precious blood, and not only to endure that most
shameful, ignominious tormenting death of the Cross, but the whole weight, and
burden of his Fathers wrath and displeasure, and the severe strokes and lashes
of vindictive, punitive justice, and the very pains of Hell to take hold of his
soul: I say after all this, to see him exalted in glory, and majesty, at the
right hand of his Father; a sparkling Crown upon his head, sitting upon a
magnificent Throne, to see his countenance as the Sun shines in his strength,
Rev. 1.16. to see him exceeding all the glory of Angels; to see him infinitely
more beautiful in his whole body than his Spouse the Church (when enamored of
him) most passionately and Rhetorically describes him to be, Cant. 5.10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16. To see as much of the Creator, and the Divine Nature in
Christ, as is possibly visible in the nature of man; and not only to see Christ
in all that eminency of his glory, but (if we be Saints) to see Christ in it as
ours, as we are interested in this object, will make it most delectable, Joh.
17.24. We find this is the great happiness, honor, and privilege that Christ
Wills for all true Believers. Father, This proves his Divinity.
I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that
they may behold my glory which thou have given me. Certainly Christ would never
have Willed this, would it not afford ineffable joy to the beholder, and fully
prove, that as much contentation as the creature can be made partaker of by the
sight of any one visible object, will be the portion of the Beholders of
Christ, as he is man. The wise man tells us, The eye is never satisfied with
seeing, Eccl. 1.8. Although it may be wearied with looking upon various
objects, yet it is not satisfied, but still desires new ones, and can drink
them in without surfeiting; so that though the acts of the eye be scant, and
finite, yet the lusts of the eye seem to have a kind of infinity in them. Now
all this arises from the imperfection of all conspicable glory and beauty in
this world; for the sight cannot be quieted, except in the most excellent of
visible objects, and this it only meets with in heaven. Melancthon desired
death for this very end, that he might see Christ in glory; Cupio ex hac vita
migrare propter duas causas, primum ut fruar desiderato conspectu filii Dei,
and Coelestis Ecclesiae, etc. And if death be desirable by the Saints for this
end, certainly the object will be proportionably delightful.

We may likewise rationally conceive the glorified bodies of the Saints will be
very delightful objects, whose constantly flowring and radiant beauty shall
never be incentives and baits to lust; shall not beget unchaste thoughts, nor
allure and tempt to unclean embraces. There shall be no need of Ornaments to
cover any deformities of the body, or to add a grace and comeliness to any of
i'ts parts; all meretricious Painting, and Patching; all the clouding Tooers
(as an addition to that sufficiency of hair which God, and nature has given to
the female Sex) shall be quite out of fashion, and of no use. Had man continued
in the state of Innocence, that beauty which is now composed of the most exact
symmetry, and complexion, falls inconceivably short of what it would then have
been; and even that, before sin darkened it is luster, and stained it is glory, or
in the least withered it is flower; was not to be compared with this. Then
(says our Savior) shall the righteous shine forth as the sun, in the kingdom
of their father. Which may very well be understood (as one sense, if not the
chief) of their corporeal brightness; and it is probable, had there been a more
splended creature in the whole visible Creation than the Sun, our Savior would
have made use of it, to express the formosity of the Saints bodies by in heaven.

To see then Heaven full of those bodies, which perhaps were once clothed with
ulcerous soars, with loathsome and nauceating deformities, and liable to so
great variety of diseases; and though many of them were freed from these
unamiable things, yet at last their rarest Beauties were exposed to blasting
Old age, which planted deep Furrows in their smooth Brows, shrunk and shriveld
up their plump, and comely Checks, and causing their most straight, and upright
Bodies to bow themselves, and uncomelily to stoop; I say to see Heaven so full
of those Bodies, and every Body so perfectly beautiful, that no addition can be
made, and al supplements are excluded; what delight must this afford? what a
strange magnetic virtue is there in imperfect Beauty upon earth? Scarce an Eye
can come within the reach and view of it, but more or less it does attract it,
how much more com^ti^ then must it is attractions (...) complete in Heaven.

Through the corruption, and depravi^ of (...) nature, how fatal, and pernic^
(...) been to mankind in this lower (...) by it is effascinations, and (...)
has woefully, and miserably (...) many thousands. What an (...) and Queen is
she in the W^ld? (...) ^i^ions, and Sovereignty ^ding as far as there are any
reason^ (...) the Earth. And with (...) ^ness, and great authority (...) she
command? To fulfill her pleasure (...) sometimes makes wise Men Fools courageous
Men Cowards, and Cowards sometimes courageous to their own destruction, while
their Rivals lay the Foundation of their supposed (but mistaken honor) in
their blood. Rich men she makes poor, what vast Estates, and Treasures has she
devoured. Patrimonies, Inheritances, and Lordships in abundance has she
swallowed up. Millions of Silver, Gold, and Jewels have been Sacrificed to her:
And all the Riches both of Land and Sea, are not too much to maintain her; so
boundless is the cost, and charges of her insolent Pride? How unkind is she to,
and tyrannizeth over them most, that are her greatest Admirers, and Adorers,
and ruins them unmercifully, and cruelly that do the greatest Homage to her.
How many Nobles has she degraded, and debased? How many crowned Heads has she
conquered? How many Kings, and Princes has she made her Servants and Vassals
to Lackey after her? How many flourishing Kingdoms, and goodly Politic Bodies
(as ere the Earth bore, or the Sun shined upon) has She laid waste and
destroyed? How many thousands has She given to the devouring Sword, the mortal
Dagger, and the ignominious Halter? How often has She filled the World with
Blood, or made it a Sanguineous Stage, and Theater? How frequently has She
made the strictest Bonds of Nature to be broken? to make her Commands to take
place, and her Laws to be kept inviolable by her Captives; She has made the
nearest, and dearest Relations cruel unto, and to embrew their hands in the
Blood of each other. How contrary to all Justice, Equity and Reason are her
Edicts, and yet her power is so great, and absolute that but few Hero's can be
found, that with a daring boldness, are resolute to disobey, and resist them.
And this is the greatest mischief of all that she does to the world, that as
she has a power to effect it, so She sports and delights her self in nothing
more, then in brutifying (and yet with their own consent, which with some
bewitching charm She strangly gains) her Devotees, and turning them into Beasts.

But because this is so, is therefore deformity to be desired, chosen, and
preferred before Beauty? certainly no, for that were to despise, and contemn
one of the most excellent outward gifts of God, and Nature, it were to besmear
and cast Dirt upon that which is the greatest glory (next to Reason) of humane
Nature, and to disparage that which is to be the smile of nature, the
excellency and gloss of the whole Creation, yea a more dark and imperfect
resemblance of God himself. Let but the noble Reason of man keep it is Throne in
the Soul, and hold the Reins of Government over the same in its hands,
exercising like a King it is Regiment over the inferior faculties, curbing and
restraining a brutish, extravagant appetite; and then a due, and right
improvement will be made of it, which is to admire the wisdom and power of
it is Original and Creator, and to celebrate him for the same. And thus shall
the glorified do in Heaven, they will always celebrate that infinite wisdom and
omnipotent power which could cloth so many Myraids of bodies with this white
Raiment, that could advance Dust and Clay to such high perfection, Rev. 3.4, 5,
7, 10. How do we praise and commend a Limner when he draws but an inanimate and
liveless Picture to the life; when every Limb, Member, Muscle, and Feature,
with all the smallest visible Parts of the original shadow, are exactly
represented in it; we highly applaud the Wisdom and Art that shines forth in
it, and guided tke Pencil to the perfection of the Draught. How much more shall
God be praised and magnified by hi^ Saints in Heaven, that has made their
Bodies in some sense living, and immortal Pictures of himself, which has made
them fairer then the Moon, (which has her spots) and clearer then the Sun. To
know and consider their Beauty, to be the effect of so many of Gods glorious
attributes, will makt it infinitely more delightful and ravishing. Here Beauty
shall do no hurt, but good, where the Fire and Flames of Lust shall be for ever
extinguished. Do we hang up Pictures in our Rooms, because they are so
ornamental, and do they afford so much delight to the curious Eye, and
critical, beholder, when drawn most dexterously by that curious Pencil, which
was managed and guided with the steady hand of some rare, and most ingenious
Apelles. Certainly then to see constantly, so many Millions of Bodies
beautified by all that wisdom, skill and power that is in the Creator of the
Heavens and the Earth, must make this Heaven where the Saints substance is, a
place of admirable Delectability. The Firmament when most bespangled with
innumerable sparkling Stars, is but a dull, deformed and unpleasant object, in
comparison of the same; and could we suppose the whole Earth to be one Garden
full of odoriferous and beautiful Flowers, yet the delectableness of their
object would fall infinitely short of the other, yea if all the Beauty diffused
through so great a variety, were concentring in one Flower; yet would it not
match, or equalize the pulcritude of one Saints Body in Heaven; Therefore as
our Savior tell us, that Solomon in all his glory was not clothed like one
Lilly, so all Lillies and other Flowers are not in all their glory, clothed
like one Saint in Heaven.

We may not without good reason also conceive that the sense of Hearing, shall
have it is delights in Heaven, as well as that of seeing. For the speaking
Tongue (that is the glory of man above a Beast, while upon Earth,) methinks
should not be useless in Heaven, and there all the Saints be Dumb, Psalm.
16.9.57.8. Some conceive that the Saints probably shall speak in the Hebrew
Tongue.
Nothing hinders but that we may believe, that they shall speak not only
mentally, in an Angelical manner, but also (vocally when they please) after
the manner of humane Locution here, though their Tongues, and Voice, and
Language may not in all respects be there, what they are here, but in some
inconceavable manner undergo a change likewise. And the sacred Scriptures seem
to affirm that there shall be audable Halelujahs, and Songs of Thankfulness in
Heaven, which the Tongues of the Saints, shall be employed to sing forth to
God, Re.v. 19.1, 3, 4, 6. besides the high and constant inward Admirations and
Adorations of their Souls. Which things, with all their other vocal converse
together, (though no doubt there shall be likewise the Speech of their blessed
Souls, which is a power whereby they can make known one unto another, what they
know themselves by spiritual insinuations, and instillations.) shall be a far
more pleasant and ravishing Melody, and infinite more delightful to the Ear,
then any Instrumental and vocal Music upon Earth, that has the sweetest Air.
But though it may be above the grasp of our capacities now inffallible to
determine how their Tongues shall every way be employed, to please and delight
their Ears; yet we certainly know they shall never be used to grate and molest
them; All Tongues sins there shall cease. Heaven knows not what swearing, nor
blaspheming, what obscene, nor filthy talking, railing nor reproaching,
slandering, nor backbiting, lying, nor perjuring; yea, nor what idle, nor vain
prate means: all those are excluded, and shut out for ever there.

Bue are these the grandest and highest things to express the Delectability of
this substance by as it is in Heaven? No, for the accomplishment of all, shall
be the advancement of the perfectly sanctified soul, to the fullest fruition
of, the nearest and closest union and conjunction, the most intimate and bosom
communion with the infinitely blessed God, that it is capable of: This does far
surpass all other delightful objects that can be named; This is that which
certainly will afford the highest complacencies to the soul; for now it is
powers and capacities being exceeding great, it is actions exceeding vigorous
and strong, it is enjoyments must be most sweet. The pleasant knowledge the soul
shall have of God, will be unconceivably delectable and complacential. What
sweeter embraces are there in the world, than between the Intellect and Truth,
which makes the delights of a Philosopher (though perhaps poor) so far to
exceed the pleasures of all gluttonous, unclean Sensualists, filthy
Voluptuists, rich and illiterate Clowns, and covetous Misers in the world. But
when this most noble faculty of the soul is matched with, and has for it is
unchangeable object the prime Truth, God himself; how unspeakably ravishing
must it is delights then be? It is impossible for the understanding to
acquiesce, except it be in the highest Being; for as Being and Truth are
convertible, so is the highest Being, and the highest Truth. The understanding
then having arrived at this, all it is restless search and enquiries after truth
must be terminated and concluded, and when it has found this most
comprehensive truth, who can conceive how generous and delicious its pleasures
will be? It Is by this visive power of the soul, that it sees the divine Essence
it self, which beatifical object in an incomprehensible manner applies it self
to the same. This is expressed by Schoolmen various ways; some saying, that it
is an actual illustration, that is, a supernatural influx, elivating the
understanding unto the vision of the Divine Essence; others, that it is the
supernatural concourse of the beatical object, whereby the object immediately
manifests it self to the understanding, together with the understanding,
causing a most blessed vision; and when others call the light of glory, a
perfection super-added to the understanding, whereby it is made able to see God,
the sense is the same; and this is that which will be the joy of joys, and
afford the most quintescential delights, and elixorated pleasures to the soul;
for in the perfect knowledge of God, the glorified understanding shall know all
other things cognoscible; for then shall all Philosophical, as well as
Theological doubts be resolved; such as we have in Job 38.16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
For the will of God representing the creature, is that eternal Idea, where, as
in a glass, the Works of God are more perfectly seen, than in themselves. God
is an infinite Essence, and contains eminently the perfection of the whole
Creation, or every creature from the first to the last, and therefore as
effects are visible and legible in their causes, and conclusions in their
principles, so is every creature to be seen in God; for they are all
eminentially contained in him, and so may be seen in him, in a more excellent
manner than in themselves: As a Building, or a Watch, or any other piece of
Mechanism, could we see it clearly in the perfect conception of the Artificer,
we should see it in a more excellent manner than in the Edifice, or work it
self. When once the perfected understanding fully knows the first cause, and
original truth, it shall be liable to no mistakes nor errors more, which do so
much perplex and torment the mind. Hence Simplicius, in his Commentary in
Epict. Enchir. speaking of the gradual progressions of the Intellect, in the
investigation and prosecution of truth, asserts, that when it reaches God, its
seize are the best, and most perfect. -- (...). Vnae enim haec quae ad
Deum sit contentio, est optima and emnis quantum fieri potest, erroris expers.

To all that has been said, this may be added to demonstrate the Heavenly
Delectabilities, that is, the constant uninterrupted profusions of the
perfected Divine Love upon God (which includes the perfect rectitude and
conformity of the souls wills to the Sovereign, Supreme Will of God, and its
attained rest in its utmost and perfecting end;) for as Love is the Essence of
God, 1 John 4.8, 16. so Love is the Essence of the Soul, and the noblest
pleasures, and purest joys, are fetched in, and conveyed by love into it: every
man by sense and feeling knows what a secret emanation of sweetness there is
from a good that is loved. Its by Love, that every good communicates it self to
our souls, and they are made capable of a participation thereof, by; and the
greater the good is, (provided the actings of love be proportioned thereunto)
the greater and sweeter are the pleasures that spring from it. God then being
the supreme Good, and that Good which for its perfection comprehends all other
good, what plentiful delights must result, and be derived from it, when
supremely and perfectly loved in Heaven? This it that which will make the joys
of glorified Saints, to flower, and spring up for ever.

When love is not mutual, and reciprocal, when it is not reflected back again,
and the soul cannot hear the pleasant, and earnestly expected Echo (I love
thee) from the amorated object: And when no alternate exercises of this passion
can be perceived, then many times it produces strange inquietudes, and
perturbations of mind, excess of grief, besotting Melancholy, restless
commotions of spirit, and sometimes weariness of ones present life, and being,
and then its so far from being the cause of the Amorists felicity, that it
creates his greatest misery; and when all its hopes of a suitable response and
answer from its object are exspired, then it turns into loathing, and the
highest disdain of, and revengeful fury against the same. And not only so, but
exceedingly tortures, and proves prodigiously, and monstruously unkind to the
soul that first conceived it, and brought it forth: and having obtained too
great a Masterdome over the soul, (enfeebled and consumed with its flames)
Nero-like, it would rip up the womb, and tear out the bowels of its own Mother.
And under this miserable frustration, and deplorable disappointment, its like
an enraged man, who when he cannot be revenged upon the person, that has
highly affronted, and offered great indignities to him, he will tear his own
hair, and flesh, and execute his fury upon his nearest relation, or the man
that is next to him.

But Heaven admits of no such thing; for there the glorified Saints shall not,
yea cannot possibly love God so much, as they shall be loved by him; for they
love him but according to their perfect, finite goodness; but he loves them
according to his perfect, infinite goodness: they love him so far as they are
made good; and he loves them so far as he is good: and therefore look how far
his goodness exceeds theirs, so far must his love surpass theirs: When God
therefore and they meet together in heaven, there will be nothing but the
highest endearments of love betwixt them, nothing but the mutual constant
actings and embracements of Love, in the very bosom of God's Love shall their
pure and holy souls be lodged for ever. O how sweet, and pleasant will that
Heaven be, where perfect created, and perfect entreated love shall meet
together; were the Saints shall never doubt more, whether or no they do love
God sincerely, (that is, prevalently and supremely) which occasions many
perplexing thoughts, many inquiries into, and much deep searching of their
hearts here, least after all their highest pretenses, and professions, they
should prove and perish as hypocrites for ever: And then shall all their
perplexing doubts, and disquieting fears that they are not loved by God, cease:
No such complaints as we read of in Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9. and in Psalm. 88.3, 4, 5,
6, 7, 14, 15, 16. shall be heard in heaven; There shall be no need of that
counsel which we have in Isa. 50.10. Who is there among you that fears the
Lord, that obeys the voice of his servants, that sits in darkness, and
sees no light: let him trust in the Lord, and stay himself upon his God. That
text, shall never be preached upon in heaven, for the comforting of drooping,
dejected, (though holy) souls.

And as there shall be nothing but Love betwixt God, and his Saints; so there
shall be nothing but love among themselves. Peevishness, and Passion,
Mis-judgings, Mis-constuctions, Hard-censures of each others Actions,
Quarrelling about Property, too much Self-love, Difference in Judgments, Pride,
and Emulation, Imbetter their Converse, and breed too great an estrangedness
among them here upon earth; but as all these things proceed from the weakness
of Christian and Brotherly Love, so when that Love is perfected toward each
other, as well as God himself, none of these things shall be found in heaven,
to render it a place, and their society unpleasant to them.

We find that too often, a few days, or hours converse in this world, makes
them weary of each others company, and they desire to draw of, and retire,
though there be none of those former things to occasion it. And such a
Seclusion in solitude they find after converse, very Recreating, and delightful
to them. But as this arises from the Languidness and imperfection of their
Love, so when there is a Consummation of it in Heaven, then a whole Eternity
will not make their Fellowship ungrateful and burdensome, nor their
uninterrupted Converses, Nauseous and glutting, all desires shall then cease to
Sequester themselves each from other..

And as there shall be such perfect exercises of love among all the Saints, so
shall there be betwixt them and the Holy Angels. No doubt the love of Angels is
now very strong toward the Saints, which is not apprehended by them, because
their Nature is so little known to them. But when they come to Heaven they
shall have such a clear knowledge thereof, that it shall strongly Elicit, and
powerfully draw forth their love to them again.

The Scriptures discovers to us the co-habitation of Angels and Saints in the
same Heaven, Rev. 4.8.5.8.7.9.
and as they do dwell together, so we may rationally suppose they converse, and
love together for the Soul of the Saints being of a spiritual substance, they
and the Angels are capable of speaking one to another; that is mentally,
(though not vocally) in a heavenly spiritual manner, communicating their minds,
notions, meanings, and conceptions, as they see cause, and as they please each
to other. But though we cannot absolutely, and certainly determine either how
Angels speak among themselves, or how they, and humane Souls speak each to
other, yet we may not in the least doubt, or question, the most delightful
reciprocations of love, and highest Carasses between them.

Now how pleasant is every place that is full of Love? how comfortable is it to
live in a Family of Love? what a complacential co-habitation is that which Love
is the Cementation of, where it conglutinates, and joins all hearts together?
When conjugal Love is kept up in it is truth, and strength: How delightful and
unwearied a converse is there betwixt Man and Wife? And if uniting and knitting
Love (according to Psalm. 133.3.) render all Communities and Societies so sweet,
how incomparably pleasant then must Heaven be, which is perfumed throughout
with Love, where Love is most immixt and pure, where the Love both of God,
Angels and Saints meet together. Where Love is not only complete, but
perpetual, which shall never be shut up, and buried in the depths of sorrows,
nor breath out its last by violent and forced separations, as the Love of the
nearest Friends and the dearest Relations soon-or later does.

And has Love such a virtue in it that if Friends be cast into a loathsome
Prison together, it can turn it into a pleasant Palace, if into a dark
disconsolate Dungeon; it can supply the want of Light, if in a Wilderness, it
can change it into a Paradise. How can delights then be wanting in Heaven? what
perfection of all dilectabilities must be there, where there is such a perfect
plenitude, and fullness of Love.

5. Superlative Excellency, this I have spoken to before, and therefore shall
not dwell long upon it now, but seeing its a a substance in Heaven, it must be
most excellent. 1. Specifically, and in respect of kind. This substance being
in Heaven, it must be distinct from any substance here upon Earth; and as far
as the Celestial Bodies excel Terrestrial, so far must this surpass the other.
And being Essentially the very glory, and blessedness of God himself, what can
compare with it? Not Gold, nor Pearls, nor Princes Crowns, though they could be
heaped up, as high as the highest Mountains, or could be made to reach the Sun,
and Stars; yea, the highest Heavens. 2. Gradually, for measure here is nothing
wanting. Heaven imports most absolute Perefection. All earthly Substances are
defective, and imperfect, and therefore usually they that have most of them,
would have more, and seldom sit down, and say they have enough. This makes
Kings so desirous, and industrious to enlarge their Dominions and Empiers, to
add to their weight of, or multiply their Crowns. This makes many Rich men so
thirsty to increase their Bags, and their fields. These and many other things
demonstrate an intrinsic deficiency in all Earthly Substances, which renders
them mean, and inconsiderable, what ever esteem men may have of them, that know
no better: for of what little worth is that Drink which will not quench the
thirst? or that Meat which cannot fill and satisfy the stomach; and so what
little value is to be put upon all these worldly substances, that can never
fill and satisfy the soul: But when the soul is possessed of this celestial
substance, it shall say, I need no more, nor no other: According to that Axiom
desiderium boni imperfectioris cessat, acquisito perfectiori. The supreme
excellency of this substance is Rhetorically set forth, and displayed by the
Apostle in 2 Cor. 4.17. where its called a weight of glory, to show the
abundance and greatness of it, and such an one as is far more exceeding. (...),
is the Original, and its such an emphatical Graecism, that other tongues
cannot, word by word, express it to the full; therefore they are necessitated
to use other words and phrases, which exceeds all comparison; as Mire supra
modum Erasmus, supra modum in sublimitate, Vulg. Lat. Excellenter Excellens,
Beza. Exceedingly excelling, a most excellent, the Dutch Annot. and as our
translation has it, a far more exceeding: the Greek most properly is, A weight
of glory, according to excellency unto excellency. Its as much as if the
Apostle had said, that all Hyperbolical expressions fall far short of this
glory; such is the transcendent excellency of it. Much might be spoken of it,
but when all is said that the most Florid and Rhetorical Tongues of Men or
Angels can, it will but disparage it. And when the Saints come to possess it,
they will say as the Queen of Sheba did concerning Solomon's glory: The half of
it was not told them. Finite created good is usually better in the expectation
then fruition; but infinite increated good is infinitely better in the
fruition, than it can be in the expectation.

6. This shows that the happiness of the Soul is local. It is not every where,
not any where, but limited, and confined to a particular place, and that this
happiness is distinct from Heaven it self, as much as a Treasure is from the
place where it is laid up, or a man from the Room where he lodges. There are a
Generation of men (as has been already said, and spoken to in part) that would
possess the World with a belief, that all the Heaven, or Hell there is, is
within a man, that is, all happiness or all misery, that he shall either enjoy,
or suffer, is in his Soul, and where ever he is, and goes he carries his Heaven
or Hell about with him. This is indeed a truth in a sense; but as it is opposed
to a place where the righteous shall be felicitated, and to that which the
wicked shall be tormented in for ever, or where more of God shall be enjoyed,
and a deep sense of the loss of him, and pain shall be felt, is a most gross
Error. And hereby they carry on a most pernicious design, (destructive to all
Religion,) endeavoring thereby to vacate Gods rational, and mortal Government
of rational Creatures; that is, his ruling, and governing them in a way,
consisting with promises, and threats; and so opening a passage to all
Licentiousness, and Profaneness, to the most Nefarious Courses, and profligated
flagitious Practices in the World. Those that do read and believe the Holy
Scripture ( Romans 3.2. Those Oracles of God which give clear and certain
Answers, to all that do consult with them about their future state,) and do not
pervert the proper sense and meaning thereof, nor wrest them to their own
destruction; do know, that besides the Hell; (which every awakened, enraged
guilty Conscience is; even the Hell of Hells, called therefore the Worm that
never dies, Mark 9.44. like the Vulture that the Poets feigned was always
gnawing, and preying upon Prometheus his Liver while chained to the Mountain
Caveasus) and the Heaven within a man, (which every one has, to whom the Love
of God through Jesus Christ is manifested, and the Remission of his Sins, is
Sealed up in his most precious Blood) there is a Local Hell where as in a
peculiar place the wicked shall be for ever tormented, and a Local Heaven,
where they shall be for ever blessed. And this substance may be said to be
there, as to be in no place else. The light of nature, does so much attest this
truth that none but such as imprison, and extinguish the same will deny it.

3. It Is a Substance that is better: that is, bettter than any Goods the Saints
can be be robbed, and bereaved of, or the hands of violence can tear from them.
But because I have spoken to, and explained in part this already, I shall only
add these two things which it involves in it. 1. What encouragement Saints
have, and how reasonable a thing it is, that they let go, and part with their
Goods for pure Gospel Religion, and the sake of Christ, seeing they have that
which is better. They have it in hope, and if they do this, they shall
certainly have it in fruition. Who will not part with a less perfect for a more
perfect good? this every man's Reason will consent, and agree to. Who will not
part with Brass for Gold, with pebble-Stones, or painted Glass for Orient
Pearls, with Rags for Robes, with a poor Cottage for a Crown, and Court, with
Puddle for Fountain waters? Much more highly rational is it, to part with all
earthly Treasures, for that which is heavenly; seeing the disproportion is
infinitely greater. And how much do many Professors of the Christian Religion
discover an imbecility and impotency of Reason, as well as a want of Faith,
and Religion it self to stick at this; and make it a Stone of stumbling; when
called thereunto; seeing the possession of the one is depending upon the other.
2. How rational the Saints joys are, when they do thus take joyfully the
spoiling of their Goods. A Beast has no reason to guide him in his choice or
rather pursuit of any good, suitable to his own Nature, he is only conducted and
led by sense; hence that which arises from the good, proper to such
unreasonoble nature, may rather (as some say) be called delight, then joy, this
being thought more appropriate to reasonable nature, and intelligent beings.
And though all men (as men) have a Principle of Reason inhereut in their Souls
yet are they not directed, and guided thereby, but by sense in the prosecution
of good: To its dictates they hearken, and by them are they determined to the
Mark, and end which they eagerly pursue. The Reason which they have works only
in a subservency to sense being its drudge, and Slave to form, and contrive
those designs and methods which have a tendency, and are most conducible to its
pleasures, and gratifications, and this makes most men's joys only bruittish
and sensitive, for what else can they be, while they do not spring from any
rational choice (which can never be, when Reason is inclined, and biased by
sense;) but only from pleasing a sensual Appetite, and satisfying the sensitive
and carnal appetions, such as the Apostle enumerates in 1 John 2.16. The Lust
of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life.

Now this being so, all humane joy is only rational, when the understanding,
and reason guides the noble elective faculty of the Soul, (the Will) chiefly in
its choice of good. And the better the good is, which under Conduct of Reason
is thus chosen, the more rational must the joy be that issues from it. Its such
a joy as there is the strongest, and best Reason for a joy that most becomes,
and is most agreeable to a rational immortal Soul.

Hence it comes to pass, that the Saints in the faithful discharge of their
duty toward God; parting with all inferior good; for this better Good, and
Substance, it highly commends and justifies the rationality of their joys;
resulting from such an Act, that involves a most rational, and wise choice; as
any man's parting with a lesser, visible good for a greater, (and rejoicing in
so doing;) before all understanding men would certainly do. It will not belong
before all masked, and painted Hypocrites, that will not hazard their Estates,
for Gospel Religion which they do profess; (with all Sensualists, and
Epicures,) shall know to their everlasting shame, and sorrow, the
irrationallity of their joy ( that is but like the crackling of Thorns under a
Pot, Eccles. 7.6. Prove. 7.20. or like the laughing and singing of a Fool when
he is going to the correction of the Stocks.) and how much their Reason was
debased and trod under Foot by the usurpt Dominion of sense, and their brutish
passions over it; while they made choice of a flesh pleasing good, before this
Heavenly substance; which is the commensurate end to their immortal Souls.

4. It Is a substance that is lasting and abiding; which (as has been noted) is
it is immortal nature, and Eternal duration. Were this substance fleeting and
fading, as all are here below, it were not so highly unvaluable, so eligible.
Mortality which does disparage, and disgrace all sublunary glory, and felicity,
and because the fairest and most fragrant Flowers of all earthly comforts, do
so quickly wither; therefore are they so inconsiderable, and so little to be
regarded. And because all worldly honors are so soon Eternally clouded, and
ecclipsed, are they so little to be admired, and doted upon: The longest
Eternity is the Glory of this substance, and this is the Reason why it so far
surmounts them all, it is an abiding substance.

1. Subjectively in it self considered, thus it is always the same, it is not
capable of a more, or a less, of Augmentation, or Diminution; it is not like the
Sea, that Ebbs, and Flows again, that is sometimes higher, and sometimes lower,
nor like the Rivers that sometimes are so deep, and swell so high that they
overflow their bounds, and Banks, and at other times are so shallow, that they
are foordable, and may be waded over; nor like the Moon that is sometimes in her
Wax, and sometimes in her Wain; nor like a Comet that blazeth for a time, and
is soon extinct again. But like a Fountain that is always full, or like the Sun
whose light and brightness in it self is always the same, or like the Laurel
that is always Green, or the enduring Scarlet that is died in Grain.

2. Objectively, To them that once possess it; when once it is ours, it is ours
for ever. Many men are thrown out of their rightful Possessions, many men are
necessitated to part with them to prevent some considerable mischief, and evil,
and so to free themselves from a greater, must undergo a lesser misery. But the
Saints shall never be cast out of theirs, or be under any Necessity to part
with them. Sometimes Men's Earthly substance, and Treasures do leave them, Prove.
23.5. Will thou set thine Eyes upon that which is not, for Riches certainly
make themselves wings, they fly away as an Eagle toward Heaven, Prove. 27.24.
For Riches are not for ever, etc. And if they do not leave them, they must
certainly leave their Treasures; but this Celestial substance admits of no
such thing. It Is not like an Earthly Inheritance, in the Possession of which
each one succeeds another, that is like a Stage whereon one Acts a part for a
few days, and then goes of, and comes no more; to make way for another. Were
it so in Heaven, the very foresight of the loss would quickly darken, and
conclude their Joys, and make their Sun to set, and turn all their sweetness
into bitterness. It would be a Hell in Heaven once to think of losing, and
leaving Heaven. As it would be a kind of Heaven to the damned, had they but
once hopes of escaping Hell, and that the Origenists Doctrine of a thousand
years torments were but true. But O! what can we Mortals and blind dust say,
when we talk of Eternity, we may, and ought to be always admiring it; but there
cannot by us. be any comprehending it; which is not measured by time; not by
Minutes, Hours, Days, Weeks, Months nor Years; having a continuing Now: to
rejoice, and ever rejoice; to be happy, and ever happy; rich, and ever rich;
honorable, and ever honorable; what sweet and ravishing words are these? It Is
this word (Everlasting) that makes this substance so much better than all the
riches that a thousand worlds can afford to us. Eternity is the only jewel in
the Saints Crown, Rev. 2.10. This is the Crown of their Crown to be flouring
and flourishing upon their heads for ever. Princes Crowns may be blown off
their heads with the breath of Mortals, or snatched and plucked away with the
hands of violence; their bright Diadems with scorn and contempt, may be cast to
the ground, and trampled in the dirt; their Thrones may be shaken and tumbled
down, but if this be not, ere long by inexorable and irresistible death their
heads shall be removed from their Crowns, and they shall be tumbled down from
their Thrones. But the Saints, and their Crown and Throne shall continue for
ever together, 2 Cor. 4.17. their Glory is called (...), a weight, not only for
the greatness, and abundance of it (as has been noted) but the firm stability
and immovableness of it, Possa ratio collationis ut gravis gloria dicatur nos
quae sit molesta sed e contrario quae suo veluti pondere in aternum ma^eat
immota. Beza upon the place.
like ponderous bodies that stand fast with their own weight like as the great
hills, or mountains: Its therefore (...), Eternal; this is the accomplished
perfection of their Glory, of this their substance. How admirably wise then are
those believing souls, that will adventure, and cheerfully part with that
substance which is measured with a few moments of time, for that which is
coextended with Eternity: And oh! what folly possesses them, and what is their
debility of reason, who will not do it Having now dispatched this third and most
considerable particular in the proposition, I shall proceed to the next, in
order as they were at first laid down to be spoken to: Therefore

4. How comes this substance to be known to the Saints? or how come they to
know they have such a substance in Heaven? Answ.

1. By Divine Revelation. Had not God first made it known to them, it could
never have been known by them: but its clearly discovered in the sacred
Scriptures, in the writings both of the Prophets and Apostles, though more
plainly and fully in the latter. Its true, the dim twilight of Nature helps
most men to some very low, imperfect and confused Notions, and obscure
glimmerings of a future happiness in another world, when they depart this; but
it can make no such discovery of an Heavenly Glory and Blessedness, what it is,
and wherein it consists, as the word of God does.

The Heathens had their Elysium, a place (as they conceived) of all pleasures,
whither they thought the souls of all the virtuous went after death. The
Mahometans have their pleasant Paradise, whither they believe their great
Prophet Mahomet will convey the souls of all those that live agreeable to his
Laws, but still are grossly ignorant of the true happiness in Heaven. All the
most profound Philosophers in the world by their most diligent and laborious
investigation and seach, cannot discover and find out this Mystery, though they
can so many rare secrets of Nature; Its the Gospel that brings life and
immortality to light, 2 Timothy 1.10. The word (...) signifies Res ipsas occultas
in lucem proferre, seu reddere visibiles, and illuminare ipsos homines, ut qui
in tenebris non poterant, ad presentiam Lucis ipsi etiam illustrati, possint
videre, Zanch. That is, to bring occult and hidden things into light, or render
them visible, and to illuminate men themselves; so that they who could not be
seen at the presence of the light, they themselves also being illustrated might
see. So that until the Gospel like the Sun shine unto men, this immortal
blessedness and eternal life is hid, and kept secret, and all men are in
darkness, and cannot possibly search and seek it out, no more than a man in the
darkest night can distinctly see those objects that the light of the Sun only
can clearly manifest. Hence till the Gospel be sent among a people, they are
said to fit in darkness, and in the Region of the shadow of death, Luke. 1.79.
Matthew. 4.15. even deathful ignorance: This is the light that springs up among
those involved, and envelop'd in dreadful darkness, which they see the
beatitude of Heaven by.

2. By divine illumination of the Soul: For any man to know this Heavenly
substance; it is not sufficient that there be a light without to manifest it,
but there must be a light within (like an eye to the soul) to behold it. Let
the Sun shine never so brightly; let all Clouds be chased and driven away, and
the Heavens most serene and clear; yet a man that has no eyes can neither
behold the Sun, nor any objects it does discover: So let the light of the
Gospel shine round about us, yet unless its bright and blessed beams break into
our souls for their illustration and illumination, we see nothing by it. And
therefore as the Gospel does enlighten the object, so God must enlighten the
Intellect, which is the faculty the soul sees by. He must give the seeing eye,
and actually enable to discern the illustrated object. Let the Gospel be
preached unto an Heathen, or an Heathenish Congregation, yet they will not
understand what the blessedness of another world is, till God in some measure
shine into their souls; which is the opening of the blind eyes, and turning
from darkness to light, that the Apostle speaks of in Acts 26.18. which fully
proves this truth. This is the reason why so many in the Christian world, who
have lived many years under the preaching of the Gospel, yet know so little of
the life and immortality it brings to light: Alas! their souls are not from
Heaven enlightened; and though the light does shine, yet their souls are wrapped
up in Clouds, and darkness; and that darkness cannot comprehend that light, 1 John 5.

Every man, according to the measure, and degree of divine light that shines
into his soul, forms his Notions, and conceives Idea's of the future
blessedness: If his light be but common, or of a low degree; then his Notions
are less clear, more languid and feeble, less powerful and impressive upon the
soul for its change and renovation, and rise no higher, or proceed no farther
than some jejune and unaffectionate speculations, (and indeed this is the
reason why we have so many speculative, but so few practical Christians:) But
when this light is more special and saving, when it so irradiates the
understanding, that it efficatiously works on the will to cause a choice of
this object, and becomes transformative of the soul into the nature thereof;
then are its Notions profund, and vigorous, and produce a firm belief thereof,
with a frame of spirit, and conversation suitable thereunto; and no more than
you can make a man that has his eyes in his head, and his sight clear, believe
that the Sun shines not at Noonday, or that he sees not Trees and Men distinct
from Mountains; can you make a soul thus specially enlightened believe he is
under a mistake as to his future happiness, or that he sees, and knows not such
a substantial Glory in the other world.

3. By Divine Promission, or the Promise of God. Had not the faithful and true
God promised it to them; had they not the word of a God for it, they could not
know it should be theirs: yea, it were sinful presumption for such finite
crawling worms, and mortal defiled dust without this, so much as to hope for
it: but they have the Promises of God (those sure Rocks of Eternity) to be the
basis and foundation of such high expectations, Tit. 1.2. In hope of eternal
life, which God that cannot lie, has promised before the world began, Rev.
2.10. Rev. 3.21. If we firmly believe a man to be just, and honest, when he
promises to lend, or give us so much money, or leave us such an estate and
treasure when he dies; then we have a strong confidence that it shall be ours,
and say we know it shall be so. So they are these Promises of God that cannot
lie, nor deceive his Saints, that give birth, and life, and strength to all
their hope, and makes them thus to know they have in Heaven a better and
enduring substance.

4. They know they have this substance in heaven, by the purchase that Christ
has made thereof for them: As when a man has purchased an estate, he knows
then it is his, or if it be by any other purchased for him. All men, as the
Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.3. are by nature the children of wrath: that is their
proper portion; they are heirs of Hell by Adams Covenant Breaking Fall, and so
by their very original sin are they deprived of all right to the Heavenly
inheritance; all is forfeited into the hands of Justice, who is the disseisor,
and therefore that must be satisfied, and the debt of the sinner paid, before
there can be either seisin in Law, a right to it, or seisin in fact, an actual
possession taken. And this is that which none can, or could ever do, but he
that has done it, the Lord Jesus Christ, by his most precious blood, the
effusion whereof was to satisfy the Law, whereby their title to this most
blessed inheritance is renewed, and regained, and actual possession shall
certainly follow for all those that believe in him. This is the sweet fruit of
his sufferings, the chief fruit of his blood: And so far as they know by the
testimony of the spirit, and have an assurance; or though they have not that,
but a well grounded hope, that Christ died for them, and their sins for his
sake, by the infinite freest mercies of God are pardoned, (so that all the
strictest demands of vindictive justice are answered by him) so far they know
they have this purchased possession in Heaven, and this knowledge shall never
prove fallacious, it shall never deceive them; and indeed there is nothing in
Heaven will make the Inheritance more sweet, and fill the souls of the
glorified Saints more with perpetual ravishments than to see clearly, and know
perfectly that unmatchable Love, that engaged, and prevailed with the Father to
give his Son; and with the Son, so freely and readily to lay down his life, to
purchase this immortal substance for them.

5. And lastly, What is it to take joyfully the spoiling of our goods upon such
a knowledge? this must imply these following particulars.

1. An act of our Wills, and a prevailing act; the strongest bent thereof must
be for it. No man can rejoice in doing or suffering any thing that his will
(especially prevalently) is averse to; such reluctance and repugnancy always
hinders and prevents joy; for that always springs from an actual free choice,
which supposes a predominant inclination and propension of the Will toward
the chosen Object. Hence it comes to pass that no man can be happy against, or
without the consent of his Will. What Is the reason that many Professors of the
Christian Religion, sinfully comply with the Adversaries thereof, when there is
danger to own it, when they do but hazard their Estates for so doing? Its
because it ha^ not so great an interest in their Wills a^ it ought to have: for
the preponderating bias of their Wills is toward the world and not God, nor
Religion: No man ca^ stick at the parting with his Wealth for this, but for
want of Will; for the Will has potentiam executrice^, and an imperative force,
and commanding power over the man. Men know not what they say, (but deceive
themselves, and put the grossest cheat upon their own souls) when they tell us
their hearts are as much for religion, and truth, (though they cannot suffer so
much for it, and so resolutely own it as others do) as the hearts of any
Christians are: and it is the heart that God looks to and accepts: for if they
have any heart or will at all, it is but remiss, and in a low degree; it is but a
weaker inclination of the Will, some little, faint, and feeble velliety at the
best, some motions of the Will that never come to the countenanced prevailing
choice, and resolution: for where this is, the imperate acts follow, and are
performed, if there be an outward ability and power to do it; and when the
defect is a cannot, then the not doing it is excusable: As far example, If a
rich man have a heart for acts of Charity, and to relieve the distressed and
poor, he will proportionably do it; still his charity is answerable to his
heart: and if he have an Estate, and do not give, he has no heart at all, or
gives not proportionably (though he give something) to them; he has but very
little, his Wills is remiss, and this is his great sin before God, and shall
not excuse him from Soul-damning guilt to say he had a Will, and Heart (and
that Will God accepts of) for such good Works, while he did nothing of them,
are very little, but a man that has no Estate to relieve the necessitous, or
but a little one, and his charity is coequal with and proportioned to it, and
he has a a Heart to do more (which is known to the Sercher of Hearts) but
cannot, then is he not culpable, or inexcusable, but God accepts thereof. If
the Heart lead, all that have no impediment, and obstruction follow. All the
Members, and Powers; and faculties of a man, say to the heart, and will as the
People to Joshuah, chap. 1.16. All that thou command us We will do; and
whither soever thou sendest us we will go, only the Lord be with thee.

Though a remiss and inferior Will under a Physical, and Natural consideration
is really a Will, and may be so called, yet morally it is no Will, for it is
neither to denominate, (not being the prevailing choice) neither is it that God
by his Law requires, and is made the condition of our Salvation; only in thy
sense qui mavult vult, he that rather wills, that wills most strongly; wills
aright. Let us apply this to the Case in hand. There are many men of Estates
(and some very considerable) who will own pure and undefiled Religion, and the
instituted worship of God, and pretend much Love and Zeal for the same, till
their Estates be in danger by a Rivality and Competitorship between them; when
they must either lose their Estates wholly, or in part, or they must lose their
Religion, and worship God in a way less pure, or that is false. When it comes
to this pinch, they part and shake hands with their Religion, and do the latter
to secure and preserve the former. When this is done; that they may have
something to plead for themselves, and quiet their Consciences with, and
prevent (for their shameful Cowardice, and Apostasy) their grumbling, or
raging; they say their Hearts are for the truth, the best Religion; the purest
way of worshipping God; and for the most profitable way of Preaching. And God
accepts the Heart, and the Will for the Deed. O prodigious Hypocrite! be
astonished, O yea Heavens at this, and be horribly afraid! We will grant that
these men have an Heart, and a Will for Religion, but it is that which is
Inferior, and not Superior to the Will, and Volitions they have for the
World, and their Estates, it is divided between contrary objects, and it is
strongest inclination is toward the more vile, and base, the Creature, and
Earth as opposed to God, and Heaven; the former has plainly their choosing
Will, for to that do they adhere most, and cleave the fastest. That Will, and
Heart which they then pretend to have, is abominated, and rejected by God, (who
will either have our actual choice, and the prevailing part of our Wills, or
he will have none) and shall never stand them in steed, or be the least helpful
and advantageous, to them at the day of Judgment, to prevent their being
turned into Hell, with the greatest Opposers and Persecutors of Religion, Romans
10.9, 10. Matt. 10.32, 33. Mark 8.38. Would this serve their turn, then might
the grossest Sinners, who live where the Gospel is preached, and under the
discoveries of salvation by Jesus Christ, escape everlasting Condemnation;
because there is a willingness in all such to be saved, and this willingness is
much stronger in some then in others, insomuch that many are willing to do many
things for salvation, and some to perform the whole Gospel condition, but yet
all their Wills are more strongly inclined toward, some Lust, or many Lusts
and their actual choice is to please their Flesh; they would have Christ and
Heaven, but yet they would have some inferior good, (that is what they judge
to be so, though an evil, or perhaps in it self it may be a natural good)
either equally with, or rather then them. How many Avaritious, Ambitious,
Libidinous, and Ebrious Persons are there in the Christian World, who will
their salvation by Christ, but yet they will their particular Lust, their
Profits, and Honors, and unchaste impure Pleasures, and the gratifying of their
sensitive Appetites, with their pleasant Cups more, and so, notwithstanding all
their Wills, they eternaly perish; did these men prevalently will Christ and
Salvation, then would they part with every thing that comes in competion
therewith, which is coming up to the terms and conditions thereof: to take
joyfully then the spoiling of our goods for the sake of Christ, implies as the
principal, and chief thing, the strongest bias of our Wills toward Christ,
and Heaven; for this was eligible to the Hebrews, and chosen by them: It was no
force upon them, as in time of War; when, without the consent of any man's will,
his Goods are often taken away. But as it is said of Moses, Heb. 11.25. They
chose this rather than to betray the Truth.

2. Great Patience, Patience which is the strength and power of the Soul to
endure grievous things, which is the breath of the Soul, whereby it holds out
long, and perseveres in the Race of Christianity to the end. To take joyfully
the spoiling of our Goods, this must be in more then an ordinary measure, and
degree in us; for one that is impatient under sufferings, that frets, and fumes,
and chases, and rages, and railes at, and conceives revenge against
persecuting Enemies, can never rejoice when thus wronged, and oppressed:
Impatiency, and such joys are inconsistent. A Christian must be so patient, as
that the raging Sea of Passion may be ruled, the Waves of wrath appeased, and
stilled, the Surges, and Billows of Fury, with all inward Storms, and
Tumultations assuaged: We must be calm, sedate, and composed within if we will
rejoice when we suffer for Religion. Patience is of a very great use, needful
for the accomplishing, and atting of many things, which concern a Christian, so
particularly this Joy whereby his cause is so much honored, without this he
cannot obey that Law, Jam. 1.2. Count it all joy when ye fall into diverse
temptations, nor that in 1 Pet. 4.14. But rejoice in as much as ye are
Partakers of Christ's sufferings. This is one Reason among many why our Savior
exhorts Christians to possess their Souls in Patience, Luke 21.19. and the
Apostle in Jam. 1.3. that Patience might have her perfect work in them, so in
the 36. ver. of this 10. of the Heb. He tells the Hebrews ye have need of
Patience, with many other places to the same purpose.

3. Courage previous, to our suffering joyfully, is great boldness, invincible
magnanimity, and mightiness of Spirit, Pusillaminity (which by too many is
called Prudence) and joyful suffering are inconsistent fear, and joy are
exterminative, and exclusive of each other; had these Hebrews been dismayed,
and their Hearts fainted through fear, they could not have taken joyfully the
spoiling of their Goods, Fears, and Sorrows Courage and Comforts attend upon
each other, and go together. He that does not live above the fear of Poverty
for the Gospel sake, will most dishonourably flinch, when his Estate is in
danger for it, the loss of a little, (comparatively to the whole) will gall,
and perplex him, and you shall seldom find him guilty of the same Error (as he
counts it) twice his fears still make him keep out of harms way.

4. Self-denial, that first Lesson which a Christian is to learn in the School
of Christ, and which though he be always learning, he is never so perfect in as
he should be. Matt. 16.24. Mark 8.34. Luke 9.23. In Self-denial consists the
Vital part, and power of Godliness, and Religion, without which we can no more
be sincere Christians (whatever our profession may be) then we can be Men
without Reason; and this is highly requisite, yea absolutely necessary to the
performing of this Act, the taking joyfully the spoiling of our Goods. Most
Professors cannot deny themselves Superfluities, Superfluity of Dishes, of
Diet, of Meat, and Drinks; Superfluity of Apparel, of costly Furniture for
their Houses; with many other things which might be enumerated (and most men's
Superfluities will bear, and defray the expenses, the costs and charges of
Religion) much less those things that seem more necessary for the maintaining
of their Lives, and beings in the World: but till a man be of that frame of
Spirit, to deny his Wealth, and Riches, and so be willing to be made poor for
the sake of Christ, (which both Ministers and private Christians must do, 1
Cor. 4.11. 2 Cor. 6.10. Phil. 4.12. Heb. 11.37, 38.) they cannot perform this
duty of parting with their Goods joyfully for him.

5ly. Contentation; to be contented with any state and condition, though it be
never so mean and low. Contentment, indeed, implies the two former; but yet
it is something more; it is a being well pleased with our present condition; a
complacential acquiesce therein. This must be, or else a Christian cannot
rejoice to be impoverished, or cheerfully undergo such losses for Religion.
Phil. 4.11. To do this, we must learn what the Apostle there tells us he did; I
have, says he, learned, in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content. And
that Doctrine of the Apostles, in 1 Timoth. chap. 6. verse. 8. And, having food
and raiment, let us be therewith content, (...), the word signifies, let us
have enough, though we have neither delicates, nor ornaments; but any thing
that may be called food and raiment, (...), Coverings, any garments that will
cover our nakedness, and shelter us from the cold; though but hair covering;
though but such as those Worthies, had, in Heb. 11.37. They wandered about in
Sheep Skins, and Goat Skins, etc. yet let us count this enough, and sufficient.
Those that cannot deny their sensitive appetites, their flesh and senses
(whether outward, or the fancy and imagination, which deservedly comes under
the same denomination) their gratifications and satisfactions, that cannot live
without full Tables, Silks and Sattins, and a large confluence of more
inferior comforts, and drossy pleasures; whose souls are not the Cabinet where
this rare Jewel of Christian Contentment is to be found; will never do as the
Hebrews did, i. e. take joyfully the spoiling of their goods.

6ly. A low esteem of these worldly goods, especially compared with this
Heavenly Substance. What a man estimates very highly, it is very ungrateful to
him to part with it; he cannot do it with any joy. Men's value of terrene
Treasures, must be brought to a very low ebb (and that by an exceeding high
appretiation of unseen immortal treasures,) before they can take joyfully the
spoiling the same. The reason why so many Professors stick at this, is, because
Earth out-weighs in the balance of their esteem, Heaven. Those Saints that
have their conversations in Heaven; that are frequently taken up into the Mount
of Contemplation, to view and behold their most excellent Inheritance there;
that often revolve in their minds the cogitations and thoughts of its
inestimable pleasures and delights; the whole world, with all its glories, is
no more to them, when compared therewith, than a drop is to the Ocean, a beam
to the whole body of the Sun, or the smallest punct or point to the vast
expanded and encompassing Heavens: After they have looked upwards a while, and
pierced into eternity, and then cast their eyes upon the things of this lower
world (which are admired so much by those that never beheld better) they all
seem to vanish and disappear (as blushing, and being ashamed, from a
consciousness of their vileness and imperfections to stand before those very
mental Idea's that they have of what they have seen in the other world) and
become very contemptible to them. Its from want of a superlative esteem of this
better and abiding substance in Heaven, that men reluctate so much to part with
for God, and Christ, the vacuous and flaccescous things here upon Earth; things
that are so empty, and therefore cannot fill; things that are so transitory,
and therefore must leave an immortal soul.

7ly. The weaning of our affections from worldly good; from estates and riches;
a considerable mortification and crucifixion to them, in respect of love and
desire for them, and delight in them. What a man intensly loves, vehemently
desires, and abundantly delights in; that he cannot joyfully part with; for
that is a rending of the thing from the soul, which puts it to grievous pain.
Every man's sorrow in losing any earthly good, is proportionable to the love he
had for it, and delight he took in it. And when these affections are in excess,
and acted beyond those due bounds and limits, that reason should, and which
Divine Laws have prescribed, and set unto them; they make their darling objects
at last the most smarting Rods to correct and lash them with for their folly:
And sometimes they become sharp swords, cruelly and deeply to wound them, that
had too kindly entertained them before. All that violent, and unbounded sorrow
that we see in many, when some finite good flies away from them out of sight,
and returns no more; proceeds from the deep possession it had in the soul by a
no less imperious and commanding love before. This is so universally an
experimented truth, that it clearly demonstrates and proves another, viz. That
no man will, or can take joyfully the spoiling of his goods, till such
affections be moderated toward them; or in a considerable degree be withdrawn
from them. Could we that profess our selves Christians, but follow, and put in
practice the Psalmists advice, Psalm. 62.10. If riches increase, set not thy
heart upon them. And the Apostles, in Heb. 13.5. to have our conversation
without covetousness, (...), without the love of money, as that Greek word
signifies; and that counsel of his which we have in Colos. 3.2. Set your
affections upon things that are above. And were we but as the Apostle was in
the 6th chap. of the Galatians, v. 14. crucified to the world, etc. and had the
world crucified unto us, then would it be easily attainable for us to do what
the Hebrews did; and the present Doctrine should not be judged so
impracticable, or so little practiced as it is. Let us but close, and shut our
hearts against the world, while we have it in our hands, and then we shall
neither sigh, nor sob, to let it go for the Gospel, and the great concerns and
interest of Jesus Christ: But if this world be profoundly radicated and riveted
in men's hearts, and have the prevailing interest in their affections, to speak
to them, to use all the swasion and counsel that we can to make them lose and
leave it thus joyfully for the same, is an attempt as vain as to command
Mountains to remove out of their places, and fly up into the Air; or the Sun
to forbear shining, and the Sea flowing at their stated times.

8ly. And lastly, An act of deliberate Judgment, not a precipitous and rash
act, for that would cause repentance and sorrow for our folly afterward. Men's
timerarious actions are usually erroneous, and terminate in some angry, or
pensive reflection upon their incogitant, hastiness, which they find has
discommoded them. So that to suffer joyfully for Christ (that such joy may not
be turned into sorrow after from an apprehended mistake) must suppose some deep
cogitancy, and consideration; a weighing in the judgment what the loss and gain
will be thereby: This therefore results from a comparison made between these
two, and a sober pondering judgment passed thereupon, which will prevent all
after repentance; for the ruminating soul finding that the disproportion is so
vast between what it shall lose, and what it shall gain; and that the former is
so unworthy to be compared with the latter; it shall never befool it self for
suffering, and learn to be wiser thereby for the future; to verify that old
Proverb, That bought Wit is best; and that saying of the Heathen -- (...).
Hesiod.
A fool is wise after he has suffered. When the Apostle tells the Hebrews what
they had suffered, and what joy they had therein; he makes it an argument why
they should persevere and be constant in suffering; which implies, they had not
declared any repentance or sorrow for their former folly. Such
praeconsideration there was to part with their goods for the pure Doctrine of
the Gospel. The reason of many men's inconstancy, and instability in suffering
for Christ; (but after perhaps they have endured a little, they flinch, is, the
want of a through deliberate judgment before they engage in such a sight. So
much those words of our Savior import in Luke 14.26, 27, 28, 30, 31, 32. But
when Christians (to use the Apostles words, in James 1.2. Count it all joy
(which is an act free from all temerity, and the doing this in their choicest
deliberation) when they shall fall into diverse temptations. And with the
Apostle Paul, (...), the word is not to be referred to Opinion, which is
uncertain and doubtful, but to assuredness, and certainty; and is a metaphor
taken from such as Casting Account find the true total sum, as if he should
say, I have cast up the cross, with all the encumbrances of it. Par. in Loc.
Romans 8.8. Reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be
compared with the glory that shall be revealed in them. I say, when they do
this, then is their joy durable and abiding; a joy that suffers no eclipse; a
Sun that never sets in a Sea of sorrow. And such counting and reckoning there
must be to take joyfully the spoiling of our goods.

The Application of the Doctrine thus explained.
The first Use may be by way of Information.
1. Infer. FIRST from hence infer that the joy which springs from an Heavenly
Substance, that is a sweet stream from that upper fountain; can subsist, and
live in the soul, in the want of outward, and earthly comforts. Its not
depending upon sensible things, and present enjoyments; upon a great estate,
and a copiousness of wealth, dignities, and honors, or such foeculent and
drossy things here below. This is too noble and sweet a Lamp in the soul, to be
maintained and fed with such impure Oil. This is the reason why Paul and Silas
could sing in a prison, and in the stocks, Acts 16.25. why Paul was so filled
with joy, and exceeding joyful in all his tribulations, 2 Cor. 7.4. why he
could say; he, with others, (...), it notes the most exuiting Joy.
did glory in tribulations, Romans 5.3. why the Prophet Habakkuk could say, chap.
3.17, 18. Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in
the Vines: The labor of the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no
meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in
the stalls; yet will I rejoice in the Lord; I will joy in the God of my
salvation. And this is the reason why the Heroic and blessed Martyrs had such
a redundancy of joy in the midst of torturing flames, and under the most
exquisite torments. And no less does that great emboldening and encouraging
promise hold forth, in Matthew. 19.29. And every one that has forsaken Houses,
or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands
(that is, the nearest and dearest relations, and all possessions) for my Name
sake, shall receive an hundredfold, and shall inherit everlasting life. The
hundredfold promised concerns not another world, but this; or not eternity,
but time; as we may see by comparing this Scripture with Luke 18.30. Mark
10.30. And yet, though this may, and is sometimes made good in the plain
literal sense (a certain number being put for an uncertain, an hundredfold for
manifold, as the other Evangelists explain it) and in specie; yet it is not
always so: And though the former sense, according to the judgment of some, may
be true in part; yet its not in the whole only, so far as the nature of the
thing will ordinarily admit of it; for an hundred Wives, and Fathers, and
Mothers, etc. are not to be expected, though a far greater estate may, than
that which is forsaken for the Namesake of Christ. Therefore the performance
of the promise is to be understood eminenter; that though God does not give
those things formally, and specifically, yet he will do it eminently. What are
relations and possessions for? but comfort: Now when there is by any a
dereliction and forsaking of these for Christ, they shall have that in God, and
receive such exuberant consolations from him, which all the creatures would be
to him (yea and far more) if they were multiplied an hundred times. Did all
that profess the Christian Religion firmly believe this; or did they but feel
and taste, before they are called to suffer for their Religion, those sweet and
pure joys that are an effluence from God and Heaven; did they not really think
their principal (if not all their) comforts to be wrapped, and bound up in their
present enjoyments, and possessions; (and all because Sense is the great
Dictator to them, and their souls lie so much under the dominion thereof) so
many of them would not desert in the day of trial, their most noble Religion,
as they do. The enemies of the Saints, when they drag them to prisons, and shut
them up in dungeons, and spoil them of their goods, they conclude they have
hereby made them miserable, and revenged themselves upon them, not knowing, nor
considering what an effectual course they have taken to make them more happy:
How they have taken away puddle waters, that they may more freely and
plentifully drink of fountain waters; that they have removed their
Candlelight, that they may enjoy more of the Sun; that they have deprived them
of the Earth, and the creature, to make way for their possessing more of God
and Heaven. Sensual souls, and worldly-minded men, wonder often at the Saints
comforts, when they seem to be denuded and divested of all, not knowing, as our
Savior said in another case, that they have meat to eat which they know not
of, John 4.32. The sweet effluvium's of these joys, and their secret illapses
into holy souls, cannot by all humane or diabolical malice and power be
obstructed, or intercepted; they have their occult conveyances and
communications to the souls of suffering Saints, else the Hebrews had not taken
joyfully the spoiling of their goods.

2. Infer. Secondly, How wise a choice they make, that leave and abandon this
world for the sake of Christ; seeing they do not deprive themselves of present
joy and comfort; and likewise render themselves capable of a better, and more
excellent substance by it. It matters not what hypocritical Professors censure
them for, who think it their greatest wisdom to secure what they have, whatever
becomes of the Gospel, the pure Christian Religion, and the Interest of Christ
in the world. They may secretly deride them for imprudence, rashness,
inconsiderateness, and perhaps worse; with the openly professed and declared
enemies of the Lord Jesus Christ; but when these children of the Kingdom are
cast out into utter darkness, Matthew. 8.12. and see these (now judged fools)
inheriting everlasting life, and light; then, when its too late, will they be
convinced of, and justify their wisdom. Its an amazing and confounding thing,
to consider how strong, and unto how high a pitch men's reason is raised, when
it is exercised about earthly things, and is to pass a judgment upon them, and
how enervated and enfeebled; and at what a low ebb it is, when it comes to be
acted about heavenly things, and is to pass a true judgment upon them. Its rare
respectively to this, to find a man that is compos mentis, that has his right
wits; but most men here, are like to some madmen, who will discourse soberly
and rationally, till that be the subject, which was the first occasion and
cause of their madness, and then they quickly discover their distemper: And as
such phrenetical persons think all men so but themselves, and judge the most
sage discourses to be but folly: Even so world-minded Hypocrites, with the
large generation of Sensualists in the world, think the wise traffic and trade
of a few Saints for Heaven and Eternity, (while they adventure, and sometimes
lose all their worldly enjoyments for the same) to be a most unadvised
undertaking, to bewray much debility of reason, if not some frenzy, to have
seized upon them. And though perhaps they will not always; or all of them will
not thus explicitly and openly brand them with folly and madness, yet they will
do it implicitly and tacitly, either by ascribing what they do, to some sullen
obstinate humor (for they who will so gratify this, hazard and lose their
estates, and outward comforts are most egregious and enormous fools; do I say
fools? yea highly insanous and sit for Bedlam) or to too much niceness and and
over-scrupleness of conscience, which does sufficiently put the fool upon them,
while it asserts the exility (and almost nothingness) of there reason. But true
Believers can live above all these reproaches, and patiently wait till their
wisdom in another world be avoucht and justified by Christ; or their visible
and most glorious enthronement there do clearly demonstrate, not only the
verity, but the supereminency thereof, and what it is most noble origin and
descent was, James 3.17.
when so much unknown unto, disdained and vilisied by the World.

3. Infer. Thirdly, That Assurance of Heaven is attainable here upon Earth; it
may be had, though all the children of God have it not; it is no impossible
thing to be obtained; for if it were, that counsel and command (which makes it
a duty) were vain, which we have, 1 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren,
give diligence to make your Calling and Election sure: Which words are not to
be understood of an objective, but subjective certainty, sure to our selves in
our own hearts and consciences. When the Hebrews knew in themselves that they
had in Heaven this better and enduring substance, it implies (as has been
noted) that they had some assurance of a right to it, and a possession of it.
But this was not proper and peculiar (as a privilege) to them; but it is that
which Saints now, and to the end of the world may have likewise. It must indeed
be acknowledged, that assurance of our salvation is not with facility and ease,
but with arduousness and difficulty (as usually the choicest and most excellent
things are) obtained. This bright and precious Jewel cannot be brought into the
soul, but by the greatest assiduousness, painful laboriousness, highest and
constant solicitude and care; as the Apostolical Exhortation imports; Give
diligence, ((...)) which signifies all manner of studiousness, seriousness, and
intention in doing. It requires a close walking with God; an observant
watchfulness over our own hearts; a frequent, impartial, sedulous exploration,
and examination of them, 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the
faith: Prove your own selves: Which things too many, Christians being too often
omissive and negligent of, they possess it not: And whatever assurance any man
pretends to and boasts of, that he obtains not in this way, it will prove false
and deluding, and leave him short of Heaven, and all his hopes of an eternal
happiness, under a most miserable abortion and frustration. If the generality
of Christians want assurance, the fault is their own. The sloth and laziness,
the torpor and sluggishness of their souls; their oscitancy and carelessness,
their inactivity, insedulity and inconstancy in the performance of all those
holy duties, which are the vital parts of Christian piety, is too frequently
the cause hereof. The want hereof likewise in many, is to be ascribed to the
not exercising of their reason vigorously, and enough; for its usually (if not
always) wrought in a rational way: for as the soul of man has the power of
ratiocination; so hereby Gods Children must argue themselves into this joyful
Assurance, which is done by inferring one truth from another, and drawing true
conclusions from right premises; which are two propositions that help them to
syllogize. The first of these is Scriptutural, such a Proposition as is
infallibly true, because it is founded in the Word of God: As for example; let
it be that, He that believes on Christ, has everlasting life, Joh. 3.13. The
other Proposition is experimental. But I believe on Christ; now if after a
serious, laborious disquisition, and through examination of our faith, we find
it exactly to correspond, and square with that description, and those
characters which God gives of a true and saving faith in his Word (which is not
impossible to find and know, else that exhortation and command in the 2 Cor.
13.5. were very futilous and frivolous) then may the conclusion be rightly and
confidently drawn, therefore I have everlasting life. Much in such a way as
this (that requires the exercise of our reason) is Assurance wrought, which
many sincere Saints not taking, but waiting for, and expecting some immediate
testimony and witness from Heaven, are longer clouded with fears and doubts as
to their eternal estate. Its true, when all this is done, such may want
Assurance, both because they may not after a diligent search, experience such a
Proposition (there being requisite hereunto besides reason, the special help of
the Spirit, which may not always be afforded) and though they may, yet may
they hasitate and demurre, and not have the confidence to draw the conclusion;
which must be done likewise by the assistance of the same Spirit; which is
sometimes (though for most wise ends) denied them. But yet notwithstanding this
concession, its most probable (if not an indubitable truth) a comfortable
Assurance by such means (the Spirit concurring therewith) is attained unto;
though still it must be confessed, it admits of several degrees, and durations,
and so is not equally in all that have it; neither for measure, nor for time. I
might discourse much more largely of this Doctrine of Assurance, but that would
not be pertinent here. I only speak so much of it as shall make a clear way to
the ensuing particular.

4. Infer. Fourthly, Then that this Assurance of an Heavenly Substance renders
it very facil and easy to part with our earthly goods. The soul that can once
say, I know in my self that I have in Heaven a better, and an abiding
Substance, an immortal Treasure: Its never put to any hard struglings and
conflicts, to forsake all the treasures in the world, when the glory of God,
the interest of Christ and Religion calls him to do it; but with the greatest
promptitude and readiness; with the highest alacrity and cheerfulness he parts
with all. Let the world court, and complement the soul never so much; make the
largest promises to it; use all its blandishments and allurements, with the
utmost of its craft and skill; and never so earnestly solicit the same, to hold
and keep it fast, to adhere and stick to it; it is inflexible; it will not
yield; no conquest can be made of it; its hardened against them all: It can be
no more moved herewith, than a man would be with importunate entreaties and
solicitations to continue in some petite and contemptible Cottage, and little
spot of ground, when some magnificent Seraglio; some most illustrious Palace
and mighty Empire were offered to him, and he had a full and infrustrable
assurance always to possess the same. If a man were the Absolute Lord of all
the East and West Indies, and had as many Pearls, as there are Pebble-stones;
could accumulate and heap up the Gold of O, her, as high as the highest
Mountain, or Pyramides; could he possess as many millions of the purest Gold
and Silver, as there are grains of sand, piles of grass upon the earth, drops
of water in the Ocean, Stars in the Firmament, and moments from the beginning
to the end of time; Had he at once as many bright orient Gems and Jewels, with
Imperial Crowns, as there are Atoms; as have, or shall be hairs upon all men's
heads in the world: Or were he the possessor of as many Kingdoms; yea worlds,
as there are fishes in the Sea, fowls of the Air, beasts, reptiles, and insects
upon earth, yet would his Assurance of this one Celestial Substance (though it
were but of the lowest degree, and no pleropherie and full persuasion, that
does exclude, and will not admit of the least doubt) it would make him abandon,
Phil. 3.8.
and reject all as dung and dross for Christ; for his Gospel, and any truth
that has the stamp of his Authority upon it: Yea and all this it would do
without grudging, and murmuring; much more without absorping sorrow, if not
without one pensive thought. The reason of this is evident and plain; because
there is not so great a disproportion between a mite and all these numberless
millions, as is between them and this one Substance, this one Inheritance in
Heaven. And besides, this Assurance is never wrought in, or obtained by any
soul before the prevailing bent, and strongest bias of its will be unto, and
its actual choice be made of this immortal treasure, which conquers the
difficulty of parting with what is earthly.

5. Infer. Fifthly, Then (as connective with the former, and a further
amplification of it) that they who will not cheerfully part with, and take
joyfully the spoiling of their goods for the sake of Christ, cannot have any
Assurance of this better Substance, or any real right and title to the same.
Its true, such men may be (and many of them usually are) the greatest
pretenders to Assurance, and to the most confident Hopes of possessing Heaven.
But alas! all will prove but a vain and vanishing dream in the end; and ere
long they shall awake, and find it to be so; if not in this world to retrive
the mistake and error; yet in another; covered with horrors, and clothed with
consternations; when eternal flames shall thoroughly awaken, and effectually
convince them of that most gross delusion they laid under; while they thought
their right and title secured to the treasures of eternity, yet to honor and
glorify God, (and so answer the supreme and higest ends of their lives and
beings) and to maintain the Interest of their Redeemer in the world; they will
not part with those trifling treasures that are circumscribed, and bounded with
a few moments of time, beyond which by the decree and determination of the
Eternal God, they shall not pass: And when they thus awake, and their eyes are
thoroughly opened, they shall see, and know, that the Assurance and hope which
they had a firm and fixed dependence upon, were but like golden Chains (and so
more pleasing) that Satan detained, and held them as his prisoners in, till
with himself he had brought them down into the most tremendous Chains of
everlasting darkness. These persons are like to a poor wretched man that I once
saw in Bedlam, who did stronly fancy himself, and was fully assured that he was
a King, and had a real right to a Crown and Kingdom: But alas! (while none
could convince him of the contrary) all the while he was in Bedlam (a most
miserable Palace for this fanciful Prince to live in, and a very disconsolate
Throne to sit and reign upon:) And though he would assume Imperial Grandeur,
and with much state and majesty deport himself; yet he possessed nothing to
maintain it, but in his own imagination. Such a Heaven, such a Crown of life
and Glory shall these one day find (after all their Assurance) they are the
possessors of; who would not subordinate all their earthly interests and
possessions to Jesus Christ; and who would rather part with his pure Doctrine
and Worship, than these should suffer the least impairment and diminution; much
less would they suffer the loss of all for the same. And though these men do
think they are the only Sophies, the only Oracles for wisdom in the world, and
that the Systeme of the best Politics, and the Epitomy of all true prudence is
in their brains; and apprehending themselves to move in the highest sphere of
reason, to be Stars of the first magnitude for understanding; and admiring
their own Intellects, as elevated to the highest Zeninth, and sublimated to the
most lofty pitch: they judge themselves most worthy of the Chair, to be
perpetual and dogmatical Dictators unto all others. Yet it is not long before
it will appear both to themselves, and all others; how much they were void of
all true reason; what its tenuity and slenderness was, and how much more mad
they were than any of those sent to Bedlam to be made sober, to recover their
lost wits, to consolidate their cracked brains, and redintegrate their crazy and
shattered reason: Oh! you that are so tenacious of a little gilded earth, and
glittering clay (as if it were your God, and Supreme Good) that will sin
against your very light, debauch your own consciences, giving them many a
deadly stab, and mortal wound (and after by various Narcotick and stupefactive
potions; or by some strong enchantments and charms (which are composed of a few
fine-spun and Cobweb distinctions) making them for a few days insensible, and
laying them asleep;) rather than you will hazard, or suffer the loss of the
same for the very Religion that you profess, and are denominated Christians
from; or for that Religion in its most pure and undefiled constitutions:
Consider, I pray, betimes, how inauspicious and unhappy that tenure is like to
prove to your immortal souls; how certainly and infallibly it does augurate and
portend your loss of God and Heaven for ever; and that the Assurance and hope
that now you think you have, will prove a heartbreaking cheat, and be one high
aggravation of your misery to eternity. For if you had such an Assurance, you
would take joyfully (with the Hebrews) the spoiling of your goods for the same
pure Worship of Jesus Christ. You may as rationally suppose that the Sun should
harden and soften the same Clay, and the Fire the same Wax; or any natural
cause in an ordinary way of operation, produce the most contrary effects in the
same specific matter; as that the Assurance of a future eternal happiness, and
immortal glory, should make some so weaned from this world, and mortified to
it; and in so great a measure draw off their hearts and affections from it,
that with much facility and joy they can leave and forsake it, when called
thereunto; and yet in others, it should suffer their souls to be so fast glued
unto the world, to adhere and stick so close to the same; to be so deeply sunk
into the earth, and their riches and treasures to have that prevailing interest
in them (as if they were incorporated) that, (though they have the same call,
and have the same Cause to suffer for, as the propugnation and defense of
Gospel Truth) they will no more leave it, and suffer a separation and divorce
from it, than they will suffer their skin to be torn from their flesh, or their
flesh and sinews from their bones, when they can prevent it.

6. Infer. Sixthly That it is not enough to take the spoiling of our goods for
Christ, unless it be done with joy. Some men's darling lust is more pride, than
covetousness; and therefore to keep their credit and reputation among the
Professors of Religion, they may run an equal hazard of their estates with
others in serving and worshipping God; and sometimes may actually lose as much
as others; yet it is with much more inward disquietness, and discomposure of
mind; the reminiscence of, and reflection upon their losses (especially if
considerable) is with much sadness and sorrow: Their present parting with their
goods puts them to much pain, though they will conceal it, that their honor
may not be clouded: But this is not acceptable to God, nor approved of by him,
because it springs not from any prevailing love to him, and his Gospel; or from
a predominant interest that they have in their affections. The conflict is not
between grace and corruption, or between it and temptation; but between two
different lusts, and the one must yield to the other; which never demonstrates
heart-uprightness and sincerity.

7. Infer. Seventhly, That both the taking joyfully the spoiling of our goods,
or suffering for our Religion here depends upon the knowledge and hope of a
reward hereafter; and the possession of that reward hereafter depends (when
called to it) upon taking joyfully the spoiling of our goods, or suffering for
Religion here. This is likewise employed in the Proposition. The Hebrews doing
the one upon the knowledge of the other, supposes a necessary connection
between them; and that they were convinced effectually of this truth. For who
would cast away that which constitutes his happiness in this world, were it not
to gain a greater in another? or who would make himself miserable here, were it
not to avoid eternal misery hereafter? and had not God by an irrepealable Law,
and wise Sanction, made the one the condition of the other. If it were granted
that man, as he is Gods creature, and has his being from him (which his
subject state, and and Gods absolute sovereignty and dominion over him are a
resultancy from) stands obliged, and ought contentedly to act in pure obedience
to him, though he should not hereafter enjoy any unchangeable state of
blessedness, as a consequent reward; but after he had done and suffered all
that is required by his Makers command, he should perish for ever, or be
annihilated, and reduced to nothing: I say, if this were granted, how soon
(whatever some men may talk) would Religion languish and expire in the world?
what an allay and abatement would it be to the vigor, and fervor of divine
affections in the best? how would it damp and stifle all readiness unto, and
cheerfulness in the loyal service of God, and suffering for him. So that if God
should signify his will, that we should lose our goods, and suffer
imprisonment, to maintain his interest, and advance his glory in the world,
without the promise of any future happiness, and so to leave us without any
hope of compensation by it. We should soon see a prevailing averseness and
unwillingness in all to it: And we should never have read that the Hebrews, and
such a cloud of witnesses in former Ages, had done it: For we find, that
notwithstanding both the clear revelations, and sure promises of such a blessed
immortality, and permanent Substance in Heaven, with what a paucity and
inconsiderable number of men it has any efficacy, and power to command and
govern their lives, and be prevalently influential upon them to do (but) this
one thing for the honor of their Creator and Redeemer. It Is true, all our
doing and suffering cannot merit such a compensating faelicity; but yet God
(dealing with us as we are men, and have a principle of self-preservation in
us) promises this for our great encouragnment hereunto. And indeed it seems
very inconsistent, both with the wisdom and goodness of that Eternal Being,
that is the Supreme Rector and Governor of the world; and a very unlikely and
inefficacious way to maintain the just honor and reputation of his Government
over rational creatures, to command the one, without the promise of the other.

And yet it would be as incompitable with, and disagreeing from these and other
glorious Attributes of God, to confer upon us, and crown us with the latter,
without our doing of the former: And to assert the contrary, is a prodigious
solaecism and absurdity both in divinity and right reason; for it were
unwarrantably to maim the Notion of God; to conceive and bear in our minds an
Idea of him, altogether incongruous to his very Justice and Holiness. Seeing in
compliance herewith, he must own them as Heirs of the incorruptible Inheritance
in Heaven, who have disowned and denied him upon earth; and have preferrd a
finite, before his infinite goodness and glory. But let the Word of God speak
fully in the defense of this truth, Matthew. 19. v. 29. And every one that has
forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or
children, or lands, for my Names sake, shall receive an hundredfold, and
inherit everlasting life. Now, though this be a positive assertion, yet it
includes a negative (as in Scripture it is frequent) none but such shall inherit
this everlasting life; and this will appear to be the proper genuine sense of
it, if we compare it with Luke 14.33. So likewise whosoever he be of you that
forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my Disciple. And if no Disciple of
Christ, then no Heir of the future glory. All this shows us how many (now) of
the Visible Church of Christ shall be excluded the Kingdom of Heaven, and meet
with that most dreadful repute, and eternal separation from God. Depart from me
ye workers of iniquity, I know not whence ye are. Luke 13.27. But I having
intermixed this Discourse with other foregoing particulars, I shall not expiate
and enlarge it further, though it cannot be too industriously and frequently
inculcated upon us, who are so backward firmly to believe, and to be brought
under the powerful and effectual conviction of such a truth.

8. Infer. Eighthly, How vast a disproportion there is between the Saints
present losses, and their future gain. This is that which makes them so
joyfully suffer the loss of all things. The ineffable and unutterable
inequality between them is the sourse and spring of their joy: They have a
substance for a shadow; a substance that is permanent, and perpetual, for that
which is withering and fading. Who will not rejoice to part with a penny for a
pound? with one pound for an hundred? with a hundred for a thousand? with a
thousand for a million? etc. but yet what is the disproportion between the least
of these, and the greatest sum, to that which is between an earthly and an
heavenly Substance? But my purpose is not to dilate and amplify this great
truth; having already in part glost, and paraphrased upon it. I say but in
parts; for who can speak to that fully, which is so infinitely above, and
beyond the grasp, and reach of his Reason; the comprehension of his capacity,
and the compass of his understanding? But it is to raise the Souls of Saints to
a more sublime, and frequent admiration of the unsearchable Riches of God's
free Grace, and exurbetant Mercies, and to fill them with more ravishing
contemplations thereof; which this disproportion does so much illustrate and
celebrate; varnish, and beautify with a matchless Glory. That there should be
an infinite, and eternal reward for a finite, and temporary Act; and that which
we are under an indispensable Obligation to do; and when we have done it, to be
still unprofitable Servants. That an Act should be thus rewarded by God, that
he stands in no need of, that he has no dependence upon, as Augmentative of,
and and additional to his blessedness; for the uttermost contributions of men,
and Angels, with all other Creatures, can add nothing to him) And that an Act
shall be so superabundanly recompensed, which is but the employing for Gods
glory, and the returning to him what is his own, and what we first received
from him, what he has but lent us; or we are still but Tenants at Will (his
property never being alienated.) That we should have as the Apostle says in 2
Cor. 4.17. Glory for afflictions; a weight of glory for light afflictions; an
exceeding Eternal glory for momentary afflictions. (O! astonishing Antithesis)
In what extatical, and transporting admirations hereof, should the Souls of
Saints be in; and certainly more frequently (than they are) they would be so,
were they but more with the Apostle in Reckoning that the sufferings of this
present time, are not worthy to be compared with the Glory, that shall be
revealed in him, Romans 8.18. And would we but fixedly and steddily meditate
hereon; our Souls would not be so effaete, and barren of praises to God as they
are. But we should be ever blessing, and adoring him for that superfluous, and
reabundant compensation of the very little that we can do, or suffer for him.
And seeing time is too little for this work, we should more ardently long to
Triumph in his Praises to Eternity.

The consideration of this vast disproportion between our losses and our gain,
our sufferings, and our reward, should wonderfully animate, and encourage us to
suffer the loss of all things: it should ^l and strengthen our hearts, and
fortify our Spirits to endure the utmost extremity of misery, and to be
insuperable, and unconquerable in a patient toleration of all Tribulations for
the sake of Christ, to promote and advance his interest in the World. And
certainly were there but an immoration, and dwelling of our most serious
thoughts hereon; we should never dread such sufferings (which are ever worse in
fearing, then in feeling them) as we do; not be so averse to undergo them as we
are.

9. Infer. Ninthly, That one and the same Heavenly substance belongs to all
Saints and all Sufferers, for their Lord and Master Jesus Christ. There is but
one Kingdom, Matt. 25.34. one Inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.4. One Crown, Rev. 1.10.
one Throne, Rev. 3.21. that belongs to them all. It Is in the Text, one
substance that all the Hebrews knew they had. If an Earthly Father have many
Children usually the firstborn Son, or the eldest living inherits his Estate,
if a King have many Sons, the eldest usually is Heir to the Crown. When
Jehoshaphat died the Text tells us, 2 Chronicles. 21.3. He gave great Gifts of
Silver, and of Gold, and precious things, with fenced Cities in Judah: But the
Kingdom gave he to Jehoram, because he was the firstborn. This right of
Primogeniture unto Earthly Inheritances, has some Foundation in the Law of
Nature. But in Heaven there is no difference, nor distinction made among all
the Children of God: one inheritance he has provided for them all, and every
individual shall have the whole, as all the Inhabitants upon Earth equally
enjoy the light of the Sun, when it shines unto them, (provided their visive
faculty be alike) so shall all the Inhabitants in Heaven equally enjoy a
Kingdom. Indeed God puts a difference, and makes distinctions between his
Children in this World; some are rich (though but a very few) some are poor,
some noble, (though not many) and some ignoble; and he will have the order of
Superiority, and Inferiority maintained among them, and to break it is a sin.
Servants though Godly must keep in their proper Station, and know their
distance from their Godly Masters, and Mistresses; and greatly fear and
reverence them, and the base for their Piety, must not think themselves equal
with the honorable, nor behave themselves the more immodestly, and
disrespectively toward them (for such a procacious carriage, and malepart
deportment, is a violiation of the Law of God, Nature.) But in Heaven all these
distinctions shall cease, Masters and Servants, Parents and Children, the High,
and the Low, the Rich and the Poor, the Noble and the Ignoble, Kings and their
Subjects shall stand upon equal ground; therefore they shall be all Kings, Rev.
1.6. What those different degrees of Glory are, that some assert shall be in
Heaven, proportioned to the attained degrees of Grace upon Earth, (and which
some places of Scripture seem to point at,) is something difficult to
understand, and to give satisfactory Answers to those Objections which might be
raised against the same. The essential blessedness, and glory of the Saints is
the same, its one Substance, but something accidental there may be to increase,
and heighten the joy; as there will be in Hell to increase the Sorrows and
Misery of the damned; and to make the damnation of some greater than others,
Matt. 23.14. This truth I thought fit to infer, to comfort those that are the
Children of God, but whose condition is low and mean, and exposes them to the
slights, and contempt of the World. And to make them contented therewith for a
few days; notwithstanding all the affronts and indignities they meet with from
the Strutting Gallants upon Earth, and while perhaps they meet with too
disdainful, and disrespectful a carriage from their fellow Christians, and
Brethren who are Superior to them for wealth. It likewise may administer
abundant consolation to those that have but a very little lose for to Christ,
whose Estates are so exigious, and small that its perhaps their grief, and
trouble, they have no more to adventure, and part with for him. Let all such
know they shall be as well rewarded in Heaven, as those who forsake the
greatest Treasures for him; for its their All and so demonstrates their
sincerity, and the supremacy of Gods interest in their Souls: Therefore as our
Savior says, whosoever shall give to drink a Cup of cold Water (that is when
he has no better Liquor to give) in his Name to his Disciples, and because
they belong to Christ, shall not lose their reward, Matt. 10.42. Mark 9.40. And
as when the poor Widow cast her two Mites into the Treasury, it was highly
applauded and approved by Christ, and as acceptable to him as the much which
was thrown in by the rich, and no doubt as highly rewarded by him in Heaven,
Mark 9.41, 42, 43, 44. so those that lose their Mites for Christ (and have no
more) shall, be compensated with as massy a Crown of immortal glory, as they
that lose their Millions. (if any such can be found) And as our Savior says
concerning that poor Widow that she threw more in, then all the rich that cast
into the Treasury, ver. 43. For says he all they did cast in of their
abundance (what they might well spare) but she of her want did cast in all that
she had, (...) all her life.
even all her living; so those Christians that leave and lose that which in it
self is most contemptibly minute for Christ, when its their living (that is all
their means that have to live on, or to maintain their Lives) its of greater
value, and more in the account of Christ, then that which is lost by the rich,
when its not their All; not the total of their Estates: but still a sufficiency
is reserved to live upon. What is translated the VViddows living properly
signifies her Life. When a poor Christian, therefore offers and sacrifices
his petite substance, his tenuous and small pittance to Christ, to advance his
glory, and Kingdom in the World, he seem to offer, and sacrifice his life, and
its as greatful, and acceptable to Christ as if it were the same. And I think
that Christian who will lose his whole Estate (be it more or less) for Christ,
will lose his life too: But this is certain, that he who will not adventure,
and forsake the one, will not hazard, nor lay down the other.

Tenthly, From hence infer, that the possession of this Heavenly Substance will
not admit of, nor consist with any grief and sorrow. If sincere Christians can
joyfully suffer from the very foreviews of this substance, and the
praebibations and foretasts of its effluent sweetnesses and pleasures;
certainly no mortal can declare what joy the full possession of it will afford.
The hope that Princes have of Crowns and Kingdoms, raises their joy above an
ordinary pitch: but when the day of actual Coronation and Inthronization comes,
then their triumphs surpass. Thus Gods children rejoice in hope of a future
Crown, Romans 5.2. and their joy surmounts the joy of Princes: but when they hear
those words, Matthew. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world. And when they shall be
crowned by their dearest Redeemer in the presence of all the holy Angels: And
he shall further say unto them; Seeing you have overcome the world, and the
flesh, now boldly ascend my Throne, and sit with me thereon: even as I also
overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne, Rev. 3.21. What
shouting for joy will there then be? All Triumphs, and Exultations at
Inaugurations and Instalments here, are but dark resemblances of what will then
be. Certainly sighs, and groans, and tears they shall know no more. To use
those words of the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 51. ver. 11. The redeemed of the Lord
shall return, and come with singing into heaven (instead of Zion) and
everlasting joy shall be upon their head: They shall obtain gladness, and joy;
and sorrow, and mourning shall flee away. How inconceivably sweet must their
solace then be? What voluptuousness, and delectations can be like to theirs,
who can imbibe and drink in fresh pleasures from the fountain like to them? But
in the explicatory part of the Proposition, having said so much to this
already, I will extend the discourse no further; yet I thought fit to add this
little, (it being a rational deduction from the Doctrine) to renew the Gusto
and taste of the former, and to refresh the Readers memory of what has been
spoken of the Delectability of this Substance as it is in Heaven.

Use 2. The second Use.
Secondly, Then it may be useful by way of Counsel and Exhortation, unto all
that profess the true and pure Christian Religion, and Apostolic Faith, that
they would put this Doctrine in practice when called to it: that they would
never betray nor renounce it, nor in the least recede from it, to have an
Estate (though never so great) or that they may proceed in the coacervation and
heaping up of their riches and treasures. If we acknowledge and believe the
Sacred Scriptures to be the only directive, and conductive Rule to our supreme,
and ultimate End; our everlasting, and future Blessedness; and that nothing can
be constitutive of Gods Worship, but his own Commands, and Institutions: and
that whosoever would mix any thing therewith, or add any thing thereunto, as
parts of that Worship; do usurp and invade the Divine Prerogatives, and violate
the peculiarities of the Godhead. Why should we wrong our own souls in
contracting such great guilt, either by forsaking that Rule for another, to
avoid some pecuniary mulct imposed upon us, or by neglecting the true and pure
Worship of God, and complying with that which is false and corrupt; and not
from any conscience (though erroneous) or blind zeal (which many have) but to
secure a base sordid interest. To be content to hear 2 Cor. 2.17. (...). i. e.
By fraud, and base acts, play the Hucksters with the Word of God; or like
deceitful Vintners, who for gain mix Water with Wine, or decayed Wine with that
which is generous and good.
sophisticated Doctrine, and join with others in an adulterated vitiated
worship (and which we know to be so) for some worldly advantage; either to
prevent the total loss, or some diminution of our Estates, (which alas! too
many do;) is a most clear demonstration that we are not acted by the same
spirit the Hebrews were, nor possessed with the same Principles of Religion
which they had. This Counsel belongs

First, To the Ministers of the Gospel. Reverend Sirs: Though I am unworthy to
give advice and counsel unto you, from whom I should receive it: yet as Elihu
said in another case, Suffer me a little to speak on Gods behalf; and if it may
consist with modesty, let me say as he said, Job 32.10. I also will show my
opinion. You have an high and honorable calling; which does not stain the
noblest blood (for however it be undervalued and had in contempt now, yet one
day the Ministerial function will appear to be no blot to any the most
honorable persons Eschutcheon.) And as it derives its honor from its Author,
(the great and eternal God, whose Ambassadors you are, and who has advanced
you to this dignity above others, (and from its object, (the glorious Gospel of
Jesus Christ:) So you stand obliged to do every thing that may maintain the
Honor of the one, and promote the Interest of the other in the world. And
there is nothing that does more efficaciously conduce hereunto than your
Assiduous and faithful, and constant preaching, whatever sufferings you expose
your selves unto, and undergo thereby; for otherwise how can it be evinced to
an opposing world, that you really believe the goodness of your Cause, the
verity and truth of that Doctrine which you preach, the future immortal Glory
which it does discover, and that it is a sufficient compensation for all your
troubles and sufferings; Or how shall others be convinced of, and believe the
excellency of that Gospel that God has invested you with the Ministry of, (see
the Apostles sentiments hereof, and heroic resolutions thereupon, 2 Cor. 4.1.
Having therefore this ministry, (the excellency and dignity whereof he had
proved and discoursed of in the former Chapter (for to that do these words
refer) we faint not, (...), we shrink not back, or grow weary and slothful.
English Annotations.
Though we are broken in pieces with heart griefs and calamities, yet we yield
not; notwithstanding all the discouragements we find in the world, we slack not
our pace, nor remit any thing of our zeal for God's Glory; which like fire is
kindled more, and not at all quenched by the blasts of opposition:) or how
shall it appear that you have your firm dependence upon God, and strong
confidence in him, as one that will stand by you, and own you, in supporting
you under, and comforting you in all your troubles; as one that is faithful to
make good all his promises to you. Or how shall it be known that you were
upright, and sincere in taking upon you this noble Office, and that you have
not made it subservient to some by-ends (as the principal, and chief) of your
own, not ultimately designing the glory of your Lord and Master, Jesus Christ.
And as your sufferings maintains the honor of your calling; (in these, and
many other respects as might further be evinced) so they do promote the
Interest of God, and the Gospel in the world. You know how fully the New
Testament, and Ecclesiastical Histories do prove this truth. That they never
lost, but gained exceedingly, an interest by the persecutions of faithful
Ministers, when they courageously endured the same. And though this be so
unlikely a Cause, (and seemingly so contradictory to Reason;) to produce such
an effect; yet God will have it so that the Divinity of his Gospel may be
demonstrated, (whilst it flourishes in the midst of; and the more by
opposition,) and grows stronger, and more victorious and triumphant, by that
which seems the most likely way to weaken, and vanquish it, and to extirpate,
and banish it out of the world, or else the Reason of its implacable Enemies
would not in all Ages, and Places dictate unto, and prompt them ^e this course,
as a most effectual to accomplish such an end.) And those Ministers that this
does not weigh, and signify more with, than an Estate, their ease, liberty, or
any outward comforts in this World, let their parts be never so florid, their
Tongues never so Rhetorically fluent; and let them Preach to admiration of all
that hear them; to the gaining of the greatest applause, and the largest
Encomiums, yet their eternal State, is likely to be the same with those that we
read of in Mat. 7.22, 23.

Did you in the day of your Ordination Covenant with God that you would only
preach his Gospel, and serve him in the work of the Ministry in Halcyon, and
serene days? when the Sun of outward prosperity shines bright upon you? when it
consists with Peace and Plenty; with your credits, with the respects and honors
of the World? Is this to answer the great, and dreadful charge of the Apostle,
2 Timothy 4.1, 2. (which concerns every Minister to the end of the World) I charge
thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ; who shall judge the
quick, and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom: Preach the Word, be
instant in Season, out of Season; (which latter words answer most Objections
that Summer Preachers can make against this work, when accompanied with dangers
and difficulties, and when it is to be done against humane Laws, in obedience to
the Law of God the Supreme Legislator) if these were your secret, and inward
thoughts, the All-seeing, and Heart-searching God will one day discover it, and
declare (though in a terrible manner) he will not be thus mocked.

Do not all your Titles oblige you to faithfulness in your work, what ever you
suffer by it? You are called Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5.20. you are so for Christ:
And if an Ambassador do not boldly assert and maintain the Rights, and honor
of his Master (though there be danger in so doing) he deserves severely to
suffer. You are the Lords Laborers in his Harvest, Matt. 9.37. Luke 16.7. 1 Timothy 1.16. 1 Cor. 3.9. and will you not endure the heat, and burden of the day?
You are the Lords Shepherds, he has appointed you to feed his Flock; to be the
Overseers thereof, Acts 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.2. And will you do this only when there
is no danger? when no Wolves, and devouring Beasts appear, when no Storms
arise? or will you be with them in the day, and not in the night also? or in
the Summer, and not in the Winter? Will you then depart from them, and leave
them to the roaring Lion? if so, expect not, as the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 5.4.
When the chief shepherd shall appear, that ye shall receive a crown of glory
that fades not away. You are God's Stewards, 1 Cor. 4.1. Tit. 1.7. Will you
then neglect God's household, and family, and not provide for the same when you
meet with troubles? Is this to be faithful in the discharge of your Office? Or
is this the way to render a good account of your Stewardship at the great
Audit? You are God's Trustees, or as it were his Feoffees: the Gospel is his
Feoffment of trust, 1 Timothy 1.11. 1 Timothy 6.20. It Is a most sacred and precious
Depositum which God (like a Feoffor) has committed to every Minister to keep
it safely himself, and carefully to transmit to posterity. Will you then betray
your trust by a sinful silence, and sitting still? Shall the next Generation
want this inestimable treasure, for want of your laboriousness, industry, and
sufferings? If you above all others contend not earnestly ( Jude 3. (...),
Agonistically) for the says; God, who has put you into the Ministry, will
never count you faithful, as he did the Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy 1.12. You are
God's Pilots; by your steerage must the Ship of the Church be conducted, and
brought safe to the port of Eternity, and haven of everlasting rest. Will you
then leave it in the greatest danger, when the Seas are rough, and raging, and
the winds most tempestuous, and so expose it to all Rocks, and Quicksands? As
if God had made you Pilots only for fair weather and smooth waters, and would
have you put to Sea, only as many do for delight and pleasure. You are God's
Military Officers, (in a spiritual sense) set for the defense of the Gospel,
Phil. 1.17. he has made you his Captains to fight the Battles of the Lord of
Hosts: you are to lead the Van, and charge in the Front; And will you be the
first that will run away, and cowardly quit the Field? (You know such Captains
deserve to have their Commissions taken from them, and their Swords, to their
eternal disgrace and dishonor, broken over their heads, as most notorious and
enormous Cowards.) If you be perseveringly guilty hereof, What do you think
will God do with you, or how will he reward you? Is this to act according to
the Apostles Counsel, 2 Timothy 2.3. to endure hardness as good Soldiers of Jesus
Christ. Or do you think that Counsel once concerned Timothy, or was calculated
for the Primitive Age of the Church? Is this, to act according to the Apostles
call, and counsel to Archippus, Col. 4.17. To take heed to the ministry which
you have received in the Lord, that you fulfill it? Or is it to make full proof
of your ministry, according to 2 Timothy 4.5. where you find the enduring of
afflictions to be one ingredient thereof.

It Is true, you may hereby be reduced to poverty; And were not the Apostles so?
1 Cor. 4.11. For even unto this present hour we both hunger and thirst, and are
naked, and have no certain dwelling place, and labor, working with our hands,
etc. And many thousands more, who are now enriched with the treasures of
Eternity. Poverty indeed will expose you to contempt, and make you less
honorable in the eyes of the world: But what then, did not this befall the
Apostles likewise? 1 Cor. 4.13. We are made as the filth of the world, and are
the offscouring of all unto this day. ((...), i. e. We are as the filth or
dirt scraped off men's shoes, or any filth that comes off the most squalid and
nasty thing that is cleansed: we are a Purgament, or we are as the Dung-Cart
that goes through the City, unto which every one brings his filth, and casts
in: Or its an allusion to the lustrations and expiations in use among the
Heathens; which was done by sacrificing unto their gods some most facinorous
and profligated men, to propitiate and appease them when they apprehended them
angry: especially in time of Pestilence, or such contageous infections: which
men were termed (...). And so the meaning is, we are as dispicable, and as
abominable, and as much loaded with the curses and calumniations of the
multitude, as those execrable persons who were offered up by way of public
expiation. The other word (...) has the same sense and signification in all
respects, and so is a Rhetorical amplification.) Can your honor then be at a
lower ebb, and be more laid in the dust than theirs? And why should you be more
concerned for a little popular breath, for a mere bubble, than they were? But
what though this be so in respect of the greatest part of the world; yet though
you be as poor as Job, you will be honorable in the eyes of all those that
highly value and prize the Gospel, that account it a glorious thing. This you
will be for your work sake, as the Apostle says, 1 These. 5.13. if you be
faithful therein, (for its a certain truth, that every man esteems of a
faithful Minister, whatever his outward condition be, is proportionable to his
esteem of Jesus Christ and his Gospel, and the want of the one, has always
it is Fountion laid in the want of the other.) with what an humble disdainful
patience, then may you pass by, and overlook the disrespcts, the scorn, and
contempt of others. Your Souls should be more highly generous, and more greatly
enobled then to receive any impressions, or yield to any passionate Resentments
hereof. What though a Dunghill Cock contemn a pearl from the ignorance of its
worth, or its unsutableness to his vile, degenerous nature; it is a Pearl still,
and highly valued by a man. What though a filthy Swine may trample the purest
Gold with his unclean Feet in the mire; and besmear it all with Dirt, it is Gold
still? whose worth is owned, and acknowledge by a man. What though a dull and
sordid Ass when phalerated, and in trappings; or laden with Gold, attract the
Eyes and admiration of the vulgar, and more ignoble Natures; while a more
generous Creature ( as a sprightly beautiful, and well proportioned Horse,
whose Neck is clothed with Thunder, the glory of whose Nostrils is terible. Who
rejoices in his strength, and goes to meet the armed men. Who mocket at fear
and is not affrighten, neither turns his back from the Sword: Who swalloweth
up the ground with fierceness and rage. And says among the Trumpets Ha, Ha,
who smells the Battle a far off; the Thunder of the Captains, and the
shouting, Job. 39.19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.) passes by without any observant
respect, but yet is more highly valued, and more delightfully viewed, by a
noble Spirit. Let Asses (in another sense) laden with Gold, and Earthly
Treasures be honored by men like to themselves, whose souls are sordid, and of
a Dunghill constitution, yet you shall have a venerable respect and honor from
those that have the true Sentiments thereof; who value men, not as Beasts, but
from an internal, and intellectual worth.

But suppose you are contemned of all by reason of your poverty, yet is not the
glory of God; the Crown of Glory? the Honors of the other World, which shall
shortly be conferred upon you, (to which an immercessence, and immortality is
appropriate) be sufficient for you, have you not the lively hope hereof; do you
never rejoice in the hope of the same? are you without the foreveiw, and
prospect of it? while you preach it to others. Do not you see a superabundant
fullness in it to compensate all the contempt, and dishonor you meet with in a
world (where your worth is not known) for a few days.

Have you not often preached up a life of Faith, and pressed others to live, have
you not by many rational, and strong Arguments urged and persuaded others, to
be courageous, and to live above the fear of suffering, and will you not live
upon your own Doctrine? will you not be exemplary for the practical Part? will
you be the first that shall discover unbelief? shall there be any cause to say
of you, as Christ said by way of a smart reprehension, and objurgation to his
Disciples, Matt. 8.26. Why are ye fearful, O ye of little Faith? or as Mark
has it. why are ye so fearful? How is it that ye have no Faith, (as if weak
Faith sometimes will stand the Soul in no more steed, then If it were none at
all.) how unanswerable a thing is this before God.

It Is granted indeed you do not stand obliged to preach at all times, nor in
all places, as things may be circunmstantiated; but if you cannot without
manifest, and apparent ruin, to your selves and your Congregations and without
constant opposition in one place, preach publicly, then you must do it more
privately, and secretly. (which is clear from the Word of God) For hazards you
must run, and dangers you must expose your selves to in preaching the Gospel
either publicly, or privately. And though God does allow you the use of your
own Prudence to guide you in the management of this, as well as other Affairs;
yet beware it be not sometimes carnal Policy, or degenerous Pusillanimity, that
withholds you from a more public appearing for God, and Jesus Christ in the
discharge of your duty.

Blessed be God, there are many of you; who have with wonderful, and laudable
Resolution, and boldness preached the Gospel, who I hope will still persevere,
and endure to the end. But as for those that quit their work, and whollay it
aside, either from danger, or because they have found a more plentiful way of
living in the World (and probably with greater credit, and reputation) perhaps
one day they may find what is here assered to be a truth: If they think there is
no need of their ministerial labors where they are; or that they ought to
silence themselves, when others would silence them. Let them then consider how
they are to teach all Nations, Matt. 28.19. and and therefore stand obliged by
their calling, to go among those that want the Gospel (if they may be received)
to propogate it, and plant Christianity.

Such of you, as of late, have been very much alarmed with Popery and do now
profess great fears of it is invading and overspreading us, (though while your
Protestant Brethren were in a suffering condition, were trampled under Foot,
were trod in the Dirt; and their Wounds were bleeding afresh (till his
Majesty's mercy was in some measure a Sovereign Balsome to heal them) And all
the while you were helping forwards their sufferings, and rejoicing therein;
when at the same time, not the edge of any one parnal Law, and Statute was
turned against the Roman Catholics, nor they in the least valuerated and
wounded therewith: Yea when at the same time they were your intimate
Companions, and you had your mutual Carasses, none of them were presented at
your Courts, for their Nonconformity, nor were excommunicated, nor were ever
plagued and pestered with writs De Excorm. Cap. were not therewith driven from
their Wives, and Children, nor hunted like Patridges upon the Mountains.) I
beseech you if your fears (which God prevent) come to pass, approve your selves
to be firm, and well grounded Protestants; and of the true reformed Religion,
by taking joyfully the spoiling of your Goods for the pure worship, and
doctrine of Jesus Christ. Look to it that you leave your Benefices, your
Ecclesiastical Dignities, Promotions and Preferments, and that you zealously
show your selves Non-conformists to the corrupt, adulterated Romish Doctrines.
Take heed that after you have boasted your selves so much (exclusively of all
others) to be the true Children, and Legitimate Offspring of your Mother the
Church, you do not at last publish a contract of Matrimony betwixt Her, and his
Holiness at Rome; or at least prostitute her to his filthy Stupratious. And
beware (least to save what you have) you do not (as persons well Skilled in
Rhetoric,) by some Synaresis contract two opposite Doctrines into one, or by
some new contrived Crasis make a meddle, and mixture of them together.

Secondly, To the people that hear them. Consider the duty is not incumbent
upon your Ministers only thus to suffer, but as much upon your selves: You are
apt enough, many of you, to spur them forwards, to adventure their all for
Religion, but draw back your selves: If they will not make themselves poor for
Christ, and expose their Wives and Children to beggary, or much penury and
misery; then you are apt to reprove them as covetous, and worldly-minded: Many
of you will make plentiful provision for your own Families, and leave hundreds
and thousands to your Children; but concern not your selves how little theirs
have, or what becomes of their Posterity. Consider, all the Hebrews were not
Ministers, nor the greatest part (if any of them;) what was therefore their
duty, is yours. Let me now to conclude this discourse, speak jointly to all,
and offer a few Arguments for Consideration.

First, Have you not a cloud of Witnesses? the Hebrews, Primitive Christians
without number, that have done this; have suffered the loss of all things for
the sake of Christ? You are not the first; you are not called to break the ice,
that you should shrink and be startled at it. How cogent an Argument does the
Apostle make the suffering of a multitude before us, why we should suffer, Heb.
12.1. Did God call us to that which never any in the preceding ages of the
Church underwent and suffered, we might perhaps have a better plea and pretense
for our refusal, but it is not so: he calls us to go in a beaten path, and
common road; why should we then stick at it, or be afraid to enter, and hold
on in it? This is an encouragement to other Enterprises and Achievements, and
produces a daring boldness in us many times; and is it not as rational that it
should heighten our courage, and prevail with us to do this? What are we better
than such multitudes that have gone before us, that we should be exempt from
this kind of suffering? or why should our Estates be preferred before Jesus
Christ, his Gospel, and pure Worship, more than theirs? or can we think to
enter into the fullness of everlasting joy in another way than they have done?

Secondly, Have you not many promises of the faithful God to make you willing,
and encourage you hereunto. God is so abundantly Gracious, and merciful, that
he never from an absolute sovereign Power and Authority, commands us either to
serve him, or suffer for him, but he annexeth the promise of an ample reward.
You do but lose, to gain; you do but make your selves poor, to be rich. Though
I might produce a large Catalogue of Promises, yet that in Matthew. 19.29. shall
serve for all: Shall this and other Promises be of no value or account with us?
Shall it not signify more than this world? Will we prefer some mountanous
Dunghill, or shining Dust, and Earth before it? Certainly if we refuse to do
this for our Lord Jesus, this and other Promises cannot be exceeding great and
precious to us, as the Apostle says, 2 Pet. 1.4. And hereby we do declare to
the world, that the Word of God is less valued by us, than the word of many men
(who are of credit and reputation among us;) And that we actually and
practically renounce and disclaim (though we may profess, and pretend the
contrary) all right unto, and interest in this, and all other promises, (that
the pages of the Holy Bible are be spangled with, as the Firmament with Stars.)
It Is also plain and evident hereby that we have no dependence upon them; they
are not the Basis of our Hope, the food of our Faith, the support of our
Spirits; but that they are very impertinences, and signify as much as nothing
to us: that they are like Wells without water; Breasts without milk, that never
revive and refresh us; that we derive and fetch no comfort from. The Apostle in
Heb. 10.23. makes it a valid and nervous Argument why we should hold fast the
profession of our faith; because he is faithful that has promised. To hold
fast then our possessions, and let go our profession, is a reflecting of
unfaithfulness upon God, or ascribing an insufficieny to what he has promised,
to make us happy; and an implicit asserting that the Apostles reason, is no
reason at all.

Thirdly, Consider Christ took joyfully the spoiling of all for your sakes: How
influential then should this be upon your souls to take joyfully the spoiling
of all that you have for his sake? He that is Lord of all things, was content
to have nothing; to be in a worse condition than the fowls of the air, and
beasts of the earth, Matthew. 8.20. The foxes have holes, and the birds of the
air have nests; but the Son of man has not where to lay his head. Phil. 2.7.
The Text tells us, he made himself of no reputation: (...), word for word, he
evacuated, or emptied himself: He not only divested himself of his robes of
Majesty and Glory, but he brought himself, as it were, to nothing; or made
himself worth nothing: and all this he did for your sakes. 2 Cor. 8.9. the
Apostle tells us, That though Christ was rich, yet for your sakes he became
poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich. (A most clear demonstration of
the exuberancy of his Grace, as in the Text it is showed.) And Christ did all
this as a most free undertaking, when we could lay no obligation upon him, (but
the contrary, as being enemies to him) But he having done this voluntarily and
freely, it brings you under a necessary and indispensible obligation, (even by
the very law of Gratitude) to make your selves poor for him, that he through
your poverty may be rich; though not in the same sense, that you might be rich
by his; But that his Interest thereby might be advanced, and the light of his
Gospel more diffused; and by all, much glory be brought unto his Name. And oh!
how unthankful are they to their Redeemer, and how little are they affected
with all that he has done, and suffered for them; that will not part
cheerfully with all earthly treasures, and submit to the lowest, and most
ignominious condition in this world for him.

Fourthly, Consider how soon God can take away an Estate, and Riches from you;
or you from an Estate, and Riches. Do you not see the former frequently? many
who thought their Mountain of Wealth stood firm, and fast, have it quickly
removed, and overturned, and it flies away like a Feather, or like the light
Chaff, and the small Dust before the stormy Winds, and the Whirlwinds, how
often does God give Riches a Commission to leave such a man, and such a Family
(perhaps, sometimes because he who is the great Heart-Sercher, knows will never
honor him therewith, by suffering the loss of them) and when he does it, who
can put a stop to them; how quickly, and and irresistably are they gone? as the
Wiseman says, Prove. 23.5. They make themselves Wings; they fly away as an
Eagle toward Heaven. Fire, and Water, and Winds, and sometimes the Earth it
self, devours and swallows them up. And so God after makes the very Womb
wherein they were first conceived, and which traveled with them till it had
brought them forth, to be the Grave that they shall be buried in; and where
they first (as it were) received their life, there they shall receive their
death and destruction: And God by a course of such common Providence does many
times recall and take back from men more, than perhaps they would be
necessitated to lose for Christ, had they but hearts to do it. How are we
exhorted, and cautioned, not to trust in riches, because they are uncertain, 1 Timothy 6.17. But its plain our dependence is upon them (as durable and permanent
things,) when we will not part with them for the Gospel sake: But suppose they
do continue with us, and stick close to us, and prove fast friends indeed,
affording all the support and comfort to us they can, clothing and feeding us
most sumptuously and deliciously, while we act our part upon this terrestrial
stage; yet but a very few moments of time, and puffs of breath more must pass
away, before we take a solemn leave of, and bid an everlasting farewell and
adieu to them: Let them clapse about us, and let us cling never so fast about
them, yet inflexible death will rend, and tear us each from other. Perhaps many
may think within themselves, and say to their own souls, as we have it, Luke
12.19. Souls you have much goods laid up for many years, tak^ your case, eat,
drink, and be merry. But ye fools, do you know how soon you shall efflate and
breathe out your souls, give up the Ghost, and your murmurring breath; and when
your souls are required by God of you, then as it follows in ver. 20. Whose
shall all these things be which you have provided? And not only so, but what
relief will they aford to your trembling and amazed souls, and to your guilty,
enraged Consciences before the Bar of Christ, wh^re you must certainly stand to
be judged for holding fast, and keeping close your goods when you should have
parted with them for his sake. And as it follows in ver. 20. so is he that
lays up treasures for himself, and is not rich toward God; (and he that
makes himself most poor for him, is most rich toward him.) Oh! how much more
comfortable will the reflection be in another world, upon all that we suffer
the loss of for Christ, than upon that which we detain from him, and deny him
when he calls for it, and requires it at our hands.

Fifthly, Consider though you may keep your wordly goods when you should part
with them for Christ; and though you may make your selves rich, and flourish,
when others make themselves poor, yet all shall be a curse, and not a blessing
to you. Whatever we withhold from God that he calls for, it will prove at last
like Achans wedg of Gold, an accursed thing to us. As God suffers many men to
wallow in wealth, and increase in riches, according to the vastness and
vehemence of their desires, and most insatiable appetite after the same, not
for a blessing, but a curse to them (though they apprehend it not, but the
contrary, i. e. that their prospering after this manner is rather an evidence
of God's favor toward them:) So when we deny God our Estates, to advance his
Honor and Interest in the world; then does he, as we have it in Mal. 2.2.
curse such blessings, though for present we feel, and perceive it not.
Sometimes indeed the curse is outward and visible, when God blasts men's
Estates, and causes them to wither and moulder away before their eyes; or
after they are dead to melt away like snow, when their posterity does possess
them. Yet if this never come to pass, it proves inward and invisible (which is
far more dreadful) a curse upon their souls; so that they never thrive, nor
prosper after. What the Psalmist speaks concerning God's gratifying the desires
of the children of Israel when they lusted after flesh, Psalm. 106.15. that he
gave them their request, but sent leanness into their soul; the same may I say
concerning these men for their resolute and strong tenaciousness of this world,
when they should adventure and part with it for Christ; he lets them alone to
enjoy it, and perhaps abundantly to coacervate, and add to it; but he at the
same time sends leanness into their souls; they starve and famish, and pine
away; while they satin, and fill their Purses: And as the Prophet Isaiah
says, Chap. 10. ver. 16. (though not in the same sense,) God sends among these
fat ones leanness. As the Wise man says, Prove. 11.25. (to which I only allude)
The liberal soul (toward God) shall be made fat; but for others, he withholds
the dews of heaven from them, and they are not watered from those upper Living
springs. So that an incurable atrophy is now the disease and distemper of their
spirits: And in this respect they have cause to say as the Prophet said in
another case, Isa. 24.16. Our leanness, our leanness, woe unto us! And so they
would; but that like men that are consumptive, by reason of a Cachexy, and an
evil disposition of body, they gradually waste, and languish, and are very
insensible of it, because they feel no pain. We can never wish them as the
Apostle John did Gaius in his third Epistle, ver. 2. That above all things they
may prosper, and be in health, even as their souls prosper. This is the sin
that provokes God to curse them, as our Savior did the fruitless Fig Tree;
Saying unto them, Let no fruit grow on you hence forward, and for ever. And
when this is done, presently they wither away, as there the Text has it,
Matthew. 21.19. Many professors of Religion may date their spiritual
languishments and decays, from the time of their refusing to suffer in this, or
other ways for the pure Doctrine of Christ. A refusal to part with these
perishing treasures upon this account, proceeds always from an high degree of
avarice, and excess of covetousness, which is the rust and canker of Religion;
and having now obtained so great a dominion over the soul, it keeps it bound,
and chained down to this Earth, and imprisoned within the narrow confines of
this lower world, where it can never thrive or flourish, it being none of its
proper Element to abide and converso in: for now its at so remote a distance
from the fountain of living waters, and the pure salubrious fresh gales of
heaven, (which are most proper for it, and which it cannot live and prosper
without) that a great lanquor must seize upon it, and Religion can no longer
grow and spring up in it. This is one of the thorns that suffocate and chaoks
this spiritual seed, Matthew. 13.22.

Sixthly, and lastly: Consider, if you refuse to suffer the loss of your
Estates for Christ, he will never own you for his Disciples: This is the very
condition made by himself of true Discipleship, Luke 14.33. So likewise,
whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my
disciple. He may be nominally, but he cannot be really so: And its as much as
if Christ should say, Let never such an one expect to be saved by me, or have
any benefit by my blood; I will reject and discard him for ever. Would you have
your Redeemer to confess you before his Father, and not be ashamed of you, when
he comes in his Glory, accompanied with the Holy Angels? Mark 8.38. Would you
have him then, in the pesence and hearing of God, Angels, and men, (to your
exceeding great joy, and everlasting consolation) say, Father lo, here are my
fast and faithful Friends, that loved me more then the world, that gave up
their whole hearts, and all their affections to me, that preferred me before
all their outward and Earthly comforts, that were willing to divest themselves
of all, to become poor; cheerfully to submit to the lowest and most despicable
condition for my sake. Therefore now let them be rewarded with all thy Glory,
with this incorruptible inheritance, with these eternal Treasures; or would
have him say to your everlasting confusion.) These are the worldlings, and
Earthly minded Wretches; who esteemed a little mouldring Clay and Dirt, before
me and my Gospel, they were for gratifying their sensitive Appetites, than for
honoring me. I now am ashamed of them, they had the Name, but not the nature
of my Desciples. Let them now eternally perish, and be for ever banished thy
presence and separated from thy Glory.

Seventhly, and Lastly, If you will not part with your Estates for Christ, you
will never part with your Lives, or resist unto Blood for him; if you will not
do the lesser, you will never do the greater. Nature does most regret, and
reluctate at this, it abhors dissolution, and so the conflict is more sharp,
and the trial far greater, when you are called to lay down your Lives for
truth. Its a sad Omen that you will betray the Cause of Christ, when he calls
you to be faithful to the death. I do not much doubt that man's dying for Christ
that can be joyfully poor for him; but he that will not, how can we hope he
will endure the torturing Racks, the tormenting Flames, and such cruelties as
we read the Martyrs in former and latter times have done. Though death is worse
in the fears of it, then in the real suffering it; and most Men that dye a
natural death, feel as much (if not more) pain than they that dye a violent one
for Christ, yet because the other is unavoidable, and irresistible (there being
no discharg in that War) and this being voluntary and chosen, most men cannot
bring their Wills to it. And they whose Wills are not effectually bowed, and
inclined to the former, there is little ground to hope. they will be to the
latter. Let the Cause be never so good, or the ground of their sufferings never
so clear. (He that will not endure a few drops or a shower of Rain, it is very
unlikely he will endure a blustering Tempest, and boisterous Storm.) Those that
will be Christians indeed (through paced) should inure themselves to hardships,
like good Soldiers as they have opportunities; and are called thereunto, they
should proceed from a lower to an higer degree, from a less to a more grievous
kind of suffering, till they can suffer to the utmost extremity for Christ. But
I shall say no more by way of Arguments to persuade hereunto. I shall now
answer an Objection or two.

The first Objection is this, I have much to lose, were it but a little I could
part with it for Christ. Ans. 1. Who gave thee, or rather lent thee all that
thou have? who is the high Lord of all thy great Possessions? Job 1.21. Job did
acquiesces in Gods taking away, (...) his giving, and judged it reason enough
^n so doing. Why then should not (...) giving, be a reason cogent, and suffi^
for thy leaving all that thou have; s^g all are but Talents that God has
entrusted thee with to improve for his glor^ When therefore that ultimate end is
more attained by losing, than keeping them, thou stands obliged thereunto; or
else it is clear ^m enjoyest an Estate for it is own sake; and ^o make a God
thereof, or self is thy supreme end, and so thou art guilty of damning Idolatry.

2. Consider the Text; they are Goods indefinitely, so Mat. 19.29. and so the
quantity, and measure, or kind does not after, nor vary the Case, be it more,
or less Christ requires of the; to make an offering of it to him, to maintain
his Cause, and advance his interest in the World. This will be no Plea at the
Bar of Christ, when thou art judged for this refusal to tell him thy Estate was
larger then another man's. Let it be never so voluminous and vast, is it of more
worth than Christ? and his Gospel? What vain things do men make their refuge
for a while in this World.

3. He that has but a little, its his all, and as much to him, as all thy
Revenues are, so that in this respect God calls him to suffer the loss of as
much, as he does thee. This I might enlarge but I hasten to conclude, and wind
up this Discourse.

4. If thou have so much thou have the more then to glorify God with, and in
this should thou rejoice; as he that has the highest measures of Reason,
and Learning, and all intellectual, and corporeal Abiliments, has more than
others to honor God with. And, he strictly requires, that all these should be
employed and improved for this supreme end; so he that enjoys most of worldly
Treasures, is in the best capacity to do what God commands, in Prove. 3.9.
Honor the Lord with thy Substance, and God is never so highly honored with
that, as when the loss of it is suffered for his sake, as might be largely, and
strongly evinced.

5. This proves the more rotten at the Heart, whatever fair Paint is upon thy
Face, and one day after all thy most specious Profession of Religion, thou will
appear no more Religious than that young man spoken of, Math. 19.22. For it is
not God (the supreme good God) but inferior good that has the predominant
interest in thy Heart, which is damnable Hypocrisy. And when thy Heart is
eviscerated, and unboweld, when thy Soul is exenterated, and all its secrets
exposed to open veiw, and thy paint falls of before the Fire of God's wrath,
and the hand of revengful justice plucks of thy mask, and Vizard than shall it
appear to be so before Angels, and men.

2. Object. The second is, I have a Family (Wife and Children) to provide for?
An.

1. This results from infidelity and unbelief, that thou can not trust God
with thy Family, in the discharge of thy duty. That thou have Faith to believe
no further than thy sense can reach, or thou can see with thy Eyes. Has God
commanded thee to do this, and will he forsake thy Wife and Children, when thou
art obedient to his command. But what satisfactory answer can be given to men
that are under the power of unbelief.

2. Consider what an effectual course thou take to provoke God against thy
Family; how justly may that which thou detainest, and withholdest from God be a
consuming Moth in all the rest, that thou hoordest, and heapest up for the same.

3. If thou do lose, or impair thy estate for God he will take a more signal,
and eminent care of thy Family, when thou art dead and laid in thy Bed of Dust,
there is no doubt but the faithful God, will make good his promises to thy Wife
and Children, a multitude of instances, might be produced to confirm this.

4. Be more deeply concerned to get thy Children into Covenant with God; if
this once be, he stands obliged to provide for them, only be thou (as thou
ought to be) contented that he provide for them, as he according to his
infinite wisdom, think fit. If they be not in covenant with him, but
disobedient to his Laws, and Rebels against his Majesty; they deserve no
Provision (much less that which is plentiful, to be Fuel for their Lusts) in
this World.

5. Its better however thy Family suffer, and be in want for a few days here,
than that thy soul should eternally perish hereafter: It Is thy great wisdom to
hazard the former, rather than the latter: It will be little comfort to thy
soul, when it is in unquenchable flames, and feels the gnawings of the
never-dying worm; to reflect upon a large Estate, and treasure left to thy
Wife, and Children! Having said all this, let me now desire you to keep out of
your hearts, what you have in your hands; with the Apostle, Phil. 4.12. Know
both how to be abased, and how to abound: every where, and in all things to be
instructed both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need.
Get your affections fixed upon things that are above, Col. 3.2. Eye and view
more this better and enduring substance frequently, revolve it in your
thoughts, and forsake all things dispositively, and then it will be easy to do
it declaritively, and actually: Then let persecuting and sanguinary Popery
come, or whoever you shall be persecuted by for your Religion; to secure your
Estates, you will not forsake the assembling of your selves together (as the
manner of some is) Heb. 10.25. purely to worship your God; if you cannot do it
publicly, you will privately; that so you may possess this blessed Substance
for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
The Heavenly Substance


