THE Ceremony-Monger, HIS CHARACTER, In Five Chapters.

CHAP. 1. Concerning Bowing to the Altar, To the east. CHAP. 2. Of Implicit
Faith. CHAP. 3. Concerning the Reading-Dons of the Pulpit. CHAP. 4. Concerning
Bowing at the Name Jesu, and the Power of the Keys, The Church-Keys. CHAP. 5.
Concerning Vnlighted Candles on the Altar; Organs, Church-musick, and other
Popish-like and Foppish- Ceremonies.
With some Remarks (in the Introduction) upon the New-Star-Chamber, or late
Course of the Court of King's Bench.

Of the nature of a Libel, and Scandalum Magnatum.

And In the Conclusion, Hinting at some Mathematical Untruths and Escapes in
the Common Prayer Book, both as to Doctrine and Discipline; And what Bishops,
were, are, and should be; And Concerning Ordination.

Humbly proposed to the Consideration of the PARLIAMENT.

Ye men of Athens! I perceive that in all things ye are too Superstitious.
Acts. 17.23. Behold, the Devil shall cast some of you our into Prison. Rev.
2.10. But, those that walk in Pride, God is able to Abase. Dan. 4.37. By E.
HICKERINGILL, Rector of the Rectory of All Saints in Colchester.

EDINBURGH, Reprinted in the year, 1689.

To the Right Honorable CHARLES Earl of Shrewsbury in England, of Waterford
and Weshford in Ireland, Lord Furnival, etc.
His Majesty's Principal Secretary of State.
My LORD,
I Come not now to praise you, it is needless; for, who can be ignorant, what a
mighty Hand (both Military and Civil) you have, as successfully, as vigorously
extended, (under the happy Influence of their Sacred Majesty's) as a Tutelar
and Angelical Guardian of these Kingdoms, (amongst other Worthies) in this
auspicious and late Revolution; And in the Hand of the Almighty, a signal
Instrument of our Deliverance from impending Ruin, venturing all that was near
and dear unto you, as well as your Life, to help to save ours, by a Kindness as
superlative as your Courage and Conduct?

Much less do I come with this little Manual, to avert your more Important
Studies; It will rather (I hope) divert your Cares in your softer Minutes. But
however, if the Picture I draw do not please, yet being in minoture, so short a
view cannot long detain you.

That Church-Ruffler (in this following Character exposed) has so discomposed
and d^fa^'d to his uttermost the Church, that to pourtr^y his Deformity in its
proper Features, requires more of the skill and dexterity (of a Titian) than to
limn a perfect Beauty; and the Divertisement is as pleasant to a judicious Eye,
that Examines even the Shades of every Line and Lineament; but my Ink is not
black enough to draw him in his proper Colors, and suitable to that Havoc he
has made in the Church in our Age. For, like the Moor of Venice, he has been as
bloody as black; and to decipher his Face to the Life, my blunter Pen should
have been sharpened, and (imitating the keen Fury against the less Haggard Face
of Witches) scratch't it, 'till the trickling Blood had supplied my Pen with
Colors proper for his Character.

Some perhaps will wonder where this Ecclesiastical Scarramuchio has ^^rk't all
this while, that he should not be visible enough 'till his Picture ^e drawn:
But, I bring no News, nor tell any false Tales, for he has long ^een descried,
but now is the Time, to let him see the Spots in his dirty ^ace, if he will but
impartially view himself in this Mirror.

But, if he happen to be enraged at his own Physyognomy, (like that ^d Lady
that broke all the Looking-glasses she could come at, because ^ot one of them
would show her a handsome Face) and he offer to break his Glass, where can it
better seek for shelter than under your Lordships ^tronage, that is as
generously willing as able to protect oppressed inocence.

For, as such, I must and may recommend it to your Honorable Protecti^^; which
would be affronted, if it appear not to be so very Innocent, ^at it hurts no
Man; describing and characterizing the Vice, not the ^lty Person (vitium non
virum) offending none but that dull Fool (if ^ere be any so dull) as to hold up
his hand and cry Culprit.

Some Ceremonies are as necessary as useful in our Address to Heaven; as also
whenwe pay our due Respects to the Thrones below; but the Ceremonies here
exposed, are the Bastard-brood that Popery and Foppery begot in our Protestant
Church; and which neither the Laws of God, nor the King, does legitimate.

For when the Popish Ceremony monger was at the Reformation excluded and shut
out of our Protestant Church, he had ('till now) Interest enough
(notwithstanding) to make my Ceremony monger his Surrogate, or dull Tool: And
the duller Tool, the fairer Candidate for the place; so he had but wit enough
to remember his Creator, and know his Cue: And since Popery (plain bare faced
Popery) was inconsistent with the Laws of our holier Church, and being
Adulterate, and consequently Illegitimate, Therefore a Popish Ceremony in
Masquerade, an Ecclesiastical Symn^^ must be laid in its room.

But none of their Spiritual Changlings shall inherit here; nor is any other
here condemned but what has made great waste, and disturbed the Peace of the
Church; and must necessarily bring True Religion to an irrecoverable weakness
and Consumption, if much longer tolerated.

That Redemption (which St. George, the Champion of England gave to the Virgin
ready to be ravaged by the Dragon) may be fabulous; but it is certain, that
your Lordship cannot better deserve the most Honorable (George and) Garter,
nor more immortalize your great Name, than by improving your happy Talent, and
Interest in their Sacred Majesty's, that they may (by redeeming the Church from
Popish-like Slavery, in non-sensical and illegal Ceremonies) grace with fresh
Luster, that old (but sometimes sullied) Flower of the Crown -- Defender of the
Faith: That so, as our Renowned King William, the Conqueror (of Hearts, and
therefore the Conqueror) of Kingdoms, may perfect a Redemption for us in the
Church, without Blood, as well as our late miraculous (because not sanguinary)
Redemption in the State; Whereby Pri^e has the fairest Ground in the World,
whereon to build her self a so idly, so illegal despair of the vain Attempt;
their Sacred Majesty's being as humble as high; like the State-house at
Amsterdam, whose Foundation is as deep in the Ground, as their Pinacles high,
and ma^ing the Skies.

And what Rebel to Heaven, as well as Traitors to their Sacred Majesty's, can
refuse due Homage and Fealty to such Landlords, to whom God himself has deigned
to give Livery and Seizin, and given, by his visible Hand, Possession of the
Throne?

And as the Countenance (only) of former Kings gave Life to these Popish like
Brats (merely for their likeness to Popery) so their sacred Majesty's can kill
the Changling (only) with a Frown; so futile, so idly, so illegal and
Spiritless a thing is this same Ecclesiastical Bugg (here character^z'd); And
yet as little and as weak as he is, he has been a most mischievous Scandal and
Stumbling blo^k to keep his Betters out of the Church, as well as the better
half of the Kingdom, and consequently has made the Church so little, so
schismatical, so divided; and therefore weak, dull and dark; as being so mainly
dedicated to the spurious and irrational Whimsies of his Ecclesiastical Noddle
and Invention.

But how Nonsensical soever his Whimsies are, he has made true steps thereon
(sometimes) to mount to the Pinnacles of the Temple, and there secure as well
as engross the Honors and Privileges of the Church (as a Monopoly) to himself
(if possible) and to the Men of his scantling and little way.

Have we not the like Con^^lsions in 1^89* a^ in 1639, both in Church and
State, and from a like Cause too?

The then Star Chamber was revived in the late King's Bench, and the
High Commission Court sat again in the Council Chamber, the Popish like
Ceremony-monger has again debauch'^ the Virgin Purity of Primitive Religion,
and ravished her mo^^ impudently in the very Church; where we that have se^n
both the Years, -- 39, and -- 89, may well be affrighted to see the Ghost of
little Doctor Laud (that occasioned the Commotions of Civil War (first) in
Sco^land, afterward in England) now again, (to our great astonishment) to walk
in the Church.

I have done my endeavor to lay the Ghost, and charm it down; let it go to
Rome, its birth^place, what does it do here in a Protestant Church? where, if
my Ceremony-monger Sin before all, Rebuke before all; nay, rebuke them sharply,
says St. Paul, (...), cuttingly.

The Corruptions are great, and deeply impo^humated, a Gangreen may well be
feared; and if I have, with sharp and cu^^ing Words (sometimes) gone to the
very bottom of the Sore, (why should they roar so?) it is but to let out the
Filth, my Ceremony-monger will thank me, if he overlive his Ulcer; was it ever
(before now) dressed to the bottom?

They Will say, my Style bites; Yes truly, I have made a File of it for the very
nonce, to file off the Roast of an Iron Ag^; I have lent a hand to polish it:
Let them call it an Incision Knife, a File, (or what they will) a Besom (if
they please) I care not, so it do but help to sweep down the Futile, and frail
Church Cobwebs, though they hang aloft.

And tho I have anointed my Incision-Ka^^e with Weapon Salve, to cure as it
cuts, yet I But, as Bellarmine, in a far it is but wise foresight to ^eek some
noble Shelter, and where better, than under Your Lordship's Patronage and
Protection?

To which I might make some remote and modest Title, by Consanguinity, (for no
Man was ever counted Vain or Arrogant in making claim to his Bl^th right) one
half of the Blood in my Veins, (my Mother ^^ing a Troutbeck) is lineally
descended and derived from the Noble Blood of the Trout^eeks, the Autient Earls
of Shrewsbury, whence you derive half of your Noble Blood, and all your Noble
Title.

But, as ^ellarmine, in a far greater Case, having writ several Treatises of
the Merit of Goods Works, concludes, that in reference to the Soul's Salvation,
The best Title is Free Grace; so, in this far Inferior Case, to protect and
save this little Treatise, from the desperate Assaults of devilish and wicked
Men, by your Noble Patronage, The best Title I can make to it, is your own
Free Grace, and Generous Goodness, which (be pleased to) vouchsafe to

My LORD, Your Lordship's most devoted Servant, and Admirer, E. Hickeringill

The INTRODUCTION.
AS Black as my Ceremony-monger is, (here described) he is neither Moor, nor
Tawny-Moor, Infidel nor Jew; but a Protestant-profess'd; he may be a Papist, or
worse (an Atheist) in Masquera^e, but his Face is Protestant.

I grant, that I have Censured, Condemned, and Hanged him up in Effigy; yet I
have drawn no Blood, done hurt to none; for my Man is a Man of Clouts, a Man in
the Clouds, a mere Individuum Vagum; so that no Man alive can be offended,
because let his Guilt be never so great, in being like my
Whiffler-Ecclesisstical, though ^e^^ip him to the very Heart, and fly in so
much influance the Throne, come thither, and make him blush, yet he is as sat
as a Thief in a Miln, except he come into Court, and confess himself to be the
Man which is here (for his guilt) Exposed and Sentenced.

If the Fool Confess, he must Suffer, like that silly Wit-all, (who shall he
nameless) and not being content to be a Cuckold, he must needs Wind his Horn,
and Proclaim his own shame in open Court, by good Evidence; and so he remains a
Cuckold upon Record; like the silly Snall, who had never been taken for a
Cornudo, or Horn'd-Brute, if he himself had not thrust out his own Horns: If
such Disasters behappen a Wise Man, his Wisest way is to make no Words on it,
but to cover the shame as decently as may be, and put his Horns in his Pocket.

This Brute with his Irrational Ceremonies, should belong to a Protestant
Church and Constitution; but (like an out-lying Deer, which are usually the
^ustiest and fattest of all the Brutish Herd) has through Wantonness, or greedy
Ravage, broke out of the Pale of the Church; where if he would be content to
keep, (...) would be safer for him; and my design is (in pure Love and Kindness
to his Welfare) thus gently to Hunt him Home; and so he will acknowledge it
surely: But what Gratitude can a Man in Reason expect from a Brute, who hears
no Reason, but is guided by furious Passion and Appetite?

And I deny not, but that he may owe much of the Flesh on his Back ^o his
Rambling after Popish like Ceremonies, (when Popery did so much influance the
Throne, in the happy days of the two Castle-mains, and Father Peter) who not
being able to bring in Popery Barefaced, therefore the Quid pro Quo, the
something like it, and near it, must be countenanced ^d preferred. And my
Ceremony-Monger is now as loath to depart with ^em, (his Dear dear, Silly, and
Illegal Ceremonies) for old Acquain^nce-sake, as with his old Dog, or old
Horse, that though past Service, yet ^e retains them for old Kindness, and old
done Deeds.

And yet they are such, as neither the Laws of God nor Man ever made, ^d
therefore must be Condemned and Executed, if brought to the Bar of ^ly Writ,
and right Reason.

At which Bar, no Man has a better Commission of Oyer and Terminer, to ^raign
and Judge him, than my self, as being lawfully (into the Sacred ^der of
Priesthood) Ordained, and the Holy Bible then put into my ^nds, by the Learned
Saunderson,) then Bishop of Lincoln, and now (I ^bt not) a Saint in Heaven,
though he was Nick-nam'd the Presbyterian an Bishop, and of a Captain, (both
persuaded me, and) made me a Priest, saying, Take thou Anthority to preach the
Gospel.

There Is my Commission; and let any Man, Pope or Bishop, show a patent more
Authentic to Teach all Nations; and I will never Preach nor Writ Divinity
hereafter; but there are but very few Glergy-Men, or Bishops in England,
(either in or out of the Universities) that can show any Authority of so
ancient Standing, or of to old a Style and Date as mine. Nay, we had no
Scripture, if Writing be not Preaching: Besides, if I should not thus teach my
Ceremony Monger by the Press, I could not Admonish him at all; for my Pulpit is
a narrow place, though it stand alost; and few Ceremony-Mongers desire to be
cured. For ^ike men that have filthy old Ulcers on their Legs, they hate to be
dressed before folks; they had rather It should Fester, than be known. There is
not one word in the Ordination of Bishops, in our Common Prayer Book, or in
Holy Writ, that gives a Bishop more Authentic Orders to preach, than a
Presbyter or Priest; only the King's Maodate makes him the King's Commissioner:
But in reference to God or the People, a Bishop has no better or fresher
Character to Teach, or Administer the Holy Sacraments, than any Presbyter, or
than himself; whilst he was but Presbyter; Nor has any King or Parliament,
Bishop, or Synod, any Power, any lawful Power to silence me for teaching Truth:
The Character is Indelible; when they answer what I have Writ, concerning
Imprimatur's, or Restraint of the Press (in my late Speech without Doors) they
shall hear further from me.

For no Flesh alive has more Authority than our Lord Jesus, and the Apostles
had, which was for Edification, not Destruction; to do good, not harm; to
Advance, not to Depress Truth; to save Men's Lives, Liberties and Properties,
not to destroy.

But some may object to me, that the late King did silence me, shut me out of
my own Pulpit, and banished me from my House and Home, my Self and my Family,
for three or four years last; not only against Law, Equity and Conscience; but
without Law or any Color, Process or Form of Law; and yet I submitted in
quietness and silence, and made no noise in the World, nor to the World; not so
much as Groaning or Complaining, but far down silently.

To which I answer, by confessing that it is (all of it) a great Truth, and I
was by Arbitrary Power and Oppression, to my Damage! some hundreds of Pounds,
thus silenced (as a foresaid) by Will and Pleasure: a word from the Court
ejected me from my Pulpit and my House: but also a word from the Court recalled
me, about a month before the Dutch Landed.

But to whom could I complain? To the Throne? I did, without Remedy, for that
oppressed me. To the Righteous God, I made my humble Appeal, and he heard in
Heaven his dwelling Place, and laughed my Adversaries to scorn, yea the Lord
has had them in Derision; and those that banished me from my House without Law,
and without a Cause, are by God's Righteous Hand and Judgment, turned out of
their Houses and Homes; and before they went, recanted their Oppression toward
me; but going away in haste, his Apostles could not hear me Restitution for the
injustice.

There is a time for all things: our Blessed Savior had ^any things to say,
but even his Aposties could not hear them sometimes; I writ against these
Illegal Ceremonies in The Black Nonconformist seven years ago: The times would
not bear i^, the Criminals would not hear; P^pery, and Popish-like Ceremonies
were Rampan^, My Soul did weep in se^et for their Pride, they would not hear,
the Judgments of God are beginning at the House of God. I Will now try again,
perhaps they will now hear.

But, may some say, Have a care of Scandalum Magnatum; (...) a care that your
Book be not a Lybel, and a Reflection apparent (visibly apparent) against great
Men, you might have whispered these things so private to them.

And have got a box of the Ear for my pains, (you mean) by that particular
Application; whereas now none can be offended justly, except his guilty
Conscience make him confess, that I have hit him home, and that he is the Man.

But clear Scriptures (may some still urge) shall not stand for Law in the
King's Bench; there you must follow the Course of the Court: Ay, ay, I know it
has been so, but I hope, the New-Star Chamher-Court (at that end of the Hall)
will now follow the Fate of that other Old Star-Chamber-Court, condemned (by 17
Car. 1.10.) at the other end of Westminster Hall; For introducing an Arbitrary
Power and Government (the very words of the said Statute) as an intolerable
Burden.

I will remember (indeed) that Lord Keeper North, in his Speech, when he
introduced the new Lord Chief Justice (what shall I call?) Scro^^s, I think it
was, told him how easily he might [notwithstanding the said Stature of
Condemnation] resuscitate and re^^ve that old Star Chamber, by a Resurrection
more glorious, more extensive. In the King's Bench, in its Cognizan^^, and
Juri^diction; then that old dead (and by Statute damned) Star Chamber.

He was too true a Prophet, witness their unconscionable, unchristian,
unscriptural and illegal (nec salvn tenem^nto)) Fines, without Bowels of
Compassion, making a Man an Offender for a word; and then ruin and undo a Man
and his House, a Man and his Heretage, his Liberty, his Rstate, his Honor, and
sometime his Life: in such an Arbitrary, various and disagreeing Way to
themselves as well as to Law, tha^ in the late famous Trial of the Seven
Bishops, the Bench it self could not agree, what was the Law of the Court.

They all agreed that the Course of the Court, and the Law of the Court were
Synonimous, one and the Phrase or Paraphrase; but what was the Law or Gourse of
the Gourt, could not be de^lded! Judge against Judge, ^he Bench against the
Bar; Attorney that was, against Attorney that is Soli^iter General that was.
against him that is; and the most killing Arguments, were Argumenta ad Hominem,
making the same Tongue in this Trial, Condemn, and Eat its own Words in former
Trials, ( viz. before they changed Places.)

The Shot flew desperately from the B^r to the Bench, dreadful doings there
were; however they kept a Pother, Richard against Baxter, and L' Estra^ge
against Roger, never made such a splutter.

At length, to end the Contest, the Wise Chief Justice went to Council, and
gravely asked the Advice of the Attorney. (Sir Sam -- but he was puzzled too,
and was Nonplus'd for the Course of the Law of the Court) except for twelve
years, good Gentleman! only by hearsay, for sixty year more, as he was told,
(by an Old Stager, that had been twice a Child, and no man alive could
remember, that ever he was a Man, (In the right Sense) the Vacation b^twixt the
two Terms, (of Childhood and Dotage) was so very a shor^ Vacation, if any at
all.

I Presume, says one. I presume, says another, I presume violently says a
third; nay, (if Presume he the Word) then I presume also, that in so presuming
against Men's Lives and Liberties, they were too Presumpruous. Therefore do not
you tell me of the Course of the Court of King's Bench, if you know it, you
know more than I know, or than the Judges know, when the course of the Court
was Arbitrary, and out of Course.

But if it keeps its due course, and pretend to no Dispensing Power, in
Abrog^ting the Laws of God, and Christ, and right Reason, I fear them nor, for
I hope in God, that I shall never by preaching Truth, Transgress; but a Truth
may be a Lybel, as one of the Lawyers urged in the said Trial.

Yet the Learned Gentleman (notwithstanding his De Libel' famos) talked without
Book and against Truth and Law, like an Oxford-Apotheca^y. For Truth being an
Attribute and property Divine, (as light is of the Sun, and whence radiantly
and virtually, all light proceeds) can never be any! art of the Constitution of
a Libel Defamatory. And therefore all the St^tutes to which Scandalum Magnatum
has any Reference, whether that of 3 Edw. 1.4. or those two of Richard 2d.
Queen Mary. or Queen Elizaabeth, are only against such as tell false Tales, or
false News, whereby Discord may arise, etc.

So that in the (...) place, nothing can be a Libel but what is false, and then
it may be false, and yet no Libel. If it do not tend to Discord; and
consequently, be malicious or Seditious; as to say a Noble Man is wet to the
Skin, came to his Country House, wore black-clothes, etc. all which may be
fal^e, and yet no Lybel.

To say a Judge, or Justice gives false Judgment, though it be True, may be so
circumstantiated, that it may be justly Punishable, as a Mis-behaviour, but he
shall not suffer by Law as a Lybeller, if it be apparently True.

To say, a Lord is ignorant of Latin, or as one said in the said Trial, We are
ignorant of Law- Latin; whether he said false or true, is no Lybel (though I
had said it;) it may be false indeed, but no L^bel, because it tends not to
Discord; but though it should tend to Discord, it is impossible to be a Libel,
if it be true, though it may be sawey and unmannerly, because we must not
imagine that a Lord is ignorant of any thing; he must be an infallible Man in
England, though the Italian Pope be not so acknowledged: (Wise doings the
while!)

But the Learned Judge Sir J. Powel, then in the said Case, very honesily and
judiciously affirmed it for a Law, that a Lybel must be false, false Tales; it
is not else within the S^atures on which Scandalum Magnatum is founded; and
still the course of the Court varled from Law^ never was the Punishment of a
Libeller, or Honour-wounder a vecuniary Muict, but ('till K. James!) always the
Body by Imprisonment, etc. repayed, and repaired Wounded-Honour; nay, by 1 and
2. Phil. and Mar. 3 the greatest Scandalous W^rds against the King or Queen,
were only Punished by B^dily Punishment, which a man might have bou^ht off,
(whether the King would or no,) with too (not ready Money neither, the (Bill
was not drawn upon him, upon fight thereof) bu^ any time within a Month, (so
tender were our Ancestors of undoing M^^ so ^ill Words, even against the King;
much more tender not to undo a Man and his House for a frall Word against a
frail Subject, though a Lord. Honor, if it he ^ase and D^eggs, is not Honor,
and consequently, not wounded or hurt; but if it be true Honor, it is like the
best Spirits. Airy and S^tri^ual, it can neither be Boug^t nor Sold; nor ever
was it known in England, that so much as a Knighthood could be so base an
Alloy, as that an ^surer (or Scrivener, o^ 10 l per Cent,) could purchase it,
till the Poverty of Scotland, coupled with an empty Exchequer, and a King
liberal to Prodigality to his Contrymen, was glad to make poor Shifts to
earn a Penny; this for one, of making Honor so Mercenary, that some Gentlemen
scorned to be Knights, whilst another rich Dame would give 1000 l. to be Lady
Baronet, that so she might take ^he W^ll of her Grand-Dame. But enough
concerning Lybels. you will find none here nor any thing struck at, but Sin and
Folly; and neither of them are Ingredients in the Constitution of true Honor;
except Honor can be M^das'd, as he Exce^fiastical Fellows do Sins turn a^ they
can touch to G^id, calling it by a Word they borrowed from Father Peter and
Rome. Commuring, or Com^nutation of Penance; a Word that buys Perriwiggs at
Doctor-Commons, as f^^ly as it is.

And if any Expression of mine (in this D^scourse) seem too Airy sometimes, for
so grave and solemn a Subject, it is neither forced nor affected, Nature will
have its Course.

But as it is easier to pick a Quarrel than to end it, so it is easier to find
Fault than to m^nd (...); and cannot a Man be sober, except he be sad? Nor
Grave, except he be dull?

Nor have I permitted one W^rd to pass with more B^iskness of Air or Style,
then just what was necessary to keep m^ Reader awake; and is not it as
Pardonable (at least) as that dull Parenthesis. by some Preachers so often
Inculcated. -- (do no sleep there?) Which is the more Unconscionable Start and
State, when he had rocked them asleep before, with his heavy and drowz^e
Lullab^e.

None can expect that my St^e should be smooth in the Sinewy and Argumentative
Part; it is not to be done.

But, be it as it may, it the Subject matter be solid and weighty, let my S^ile
shift for it self; I am not fond on it, yet, blunt as it is, I will neither
change it with thee, (D^owzie Mr. Phlegmatic!) Nor yet with thee, that (...)
test Frowning and Centuring there, I see thee. Formal Mr. Hypochondriack!

The CHARACTER of a CEREMONY-MONGER.
CHAP. I. Concerning Bowing to the Altar, to the East.
THe Cringes and Bowings of the Papists to the Altar, is in Adoration of their
wafer God that (...) there (they think) Enthroned; and is (by the Homilies of
the Church of England) frequently styled Idola^ry; and the Act of a Fool.

But the Cringes and Bowings of my Ceremony Monger to the Altar, to the East,
whe^^ there is nothing, (he must confess whatever he has secretly (...) here
(neither more nor better than what is in the W^ll, in the B^^frey, or the Body
of the Church; therefore some call him a Fool; but (like Merry Andrew) though
he act like a Fool, he is more Knave than Fool; and though ^ry Noddy pretends
that he nods to nothing, yet the old Dotard does not play the Fool for nothing;
but he is as well paid for playing the Coxcom* in his silly Superstition, as
the best Merry Andrew of them all. For it is well known what an Influence
Papists had in the three last ^^^gns of B. Laud. the two Castiemains, and
Father Peter; who not being able to bring in Popery, or a Bishop ^llis into a
Protestant Church, and Protestant Preferment; (the Laws Excluding such)
therefore they encour^ged any ^^^ly Superstition that was a Quid pro Quo; and
as like Popish Idolatry, as Twins of the same Womb.

Thus put^ing the Chang^ upon us, and Engrossing a great many of the Protestant
Preferments. Honors, and Privnedges to Fellows that were as like Papists, and
our Churches, and Worship, Adorations and Ceremonies, as like Pop^sh
Ceremonies; and our Paul's, as like St. Peter's, as one Egg is like another, to
see to; though the Yolks within may perhaps show some little Distinction; and a
Ceremonious Arminian is no right-down papist, for if he should, he could not be
capable of his high Seat in a protestant Church; and therefore he will rather
confess himself a F^ol in cringing like an Ass to nothing, than be turned out
of Church and the Revenues thereof, by confessing that he bows to things
Divine, Transubstantiated from a silly Wafer; and rather than lose his soft
place in Church or Senace, he chooses rather to confess the soft place in his
Head.

But if you take him really for a Fool, you mistake him vilely; (as I said
before) this Ecclesiastical Mountebank is more knave than Fool, and bo^s for
something; even when he bows to nothing, he gets Money by it, he gets Money by
the Bargain, and thou^h he shake his Reverend Nodle, as if it was empty (by
making Reverences to an empty place) yet he knows why and wherefore.

For though he seems to adore a Nonentity, you are mistaken in my Man, for he
there by adores his ch^efest God, (Mammon) And his making foolish Legs to the
Altar, like an Ass, was the ready Road to make Legs at Court, and be an
Ecclesiastical Apuleian Golden Ass.

For as a Costerd-Monger gets his Living and Estate (often a great one) by
vending Trifles and Trinkets of his own Purchase (as Perts, Plums or Apples) to
that Improvement many times, that he makes Money (even) of his Rotten Ware.

So a Ceremony-Monger gets his living and Estate (a great one oftentimes) by
Trifling Trinkets, and illegal (as well as) nonsensical Ceremonies in Religion,
(or rather his own Superstition) of his own Purchase, or the Invention of his
private Noddle; to that Improvement many times, that he grows great in the
World, and in the Church; and makes Money (even) of hi^ Rotten Ware, especially
in bad times.

For this Ecclesiastical Quack (like other staging Empyricks) always gets most
Money and Elieem; and both of them make the best Markets for their Impostures
and Rotten Druggs in the sickliest and worst of times.

It Is best, with these Stagers, when it is worst with all the rest of Mankind:
For it men be well to Health, and well in their Wits; both these Merry Andrews
(that for Money make fools of themselves) may go whistle; they may shut up
their Shops, and pull down their Stage.

Risum Teneatis? Amici! Come hold your sides, and look demurely if you can (for
your very guts, and spleen) to see a grave Dignitory of the Church, with Tippet
and Satin Cap, a gaudy Cope and Hood (before and behind) Nodding his Reverend
Head, and making Reverences of humble, that his brisly Chin even kisses the
ground (no Antic French Man, or Father Peter, can out vic the Complement) in
an humble Address to the East, to the Altar, and where there is better
something or nothing more than in the Belfry and in the West Catechize my Don,
(for he has been twice a Child, Come! Ask him (I say) does his Ecclesiastical
Donship bow and Cringe so supplely (notwithstanding his Age) to something, or
to nothing?

If he answers -- To something; Then take him Father Dada, for he is thine,
(...) him in the Service and Devotion of thy Water-God.

But if he reneages (because Papists are not capable of a Dignity in the Church
of England) and i^ forced to answer, that he bows to nothing; then beg him for
a Fool, and his richer Dignities; take him Merry- Andrew, for he is thine: He
is that ridiculous Stager that makes a Fool of himself, to pick up the Pence;
and no little neither: For when Popery will not, cannot get up to the top of
the Steeple or Pinnacle of the Temple, (where the Devil stood tempting our
blessed Savior with the World and the glory of it) my Ceremony Monger being
possessed, runs mad to be there: which since all the Avenues are stopped against
Lord Bishop Goddard and bare faced Popery, my crafty Ceremony-Monger claps a
vizard over the ugly bare face, and pass most religiously so one of the Order,
and Reverendly with a M^^que, does his Business, and perhaps gets a Mandate, --
In a Mo^k Election of the Chapter, which in their Prayers for divine Assistance
in the Election not only mock themselves, but which is infinitely worse, they
mock the Almighty God too, when they pray him to direct them in the choice of a
fit Man: when he is chosen before to their hands, and they neither can will nor
choose.

If you do not yet know my Ceremony-Monger, I Will tell you his Name.

His Name is Legion, for never was the Herd more numerous, or more possessed,
since the Devil entered into the Herd of Swine; and made them run (like man)
violently down hill, though they are like to perish in the Waters.

For this Ecclesiastical Hotspur (though he) has but a minute (Sober) share of
Knowledge, yet he has Zeal like mad; And therefore never admits any heartily
into his spiritual Muster-Roll or Lift, but blind Conformists; that are
presently Tall-Fellows, and preferred if they can, but readily obey this one
word of Command, Streighten your Files, Follow your File leader.

Thus, like Horses in a Team, they all Uniformly plod on together, most gravely
and soberly (with Nose in his Leaders Hind (...)) and Showel-Hal^ers through
thick and thin, at all adventures, minding nothing (they poor H^^r^s!) but
following the Fore Horse, though he go out of the way, as irregularly and
illegally, as irrationally, falling into a Slough, but desperately bent, though
not one of them know why, not wherefore; nor dare say, whether they cringe and
bow to something, or nothing. For they are forced to whisper when they say,
that they crings to nothing, least the Papists (that prefer them) should hear,
and then they are sure to get nothing, therefore are forced to say nothing, yet
nod to nothing.

If I were a Papist or Anthropo-Morphite, who believes that God fits Enthroned
in the East, like a grave Old King, I profess I would bow and crings as well as
any Ecclesiastical Limber-ham of them all; and pay my Adoration to that one
Point of the Compass, the East; but if Men believe that the Holy one that
Inhabits Eternity, is also Omnipresent, and in every place, why do they no^
make Correspondent Ceremonies of Adoration to every Point of the Compass?

But I recant my Folly for asking a Ceremony-Monger an honest reason of his
Cringes, who never (hitherto) could vouch his Supple him. Worship to the Altar,
to the East, etc. except (as aforesaid) in Adoration of Mammon his God.

But I Will be Positive, and Dogmatical in nothing of this Nature; I Will forswear
nothing but building of Churches, after I have first pulled them down; as one
did (a certain Chapel) in the memory of Man, because the Chancel stood East
and by Nore a little sideling, whereas it should have stood better, dut East,
that (with one Cringe) he might how to the Altar, and the East also; he was the
wiser, for so he kills two Birds with one Stone; and one single bow (by this
laborious Regulation) will serve to the Altar, and the East also; so to case
his unweildly body, he punishes his Purse by Eccle^astical Policy, (called)
Commutation; O the Wit of an Ecclesiastical Politician! But Fortuna favet fat
-- Fortune favors ^^t falks; a poor man might have been beggared by such a
venture, but the old D^tard (Mr. Superstitions Noddy was his Name,) made Stairs
of the Chappel-Stones, and so got up to the Top of Paul's, But let the Ceremony
monger by his ^^ppery grow never so great, he is paid in his own Coin, for in
requital, his only Adorers are Women and Fops; or such as love any thing that
is great, only because it is great: May they not by the same reason adore an
Asses Head, with Flapping Luggs, for they also are great, very great.

Thus the Hog^n-Dutchman got Money, being carried about from Fair to Fair,
amongst the ^ops that admired his Brawny-Buik, the result of B^con and the
Butter-Box.

The greatest Ingenuity of my Ceremony monger, is, that of an Ape, (viz.)
Imitation or Mimickry) for the Monky has indeed something of the V^a^e and
Resemblance of a Man, (and so has the Ceremony-mo^ger's worship the Face of
Religion and Devotion) but both of them wants Reason, and therefore the more
abominable, and of all Brutes, most o^lous to radonal Men: Simia quam similis
(turpissima Bestia) nobis?
Of Brutes, none are so lo^thsome as the Ape,
Wanting Man's Soul, he only has Man's Shape.


But such is the force of Mimickry amongst Fops, that it is far more easy to
make a cringing dancing Ass, than a dancing Horie in our Academy; but the
Mischief is, there is so many of them, they are not a R^e-Show; they are so
common, that it will not quit cost to carry them about, and show them at
Sturbridge-Hair, or Bartholomew Fair.

Come, Friends! You shall see one of the Youngsters (the Foal of a cringing
Ass,) for nothing.

Come to your Postures, Lad! Hold up thy Head, and in thy Chin, thy Breast out,
and thy Belly in: Now, your Reverences; -- well done; face about again, down. I
say, close down -- to the have, to the Altar, etc. well done; there is hopes in
thee, thou may come to be a tall Man in the Church, in time, if this Trade
do but hold.

For my Ceremony monger is an Ecclesiastical Thomas Anello (or corruptly and
vulgarly) Masanello, a despicable Tool to look on, take him out of his Robes,
as filly a Fisher as heart can wish; and yet he may grow great by as trivial
Occasions, the scrambling for a little rotten Ware (Nuts and Apples) in
Midsummer Moons, when the People run mad and are oppressed.

But the worst is, This Beast of the People is soon abused, and soon disabus'd,
and is seldom long and quietly (in England) bestrid (I will not say
Priest-ridden) by Fops; they are apt as suddenly to play as Jade's T^k; and
after they have Huzz^'d loud Hosanna's one day, soon after ready enough upon a
contrary Provocation, to cry, Crucifi^ite, Crucifigite.

Yet the Fool Masanello trusted to the unsteady Populace (which made him
insolent and insufferable, Proud and morose) till the same Mouths that cried
him up, soon after were ready to eat him; dragging at a Horses Tall, whom ten
days before, they cried up to the Skies; they would have done the same to a
Broom-staff, if it could but have stood them in stead, or could help to
withstand the Gabels and Oppression; but the Fool thought that the people
adored his (own) worth, which made the Fool insufferably petulant, and was his
Ruin.

Yet (after all) now that I better bethink my self, and that seven years ago
(in my Black Nonconformist) I did (in vain) wa^h this Aethiope, I Will even
compound the Business with my Ceremony monger.

And because he has been many times a topping Ecclehastical Fellow, Proun and
Stomachfull, Uncontrouiable and Wilful, right or wrong, he will l^ve his Will,
his Suring, and his way, (let who will stand in his Way,) therefore since he
says, he will still bow like a Fop to nothing (for he dare not say the Wafer is
there hid (slyly) under the Carpet, nor yet that God is more there than every
where; yet) I Will grant him a License upon two Conditions.

First, That he never shake his empty Noddle at the Altar, but when it is
covered with a Cap (a Sottin Cap to choose) the more decently to hide the soft
place in his Head.

Secondly, That also then he hide the Popish Face of Adoration, by putting on a
Protestant Vizor Masque, not only that his blushes be not visible, (a Braz^n
Face may do that) but to cover the Popish Physiognomy, le^ the undiscerning and
superficial Judgments of the rude Vulgar, spy it and nothing else; (for they
search not the (...) side) and consequently handle him, as if he really were a
popish Priest: his Cope, his Hood, his Surplice, his Cringing Worship, his
Altar with Candles on it, (most Nonsensically unlighted too) his Bag^pipes o
Organs, and in some places Viols and Viollos, singing Men, and singing B^^s,
and are all so very like Popery, (and all but the Vestments illegal) that I
protest when I came in 1660. first from beyond Sea to Paul's, and White Hall, I
could scarce think my self to be in England, but in Spain or Portugal again, I
saw so little Difference, but that their Service was in Latin, and ours in
English; but less intelligeable and less Edifying, (for one half thereof) than
Latin, by reason of the I^articulate Boatus and Braylog, whilst all the People
read half the Psalms, with a N^^se as confused, as the Rumbling Thunder (as I
will prove more particularly by and by) that any man in the World that had seen
High Mass beyond Sea, must say, That the contrivance of both was to keep people
in Ignorance, the Mother of Devotion. Faith comes by Hearing, (says the
Scripture) but the Papist and Ceremony monger, make as though it comes by
Seeing, they are all for a Show, a vain show. And shall not those that sin
before all, be rebuked before all? That all may learn, and all may be comforted?

But may some say to me perhaps, That I talk very boldly; why, do I? And do you
th^^k in your Conscience, that they do not sin more boldly.

There is a sinful Bishfulness (in being loath to reprove) as well as an
Impudent Sin^e, and a Whores forehead: And shall a B^ Ceremony monger dare to
transgress the Laws of God and Man, and Right and Reason; And is there not a
man (amongst us all) that has Courage enough to antique him?

Let him Huff like a blasphemous Goliath, I fear him not; (if I were young and
in my Prime (much less now, when there are so few Sands in the Hour glass of my
Life yet to run out, by the Course of Nature; the greatest Wrath can
precipitate but a few minutes; dye we must, and can any man dye or suffer in a
better Quarrel, than in vindicating the Laws of God and the King, in spite of
the Pope in Italy, or any other in his likeness.

CHAP. II. Of Implicit Faith.
THat man has neither Worth nor Honor in him, that does not truly love and
honor a Person of Honor, and true Virtue and Worth; and so much the more, for
the Grandeur; but to idolize a me, Image, because a great and golden Image,
and because (Neouchadne^ Zar) the King set it up, what is it out Popery.
Idolatry, or Flactery or Poppery? I know not how to absolve the Princes, in
Dan. 3.3 the Governors, the Judges, the Treasurers, the Counselors, (wise
Fellows!) and the She^iffs, When they adored the Golden Image, which
Nebuchadnezzar the King had set up, though I confess being sixty Cublts high,
as high as the top of the Steeple, it made a great Figure in the World.

And what can my Ceremony-Monger say more for himself, than that great golden
Image? Both of them have a great Face and Bulk, but want (...) for their
standing, and are dumb and blind.

For my ceremony Monger in the Church (I am in good earnest and in sober
sa^ness, telling a woeful Truth, which has almost ruined our Church) does almost
all his great Acts in the Church (like the Papists) by blind Devotion and
implicit Faith.

Is there any to be admitted into the Sacred Function of Priesthood? (who ought
to be apt and fit for so great, so Holy, and so Divine an Office; otherwise.
The contempt of the Clergy, and a Contemptible Clergy, is the necessary and sad
Consequence) yet this is hudled up by Implicit Faith in M^. Archdeacon, or
some casic Deputy or Surrogate; The Bishop that Ordains is not obliged to know
any thing of the matter; but goes upon Trust for all, in that great Work of
Ordination, as you may see in the words of Ordination in the Common Prayer
Book? all is done (I said before) by Implicit Faith, as the Papists call it;
but this more silly than Popery; for it is more rational to believe as the
Church believes, than to believe as a silly Surrogate believes.

Is there a man to be thrown out of the Church? This is done by Implicit Faith
too, in an casie Surrogate and Sell Soul R^gister, that perhaps has not paid
the last payment for his place, and Money must be had; whereas the Bishop that
signifies it, knows nothing of the Matter, nor of the Proceedings or Proof; but
by Implicit Faith in the Registers Certificavit, ^s aforesaid; and then the
Judges grant a Capias by Implicit Faith too in his hand, that knows nothing of
the Matter, (neither) of his own knowledge.

Is not here fine doings the while, in the greatest of Church Works? The out
and in, The in and out is all by an Implicit Faith, more irrational than that
of the Papists.

Nay, the poor Parson of the Parish must neither will nor Choose, but must, in
pain of the Law, Excommunicate, and deliver to Satan any bedy, that the
Registers Hand and Seal marks out with an Anathema by mere Implicit Faith in
Pope-Sell-Soul (the Register.) So when the Devil and the Jailer has worried him
and tortured him (as they do suspected Witches) ('till they confess) and he be
willing to say or do any thing to get out of the Tormentor's Clutches, and the
Excommunicated Person humble enough to open his Purse to Mr. Register; poor
Parson must absolve him again, by the old and Implicit Faith in the Register.

In Confirmation too, all is done by Implicit Faith in the Parish Priest; nay,
usually not so well, but hand over head to all that kneels for it, though some
of them to my knowledge, were never Baptized, nor can yet say the Creed so well
as it is possible to teach a Parrot; nor understanding one Article thereof much
better than a Parrot: Here Is sine doings! And a rare Consti^ution to sight for,
Tooth and Nalt, Swear and Forswear, by a blind Devotion and Implicit Faith,
and scarce a man knows wherefore; But no Kettles make so great a Sound and
Noise, as those that are empty.

But when men go out of God's Way, the further and faster they go, the further
and faster they go astray.

The very Disciples of Christ (as well as Popish Priests and Cardinals) sell to
Justling one another (even in the presence) for the place, the chief and
uppermost; but our Lord told them, they behaved themselves more like worldly
Princes than his Disciples; saying, It shall not be so amongst you.

Pride says, It shall be so; but will my Ceremony Monger on his Deathbed, and
at the tremendous Judgment Seat, say so, as he does now; In spite of Christ
and his Word? I am your humble Servant, says the Pope; nay, your Servants
Servant, Servus Servorum, yet Lucifer himself is not prouder.

Dear Brother, says a Popish Bishop, in his Style to the rest of the
Presbyters, when at the same time he makes no more of them than a mere
Pavement, in State to walk upon and trample; money too, the poorest Priest must
give his Highness, though the Family at home want Bread: Nay, the poor Sheep
must not bleat neither, but though clipped twice a year, like Sheep before
Shearers, they must be dumb; so open they not the Mouth; yet I told the
Outlandish Bishops seven years ago, of this unconscionable Avarice to as little
purpose, in my ^aked Truth, saying, I have read that Pharaoh's Lean Kine eat up
the Fat ones, but for the Fat to eat up the Lean, it is most unconscionable;
have a care of Bare-bones, lest they stick in your Throat, or in your -- 'what
shall I call thee?, Ecclesiastical Greedy-gut! you will never leave your
Gormandizing, 'till you surfeit, I fear.

This is the true Reason of Implicit Faith in Italy, and England; Bishops gape
more than they can swallow; in spite of that terrible Thunder -- Their Blood
will I require at the Watchman's hand -- They have Charge upon them, that no
flesh alive can discharge; Bishops and Cu^ates, says the Common Prayer,
implying that we of the small Fry, are only Journey-men or Curates to the
Bishops; well, with all my heart, the greater Charge lies heavy on his Soul.

No, (he may say) though I cannot be here and there too, yet I have Journey-men
every where; I must by Implicit Faith believe my Journeyman, my Proctor, my
Surrogate and my Register, but in requital, they also by Implicit Faith
believe me.

Is not here rare doings? And all this Inconveniencie came at first only by
Avarice and Arabition, which a whole Dincess and sometimes a D^ancry, and a
rich Commundum added thereunto, could not glut; well, that is as to the Wages,
if they were twice as big, one Man can make a shift to swallow, yea, but as for
the Work, it is impossible to superintend, or Episcopiz^, with one pale of
eyes; then come (first) into the Church, implicit Faith in their Journey-Men,
and of all Journey-Men, che^fly, the Arch-Deacon's called Oculi Episcoporum;
there are but five Pair of such great Implicit Eyes in our D^ocess; and if
they could see without spectacles, they would be the better Eves, I think: But
the Prospect is too far, all over the Diocese for one Bishop to see or
superintend; But who made that Prospect so large? Pa^^ecia, a Parish, by our
ancient Canons, signifies a Diocese, and a (...) was no larger than a Parish,
'^ill Popish Avarice, and boundless Ambition taught Pluralities.

A good Bishop, if he keep in his Bounds, as the King's Commissioner (not
sancying that he has or can have any New Spiritual Character, or greater
Spiritual Character than of a Presbyter as appears by the Words of Ordination
of both of them) the same, the very same, in all Essential Points; only the
King's Mandate or Commission, gives him an Ecclesiastical Character more than
he had, and a Temporal Character by making him a Baron of the Realm, with Lands
and Honors annex^; and not one jot too much, if he make good use thereof, in
Hospitallty, Charity, and somewhat too as an Umbrage against Contempt; the
Wages are well enough bestowed if he be fit for the place, pions, prudent and
learned; and he has as lawful a Claim and Title to them, from his
Predecessors, as other Lords or Corporations; and cannot without great
Injustice, as well as dangerous President, be bereaved of them; who but a Fool
will go about to remove Groundsells and Fundamental Constitutions?

But his Work is so great, and the necessary Qualifications so eminent and
Extraordinary, that no one man is fit for so great a Charge; and those that are
fitt^st, will scarcely accept it, the Temporal Honors and Rewards are no
Temptation to them.

For a Bishop ought not to ordain any, 'till he has first by his own
Examination and Knowledge, found their fitness for so great and holy a Work:
Not trusting by Implicit Faith to Mr. Archdeacon, nor Mr. Deacon's Deputy.

And how can he with a safe Conscience, deliver a soul to the devil by an
Anathema, when he knows nothing of the Nature of the Crime nor Prool? except by
blind devotion or Implicit Faith in the Register and Surrogate, Mr. Necessity?
so Men call him, Because he has no Law.

So that the grand Distempers of our Church, do all proceed from this Original
Sin, radical in our Constitution; and no Art of Man can cure it, or save us
from a Contemptible Clergy, and more despicable (as well as profane)
Discipline, but by applying Remedies to the very Constitution, which is neither
incurable, nor hard to cure, if wise and willing Physicians do but use their
skill.

When Boy-Popes and Boy-Bishops, or ignorant and unlearned Bishops by favor,
Money or Friends, were advanced; they neither durst attempt to Examine a
Scholar's fin^ess for the holy function, nor could do it, without betraying
their own unfitness and ignorance; which begot Archdeacons, they served for
Eyes to the blind, and at general Councils, usually for Mouths and Tongues, and
Brains too: The Dotage of Bishop Alexander, brought Archdeacon Achanasius into
the first Council of Nice, which brought him into Request, and when the old
Mandled, into the Bishopric also of Alexandria.

But above all the Implicit Faith-Men, I ever read, have my Commendations
remembered to the Pope, in the words of Cardinal Bellarmine, lib. 4 de Romano
Pontifice, cap. 5. Si papa erraret praecipiendo vitia, vel prohibendo virtutes,
teneretur Ecclesia ^redere vitia esse bona. and virtutes malas, nisi vellet
cont^a Conscientiam peccaere: If the Pope err (^hat's a buil^ too, good
Cardinal, as wise as you are) by Commanding Vice and prohibiting Virtue, yet
the Church is bound to believe, That Vice is good, and Virtue evil; except the
Church sin wilfully and against Conscience.

Even so; if a Bishop by Implicit Faith and Error O^d^in a vicious, or ignorant
Person a Priest, or Bishop, and Madam Portsmouth, or Father Peter, help him to
a Presentation or Mandate, (every thing may be done that has been done) or
should Silence a vermous Preacher, yet the Parish or Diocese must, (I say) must
accept him for their Spiritual Shepherd, Guide and Watchman; though he be never
so blind a Guide, never so wolvish or cruel a Shepherd, never so dull and
drowzy a Watchman or Reading-Don; or Copy-holding Plagiary; except they will be
willful sinners; though he starve their Souls, they must feed him with the
Tythesheaf, and the Tythe-pig.

He Is not fit to be cail'd to the Bar, that can but just read his Breviat,
though he tell the Judge he has notable Books in his Study, that argue the
Case, and state it notably, but he carries them not about, never in his head.

Nor is he fit to be a Fellow in the College of Physidans, because Galen and
Hypocrates lies moulding in his Study, nor is he fit to be free of the Pulpit,
that if his Sermon Book fall down out of his hand, must also come down as wise
(a man) as when he went up; l^^ the Curtain fall down too, and the Play's at an
end; good night, Parson.

But all Preachers have no: Memory nor Elocution and presence of Mind: No, no:
But then, there is a good Thrasher, or a good Cobbler spoiled, to make a bad
Patson, a poor Transcriber, and dull Translator, whose Character next follows.

CHAP. III. Of the Reading-Dons of the Pulpit.
THis Ecclesiastical Sophister, is a true Son of the Church of England, (that
ever was) and devoted to her Service, (as in Duty bound) for she gave him
freely all the Devotion he has, namely, the Common Prayer Book and the
Homilies: which are very good things to all, but to him a God, (a Creator) by
which as a Churchman (though as lean and cadaverous as a Church-Mouse,) he
lives and moves, and has his being.

But as true a Son of the Church as he is, yet he is a Bastard Divine, but made
a Denizon Ecclesiastic, and free of the Church by the King, and
(notwithstanding his spurious Original) Legitimated and made capable of
Succession in Church Lands, Honors and Dignities, by Act of Parliament. viz.
the Act of Uniformity In England; In England, (I say) for in the whole
Protestant World, That Act has no Parallel, nor this fellow (I characteriz:) any
Fellow in the whole Christian World, but such as himself; he is a None such all
the World over, in all Churches, except what he calls, (and he may well speak
well of her) the most Incomparable Church of England; not only the Protestants
all the world over, but the very Papists, nay, the very Stage Players would
kick him out, the very Boys and Wenches there, nay, Schoolboys, must say their
Parts better, or they are sure to be whipped for it.

Nay, the Stage Players would have no Customers (except they could get Penal
Laws, and a Constable, A Jailer and Apparitor, to drive them by Shoales to the
Play House) if they should admit any such dull Tools and Actors, that could not
say a Word without Book; but must read every Word they say, or else they are
dumb: For, take away the Play-Book, or No^es, and they are mute as Fish; the
Play is at an end, though you have paid your Money. (some small note indeed) or
prompter the best may need sometimes, or some Breviate:) even so my Reading Don
Ecclesiastical is a noteless Fellow without his Notes, and worse than an Ass
(for he can Bray without book) nay, worse than a Peacok; for he can yawl
against Rain) but this Gay Fowl has nothing that speaks him divine, but his gay
out (...).

The Propher Eztkiel calls him Dumb-Dog that cannot bark; meaning not that
these Dumb Prophets or Dumb-dogs had no Tongue, and could make no barking
Noise; but when he sees the Sword or a Thief coming he gives no warning, but
being senceless and noteless, is therefore a dumb dog.

For he (poor Heart!) has his Lesion before him, there is his stint, like a
Horse in a Mill; he cannot go out of the Track, if he does, he must leav^ work:
if the Notes drop out of the Pulpit, or the Candles go out, or the Spectacles
fall down from his Nose, or a dark day, or any such woeful disaster befall him,
his busi^eis is done, he needs no Bishop to silence him; Come, Sir, you may
(even) come down, out of the Pulpit, The Play is done.

N^y, his very Prayers to Alrighty God in the Pulpit, he is glad to read them
too, except perhaps he has (like a Pariot) got a few words by ^ote, which all
the people of the Church can say as well as himself; for like a Turn-spit Dog
in a Wheel, he keeps ado, but makes no Progress.

For (alas! for Shame and Sorrow!) how should he speak to God, who is a Spirit,
From his Heart or Spirit; or to the People's Hearts, that never had any
Divinity in his Head or Heart: It is sufficient that he has It in the Book of
Homilles, or in his Notes (stylo novo) of another Sermon book that is more in
Yogue and (...), because more adapted to our present Language and Age^

Stole! said I, he will bring his Action against me, of Scandalum magnatum
perhaps; but I Will prevent him, for I recant.

He did not steal his Sermon, nor Sermon Notes, for they were his own upon a
double account; First, because he lawfully bought and paid for the^, six pence
a piece; witness, the Book seller: Secondly, because all the Sermons in Print
are dedicated to him: To the Reader -- All -- To the Reader, and sometimes, to
Coaks him out of six pence. To the courteous Reader.

If Parents have a Ricketty Son, and crook'd legged, and Baker-knee'd; he will
serve to make a Parson, his Cassock will hide his Legs: Is the poor Child
Pur-blind also? He Will serve to make a Parson say his Parents, If he have but
Eye enough to spy Advent Sunday, the day of the Month, and the first and second
Lessons for the day. Is he a half witted Lad? He Will serve poor Child, say his
Parents, well enough for the Pulpi^, if he but hold his Notes to his Pur-blind
Eyes, it is but holding them the Closer, and the bunness is done; especially if
his Parents or Friends scrape Acquaintance with a Patron, I know how, or buy
(...) Advousion or the next Avoydance.

And then make room for the Parson, a true Son of the Church: Why do you smlle?
It is too serious, too great, and too dismal a Truth and Mischief, to draw
Tears from your Eyes by laughing; you have more cause to be weeping Jeremies,
and make Lamentations at so mischievous a Constitution of a Church, in making
Watchmen that are blind and lame, and dumb, being ordained unto Holy Orders by
blind Implicit Faith: which we all condemn in the Papists, but in the Church
of England draw a new Scene: and it is received with Applause: Oh poor English!
A foolish people and unwise, though the most Courageable and best Hearts, as
well as the most plain hearted Nation under Heaven.

You think (now) that this is a Romance, and not literally true; well then, so
let it go; It Is so much the fitter for this Character of a Ceremony-monger,
which is all a Romance.

A Romance! What Is that? It comes from Roma, Rome, the Ground and Platform of
the truest and best Histories of Truth; and the Scene of the greatest Acts the
Sun ever saw.

And a Romance is as like a true Roman History, as my Ceremony-Monger is like a
Papist, he is not a Papist, (he says) no, he is not a bare-sac'd Papist, I Will
do him right; but to see to, he is as like a Papist as ever he can look, and
his Devotion as like Popery as ever it can look: He does not say the Mass
indeed in Latin; but his Hood, his Cope, his Surplice, his Rocker, his Altar
Rall'd in, his Candles, and Cushions, and Book thereon, his bowing to it, his
bowing or rather Nodding at the name Jesu, his Organs, his Violins, his Singing
Men, his Singing-Boys, with their Alternate Jabbering and Mouthings, (as
Unintelligible as Latine-Service) and so very like Popery that I profess (when
I came from beyond Sea, about the year 1660. to Paul's and White Hall) I almost
thought, at first blush, that I was, still, in Spain or Portugal; only the
Candles on our Altars, most Nonsensically, stand unlighted, to signify, what?
The darkness of our Noddles, or to tempt the Chandlers to turo, downright,
Papists, as the more suitable Religion for their Trade: for ours mocks them,
seeds them with Hopes only, he gapes and stares to see the lucky Minute when
the Candics should be lighted, but he is cheated, for they do not burn out in
an Age.

But the Foppery is Homogeneal, all of a piece, foolish and illegal Ceremonies
all over, only my Ceremony-monger has got Law of his side for his Surplice, and
his Common Prayers, which are both very good things, and though perhaps he may
be persuaded to part with the former, if you take away the latter, viz. the
Common Prayer Book, ye had is good cut out his Tongue; nay, even few up his
Mou^h also; for he has no occasion, for it, nor for his Teeth neither, for his
Body most starys, and be as clean and jejune as his Soul: Therefore, as you
love his Life and Soul let him have his Common Prayer Book, or else his Curate
will have nothing in the World to do, but must be forced to turn Sexton; why
should not the Dead bury the Dead? The dead in Sin, bury the Dead for Sin, to
so liseless and spiritless a thing is Religion reduced by my Ceromony-Monger;
nay, some of them in their pretended prayer before Sermon, do mock both God,
and the people, praying, or pretending to pray as the mouth of the people in
the pulpit and yet (like good Hannah's private prayer) their Lips only move,
but their Voice is not heard.

Old Eli thought the good Woman was Drunk or a Fool, to talk to her self; but
she designed only private prayer.

But certainly the Master of the Ceremonies, is either a Fop, or a Madman, or
else takes all the People for a Fop of his own making, to have only a handsome
gaze at the person, whilst he Acts his Mammery in the pulpit.

Why does the pulpit stand alost? But that the preacher should lift his Voice
like a Trumpet, that all the Church may hear, or else what does he do there?
The papists indeed do vindicate pictures in Churches, as being the Lay-man's
History, though he know not a Letter in the Book, his Eyes may read by seeing a
picture; and thus my Ceremony-monger brings up his Fops in Ignorance, and
Ignorant Devotion; they know nothing of the matter, and cannot say Amen, to
they do not know what; It is no matter for that, for (just like popish Mass,
called Secreta, which the priest mumbles to himself, so our Foppish
Ceremony-monger that must be like a popish pri^st, or else perhaps he had never
come to so high a pulpit, and place in the Church, he must mumble too his
prayers, though in pulpit, to himself, because it is just as the popish priests
do, that make as if the people need not pray, nor believe; the priest prays for
them, and believes for them; keep them blind, says the priest, and then you may
lead them by the Nose, which way you please; O poor English Fops! To be fopt by
an Old Fop, that is as much or more an Hypocritical Knave than a Fool.

And I am the more apt to believe it now, because the mumbling Hypocrites,
never mumbled so much, and so long in the pulpit-prayer before Sermon, as now a
days in this Juncture and Revolution in the Kingdom, and change in the Throne;
to pray for the Abdicated King, would be to own him and Popery with his Mouth,
but he dare not do that, they have only his heart at present.

And to pray for their Sacred Majestle's, our Sovereign Lord and Lady, King
William and Queen Mary, they are such Strangers to his Heart, that he chooses
rather not to pray at all, in his own prayer before Sermon; or not at all to be
heard, till such time, as it may be guessed, he had done it to himself, talking
(as they say Witches do) to himself in the Pulpit; most profanely mocking God
and the People, by pretending to speak, when he only mumbles with his Lips; for
if his Voice be heard, the crafty Hypocrite thinks that some Body will tell
(because the Tongue tells) who he is for: Where as now the Fox lies learing and
lurching, to see which King will get the better, and then, (and not till then)
he will declare himself, and in the Interim, his Ambo-dexter reserves himself;
for he is true to no Interest, nor to any Religion, but that which most tends
to the Advancement of his only God, Mammon, and his Curate only runs the
Risque, in praying for King William, and Queen Mary.

In short, (for I am quite tired and sick of him) his Church-Work is just like
his Church-Clock, moved extraneously, by outward Weights, Wheels, Springs or
Plummets, but has no inward or spiritual Life or Motion; such is his prayers,
such his Sermons, (though he have a Budgetfull) Dead, Dull, spiritless,
lifeless, frigid, and perfunctory Devotion; he never converts any Man, except
to silly Ceremonses, Because himself is not converted to any thing; else his
Words die before they reach the Heart of his Hearers, for how can they well
come to the Heart of his Auditors, when they never came in, nor from his own
Head nor Heart; he is the great Stock-Logg of the Church, that has neither Fire
nor heat within, the little he has, is all outside, superficial, and without;
it takes up a great deal of Rome indeed, but it is good for nothing in the
World, but the dung-hil; he is that Salt that has quite lost it is Savor, if
over he had any, and good for nothing, but to be trodden under Foot of Men; and
relished by none but such as have lost their Taste, or never had any.

I Will tell you how you may be quit of this Ecclesiastical Copyholder; all his
Tenure and Title to the Pulplt is Copyhold, get but his Notes, or his Copies
from him, and the Pulpit will not hold him, he must come down and hire a
Journey Man of more Skill, if any such can be had, for Money, so to debase
himself to be Surrogate to a rich Fop, that with his silk Cassock, and Scarlet
Hood runs away with the Galm, whilst poor Threadbare Crape takes all the pains.

Yet, even these are scarce to be had for Love or Money; for the
Ceremony-monger has so polluted the Fountain of Learning the Universities, that
where shall a man sooner meet with noysie Impudence, and gingling Nonsense, (a
sounding Brass, and rinckling Cymbal) than in the two great St. Mary's Pulpits
in the Universitiis?

So that if God be not the more merciful, and Their Sacred Majesty's the more
careful of their Academies, the generality of the Clergy must be like the
Scribes and Pharisees, in our Savior's time, painted Sepulchers, Gay without,
fine Ornaments without, but within, nothing but Rottenness and dead Men's Boues.

Just as we were in the Church of England (I remember) fifty years ago, in the
Reign of that great Master of Ceremonies, little Doctor Laud, that did so
discountenance lively and edifying Sermons, or almost any Sermons, that a Man
must have traveled for it, and far too, if he heard any thing but the Common
prayer and Organs, above four times in a Year. Indeed, now there is to many
Sermons in Print, that we have plenty in the Pulpit, though generally such
discrepant, Heterogeneous, and Immethodical Stuff, as being composed of several
printed Sermons, a patch here, and a patch there described, that they are like
a Beggars Coat, or a Tallor's Cloak bag, made up of party-colored Lists and
Parches, they are so dis-compos'd by the Plagiary, in wise Prudence, like a
Thief that takes By-Roads, for fear of being known, pursued, sound out, and
taken by the Hue and Cry.

Therefore this Plagiary Reader, conscious of Guilt, disguises all discovery,
if possible, like the crafty Hare that makes false Steps and Doubles in the
Snow, when she is near her form, for fear of being track'd by her Steps, and
Traced.

Thus this Chattering Jay has nothing good about him, but the Gay Feathers, his
Carcass is worth nothing but to Dung the Land; so that the Church, you see, can
breed Vermin as well as the Barn.

CHAP. IV. Of Reading of the Psalms, Te Deum, Althanasius's Creed, etc.
Alternately, every other Verse, by the People.
THis is such another Nonsensical Ceremony, that it is Point Blank against Holy
Scripture, as well as against Reason and edification; and neither Canon of the
Church, nor Rubric, or Rule in the Common Prayer Book, to vouch it, and
punishable therefore, by the Act of Uniformity.

If so, then where is the Brains, you will say, of all our Ceremony-Mongers? Where
do you say? They are there where they always were, but never Consulted in any
of these Illegal and silly Ceremonies, further then, whether they are like
Popish Ceremonies? That Is the Test, that is the Testimonial! that first gave
them Entrance into a Protestant Church; and the Papists finely laugh at us, and
deride us, for being their Apes as I have heard the Popish Friars beyond Sea
Jear at us for the Mimickry grave English Noddles, that have no other Reason
not Religion for what they do, but that they are the Pope's Baboons, in spite
of Holy Scripture, Right Reason, true Religion, and the Laws of the Kingdom.

This confused Noise of the People, is not Articulate, but an un-intelligible
and brutish Braying, one Man's Voice drowns the Accent and Articulation of
another, and therefore is no more Intelligible than the Latin Mass, and I
suppose that the best Reason that can be given for it, is, that it keeps the
people ignorant, if they cannot read, of at least one half of the Psalms.

The next step may be, if this be suffered, that the people shall read one half
of the Chapters two; and then though the vulgar cannot kept together from
hearing the Scripture, they shall be debarred one half; in time, we may go
further, we are just in the Popish Road, that debars the vulgar from the whole
Scriptures.

Read but the 1 Cor. 14.11.23, 26.31, 33. And if you fear God, you will never
do so any more; Latin Prayers, or Prayers in an unknown Tongue, or an
unintelligible Tongue also, are Prophesies or Preachments in an untelligible
Tongue, by the Confusion of which, God is not the Author but the Devil, and the
Pope invented these Contusions, by them to beget, the Mother of Popish and
Ceremony Mongers Devotion, Ignorance. For says St. Paul, in that 1 Cor. 14.11.
If I know not the Voice, I shall be unto him that speaks a Barbarian, and he
that speaks shall be a Barbarian unto me.

Here is a plain Scripture against this confused Noise, no man can know the
meaning of a Voice that is not Articulate; But what cares a Ceremony. Monger
for Scripture? Give him his God, give him his Mammon, give him his popish
Mimickry; but whilst he makes himself a popish Ape, he makes dull Englishmen
both Apes and Asses.

All the Reason that ever any of them can give for this profane Folly, is, that
the Singing boys do it, and the great Heads do it, and therefore, the silly
people, like the Papists say, must not we believe and practice as the Church
believes and practices? meaning, by the Church, the Clergy, the rich, the
great, and the gay Clergy.

And if this must be a Reason, why may we not as well believe and practice, as
does the ^ope of Rome, as well any old Innocent here at home.

We talk of h^ting Popery in Italy, we do well; but not a j^^ better for us, if
we follow the same Implicit Faith in England, that the Italians do in Rome.

Thus the Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear Rule by their means;
and my people love to have it so, and what will ye do in the end thereof?

Let all things be done to edifying, (says the Apostle) and ye may all
Prophecy, or read, for if Reading be not Preaching or Prophesing, we have
abundance of dumb Prophets, if it be not a Bull, in England, 1 Cor. 14.31. Ye
may all Prophecy, read or preach, one by one, that all may Learn, and all may
be comforted; Implying evidently, that there can be no Learning, no comfort, no
Edification in our confused and banling Superfuelon; which is just like the
Gossips Chat, where all Tongues wag, and all are Preachers, and no Hearers.

Since therefore, God is not the Author of this Confusion, neither Law, Canon,
Edification, Rubric, Reason, Act of Uniformity, Religion, nor Scripture to
^ouch it, but point blank against all these, tell me how it came here, except
from the Devil and the Pope? Short Ejaculations, as Amen, Lord, have Mercy, or
repeating after the Articulat Voice of the Minister, falls not under this
Censure.

But, I wonder who taught the Women, whose chiefest Beauty is modest Silence,
who taught them to prate in the Church? They are so full of Tongue, you will say,
that perhaps a little teaching would serve.

I never suffered such a confused babbling in my Church of All Saints, Let them
play the fools, and popish Apishness, some where else, I never would permit
them, at which abundance of people took Snuff, and because they might not be
superstitious Apes, they would not come there at all: a good riddance of them;
they left the Room to their betters; for we want nothing there so much as Room.

Is there not some fear, least we all be begged? Begged? For what? for wise men?
No; but to replenish the College of Gotham; we are topping Fellows, if the
Pinacles of the Temple stand in view; which is the way thither?

Are we not all as silly as that Cardinal, who says, Sit ergo Dominus noster
papa baculus in aq^d fr^ctus, absit tamen ut crederem quod viderim: Let our
Lord the pop^b a Staff, partly in the water, seeming crooked, yet God forbid
that I should believe mine own eyes. Like Cardinal Bellarmin, who makes
Ignorance, not Understanding, the Ground of Faith: Intending surely, that none
out Coxcombs, priest-ridden should be of the Church.

This Ceremony monger carries one infallible Mark about him, you may know him
from a thousand, for he sets such a Value and price upon his Illegal Trinkets
and Ceremonies, that if you take them, or offer to take them from him, he cries
out, and roars like mad Micah; Ye have taken away my gods which I made, and the
Priests, and ye are gone away, and what have I more? And what is this that ye
say unto me, what aileth thee? Would it not make a man bellow and cry, to lose
the Diana's, by which he got his Wealth, and on which ^o chiefly volues
himself, because it made him a man of value: and those that are his Favorites,
on whom he puts the greatest Value, That Trinket after him, in a blind,
implicit, slavish Mimickry and Imitation; He that calls for a Reason, he is
not a man for his turn, but saucy, troublesome and petulant: Thus the blind
lead the blind, have a care of the ditch there, just before you; you had better
take warning than tumble in.

But, I fear, lapidi loquor, I wash a Black Moor, I doubt, yet I know no harm I
do, if I do him no no good, if the Leopard will keep his Spots, I did not make
them; he is Bedlam mad surely, why do thou strike so furiously? I would but
unshakle thee, and set thee free; or make thee set thy self free, by
representing thy self to thy self.

For I Will assure thee, that in City and Country, good Master of the
Ceremonies! thou have not amongst rational men more Beholders than Abhorrers.

Surely, thy Ascendant or Lord of the first House, was wonderfully culminant
and strong, or else it is imposible that Irregularity and Folly could ever have
been so notourly signified; If I can erect thy Scheme, I do prognosticat thou
art in thy Detriment. Fall and Azimuth.

I confess, that amongst Dancing masters, Rop-dancers, Spanials and Monkeyes;
he is the fairest Candidate for a Reward or Crust, that cringes, comes over,
and bends the most nimbly; but that men by Illegal and Irrational Capricio's
should cherish their hopes, so, to become Favorites in the Church, I do not
understand it; if I were as supple as the best.

I can only say, as Cicero in his Declamation against Cataline, Vivunt? imo
vivunt and in senatum veniunt; Oh tempora! Oh mores! It was a sad time, when
Father Peter, or Madam Portsmouth chose Senators: and that a poor Lad should
find it out, that the readiest Road, to get into the Church, or to the Steeple,
and Pinnacle, is to be like a young Setting-dog, that first learns to stoop,
when he is bidden, to nothing; there is hopes of him, he is coming on, and may be
a right Setting-dog in time, and stoop to something.

CHAP. V. Of Bowing at the Name of Jesu.
THere is but one of these said Irregular and Illegal and Irrational Ceremonies
aforementioned, that have any color of Law, and that is the Canon for bowing
at the Name Jesu; but that Canon is nailed by Scripture and Reason, as well as
by the Act of Uniformity, which enacts great Penalties, even Deprivation, if
any Ceremony monger obstinately persist in the Practice of any Ceremonies,
except those alone that are contained in the Common-Prayer-Bock; of which that
same of bowing at the Name of Joshua or Jesu; and all their other Bowings and
Cringes to the Altar, to the East, are none at all; I protest, I wonder at the
Ceremony mongers Audacity and Fool-hardness, that he still dare to do it, in
defiance of the Law, Reason and Scripture; except he think to set the
Convocation-House over and above, and on the Top of the Parliament House, where
it will stand most Totteringly, and subject to the Storms.

Let no man therefore think this Discourse to be bold, or over-hold, having the
Law of God and Man, Holy Scriptures, and right Reason on my side, and can
therefore with such great Advantages baffle them all, wonder rather at my
incorrigible Ceremony-monger, that will take no warning till he be forced
publicly to recant the Schisms and Mischiefs his Noddle has forced in the
Church of God.

The strength of his Mai-Guards, like that of Hell and Popery, lies all in
stopping the several Avenues of Light, that none may enter into the Kingdom of
Darkness, for they hate the Light, because their Deeds are Evil, and therefore
would, if they could, keep the Keys of the Press doors, as well as the Pulpit
doors, that no glimmering may appear without License. Thus the Devil Rages the
more, because his time is short, and Frets and Fumes when you discover his
Cloven-Foot, especially when he has long been adored, of which he is most
Ambitious, as an Angel of Light: But, Blessed be God, that is above the Devil?
Truth and Light are his Glorious Attributes, as Error and Darkness are the
properties of Heil.

And if the Devil were not great in men, and greatly strong, they would submit
to Law and Reason, to God and his Holy Writ, to the Laws of the Land. Equity
and Conscience, and not call to the Bevil and the Jailer, to help them to wreek
their Malice upon Innocent men, that only show them their dirty Faces in a
Glass.

God's Will be done, I say with Chrysostom to Eudoxia the Empress, I fear
nothing but Sin; and I must Sin, except I reprove my Brethren, and not suffer
Sin upon them; for as they have Sinned before all, it is sit they should Recant
before all; And so all of them will, except they be past shame, and
consequently past Grace: When Sick Men are deadly Sick, and their whole
Constitution so Distempered and out of Frame, that the very N^ble Parts are
senseless, stupid, and past feeling, it is high time to Toll the Bell for them,
they have not long to live.

Come, then, give Glory to God, Confess and Recant publicly in the Church,
where thy Nonsense was committed, and defy the Devil and all his Works, the
Pomps and Vanitles of this wicked World. Oh! but may ^ome say, It cannot be
denied, but that your Coremony-Monger is the Fop of all Fops, for bowing to the
Altar, to the East, now his Wafer-God is departed; bu^ have a care of
condemning him when he bows at the Name of Jesu; for Holy Scripture, the Canon,
and Right Reason, all three, are his Vouchers.

Poor hears! And, as Solomon says, Ye Fools! when will ye be wise? have not I
wash^ the^^ ^^aok^mor^s, and to as little purpose, long ago? For First, That
(...) Philipptans the second At the Name of Jesu every knee shall bow, woether
in Heaven or Earth, etc. is no Precept, but a Prophecy, That the time shall
come, it is not yet come, that the Name of Jesus shall (...) above every Name,
whether Barchochobab, the Jews Messiah, in English, the Son of the Star;
Mehomet, Antichrist, or any other.

The th^e is not yet come, for Jews, Tu^ks, Athlests and Devils, do no^ own the
Name of Jesus above every Name, whether in Heaven or Earth or Hell, or things
under the Earth, but it shall come, (at least) at the day o^ Judgment, and
probably before.

Besides, That Text -- At the Name of Jesus -- is depraved, and ill (...) to
say no worse, for if I did not revere to cast Dire upon the Ashe^ of the Dead I
could name a great Favourite-Bishop, under King Charles the (...) that made
that Text speak false English, to Countenance his ^illy and Fopplsh Warship
from that Text; for because he could not bring himself and his Silly Worship to
the Scripture, he as Impudently as Profanely, brought the Scripture to his
Whimsey.

Thus Mahomet pretending to have Faith to remove Mountains, told the People
(his Followers and Musselmen) that he would make that great Mountain, that
stood before him, to come down to him at his third Call, and therefore most
gravely admonished it to come, Once, Twice, Thrice, but no Mountain would come,
whereupon, without changing Countenance, he said, If the Hill will not come to
Mahomet, Mahomet shall go to the Hi^l; and so marched till they met.

For by that Holy Scripture (...) In the Name, is meant, In the virtue and
power of J^us. Every (...) shall how. etc. (As the Name of the Lord is a st^on;
Power, the Righteous shall run to it, and (...), Prove. 19.10. No^ the Letters
or sound of Je^ovah. not the Tetragrammat^n, but the Power of God, is the
Tower, not the four Letters, or Sound of the Name, whither the Righteous run
and are safe.

Besides, my Ceremont-Monger does not bow at the Name of Joshua, which is the
very word, Jesu. in all Languages: As Mat. 1.21. Thou shall call his Name
Jehoshua, Joshua, or Jesu, all one Hebrew word.

Besides, That Holy Text does not say, in the, Name Joshua, but in the Name of
Joshua (...) not (...); but my Ceremony-Moneer does not bow at the proper Name
of our (...) or Joshua, to wit, Emmanuel (or God with us, which (...) both his
^ivinity and Humanity) nor at the found of the word Christ, Messiah, etc. but
stands as unconcerned, and as (...) as a Stake.

Besides, he does not how the Knee, but like the Papists, nods his Head, or
puts off his Cap or Hat, as the Popish Jesuits do, when they Preach, every
time they mention the word Jesu, if they do not forget, which they commonly do,
and as commonly Sin, if that Foppery be a Duty.

Besides, That Text says, Every Knee shall bow in Heaven, and Earth, and under
the Earth: but there are no Knees in Heaven, and those in Graves, in the Earth,
and under the Earth, are too stiff to how: Come, it is Nou sense and Ridiculous
all over, and as a very Specimen of my Fop as any other.

For as there is no Scripture to Vouch for him, so no Reason: What, shall
Christians be like that Hystaron Proteron Herb. which Physicians (as toolishly)
call Filius ante Patrem? The Son before the Father?

Do we well to blame the Arrians for placing the Father above the Son? Do we
well to believe the Unity and Equality of the Holy Trinity? And yet do we bow
at the Name of the Second, and not at the Name of the First and Third Person of
the Holy Trinity.

Nay, Is Christ divided? do we pay more Reverence to the Name Joshua, (the N^me
of my Foot Boy) then to the Holy Name of Jesu, namely, Messia, Christ, or
Emmanuel? For shame! do not pretend a reason for such Foppish Adoration.

And, if neither Holy Writ, nor right R^ason be of thy side, Mr.
Ceremony-Monger, thy Canon will be noll'd by the Statutes, the Acts of
Uniform^^y, that makes it very Penal, even deprivation ((...)) for thee to
follow thy Trade of making Coremor^es, which God never made, nor the King and
Parliament, or right reason ever made.

Besides there are several (...) of Provisors, and then he incures also a
Prem^ire, to set up the Mi^re above the Crown, the Bishop and Priest above the
King, and the Convecation-house above westminster hall.

And this Sawey and Priestly Petulaney, derived from Rome, makes my
Ceremony-monger many times very troublesome to the State, and to the Crown,
which he will obey, like Thomas a Beck^t with a salvo honor Dei, that is, many
times, as far as he list, and when he list, or in any thing that is for his own
ends, and his own honor, nor a jot further; of which I shall give no late
instances here, of those that could strain at a G^at, when against their
Interest, though for, and against Gods glory, and yet could swallow a Camel, if
sent from that Court, if it would but advance their Dominion and sway, or at
least not hinder it, witnesses their publishing in Churches, the Sports that
may be used on the Lords Day, etc. when this Spirit possesses my
Ceremony-monger, he is not only troublesome, but dangerous, and insufferable;
which will make me repeat some o^ my own Speech, Printed Anno 1681. p. 3.4. In
Vindication of my Book called the naked Truth; though I am no Erastian,
concerning the Keys, the the Keys of the Church; (which some said was true, but
unseasonably urged; surely it is now seasonable, what was then said to the
Archdeacon, viz.

And first like a Churchman (of the old stamp) he will permit his Majesty to
come into the Church (that is more kindness than old St. Ambrose, Bishop of
Milan, would show sometimes to the great Emperor Theodosius, when he did not
do as he would have him to do) nay, this Archdeacon opens the doors himself,
to let his Majesty into the Church, but he will nor trust him with the Keys; as
who should say, we will open the Church doors to your Majesty; and come in and
welcome, whilst we continue good friends.

But they that keep the Keys, and can open the Church-doors to let his Majesty
in, can also (whilst we have the keeping of the Keys) upon displeasure, lock
him out: well, for this very trick, and for another late Scotch trick; it I
were a Privy. Counselor, I would advise his Majesty, as Head of the Church,
and the Governor thereof, to keep the Keys of the Church in his Pocket, or
hang them under his Girdle; if it be but because this Prclatical Champion this
same pitiful Archdeacon, like another Pope, or Sr. Peter, w^^^ keep the Keys
of the Church, and will keep his Majesty from them, and we would f^^^ persuade
him, that our Laws, (to use his words p. 2. of the Proeme) Excludes the purely
Spiritual Power of the Keys from the Supremacy of our Kings: except it be to
see that Spiritual Men do their Duty the (...) Belike this same Archdeacon
carries the Leges Angi^, the Laws of England in his belly, and greedy gut; for
I am su^ he carries the^ (...) or no where, he carries not these bulky L^ws of
England in his (...) no gues, in his brains. For, I pray, Good D D. where goes
our Laws (...) ^urely Spiritual Power of the Keys from the Soptemacy of our
Kings. if our Kings, (^ke good King David) or wh^ King Soloman shou^ have a
mind to be ^cclesia^tes

In the days (even) of Popery, I never heard of a King shut our even from the
Topp^n-Pulpit, if he had a mind to climb so high; stone Henry the 3d. made
(...) to (...) ^he Pulpit, took his Text, Psalm. 85.10. Righteousness and Peace
have kiss d^each other; and then in his Sermon ad Cierum -- to the Le^rned M^ks
of the Cathedral Church of Winchester, when he had a little self end too (as
some Pulpiteers have also had) in the case, namely, to C^jole the said Monks to
Elect his Brother (Athelmar) Bishop of Winchester; Paraphrasing and enlarging
upon his Text, and saying, (to use his own words) (...) To me and other Kings,
who are to govern the people, belongs the rigor of Judgment and Justice; to
you (who are men of quiet and Religion) Peace and Tranquillity; And this day (I
hear) you have for your own good, been savourable to my requ^^. With many such
like words. I do not know whether the King had got a License to Preach -- from
a Bishop. It seems the Clergy (then too) would favor Kings, in what was for
their own good, and if it were for their own good, would also permit the King
to take a Text and preach in their Cathedral Church; how hard hearted, or
strait-lac't soever our Archdean proves, and will not suffer our Kings to have
the Keys neither of the Church nor Pulpit; I say, therefore, some Kings would
therefore keep the Keys of the Church themselves, and trust never a D. D. of
them all with them, no, not the Pope himself.

But what if I prove that our Kings at their Coronations, have at the same time
been ordained Clergymen, they are no more excluded (then) by our Laws from the
power of the Keys, then Mr. Archdeen, or the Pope himself.

What is Ordination, but the ordering, designing or setting a Man a part to
some office? if, to the Ministry, then there are certain significant Words to
that purpose, and what more significant words for Ordination to the
Priesthood, or making a Man a Clergy man, than those the Bishops uses to our
Kings, namely, with Unction, Anthems, Prayers and Imposition of Hands (as is
usual in the Ordination of Priests) with the same Hymn, -- come, Holy Ghost,
Eternal God, etc. The Bishop, saying, also, amongst other things, Let him
obtain favor of the people, like Aaron in the Tabernacle, Elisha in the water,
Zacharias in the Temple, give him Peter's Key of Discipline, and Paul's Doctrine.

Which last Clause was pretermitted (in times of Popery) from the Coronation of
Hen. 6. till Charles 1. and Charles 2d.) lest it should imply the King to be
more a Clergy man, and Ecclesiastical Person than these Archdeacons could
afford him; but our Gracious King Charles 2d. and his Father, at their
Coronations, had the ancients forms of crowning Kings revived, and in the
Anointing, the Bishop said, Let those Hands be Anointed with Holy Oil, as Kings
and Prophets have been Anointed, and as Samuel, etc.

Then ^he Archbishop and Dean of Westminster put the Coif on the King's Head,
then put upon his Body the Surplice, saying this Prayer, O God, the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, etc.

And surely (of old) the very Pope himself looked upon our Anointed Kings as
Clergymen, else why did the Pope make Hen. 2, his Legate De Latere here in
England, the usual office of the Archbishop of Canterbury (usually styled)
Legati Nati?

Therefore, Mr. Archdeacon, you talk like an unthinking Black-coat, stockt
with a little superficial Learning, when you say, our Laws exclude the King
from the Keys of the Church, to which he has as good right as your D. D.
Divinity ship.

And (indeed) to give the Man his due, he is glad afterward to confess, that
Constantine, and the Eminent Christian Emperors called Councels, and approved
their Canons.

Then, by your leave, dear D. D. They also, for the same reason, might, upon
occasion, and if they had seen cause, also disprove the same, who then was Papa
of old? Pater Pa-trum? surely no other but he that is PaPa, (I mean) Pa^ter
Pa-triae.

All the Male-Administrations in Ecclesia stical Government, take their Rise
and Original from our Ignorance of the Power of the Keys; or who are the
Clavigers, Key-keepers, or Porters to let them in, and turn them out of the
Church?

The bulky Clergyman called a Bishop, an Ordinary, or a Diocesian, he (we say)
keeps the Church-Keys, he Excommunicats and Excludes Sinners out of the Church,
and he alone receives them, and lets them in: (but that is false, the sneaking
Register and Surrogate do that Job.)

Ay, But who entrusted a Bishop alon^ to be the Church-Porter, Doorkeeper, or
Church-key-keeper? Where is his Commission, Where is his Authority, and who
gave him this Authority?

For it is evident in Holy Scripture, that God never gave him any such
Commission, Place, Office or Authority to keep the Keys of the Church, any more
than the Speaker of the House of Commons, or Chairman to a Committee, has
power to turn out of the House, or let in any of his Fellow Members; For does a
Bishop differ from another Presbyter, more than the Chairman from the rest of
the Committee, or he that gives the Rule of the Court at Session, differ from
the rest of his Brethren and Fellow-Justices, he is no better man, nor the more
learned, wise nor more honest a man, though he be Ordained to be the mouth of
them (that is all) to to speak what they put into his Mouth: The Speaker takes
too much upon him, to speak the Sense of the House 'till the Majority of Votes
has given him Instructions and Commissions to pronounce a Sentence, or the
Sense of the House, or to turn any Member out of the House of Commons; he has
no such Authority, he is the Speaker (indeed) and is looked upon as the wisest
and fittest Man for that place [it should be so, it is not always so] one or
other of the Members must be chosen Speaker or Chairman, and have precedence,
for Order^salte, and to avoid confusion; but he no otherwise differs from
other Members, except only that the Honorable Speaker, is the Honorable
Mouth, that is all, after the Members have chosen and ordained him, and the King
has confirmed him: Even so a Bishop has no new Character conferred upon him more
then when he was but a Presbyter or Elder, save only the Kings Ordination, or
Mandate or Conge d' Estire. The E^^ction of the Dean and Chapter is a mee^
mockery, as aforesaid, besides the playing with the Edge^ools, and mocking of
God. Bishops and presbyters used to be chosen just as Parliament Men are
chosen, by the Majority of the Vows of the people, as shall be more
particularly proved in the (...), in the Chapters concerning Bishops and
Ordination. Thus Paul and Barnabas were chosen and ordained by the whole
Church; Acts 13.3 Perhaps the chief Church Members laid their Hands upon, or
ordained the Ministers, Missioners or Messengers of the Church, but the worst
Member had as much power and virtue to ordain a Messenger, Elder, or Bishop, as
the best Bishop or presbyter, if the Majority of Votes had ordained and so
appointed, as is clear from Scripture, and the practice of the primitive
Church, and shall be more particularly insisted upon in the Conclusion of the
Chapter of Ordination.

Ordination? What is it more then choosing, approving or setting a Man a part
for an Office, to do business relating to this life or a better? I will not
say, in Church or State, or as a Clergyman or Layman; for these are idle,
ungrounded, vain and odious names of distinction, where God and Holy Scripture
never made any such distinction, and has not only confounded our notions of
things but has been, and yet is the cause of most of our Confusions, in, what
Men mischievously distinguish and call Church and State; which are not two
things, nor two distinct Bodies, if you make them so, you must make two Kings,
and two distinct Heads to these distinct Bodies, and that is one too much.

And if you make a Clergyman and a Layman, two distinct sorts of persons, you
make a Man that God never made; And, if so! Then Clergyman! [I must Catechize
you,] Who made you so? God? It is false; For God in Holy Scripture does not
call the Preachers, but the Hearers, not the Bishops, Presbyters, and
Minister's the Clergy, but the Hearers and Flock are God's Clergy, 1 Pet. 5.1,
2, 3.

The Presbyters which are amongst you, I exhort, who am also a Presbyter, or
Elder, or Elderman, or Grand Senior; no greater name can well be given. St.
Peter was a Presbyter, can there be a greater Disciple of Christ? And the
Presbyters to whom he preached, and were under him are the same with Bishops,
and those Presbyters also to whom St. Paul preached at Ephesus, and are called
Presbyters in one verse, are called Bishops in another, and their Auditors or
Flock are called (the Clergy or) God's Heritage, 1 Pet. 5.3.

How came Cassock men, and Lawne-sleev'd-men, (first) to make an Impropriation
of this Word (Clergy or God's Heritage) to themselves forsooth?

I Will tell you: First, it is clear that in all the Holy Scriptures this word
(Clergy or God's Heritage) is never mentioned except in this place, 1 P^t. 5.3.

Secondly, It is as clear that the word Clergy, or Gods Lo^, belongs as much at
least to the Layety, (as they call them in scorn) if not more than to
Presbyters, or Bishops, or Pastors, who by another proud word too call
themselves Divines, for distinction sake from the Flock, just as they have
robbed the Layety of their good name Clergy, which by God was given to the
Layety in Holy Writ.

Thirdly, When the Pope and Bishops made Encroachments and Usurpations upon the
Princes and Emperors, taking their Dominions into the Church, and St. Peter's
Patrimony, then, the Pope and Bishops feeling their own strength, that they had
strength enough of themselves (as a distinct Body) to go alone; then they set
up for themselves, and made a new and distinct Corporation in the World, called
The Church, The Clergy, The Clergy, The Lords Spiritual, which is (a Title
absolutely and by Name) forbidden as a profane Name, 1 Pet. 5.3. and also in
the very next words in the same Verse, they are forbid to Rob the people of the
good Name (of Clergy or God's Heritage) because God gave the Flock that Name,
and Peter charged the Bishops, as our Savior did before, that they should not
be Lords, nor Domineer, nor exercise Lordship, as the Princes of the Gentiles
do: For, there was no such distinction, nor profane Names of distinction, as
Clergy and Layety, Spiritual Lords and Temporal Lords, there was but one sort
of Clergy, the Flock; and but one sort of Lords (Temporal) The Princes, or
Temporal Lords; for it is a Jesuitical Tenet (which we practice, and an old
Popish Tenet and Error) in making Dominion to be Founded in Grace; or to talk
of Spiritual Lordship, quatenus Spiritual Men, or Apostles: for it is totidem
Verbis, and by Name forbidden the Apostles.

I grant, that a more Honorable Office or Officer cannot be in Nature, than a
good Presbyter, or Bishop; nor can that Holy and Spiritual Office be more
debauched and profaned than by making steps of Divinity to mount over all
Humanity; This is to Rancounter and Ruffle the whole course of Nature; and make
Heaven, a pair of Stairs (whither go you so fast?) To Hell, To Hell? And the
Devil, by the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked world? (contrary to that
(pretended) Vow in Baptism; of which a Bishop (one would think) should make a
Conscience.

Thou (that say) a Man should not Steal, (says Paul) do thou Steal and
Filch M^ns good Names, that God has given them, (the Clergy, the Church) and
appropriates them to thy self and thy Coat? ^^le for shame, this is a proud and
covetous Encroachment, (taking in the Common, by wicked Enclosures) forsake the
Devil and the Pope, the Pomp^ and Vanities of this Wicked World. In the
Conclusion, (I Will tell thee) what Bishop; were in the purest and Primitive
Times, and how much now they are unlike what they ought to be, if they have any
Conscience or Reason in them; but if not, they are sit for any thing rather
than Bishops.

Which Honor of Bishop or Presbyter, (for they are all one, or little or no
difference (...)says C^^^sosteme ((...) (...) in Tim.) very little, no more
than ((...)) betwixt the Honorable Speaker of the House of Commons and the
Honorable Members, no more, if so much: But this Honor no Man takes of
himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron? where note by the way,
that he that is called by the Church, is said to be called by God, or the Holy
Ghost; as Acts 13.2, 3. But how was Aaron called of God? By being Ordained
High Priest: Who Ordained him? The Captain, the Layman (as you call him,) the
Prince, by Name, Moses.

And why may not Moses, or any King or Prince, Preach (in his own Person, and
Administer the Church Keys in his own Person) as well as Ordain a Deputy, or
Deputies, called Aaron's, if he be a Member, as surely, the Head is the
chiefest Member?

A King Preach! You Will say, that would be worth the hearing: Yea, so it is; and
does not his Sacred Majesty now Preach publicly once a Week (more or less) as
occasion serves? What, in the Pulpit, as the other King Henry aforesaid? What
matter is that? Whether in the Pulpit, or the Throne, or the Chair, or the
Church, or the Banqueting House, or Parliament House? The place alters not the
Sermon, or Speech?

But, he does not Preach an Hour by the Glass: No, but Preaches more Divinity,
Wisdom and Sense in a Minute, than the best of them do in an Hour, that I can
Hear, and Preaches oftener than the Archbishop: It is a Thousand times more
skill to speak much in sew words, than to talk Impertinently a whole Hour. Oh!
but Preaching is not the Archbishop's Province, but ruling. I thought that
Ruling had been only the Kings Province. Yea, the Archbishop is Deputed by the
King, and Commissionated for the Work.

I am glad to hear it; he should be so Deputed and Commissionated, a^ other
Judges are; but he that gives a Deputation, may upon Maladministration take
it away; and if either Arch Bishop, Bishop, or other Prelate of them all,
pretend jus Divinum for that prelacy; it is not only false, but they incurr all
of them a Praemunire, by the Statutes of Provisor^s, made even in popish times,
against those bold Intruders and Usurpers upon the Throne; nay, nay, If the
Rook or the Bishop can Check-mate the King, (put them all together in a Bag)
the Game is at an end.

What Is the matter with these People, that do not know themselves? If they do
not, they must be made to know themselves; wherefore else do I bestow all this
pains upon them?

St. Peter, after he was an Apostle (are these Men more) was a Layman, so were
all the Apostles, even the 13th too, St. Paul: Peter said, Lo! I go a Fishing;
we also (quoth they) will go with thee? Did they throw their nets with their
Cassocks on? Or did St. Paul Weave Tent in his Gown? If not, what Flesh alive
would have taken them for Clergy men, more than other Fishermen or Weavers, as
we foolishly and falsely accept and use the Word, Clergyman?

In the Old Testament, Eli, Samuel, etc. were no more Ministers than
Magistrates, no more Priests than Judges; nor David any more a Prophet than a
Captain or King? nor Solomon the Wise any more a King, than a Preacher, (or
Ecclesia^^^^.)

In the New Testament, Annas, and Cajaphas were Judges and Priests also;
whether were they Laymen then or Clergymen? The priest sat Judge upon the
Bench, and the Judge Preached, or gave the Charge, Yea, but not in the Pulpit,
and the Church: What then? does that make the least difference? He is not fit
for the Pulpit, that understands not the Law of the Land and Nations (where he
preaches) nor is he fit for the ^ench, that cannot Preach Gospel from thence,
as well as from the Pulpit: Caesar was ^ontifex Maximus, Chief Priest, and
chief General or Emperor.

Amongst the Jews, the Scribes and Lawyers were Judges on the Bench, and
Preachers in the Synagogues also; In all Nations it is generally so, in T^ky
they have no Judges but their Preachers; nay, our Bishops rule not the Church
otherwise than by Lay Elders, (the worst that ever were) ^un^ers, Registers,
Scribes, Notaries, Canonists, Officials, Vica^generals, Chancellours,
Commissaries, and that Ecclesiastical Crew at Doctor's Commons; never was
Church in the World ^o Disciplined: What Repentance? What Penance? The purse is
punished, That pays the Reckoning! Oh brave Church! Oh! brave Keys of the
Church! Fine Golden Keys, and Dainty Gay Porters, Door-keepers, Key-keepers, or
Ciaviger's! In the first four Hundred Years after Christ (till ^ishops, and
(afterward) The Pope, made such encroachments upon the Layety (as ignorant
persons, so esteemed, so called, and so treated) never was any Man let in to
the Church till approved: By who? By the Bishop? No, by the whole Church. Nay,
St. Austin, after he was Thirty Years of Age continued a Probationer or
Catechumenist, before he could get Admittance into the Church, as a
Churchmember, Attended at the Door and waited (as he confesses in his Book of
Confessions and Rec^^^ations) Three or Four Years; and then, most Votes of the
House carried it, not Mr. Speaker's alone, as with us; nay, The Speaker, or
Bishop, or Archbishop, knows nothing of the matter with us, but leaves all by
implicit Faith, to Registers, etc. Was ever any Church of Christ under the
Copes of Heaven Governed at this loose, filly, and perfunctory rare?

The Papists have much the better on it, for every Priest Rules (as well as)
Feeds, uses both Doctrine and Discipline (of Confession and Penance) but the
great Diocesan Bishops permit no such matter to protestant presbyters? And why?
are not they fitter than Sel-soul Registers, Sumners, Officials? Yes, much
fitter; but then people would say that the great Archbishop, that preaches
little or nothing of Doctrine, or Bishops that preach no better (if so well and
so often) as when they were Presbyters only, are good for nothing more than
common Parsons, except for ruling the Church? And how do they rule? by
Implicit Faith in the Black-guard, at Doctor's Commons: Bless us! What
Discipline is here? For above three hundred years after Christ, the peoples
Vote ordained, and where the only Clavigers, porters and Key-keepers, to let
them in, and turn them out of the Church.

So that the King who is Father of the Country, is Father also of the Fathers
Ecclesiastical (as well as Temporal) whether they know it or no.

And if I were of Council with or for the Bishops, I would persuade them to
alter their popish-like Style, in sending Process and keeping Courts in their
own names, contrary to the express words of the Statute of Edw. 6. in that Case
made and provided; as I have proved (as yet unanswerably) in my Book called The
Test, seven years ago, have a Care of a Praemunire: A blot is not a blot till
it be hit, but if it chance to be hit, the Game is at an end.

Let them not strive to be Independent; are they Subjects in Spirituals, as
well as Temporals? If Subjects, then act in the King's name, as other
Commissioners do, who are authorized by him; but if they dare pretend to a
Jurisdiction, Episcopal, Jure divino, more than a Presbyter, have a care of the
Statute of provisors; as aforesaid.

But some Men scar nothing, till it fall as heavy as Inevitably; Do we blame
Arbitrary power in a King, and allow it in a Bishop? Or, would any Bishop, that
knows what true Canonical obedience is, write in that Magisterial and
Apostolical style with Saint Paul, when perhaps the business is a mee^ wanton
or trivial Injunction, I might enjoin you on your Canonical obedience, but for
love sake I rather beseech you. We owe obedience to Bishops, and Judges, and
Kings, alike in this, namely, to obey them in licitis and honestis, in all
lawful and honest things: Loyalty is Legality, if I be legal, I am loyal:
Cononical obedience, say all the Canonists, is obedientia secundum Canonem: If
Bishop's, whom I reverence and respect heartily as the Kings Commissioners, so
that they do not exceed and transgress their commission, should command me to
say twenty pater Nosters every day before breakfast; it is mandatum honestum
but not licitum* quia lex non jubet: It is a good thing, but I am not obliged
to do every good thing, no, nor, sometimes, not obliged to do the best thing:
He that marries does well, but he that keeps his Virginity does better; If I do
well, when I marry, let the Friars or Nuns do better that like, and if my
Bishop command me not to Marry, which is an honest command, but not a legal
command, but an arbitrary, lustful, imperious, Tyr^annical command, for which
the Bishop has no Warrant and he talks without Book, which is more perhaps than
he can do in the pulpit, when he prates of his power to command, yet for love's
sake he rather beseeches; let him first learn to obey the Word, and to
understand the mischief of Impositions, poor Heart! Before he come to give a
Magisterial and Dogmatical Command, and to his Reverend Brethren, so, In
complement he calls them, but uses them perhaps like Slaves that must do his
bidding with Cap in Hand! let him command his Servants and go himself, I am his
Reverend Brother if he do not speak against his conscience; mentire est, contra
mentem ire; like the pope who is the greatest Tyrant under Heaven, enslaving
Souls and consciences, as well as J^^ling their Bodies till they be Carcases;
yet his style is, Servus Servorum, Servant and Reverend Brother; but I hate the
Hypocrisy and dissimulation; It looks like Joab's complement to Abner, Art thou
in Health my Brother? And then stabs him: Go Judas! Mind the Bag, mind thy God,
Mammon; mind the bagg, and keep your popish Complement -- Dear Brother -- to
your self, till you use him in respect as a Brother: come thou to betray the
Son of Man with a Kiss? Thou Hypocritical Judas! can any Man look into our
Chronicles and not see the insufferable Arrogance of priests, in the Reign of
popery, and since also, in the Reign of the popish like Ceremony-monger.

What a Slave to priestcraft was stout King William the Conqueror, when
Aldred Archbishop of York required a Boon of him, which the King was so bold
as to deny; whereupon the Archpriest cursed him and flung away, in a rage, out
of the Room; The King kneeled and said, he would never rise till the
Archbishop would come and absolve him: The Courtiers begged, for they durst
not, lay hold on his Laun sleeves, nor lay violent Hands upon a Clerk, but with
much ado and much humble Intercession, they persuaded him at length to return,
and to forgi^^ the poor kneeling King and humble penitent; No, quoth the
Bishop, let him Kneel, that he may know what it is to vex St. peter and me; at
length the King granting the Business, a Money matter, the Arch-bi^hop did
loose him, absolve him, and bid him rise.

The King in all other things was wise enough, but being bigoted by
priestcraft, and priest-ridden, he was crazed with a foolish Notion and
Superstition; Nay, he would not fight, nor inv^de England, till the pope gave
him his benediction; a B^nner with a Wafer-God enclosed in a Golden-crucifix,
and also one of the Hairs that once came from St. Peter's Head. People can
scarce imagine, the Imperious force of a silly Ceremony and Superstition, even
amongst Men, otherwise, wise even, at this day, amongst us, merely by blind
Devotion and Implicite-Faith in a filly Ceremony-monger, because, like as I
said before, the filly Image, and unthinking Black Coat, makes a great Figure
in the Church, and which Nebuchadnezzar the King had ser up.

But if they pretend that Jus divinum is the necessary attribute of Lawn
Sleeves, and that all the little things he commands, are Law and Gospel; God
help his Noddle, and keep him from a praemunire.

A Bishop may possibly be a good Man, and a good Scholar, though made when
popery Influenced the Throne; and some of them made so, for the unlikeliest
Merits that ever advanced a poor heart.

But, if he were not a good Scholar, a good preacher, or a good Linguist
before; It is not probable that the Conge De^slyer, let it be got how it will,
can Improve either his parts or his Learning.

The King's Mandate can make a Man a Bishop, or Lord a Barronet; but all the
Kings Mandates in Christendom cannot make him a better Scholar; a better Man,
or a better Linguist; this I can demonstrate, by my own Knowledge, Acquaintance
and Experience, that they that knew not Syriack, Arabic, nor Hebrew (before
they got the Conge-deslier) are as igu^tant, and unlearned Linguists as they
were when they only were (...) not a jo^ the ^ore improved by the Kings
Mandate, in any Knowledge, except that of their great now Rents; nay without a
Miracle, their bu^ Employments from the Parliament House to the Council Board,
or to ^rmations or Visitations, must hinder their learned Studies: For Law^
Sleeves cannot make I man a Linguist, th^^ was none before; pan^s pretend (I
know not what, nor they neither) Episcopal Character, but a young Bishop, a
Novice-Bishop, a Boy-Bishop, and unlearned Bishop; is a B^y, a Novice ^till,
his Bishopric cannot make him more Learned, though it may make him more Right
R^verend (I grant) then he was when but an ordinary Presbyter.

In short, This Ceremony-monger is that Cumbersome Baggage that Pesters the
^hip of the church in a Calm, and helps to sink it in a Storm; but what Cares
he? Let the Church or State sink or Swim, so he can but save his own Cargo and
himself, in the Long-Boar.

Nay, like an uoruly Beast, when he has drunk his fill, he blunders, and
puddles the Fountain with his Fect, that so the Streams may be muddy; this
makes a Lean and Cadaverous Clergy, the whole Protestant World cannot sample
such a jejune Crew; he does well to stand up for pen^ Laws, and to bring Men
with a Constable and a Warrant (into his Church) to hear him read his Plagiary
No^es, or else he might read them to the Walls and his Sexton, (being conscious
to himself of his own Emptines^ and Demerit) for they must be very hungry that
without force and constraint feed on lean Carrion, and cold Cramb's.

Therefore he Caresses, and Hugs a Patron that has a good Living in his Gift;
he is his Man of Metal.

I have read an Oration in praise of Judas; I am apt to think a Ceremony-monger
made it, because he admires any Man that carries the Bag; and in his heart
loves Popery, because (like him) it makes Money of its God, and yet hates plain
down right Popery in England, because it in capacitates a Churchman, and is
inconsistent with a Dignatory Ecclesiastical: For though he be of no Religion
in good earnest, yet I Will trust him for a sure Stake against baresac'd Popery;
whilst the current of the Laws of Preserment runs strong against it: He Will
never kiss the Pops Toe, (I Will warrant you) whilst he lives in hopes to make
Men kiss his own Golden Slippers.

Thus my Ceremony-monger loves Religion and God too, as the Lions and other
Beasts of the Wilderness love him, who seek their Meat from God, Psalm. 104.21.

Nay, he can fast and pray too, and keep Thanksgiving days (as the State calls)
in show, but in his heart is as Hypocritical therein, as the Emperor Charles
the 5th. Who Ordained public Prayers and Fasts to be made to God throughout
his many Dominions, for the deliverance of Pope Clement the 7th from Captivity,
when he himself had taken his poor Holiness Prisoner, and kept him Captive in
the Castle of St. Angel^ in Rome.

Thus Mocking God (as the Dean and Chapter does in choice of a Bishop (as
aforesaid) after they have received the Kings Mandate to choose N. N.) and
begging the a(...)ce of the Holy Ghost in their Election of a fit Man to that
holy Office, when they knew well enough their Man befare hand, fit or unf^hcy
can neither will nor choose; th^^ (like Ephraim Hos. 11.12.) compassing God
about with (...), and the House of Israel with deceit.

Thus the crafty Fox (the Emperor Tiberius) Mocked Heaven by Commanding Common
prayers should be said throughout the whole Empire for his safe Conduct in a
Progress he never intended to make, pro itu and reditu (says Suetonius)
supplicationes indixit cum non intenderet.

Thus the Ceremony-monger is always crying up the Church, the Church, (meaning
himself and such as himself) for whatsoever a do he makes about Establishing
the Church, '^is the wages (it brings him) which makes him bustle, like King
Hiram's Servants in hewing Timber to build a Temple for that God which they
never knew nor cared for, being a lover of his own Will Worship, his own Will
and pleasure, more than a lover of God.

Uniformity he cries, and one Mouth; meaning his own; for with his Mouth he
shows much love, but his ^eart (like Ez^ki^ls Auditors) goes after his
Covetousuess:

Yet as Covetous as he is, he will sometimes be as liberal as a Prince, to
propagate, maintain and uphold that single and paramount Virtue of his Foppish
and illegal Ceremonies: and therefore at the Choice of Parliament men, what
pains and cost does he lavish in making Parties for such men as are most like
himself, and such as he thinks will keep up the outside of the Church, how
little soever of true Devotion is within; being Zealous for Faith, and perhaps
true Faith in his head, though he banishes Charity by a Penal Law: Good or bad,
are but empty Names with him, and things indifferent. Is he a Ceremony monger?
That Is his Test by which he tries all Men's Religion and Devotion.

Like the Prince of darkness, he hates the very Sun in the Firmament, if it
discover his dark abode.

This Eccle^cal Fop espouses Religion (as other Fops Marry) only for the fair
F^, Portion, and gaudy Dress; and may be a Son of God notwithstanding, (I mean)
in that Sense the Scriptures called the Old Giants, the ^^ns of God, that
seeing the Daughters of Men, that they were fair, took them Wives of all, which
they chose merely for the Skin deep perfection;) Eyeing nothing of inward
goodness, nor the Beauties of the mind: for both of them are Carnally-minded
and Fleshly given, hankering after the Law of a Carnal Commandment, and Carnal
Ordinances; O! how he hugs them?

And if any Man dare speak a word against the Beauty of his Mis -- or dare make
Comparisons, or prefer a richer Beauty, Oh! how he Suaggers with his curses and
Anathema's, and Damms him for a Schismatic, and if he can, Jay is him too, and
there lets him D^^ and Rot; what speak against Mis^?

Thus, he is indeed the great Scare crow in the Church, a man of Clouts that
looks like a man at a distance, but, if you search him, he has no bowels; he
wants not Will, but Power to make his (...) Finger thicker than his
Predecessors Loins.

His Conscience is always just of the Size with that of his Prince; If his
Prince be given to Wantonness, he dares not so much as quote the Seventh
Commandment in his Sermon, nor name Adultery; If he had lived in Maoedon in the
Reign of Alexander, you might have known him for a true Courtier, by his Wry,
neck, Regis ad exemplum.

His Ceremonies are more futile and thin than a Spiders Web, and can neither
catch nor hold any body but Flies or such silly Infects; yet he has in their
Defense the Venom and Gall of a Spider, which transcends him in one thing, for
she begins her Web at her Bowels, but he has none; as being of the Opinion of
the Philosopher Zeno, who, amongst the Diseases of the Soul: (which he reckons
up) makes Humane Compassion to be One.

He keeps a bustle for his Trinkets, let it make never so great a Disturbance
or Danger to the Church or Sat; pro Aris and Focis, he cries, stand up for the
Church; though indeed his Area is the Ara to which he bows so devourly and
demurely.

Not that he cares for his Trinkets neither, if he could make more Money by
parting with them, than he has got by keeping of them; He would forsake them
and the Saints too, with Demas, for love of this present World, upon a fair
Prospect of a better Market at Thessalonica, in the Idols Temple; Amicus Plato,
he cries, amicus Socrates, fed magis amici Divitiae and and Honores.

He is worse than Balaam, who would not curse Israel, though Balak would have
given him his House full of Silver and Gold.

For my Ceremony-monger is always for that Religion, that is most in Vogue For
my Ceremony-monger is always for that Religion, that is most in Vogue and like
a Frenchman, loves any thing that is infashion, but when out of fashion, he
leaves it like Lice, that prey only upon the Living; but forsake men when they
are going to die; or like Rats, that by Instinct, desert the House that is
ready to fall: Thus he worships (with the Indian) the Rising Sun.

When the Mendicant Friar, preached before Cardinal Odescalcho (this present
Pope, before he got up to the Infallible Chair) and Cardinal Sachetti; he begun
his Sermon thus:

-- St. Peter was a Fool, St. Paul was a Fool, the Prophets, and Aposties, all
Fools, for wandering about in Sheepskins and Goat Skins, being destitute,
afflicted and tormented in their way to Heaven, when they might as well have
gone thither (as their Successors) in Scarlet Gowns and Scarlet Hats; The
Capuchin had an Eye to my Ceremony-monger, or to one as like him as ever he can
look.

For this Ceremony-monger (notwithstanding his voluntary humility) it as proud
as Lueifer, and hectors like a Pope against all Opposition, exalts himself
above all that is called God; valuing his Canons, above the Statutes of the
Realm.

Thus as the Papists preach up the Rules of St. Francis, St. Benedict and St.
Dominick; that may be good things too (many of them) not only above the Laws of
the Land, but above the Laws of God too, and strains at a G^at, at the same
time, when he swallows a Camel; for in his Prayer before Sermon, he speaks like
a Mouse in a Cheese, when he prays to God there, but when he preaches up ^he
Gospel Rules, then he makes the Pulpet thunder (till the Church Echo again)
with the Canons, The Canons (which may be good things too,) some of them, so
that they make no comparisons with their betters) making a hideous noise with
preaching up them and his Ceremonies: methinks he then looks like the Emperor
Caligula, when with a numerous Army he marched with Colors flying, Trumpets
sounding, and Drums beating (loud as a Thunder clap) to gather Cockie Shells.

No man more zealously cries up the Laws of the Land and Acts of Uniformity,
when he gets a Nonconformist thereby upon the Hip, and to Penal-Law him; but
when the point of the same Acts and Laws of the Land are turned upon himself,
or he be commanded to do any thing he does not like, he cries out Conscience
and the Liberties of Holy Church are Invaded: Just as the Jews, to affront
Caesar, they cried out, That God alone was their King, but to affront Christ,
They alter their note, and say, We have no King but Caesar.

Thus he lays heavy Burdens upon others, and grievous to be born, but he
himself (that is the greatest Nonconformist to the Act of Uniformity with his
irrational and illegal Ceremonies) does not touch the Burden with one of his
fingers. Yet you cannot well discover him; for ye shall not readily see him
walk, but like a Spaniard, never or seldom abroad without his Cloak; Beggarly
enough too, for the most part, and can scarcely cover his Rags, and his
beggarly Elements and Will Worship.

CHAP. VI. Concerning unlighted Candles on the Altar, Organs, Church-Musick,
and other Foppish Symbols, etc.
THE Papists, like the Cynick Diogenes, that went with his Candle and Lanthorn
at Noonday into the Marketplace, to see if he could find an honest Man there,
because the Sun could not show one, at their Idol^trous and Preposterous Mass,
draw the Window-curtains and Window-Shuts, as if they were ashamed, that the
Sun should see such a dark Devotion, and dissipate the darkness, like that
heavy Plague sent by God to Egypt, a darkness palpable, a darkness that might
be felt: Thus the dark Shop Commends the Ware, and like other Stage Plays, Act
at Noonday by Candlelight to choose, lest their Tinsel-lace should not pass
for Silverlace, nor their Bristol stones for Diamonds: Our Fops, with less
Reason, do set up Candles too on the Altar, as well as the Papists, we must
still be like them, and be popish Apes, without so much as Popish Reasoning,
filly though it be; Ours is Non-scene.

For what signification of Light can this Ceremony be, any more than a stick? A
Candle unlighted is no more a significant Ceremony of Light, than a Stick,
before the fire touches it, is a Firebrand, I am not anly afham'd of my Fops,
but really am ^fham'd to use any words about it; it is needless to expose it,
and yet it is retained as a thing of value, because that Foppery, amongst
others, made my Ceremony-monger, a Man of value; for without them he had still
Sare in the Seat, which best becomes him, and it is too good for him, the
lowest Stool in the Church.

No^, that our Blessed Savior loves to see his Spoure, the Church, In a (...)
D^ess; no, her ^eyment is, or should be, of Needle work and Wrought-gold; Does
any Queen deserve it better? but her chiefest Beauty is her inward and
Spiritual Grace and Virtues.

There Is something more than a pretty Face and Portion, that Wise Men look for
in a Bride; though my Cremony-monger, like other Fops, minds little or nothing
(...), or nothing so much; he will debar you of the Holy Sacrament, if you accept
not his A^ry Cross in Baptism, though his hand in making it, (...) a Circle more
than a Cross, or looks like nothing, (...) is nothing, or is I do not know
what: And will deny the Chil(...) Bread of Heaven, and rather give it to Dogs
if they crouch, except the children (...), like Popish children, take it in the
same posture of Adormion, as the Papists their Transubstantiated W^ser; 'tho it
offends the (...); as a Baboon, so much the more loathsome, for being so like us.

I know, that the Church of England declares in words against any Ad^on, though
they retain the posture, the Popish posture, not our Saviors posture at the
Holy Supper, but vulgar people mind Works more than Words; and is not that
S^iritual Father very Wanton, that will lay a S^um^ling-block (so Popish like)
to make his weak Child fall? You and I can (...) over it, but all Men are not
so ^imble; and can wear a Surplice or White gown as harm^esly as a Black; but
others dislike it, because it is a Mass Priests Weed, which is true, though it is
a silly reason, but all Men are not Wise.

I Read of Vocal Music in the New Test^ment, and Singing of Psalms, but not a
word of the little Instrument, the Violin, nor the great Bagpipe^, or Organ;
nor of Men that made a Trade of Singing, as the Beggars do in Bohemi^, and as
Gypsies, and our Singing-men, and Singing-boys get their living by Canting:
Nay, most abominably and profanely they Cant the very Creed: what chopping of
words so ludicrously in so Solemn a Confession of Faith; Born of the Virgin,
Virgin, Virgin; Born of the Virgin Mary, Mary, etc. Oh! most profane! and every
body hears this, but who reproves it, who amends it? That ought to amend it,
and not fit (like so many unthinking Black-coats) not minding what is done with
such Impious Mockery, and silly Echo.

But, why not Instrumental Music as well as Vocal? There Is a vastly different
Reason, the poorest Men, the poorest Parishes have Tongues wherewith to praise
God, but have not so much superfluous Money to spare, as to buy Organs, and then
give as much or more to maintain an Organist, as the Vicar has.

Some Bishops talk of Uniformity and one Mouth; Why not one sound too? A poor
Country Man may be as good a Christian, as a Rich Citizen, E^oker, or Usurer,
that has superfluous Money to buy Organs, which if (...) conduce to Godliness,
the Bishops ought to commend it to the poor, as well as to the rich Courtier,
King or Queen; and allow some Thousands Yearly, (surely he can spare it freely
for the promodon of Godliness and Uniformity which he so eries up:) but Mum --
not a Penny, I Will secure you, to make one Sound, and one Mouth.

And who can blame that Country Man (though all the Church laughed at him in
the great Ally) when the Pipes begun to Play, he fell a D^ncing, having never
heard the like before, except the Bag-pipes in an Alehouse where he did always
use to Trip it?

And the Country people do think that they want some expedient and requisi^^
Devotion, in Prayers and pralies, or else they and all the World must think
that this Popish like Mus^ and Organs, is too much Superstition.

But what can ray silly Ceremony monger say for himself, why Sentence should
not be pronounced against him for an Impenicent Dissenter, Anathematized, and
then by (his own invention, the strange Wr^ de Excom. cap^endo) be say^'d, and
tormented (like poor Dissenters from the Act of Uniformity) till h^ Roar again;
and then Deprived and Degraded; Come! Perillus! It Is but just you should
hand-sell your own Brazen-bull. For Disiencers (by Omission) are pardonable,
they may pretend weakness and Conscience; but in those needless, silly,
irrational, illegal and unscriptural Ceremonies, what constable thou plead but
wantooness, folly and Impudence?

Mu^lick is a great Spender the greatest Spender and Waster or (...), in the
acquest of all Sciences, to be expert and ready at it: Nay, you will lose it too,
if you have no (...) great deal of waste time (from business) to throw away
upon it! David had nothing to do, when he was young but sit on a Hill and Pipe
to his Sheep, and pinger his Lute and Harp, in which by use he was so skilful,
that i^ made him a Courtier (though King S^ul had forgot him when he killed
Goliath) but he had often before used to play the Devil out of him: And (...)
^ental Music was as Natural to him as Psalms; his Fingers as good at it, as
his Tongue; if Men be brought up in Hunting, in Music, etc. they'^e scarcely
leave it, when older or richer, but rather use it the more, and improve it; and
when we have got David's Skill, and King David's exchequer, we will have as many
Organs and kill as many Bullocks for a sacrifice, as he did, if we have nothing
else to do with our Money; or cannot cell how to while off an hour or two, in
Devotion, without Org^^s to divert us.

However, we may make my Ceremony-monger pull ^own his Organ, and S^ll it to
the Playhouse, or M^sick house, because it is a Ceremony not contained in the
Common Prayer Book, and therefore against Uniformley, and against his Act of
Uniformity, with which he does (...) Mouth, crying, One Mouth, one Mouth, why
not one Sound, one Sound as well in all Churches?

My Ceremony monger pretends to a have wonderful zeal for knowledge and against
ignorance, and would have the Youth instructed (in the Catechisms) to
admiration, like the Pharisee (of old) and yet to his utmost takes away the Key
of Knowledge from the people, getting the Press Monopoliz'd to himself many
times, and (stopping the Press and the Pulpit-doors) and Silencing those (to
choose) that Discover his Buffoonery in Religion; taking a pride in a Tyranical
prchemins^^^, (like the Pharisee too) and saying, That these same People who
know not the Law are accursed: He would gladly be accounted the Domine sac
Totum, and yet does nothing (at all) that good is, nor permitting others to do
it; he neither enters in himself, and they that would enter in, he hinders,
except he may be the only Authentic Porter, or Doorkeeper, scorning that
Almighty God should give any Man better Lies than his own, though he (poor
Soul!) sees but gl^^nerlogly, and by Spectacles, in a Glass darkly; and all to
uphold the high Seat he has got in the Church, (I know not how; and yet I do
too, in part, though not so well perhaps as the Popes Nuncio, or the
Ambassador Castlemain, or Father Petres.)

The CONCLUSION.
CHAP. I. Of Sureties in Baptism.
AND now, you may see by the Picture I have drawn, that a Ceremony-monger's
Soul, and Conscience is neither ruled by Holy Scripture, Right Reason, nor by
the Law of the Land; but in despite of all these, some of them are such only
through Custom, Ignorance, blind Devotion, implicit Faith, and apish
Imitation; others, and those no small Fools, upon design, duckoy'd by Avarice
and Ambition: But, Custom is a second Nature, even in Religion too, or more
properly, Superstition: Custom is the Father, and Ignorance is the Mother of
their Devotion: As soon may an Ethiopian change his Skin, or a Leopard his
Spots, as a Ceremony-monger his foppish Superstition, he is so accustomed to
it. Custom can beget nothing upon a Man of Reason, a Man whose Reason is not
clouded; and yet Custom has a Brood in the World far more numerous, than Truth
could ever beget; because Truth, the Father of wise men, can never beget any
thing, but upon Reason the Mother of true Devotion: But these Mothers are but
few, and therefore there are but few of the Breed, very few rational Men, and
rational Christians, in comparison of the Numbers of those that go the broad
Way, and go in at the broad Gate that leads to Destruction; and many there be
that go in thereat, namely, all those, whose Religion and Worship has no other
Ground, except Custom (in Conjunction with Mother Ignorance) for their foppish
Devotion; and Covetousness, for their Knavish Superstition.

Thus the poor silly naked Indians, In America, (I have catechized, them) and
asked them the Reason, Why they did bow to such an Idol, that was nothing more
than other. Wood and Trees of which it was made: They had all one and the same
Answer, namely, Custom, and their Peel's Peel's, What are they? but a certain
crafty sort of Men amongst them, that lead the rest of the Fops by the Nose, by
some Superstitions of their own Invention, Peel's, that is, Priests of the
Devil, whom they worship in that ^owing Idolatry! for they never worship God,
(whom they acknowledge in dark apprehension) for they say, God is good; and
some of them will say. God is a good Man, and will not hurt them, and therefore
they worship the Devil to assuage his mischievous Wrath.

Even so, our English foppish Ceremony-mongers answer, (when I catechize them)
and ask them the Reason of their bowing to the Altar when there is no Idol, and
to the East when there is nothing Divine more than in the South and North, and
the Altar nothing, but a piece of Wood, made of the same Wood and Trees with
the Pues, the Stools and the Pulpit: then, just like the naked Indians, that
are but just one degree (if they be so much) removed from a Monky, answer, that
it is a Custom and their (Peel's: or) Priests do so, and therefore the poor
Apes imitate, that is all.

Oh! but the Priests are crasty, and have some more Reason (though a wicked
One) to bow to nothing; they do not bow for nothing, they get a Place by it,
and Preferment; and therefore are forced to get as many Fools as they can to be
their Disciples and Followers; for, when Owls are alone, they are houted at,
but not Birds that fly in Flocks, tho they be Jack-dawes.

I have asked some of them a Reason for their confused and profane. irrational
and unscriptural babbling together the Reading Psalms! and all their Answer is,
that [It is granted, that) It is a confused Noise, and therefore
unintelligible; but their priests do so, and the Singing Boys; and they are
accustomed to it: It is a very honest Confession; but is this Man-like, or
Baboon-like?

I have asked some account also, of others, how the Organs got into Church, to
make such a Noise, and at so great a Charge and Expense, In the first purchase
and continuance; Judas his Question is proper here, To what purpose is this
waste? Had they not better be sold, and the Organist's Sellary retrenched, and
given to the poor?

They answer, that Mr. Alderman was willing withal, and that he could not stay
a long Hour or two out of his Counting House, at Devotion, without sleeping;
and therefore, how clunch-fisted soever he used to be at other times, yet on
this occasion he nimbly opens his Purse to pay the Music, for that it either
keeps him from sleeping, or joggs and awakens him, and makes him stare and look
up; therefore, etc. Ay, say no more; you have said enough, and you deserve to
be a Laureat, as well as Sir John Suckling's Alderman; come, clap the Laurel
upon the Alderman's Head.

But of all the brisk Reasons of my Ceremony-mongers, that of a She
Ceremony-monger was very surprising, when being ask't why she, in defiance of
plain Scripture, spoke in the Church, answered nimbly, That her Tongue was so
used to wagg at home, that it could not lie still in the very Church? and yet
the same Church-pratter, was silenced, when questioned, why she, in imitation
of the Doctor's bowing his Noddle to the Altar, Madam Limberham made a
Courtesy, and bowed both her Knees? no Reason could be got for that Mimickry;
that is no more like, than an Apple is like an Oyster.

And all the Reason that some Bishope can give, why they ordain many times,
rude, illiterate, unthinking Don's to the Pulpit, to teach others, and know
nothing of the Matter, nothing of their own Knowledge, no Divinity is concocted
or digested, and made their own, and in their Head and Heart, (the Body of the
Law is digested by a Lawyer, before he is fit to come to the Bar; and the Body
of Physic, by Physicians, before they are fit to feel the Pulse, or be
Licensed).

His Answer is, That he trust; to his Deacon, or Archdeacon, by implicit
Faith, He believes as the Archdeacon tells him; and that the form and manner
of ordaining Deacons, Priests, and Bishops, requires no more: well, it is well,
it is very well answered, and most Episcopally;

And why do you Confirm, and lay Hands suddenly upon so many ignorant Persons
that understand not one Article of Faith, nor can so much as say the Creed? The
answer is, The Common Prayer Book requires no more than to believe oy Implicit
Faith, the fitness of all that the Parish Priest says is fit, he must take it
for granted, and believe as the Priest believes, and see with other Men's Eyes;
but that is the Fault (Brother!) of your Constitution, that obliges you no more
Work and Inspection, than any Mortal can perform.

Besides, where do we read (except in the Mass Book, and Common Prayer Book) of
such a thing in Scripture, as Confirmation by a Bishop? That Scripture of
little Children coming to Christ, and he laid his Hands upon them, and blessed
them, is, in the Common Prayer Book, applied to infant Baptism, in the Office
of Public Baptism; and most incongruously (too) for that purpose; for Jesus
baptized none, neither Men, Women, nor Children, but his Disciples did that;
Nay, the great Apostle of the Gentlies went about confirming the Disciples by
sound Preaching, but he baptized very few; one, or two, or three, he confeiles
that he did baptize, and if he had baptized any more, he had forgo^; therefore
he did not make such a business of it in his own Person: And as for laying
Hands upon any Children, or other, there is not the least mention of any such
Matter. How came it then into the Church; I Will tell you:

Infants being not able to make a Confession or Profession of Faith and
Repentance, which two are required of all persons before they be baptized, (as
says the Church of England in her Doctrine Catechistical in the Common Prayer
Book, and so said St. Augustine, but I believe neither of them).

But, because that Infants, by reason of their tender Age cannot perform them;
therefore they do perform the by Proxy, (...) by (...), because the Sureties do
promise (a wise Reason, for ^ises may be broken) they shall perform both Faith
and Repentance, when they come to Age.

Ay! Here Is a wise Reason for a Learned Church, and enough to make all Rational
Men (that have not lost their Reason) be Anabaptists, or, at least, like
Witches, to deny their Baptism so Infancy.

For all Promises and Vows are either broken or kept, but the Promises and
Vows of Godfathers and Godmothers in infant Baptism, are seldom or never
kept; but are broken Vows, and broken Bonds and Promises.

The Sureties Promise and Vow, that the poor Insolvent Child (that cannot speak
for it self) shall when it can hear (for Faith comes by hearing) have Faith;
and when it can speak, and gets Wit, then it shall have Grace to confess and
repent.

But, suppose the Child live to have Wit enough to be a Ceremony-monger; Had
ever any Man or Woman of them the Grace to confess, recant and repent? And then
the Promise of the Sureties is not worth more than some Lord's Promise, nor
worth a Farthing.

Again, suppose the Child prove Deaf, or Dumb, or a Fool, the Sureties Vow they
do not know what; nay, if it live to be hanged, as many are for Thieves,
Witches, Murderers; Hlow is the Godfathers and Godmothers Vow and Promise
performed, when they vowed and promised for poor Child in Baptism, that it
should forsake the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of this
wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh. 2dly, They vow and promise
that Child shall believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith; do they not
break their Vow, If poor Child prove to be a sceptick, a Hobbist, or an
Athlest? 3dly, They vow that the poor Child shall keep God's Holy Will and
Commandment, and walk in the same all the days of its Life; Do they not break
their Vow, if, poor Child, for whom they swore a solemn Vow and Promise, in the
presence of God, being an Oath, happen to turn Apostate, Papist, Mohammedan, or
Infidel, are not the Sureties all forsworn? And though they be, or be not,
there is the mischief, no good can possibly come of it, but that which is
lucumbent upon Parents, and which Sureties seldom or never mind, namely,
Christian Education; and if so, they should not Swear and Vow in the Child's
Name, that the Child does or shall believe and repent; It is enough to promise
good Education (if the Godfathers and Godmothers be barren, or old and past
Children; in such case, it is enough to (...) kind and careful of another Man's
Child: But if they have Children of their own, or likely to have any, it is too
much, because Charity should begin at Home. And therefore the said Vow and
Promise, is, but usually like the common Discourse of Hectors and Bullies; (I
swear and Vow, they cry on all Occasions) when they intend nothing; by Vowing
and Swearing, but forswearing; and adding a Lie to the Promise and Vow.

First, Then the Sureties promise that which no honest Man can honestly
promise, who makes Conscience of a Vow, because he promises that which is
impossible for him to perform.

Secondly, If the Insolvent Child be bound by Sureties and good Bayl, if he
leave them in the lurch, he wrongs them not, he gave them no such Commission,
Power, Deputation, Authority, or Request to promise and vow in his Name: And
therefore that talk of a Vow in Baptism, it nonsense, idle, and vain: How can a
Man break a Vow, or a Bond that he never made; but his Sureties made it in his
behalf; Ay, without his order, knowledge, care, or desire: How is Child
concerned therein, any more than other Children in the World? I have to hear
Nonsense, much more to preach it, except I were sure, I was to preach to none
but Fops, that swallow every thing that the Priest puts in their Mouth (like
the Wafer God) without chewing.

Thirdly, Suppose another Man's Faith or Repentance (that has enough of both)
for his own Salvation, and also Merits (called Works of Supererogation by the
Papists) to spare, heaped up and running over, which the Saints departed, St.
Bridget, St. Winifred, St. Francis, St. Ignatius Loyola, St. Coleman, etc. has
left at their Departure, as a last Legacy to the Pope (as the Papists hold)
Faith and Repentance enough to save all the Whores and Rogues in the World, to
whom the Pope gives, no Sells, to any that has Money, and is willing to Buy.

If Works of Supererogation be true, it is the first Market I would make; I had
rather buy Heaven than a Knighthood, or a Bishop^ick.

But, suppose the Fool and his Money be soon parted, and a Man get nothing but
Hell by another Man's Graces of Faith and Repentance, by relying thereon, as
Church of England holds; then much more Nonsense it is for Church of England,
on such idle and false Principles, to talk of Faith and Repentance to be
performed, (tho never so much promised to be performed) by Proxy, or by
Sureties.

If God Almighty would (like some Creditors) take Sureties, and quem pro quo,
that if Child could not perform and pay Faith and Repentance, then fall upon
the Sureties, and make them smart for it; then you speak to purpose. But, God
is Just, the Soul that sins it shall die, and the Soul that believes and
repents shall be Saved, but I fear the best Protestant has nothing to spare for
a poor Insolvent Child.

Fourthly, Suppose (which is possible) that the Sureties are Insolvent and have
not Faith and Repentance for themselves, then all this great Fat is in the
Fire; they can never perform nor pay a Debt for another, that have not
wherewith to discharge their own Debts, let them promise, and vow and be Bound
in as many Bounds as they please for other People; any Fool or Beggar can
promise to pay a Thousand pounds for another, but what signify Promises, Vows,
or Oaths, made only to be broken and forsworn?

Lastly, Which is the saddest Case of all, (or not a Pin to choose) suppose that
poor Child is baptized without Sureties, as are the greatest number by far, in
this populous own; and in private Baptism, neither Sureties, nor the Sign of
the Cross is required; then they must bring Sureties afterward to Church, and
then it shall be signed with the Cross. But half the Parishes in this Town have
no Churches, and they are not obliged to carry Child to another Church. Now you
are gravelled, Mr. Ceremony-monger, and you do not know what to do, or say.

Again, those that have Churches, will not, nor cannot, for Love nor Money, get
such good patur'd and kind Sureties, to promise, vow or swear for the Child;
What will you do now? now you are worse gravelled.

For either the Child in private Baptism, without Sureties, and the Sign of the
Cross, is baptized aright, truly and fully, or no?

If not, then half of the Kingdom are unchristned Infidels; there is one of the
two Sacraments half lost by your foolish Reasonings, and fond Doctrines; except
you confess that the Child is rightly baptized without Sureties, or the Sign of
the Cross.

Which if you do, I have conquered thee, and thy silly Doctrine, of making
Faith and Repentance requisite, before a Child be capable of Baptism: And when
you had made so great a Flaw in Divinity, you sodder it worse with a
nonsensical Whimsey of Sureties performing Faith and Repentance for poor Child
by promising both, Sureties, Sponsores, Customers not more silly than Ancient,
even in the 2d, or 3d. Centuries, as I remember, but have no time to turn to
it, but an Error not so old as that of Papias, viz. Christ's reigning here upon
Earth a thousand Years personally, as the Millenaries hold; and a hundred more
Errors of older Style.

Besides, the Vow and Promise of Sureties gives either true Faith and
Repentance, or not: If only false, it is nothing worth, it is false Coin, it
cannot, shall not pass current any longer: If true Faith and Repentance come
thereby, then is this believing and penitent Child capable also of the other
Sacraments of the Lords Supper; for no other Qualifications can be requisite;
Faith and Repentance fits them for Heaven and Glory; and if so, it must needs
fit them for the means of Grace, in the way to Glory. St. Augustine, good Man.
was thus run to the Wall with this Argument, and so must Church of England,
'till they get a better Reason for Infant Baptism, than they tell us in their
Catechism and Common Prayer Book, and must rationally fall into the Error of
St. Augustine, who put the Holy-Supper, like Spoon-meat, down the Childrens
Throats, thus profaning, because not discerning the Lord's Body.

But the Sureties do it for them; then let them eat and drink also for them,
take both the Sacraments in their Name and stead, and go to Heaven also in
their Names and stead. And what will poor Child get by all this? He will never
know any thing of those Heavenly Joys which his Proxy and Surety enjoys.

Therefore to salve this Sore, make room then for Confirmation, a Romish
Sacrament. Well, (you will say) you can expose Mother Church, and show her
Nakedness; but can you cover it? Yes! that I can, and have done it many Years
ago in my printed Book called -- Gregory Father Gray-Beard: If I be forced to
lance my poor Mother's Sores, I always sprinkle sympathetick powder on my
Lancet, that it may heal the Wound. It is forced to make, to let the corrupted
Quitter out. But, if she be so wilful and proud, that she scorns my Hand, my
charitable Hand and Help, march on, let the Blind lead the Blind; when you are
in the Ditch, we shall hear you cry for help; though now, like the wild Ass in
the Wilderness, she tosses up her head, and runs snorting away, in her month we
shall find her.

CHAP. II. Of Escapes in the Common Prayer Book, in reference to the Act of
Uniformity.
WHat! shall we have no Ceremonies at all then? Oh! yes, your fill, so you will be
content, and not impose your small sense upon others in Canons, and Acts of
Uniformity; which are not only vain Attempts hitherto, (even since the first
General Council of Nice) but all the great Wars in Christendom, upon the score
of Religion, the Innocent Blood spilt betwixt the Arrians and Athanasians, the
Papists and the Protestants, the Conformists and Non-conformists the
Animosities. Jalls, Ruin, Fines, Imprisonments, Smithfield Friars, and Bloody
Inquisition, must all be charged at the foot of this Account.

It is very strange that Christians will not be content with the Imposition and
Acts of Uniformity, which God, the Holy Jesus and his Apostles have provided.
Have thou Faith (says the Apostle) have it to thy self? Have thou a ceremony,
thou art fond on, it may be good, it may be bad, make much on it, keep it to thy
self; to thine own Master thou (...) or fallest.

We have general Rules, as to honor God with our Substance, or Estates, in
Works of Charity, which is the greatest Thing in Religion, and without which
all thy Faith and Hope is nothing, as says St. Paul; or is a dead Carrion, as
says St. James, because Charity, the Soul of Faith, is de^ed, when thou
evidences thy Faith to be a nothing Faith, a dead Faith, by destroying Charity,
in killing and imprisoning thy Brother for Faith's sake; and perhaps thy weak
Brother, for whom Christ died, through thy Imposition, and Penal Acts of
Uniformity; Acts that are not only mischievous in breaking the Peace and Unity
of the Brethren, not only uncharitable in beating thy Son, or thy Brother,
because he is blind; restore him to his Sight, in the Spirit of Meekness, is
the Apostle's Rule, blows will never cure his Blindness.

Besides, Uniformity is an unnatural, impossible, and therefore an irrational,
wicked, and vain attempt: Go, teach God to make a new Heaven, with Uniformity
of Stars, and Skies spangled uniformly, they are now all of different Forms and
Features: Go, reach him to make Men uniform, they are all now of different
Forms and Features; Go teach him to make a new Earth, and set a new Face on it;
The Landscape now looks so much the more lovely by the Variety, which God and
Nature seems to delight in; And will thou (thou silly Ceremony monger, and
Projector) be wiser than God?

If thou had seen our blessed Savior sometimes stand and pray, sometimes
kneel and pray, sometimes ly on a Bed or Couch, and eat the Holy Supper;
sometimes fall on his Face and pray; if thou had seen this variety, thou
would have Excommunicated him, then caplass'd and jalled him, if thy
fierceness had not kick't him, and spurned him up, had thou but had an Act of
Uniformity to back thee.

We are bound to honor God with our Substance, In Works of Charity (the
greatest Duty) but how much; when, and how, in particular, is left to the
discretion and liberty of every Man, no rule of Imposition is, or can be made
about it.

We are obliged to honor God with our Bodies, the least thing in true Worship,
for bodily Exercise profits little, but how much, when, and how in
particular, is lest to the discretion and liberty of every Man, no Rule of
Imposition is or can be made about it.

Then, you will say, the Church of England was mistaken in one of her XXXIX.
Articles, that says, The Church has power to appoint Ceremonies: And also the
King and Parliament were mistaken in the Act of Uniformity, that enjoint all
Bishops and Clergymen, on pain of Deprivation, to subscribe, assent, and
consent to all and every thing, as true, which is contained in the
Common Prayer Book.

Here is a heavy Charge, Convocation-House, and Parliament House, both upon my
back; but, come, one at once, and I Will deal with them both, one after another,
as well and as fast as I can.

First then, I say, in general, that any Decree under Heaven, that is either
unlawful, or Impossible to be obeyed, is not at all Obligatory: This is so
plain, that it needs no further Proof, it is like the Light of the Sun,
self-evident; if the Sun shine, no man doubts it, but he that is blind, or
winks on purpose, lest he should be convinced. And as to that Article, viz. The
Church has power to enjoin Ceremonies -- it confounds all the Ceremony-mongers
amongst us. And in all my Travels, Reading, and Discourses, I never met with
any Man; Bishop, Priest, or Layman, that ever did, could, or durst explain
what is there meant by Church.

If it be taken for the Clergy, either in (or out of) Convocation, or Synod,
viz. That they have of themselves a Jus Divinum, a Divine Right, to enjoin
Ceremonies to the People of England, they all incur a Praemunire, that claim
such a Power, and justly, for they there by set up a Legislative power,
independent of, and distinct from the King and Parliament, (the only
Legislators) and is of most pernicious Consequence, and found to be so in all
Ages; And by the Statutes of Provisors, made both by Popish and Protestant
Kings and Parliaments, condemned as most pernicious and insufferable, by
invading the only Legislative power, [Kings, Lords, and Commons] the great
Fundamental of our Government, and setting up a Thing called, A Church,
independent of, and equal with, or above the State, and bearding the State, if
it be so bold as not to please them, or should dare to displease them. Better
it is, not to be a State, than to be such a pitiful State, at this precarious
rate, that dare not but be Priestridden: Our Noble Ancestors, in Popish Times,
scorned the motion, and were true English Men: This distinction of Church and
State, is a Popish and pernicious distinction; two higher powers is one too
much.

But if by the Church in that Article, be meant, the King and Parliament, the
Representatives of the whole Body of the people, the Convocation and
Canon-makers will by no means acknowledge that; for that makes them Ciphers,
and [as many people account them] useless Tools: And never did King and
Parliament, neither, make Laws coercive in matters of Religion, or Uniformity
in Religion, but Confusion, Divisions, Schisms, Tumults, Sedicion, Blood,
Ruin, and civil Wars, were the dismal consequences in England; whereas there
would be none of these, no dissentions, no penalties, no complaining in our
Streets, if the Legislative power, unsuborned by Priestcraft, make no Laws but
what are proper for their cognizance, and for the peace, welfare, good manners,
and good abearing in the State: And then, where there is no Law, there can be
no Transgression; and those odious Names of Dissension and Sedition, Conformist
and Nonconformist, will find an eternal Grave.

I Will give but one Instance in that same Act of Uniformity, which requires all
Clergymen to give their assent and consent to all and every thing (for Truth)
which is contained in the Common Prayer Book.

But, who made the Kings and Parliaments of England infallible Popes, since the
Church of England confesses she may Err?

And how irrational and unaccountable is it for men that confess their
ignorance, and yet with the same mouth will vote a Law, or Imposition of their
Sense in Religion upon all Mankind under their Jurisdiction? For ought they
know, they may command and enact that all Clergymen shall assent in their
Judgments, and consent in their Wills, to a palpable error, lie, or untruth; or
else, take their choice, to starve, lie down and die; for Farm they may not,
Thrash they cannot, and if they Beg, they are sent to Bridewel.

And this is our very case this day; We may not choose what Chapters for
Lessons, what Collects, Epistles and Gospels, we list to read, but must read
those that are appointed for the day: And the last year they were all falsely
appointed, or else those words in the Common Prayer Book are false, that fixes
and ascertains Easter Sunday (the Era, or beginning of the Account, whence all
the Lessons, Collects, Episties and Gospels, are computed, nominated, and
appointed).

But that is not only silly, and uncertain, but false and contradictory in the
Common Prayer book, and therefore both the said Aera's cannot be true. As for
example, by one Common Prayer Book Rule, the last Easter Sunday should have
been kept upon April 8, because Easter Sunday (whence all other Feasts,
Lessons, Collects, are computed all the year after) is always the first Sunday
next after the first Full Moon which happens after March 25, which was April 8,
last past: But by another Rule in the Common prayer Book, it was (and so we
kept it) upon April 15 last past.

They cannot both be true, but one of them is a Mathematical untruth, (and
which no body can deny); yet Bishops and Curats must all assent and consent,
that this falsehood is a truth, and such a falsehood it is, and of so evil
consequence, that it makes a blunder, and confounds all our wise Methods of
uniformity in Common Prayers, Episties, Gospels, and Lessons: And if we do not
confess and subscribe that this falsehood and untruth is (...) truth, then
starve and dir.

I can give several other instances of our irrational Doctrine and Discipline,
but I am loath to offend, let them even go on, they will give me but little thanks
for my pains already; but, I thank God, I do not find the fault, to expose it
to shame, but to cure it, I know how: And, let me tell you, it requires some
skill in the Cure, Why may not Lightning sometime come from a black Cloud? and
a dull By-stander see better sometime, than he that play? Some part of that
seven-hill'd City (Rome) is situated in a Vale, as well as Westminster Hall;
and therefore no wonder (...) sometimes both of them be in a Fog.

And if it abate the proved, pragmatical, imposing, self-conceited, dogmatical
and imperious Spirit, that confounds the whole Creation by Methods and Aims of
Uniformity, point blank against those different Measurer of God and Nature, it
is well.

CHAP. III. Concerning Bishops.
WHat I am going to speak concerning Bishops, may the more favorably be
received, because so contrary to self-interest, the worst of evil Counselors.

For why may not I, as well as any other, live in hopes of a pair of Lawn
Sleeves, rightly put on, since nothing else keeps me from making as good a
Speech in the House of Lords, as that which of late was only a Speech without
Doors; and proves so genuine and well aimed, that all of it (...) (now a Speech
within Doors. However I could serve as well as the best, to make up the number
of the Yea's or No's: And that is all the wise Speech that some men ever did
make: (I do not say) that ever they can make; for the more frugal any man is,
and the less he spends, the greater is his Stock.

But if I had been so hasty as to bespeak the Lawn-Sleeves, this Sheet (that I
am going to write) will spoil all my finery* And certainly there cannot be such
a Fool in England, or the World, as to think that the King's Letters Patents,
or Conge de Slyer, can make the Baronet or the Bishop, a Linguist, or a Learned
Man, except he was so before, though usually the Vulgar are of Opinion; that if
a Bishop, or a Lord says it, writes or preaches it, O Heavenly! because O
Earthly? and is a Judgment as preposterous a^ that Action of the Orator, when
pointing to the Earth, he declaimed -- O Caelum!

But, it is a received Maxim, -- No Bishop, no King: I know not who invented
it, but it may be true, in some sense; but it is false, If it be meant -- no
Rich Bishop, no King; for that the Rich Bishops were so Rich, that what with
the Hank they got upon silly Men's Consciences, and the Interest that their
Lands, good Leases, and Dependencies, their Tenants, Servants, and Friends,
they were so prevalent, when united, that, when our Kings have (sometimes) been
so hardy and boid as to displease them, they have either taken the Crown from
his Head, (as the Rich Bishop of winchester unking'd his Brother King Stephen)
on whose Head that Nimrod of a Clergyman had, without any right, clapped it on;
and upon displeasure, the Bishop chiefly unking'd him again, and (in effect)
spurned (...) off, as Pandolfus the Popes Nuncio, did the ^rown off King John's
Head, which say grovelling at his Foot, whilst the proud Prelat, put it on: and
to show the Ecclesiastical Insolence of some Lawn-Sleeves, he up with his foot,
and kick't it off from the Kings Head.

So that -- no Bishop -- no King ( Stephen, or John) and a Bishop -- no King (
Stephen, or John); for that Rich Bishops, like other Rich Lords, are a Strength
to the Crown, when it does not displease them; and on the contrary, have been
too great and dangerous when controlled, growing musty and morose; a King had
as good be a Slave in Turkey, as to be at the mercy of such Popish-like
Ecclesiastical Pride.

Nay, did not the very Dean of westminster, and the Archbishop of York
(chiefly, though with others bandyed) make the Reign of Hen. 4. and Hen. 5.
very uncasie? For which cause the wise King Henry 7. Invented a way to pull
down the Stomachs of the great Temporal Lords with their own hands, by enabling
them to alienate and sell their Lands; of which many were so glad, that it was
the first Bargain they would make, [to chuse]; away runs the Footman for the
Usurer and Scrivener, who were as glad to buy as the other to sell, when both
sides are willing, the Bargain is soon struck up, and Time was unwing'd till
the Entail was dockt.

Then his Son Hen. 8. he reformed the Clergy with a Witness, and pocketed up
the Reformation by Act of Parliament; and excluded from the House of Lords, all
the spirtual Lords Abbots, and ^ut their Lands in his Pocket by Statute Law.
Edw. 6. and Queen Elizabeth, were his own Children too; for they, and their
wise Counsel, finding, that though the Spiritual Lords [Abbors] were excluded
the House of Lords, yet the other Spiritual Lords [Bishops] were so proud
sometimes, and high; that no Body could imagine them to be the best Disciples
of Christ; who was meek and lowly; therefore Edw. 6. took at once from the
Archbishop of York, about 37 great Manors; and were annexed to the Crown; and
Queen Elizabeth, amongst other things, took all the Lands belonging to the
Prince Palatine of Ely (Bishop, in the Vacancy, and gave 2000 l. to be paid out
of the Exchequer, Annually, a sufficient Competency, and an Injury to no Man,
for the Bishopric was in Abayance, as the Law calls it, in nubibus, it being
in posse any, bodies, but in esse no bodies.

So that I also am so much a Friend to that Proverb -- No Bishop, no King --
and so very much a Friend to Bishops, that where there is one now in England, I
wish there were twenty; and as old as I am, I hope to live to see it: and yet
not take one Farthing from the present Incumbenrs, nor in the least diminish
the vast Revenues and Grandeur of, my Lords, the Bishops that are in
possession; let them keep it (I say) till they die; and die they must, and then
their Bishoprics being vacant, (by Death however, if not sooner justly
forfeited) it will be no Injury to any Man, to share out and divide the vast
Incomes to many Bishops, who must take the pains, and perform the Work of a
Bishop, in their proper persons, which is now done by Proxies, Sureties, and
Implicit Faith.

And, I doubt not but that all my Lords the Bishops would be of my mind herein,
as to the Work of a Bishop, which they themselves; and all Englishmen, find to
be so great a Work, and a Burden so much too heavy for any single Shoulder,
that they are forced to perform the great Acts of a Bishop, in Ordinations,
Confirmations, Excommunications, Absolutions, etc. only by Foppish as well as
Popish like Implicit Faith, seeing with other Men's Eyes, and hearing with
other Men's Ears, that it is no wonder that they err so often.

Oh! but the Wages then must be divided, as well as the Work, Flesh and Blood
cannot bear this Doctrine:

No, it cannot; therefore Flesh and Blood cannot enter (neither) into the
Kingdom of Heaven: But a Bishop (of all others) ought not to consult with Flesh
and Blood, and self-Interest, which above all things in the World does bribe
Men's Judgments, that they cannot (because they will not) give their Assent and
Consent to so great a Truth.

King Charles I. was tenaciously in love with Bishops, as now in England
constituted, even to death, so great was his Opinionatree in the Case; and yet
he says, they were not Bishops Jure Divino, by Divine Right, and yet neither
contra Jus Divinum: But, I think quite contrary, viz. that ^here is nothing in
Scripture more plain, than that Bishops are Jure divino, and nothing more plain
than that the Bishops in Eng^and, now constituted, are contrary (absolutely
contrary) to Jus Divi^um: or Divine Right, so far as they act like Novices in
Implicit Faith: Tim. 3.3. A Bishop must neither be a Novice, nor given to
filthy ^ucre. For any B^y-Bishop, any ignorant and unlearned Bishop is as ^ood
as the best, in those Acts of Implicit Faith; any Novice can see ^ith other
Men's Eyes, and hear with other Men's Ears; any Novice can, and the greater
Novice the fitter too, believe as others believe, without any other Reason.

Therefore, since the Holy Scripture says, a Bishop ought not to be a Novice;
if he be a Novice, that sees but by Implicit Faith; then tell me, count them
if you can, How many Novices have we in England that do all their greatest Acts
by Implicit Faith? This is as bold a Stroke, you will say, as ever was; and yet
not a jot too bold to strike at so Grand, so Poppish, so Popish a Folly, as
Implicit Faith; by which, it must be granted, and cannot be denied, our
protestant Bishops do all their mighty Businesses, and is the cause of such a
contemptible and ignorant Glergy, ill grounded Excommunications and
Absolutions, and ^apias's thereupon; and such unscriptural, irrational, and
Blind Confirmations, persuading the Ignorant that they are fit to receive the
other Sacrament of of the Lord's Supper, when they know nothing of the Creed;
and sometimes were never listed or matriculated into Mother Church by the
Initiating Ordinance of Baptism.

But that is the Fault of the Person, not of the Constitution; If that were
true, it might be amended; but it is false, for it is not the Fault of the
Person only, but the Fault of the Constitution, which obliges no Bishop in his
Office, and performance of these great Episcopal Acts, but only to the
knowledge of a Novice, or implicit Faith.

Nay, if our Constitution did oblige him, it would oblige him to
Impossibilities, for his Work is more than any Mortal can perform in propria
persona; and the great charge of Souls, which he takes upon him, more terrible,
if his Conscience be awake, or not bribed with the Wages, it must be sensible,
that no Plety, Parts, or Prudence can possibly discharge, except as now, by
implicit Faith, which any Bay, a^ Child, a^ Nevice can perform as well as the
best.

It was Covetousness therefore, and Ambition, that first made Bishoprics so
large (for the sake of making all the Bishops Lands therein one Man's
Monopoly); and also made Bishops Consciences so large, as to gape and swallow
all, the relishing Bit was so gustful and grateful to a greedy Gut; but from
the beginning it was not so.

Now every County must have a Bishop, nay, sometimes two, or three, or four
Counties will scarcely hold one great Bishop, nay, to them too, must be added
sometimes a Rich Deanery. Is it not strange that a Bishop should be a Deacon
again, for the Money sake, and a Parson again by Commendum, for the sake of some
bulky Parsonage, like Wiggin in Lancashire, in Commendum held by Dr. Cartwright
Bishop of Chester, now advanced to be a non-such Protestant Reader in Popish
France, and Curat to a Popish Prince in the Protestant Chapel in the Castle of
Merli.

And I am persuaded they will have the Grace to blush, if it do not also make
their heartsake before I have done, at the horrible Burden they have
undertaken, which the Shoulders of the strongest and ablest Apostles of Christ
never did or durst renture to take upon themselves, no Mortal ever did or can
discharge it, but in this Novice way, by Proxy, or blind Implicit Faith; God,
in his Mercy, forgive them, they know not what they do.

Philippi. (nay, Jerusalem) a little scanty City, not so big and populous as
Colchester by half, and yet had several Bishops at a time therein; Philip 1.1.
To all the Saints which art at Philippi, with the Bishops and Deacons. How many
Bishops of London, at this rate, must there needs be in London, not to mention
the three Counties of Hartford, Essex, and Middlesex, into the bargain.

Ay, but the House of Lords will not hold so many Bishops.

No, I grant! There are Bishops ^now there already, as some have laid, and
angerly grudge that we Clergymen (who are as much represented in the House of
Commons, as any Commoners in England, and make as great a bustle at an Election
of Members, to get Men for our turn) should also be represented in the other
House, which no other Commoners are; and that my Lords the Bishops are tried by
their Peers, that is, by their Equals, Commoners, but the Lords are Conciliarii
Nati: It is part of their Inheritance to be the King's Counselors, and a Seat
in the House of Lords is part of their Estate and State. But such Men talk like
those that say, that we had English Parliaments before Bishops and Abbots sat
in the House of Lords, and many Statutes (the Judges say are good Law) tho made
in several Parliaments, excluso Clear, the Lord-Bishops and Lord-Abbots being
shut out of Doors, and not permitted into the House of Lords; nay, the Lord
Abbots that had as good and as ancient Right to sit in the House of Lords, as
Lord-Bishops, are Long ago, and to this day excluded? Notwithstanding my known
Devotion to my Lords the Bishops, (I confess) I have not skill enough to answer
such Reasons and Records; It behooves them that have more wit, and are more
concerned than I, to give this a Rational Answer; I consels my Ignorance, but
my Devotion to them is well enough known.

And I cannot deny, but that the Bookish-men (as my Lords are bred) and usually
Fellows of Colleges, by that state they take upon them in the College, all
but themselves going bare to them, if they do but see them at the further end
of the Court, let it Hail, Snow or Blow; this inclines Men to be pedantickly
proud ever after (I knew it too experimentally) being made a fellow of Gonvil
and Cajus College in Cambridge, when I was but Junior-Batchelor, and not 19
Years of Age, till Travel and Experience in the World (which all Bishops have
not) refines this Insolence, and makes it more sociable and complaisant.

But let no Man envy the Liberality of our Ancestors, in endowing the Bishops
and Universities so plentifully: a few that are truly worthy and Learned Men
may well compound for the generality of a contemptible Clergy; that would not
have been so truly contemptible, but that my Ceremony-monger in bad Reigns got
possession too often of the Steeple, the lostiest Piece of the Church, by
Popish-likes and Foppish Ceremonies; and then it behooved him to keep open the
Door by which he entered, to such only, as were like him, and followed his
Steps, and ezclude all others to his uttermost, whose Virtues and true Learning
must necessarily [if set near him) ruddy his Cheeks, and make him blush for
shame.

But crafty young Lads finding that easy way to the Wood, and that it was much
more easy and profitable to go to a Dancing-school, than to the Laborious
Schools of Worth, and Crabbed Learning, to which it is so difficult and not so
unprofitable (as times has been) to bend the ^^nd; and also so very s^cile,
honorable and beneficial to bend his Body, in filly Cringings and Bowings;
farewell Books, says he, and dry, unprofitable Studies, I Will go to the
Ecclesiastical Dancing-school, and commence Doctor Ignoramus.

Hence it is, that our Wise Men of England have made our English Bishoprics
out of two poor words in Tit. 1.5. (...); ill understood; in every City making
Elders (or Bishops) says St. Paul to- Titus, as I have appointed thee; (...),
^u every City.

Thence it is, that such a pother wa^ made to make such a little Town' as
Carlisle, a City, for why? Forsooth, and Colchester an Ancient City, and twenty
times bigger than Carlisle, to dwindle to a Village, for why? Forsooth.

Because every Bishops See must be a City. ((...)) and but one City in a
Bishop^ick, and therefore little Ca^lisle must be a City, and Colchester, which
to my knowledge is Ten times bigger, and Forty times more Rich and Populous,
must dwindle from a City (as Anciently it was the only City of Essex) and why?

(...) has done its business, City and Bishoprics must be Convert^es, and
London being the greater City and Bishops See, or Seat, E^go etc. (...), which
I confess, Origin (lib. 8. contrae Celsum) does Paraphra^, (...) much like
Chrysostom (...) 1 Tom. Homil. 1 in every City; thus the Lifeless Feather of
on (...), consumes an other Feathers that are near it, and in the Nest; whereas
not only the hest Greek Authors, but the Holy Scripture, confounds the word
(...) and (...) a Village and a City, in several places, both in the Old and
New Testament; as for Instance, in 1 Chronicles. 4.32. their Villages were Five
Cities, ( Exam, and^)

So, in the New Testament, St. Luke calls Bethlehem, (...) the City of David,
(Luke 2.4 but St. John calls it (...) the Village of David and I'l^ call
Bethlebem, as I Will give Colchester a Name too (why not? Since I have helped to
Christen a great part of the Town these Seven and Twenty Years) (...), a City,
Town, though the Bishops See or Seat at the great City of London, has taken its
good Name from it most Scandalously and nureasonably, to give it to little
Carlisle for the sake of (...); a word, the Ceremony mongers never right
understood, they were so busy about Ceremonies they had no more leisure to
understand, Tit. 1.5. than Philip. 2.10. both of them falsely Interpreted, and
the latter falsely constructed, and falsely Translated, either through
Ignorance or fraud, to make room for a Nonsensical Ceremony.

There were 1000 Bishops in Armenia, says Baron^us (ad An. 1145.) And Justinian
the Emperor ( Petravon, and Novel. 31. c. 1.) says, there were but Twenty
Cities in Armenia in his time, and they have decreast ever since; how could
1000 Bishops then Sit in Twenty Cities, except there were many Bishops in one
City, or many Bishops in Villages and small Towns?

Nay, to go no further than Ireland, St. Patrick Founded there 365 Churches,
and as many Bishops, says Nemius, and also Bishop Usher, late Primate of
Armagh; and yet there never were 365 Cities, and now but Ninteen.

In St. Augustin's Time there were 900 Bishops in Africa (August. Tom. 7. de
^estis cum Emerit.)

And yet not half so many Cities, and many of the Cities in St. Augustin's Time
were Heathens; nay, the Inhabitants of the famous City in Syriae, called
Heliopolis, were all Idol^ to or (...) ( Theodores lib. 4. c. 29. Eccles.
Hist.) (...) nor a Man of them would hear (says Peter of Alexandria) the Name
of Christ.

And yet there was then a Bishop of Heliopolis, says Bishop Eusebius Pamphilus
(vit. Constantine l. 3. c. 5.6.) a Bishop, that had a Flock like that of Bishop
Mills, in Arabia, who had not got one Convert in his City, nor any thing else
but blows ( Sozom. l. 2 c. 12.) these two Bishops had fewer Souls by Seven in
their Diocese to Excommunicate than Bishop Ischyras, who had but just Seven,
whereas our Diocesses are as much too big, nay. Moustrously too big, as the
other too little; Is there no measure in us? No Medium? No middle way for true
Virtue, which always sits Enthroned betwixt the two Extreama?

In Gospel Times, the Bishops were chosen by the People, and most Voices
carried it for two, of which God chose one by Lot, the Lot fell upon Matthias,
and 260 Years after ( Cyprian tells us) that all the People, that is, the
Majority consented, or else no Bishop was chosen, Cyprian l. 2. Epist 5.
Convocat^ plebe tot^, and de universae fraternitatis suffra^io, and Caec^lianus
was chosen Bishop of Carthage, totius populi suffragio, Optat. lib. 1. by the
general Vote of the People. No Man was Excommunicated, ( Cyprian lib. 3. Ep.
14.) nisi causam acturus apud universam plebem? Not every sneaking Register,
and peaking Surrogate could send a Soul to Satan, for refusing or neglecting to
give the Knave a Groat, or the like; brave Ecclesia^^ical Discipline of Church
of England! It is just so in Spain and Portugal, but not so bad as here in our
(said to be) Reformed Church of England; Reformed? In what? Oh! the Service
Book is in English, and made Intelligible by the Peoples alternate babbling,
like those illegal Irrational, and unscriptural Mock-songs of the Singing-men,
and Singing boys, to feed which Mouthing Tribe, so vast an Income is Yearly
thrown away in Gathedrais, that would easily supply, together with the Sleepy
Prebendaries when Vacant, all the scandalous Livings in England.

For what Heart can a poor Minister of Twenty, or Thirty pound per annum have
to Study? (A Carpenter Journey man has more) besides out of that, Synodals,
Procurations, First Fruits, Tenths, Delapidations, Repairs, Poor-Rates, Arms,
Assesments and Taxes, besides a great deal of Money most unconscionably to the
Rich Bishop, or his Secretary, for Ordination, Seven or Eight pound more for
Institution to the Bishop, then to the Rich Archdeacon for Induction, etc.
though he seldom or never stirs one foot about it, but he and his Register
agree to Pocket up the Money, these charges Preliminary must be paid, out of
the poor Pittance, and Trade he cannot, Farm he may not, nay, Beg he may (...);
Starve he may, except his great Task be to Study how to get Bread, Drink and
Clothes, and how to keep out of his Creditors Clutches, Sergeants and Bum
bailiffs; This is his greatest Study, and closest concern; If he can spare a
Sixpence or two to buy a Printed Sermon, his Study has Books enough; whilst the
Lazy Fat Prebend and Ceremony-monger, with two Livings, a Prebendry, or Deanery,
and Arch-Deaconry, and two or three more (unseen) Incomes, Advantages and
Pluralities, Drink Wine in Bowls, and is not affected with the affliction of
Joseph, but as Red in the Gills as a Turky-cock, or his Searler hood, ever
since he was made Doctor by Mandamus, or the Morrocco Ambassador.

Virtue and Learning always Shoot low. If there he not some high, and glorious
Mark set to aim at? Never greater Warriors in the World, nor more Succesful
than the Old Romans: Why? They were not so big as the Gauls, much less then the
Germans, nay, less then the little Don Diego the Spaniard, yet Conquered them
all, wherefore? The Historian tells us, by the great Triumphs, Privileges and
Rewards they gave the Emperors or Generals, with all his Soldiers, which made
them Fight like Mad.

This is certain; Would you have a good Army? Pay them well: A Learned
Ministry? Pay them well; but do not permit (as they do in some Fish Ponds) Ten
or Twenty great Jacks to devour all the small Fry: Yet too great Preferment
breaks a good Back by over loading it; A Scanty mean, Presbyterlan-level of
Preferments, makes Scanty and mean Scholars, (for who will mend his pace and
pains, when fast or flow is all one, all of a price, all of one Reckonine?) And
poor Scandalous Livings must make a poor and Scandalous Glergy, and reduce us
again to Barbarism.

How would such a Primitive episcopacy as I have shown here, Reconcile the
difference betwixt Presbyterians, and Episcoparians, and so truly construe
that saying of Jerome (Epist. ad Evagrium) I know not what a Bishop has more
than a Presbyter, except Ordination; which is by our Bishops, for want of
Numbers, now performed by ^he laying on the Hands of the Presbyters, in
Conjunction with the great Bishop, who yet knew no more of the matter, as to
the Fitness of the Person Ordained, than the Bishop himself, viz. by Implicit
Faith in oculo Episcopi, called Mr. Archdeacon, or some Surrogate (as is
usual) in his Room.

The Apostle Paul from Miletus sent to Ephesus, and called the Elders of the
Church, Acts 20.17. which are there called, ver. 28. Bishops.

Nay, Mr. Mede, in his proof for Churches, in the second Century, evidences,
That no one Bishop had more than one Altar, and that o^e Bishop, and one Altar
were Correlates.

But Pride, Avarice, and the Pope (first) made one Bishop serve many Altars, by
Curates and Journey-men, and in requital they made the Pope, The one great
Bishop of Bishops, [Papa] as every bulky Bishop is usually Styled in our
Ecclesiastical Histories, a Pope, Pater Patrum, ^ay, the Pope himself called
our great Bishop of Canterbury, alterius orbis Papa.

And Mr. Fuller, a great Friend to our Episcopacy, confesses (in his History of
the Holy War, lib. 2. c. 2. p. 45, 46.) that Bishops were set (of old) too
thick for all to grow, Tall, and to such a Height, as now, and Palestine fed
too many Cathedral Churches to have them generally fat: Lidda, Jamnia and
Joppa, three Episcopal Towns, were within four Miles one o^ another, ^^d surely
many of their Bishops, to use Bishop Langham's expression, had high Racks, but
poor Mangers; (Ay! this alone will breed the quarrel against all that I have
said; my lean Project starves greedy Avarice, that will be ready to eat me for
my pains; well, actum est de Episcopatu meo* this is not the way for me to get
a pair of dainty Lawn sl^eves,) I have read my own Doom, and may use the Words
of Bishop Chrysostom upon Heb. 13.17. (...). The fear of that threatening [as
they that must give an account] makes my ^ul to tremble continually: And the
p^ous Learned Bishops will thank me heartily; and those that are otherwise may
live to amend: Here, has been a sad do with some of them in this poor Kingdom,
and all, to keep up that Eccles^^stica^ Grandeur that God never made; which
makes Chrys^stome say [in Hev. Hom. 34.] I wonder how it is possible for a
Bishop, ^o go to Heaven, or to be saved.

Read se^^ously his Homilles in Tit. in Act. in Heb. and if thou have Grace,
thou will not so strive so for a Bishopric; and if thou have not Grace, thou
arr not fit for a Parish Priest; to whom Bishops allow no part of Discipline or
Government, they are are only to Feed, not to Rule the Flock: But the Learned
Fuller proceeds -- after this Interruption, Neither let it stagger the Reader,
if in that Catalogue of Tyrius, we light on many Bishops Seats, which are not
to be found in Mercator, Ortelius, or any other Geographer; for some of them
were such poor places, that they were ashamed to appear in a Map, and fell so
much under a Geographers notice, that they fell not under it: No, but as little
as (...) [ pace tua, quaint Mr. Fuller] it is a great Bull] for in that Age
Bishops had their Sees at poor and contemptible Villages.

The Apostles, Paul and Barnabas, ordained Eiders, Bishops, In every City, at
Antioch, Iconium, Derbe and Lystra, the three last are there called Cities,
Acts 14.

Antioch was a great City, the third in the World, but in that almost all the
Christian Inhabitants could meet together in one place to hear a Sermon. Act.
13.44 And I^onium was but a small Village, says Strabo, l. 12. (...), or (...):
And Derbe, only a Citadel in Isauria and Lystra, only (...). ^ Village in
Isauria too; And, as for the Names of Bishops and Presbyters, or Elders, of
Aldermen, they are in holy Writ Indifferently used, to signify one and the
same Grand Seigniour: Why are the Arians so condemned by the Orthodox, as
Theodor, Synod. ep. l. 2. c. 8. for not being contented with small Bishoprics,
and no bigger than a Bishop might superintend in his own person, If Rapin be no
sin?

It was never ^ good World, since ^he Clergy and Layety drove on two several
Interests, and two Bodies distinct, and made the Church one thing, and the
State another; If the Clergy endeavor to keep the people in subjection, and
under their Girdle Canonical, by Impositions, Canons, and Acts of Uniformity;
endeavoring to Lord it over God's Heritage the Layety; no wonder, that they
strugle for life and liberty, and that the Feuds and Animosities betwixt them
are Immortal; but they would die, cease and decease, If Clergymen studied to
restore sinners and erroneous persons in the spirit of meekness.

Ay, but the obstinate will not so be restored; then, let him alone, perhaps he
knows more than thou do, that art his Teacher; However, to his own Master he
stands or falls, and thou by giving him Warning have delivered thy Soul; as
to matters of Faith and Opinion; but as to evil works, that is the Magistrates
Province and care to correct and punish.

But, if we cannot fright our Parishoners, they will not care a Pin for us.

No? (you should say) they do not care for you, nor love you, because you are
such Scare-crows, and Bug bears, that would be; If they fear you only, they will
never love you: Do but labor diligently in the Word and Doctrine, and fear
not, but that all good men will give thee of all men living (as the Apostle
says, double honor, which is due to a Ruling Elder, much more to the Ministers
that labor in the Word and Doctrine; though with us. (quite contrary to
Scripture) The Ruling Elder, or Bishop, is the man of double Honor amongst us,
and the Pastor, or Teaching Elder, must ^carce keep his Har^on in the presence
of the great Ruling Bishop, to who^ the Apostle indeed commands us to give
double honor but more especially to the Ministers or Pastors, that Labor in
the Word and Doctrine: Those are the most honorable, the most reverend Jure
divino, if you believe the holy Scriptures. But Fops mind chiefly who speaks,
not wha^ is spoken, if it be the word of a Lord, It is with them more valued
and obeyed, than the Word of the LORD.

These are unjust and corrupt Judges; but, I will not punish them, (if I had
power) as King Cambyses did one of his unjust Judges of the King's Bench, viz.
pulled his Skin over his Ears, stuf^ it with Straw, and there Hung my Gentleman
over the Bench, in terrorem, that other Tresylians might learn to beware of
undermining (the chief Pillar of any Government) the Fundamental Laws.

Since therefore, to give a Ruling Elder or Bishop more honor than a Paster,
or a good Preacher, is expressly against holy Writ, as aforesaid, look you to
that; but that great Scripture, which they bring to prove, that every City had
a Bishop, and but one Bishop, and every Bishop had but one City, you see by
what has been said, both these assertions are sufficiently proved to be false:
though we had no other instance than in Tit. 1.5. For this cause left I thee in
Greet, to ordain Bishops, (...) (that is) (...): Greet, is an Island that (...)
a hundred Cities, and was therefore called (...) in the Reign of Leosophus the
Emperor, and Anno 880. there were but Twelve Bishops; but all that time, why
should we imagine that they were all Christians? when the third great City of
the Empire, Antioch, where Disciples were first called Christians, and bigger
than any City, except Rome and Alexandria, yet had no more Christians in is,
than one Church will hold, Acts 13.44. Nay, Jerusalem (where our Lord was
Crucified) had so few Christians forty years after, at the destruction
thereof, that all the Christians being warned by God to depart, did depart to
Pella; a poor little Village, says Eusebius (lib. 3. c. 5.) held them all.

But, we will take it for granted, that Titus ordained in every City (in the
Island of Creet) a Bishop, namely a hundred: And, which is not at all likely,
that all were Christians (for till Constantines time, one Church held all the
Christians in Rome; and one great Church in Alexandria held all the Christians
there, as their Bishop Athanasius gives an account in his Epistle to
Constantius, the Son of Constanine) yet Heylin in his Cosmeg. p. 263, says,
There are in Creet but two hundred and seven Parishes, then by that account the
great Bishops will get but a Plurality, two Parishes for their Diocesses.

And ever since, that Bishops first Monopoliz'd so many Parishes, all under
their Ecclesiastical Government: There has been no Ecclesiastical Government at
all, but a mere Anarchy and confusion, as at this day, and has been the
occasion of setting up so many Independent Churches, to the care of themselves
and one another, for whom the Ruling Bishop could not poisibly take care;
E^grossing all Government, we have none at all but some silly face of it, in a
poor surrogate and Register, that minds little else than to singer the Pence,
and shear the poor Clergy and Churchwardens twice a year, in Visitations, etc.
Deliver your Purse; Poor Sheep escape better than we, they are clipped but once a
year, and the Master that seeds them has the Wool, but they that shear us poor
Lambs, take our Wool, but seed us not; they have it for nothing, and their
great Revenues will not satisfy, but (as I said in my naked truth) It is not a
sin for a rich man to rob the Spittle?

Let such hard hearted Clergymen, who have such exceeding many Flocks and
Herds, read their Neck Verse, 2 Samuel 12.5, 6. In Nathan's Parable of the Lamb,
and the Sentence.

And David's anger was greatly Kindled against the man, and he said to Nathan,
As the Lord lives, the man that has done this thing shall surely die; and he
shall restore the Lamb four fold, because he did this thing, and because he had
no pity.

And, what do they visit for? To see that all be Uniform; Pish! it is not to be
done; they themselves are not Uniform, nor their Cathedral Worship Uniform with
one another, nor with Country Churches, nor with the Act of Uniformity; And
what harm? So all things be done decently, and in order, it needs not, by order
of Uniformity; Nay, Pope Gregory the (...) Six hundred years after Christ,
commends variety of Usages, In una fide nibil officit -- Sanctae Ecclesiae
diversa consuetudo.

Let them show us one such Diocesan Bishop as we have got in England, In the
best and purest Times, or one Bishop that ever durst pretend to Govern the
Church by Implicit Faith in others, for the first three hundred years, or any
thing like it, In holy Scriptures or any reason for it, or any possibility to
discharge that heavy charge; And I Will strike out Avarice and Ambition, as the
great cause, and Surrogate a better Reason in the room, and be their Profe^^te;
Nay, I Will stoop lower, I Will condescend to be my Lord's the Bishops Chaplain,
and Apologist.

But, If all their skill cannot do it, then it is high time to Recant and
Repent, that iniquity may not be our ruin: and to restore the Lamb fourfold:
and because rich Dives had no more pity of his brethren, whom the rich Diocesan
calls (according to the Style in the Primitive Church) Reverend Brother, and
Brother, but looks over the head of his Brother Elder, or Presbyter, as if a
Conge d'Fslier had made him a Saul, and higher by the Head, when he only Struts
(being Rich) and stands a Tip-toe, but is not a better man, nor a better
Scholar than he was before.

It may binder his Worth and Learning, rather, by Avocations, running from
Ordinations, to the House of Lords, thence to the Council Chamger, thence to
confirmations, thence to Visitations, etc. If these do not hinder a Man's Study
and Improvement, I have lost my aim.

Let them but Read Mr. Baxter's Learned Book of Episcopacy, or Archbishop
C^^nmer's Opinion or Ordination; This latter a Learned and Holy Martyr, The
former a most Learned and pious Confessor; or let them bu^ read the New
Testament, and there is little or no difference at all, betwixt a Presbyter, or
Elder and Bishop; what in one Verse is called Presbyter, in the next is called
Bishop; as Bethlehem the Town, is the same with Bethlehem the City aforesaid:
And a Parish signified the same with Dioce^s.

But, in alter ^^mes, when Christians Multiplied, if a Presbyter could not
Watch over all their Souls, they allowed him a Co-adjutor, and for distinction
and Precedence sake called him a Bishop, who sometimes had not one Presbyter
under him, as aforesaid, most commonly, but one; and till Bishops begun to
Scramble for more Ground, and like other Princes to enlarge their Dominions and
Jurisdictions, which was not till the Emperor Constantine made them so bigg,
that in the Fourth Century, the great Work of Councils and synods was
Perambulation, to Mark out the Bounds of the^ (...), their Parishes or
Diocesses, to keep the Peace bet wixt the Encroaching Bishops in that Fourth
Century, called Ambitionis seculum, The Ambitious Century; not that Bishops in
after Ages grew more humble, or were Ensamples to the Flock, in Self-denial,
Modesty, Humility and Contempt of Worldly Grandeur, and (as they say they Vowed
in Baptism) to forsake the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanitles of
this Wicked World, etc. But then (first) they begun to be ambitious of large
Diocesses more than possibly they could ((...) or,) oversee; then they got
Journey-men, and Surrogates, and Registers, and Apparitors, and all that Tribe;
to Feed whom, the Church Wardens are the Spaniels (Sworn) to Hunt and Flush the
Game, that the hovering Jar-Faulcon, the Register, may Pounce them, (there is
all) and make a Prey of Poor Sinners, never to be Redeemed, but by Silver or
Gold.

The Golden Key always gets Absolution, which in Gospel Times, and the
Primitive Times, never was purchased but with Tears, in the midst of the
congregation (as Jerome of Fabiola, ep. ad ocean. Episcopo, Presbyteris, and
omni p^puio Collachry-mantibus, etc. The Bishops, Presbyters, and all the
People Weeping for Joy at those Peultent Tears; and at the Return of the
Prodigal, mixing their Tears with his. ( Heb. 13.17.) Obey them that Rule over
you, for they Watch for your Souls, as they that must give an Account, etc. A
woeful and sad Account must that Bishop make, when God calls him to give an
Account, which will be very shortly, of his Bishopric, for he shall be no
longer Bishop; Howought he to Tremble at the Thoughts of it? When in ^^ead of
Watching for the Souls committed to his Charge, he has only wa^ch't for their
Pu^^es; And instead of Guiding them, he has sent out Doctor's Commons-men to
Watch all England over in the Bishops Room: we Trace them by the Footing, at a
Visitation, etc. What have they been doing? Citing. Admonishing,
Excommunicating, Jayling, Absolving, (this Twenty Nine long Years) in all this
Kingdom; What ^en^^en^s have they made? What Penance? What Repentance? Is it
not a great Cheer that defeats all Repentance? By Commuting (as the Papists and
we say) turning the Whores Sins (by which she got Money, they Joy in her* for
they go Ships) into Money, and a few great Whores are ^how to Maintain all the
Ecclesiastical free-booters in Doctors-Commons, she is the Thief that Pick's
Men's Pockets, they the Receivers; Oh! the Jubi^ee's they make, when the
Apparitor has found out a Rich Wh^re and a Rich Bastard; which (least they
should miss) let the Churchwardens look to it, for they Swear the
Ecclesiastical Span^el (always) to quest upon a Haunt; if he do not, he is
forsworn; Oh; most Preciou^ Ecclesias^ical D^scipline! that begins with
Perjury, and ends with Mercenary Repentance or Bribery!

Why should not the King and Parliament be as careful of their Subjects Souls
as their Bodies? For they also must give an Account: But, what an Irrational
account would it be, if it was to be feared, that an Enemy should Land and
Invade us at Harwich or Canterbury, to say, I have set a Watchman upon the Top
of Paul's, or (to make sure) upon the Higher Steeple of Lambeth? (call to the
Watchmen) is the Enemy Landed at Harwich? How angry would they be at such a
non-se^sical Question? And say, Surely you are Mad; Do you think any Mortal Man
can see from London to Harwich? Or, from Lambeth to Canterbury? There may be a
Hundred Thousand Enemies Landed for ought we know; How is it possible for us to
Watch and Ward at this Distance?

In the ^nte^im the Kingdom is well looked to. And the Coasts well Guarded, are
they not, We are the next Door to Ruin, if more Watch men be not set, and
stronger Guards, which is easy and no charge, or expense at all, when the Pay
(that two Watchmen have ingrost) would well pay and maintain forty of as good
Vigor and Ability, and (in some Sense) better-sighted, and better Tongued
Watchmen, to Feed and give Warning; Or, are the welfare of our Lands and
Bodies only the care of Governors? And as for Men's Souls, one Watchman is
enough betwixt this and Canterbury?

But, (you will say,) a Man is but a Man, he does what a Man can do? Nemo tenetur
ad Impossibilia, I grant; But who bid him undertake such a Charge, that no
Mortal can discharge? Who? Who think you, but Filthy-lucre, and Ambition.

The Council of Sardica in the Fourth Century, Anno 347. saw this Devilish
mischief coming Trowling into the Church, and a perpetual strife and come
about the Borders and Limi^s, as Litigious, as now at Doctors-Commons, about
the Probate of Wills, and about Letters of Administration; namely, who shall
get the Money, whether the Bishop's or Arch-deacon's Courts of that Diocese
where the Man Died, or else a P^erogative Case, by the bona notabila, of the
value of Five or Ten Pounds, old doings there were; Wherefore the said Council
made a Decre^, Can. 6. That no Bishop should be made in a Village or little
Town, for which one Presbyter might well suffice; because it is not necessary
to make a Bishop's See there, least the Name and Authority be rendered
contemptible. There were Three Hundred and Forty Bishops there, which exceeded
the Number of the General Council of Nice, and they took care for the Honor of
their own punction, yet they add, That when the People in a Town shall grow so
Numerous, a Hundred and Fifty was the Common st^^^or a Presbyter's Care and
Cure, Then that Village deserves to have a Bishop, and ought to have one.

By this Rule, London had need have more than Forty Bishops; And this would
where Industry, and make M^u S^udy to be Workmen that need not to be ashamed,
least the People should never choose them, as of old they did, wherea^ now if
they can but Buy an Advowson, or next Avoidance, or a Patron, etc Let the
People go whilstle, they are their Feeders and Pastors in Spich of their ^eeths:

But, how can Men Relish what is Cra^n'd down their Throats, as Capon's are
served, or given them with a Horn like a Drench? This makes an Immortal Feud
and Disgust, generally, betwixt the Physi^k's Patients, and their
Ecclesiastical, not Father's but, Far^iers, that force open their Mouths, and
pour down what they please; thus are the People Treated like Bru^es rather than
Men, and Christians, they are like to be good ones; But what cares the Reading
Don of the Pulpit? He cries, I am Instituted and Inducted, come to your Parish
Church, the Horse and the poor A^s must Graze where he is Tied; I Will feed you
in spite of your Teeth: Ay, and Starve us too, in spright of our Teeth.

There is neither Reason nor Religion for this; If he were never so good a
Physician of Souls, all he says is accepred with Prejudice, and Disgustful; for
let his Potion be never so wholesome, It goes against any Wife-mans Stomach to
be Drench't; this is the Fault (also) of our Con^^^^ution, and wonderful are
the Inconveniences that follow this, as Antmosi^es E^ernal betwixt Minister and
People, Suits at Law about his Maintenance, for they Pay as they Heat, only so
much as they are forced to, and as for the Care of their Souls, they will trust
him no more than they will their Bo^ies with a Physi^ian of another Man's
choosing.

Patron's will lose nothing by parting with their Advowson's, not a Farthing
honestly; yes. you will say, he may make it a Portion for his Daughter, or to his
Waiting-Maid, to a poor Parson that will Leap at her

But, this is the worst of Simonies, and such never thrives no more than other
Symonists a Curie attends it and blasts all; this Smock Symony; In other
Symonies, Money makes the Mare to go; but in the, the J^de make the Par^on
Ride, that must otherwise have gone on Foot.

Besides, the most of the Livings in England are in the Kings Gift, At the
Chancellours, or the Bishops, or the Universities, few have private Patron's,
except Noblemen, Gentlemen and Papists, the former are all t^o Noble to C^yn
their Advowion's* and the l^st, the Papi^is are very unfit, nay, they are by
Law Inc^p^c^ared after Conviction.

I^ is certain, that, wherever the Carcass is, there will the Eagles be
g^thered together; every Man that is at a lo^s for Preferment, or for great^r
Preferment, will be sure to inquire, which is the way thither? And if Sym^ny,
Smock Symony, or a Ceremony be the way and the Doo^, thither the Clergy make
Application, it is their great Aim and Study; thence comes the common
Ignorance, Lazin^^^, D^ed and Duil Freaching, or rather Reading, because it is
^asie, most in equest with the great D^n's that can do not better, and is
therefore more acceptable than the best.

But, If you make Merit, the only way to preferment, then you will ha^^ a (...)
Learned, Loving and Lovely Clergy, that will go H^nd in Hand, and Heart in
Heart with their People, and nothing though^? (...) good for them; but, now
what they get, is only got with Scrambling, in all places, especially in
^luraliti^s.

By Pluralitles, I do not mean Two or Three Parishes, for one Pa^ish may be Ten
times more a Plurality, (as S. And^^ws Ho^^born) than Twenty Norfolk or Essex
Livings in some Places.

And I wish, that the Right Reverend Clergy man who was so Sa^acious (at some
little Animals are) to leave the failing House, and the efore left his Seat in
the High Commission Court, least i^ he stayed any longer, it had fallen upon
his Head, would also be as Sag^cious, as to leave his Inco^sistent Pluralities;
what Sense is it for a Bishop to be a Deacon? For the due joining of (which
two) words in Coustruction; Subintelli^itur, Avaritia.

And (by way of Parenthesis.) now I have Named that High Commission Court, I
cannot but remember one word used by my old F^iend, Lord Jeffery, soon after in
my Lord of London's case, repeated, viz. ^^ptim, we do all things here (quo^h
he) Raptim, rashly, in ha^^e, without thinking, without consi^eration, without
W^^^ing, without so much as a Clark, or Register; Ay, the Wiser, for litera
Scripta Manet, (but enough of that) and of Bishops, at present.

CHAP. IV. Of Ordination, etc.
I Never could understand any thing by Ordination, but what Arch bishop Cr^nmer
makes it, a setting apart Bishops; as a Constable, a Justice, or a Judge is
Ordained for some special work.

And the grea^er and more Sacred the work is, the greater and more Sacred is
the Ordination.

The Church, the whole Church did this in the Gospel Times and long after; so
says Ierom. Requiricur in Sa^^dote ordinando etiam populi praesentia, the
Peoples presence is necessary when men are Ordained* not as here, by a Mockery
of this Ancient Cu^tom, Ordaining Men in a Congregation, who are as Ignorant as
the Bishop in Reference to their Person. Conversations, Learning or Abil^les;
but, in the Pur^st and Primitive Times, they were always O^^a^n'd by the
Church, as well as in the Church, and sometimes by Laying on of H^nds of the
P^esbytery alone, as Titus; and sometimes by the whole Church, as Barnabas and
Paul, the Laying on ^f H^nds was only a Jewish Custom or Ceremony, Pointing out
the Persion Ordained, It was not the hands did any thing, none are so foolish
to think that ^x^ept Virtue could go out by touching, as when our Savior
touchen the Woman (not willingly) which had an Issue of Blood; none are so
Blasphemously silly as to pretend h^t; indeed the ^ign is taken often for the
thing S^gnified; as, for this C^use Bow I the Knee to the Father; and sine
stantibus non staret mundus; and, neglect not the Gift of God that was given
thee by the Laying on of the H^nds of the Presby^ery; by all wh^c^ Ceremonies
of Kneeling, Standing and Laying on of Hands, is only meant P^ayers made when
they were in that posture; now, who can Imagine then that the Prei^^^ of a
Bishop i^ more needful than the Presence of the Presby^ers or People, except he
could Pray more heartly, and more Sp^ri^ually than the rest?

Which he u^ually was supposed to do, because his Worth, (no^ his Friends,
Relations, Mon^y or K^nd^ed) advanc'^ him, in Gospel Times, and in the
Primitive-Tin^s: When Timothy was Ordained a Bish^p, the Presbyters only did
it, except Presbyters; and Bishops be only two Names for one person, as
undoub^edly they are; aftertimes did d^^^inguish them, how? Only by
P^ec^dency, as the Chair Man of a Comm^tee, the Speaker, he that in Sessions
gives the Rule of the Court, but no better Men, nor other Character ^han his
other Brethren the Justices, or Memb^rs, except for Order sake Precedence.

And therefore for Order-sake, the Bishop with the Presbyters, or the
Presbyters, or (in default) any Church Member, or the whole Church, might have
L^id on Hands, as well as have Prayed at an Ordination, thus when the holy
Ghost had chosen Paul and Barnabas, they had their Mission from the whole
Church, Acts 13.2, 3. Je^om and Chrysostom agree; that there is no difference
be^wix^ a Pr^^by^^r and Bishop; but only Ordination; and that was by Custom, as
the best man, not as the sole men; he never could Lawfully Ordain but in his
own Church, and his own Church Members only, and by the consent of the rest of
the Members; for Bishops, for Three Hundred Years after Christ, had no more
Souls in their Diocesses than they were intimately and familiarly acquainted
with; this makes Chrysostom say, that (notwithstanding the Custom of a Bishops
Presence at Ordination, yet betwixt Presbyters and Bishops there was little or
no difference ( Homil. 11. in 1 Tun) (...), very little difference: and in
Scripture times nothing at all; Theop^^lact calls it, ferme ni^il, next to
nothing; namely, Precedence; but the Church in Scripture, or the Faithful,
Ordained as many Bishops as was needful, and may not Presbyters Ordain now,
without a Bishop's Presence, as well as of old in Scripture Times, or as well
as Bishops do Ordain Archbishops and Metropolitan's?

But, in Holy Writ, if any had the Precedence, the Presbyter had it The
Presbyter's that are amongst you (says St. Peter, I exhort, who am also a
Presbyter, 1 Pet. 5.1. no greater Titles of Honor can be given than what Age
and Nature gives, thence comes, Sieur, Monsieur, Sire, and Sir; or Father;
Ma^am, a diminutive, of Dame, or dam, Madam, my dam, or Mother; and Age being
Honour^ble, the greatest Title of Honor is thence derived, Senior, Seniore,
Seignior, G^and Seniore, in Spanish, Italian, and Lingua Franka; Presbyter
amongst the Greeks, Elder or Alderman, or Earl, all is one derivative from
Seniority; to that if People be Ambitious of a Name, Presbyter or Earl,
Alderman or Earl of the Church, is far before Overseer, or Bishop; whose
Diocese was at first no bigger, than that he might ^asily Oversee it, or see
over it, now it is Monstrous.

The burden of a Bishop is so great, and the danger greater in
Maladministration, that (...), H^mil. ult 23 6. 13 in Heb. 12.17. says.
(...); What (...) for Sours? Y^^, and at his (...) too; Does not the Horrid
Hazard threaten his Head?

But, what cares some Men for the Thunder of Heaven's Vengeance till it fall
upon them, they are Stouter than those two Atheistical Emperors, Tiberius and
Caligula, they would Run under Ground in Yaults and Caves when it Thundered;
but some are as unre^enring as the High. Priest of Rome called Julius Caesar,
that notwithstanding that he Rea^ Divinity Lectu^ in Rome to the People, was
the greatest Robber and Murderer in the World and Sacrificed to his Ambitious
and Greedy Rapacity, the bravest C^mmon wealth that ever the Sun saw; but he
fell in the height of h^s J^li^y and to shall all ^erably, whose Portion is, as
they desire, in this (...) only.

In short, the difference betwixt Presbyter and Bishop in Holy Writ is nothing
at all; no not in Ordinations: As in Asrica Presbyters did Ordain, and so now,
at this day, in Germany, France. and in the most Prorestant Churches; And must
we Schismatice from Scripture? And from all the Protestants in the World to
follow a Custom they got into the Greek Church. (Forty Customs they had
besi^es this contrary to Scripture Customs) Chrysostom being a Greek Bishop;
and Hierom though Writing in Latin, yet dwelling and conversing amongst the
Greeks, but would never make so bold a venture as to be a Bishop, in those
times so the Fourth Century, when the Task was forty times easier, because the
Province or D^^cess was forty times less, nay a Hundred times less than now in
England and Wales, besides (...)(make the most on it) is but per Civitates,
along the Cities, which being a Hundred in Creet, and the Parisheth (...) two
Handred and Seven, and not a Tenth part Chilmans, this (...) is only sillily
Construed to make such Havoc (...) it has both in the State and all true
Devotion.

Yet Men drink Healths to the Prosperity of the Church of England; I they mean
hereby a good Health to the Protestant Head of the Church, and the Protestant
Members (the only True meaning) with all my Heart, let it pass

Bu^, if by the Church of England, they Scandalously mean, there by only the
great Diocesan's that cannot possibly Watch over Sou^s excep^ by (...) Faith in
the Black Guard of Apparitors, Sumners, Register^ Proctors, Canonists,
Lay-V^cars, Vicar-Generals, Commissaries, Officials, Surrogates, (or I do not
know who) at the General Randevo^z, and Head Quarters at Doctors-Commons; What
an affront is this to the True Protest^nt Church of England?

I grant, that the (...) have all this whole Ragged Regiment, and by the same
Names too, and for the same Service in their Popish MusterRoll.

But, God forbid, That the Reformed Church of England should signally d^ffer
from Popish Church Discipline, not so much as Nominally, and so little really,
and to purpose, that some have only been Starved to Death in a J^yl, and many
Hundreds (and their Families) undone, whilst the Smith field Fire's were fierce
indeed, but the ^ortures did not last long; Our Marciful Hands made Men feel
Death long and often, before that King of Terrors was permitted to end the
Pains: Oh! blessed Reforma^n!

Y^^, you will say, our L^rany is in English, the Mass Litany in Latin; and the
Saints are omitted; and Te D^um is ^ung in English, or half Jabb^rd over
unintelligibly after the firth Le^n; We praise thee, O God, We Ack^ow^^ge thee
to be the Lord, All the Earth does worship thee, etc. All the Earth (...) wish
it did; but in my little Travels, I know it is less; for more than half the
Earth are Infidels to old Day: There we are out of the Truth, whatever be the
Tune; And why do all the People say this Very? There Is no Rule, no Rubric for
it? Or, is it because the Ministers are wise and know better things, and
therefore will give the loolish unthinking M^mick's leave to tell that false
Story.

But, I am quite Tyced, It is end^ess to find fault; I had much rather see it
amended; the Common Prayer Book is the more Amiable to me as Old Gold is more
acceptable than New, it has been long Tried and has endured the Test pretty
well, which is more than can be said of any other Desultory Prayers, that like
New Guinees may many times be Counterfeit; but as the most Tried Gold will well
endure, to it may sometimes need the Refiners Fire.

But as for the said Black-Guard of Sumners, Surr^gaces, Apparitor's,
Informers, Registers, etc. that Live by the Sins of the People, it is as much
beyond the Art of Man to 'mend them, as it is to 'mend a broken Cob-Web, and
when you have u^'d your utmost skill, it will not quit cost: I have Studied the
Point, and yet am I not one jot the better Artist at it, than I was Seven Years
ago, when my advice (in my Naked Truth (was to dress them according to the
Vertuoso's Receipt, to dress (...), viz After you have washed them, in several
Waters, then Salt them, Pepper them, and lastly, the surest way to prevent
their Maliguity, is to throw them on the Dunghill. -- A Racr -- To bring the
Pillory in D^sgrace. Fruges consumere nati, as if they were born for no other
end, but (like Rats, M^ce, Polcats, and other Vermin) to cat up the Victuals,
Hunt about for a Prey, and Run Squeaking up and down.

Never was there such Church Discipline, and such Ecclesiastical Fellows to
Manage it, in the whole Christian World (except amongst the Papists) they
indeed have the like Harpyes, but every private Priest there is more than a
Bishop here, can take Confessions; search their Entra^s, and enjoin Penance.

Whereas we are Cumber'd with the same great Diocesan's, but every P^^st there
has Power to Rule as well as Feed the Flock; and the word (...)(in 1 Pet. 5.2.)
Si^infies both, to Rule and Feed; God commands both to every Presbyter, but the
Bishops Counter-check God's Commands, and will take all the Weight upon
themselves, with the help of Sumners, Notaries, Register's, etc. Well, God help
them, and forgive them; they can take the Charge, and strive for (...), and
think it a great Honor; Ay, so it is, if rightly d^arged; (which is impo^s^c
in our present Circumstances) therefore have a care that the great H^nos ^e not
too great an Onus, a Burden heavy enough to break the Back of any Mortal; no
Apostle duest undertake it, but took care to leave Res^^entiary Bishops in
Creet, one for every Two Parishes, when the Tenth part of those were not
Christians neither; but the generality of our People also differ from ^^fi less
only in Name, or the Baptismal Vow of Sureties in Baptism, (if ever they had
any) and is not worth a Rush; nay, it is ^orse than nothing, by the P^rjury.

And in Italy at this Day they have many Diocesses that are not half so bigg,
nor by half so Rich and Populous as the Pa^ish^s of St. Andrews-Holborn, St.
Margarets-Westminster, Sr. Martins Stepney, St. Giles, and many others? yet not
any of these, is thought a Charge great enough for one single Shoulder under
the Bishop; whereas good St Augustine knew not how to discharge alone the
Eplscopal Work of little Hippo, without Co adjutors; and in the little Teritory
Adjoining, there were many Bishops, (as one at the Castle Synica, near H^ppo;
another at the Castle Eussula, ad Ecclesiae H^pponensis Paraeciam (August, de
Civitate Dei, l. 22. c. 8 Epist 261. Epist. 68) Ecce Interim Episcopos nosires,
qui sunt in Regione Hepponensi ubi a vestris tanta mala patimu^, convenite:
Aslemble our Bishops, that are in the Territory of Hippo, etc. Bishops that had
a City to Govern, did not use to Bishop it, in the Ter^ory Adjoining; the
Bishop of Rome never pretended that his Diocese of Rome reached beyond the
City; for at this Day there are Forty Bishops in the Ter^tory of Rome and of
old, there were Sixty Nine Bishops there, and not one of their Diocesles is so
Great, so Populous, and so Rich as St. Andrews-Holborn.

Pope Innocent I. ( Epist. ad Descentium Episcopum Eugubi. Ep c. 4) cum omnes
Ecclesi^e nostrae intrae Civitatem Constitutae sunt. All the Churches of my
Diocese are within the City; and Acts 14.23. A Bishop or Elder had but one
Church. And Bishop usher (Irish Relig. p. 63.) says, that the Diocese of the
Bishop of Duplin in Ireland, did not Reach over the City Wall; tantum intra
muros exercet Episcopale Offi^ium.

This which I have said is enough to pious Bishops; but to such as are given to
Filthy Lucre, nothing will satisfy but more Mammon, more, more; even Pope Leo
himself Condemns such Bishops, saying, Dominari magis quam Consulere subditis
quaerunt, They make it their business to Dominter, but not to Consult the
Welfare of those under their Charge: Pope Gregory Appointed Twelve Bishops in
the County of York, (Respon. ad 8. Interrog.)

Surely, our Bishops and great Doctors have contemptible thoughts of the Common
Prayers, as a Mean, Underling Office, or else, why do they put mean Underling
Curates, and Singing men, Sadlers or Cobblers that can Sing, and therefore, made
Deacon's to serve to Road Prayers and ^lo^ them, to some Tune; and as soon as
that Drudgery is over, then a way goes the Quer^ster to his Shop, whilst the
Doctor and the Bishop reserve themselves, for the Topping Pulpit, if they say
any thing, except benedicite, leaving the Common Prayer to Readers, some
Schoolboys, not yet ^n^ncipated from School-dames, will Read more Audibly and
distinctly than many of them: In short, the Common Prayer, if 'mended will
serve for a Crutch to the Lame; and though I, blessed be God, need none, yet,
the Crutch must not be thrown out of the Church; for then you must throw the
Parson after it, general'y, all England over: The Common Prayer Book? Oh! It Is
all in all, it is a Crutch to the Lame Parson, Eyes to the Blind Parson, and
puts Words into the Mouth of the otherwise, Dumb Parson; nay, it is Ears too to
the Deaf Disciples, and Music Ceremony monger, the very O^accusticon of the
Spirit; Therefore, here is my Hand to it* it shall have my Vote, for my poor
Brethrens sake; upon condition, though that it be not G^amb'd down other Men's
Throats, that need not be so Fed, but can Chew what they swallow; and also upon
condition, That we do no longer exclude a great part of Holy Scripture to make
Room for Tobit and his Dog, I mean, The Apocrypha.

Have we not Apocryphal, and unscriptural Ceremony-mongers enough that fill up
the Steeples and High Places in the Church, l^ke a great Cracked Bell, that is
good for nothing but to fill up the Vocancy; But must Apocryphal books too
Justle the Holy Scriptures also out of the Church? You Will say, the Mass Book did
it before we did it: Yea, that is true; so a Popish interest also possibly
brought this great Cracked Bell into a Protestant Steeple; (What does it do
there?) there it hangs, but had never been hanged so high, but that it was
cracked, and good for nothing but to give an unintelligible and Jarring sound,
to keep out a better, and in room of a better, it will serve well enough to
make up the number of the Yea's, and the No's.

Well may this Cracked Ceremony monger dread a wise and a pious, and honest
English Parliament, more than he sears either God or the Devil, more than
Heaven or Hell, lest they spy this Church-Cobweb, (though it hang alost) and
sweep it down, or new Cast this useless Cracked Bell.

You may know him by this certain mark; for conscious of Guilt, and of his own
uselessness and Futility, (through well-grounded sear) like the murmuring
Israelites, he longs for the Flesh pots of Egypt again, Egyptian or Popish
d^rkness, which has covered (as darkness does) all his faults, this Pope Joan
(in the dark) has been as good as my Lady) and a Popish King (he joys in) to
choose, rather than Angels food, Manna, (What is it?) he knows not, he relishes
it not.

For he loves Popery in his heart (as the Carpenter loves his Ladder) because
it helps him up so high, to overlook his betters; Well! let him (even) march
then, after his Brother Cartwright, he is fit for nothing so well, as to read
Common Prayer in the French Protestant Chapel in the Castle of Merli.

Thus have I run him to an Inavoidable Dilemma, one of the Horns whereof must
Gore my Ceremony-monger; for, it he obstinatly persist in his irrational and
illegal Ceremonies, the Law and the next Jury deprives him by his own
Celebrated Act, The Act of Uniformity, which condemns all Ceremony mongers, and
all Ceremonies, not contained in the Common Prayer Book; and then the King may
in the Vacancy (without Invading any man's propriety, like Queen Elizabeth) put
this unprofitable and impossibly to be performed Nuisance to its proper use, and
to a good use.

But, if he Recant, Abhor, Repent and Forsake his Illegal and Popish-like
Ceremonies, we have got the day, he is converted to be a good man; and will
then voluntarily relinquish that burden, which no mortal can bear, for fear of
the Torments Eternal, which none can bear; the saying of St. Chrysostom (in
Heb. 13 7. H^mil ult. 24) will penetrare his hard Heart and ^cared Conscience
(...) etc. I wonder in my heart ((...)) (...) it is posh (...) for a chief
Bishop in the Church to be saved, etc. High Priest Aaron said, Nolo Episcopari,
Moses also was as loath to come into the Collar, Send by the hand of whom thou will send, said he, in a Pet, to God Almighty; foreseeing the dreadful burden:
St. Chrysostom in that Homily says in effect, concerning a great Bishop, as
one said of an Executor, viz. If I had a mind to send a man to the Devil, I
would make him my Executor, and if I had a mind to send a man to the Devil, I
would make him a great Lord -- Bless me! That vain ambitious man should hope to
comb Heaven by that very sin of Haughtiness and Pride, which made Lucifer a
Devil.

I well know that in this Juncture, every Projector is full of his Notion,
which may do well to in Utopia, but is not practicable here.

And I Will Answer such well-meaning Noddles (is a grave Senator of Old Rome did
his pious Friend, that brought him an excellent Model of Government) my Friend?
This would do well in Plato's Commonwealth, but it is not feazable for us who
live in the Dregs of Romulus.

But nothing is here proposed but what is easy, good for all, sound, pure,
primitive and practicable, as well as profitable, and hurts no body, no not the
great Diocesan and sleepy fat Prebend, in their present Incumbencies and
Possessions, if they can (with a safe Conscience) continue them.

For St. Chrysostom is bolder with such Bishops as are so addicted to filthy
Lucre, that he quite incapacitates their for the place, (...) in Ep. ad Tat. c.
1.) (...), and^, (...); hic ut indigenus Sacerdotio est removendus; Let him be
Deposed, nay Degraded, as unworthy of that holy Function.

Some Repairs of necessity must be done, as the Wisdom of a Pious King and
Parliament shall think meet, upon those that have by their filly, illegal, and
foppish, and Popish-like Constitutions and Ceremonies, reduced all true
Devotion to a mere Pharisaical and Outside Superstition, (which is also very
silly and non-sensical) to boor.

Does not St. Cyprian tell us, ( Ep. 68.) That in the Ordination of Sabinus,
the Bishopric was conferred upon him by the Suffrage (that is, the Vote) of
the whole Fraternity, or Brethren, and by the Judgment of the Bishops that me
together in our presence? etc.

That Exhortation in the Common Prayer Book, before the Communion, concerning
the quieting of a troubled Conscience, (when the guilty person thinks himself
not qualified sufficiently for the receiving that blessed Sacrament) gives the
Minister power of Absolution; that is, power of the Keys, the Church Keys [good
reason] of his own Church, whereby I judge, that every Minister has power to
loose what any R^gister, or Bishop, or Surrogate, has ^ound, if he think fit,
though they also have bound the Spirit down to Hill, or his body afterward lies
bound, for want of Absolution, in a ayl; I think, a Minister has power, like
Orphtus, to setch him back from Satan, but not from the Jailer; is not this to
give the power of the Keys to a Minister by the Stature or Common Prayer Book,
which the common practice or Canons do not allow or admit? This is to give and
take again; this is to give we do not know what; this is to give the great
Bishop more eyes, than those same large eyes, called Archdeacons; this is to
give Ministers the power that Christ gave them, to Ru^e and Feed, for (...) in
1 Pet. 5 2. Signifies both Feed and Rule, and one as much as the other, God has
joy 'd them together, and woe be to him that sepatates those whom God has
joined together, only to gratify his own ambitious and avaricious Claw, that
grasps more than it can possibly hold, and by endeavoring to be Mr. Do all,
becomes Mr. Do ill; this is to mock the Presbyrery, give and take again: this
is just like the silly Charm, In-Dock, Out Nettle. Ye shall, says the Stature;
Ye shall not, says the Present Discipline; here is wise work, and most
cousounded clashing, and irreconeileable Ministrations Ecclesiastical; well, it
is well (in Apology) that we can say, it was made in haste; but, we have had
time to 'mend it: Yes? but, those that Steered then, must have acknowledged
their Frailty, Weakness and Mortality, which flesh and, blood cannot deny, but
is most unwilling to grant and coufess; which Popish ( English, not Italian)
pride, I fear, will put in a Caveat, as formerly, against Reformation.

Never could any Bishop or Priest, (with whom I ever yet did discourse the
point, either here or beyond Sea) allege any Reason, why the Presbyters should
not be helps in Government, rather than filly and Rascally Registers, Sumners,
Officials, Canonists, etc. except that the work being divided amongst his
Brethren, in time the Wages would be divided also; whereas the other
Free-booters Ecclesiastical, or rather Mongrels [party-per-pale,] Lay Elders,
went, no purchase no pay, and perhaps gave Money too, to purchase such a
spiritual Letter of Mart; Ay, and get good Booty too by the Venture.

In short, such monstrously bulky Bishoprics, as now we have, has formerly
been found too dangerously big for the King and Kingdom, as well as uneasy for
the people, and [like a Shoe, too big] useless, except it be stuffed out with
those said refuse Stuff and Excrements, Sumners, Registers, etc. or, if a great
Shoe be too disparaging and disagreeing: Metaphor for such High-Top-Knots
Ecclesiastical, (the Pride as well ^s the Mode of our High Church Man) (...)
compare them to the poor (...) that has got the (...), which (...) the poor
Limbs, to make a monstrous great Head, stuffed like a Bladder, sometimes with
more Wind and Vapor than Brains: Verifying the Proverb, A great Head and
little (...), not, that the Diverb is always true, but it is often so when a
Whore or a Jesuit made that great Head; so, that the Head had never grown so
Ghastful a Portent, had it not been for a very carnal Heart.

Me thinks it looks like Tom a Lincoln, (the great Cathedral Bell there) too
big for use, or to call men to Church, it would well make ten good and useful
Bells, if well Cast, whereas now it serves for nothing but a show; and only the
name Rings all the Kingdom over, but good for nothing but to be gazed at, and
admired by Women and Fools, for its huge Dimensions: And is certainly a too
much overgrown thing, since the days of the Martyr Ignatius, Bishop of Antioch,
and contemporary with some of the Apostles, when he says, Every Altar should
have a Bishop, meaning certainly a Presbyter, or something very little
different; Nay, in his Epist. ad Smyr. he says, It is not lawful without the
Bishop to Baptize, or hold a love Feast, or any Ecclesiastical Assembly, etc.
Certainly then a Bishop was not Omnipresent, or an Ubiquitarian, or else
nothing like to the Bishops Office (at this day) amongst us performed.

Shall we call those separate Congregations, Schisms, from the Catholic
Church, when they keep to the Primitive Rule from which our Constitution has
swerved? What Vote Avarice and Ambition had in making such a Constitution by
President from the Hierarchy of Rome, let others judge, I shall not
Dogmatically determine.

But, (some say) Though the Bishop cannot see from the Cathedral what is done all
over the County, Shires and Towns of his Diocese, yet he can Ride about, and go
the Rounds, and Visit them; and so he is bound to Go or Ride once in three
years.

And what Improvement is made by such Triennial Visits in any thing except his
Purse, and the thing he calls Confirmation? Can he possibly be a sufficient
Shepherd and Bishop of Souls, or Physician of Souls, that has not so much as
spoke with, or visited one of a thousand in his Diocese?

Nay, grant that he do nothing else all the year (if it be not a Parliament
year) but visit his Flock, we'll grant him for every Town, Village or Parish
two or three days in one year, and by that account, in that two days, he cannot
have Examined above the tenth part or Tyth of the Parish, nor heard their
Causes and Complaints, for above one tenth part, and what shall become of the
other nine? Nay, what shall become of that same tenth part till the next years
visit; the Patient may be dead in that time, as well as all the nine, that get
no relief from his Episcopal hands.

Oh! but other Curates, Journey-men, and Apparitors, etc. do the Work for him;
that Surrogated folly has been sufficiently Answered already, not but that
sometimes he may by Implicit Faith, shooting at Rovers, hit the mark, but it
is no the Blind-man shot the Crow, more by Luck than by Wit.

In short, when a bounteous Prince publishes the Bines betwixt a nee die, greedy
Doctor, and a great Fat, Bulky, Unweildy Bishopric, the Match is food made up,
generally, though Conscience (^arried a little at the Tremendous Account and
impossibility and impotency of performance) does whisperingly perhaps forbid
the Banes; Avarice and Ambition are lewd and loud Speakers, and can soon
silence the Whisper of a Conscience, that like some drowsy Judge, is scarcely
awake, when he passes Sentence: And the Contract once Solemnized publicly in
the Church, the Divorce is not so easy.

No? Is not the Divorce easy in case of Impotence, and Impossibility of giving
the Church due benevolence, the only design and end of such a Contract? The
Civilians cheat us, if such an impotence be not a sufficient, a lawful and
necessary cause of divorce; Nay, worse, it is (some say) ipso facto void, where
there is Error personae, or not a sic man for the turn: But, I Will urge no
Parabolical Arguments so far as, (of I lift) I can make them go; if before God,
and in foro Conscientiae they can answer it, I leave them to those two Judges;
Is it any wonder to see a Church barren and unfruitful of any thing, but
Puppet-like, and Apish, as well as irrational Ceremonies, superficial and
perfunctory Devotions, (the only fruits of such Decrepit Sons of the Church)
which are begot, when impotency is supplied by Fumbling Registers, Apparitors,
Lay-Chancetours, or Lay Elders, and forsworn Church-Warde^?

Sr. Paul (indeed) had upon him the care of all the Churches; namely to advise
them, and leave Presbyters and Bishops to Guide, Rule and Feed them, but, did
not Excommunicere, or Ordain by implicit Faith: When Presbyters were Ordained,
he left the whole Government and Management of the Church to their care and
prudence; but he never undertook the Load of a whole County, two or three, upon
his own single Shoulders, least with such a Weight he could never mount Heaven,
but (...) be cast down to the nethermost Hell, and become a castaway by
Maladministration, and Impossibility of performing that Office and
Undertaking. The Apostle himself could not manage a Plurality.

A Plurality? What Is that? Not such a thing as it is commonly taken and
accepted to be, viz. two or three poor Parishes; for one Perish (such as St.
Andrews-Holborn) has twenty times more people than twenty Country Parishes, so
unequally are Parishes divided, both (...) to Numbers and Estates: A Plurality
then is more people than any one man can probably visit and regard, either by
reason of their numbers, or distance of place; no men did rule or feed the
people (in the Scripture times, purest and primitive times) by Proxies,
Journey-men-Curats, Sureties, Registers, Surrogats, or Implicit Faith; it is
Non sense all over, as well as Irreligious, until blind men can learn to see
(as our great men do now) by other men's eyes, and implicit Faith: I grant,
that the blind Beggar of Bednal-green did do his business by the eyes of his
Dog and a Bell, and got (they say) thereby a great Estate, but, still, in
Spirituals, it will not hold good, and if it would, it would be no great honor
for a Bishop, to be accounted, the great Blind-beggar-Ecclesiastical; yet, so
he must always ways beg the Question, and do his great Church-works, by blind
implic^te Faith, or else be cannot possibly do business.

Therefore, some Repairs must of necessity be done, and in time too, or else a
Church so Cr^zy in her Discipline, and ^o Non sensical in her Ceremonies,
cannot stand long, propl^ how we can.

The Papists upholds theirs with Dragoons, Constables, Jaylors, Summers,
Registers, ^^ng m^n, and the Inquisition, with Cu^ses, An^them^^ (...).
To^^^^^^ and Jayles; if any body m^k^ (...) ^ment of like Props, they will ^^^d
them (...), and give them the slip now in there day, and (...), when Governors
(whose duty it is) to Reform, do negl^^^ ^o long (...) years ago in (...) the
people could beat no longer, and took them to do; but the people are but
Tinker-like Refor^ness; if they mend one hole; they make two.

Force and Jayles, Impositions, and^ ^^ght do in the Days of Ignorance, A
German Writer tells us, That the people were (...) ^illy there, before ^^ther's
time, and so Devoutly priest-ridden, that i^ the priests had (...) them, they
would have Eat G^^^s, as our Asses and Ja^^s do.

But, those happy Days are done and past; nor must we expect such success;
formerly the Pe^^^^ were the only Clerks, the only Schollar^, and the G^ntry
went to no School, but the Dancing School; but now qui^^ contrary, the G^ntry
are the most Accomplish'^ Vertuoso's, (...) knowledge, and the great
Accomplishment of a Clergy Ceremony mon^er, is (...) to (...) his (...),
bowings, and Alamode postures Ecclesiastical (...) the two Art demiss. (those
two Fountain) of such Dancing ^^^^ature, (...) Ceremonies; wherein, being
pretty well improved so Seven Years, (...) hot and long a Skirmish of Ergo
versus Ergo, is but Addressing to ^^me (...) Chamber maid, or Groom to a Patron
that has a void Living in his G^^ and he is forthwith, by the help of Implicit
Faith, made free of the (...) pit; This may be done, because it is frequently
done, and then the Flo^^ are no^ guideable by such a Novice; but go to the
Conventicles, and (...) out for better Pastures; What then? Then they are
prefound; and (...) then? Then the Registers Shears them takes their Fl^^^^,
and (...) go, to (...) more Wool against the ^^x (...) the next Vis^on, which
begins (as all other matter of that Nature) with a Nomin? (...) (...) to be
ready to pay the (...) to the Registers, whi^^ the Bishop's great E^^ (...) is
getting himself a (...), with Wine and Oysters; (...) nex^ Question is -- I
D^ncer R^ady? Then, after Dinner, call (...) to pay; there the poor C^ergy mu^
pay again after D^^^er, when the had paid for it once before, in their
Procucations, and Synodal^, (...) they Eat a bit: well, the World grows worse
and worse, Old Bishop Humfrey, Late Bishop of London, did, indeed, makes us pay
our Visie, o^ Pro^^^ations (incended and given at first) to be^ charges, and
pay the Common Reckming, and so he did; we never paid Twice, but that
lanovation came in, as soon as he was Dead.

Then after ^^nuer to Church they go again, (when the Clergy are Short to do as
much to the Churchwardens, and Swearing them to be forswor^ (for no Man ever
did or can keep that Oath,) sometimes a Church-Wat^ den pays Four or Five
Shillings, sometimes Two Shillings and Four pence; the Sell-Soul seldom
refuses ready Money, then take in their Presentiments, and having thereby notice
where the Covy lies, by the help of his Stalking horse, (the Apparitor,) he
catches some to be sure in his Net, whence they never escape, but with the loss
of some Fathers at least.

Well, may the Fops say, Here Is a Hea^th to the Church of England, for never
did any Sickly Church stand in more need thereof; if by the Church, they mean,
the said Black Guard, and Ragged Regiment of Sumners, Jaylo^^, Sworn (I had
almost said, for^word) Churchwardens; Apparitors, Registers, Surrogates,
Officials, and Ceremony-Mongers; here is an Ecclesiastical Body of a Church for
you, the like of it is no where in the World; for though the Papists have the
same Tools, and for the same use, and by the same Names called and known, yet
every Priest Secular, besides the Swarming Monks, and Itinerary Frier's)
performs more Ecclesiastical Discipline in their way* than the best Bishop does
here, in making Pen^^^nes; Is it not high time for our Governors to Imitate
our blessed Savior, and make a Whip of small Cords, and Slash these
Ecclesiastical money changers our of the Temple?

When ^urrs get into the Church, the Sexton does not stand asking how they came
in (when he sees the Doors stand open) but Whips them out* Even so, it is a
folly to spend time in inquiring how these Ceremony-mong^^s, and Ragged
Regiment got so high into Church, but Slash them out: For though the favor of a
Jesuit or a Court-Whore, might have done Wonders in pu^^ing a great
Fapping-Cap upon my Ceremony-monger's Head, yet I cannot Imagine how they could
open his Skul and put in more Brains, except Scholars and Wits could be made,
(like Knights) by Dubbing, or as Kings make Lords, by Letters Patents.

Not, but that the Vulgar, and the Fool himself thinks himself some body for
W^t, and knowledge (forsooth) Virtue and Valor, more than before his Father or
Elder Brother Dyed, or before he got (I know how) to be a Court-favourite.

But, Anatomize and Rip him up, and you will not find him to be made of Clay
one jot more Refined, then the other Mortals, by the Sound or Title of Honor;
but he that was a Fool and a Coward before, is to still, tho he had Fools
Fortune, the luck to have a King for his Godfather, an^ to give him a Name,
but, in all other respects, he is just as God Almigh^^ made him, and as his Sin
and Ignorance has Polluted him, only a great de^^ more Lofty, and Confident, (I
dare not say) impudent, Proud and High.

But the Canons of our Church, now in force, I Will prove, foreseeing the
Arrogance Ecclesiastical, took care (as well as our Savior did) to prevent it;
nay, even in Minute matters, such as that, namely, That a Bishop should not
suffer a Presbyter (his Reverend Brother) so much as to stand bare, or keep off
his Hat in his Presence, and Imitate our Savior in Washing his Disciples Fee^,
both of those Significant Ceremonies had no other meaning, but the Ruin of
Prelatical Pride, which begun amongst the very Twelve Apostles, as soon as ever
they came from Receiving the Sacrament or first Holy at S^^ife amongst
themselves, who should be Pope, or Archbishop.

Just like the Mother of James and John, the Love of Prelatical Price made her
Pray (such was the height of her Devotion) that her Sons might fit Check by
Jowle with our Blessed Savior upon the Throne, one on the Right Hand, and the
other on the Left, let not my Ink, herein, seem too Corrosive; it is the more
proper Remedy to cure this spreading, Cancrous and Ecclesi^stical Ring-worm,
that defaces the Beauty of a Churchman, making him more like Lucifer than
Christ, who was meek and lowly.

I have compared Popeth Prelacy (which I have s^en beyond S^^, as ^^ll as Read
of) with our English Prelacy, and I profess in the prescence of Almighty God,
and before Men, that I could not discern any the least difference, within nor
without, more than what was between two Crows-Eggs; no specifical difference,
but mostly Individual, and where there is any difference, the Papists have much
more Reason for theirs, than we have for ours.

For an Italian Bishop has not the Hundredth part so big a Diocese, neither in
N^mbers, not Extent, as is the Bishopric of London; nor scarce a Twentieth
part of the Value; and yet in that little Extent of a Diocese he has a hundred
times more Presbyters to help him in Discipline, or Penance, then the (...) of
London; we are suffered indeed (if We Bleare the Bishop) to Prea^ sometim ^^or
to Feed, but as to Church Discipline, we are just so many Ciphers; [the Papists
defrand the People of half the Sacrament, and the Bishops take from their
Brethren the Presbyters half the Work of a Presbyter; that they may be the
Domini Do all is, and yet they cannot do at all, except by Sell-Soul Registers,
and Sumners, of whom a Presbyter is but the mere Echo: What a Church have we
got? The Rulling Elder, in Scripture, i^ worthy of double Honor, but
especially the Preaching Elder, that Labors in the Word and Doctrine, but
quite contrary with us: For the Preaching Elders is no body to the Register,
Bishop or Archbishop, who if they be not Ruling Elders, are some of them
nothing at all; for Preach they do not, Rule they cannot, except by Proxy,
Sureties or God-father's, and Implicit Faith; Where lies their chief use ^hen,
more than of old, (...), and Antiquated Statutes, long laid aside amongst old
Almanacks, and out of Date?

Ay, say some, but old things and old Men must not be cast away: No, God
forbid; no more then Novices or little Children; but, woe be to that Land whose
King is a Child, and the Land Ruled by Sureties, Godfathers Proxies, and
Administrators; so woe be to that Church whose Ecclesiastical Men are Nozices,
or Antiquated, and Twice Children, an old Lawyer is not cast away, when he
casts himself off, as unfit for the Bar, being half Deaf, and half Blind; it is
time to have done, when Nature gives a Man -- his Quietus est.

Oh! but no matter who does the Work, (say some) yet the Profits, the Profits,
the Wages, the Wages.

To that, I Will Answer; Avarice, Ava^ice, (which made an Apostle ^ell his Lord)
the work, the work, which none but a God that is Omnipresent (...) discharge
honestly, except by Deputies and Curates, a Name unknown (...) and the
Primitive Church, till Pride and Covetousness would stoop to that Load, that is
enough to break the Back of any Mortal, bona interim Conscientia fremente intus
and objurgante, saltem susurrante meliora; we hoped, and are still not without
some hopes, that as we have lately changed our Popish Task-Master, our Popish
Bondage also would have been eased; for it is mere Hypocrisy, and Mocking of
God, to make a Thanksgiving for our D^llverance from Slavery and Popery, if we
be only Translated, Latin into English, and the Amendment only in words, mere
words, of the same Tenor and Signification, and are really Comrades
Ecclesiastical and Prelatical, whom our Lord has Condemned, in every thing,
except for Order or Methods sake, our Savior has past a Sentence against all
Spiritual Lordships, but Temporal Lordships, and Temporal Lords only does he
admit, Excluso Clero.

I know not how, when, or how soon it shall come to pass, but the time shall
come, (I Will say with my Savior. -- Mat. 15.13.) that every Plant which my
Heavenly Father has not Planted, shall be Rooted no.

The Devil and the Popes made certain Laws called Canon-Laws; and to encourage
Men to profess the Magic or Black Art, a thing was advanced called a Professor
or Doctor of Cannon-Law, and we are such Wise Reformers, as to Choose our
Officials, Commissaries, Registers, and Chancellours out of this Rubbish; it
will cost a Man honestly 500 l. before his Son can he Free of the Sell-Soul
Trade; but then; then, when he happens to have a Sell-Souls Place given (given
said I? Fool that I am! I mean granted) to him, when he gets understanding to
know the English of Consideratis Considerandis, or the meaning of a Gratulty,
an Income or a Fine, he may get the Devil and all of Money, and a Purse as
large as his Conscience. As for Instance: I my self Read an Absolution in my
Church of All Saints. lent to me from Doctors-Commons to publish, in pain of
the Law; namely, I must cure a Young Lady, by Absolving her, that was
Excommunicated, for breaking her Leg, or coming before her time; and because
she was loath to Repent, she punished her Purse, sent up the Guinees to
Doctors-Commons, where a Proctor, that shall be Nameless, for it is usual, Swore
in my presence before the Vicar General, in animam Dominae, for the Soul of his
Mistress (the said Young Lady whom he never saw, nor ever will see, for she is
Dead) that he did believe her very penitent, for her Sin of Fornication; it is
true, she never spoke to him, nor to the Register, nor to the Vicar, nor
Surrogate, nor to any of that stabble, but her Guinees did, to my knowledge;
this is no telling Tales out of School, for I always defied them and all their
Works, they are so profligate, and prostitute, without shame, or Conscience.

A Whore in Rome may have a pardon or Absolution for a Julio or two, and for
Twelve Royals ( a Noble English Money) in Spain or Portugal: but our Sell-Souls
have no Conscience in them; if they get a Rich Whore into their handling:
Besides, The papists Color over the pick pocket Rapin, with Enjoining some
penance, as to say Forty Ave-Maries, or sit all Night Naked upon a Cold Stone,
to Cool and Mortify them at least, to Color the Robbery of their Purses; but
our ^i^ciplineri^ans bare^ac't, bid you deliver your Purse, (full of Guinees
sometimes) or else go to pound, or pind-sold, (the Devil) and Jayle; but open
your Purse, and you sha^ not need to open your Mouth, and confels your Sins.

I have seen a great part of this Moety, or one side of the Globe of the World,
and somewhat of the other Hemispheres beyond the Equator, but in all my
Travails, Reading or Discourses, I never me ^th such a Ro^^en, Senceless,
Shameless Church Discipline, as ours is, for it is nothing but a Money-matter,
without any Sconce, or Color; the Papists are as bad, but more Cunning and
modest Sinners, they have some Cloak for their Knavery; They Worship Mammon
their god, as much as any Church of England Man does, but they make some
presence of Penance, and Repemance.

Nor is there a Church of England-man that will ever come to Heaven, but,
before he comes there, he will and must thank me (or such as me) for stopping
his Carreer to Hell, (full speed) without Check or Remotie; they will find, that
neither Almighty God, nor the People will long be Mocked.

If they can defend their Baal and Babel like Christians, Scholars or
Gentlemen, let them come forth and Answer me; but, hitherto they never durst
Encounter my Naked Truth's, but with a Picked sury, that Credited a single
Witness, in Contradiction to Five unconcerned and unby ast, as well as
substantial Witnesses; (but neither God nor any King has Pardoned Perjury,
there is a time for all things.) It was well for him, as well as for me, that I
fell into the Hand's of a Noble Person, that Scorned to make Money of his
Honor, promising upon his Honor, that he would never take advantage of that
Verdict of 2000 l. till I should Commit some other Crime, that might deserve so
great a Penalty; whereas Truth, and Reformation is so far from being a Caime,
that none can have such a Thought, but an Athiest, or he that defies all
honesty and the God of Truth,

The God of Heaven then has Decreed, that Pride and Cruelty prelatical, shall
have a sudden and Dreadful fall; stand clear there, and look to your Heads, for
prope it, and shoulder it up who will, they have been, and still shall be
Buried in its Ruins.

Oh! but the popishly invented Writ de Heretico Combutendo is taken away by Act
of Parliament! Yea, I do not say that prelates Burn Dissenters, (they cannot if
they would) but there has been Ten times more Ruin to Families by Cruel and
long Imprisonments, by Virtue of that other-popishly Invented Writ, de
Excommunicato capicndo, that had the same Original and End with the
Burning-Writ; they were neither of them plants which my Heavenly Father has
planted, and therefore you know their doom.

Pillories. Excessive and Unmerciful Fines, (the late cruel Whippings of
Gentlemen is a new Invention, the Welsh Monster must have the Honor of that
base Cruelty, that even the Bloody Romans never used to any that out lived the
infamy, nor to any, but such as were Condemned; Does not the Welsh Perilius
deserve to Roar by reason of his own Brazen Bull? That the Welsh Blood of his
back may Refund a little for the English Blood so shamefully Slash't out, and
Spilt; but, (I say,) pillories. Excessive and Unmerciful Fines, Imprisonments
Eternal and to Death, (devising thereby Hell upon Earth,) cropping off Ear,
Imposing of silly ceremonies, and Arbitrary Taxes, and Oppressions, (in the
Reign of little Archbishop Laud) were the occasion at least (I well remember)
of so many Dissenters, and the peoples pretense (at least) of Rasing in Arms,
which were not laid down with his Death, north crimes and Blood Expiated, bu by
comitting greater, in ayn unnatural, and Bloody civil War of tweny long years
standing.

But, the Sarcasme put upon Archbishop Laud, by (Archee) the King's rester, I
cannot forgive; in any other Man; namely, when at his Request, King Charles I,
admitted the Fool to say Grace (his Grace little Dactor Laud then in presence)
viz.

Great praise be given to God. And little Laud to the Devil.
For prelates, were the peoples Love and Hate.
Cried down, and once (by Chance) cried up of lates
(Rancour to the pope and popish Sta^e)
And English popery shall have the same fate.
(With last Years Almanac) quite out of Date.
For a Ceremony-monger (that Church-Cob-web) can no more be mended (as
aforesaid) then other tottered and broken Cob webt, and if you could, it is not
worth the while; a Broom will do it: However, some repairs are as speedily as
necessarily to be done: least England become Allegorically Famous (as Denmark
is in a literal Sense) for abundance of Wood-cocks, with long Bills,
gay-feathers, narrow Tongues, and little Brains.

FINIS.

