A NARRATIVE Of a Strange and Sudden APPARITION OF AN ARCHANGEL AT THE
OLD-BAYLY, ON Monday March the Seventh, 1680. English Style, BETWIXT The Hours
of Three and Five in the Afternoon, to the great Astonishment of the COURT and
all that were present.

Dedicated to all the ministers and Churchwardens of the Whole Nation.

By an Eyewitness of the Apparition.

ROMANS ii. 22. Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege?

Printed in the Year, 1680/81

A NARRATIVE OF A Strange and sudden Apparition of an Archangel at the
Old-Bayly, on Monday March the 7th. 1680.
SINCE Monday the Seventh instant, when Mr. Sherman Senior Churchwarden of
Alhallows Barkin pleaded guilty at the Old-Bayly, to Mr. Whitaker's Indictment
(which Mr. And who is reported to be the man, who was imprisoned first by the
Mayor of Worcester, and then by an Order from the House of Lords, for saying
all the Bishops were Papists except Four.
Whitaker had before indicted the Lord Bishop of London for keeping his Courts
in his own Name) many of the Parishioners of Barkin, and others have complained
to Dr. Hickes the Minister of Barkin, of Mr. Sherman's manner of proceeding
upon that Indictment (in which the Doctor, Lecturer, and Churchwardens were
equally indicted) as having gratified the enemies, and much offended, and
scandalized the Friends of the Government, and the Church.

Upon these complaints the Doctor, last Lord's day after Evening Sermon, called
a Vestry, at which Nineteen of the Principal Persons of the Parish all
Vestry-men did appear.

As soon as they were set, and had heard the Ann. 3. and 4. Edw. VI. c. 10.
Statute read, upon which the Indictment was grounded, the Doctor upon Mr.
Sherman's refusal to be present at the Vestry, made a report of his proceeding
upon the whole matter, telling them that Mr. Sherman had acted therein not only
without, but expressly against his advice and consent, he having told him the
Night before he appeared at the Old-Bayly, that he conceived it was their duty
to consult the Vestry about the manner of proceeding upon that Indictment, and
that their defense (in his opinion) was necessary, and easy; Necessary,
because other wise they should render his Majesty's Chappels-royal, the
Cathedrals, and Collegiate-Churches and Chapels, and most of the
Parish-churches of this City and Kingdom obnoxious to the lash of every
factious and disaffected person, upon the account of the Church-ornaments: And
Easy, because the Figure, for suffering of which they were Indicted, had not
the shape of the Statue of St. Michael the Archangel, nor was ever reputed the
Image, or called by the Name of any Saint whatsoever, but as we could make it
appear by the Testimony of Hundreds yet living in the Parish, had been made,
and set up (in the late times of usurpation) upon the Clock, or Hand-dyal,
between Time on one hand, and Death on the other (whose Figures are yet to be
seen (and that when the Clock was set over the Organ about Six years ago, it
was set as an ornament over the Ten Commandments, where it stood unobserved by
himself, and many of his Parishoners till the first report of the Indictment,
when Mr. Sherman was Foreman of the Grand Jury, the Sessions before Mr.
Whitaker did really indict it: He also added, that he then told Mr. Sherman,
that they had time enough to consult the Vestry, and take joynt-measures, being
not obliged to answer to the Indictment till the Sessions in Easter-week.

That notwithstanding this advice, and entreaties used to Mr. Sherman not to
appear at the private Sessions occasionally held the next day, that the privily
took down the Figure commonly called the Angel (because it had a Trumpet at his
mouth, and had written on a label hanging upon his Breast, ARISE YE DEAD, AND
COME TO JUDGMENT) conveyed it to the Old-Bayly, and there pleaded guilty to
the Indictment, and after the Court was risen would have given away the Figure,
but that he was forbidden by the worthy Mr. Hunter the other Churchwarden, who
made it be brought back to the Church, from whence on Wednesday Morning last,
the said Mr. Sherman, without the knowledge of the Doctor, or Mr. Hunter,
privily took it away by a Porter, pretending that Mr. Sheriff Bethel had
demanded it by virtue of an Order made by the Court for demolishing of it,
although the Court upon his pleading Guilty on the one hand, and Mr. Sheriffs
urging the destruction of it on the other, could not be prevailed with to make
any such Order, thinking the Indictment frivolous and groundless.

After the Doctor had related these, and many other particulars, the Vestry
gave him their thanks for his care in this business, and for endeavoring to
presrve the Peace, and good order of the Parish, and forthwith resolved (nemine
contradicente) that at was their opinion that Mr. Sherman upon the whole matter
had acted arbitrarily and irregularly, and that he ought to have consulted the
Vestry, and taken their directions how to proceed upon the Indictment.

They also (as we are informent) declared that this Order was not intended to
preclude them from proceeding further against the said Mr. Sherman, as
hereafter should be thought fit: And upon this occasion exhorted one another to
be very careful, and unanimous in the next Election of their Vestry-men in
choosing such as were Loyal and good Churchmen into the vacant places,
whereupon some Knights, and many other Gentlemen of undoubted Loyalty, and
adherence to the established Protestant Religion, were mentioned as fit for
that trust.

As the Ministers and Churchwardens of Barkin have been Indicted for suffering
the Image of S. Michael the Archangel, in the Parish Church, as the Learned
Indicter first pleased to call the foresaid Figure: so if he can find color
for it in any old Statute, he may as justly Indict them again for suffering of
Pagan Idols; for old Time may be presented for Saturn, and Death for Mors, who
with his brother Erebus every School Boy can inform the Grand -- were famous
Deities of old.

And if he please to do so, he may add by the merit of the action to the former
reputation, which he has got by presenting the Angel; which after it had
escaped the Sentence of destruction, which was hoped for from the Court upon
such a surprise, a Gentleman would have bought at the purchase of a Guiny to
have set up in his own Parish Church. I suppose that Gentleman feared not a
second Indictment, being either a good Lawyer himself, or as having heard one
of the best Lawyers of the Nation, I mean Mr. Recorder, reply to one of the
Loyal Aldermen, who asked him by what Statute, that Figure produced in the
Court, could be Indicted? By none that he knew. The same Honorable Alderman
asked one, who pleaded hard against the harmless Statue, what that writing was
upon his Breast? ARISE YE DEAD AND COME TO JUDGMENT, says he: Ay, that is it
(replied he) which, I fear, offends you, you cannot endure to be reminded of
the Last Judgment, the thoughts of it, perhaps, are trouble some unto you: And
when the same Gentleman still persisted to have it Sentenced to the Flames,
some remote Voices were heard to say, Let him have it to burn in his Kitchen. I
have only one observation to add, That in the beginning of the Late Times the
Parish of Barkin was first Parish, and Doctor Layfield late Minister of it, the
first Minister of London, who was troubled upon the account of some little
Images in the work of the Cover of the Font, which the Factious people of that
time reproachfully called, The Gods of Barkin. God Almighty, who equally hates
Sacrilege, and Idolatry, and Schism, and Sedition as much as other sins,
divert the Omen, and blast the designs of all those on either hand that seek
the destruction of this truly persecuted Church. Amen.

Dated. March 15-1680.
THE END.

