THE THIRD PART OF Naked Truth: OR, Some serious Considerations, that are of
High Concern to the Ruling Clergy of England, Scotland, or any other Protestant
Nation.

AND ALSO A Discovery of the Excellency of the Protestant Religion as it stands
in Opposition to Papistical Delusions.

Being a Representation of what is the true GLORY of Protestants, and WHAT ARE
The Base, Contemptible and Ridiculous Principles, on which those that are
called Roman Catholics do build, as upon the Sand.

Being very necessary for all Protestant Families in this present Juncture of
time.

2 Thessalonians. 2.8, 9, 10, 11. And that wicked shall be revealed whom the Lord shall
consume with the Spirit of his Mouth, and shall destroy with the Brightness of
his Coming; even him whose Coming is after the working of Satan, with all
Power, and Signs and lying Wonders, and with all deceivableness of
Unrighteousness in them that perish; because they received not the LOVE of
Truth that they might be saved, and For this Cause God shall send them strong
Delusions that they should believe a LIE.


LONDON, Printed for Richard Janeway in Queens-Head Alley in Paternoster Row,
MDCLXXXI.

THE PREFACE, BY A Friend of the Author.
THough Falsehood and Errors have need of a Veil or a Vizard to hide the naked
Face of it, because Falsehood when it appears in its own Colors it is a very
unpleasant and unlovely Object: Yet on the contrary Truth appears most lovely,
and most desirable when the naked Face of it is most perspicuous, when it
appears without Veils or Vizards.

In this ensuing Discourse, Truth is so nakedly discovered, ( viz. those parts
of Truth here treated of) as the Ingenious Readers will certainly be as much
enamoured with the Beauty of it, as once they were with that worthy Discourse
that first appeared in this Nation, bearing that name of Naked Truth, which now
is styled The first Part, (another Discourse bearing the Title of the Second
Part of Naked Truth having been also some time since published) for as in that
first part of Naked Truth, great Loveliness did appear to all ingenious and
un-interessed Persons; so assuredly this third part of Naked Truth, will engage
the Hearts of many thousands to it, that may have a view of it.

And though some Persons (whose Errors, and Evils, that first part of Naked
Truth did discover) (at lest by reflection) were so impudent as to scribble
against it: yet what did they do in it, but lay open their own Shame and Folly
to all men? So that if they had been publicly known, they would have exposed
their Persons as much to contempt and hissing, as their dirty Papers were to
Abhorrency.

In this third part of Naked Truth, is a discovery of some of those parts of
Truth, as were not treated of in the first Part, nor yet in that which is
styled the second part of Naked Truth, but in this Discourse three things are
performed.

First, The Naked Truth is so laid open with reference unto some things, which
concern the Ruling Clergy of any Protestant Nation; as will engage the most
Ingenious among the said Clergy to return solemn thanks-givings to God for this
third part of Naked Truth.

Secondly, the Naked Truth is made so conspicuous, with reference to that which
is the true glory of Protestants in opposition to Popery, as has never yet
been done by any Pen.

Thirdly, the Naked Truth is so, and in such a manner displayed, as the
Filthiness and the Odiousness of the Scarlet-Whore is made so Patent, and Bare,
as may tend to the opening of the Eyes of the Kings of the Earth, and of every
ordinary and intelligent Person, as may work in them a loathing, and a
detestation of her as Rev. 17.16. is said shall be wrought,

And it may be hoped, that this very Discourse may prove to be such a Mirror or
Looking-Glass, to as many of that Scarlet Generation (that are related to the
Scarlet-Whore, whose great thirstiness for Blood is so notoriously made
manifest, both formerly and lately) as will but give themselves leave seriously
to look upon their own odious Pictures, I say this Mirror may so discover to
them, so much of their own Shame, as they never saw before, as possibly may
work in them a loathing of themselves, and a true Repentance of their evil
Ways, which have not been good, according to Ezekiel. 36.31. and may engage them
to join with Protestants to hate the Whore and to make her desolate and naked,
and to burn her with fire.

For we have great ground to hope that the discoveries of naked Truth more and
more, will tend to the inlightening of all Nations professing Christianity,
both Protestant and Papistical, (for some Protestants have in some things erred
also,) and to the Conversion of both from the Errors of their ways, and to the
bringing of all dissenting Parties to that sincere Love one to another, and
that true Peace one with another, that becomes the Gospel. Even to that perfect
Unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to which he has
determined to bring his Church in due time, (which time may be near even at the
door.) To which all true Christians, (whatever their present Errors and
Weaknesses may be,) will in Sincerity say, Amen and Amen.

The Glory of PROTESTANTS, And the Shame of PAPISTS.
HAving for some time labored and traveled with desire of Soul, to bring
forth those things that have been given to me, which may tend to Peace and
Unity, I shall in this short Discourse only touch at some few things in order
thereunto. And the first thing that I shall humbly present to the Consideration
of the Protestant Churches, both at home and abroad is, That as the business of
the Christian Religion is now a thing not capable to be separated from an
Affair of State: so considered as such, it is far more difficult for a
Protestant Prince upon some accounts to govern it, than for a Popish Prince,
and that for the following Reason: which difficulty when the Reason is
considered, may easily be remedied, according to that Maxim, Take away the
Cause and the Effect cease.

The Reason or Cause of this difficulty, I shall here therefore endeavor to
lay open, and to manifest with all plainness and clearness. I say therefore
that the reason of this Difficulty is because the Prince having the Character
or Repute only of a Secular Authority, has not that immediate Influence upon
Religion it self, or upon Religious People, which the Clergy has; for as it is
not to be expected that a Prince should have that knowledge, so neither is it
possible that he should be any way so Conversant in, or so attendant upon the
Affairs, Controversies, and Disputes which do relate to Religion, as the Clergy
may.

And by reason of this, Though a Prince may in other things have never so great
an ability of Judgment,

And though he be never so Absolute or Supreme; Yet he is denied the Right of
this Judgment, as to the Matters of Religion, in regard that this is
appropriated solely to the Clergy.

And the Clergy taking upon them the sole right of Judgment, in all Religious
and all Ecclesiastical Affairs, do by this means presume, That their judgment
alone is to be received by the Prince, whenever they see it reasonable to
desire his Authority, to Confirm and Assent to such things in Religion, as they
would have confirmed and assented unto;

And whenever they on the contrary, shall desire his nulling and repressing
such things, as they properly dislike, and would have nulled and repressed by
him.

And seeing all such Representations, when at any time made by the Clergy, are
not only the easier, but the sooner gained by them, because of the entire trust
that in the whole affair of Religion, is generally committed to them, as to
Persons not only of supposed sufficiency, but of supposed Conscience and
Integrity. And because there can be no third party therefore, that has a power
to examine the things propounded by them, or to sift into the grounds or
reasons of them.

They are the more easy to be gained also, because of the Power and Influence
which all pretenses about Religion, do commonly and rationally carry with them,
with reference to the public Peace, and to the establishment of Piety, and to
the procuring both of Prosperity, and of blessing upon a Nation it self. Which
things being generally apprehended and believed by all, to be the real
Consequences of Religion;

Nothing therefore can render a Prince more plausible, or to speak more
properly,

Nothing renders a Prince more naturally grateful, to the hearts, or more
inwardly awful and reverend to the mind and affections of his people, than the
Supposition of his being Religious or pious does.

And therefore all Propositions about Religion, having this advantage above all
others of any kind whatsoever; no marvel if they gain a more easy reception
with any Government, than any other Proposition can.

Especially if offered by such, who claim the main care and charge of all
things which concern Religion, and concern the welfare of it, as well as they
challenge the chiefest knowledge and judgment about it.

For these reasons therefore, and for the purchasing and the conserving such a
name among his people, as may become a Prince that would justly be accounted
Pious, and for the avoiding the Blemish and Imputation of the contrary, a
Prince is oft-times induced through the instant request and importunity of the
Clergy, both to dispense with, and yield to such things, which otherwise if
duly examined, would neither be judged suitable, nor perhaps consistent with his
Dignity, either to do or to grant.

So that though it be a thing for those reasons very plain, That a Prince
cannot in the affairs of Religion, easily decline the Judgment and
Representation of the Clergy: yet nothing is more certain than this,

That their Judgments and their Counsels prove sometimes, not only imposing but
very dangerous both To his Government, To his Safety, To his Honor, and to his
Interest.

And the more, because as the rise of their Advice does often proceed, (if not
for the most part) from those Considerations and no other, wherein their own
interest as a Clergy is particularly, and sometimes privately concerned: so the
end of their advice terminates many times, in nothing else beyond this.

That due Care and just Consideration, which is but fit to be had to their
Princes Interest, being either not so faithfully, or uprightly, or at least not
so circumspectly minded by them as it ought.

For the Proof of which, we may appeal even to matter of Fact, there being not
one or two but rather too too many Precedents to be found, wherein the Advice
which the Clergy has given to Princes, has been so precipitate and rash, that
Princes to avoid those mischiefs that have followed from their Counsels, (and
doubting lest other and farther inconveniences might ensue upon them that might
be worse) have been forced oft-times to rescind their own Orders, though to the
lessenning of the Credit and Authority of their Government.

Yea not only so, but through the importunity of the Clergy, and through the
rashness and unseasonableness of their Counsels, it is not one Prince, but
several Princes, that have been frequently entangled, Either with Divisions and
Dissentions at home among their own Subjects, or with quarrels abroad among
their Neighbors, not only to the disquiet of their Government, To the Ruin of
many ancient Families, To the shedding of much innocent Blood, and to the waste
and consumption of an extreme Mass of Treasures: but which is yet worse, to the
doing of all this without any Fruit, and to the giving over (at length) the
very quarrel it self, even for these very Reasons, viz.

Because they saw they were misled in it, and were able to effect none of those
ends, which others propounded to them by it, and which they propounded to
themselves, than which nothing can render a Prince more unfortunate, to the eye
of himself or of others: which unfortunateness by their engaging in quarrels
relating to Religion, has nevertheless happened not only to Princes of
ordinary, but to Princes of extraordinary Wisdom, Courage, and Conduct.

Witness the ill success of Charles the Fifth, in his War upon the Princes of
Germany.

And of his Son Philip the Second of Spain, in his attempt upon the Netherlands.

And witness also three Kings of France, one after another.

And witness, what is not fit to be particularized, even those things that
happened at home even in our own Country; which have drawn a Mourning-Veil
upon the Records of our own times.

And yet so untractable have the Clergy been at some Times, and in some Places
or Countries, that if a Prince shall refuse their Advice (though out of
judgment) or shall oppose the unreasonableness of their Counsels, though never
so justly, They do hereupon, not only meet and Herd among themselves, but
partly by Preaching, partly by Writing, and partly by other ways of
negotiating, they do Endeavor to gain to themselves, both the greatest Persons
and the greatest part of the Nation, even to prevent the effects of this
Judgment, Prudence, and Moderation.

And if these things we have now said have any Weight or Truth at all in them,
they will evidence the Deductions following to be as true and as certain, viz.

1 That the Affair of Religion is of too active a nature to lie wholly
neglected, and unregarded by any Government.

2 That none can have a principal hand in the Government of it, but they must
have the principal power and opportunity through it, to affect the people more
than any other, either in the point of Obligation, or in the point of Neglect
and Disrespect.

3 That this must be much more true and certain in such a Nation, where the
Peoples Zeal and Affections do run most strongly of any to Religion, (as in
these Nations) than it is or can be true, in any other Nations whatever.

4 That whoever will weigh it, must find the Clergy therefore singly for this
Reason, even because of their mere Calling and Relation to Religion, to be
considerable in every Nation both for Power and Interest.

5 That though they dare not merely because of their Calling, any way challenge
an Order or Superiority above the Prince, nor can: Yet they are by consequence
always made Independent upon the Prince, and sometimes absolute over the
Prince, when the Prince himself shall entirely, and without any check commit
the Affairs of the whole Church and Religion to them.

Because if they govern Religion well, and entirely according to the Peoples
satisfaction, they must unavoidably draw and engage the very Souls, Hearts and
Consciences of the People to them, and that by the firmest, strongest, and most
lasting Tie of any, which is that of their Minds, and Affections, and of the
Duty they owe unto God.

If on the contrary they Rule the Affair of Religion wholly and perfectly to
the Disgust, Oppression, or Bondage of the people, they must of necessity as
much disgust the Government; though not for it self, yet because of that
absolute Authority which it maintains and upholds in the Clergy.

6 That the committing the Affairs of Religion and of the Church entirely to
the Clergy without any check at all upon them, is yet the more against the
Interest of the Prince, because it lays an express Temptation upon them, to
Govern both the Church and Religion absolutely, and at their own Will, and
consequently to govern Religion with much less Care, Heed, Circumspection, and
Moderation, than otherwise they would have done.

7 While the Clergy govern the Affairs of the Church and of Religion
absolutely, and by their own Will, without any Check whatever upon them, The
Prince himself neither has nor can have the least security, that they will not
Govern all things directly agreeable to their own Interest, and to their
private and particular Concern, let that Interest with the Means best to effect
it, be never so distinct, to the Interest of the Prince, or to the Interest of
the People; or never so destructive or contrary to either.

8 That it is less advisable for a Protestant Prince to commit the Affairs of
the Church, and of Religion absolutely and entirely to the Clergy, than it is
for any other Prince. Because the Clergy are by this, without any Head at all
over them, and without any Council whatever that is superior to them, (which
they are not under the Papists themselves) and because the Prince, must by this
means inevitably subject himself to their Advice, and to the Effect of it, let
the Issue of it prove never so inconvenient or rash to him, as is manifest from
the Examples before mentioned.

9. That it is the less advisable also for a Protestant Prince than for any
other Prince, Because it is not only against the Example of Holland, but
against the Example of all the Protestant Princes that were Instrumental in the
first Reformation, and of most of their Successors.

10. That as it must be utterly against the Interest of a Prince to take part
with the Clergy, when ruling of Religion wholly and perfectly to the disgust of
the People: so it must recommend him, not only to the Judgments, but to the
Minds, Hearts and Affections of the People, even beyond what any thing else
has a power to do, if he shall please, more especially at such a time as that
is, to gratify them with the sense of his own Care of them. And there cannot
well be a greater Season, and Opportunity put into the hand of any Prince,
either to Honor himself, or to oblige a People, and to oblige them to him in
strictness by all Ties that are possible to be laid in Gratitude or Conscience
upon them; Than for a Prince to take the Affairs of Religion, or of the Church,
into his own hand at such a time, as they have most miscarried in the hand of
the Clergy.

And to manifest to his people that it is his fixed resolution, to defend that
which is the Foundation of Protestantism, and which is the true glory of it, in
opposition to the Popish Religion, of which I shall now more particularly
discourse.

The Glory of the Protestant Religion is,
That by the Reformation there was a restoration of the Scriptures, in the
Vulgar Tongue, as well to the common people as to any others, and this was one
main part of the Reformation, if not the chiefest of any that came by the
Reformation it self, and it is the true glory of it, without which any thing
else that came by the Reformation could have been but of little advantage to us.

And if a Protestant Prince do assure his people, that he will maintain and
defend this Principle, or Foundation of Protestantism, This will, and must
firmly and strongly engage all the Hearts and Affections of his Protestant
Subjects unto him.

But whether the Prince will defend and maintain this Principle or not, yet it
is unavoidable: That all Protestants as well in all other Nations beyond the
Seas where any Protestants are as well as in these three Kingdoms, do
irresistably cleave to this Principle, viz. That by the Reformation the free
use of the Scripture is restored to all people, And this Principle being fixed
in them, it has these four following Effects.

The first Effect.
1. That no man or men (that no party of the Clergy or any other) shall ever be
able to remove the influence, which the Divine Authority of the Scripture must
have, and cannot but have, upon the Minds and Consciences of the People
professing the Protestant Religion, as the Scriptures are acknowledged to be.

The ONLY Word, the ALONE Rule of the mind of God unto his People.

This Character or Apprehension of the Dignity and Authority of the Scriptures,
being so Essential to our Reformation it self, that there is no Protestant can
so much as doubt of it. It being that which is not only commonly taught in our
Pulpits, but frequently inculcated to us, while we are Children by our Parents,
and by those Masters which take the Care of us while we are at School.

The Second Effect.
And secondly, this Principle of the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, being
from our very Education thus firmly rooted in us, it must make the influence of
it to be equally as strong, and equally as powerful upon the Consciences of us,
even as the Scriptures themselves are, which is equal with the very Authority
of God himself: and especially upon all such as are religiously Educated and
Bred: so that there is no Obligation or Tie whatever, which is capable to be
laid upon men upon any civil, outward, or temporal Account, that is able to
have any part of that strength, or influence upon them, as the Scriptures must
necessarily have upon, and over the generallity of all Persons in the
Protestant Church: which is a second Effect, which can never be removed by any
Authority of man whatsoever.

The strength and prevalency of which Tie as made upon the Consciences of all
Persons as Protestants, by or from the Scripture, is yet the more considerable,
because whatever Worship, Service, or Religion we as Protestants do profess to
give unto God, we profess it only from the Authority of the Scriptures
themselves, and from the Authority of them, as they are thus owned and
professed by the Protestant Church to be our Supreme: and (consequently) our
immediate Tie in all that we believe, and in all that we act as Protestants
toward God which has not its Termination in, or its dependence so much upon
men, or upon the Ruling Clergy, or upon the Church, as upon the Scripture or
Word of God it self.

We judging it lawful enough to forsake the Church, when we once judge the
Church in what it believes, or in what it acts, or practices toward God to
have forsaken his Word.
And our Profession or Religion being thus founded, I mean out of Conscience
purely to Gods Word: Every man then, properly as a Protestant, if he be
Sincere, does as much believe that the Worship (whatever it be that he
professes) is as truly agreeable to the Mind and Will of God, as is the very
Scripture it self. And consequently that he is as much to contend for the said
Worship, as he is bound to contend for the Authority of the Scripture it self:
For these two being taken by him but for one thing, ( viz. the Truth and
Authority of the Scripture, and the Truth and Authority of what he professes,)
consequently the same Tie that binds him to the Scripture, must of necessity
bind him to that Religion whatever it be, which he as a Protestant professes
unto God. And consequently if there be no Tie so firm or so strong upon the
Conscience, as that of the Divine and Absolute Authority of the Scripture is:
There can be no Tie stronger than what Protestants as such (and as Sincere)
must necessarily have for the Religion, whatever it be that they do
respectively profess unto God.

The Third Effect.
And Thirdly, This now being made clear and undoubted, viz. That the Tie and
Obligation that every man has to the Worship which he professes unto God,
properly as a Protestant lies in, and rises immediately from the Scriptures.
And it being likewise cleared that the highest Tie which can possibly be laid
upon the Conscience of any man, is that proceeding from the Scriptures, as they
are The ONLY Rule of God's Mind and Will to us.

It must necessarily follow, that if the Authority of men can neither remove
the Use of the Scriptures themselves, nor remove the Obligation which they have
above all things upon the Consciences of men, even from their very Education,
as they are The only Rule of God's Mind, then no Authority of man, can ever
possibly remove the Obedience which men will always conceive themselves obliged
to give to the said Word, in whatever it be they apprehend it does clearly
command. Seeing this Obedience is looked upon to be the same, (and no other)
with an Obedience given to God himself.

And if an Obedience given unto God, be in Conscience also infinitely
preferrable to any Obedience to man, then must an Obligation to the immediate
Law and Will of God, be always preferrable to, and stronger than any Obligation
whatever, to the Law or Command of men, which is a third unavoidable Effect of
it.

The Fourth Effect.
And Fourthly, if the Law of the Church, or of the Ruling Clergy, cannot in the
matter of Worship any way compel or bind men to Obedience, farther or otherwise
than as they apprehend it to be agreeable to the Law of God, or to the Law of
his Word: Then neither can the Law of the Prince, or the Law of the Civil
Government bind men's Consciences, in the matter of Worship, further or
otherwise than the Law of the Church, viz. no otherwise, than as the said Law
shall appear to them to be agreeable to Gods Law, which is the Law of his
Scripture or Word. And consequently it can never be avoided by any Protestant
Prince, but his Authority as relating purely to things Civil, with the Efficacy
of it, must stand upon one Rule;

And his Authority as relating to things of Divine Worship, with the Efficacy
of it, must necessarily and unavoidably stand upon another Rule.

And therefore that his Authority over his Subjects in the one, and in the
other of these, must of necessity be distinguished. Which is the fourth thing
that we say cannot in any Protestant Government possibly be prevented. That
these four things are the certain Effects, of that which is the Main part, or
the Chiefest Privilege of any that came by the Reformation it self before
mentioned, may be further and more fully demonstrated thus.

For if no Law can possibly Eradicate that Notion, That there is a God: Then no
endeavor of man whatever, can hinder his being worshipped, by such at least as
have a sense of his being, and do verily believe that HE IS.

Wherefore, if we are trained up from our Childhood, and trained up not only as
men, but as Protestants, firmly to believe that God will accept of no other
Worship at all from us as Christians, but what is agreeable to his Word. And if
it be a thing continually inculcated to us even from our very Infancy,

That it is in a Conformity to this Word alone, that all Religion whatever does
consist;

Then it is not Reason only, but Experience it self, which attests it, That a
man may as soon quit his Notion that there is a God, or be afraid to own it.

And may as soon quit the Notion that God is to be worshipped, or be afraid to
own it.

As he may quit or be afraid to own (as he is a Protestant) this Notion, viz.
That God is so only to be worshipped, and no otherwise than he has set down in
his Word.

And if this Notion then about his Word, as the only Rule of the Worship of
God, be as firmly planted in us by our Education, as any Notion can be planted
in us, that belongs to our nature as men: It must needs follow, that a
Government may as well, and with as good success, hope or propound to it self
by a Law, to extinguish common Notions, as hope or propound to it self by a
Law, to extinguish among any Protestant Nation, the Notion of the necessity of
Worshipping God according to his Word.

And therefore if it be rightly considered it will likewise appear: That it
must be to him that is truly educated as a Protestant, every way as grievous to
be commanded by a Law to forsake Christianity it self, as to be commanded by a
Law to forsake that Worship, which he as a Protestant cannot but believe in his
heart, is alone agreeable to the Mind and Law of God, which is that Worship
that is given to God directly conformable to his Scripture or Word. And of the
Truth of this the Martyrs in Queen Mary's time are a competent Witness.

And consequently they that pretend to take another Measure of Protestantism,
than according to what is thus firmly rooted in the hearts of men, both by
their Education, and by the very Principles and Doctrine of the Reformation, do
seem but to prevaricate only with the reformed Religion, and with the sixth
Article of the Church of England, and do if not in Words, yet in Actions seem
manifestly to declare, that they neither really believe the Scriptures, or the
Christian Religion, or the Reformation to be of God.

For if the whole of the Christian Religion be contained in the Scripture, and
in the Scripture alone, as the sixth Article of the Church of England does both
plainly and expressly confess it is: Then to make the rule of the Word to be our
rule wholly as Christians in the Worship of God, is so far from an Obstencie,
and so far from any thing of Humor or Superstition, or Conceitedness, that the
contrary can be no way dispensable, and much less maintainable before God: and
therefore there is neither any part of Popery it self, nor any thing of
Idolatry, though never so gross, but it may be as easily imposed upon, and as
easily entertained by a Protestant, as any worship may; which he evidently
sees, or is sufficiently persuaded of in his Conscience to be against the Mind
of God, or against the Rule of his Word.

Seeing it is This Rule that is the only Index of his Mind as to us, and it is
This Rule alone, to which all the Promises of God are entirely made, and all
the Promises of God being made to This Rule only; This Rule, and no other, must
then as we are Christians, be The alone Foundation both of all our hope, and of
all our trust toward God. And must consequently be the only ground upon which
we can as Christians have any expectation of Salvation and Life. And therefore
the whole Interest, and Concern of our Souls, (at least as we are Protestants)
does, and must stand entirely upon the said Word. Which things if they cannot
possibly any way be denied,

Then the disobeying of all such Laws in the matter of Worship, as are NOT
agreeable to The Word of God, or which at least appear not to be so, is a thing
wholly inevitable, and is impossible to be avoided in a Protestant Government;
even as we are rational persons, because there is a threefold reason that
necessarily impels it.

First as it has its rise from that most forcible and indeleable Character
which is writ in the Minds of all men; which is, That seeing GOD IS, HE ought
to be worshipped in some manner or another of necessity.

Secondly, as it has its rise from that Character which has equal force with
the other in the Minds of us; as we are bred Protestants, viz. That God is no
other way to be worshipped, nor will accept of any other worship from us (as
Christians) but what is agreeable to his Word. Which two Principles, seeing by
virtue of our Education they make but one indeed in our hearts, as we are
Protestants they do and must constrain us as soon to abandon all worship it self
unto God, as to abandon that worship which is properly agreeable to his Word.
Because so far as we abandon this, we do abandon all Worship that is according
to our Principles as Protestants, either acceptable with God, or agreeable to
the Mind of God.

Wherefore if to these two we shall add the third ground of its rise, which is
as certain also as either of the other, viz. That we neither have hope in God,
nor any Promises made us by God further than as we obey him in his Word, or
further than as we worship him according to the Rule of it.

I say these three things being now jointly considered, and seriously weighed
by us: what man is there, or what man can there be, who firmly believes that
there is any such thing as Salvation and Life, who will not run any hazard
rather than forbear what he judges to be the Worship of God? or rather than he
will observe such a Worship unto God as he cannot but know, or cannot at least
but verily believe to be contrary to his Mind, and contrary to the Rule of his
Word.

If it be evil then, for any man to believe that God is indispensibly to be
worshipped after some manner or another, or evil for a man to believe that
there is no other rule of his Will or Mind to us as we are Christians but his
Word, and therefore no other Rule wherein his Worship is contained besides his
Word.

Or if it be evil to expect that God will most truly, faithfully, and fully
perform his Promises to us, if we shall serve him according to his Word, and
not otherwise,

I say if any of these three things are evil, then it may be evil to disobey
any Law relating to the Worship of God though it be not agreeable to his Word.
But if none of these things be evil in themselves, they can never make any man
evil who simply conforms to them, I say not simply for his conformity how
strictly or entirely so ever it be.

And therefore if these three Principles are of such a nature, as creates a
necessity of our compliance with them, even as we are rational persons, we must
either then remove the Principles themselves, and the lawfulness of them, or we
must unavoidably suffer and permit their efficacy as lawful over men. For to
allow the Principles themselves as good, and lawful, and as necessary and
indispensible in themselves, and to disallow nevertheless the Practice of them;
or to disallow such persons as follow them and embrace them, and to account
such persons to be only disturbers, or to be men so evil and bad as that they
are not fit to be tolerated in a Nation, even though no Crime besides this be
objected against them: Is either grossly to prevaricate with the said
Principles, and to make but a mock or sport of them, or it is to do that which
is absolutely repugnant, absurd, and contradictory in it self: which is wholly
against the Reason and Nature of a man as a man.

For though it cannot be maintained, that all the Laws of men must or ought
necessarily to arise out of the Laws of God, viz. either that of his Word, or
that Law written in the heart of man, Yet it is maintained among all Christian
Governments whatever,

That no Law of the Civil Magistrate has any power to supersede any Law of
God, whether it be that writ in the heart of man, or that writ in his Word, and
therefore it is universally agreed by all Governments, and cannot be denied by
any that profess Christianity, That all humane Laws if they be inconsistent
either with any of those common Principles that are writ in our Nature, (which
are called the common Principles of Reason) or with any thing that is expressly
writ in the Word of God, They are null and void in themselves. Because they are
against a prior or preceding Obligation, which all men as men have by Nature
unto God, as unto their Supreme Lord and Creator.

Wherefore in as much as it is clear, that all Laws which command men to
forbear that Worship, which they as Protestants do in their hearts judge, and
believe to be agreeable to the Mind, Will, and Word of God, or which commands
them to conform to such a Worship, as they judge according to their own
Understandings (and connot but believe it) to be disagreeable to the said Mind,
Will, and Word of God, are of this nature, that is,

First, they are such Laws as have a manifest Inconsistency either with the Law
writ in the heart it self, which is, That God is indispensably to be worshipped
in some manner or another, Or,

Secondly, they are such Laws as have an Inconsistency with the Law writ in the
Word of God, which is, That he will reward all such as shall obey him according
to the Rule which he has given them in his said Word, and will punish such as
shall do the contrary. Or,

Thirdly, they are such Laws as have an Inconsistency with the Rule of the
Reformation it self, which is, that all Worship which is Christian, and
foederal, is to be given to God according to the Scriptures, and that whatever
IS NOT read in the Scriptures, nor may be proved by the Scripture, IS NOT to be
required of any man that it should be believed as an Article of Faith. Which
are the very words of the sixth Article of the Church of England, (and which
Article if wounded, the rest of the thirty nine Articles must be wounded
equally with it, seeing they are judged to be founded mainly upon it,) I do
therefore with all humbleness say, that all such Laws (in any Protestant
Government whatever) which restrain such a Worship as is agreeable to the Word
of God, or is really believed to be such by them that practice it, I say all
such Laws are entirely against that Prior Law or preceding Obligation, which
men as men have by Nature indispensably unto God, as to their Immediate Creator
and Lord, above any which they have or can have unto man, how lawfully soever
he may be the Superior of them.

And consequently, that all Non-obedience or Nonconformity to any of the said
Laws, though it be in a sense voluntary, yet it is neither elective nor indeed
truly or properly free, And therefore that such Non-obedience is not any the
least breach of affection, Nor any the least forfeiture of a man's Duty to his
Prince, or to the Government, Because it is a Nonconformity or Disobedience
that is absolutely constrained, compelled, and of an inevitable and
indispensible nature in its self, by reason of the Prior Law or of the
preceding, and indispensible Obligation which we have both as Men and as
Christians unto God; And have above and beyond any Obligation that we have, or
can have possibly to any person as the Prince or Superior of us.

And all men that maintain the contrary, and that either out of a Luxury of
Wit, or out of a Super-foetation of Vanity, Insolency, or Pride do seek to
baffle this Argument, or to evade the force of it, from or under the pretense
of the Capriciousness, Humoursomness, and affectation of Singularity that may
be in some Persons; may with as good Reason, and with as solid a Judgment make
a mere Mock or Ridicule of all the Martyrs that have ever been since the World
stood, and may as well call Daniel, and the three Children, and all the
Primitive Christians, and the Apostles who suffered for God, and for the
Testimony of his Word, and of Christ, Revel. 6.9. Revel. 1.9. men that were
only capricious, humourous, and persons that did affect a Singularity, as call
all men so at this Day, whoever they are that do not conform to the Laws
Nationally made about Worship and Religion:

For if their bare Allegation that all men that do not conform, are men only of
humorous, and capricious Tempers, and men who merely affect a Singularity and
Disturbance; shall be taken for a sufficient Evidence against them.

By as just a Law, the Testimony of any Atheist, may as well be taken against
all the Martyrs that ever were. And the Testimony of any common Person, may be
taken against them themselves (that allege this,) that they are Atheists. And
if this last be not reasonable, neither is the first. For if another bare
Allegation is not to be taken against them, nor ought to be allowed as an
Evidence, So neither is their bare saying to be taken against others.

By all that I have said then, it will appear that there is a clear difference,
between the Authority of a Prince in things Civil, and in things relating to
Worship and Religion.

For as a Princes Authority in things Civil is unquestionable, and enterferes
with no Law of God whatever, and can have no pretense therefore to entrench
upon the Conscience, or upon any prior Obligation or Duty that a man owes unto
God, and as it must for all these Reasons be necessarily and indispensably
obeyed, and submitted unto by all his Subjects;

So on the contrary, a Prince, especially as a Protestant can put out no Law
about Divine Worship, but his Subjects so far as they are Protestants, are
bound in Conscience and by the very Principles of that Religion which they
profess, not only to Consider it, But to Examine it, whether it be agreeable to
the Word of God or not, and if it appear not to be such (at least according to
the best of their Understandings,) As they will have a Plea always not to
submit to it, by Reason it intrencheth upon a Prior Obligation; So this Plea
cannot well with Justice be denied them, if no Crime whatever in their
Conversation can be proved against them. NOR can men in this Case be actually
punished, and proceeded against without the Sense and Grief of that Wrong, or
Oppression that is manifestly done to them, and suffered by them, especially
seeing their Nonconformity to the said Laws, proceeds not as we said, either
from their Election or Liberty. Nor yet from any breach of Duty or Affection to
their Prince: But only from what appears to them to be an Inevitable, or
Indispensable Necessity that arises, and is occasioned from their mere
Profession as they are of the Protestant Religion. To this end I shall
therefore offer one Argument more which shall be taken from,

The Character of a Papist.
The thing which does Essentially distinguish a Protestant from a Papist, more
than any Note, Mark, or Character whatever besides, is, That a Papist by his
Principles as a Papist may not, and indeed cannot dispute any Law whatever,
relating to the Worship or Service of God, provided it be declared and
established by what he acknowledges to be the Church: Because he takes the
Authority of the Church for the whole Argument, or for the only Foundation of
all his Obedience unto God; rather than the Divine Authority of the Scripture
or Word. And because he presumes the Church also to be a thing altogether
Holy, and such as neither has Erred, nor can Err, for should he question this,
he must question the whole of his Religion it self: opposite to which
Character, we shall now consider,

The Character of a Protestant.
But the Protestant Church on the other hand, having separated from the Church
of Rome, not only upon the Supposition that she has actually Erred, but that
she has been grossly corrupted as well in Manners as in Faith. And the
Protestant Church having for the better Justification of her own Practice, both
in the matter of Worship, and in all things relating to Doctrine, and Faith,
SET UP The Scriptures as the Sole and Sovereign Rule of Gods Mind and Will to
his Church: As she cannot challenge the Exercise of any Authority therefore,
that is beyond that of the Scripture; or any that is not subordinate to the
said Scripture it self: So it is expected that all the Duties which she
requires, and all those Articles or Points of Faith which she at any time
recommends, to such as are the Members of her, should always be enforced from
those Arguments properly, and only, which are drawn from the Scripture: Because
it is this, which she her self has appealed unto, and this only which she
challenges to justify her.

A Protestant then, that understands the Grounds of his Religion, or that has
been at all instructed in the Rise or Principles of the Reformation, taking
this for the very first Article of his Faith; That a Church may Err, and may
have Corruption in it, and may in its Worship possibly swerve, and depart from
the pure Mind, Word, and Wisdom of God: And laying that no less firmly as the
Foundation of his Belief on the other hand, viz. That the Scripture cannot Err,
nor can be other than the unalterable, and incorruptible Rule of Gods Law, and
of his Will and Mind to his People, he cannot possibly hold the Authority of
the Church to be Divine, any further or otherwise, than as it appears to be
clearly grounded upon the Scriptures as the Word of God. And therefore the Tie
or Obligation which he has to obey the Church, so far as it relates to the
Conscience, and binds the Conscience, arises out of no other Ground, than from
the Conformity which he sees, or is persuaded that the said Church has in her
Laws, Orders and Doctrines to the said Word, and if this Conformity does or
shall once cease in the said Church, a Protestant as a Protestant, cannot but
judge his Tie or Obligation to her as a Church ought to cease also with it.

And this being the true State of that Radical or Essential Difference that is
between the Principles of a Protestant, and the Principles of a Papist as a
Papist,

It will hence follow,
That if a Church that professes her self to be Protestant (or the Ruling
Clergy of a Protestant Church) shall not much consider, or regard the
justifying of what Laws, and Orders she makes by the Consonancy they expressly
have, to the Law or Mind of God in his Word, (which is his Rule to the Church)
nor shall much concern it self to clear, and enforce the Faith and Doctrine
which she holds, by the Evidence of its Truth, or by the Authority of it, as
sufficiently grounded upon that Word that is absolutely Divine: But shall on
the contrary, in whatever she Commands or in the things she Teaches, constrain
or exact an Obedience from her Members to her self, and to her own Authority as
absolute, and as unsubordinate to the Word of God, and therefore to her
Authority as it is a distinct thing from the said Word: That Church, (or the
Clergy rather, that are the Rulers of it) so far as she does this in any
Doctrine, or in any Law that she makes indispensable, does so far cease in her
Principles and Practice to be Protestant: and does so far disclaim not only a
main and chief Ground of her Separation from the Church of Rome; but the very
Principle it self, upon which she pretends to guide her self, in her
Reformation.

For it cannot be denied that these were the great, and the main Causes of our
Separation from the Church of Rome, viz.

First, Because she had made her self Absolute, and had set up an Authority in
the matters of Worship and Faith, above that of the Scriptures, as the only
Word of God. And

Secondly, Because she did not barely excommunicate men, but did also persecute
them, and did deprive them both of their Estates, Liberties, and Lives upon a
Principle as contrary to humane Reason, as it was contrary to humane Society,
and Quiet: viz. not for any evil in their Conversations, in their Morals, or in
their Lives: But merely for obeying what they sincerely judged to be the Law,
Mind, and Will of God. And merely for believing that his whole Law, Will, and
Mind to his Church as a Church, especially relating to the Worship of himself,
was contained in his Word.

Thirdly, Because by this persecution, as it was extended to the extreme
Punishment of Persons, both in their Liberties, and Goods, and sometimes in
their Lives, by stinking Prisons and want of Necessaries; she did unavoidably
draw upon her self the Guilt of men's Apostasy, Hypocrsie, and Dissimulation,
who durst not but obey and comply with her Commands, merely out of fear. And
did as unavoidably draw upon her the Guilt of all that Suffering, Cruelty, and
Blood whatever it were she spilt, and did inflict upon those persons who
withstood her Commands, and who were otherwise in all things blameless, both as
to their Morals, Lives, and Conversations.

I say if it be matter of Fact, and that which cannot be denied, that these
three things, were some of the Main, and Principal Causes for which we
separated from the Church of Rome; and for which our first Reformers themselves
called her Antichristian: and sometimes Bloody, and sometimes the Scarlet
Whore. And if these three things, when at any time mentioned with reference to
the Church of Rome, are still acknowledged to be evil, and so styled to this
day, so far as it concerns her. Yea if these three things, are at this very
present in our Controversies with that Church, not only charged upon her, but
cast in her teeth, among many other things by way of reproach, and to set forth
the just ground, that we even as the Church of England, (as well as other
Churches) have both of exception against and hatred of her.

MUST NOT these three things be MUCH MORE EVIL in a Protestant Church? who
after she has condemned all these things, not only as evil but as
Antichristian in the Church of Rome; and after she has pretended to separate
from the said Church for them, does nevertheless give her self leave to
practice them, without condemning her self at all in them? And MUST NOT This
Practice cast a manifest Blemish, and Reproach upon on her own Reformation? and
evidence to the world that she does not either believe the Principles of it, OR
does not at least dare to Trust to it.

Wherefore if the said Church (or the Clergy rather as the Rulers of it) merely
upon these Grounds, and only to these ends, which are both thus evil in
themselves, and thus contrary to the very Grounds and Ends of our Reformation,
shall endeavor to Engage the power of the Civil Magistrate to her Assistance,
(which God forbid they should ever do any more in England; for we have good
ground to believe that several of the Ruling Clergy if not all, do abhor it, to
their Praise be it spoken) I humbly offer it to Consideration, whether in
moving this to a Prince, especially as he is a Protestant, she does or can move
him to any other purpose, than That his Authority may promote the Defection she
has made from her own Principles, and may Countenance her in that, which she
knows that the Rules of the Reformation, and of Protestantism cannot: viz.
not only her Cruelty and Severity, but her Exorbitancy?

And whether she has, or can have any Argument to the said Prince, for his
Countenancing of her, greater than this, (viz) Than as she knows that all the
evil which would be charged upon HER wholly and ONLY as a Church may now
through his countenancing of her be in part as well charged upon his Royal
Authority and Pleasure as upon her. Which Argument being really of no better a
nature than this, whether it be therefore reasonable in it self? or whether it
be so much as fit or modest for the said Church to make? or whether it be
agreeable to that Duty, Honor, and Sincerity which she as a Church professes
to owe, and ought at all times uprightly to pay to her Prince, I humbly leave
and submit to the Judgments of all Ingenious Persons, and especially when with
reference to the Effect of this Motion, it is matter of Fact; that though
twenty six private Persons would be thereby gratified, (some of whom are men of
no Birth, Interest, or temporal Estate in the Nation) and more than twice so
many thousands are greatly grieved, injured, and wronged in their Persons, and
Estates, which are equally his Majesty's Subjects as well as they. And many of
which are every way Peers to them, for Birth, for Virtue, for Loyalty, for
Temperance, for Morality, for Mercy, for Charity, for temporal Estates; and
even for Learning also.

And here it will be necessary in the next place, to consider again what it is
in these respects, that we blame the Church of Rome for, I mean,

What the Guilt of the Church of Rome is.
For either Guilt is a thing of Weight before God, or it is not. And either the
Guilt which has been charged upon the Church of Rome, (by reason of her
Persecution) by our Reformers first; and by many worthy Men of the Church of
England since, is justly charged upon her, or it is not.

But if that Guilt be Real, and that it is justly charged upon the said Church,
It is apparently Criminal two ways,

First, as she through her Persecution is the cause of all that Hypocrisy,
Dissimulation, and Apostasy, which men commit for mere fear of her, and by
which though out of weakness, they do greatly wrong their own Conscience, and
greatly injure their former Profession before God, and know they do so, and lie
oft-times under trouble of Conscience all their lives afterward for it.

And secondly, she is equally guilty, as she is the cause (by reason of her
Persecution) of the Sufferings, Distresses, and great Afflictions, which many
particular Persons, and many Families groan under: by which she occasions many
solemn Complaints, Cries, and Appeals to be made unto God, which men who are
conscious to themselves of their Sincerity toward God, did pour out to him as
the Righteous Judge of all persons.

And if this be The Guilt of the Church of Rome, and if we as Protestants when
we write against the Church of Rome, do say that all the Righteous Prayers,
Appeals, and Complaints to God against her shall be heard. And that she shall
answer as well for the Crimes of others, as for the Oppressions and Wrongs that
she has done to others.

What then can be said, when a Protestant Church, or the Clergy rather who are
the Rulers of it, shall be guilty of the same manner of Persecution, and upon
the very same unjust (or upon more unjust) Grounds or Principles that the
Popish Clergy are? and when by the means of this Persecution, the said
Protestant Clergy are the occasion of many men's Hypocrisy, Dissimulation, and
Desertion of their Principles, (through weakness) to the extreme injury and
wrong of their Consciences; and are the express Cause of the Sighs, Sufferings,
Groans, and Complaints of diverse others, that are poured out in the very
bitterness of their Souls unto God; and when the said Protestant Church, or the
Ruling Clergy rather of it, shall have no sense at all of the evil of any of
these things; nor seem to be in the least moved or concerned for them? These
things being considered, the Question is, whether any man that is rational, can
draw any other Conclusion from them but that,

The said Protestant Church, (or the Ruling Clergy of it) do not believe
themselves at all, when they write against the Papists for these things, and
that notwithstanding they do threaten the Church of Rome, with the Judgments of
God because of their Cruelty, and of their Persecutions of men for their
Conscience sake: yet they do indeed but laugh in their sleeves at it, and do
not believe any such thing, as that the direful Judgments of God shall come
upon any, either for Cruelty, or for Persecution of others for Conscience sake,
or for being the occasions of many men's sinning against, and wounding of their
own Consciences: but that when they speak of the Judgments of God, they speak
of them but as Scare-Crows, Bug-bears, or Pot-Guns.

For would it not be an uncharitable thing, or rather is it not an incredible
thing, for any man to think that the Protestant Clergy should do the very same
things, which they expressly declare and acknowledge to be heinous Offenses, and
Crimes against God, in their Adversaries the Church of Rome, if they did really
believe themselves in what they usually write, when they threaten them with the
Judgments of God upon them for the said things?

If to avoid this, which they perhaps may look upon as some imputation, or
reflection upon them: the said Protestant Church (or rather the Ruling Clergy
of it) shall deny the Case to be the same, and shall say that the Grounds or
Principles upon which they persecute men, are much different from those of the
Papists or Church of Rome.

Let them (I mean the Ruling Clergy) lay down the State of it, and show us
wherein the greatness of the said difference does consist.

For if the Fact for which men are punished by the said Protestant Clergy be
the very same, (or of the same nature) with that for which the Popish Clergy do
punish men, viz. for their worshipping God, and for their worshipping of him
not contrary to the Scripture, or contrary to any thing that seems clearly, and
plainly their Duty in the Word of God, but contrary only to some Order or other
in the Church. And if the quality of the Persons that do suffer, and that are
punished by the Protestant Clergy, are the same also with those that are
punished by the Popish Clergy, that is, such men as are neither blameable in,
Nor so much as accused or charged by them with or for any Crime, Or any
Immorality in their Lives and Conversations: But such as otherwise demean
themselves in all Duty, and with all Subjection to their Superiors.

I say if both these are the very SAME one with another, wherein does the
Essential Difference lie, between the Persecution of the Popish Clergy, and the
Persecution of the Protestant Clergy, unless it be strictly in this? That the
Protestant Clergy, do pretend to believe the Scriptures to be the Supreme Rule,
and mind of God to his Church; and if asked do freely grant, That men are NOT
bound in Conscience to any Rule Superior to this, Nor can be bound in the
things of Faith, or in things relating to the Worship of God to any Rule above
this.

And yet at the same time that they own this, they persecute their Brethren,
not only in their Liberties, but in their Goods, Fortunes, and Estates, and
sometimes in their Lives also (through nasty Prisons, and want of Conveniences)
for acknowledging the said Scriptures, to be such as they themselves do own
them to be, and for that they accordingly conform to their own Principles.
Whereas,

The Popish Clergy, though they persecute men for the same Crimes, yet they do
not give so much Honor to the Scriptures, nor do so much as pretend to it,

But which of these two,
Are for this very Cause the greater Crimes before God, may be left to all
rational men to consider.

In the mean time, I am most sure of this, That whereas our first Reformers did
call the Church of Rome Antichristian, and did charge her with Innocent Blood,
and did put the name of Scarlet-Whore for this Reason upon her: Yet now it is
most certain, the Stain and Discredit of it, is in her eyes manifestly
lessened, if it be not wholly bletted out.

For it is impossible that the Church of Rome should ever hereafter grant,
these things to be Stains or Crimes proper only to her, which she does not only
see, but can daily observe some Protestant Church or other to follow her in,
upon such Grounds as are far less justifiable in the said Protestant Church,
according to the Principles they profess, than they are in her self.

And that this is not a thing ever to be hoped or expected from her hereafter,
is the more clear in regard the said Church of Rome has already, in so many
words, sharply, and closely Retorted it upon the Protestant Church: So that the
VERY things which we blame the said Church of Rome for, and for which we accuse
her Criminally, And which we pretend to be the main Grounds, why we could no
longer have any Communion with her, which was her laying aside the sole
Authority of the Scriptures, And her persecuting such as desired to walk
according to the Rule of it, some Protestant Churches have not only imitated
her in, but have outgone her, and have done so much worse than she ever did, by
how much we have contradicted the Principles we profess, which she has not.

And that she has cast this, as a Reproach upon us in words, and has alleged
several Arguments to confirm it, and such as have not to this very day been
answered by us, is matter of Fact.

And if in all Courts of Judicature, matter of Fact, be good Evidence, and if
the highest Evidence that can be given in matter of Fact is, when the Fact is
able to speak and attest it self, or when it is capable to be attested to by
thousands, then is the Evidence which I here bring, every way as good, and
every way as vallid, to prove what I affirm. Which is,

That the Church of Rome has endeavored to justify and acquit her self, from
the Crime of unjust Persecution and Blood, by instancing the same thing in the
Practice of Protestants one toward another: and therein has exonerated her
self from the sole Guilt of this evil, and from the sole Guilt of her being
alone that Babylon mentioned Rev. 17. which has been frequently fixed singly
upon her, and attributed to none besides her.

And she has produced several Arguments also, and those of Weight to make it
appear, That Protestants In their Persecution one of another, are far more
unjust, upon the Principles we profess as Protestants, than she is upon her own
Principles, how much so ever we have pleased to inveigh against her, and revile
her.

And these Arguments she has no way scrupled publicly and openly to divulge
in English; to the end, that every man that is rational may the better examine
them, and judge of them.

And that we have not as yet pleaded to the said Arguments, Or to the Retortion
she has made upon us: either by denying the Fact it self absolutely, or by
distinguishing the respective differing Circumstances and Grounds of it, is
also well known. Whereby she has the more just occasion to think, that those
Protestants that have thus persecuted others, are conscious to themselves of
their own Guilt. And seeing all this is pure matter of Fact, one of these two
Conclusions therefore do seem to be impossible to be avoided, viz.

That either we have done very evil in charging the Church of Rome as
Antichristian, and in charging her as guilty of the Blood of the Saints, which
is mentioned Rev. 17.6. (which must nevertheless be inevitably charged some
where) and very evil to impose the name of Scarlet-Whore and of Babylon upon
her. Or, If the Protestant Churches have said all this really in Judgment and
really in Truth against her, Then have some Protestant Churches done much worse
themselves, in being actually guilty of the same things, which have been so
criminally charged upon her.

And if the Church of Rome be guilty of Innocent Blood, then none that is sober
can doubt, but she must at length be liable to the extreme Judgments of God for
it.

And therefore if any Protestant Churches have followed her in that very Guilt,
the same judgments must as unquestionably come upon them, and perhaps more
severe.

And to the end that all Protestant Churches may be awakened, to consider their
great Danger in this Case, if they have been Persecutors of their Brethren,

I need do no more, than to lay before them the express Prophecy of our Lord
Jesus Christ in this Case, (viz.) That there should be some who delaying in
their hearts the Consideration of his coming, should instead of giving a
portion of Meat to their Fellow Servants, be found smiting of them.

The Pertinancy, Weight and Importance of which Prophecy of Christ with
reference even to the Theme we have at present in hand, will appear very clear
upon the Grounds or Arguments following, which are these.
1. That for the certainty of the said Prophecy, viz. That there should be
some Persons that would be forward to smite others, we have a double Testimony
even by two of the Evangelists, as Math. 24.48, 49, 50, 51. And Luke 12.45, 46,
47.

2. That the Persons who would be so forward to smite others, and of whom
therefore the Lord Christ speaks this, were to be of the Church, and were to be
those very Officers properly that were to be advanced in his Church above
others, is not only plain by the Circumstances of the words themselves, but is
yielded to by all Expositors, both Modern and Ancient.

3. That the Lord Christ would not have mentioned such a thing expressly
concerning his own Stewards, even concerning those Officers which were to have
the highest Rule and Trust in his own Church, Nor would have left it upon so
good a Record to us, if he had not in his Wisdom surely foreseen that this
Case, (how notorious and strange so ever it may appear) would certainly happen
in his Church, there is not the least Reason to doubt. And the less, seeing we
have another Testimony left us to this purpose by St. Paul also, Acts 20.28,
29, 30. with reference expressly to the Officers of the Christian Church. Nor is
it any way disagreeable to the Analogy of Faith, That if our Lord himself
suffered properly from his Church, (and his own Prophets, also before him) and
suffered from the very Rulers, Elders, and Overseers of the said Church: Then
his Servants should not think it a very strange thing, (and much less an
impossible) if they suffered also from his Church, and from Persons of the very
same Note, Name, Rank, Quality or Dignity in it, and especially seeing Christ
has left a standing Rule John 15.20. John 13.16. Luke 16.40. That the Servant
is not greater than his Lord, and therefore is not to expect a Privilege above
his Lord.

4. That the Persons who are to be smitten by the Stewards, Prefects, or Chief
Officers of Christ's own Church, are (...) even their very Fellow Servants and
no other, viz. such Persons as own, and serve the same Master, or Lord, which
the said Stewards profess to serve: and such as have received the same
Testimony of his Word, or the same Rule of his Mind and Will to them, which the
said Stewards and Chief Officers have, is plain and unquestionable also, even
from the words themselves.

5. That the smiting which is here spoken of by the Lord Christ is, literally
intended by him for actual Stripes, or for such external Punishments, and
Miseries which were to be inflicted by the Chief Officers and Stewards of his
Church, upon the Persons of Men, is not questioned by any I know of, at least
the contrary has never been maintained in any Age of the Church.

6. And it appears the rather, because the smiting here mentioned, was to be of
a Nature so very injurious, so oppressing and wrongful to them that were
smitten; Yea so provoking to the just Mind, and Temper of the Lord Christ; That
as an Argument how much he abhorred such a smiting, and how much he was
displeased at it, he threatens the said Stewards and Chief Officers of his
Church, That he would cut them in sunder for it, and would give them their
Portion with the very Unbelievers, and Hypocrites.

7. Which Severity, it were unreasonable to believe, that he who was so meek a
Master, would ever have threatened, and threatened especially against the very
Stewards, Rulers, and Officers of his own House, or of his own Church, if he
had not foreseen, that the Cruelty which these very Stewards and Officers would
use toward others in smiting of them, would be such, and so very merciless,
that the said Stewards would be such, as would deserve no Mercy, or Pity at all
from him.

For if it be a Rule, That they and they only, are to receive Judgment without
Mercy, who themselves have shown or exercised no Mercy, James 2.13. Then it is
impossible, that these Chief Officers and Stewards of Christ's Church, should
be punished by him without Mercy, if they in smiting their Fellow Servants, had
not utterly shut out all Bowels, and all mercy toward them.

8. And therefore the sum of the Lord Christ's Speech, and the end indeed of
it appears both plainly, and briefly to be this, That as there would be among
the very Stewards, and Chief Officers of his Church, some that would be forward
to smite their own fellow Servants, and to smite them so cruelly, and in such a
manner, as they would show no kind of Compassion, Bowels, or Remorse at the
sufferings of them, though this were but humane:

So the said Stewards should at length, most certainly meet with the like
measure of Treatment at the hand of the Lord himself; and should not fail to
receive the execution of his wrath and judgments upon them for it.

And these things being thus established I shall from the whole lay down only
two Positions, which I humbly conceive none can dispute with me (and much less
go about to baffle) that will not make an open mock of the Lord Christ's own
Sayings. The First Proposition is,
That it can no way be denied, But among those very Stewards, Rulers, or Chief
Officers which were to be set over the Lord Christ's own Church, some would be
found smiting of their Fellow Servants.

The Second Proposition is,
That it cannot be denied, but among the said Stewards, Rulers, or Chief
Officers of his Church, some should and would be guilty of such a manner of
smiting, wronging, and ill treating of their Fellow Servants, as should and
would render them in the Lord Christ's Esteem, no better than Hypocrites or
Infidels.

And if neither of these can be any way questioned, by such at least, as
question not the Validity, and Divinity of the Lord Christ his own Sayings,
Then for as much as the Ruling Clergy of our own Church, have sometimes not
only cruelly mulct some of their Fellow Servants in their Goods, but have
caused them to be imprisoned, whereby some times (through the hard usage they
have met with in Prisons, and for want of those Necessaries that might be
convenient, they have lost their Lives,) And consequently the Ruling Clergy of
our Church, have been guilty at least, of being Smiters of their
Fellow Servants, and even of such of their Fellow Servants as profess not only
the same Faith, but the very same Principles of Reformation that the said
Ruling Clergy do.

And seeing it is yet further matter of Fact, that notwithstanding the said
Ruling Clergy have thus severely punished their Fellow Servants, yet they have
not so much as charged or accused them of any Vice, Crime, or Immorality in
their Lives, or Conversations, and much less have proved any such thing against
them; But have caused them to be beaten, and treated after this manner singly
for this Reason and no other, viz. Because in worshipping the Lord Christ, They
chose rather strictly to observe his Mind and Will, according to the best
understanding they have of HIS Word, I say, rather than to observe any such
Orders or Rites as were not SO warranted, But were set down only by their
Fellow Servants, that were Officers of the Church above them. Consequently
then, the Issue must needs be very short, between the said Ruling Clergy, and
their Fellow Servants that have been thus smitten by them.

For either this smiting of them for this very cause here rehearsed, and for no
other, IS very wrongful in its self, as being against the very light of a man's
Nature, and against that Supreme and Primitive Obligation which the Conscience
has indispensably unto God, above any that it can have unto man, OR it is not
at all wrongful.

And either this kind of smiting which has been used and urged and pressed for
by the Ruling Clergy of our own Church, IS such a smiting as appears to have
been without all Pity or Remorse to such as have been so smitten and beaten by
the said Clergy. OR it has not.

But if the smiting we have here Instanced, and Instanced as matter of Fact be
such as has been used by the Stewards and Rulers of Christ's own Church, and
used toward their Fellow Servants, but has been used wrongfully, And used
without any manner of Remorse to the sufferings of the said Persons, whatever
their sufferings be.

Then it must either be the very same kind of smiting, with that for which the
Lord Christ in this speech of his (that is thus Recorded by two several
Evangelists) does threaten the Rulers and Stewards of his Church, that he will
cut them asunder and account them as Hypocrites. OR it is not the same, NOR of
the same kind.

But if it be not of the same kind, Then it concerns the Ruling Clergy
themselves to clear themselves, and to give an instance, what kind of smiting
there is, or has been used by the Ruling Officers of any Christian Church,
that is, or has been more wrongful, and more injurious than this, and that is
more remorsless and cruel than this, which the Lord Christ does here condemn,
and will certainly take vengeance for.

For some Case we must necessarily and unavoidably put, (unless we will deny or
make a Mock of the Lords Christ's own Words,) and such a one, as we may give a
sufficient Instance of, even an Instance in a Christian Church, between the
Rulers and Officers of the said Church, and others belonging to the same
Church, wherein the wrong that is to be done by the said Ruling Officers, in
smiting others of the said Church, is to be so extremely evil, and so perfectly
injurious and cruel, as that the Authors of it, will neither merit any Mercy
from the Lord, nor are according to his Word, to expect any Mercy from him.

From the Consideration of the Premises, these following things are humbly
presented to the Consideration of the present Ruling Clergy of our own Church;
some of which (if not all) it is to be hoped, are men of tender Hearts, like
the good King Jesiah that trembled at the Reading of the Word of the Lord in
the Book of the Law, viz. That for as much as we have stated or instanced such
a Case as is matter of Fact, and such as cannot be denied to be used, or
practiced by the Ruling Clergy of our own Church, toward others of the same
Church and Profession of Faith with themselves. And in as much as we have
stated it expressly in order to the clearer evidencing of the Guilt of the said
Clergy, by reason of their said smiting: and for Conviction consequently of the
Judgments that they are (without Repentance) inevitably liable unto for it. We
do therefore further say that,

If the said Ruling Clergy shall in any respect disallow the said Instance, or
shall think it meet to exonerate themselves from the Guilt, that is by the said
Instance intended to be charged upon them. Then we say that,

They cannot avoid the instancing or stating of some other Case, relating to
the Rulers or Stewards of the Christian Church, and to their smiting of others
in the said Church, and to the evil of it, that must be more agreeable to what
the Lord Christ here Condemns, than this Instance or Case is which we have here
mentioned as matter of Fact.

Nor can they avoid the Instancing or stating of some other Case, that must
merit consequently more Punishment from God and that must be in its own Nature
far worse, and much more injurious cruel and remorsless than the Case which we
have here instanced and stated is.

Nor can they avoid the instancing or stating some other Case, that must much
more properly Relate to Babylon, and to that particular and express Character,
or broad Mark, that is set upon her, by the Angel or Apostle ( Revelat. 17.6.)
than this particular Instance or Case does, which has been instanced relating
to the Ruling Clergy of our own Church; which is here mentioned: Or else they
must say that, that Vision of the Apostle is not to be regarded by us.

Nor can they avoid the instancing or stating of some other Case, differing
from what we have here mentioned, that must for the nature and kind of its
smiting, be wholly agreeable to the Practice of the Church of Rome, and to the
Ruling Clergy of it, and not at all agreeable to the Practice or Custom of
themselves.

But if the Ruling Clergy of our Church cannot state any such Case, relating to
the smiting of others of the same Church, and Faith with them, which shall
manifestly differ in all these four Circumstances, from the particular Instance
or Case we have here mentioned, and which every man knows is Matter of Fact,
then these two things will be impossible to be avoided by the Ruling Clergy of
our Church, as

First, that they will never be able to show us wherein, the Grounds or
Principles upon which they proceed to the Smiting, Punishing or Persecuting of
their Fellow Servants, are not only different but far more justifiable than
those, upon which the Popish Clergy proceed in their Cruelty and Persecution of
the Protestants. And

Secondly, they will never be able to give us any clear Reason, and much less
any Cogent and Invincible Arguments why we should believe, That the Judgments
of God will unquestionably reach the Church of Rome for her Cruelty, and
Persecution of the Protestants, but will not reach at all the Ruling Clergy of
the Protestant Church, for their Smiting and Persecution that they are guilty
of against their Brethren of the same Faith and Reformation.

Which two things we may be assured, that all the tenderhearted of the Ruling
Clergy of our Church, will lay to heart: There being some things, which that
Holy Man of God even the Prophet David sometime had done for which his Heart
smote him. And some things he was about to do for the prevention of which he
gave solemn thanks to God. For we find that David's Heart smote him after he had
numbered the people, and after he had but cut off the Skirt of Saul's Garment, 2 Samuel 24.10. and 1 Samuel 24.5. And he gives solemn Thanks for Abigails being an
Instrument to prevent him from shedding Blood, 1 Samuel 25.32. For if the Church
of Rome do punish others really, and indeed upon the Principle of Disobeying
her Authority, though she dare not pretend this openly, lest her Cruelty and
Blood-Guiltiness, being for no other Cause, should be so manifest, that it
would never be able to admit of a competent Apology, Color, or Excuse. And
therefore leaving this she insists upon the Ground of Her Persecution, as it is
for Herefie only.

But if we on the other hand, punish others not only with loss of Goods, but
with loss of Liberty, Banishment, and perpetual Imprisonment, which is far more
Cruelty than Immediate Death it self, (and would be more willingly chosen by
most men) and do all this, for a Nonconformity, and Disobedience to the
Orders, and Rites of the Church, without so much as a pretense to any Guilt of
Heresy, Then

Where is the difference between these two sorts of Persecutors, unless the
Ruling Clergy of our Church have done it more daringly, and more Broad-facedly
than the Church of Rome does?

But, which is more to be considered and laid to heart.

If the Church of Rome do not punish those that acknowledge her to be a True
Church, but those only that condemn her as a false Church, and who do under
this Notion professedly separate from her as from that Babylon mentioned in the
Revelations.

And if we on the other hand punish those that own, not only the same Faith and
Doctrine, But the very same Principles of Reformation with our selves, and who
therefore give no just Provocation nor use any such reproachful Language to our
Church as the Protestant Churches generally do to the Church of Rome.

Where then is the difference, unless it be that she renders evil to her
professed Enemies, who cannot but openly own a Hatred and Contempt for her, We
inflict all manner of Evil upon our Brethren, that supplicate for Peace with
us, and would be glad not to separate from us? and which of these two then is
the more ingenious?

But which is yet more, If we as we are Protestants, cannot but grant that
there is to be a Subordination of the Church, not only immediately to the Lord
Jesus Christ himself, but to HIS Word, and that we utterly deny that he has
any such One, as a Vicar upon the Earth, and utterly deny that any man whatever
has any power to dispense with the Commands of our Lord Jesus Christ, so far
as they appear to be clear to us from his Word, wherefore, if we
notwithstanding we make these things to be the very Profession of our Faith,
yet shall never punish any, But such as keep exactly to all and every of these
Principles, and shall observe them conscientiously, and strictly. Whereas the
Popish Clergy on the contrary, punish none but such only who deny or oppose
wholly the things which their Church affirms.

Where then is the Reasonableness of our Punishment, and the Unreasonableness
of theirs? and which of these two has the greater Resemblance of Hypocrisy,
even in our own Judgment? whether our Punishment or theirs? seeing we punish
men for following the Principles we allow, They never punish any but for
following those Principles that they totally disallow.

But the evil of this Persecution further appears thus, for if we as
Protestants say we have separated from the Church of Rome out of Conscience.
First, because she imposed those things that were Inscriptural upon us. And
secondly, because she was guilty of Blood, and that the Characters of a false
Church did for both these Reasons lie upon her, and therefore that we cannot
but give thanks solemnly unto God for our Deliverance out of her power.

And if the Ruling Clergy of a Protestant Church, have nevertheless not spared
to persecute unto Blood, even those that have not only out of the same two
Motives, separated with us, But by persisting constantly in the said Motives,
do daily justify us.

How comes our Blood and Persecution to be less sinful than hers? and why
should it be less crying unto God? for had we never so intently studied, how we
might have put the greatest Stumbling Block we could before our Adversaries, or
how we might have brought the greatest Blemish, Scandal and Reproach that was
possible upon our Reformation: or how we might have opened the Complaints and
Exclamations of men most against us; What Course could possibly have been
taken, to all these ends, that could have been more effectual than this? For
how can he that is thus persecuted by the Ruling Clergy of a Protestant Church,
give Thanks unto God solemnly, for his Deliverance out of the Church of Rome's
Thraldom, when the very same Persons, that pretend to be delivered with him,
Imposes nevertheless the like Thraldom upon him? Or how shall he that is thus
persecuted, be any way able to imagine, and much less to believe, that the
Church which persecutes him, is serious in her Profession of Thanks unto God
for her own freedom, when she is no sooner freed her self, but she brings
others into the same Hardship and Servitude, that she her self did but a little
while since, greatly complain of and groan under? But leaving these things to
be most seriously considered, by all Protestant Churches in these three
Kingdoms, and elsewhere, even by all whomsoever they Concern; I shall now
proceed to give in this place,

A Description of the Absurd, Ridiculous and Contemptible Grounds and
Foundations on which the Papists Build.
Though nothing is more Evident than this, that the Thraldom or Bondage of the
Church of Rome, does principally consist in the disagreeableness of her
Doctrines, to the Rule of the Scripture, yet nevertheless it is Matter of Fact,
That the Church of Rome does not in plain, and express Terms deny the Truth, or
deny the Authority of the Scripture, or deny the end of them as they are
appointed for the Church. And if we cannot for this Cause justly charge her
with any of these things; Then we must necessarily grant, that the said
Doctrines so far as they are corrupt, and have a real Inconsistency with the
Scripture it self, could have their Rise at first no otherwise,

Than by virtue of her Authority as a Church. And consequently, that as they
had thus their Rise at first, so they have had their whole Maintenance and
Support, ever since, no otherwise than as this Authority being Absolute and
Arbitrary has defended them against whatever might be said from the Authority
of the Scripture, in opposition to them.

And therefore here we shall lay open her Shame and Nakedness, and her great
Absurdity, that lies in the Manner and Method, and Nature of her Policy. For
the Acquiring of that Arbitrary, Absolute and unlimited Power which she
exercises. And first, we find that she does upon her own Authority affirm,
That it is neither the Letter of the Scripture, nor the Grammar of it, how
Plain, Clear, or Express soever it be, that does or ought to bind the
Consciences of men, but the sense of the said Scripture only. And

Secondly, she does affirm, That it is not the sense of the Scripture also,
which does or can any way directly bind the Consciences of men, if this sense
be considered nakedly in it self, (either as literal, or mystical) but that the
said sense is capable of binding only considered as it is Catholic. And

Thirdly, That it is not either in the Letter or in the Grammar of the said
Scripture, how clear or plain soever it be, that the Divine Authority of it is
placed, but simply and only in the sense of it as this sense is the sense of
the Universal Church, and therefore that sense which is properly called
Catholic.

Which Propositions, she having in her Prudence thus peculiarly laid down, as
the Grounds or Foundations not only of all Christian Faith, but of all
Christian Verity and Truth it self.

In the next place she builds upon these unsound Grounds, an Assumption that is
parallel to them, and that is every way as entirely her own as the former, viz.
That she alone has not only the Right (as exclusive to all others) of
Dispencing this Catholic Sense to all the Members of the Christian Church, but
of dispencing it in order to their Salvation, and has inherent in her, the
full and absolute Power finally, and Inappealeably, to determine at all times,
and upon all Occasions, what the said Catholic Sense is concerning all Points
whatever that may be controverted, and concerning all places of Scripture
whatever that may be doubted of, or disputed.

And that as this Power is absolutely necessary for the Preservation of the
Unity, so for the Preservation of the Purity of the said Christian Faith: in
regard it is impossible, that such a Sense of the Scripture as is wholly
Universal and Catholic should at any time Err.

The Conclusion then (if all these Premises be true) is, That the Church of
Rome is to be believed, and that all her Determinations whatever they be are
for Conscience sake to be Obeyed, and Submitted unto, even by the whole
Christian Church, without any Dispute or without so much as any scruple of Mind.

This Conclusion, being that which all the Partisans and Champions of the
Church of Rome, do labor with Might and Main to bring every man to, and
therefore it is the same with that Security and Rest, which they pretend all
men may have, not only with absolute Safety, but with absolute satisfaction, in
the Bosom of their Church.

But indeed this Conclusion has not any tendency to Salvation at all, but is
quite contrary to all that is alleged, and leads expressly to nothing else but
to the utter Overthrow, and Subversion of the whole Scripture it self, with the
Mind, Law, Will, and Counsel of God, so far at least as depends upon
Revelation; in regard it puts the Scripture, together with the whole Authority
of it, (though Divine in it self) absolutely, perfectly, and entirely into the
Arbitrary Will and Power of the said Church.

And therefore the Protestants upon Consideration of the extreme Mischiefs,
that must of necessity follow from such a Conclusion as this, they do with
Indignation reject it. And

First, The Protestants do wholly deny, that the said Church of Rome has any
rightful Authority to make null the Grammar of the Scripture.

Secondly, The Protestants do much more deny, that she has any Right to
institute or set up such a Sense of the Scripture, (under any name or pretense
whatever) that is either opposite to the Grammar of the Scripture, or that at
least pretends that there is not a necessity to follow and observe the Rules of
it.

Thirdly, Consequently they utterly deny, that she has any Right to transfer
the Authority of the Scripture, from the Sense proper to the Letter of it self,
to such a Sense as is only and properly hers. And

Fourthly, They deny, that she has any Right or any Power to set up any Sense
of her own at all, which is not absolutely subjected to the Rule and Authority
that is inherent to the Scriptures, Letter, and Word, with the proper Sense of
it, as this is and ought to be Supreme to all others.

Fifthly, And they do much less acknowledge, that she has any such Right in
her, or derived to her therefore, as to make her Sense of the Scripture (or
what she declares to be so,) the Sense of the Universal Church.

Sixthly, Or that she has any Right to make her sense of the Scripture, to be
the Absolute or Supreme Rule of all Infallible and Christian Truth, or to
disallow any Appeal from her proper Determinations, to the living Rule of the
Scriptures Grammar, and to the Letter or Word of it.

Seventhly, And the Protestants denying all these things, they do deny
therefore that she has any Authority, Power, or Right to dispense with, That
Duty and Obligation which is divinely and absolutely laid upon the Consciences
of men, which is, To obey the Word of God in the litteral, plain, and express
Sense of it.

Eighthly, And the Protestants do deny consequently, that the Consciences of
men are, or can any way possibly be obliged to her bare Determination of the
Sense of the Scripture. Especially so far as this is set up absolutely by her,
and is not dependant upon any Sense proper to the Words, and Grammar of the
Scripture it self.

All and every of which Powers, as the Protestant Church does wholly deny to
the Church of Rome; So for as much as the Church of Rome, can pretend to no one
of the said Rights, or Authorities now mentioned, otherwise than as it must by
some means or other, be lawfully conveyed or derived to her.

The Protestant Church therefore challenges her and provokes her, to show
that special and peculiar Commission, by which SHE and SHE alone is empowered
to do all or any of those things before named. Because, without this Commission
can be produced, and produced upon some Clear, Evident and Sufficient Warrant
or Ground, for it: All Her pretenses to the said Authority, (seeing it is so
manifestly destructive to the Scripture it self,) must needs appear to be, not
only Precarious, but very frivolous and very absurd.

The Church of Rome being thus challenged and provoked in the point of her
Commission, and yet well knowing that there is nothing which she can possibly
appeal unto for the proof of her Authority, beside the Scripture it self.

She becomes hereupon, to be several ways distressed and perplexed.

First, because she finds that she cannot allow of the Grammatical Sense of the
Scripture, in any one Case whatever, But she must necessarily, and unavoidably
allow it in all other Cases also, where it may equally and with as good warrant
be alleged.

Secondly, she discerns, that if she should allow the Grammar of the Scripture
to be Authoritative at all, she should never be able to prevent the pretenses
that others would have, (even among the Laity it self) to be as competent
Judges of the said Grammar as her self.

Thirdly, besides these two extreme Inconveniences (which by her are not to be
endured) she evidently also sees that the Words of Scripture themselves, will
not of themselves, by any literal Construction or Exposition of them, be
sufficient to prove any such Authority as she claims, and that should the words
of the Scripture be urged therefore, no further than according to the express
Tenor of them, or according to the sense that the Grammar it self would bear of
them, she should be so far from gaining the Power and Commission which she
pretends to have a Warrant for, that instead of it, she should expose her
Authority to a manifest hazard, even not only to be sifted, ventilated, and
discussed by others; but as freely censured by such as should observe the
nature of her Inferences, and how weakly and infirmly they are deduced, with
respect to the genuine Force or Construction of the words themselves.

And therefore as for all these Reasons, she apparently discerns that the
Grammar of the Scripture is an Adversary absolutely to her, so she does as
smartly and dexterously perceive, that the Scripture it self, were the
Authority of it allowed to be in the Grammar, would be as great an Enemy every
way to her, as even the literal and Grammatical Sense of it is.

For in as much as these three things are at once both equally and necessarily
Incumbent upon her, and such as cannot any of them possibly be dispensed with
by her, viz.

First, to prove the peculiarity of her Authority above any other Church beside
her whatever, And

Secondly, to justify the Incorruption of her Doctrine, And

Thirdly, to preserve the pretense that she has by this consequently to
Infallibility.

And seeing these three do so much concern her, that it is a thing very plain,
and very easy to perceive, that unless they can all be maintained, upheld, and
defended in some measure rationally by her, she can no way keep up her temporal
Power, nor any way avoid a lyableness to a Reformation.

Wherefore having upon a due and serious survey of the Letter and Grammar of
the Holy Scripture, sufficiently found, and clearly observed, that the
Scripture as thus strictly considered, in the Order, Disposition, and
Construction of its Letter, will never be serviceable to her in any one of
these three Respects: but will on the contrary, expressly oppose her.

As she is hereby expressly convinced then, that there can be no cause why she
should magnify the express word of it; and much less any cause why she should
trust in it, or appeal to it, so lest that others should be carried away with a
rational Opinion of it, and should for this cause be induced to urge, and press
several things against her from it: She saw it but necessary that she should
come to a deliberate Resolution with her self, To weaken the Credit of the
Scripture wholly, and not only to deny all Authority, and even all Divinity it
self to be in the Word, Letter, and Grammar of the Scripture, (strictly
considered by it self) but to deny also that any Sense is capable to be
certainly had from it, or any truth that is infallible, which how hold a thing
soever it might seem to be, yet she saw it no way avoidable by her, because she
had no way besides this, to secure her self against all that Inconveniency,
that she knew the Scripture would and must otherwise cast upon her necessarily,
by virtue of the expressness and Authority of its Letter.

Having then taken up this Resolution in the first place, considering
nevertheless maturely with her self, that if she should cast off all her
Relation to the Scripture wholly, and entirely, she could not maintain the very
Authority of the Church it self; and much less should be able to defend either
the Divinity, or the Infallibility of those things that are sought by her: She
therefore comes to a second Resolution, which she judges no less necessary
and expedient for her than the former, viz. To maintain the Divinity, and set
up the Authority absolutely of the Scripture, though not in the express Letter
of it, nor in the Sense proper to it, yet (as we have said already) in another
Sense that she sets up instead of it; That is, according to such a Sense which
she judges convenient that she her self should (as a Church) put upon it, and
put upon it in such manner also, and with such a Construction and Exposition,
as might be most suitable to her own end; and most answerable to her own
particular Interest: which Sense she therefore styles by the specious Name or
Appellation of the Catholic Sense, or of the Sense of the Universal Church, in
distinction at least from (and for the better avoiding of) that Sense which is
truly literal, and is properly Constructive and Grammatical.

And as it is this Sense alone therefore as Catholic, that she confines both
the Authority and Divinity of the Scripture to, and that also entirely: So she
does this in her own more than ordinary Judgment and Prudence. In regard she is
sure that this Sense will never fail her, but will always be ready to abett
whatever shall upon any occasion be determined by her: Because this Sense
requires no deeper Reason, nor any firmer Bottom or Ground at any time for it;
Than what resolves it self at length into the mere arbitrary Will and Pleasure
of her self. And so she can never be accountable further for it, than barely to
declare it or affirm it to be the Catholic Sense; because she says it is the
Sense of the Universal Church.

And is not this rare Policy?
And therefore to justify this medly Sense, which (if what she says be true)
is both the Sense of the Scripture, and is not. And which must necessarily be
the Sense of the Scripture because the Church will so have it; and not because
it is a Sense really, properly, or radically inherent in it. To justify also
her Rightful throwing off the Authority of the Grammar it self, and to justify
her transferring the whole Divinity of the Scripture, from the natural Order
and Construction of its Words, to a Sense altogether foreign to its Letter,
and to the expressness of it.

I say to justify ALL THIS she pleads her own Authority, not only as Divine,
but as absolute, and infallible: and consequently as that which ought to be
submitted unto by every one, and that readily as to the very Ordinance, and
Appointment of God himself. Which being the very Question it self that was in
dispute, and that very thing therefore that was first of all necessary to be
proved by her, she is constrained by this means whether she will or no, to run
round in a Circle, viz.

To prove her proper Authority by the Catholic Sense of the Scripture, And

To prove the Catholic Sense of the Scripture by virtue of her proper
Authority.

And at length not only without all ground, but without all shame or sense of
Justice, to beg the whole Argument it self in Controversy between us: Than
which we say, there can be nothing whatever, that is either more unreasonable,
or more impudent and base.

And having gotten her Authority therefore in this manner, not only, or not so
much by shuffling, as by plain snatching it; and being conscious to her self
that it would be a very vain thing for her, to suppose she should be able to
defend the said Authority, by any better Argument than that very Stratagem she
made use of it to prove it: she concludes it to be most safe to maintain it
therefore, in the same manner as she got it: which is by force, and therefore
resolves to punish all men with Death, that will be so hardy as to deny it; so
far at least as her Power or Mediation can any way extend to do it.

And yet lest the Quarrel should by this means look as if it were too personal,
and too private, and that such Princes as were less concerned at it, should not
be much disposed to engage with her in it: She, as if she were Pious in the
very Execution of her Malice, pretends this shedding the Blood of men (though
it may seem indeed to be very severe yet) is absolutely necessary: not so much
because they disobey her as because they disobey and oppose the Catholic Sense
of the Holy Scripture, In which Catholic Sense all the Authority, and Divinity
of it, (if you will believe her) is properly placed, and that by opposing of
this they oppose by Consequence, not only the Catholic Faith of the Church,
but the consent of all Christianity it self, In the unquestionableness of
which, the Security and Salvation of men can only and alone rest: which pretext
is another part as well of her Absurdity as of her Violence and Fraud.

That notwithstanding she neither has nor can prove any Obligation that men in
Conscience can have to her Authority, or to rely upon the Determination of it.
And though she cannot otherwise require the belief of it from any, but as it is
a thing merely precarious, yet she puts all to death that yield not to this
absolute Usurpation of her Power.

The Use of this last preceding Discourse.
From this brief Scheme or summary Prospect of the Nature of this new and
peculiar Policy of the Church of Rome, We may easily make a measure of her
Wisdom, as well as of her Truth; for by this short State or Account that we now
have of these Motives which did mainly induce the said Church, entirely to lay
aside the express Letter and Grammar of the Scriptures, (at least as to the
Certainty, Truth, or Infallibility of it) we may easily have a view of several
horrible Absurdities, Contradictions, and indeed Impieties, that she is by this
means forced, and necessitated to fall into, of which we shall now mention a
few Particulars.

For first as it is Matter of Fact (which is the most infallible Evidence in
the World) that all the Doctrines of the Church of Rome, do depend solely upon
The Authority of the said Church: So it is Matter of Fact equally, That both
the said Doctrines and the said Authority it self, (which upholds the said
Doctrines,) do depend upon the Catholic Sense of the Scripture. For the same
Reason therefore, it is even from the strictness of the Connection and mutual
Dependence of these three one upon another, That as the Doctrines of the Church
of Rome, must necessarily be all of them True, and all of them Divine, If the
Authority of the said Church is altogether True, and altogether Divine: So also
the Authority of the Church of Rome, must be unquestionably Divine, If the
Catholic Sense of the Scripture upon which it is alone built, be absolutely
Divine and free from all possibility of Error.

And consequently then, as the surest proof that we can possibly have of the
Divinity of all the Doctrines of the said Church, does lie in the proof the
divine Authority of the said Church, and in the sureness of it: So the surest
proof of this does lie in the proof of the Catholic Sense of the Scripture,
viz. in the Proof, that this Catholic Sense is both divine and infallible, and
free from all manner of Error imaginable.

For it is this Sense alone that gives being to the said Authority.

In as much then, as it is strongly alleged that the Catholic Sense cannot
possibly but be Divine, Infallible, and free from all manner of Error: The
Authority of the said Church therefore must necessarily be Divine, Infallible,
and free from all manner of Error, and therefore it is impossible, but the
Doctrines which are taught by the said Church, must be such also: that is, They
must be Divine, Infallible, and free from all Error.

So then, these three are and must be all of them Divine alike, viz,

The Doctrines of the Church of Rome, and the Authority of the said Church, and
The Catholic Sense of the Scripture. And consequently, the Sense of the
Universal Church must be as Divine as any of these three, Because the Catholic
Sense of the Scripture, and the Sense of the Universal Church is but one and
the same, (Et quae in eodem Tertio convenient inter se convenient) wherefore
seeing of all these, The Catholic Sense of the Scripture is -- The main and
sure Basis of all the rest -- and that upon the Divinity, certainty, and
infallibility of This, ALL the Divinity, Authority, and Infallibility of the
Church of Rome, with its whole Doctrine does, and must wholly and entirely
depend. The absolute and unquestionable Certainty or Divinity of this
therefore, is first to be cleared: seeing this (as we said) is of all others
the most strongly alleged.

To one that is an apt Scholar to understand, and receive whatsoever the
Church of Rome teaches, we shall here show how this is, by her cleared. To
evidence then the truth of the Catholic Sense of the Scripture, how Infallible
and Unquestionable it is, and to manifest not only the necessity, but the
absoluteness of its Divinity, We need not much more than one Reason, because
this does of it self upon the matter, amount to a Demonstration; (which is,)
That there is nothing more clear or more certain, than that the said Catholic
Sense neither really is, the Sense of the Scripture, nor really is not: nor any
thing more certain, than that the said Catholic Sense is Both: That is to say,
both it is, and it is not the Sense of the Scripture. And that we may be yet
the more fully and distinctly instructed in the nature of this Mystery, and of
the strangeness of it, we are to know, That the extraordinary wonderful, and
peculiar Power of this Catholic Sense, lies, in the singular Relation which
it has to the Universal Church, and to the Scripture as it is the Sense of
neither of them properly and entirely; and yet is the Sense of both of them at
one and the same time.

For though this Catholic Sense cannot be had without the Scripture, and
though it is, and must necessarily be given therefore to the said Church by the
Scripture. Because it is the Scripture only that the said Church does always
refer to, when it does at any time cite, or allege the said Sense as it is
Divine. And consequently though without the said Scripture, it had been wholly
impossible that the said Church should either have Challenged or laid Claim to
any Truth that had been Authoritative or Divine. Notwithstanding this, The said
Catholic Sense both is given, and must necessarily be given to the Scripture
by the said Church; because without the said Church, it would be impossible
that this Sense should ever be found out in the Scripture it self, in regard
nothing is more certain, than that the Scripture has of it self properly no
Sense at all (at least none that is True, Certain and Infallible, but as this
is by the Universal Church, and by the Prudent Care and Foresight of it
bestowed upon it. And so we must unavoidably grant, that though the Catholic
Sense be but One, yet this One Sense is both created by the Church for the
Scripture, and created by the Scripture for the Church, ( Which is a very rare
and unusual sort of Production.

And therefore it will follow also: that if we regard the Truth, Certainty and
Infallibility of this Catholic Sense, it is wholly and entirely from the
Church, because neither the Authority properly of it, nor its Divinity, does
consist in its Truth, or in its Certainty, If we regard the Divinity and
Authority of this Catholic Sense, it is not only originally, but entirely from
the Scripture: because it may be Divine, though it have neither Certainty nor
Infallibility in it, (at least) as the Church of Rome tells us. And
consequently, the said Catholic Sense considered as it is strictly in the
Scriptures, has indeed both Authority absolutely in it, and Divinity: but it
neither has Truth, Certainty, nor Infallibility. But considered as it is
strictly in the Church, it has both Truth, Certainty, and Infallibility
absolutely in it. But it has not for all this any thing of Divinity, or
Authority; for this it must borrow from the name of the Scripture.

So that it is plain, That the said Catholic Sense is neither the Sense of the
Church properly and entirely, nor the Sense of the Scripture properly and
entirely, and yet that it is the Sense of both of them entirely. And the Reason
for this is also plain, viz. Because according to the Doctrine of the Church of
Rome, the Divinity of the Catholic Sense is one thing: its Truth, and
Infallibility is quite another: for though the Church can give to the Catholic
Sense its Truth and Infallibility entirely, yet she cannot give any part of its
Divinity.

And though the Scripture, can give to the Catholic Sense its whole Divinity;
and consequently its Authority entirely yet it cannot of it self give it any
thing of truth, or any thing of Infallibility, but this it must have from the
Church.

So mystically is this Catholic Sense parted and divided between both. By
which partition of the Catholic Sense (which is strange) we come to know
another thing also (which is as strange) and which otherwise we should never
have been able to have found out, viz. That though the end of giving the
Scripture was unquestionably for the enlightening Ruling and Governing the
Church, yet the end of setting up the Church was equally also for the
enlightening Ruling and Governing of the Scriptures.

Which as it is a Consequence that can no way be avoided by the Rules of the
Church of Rome, so it is as manifestly absurd as all the rest. Secondly, The
Divinity of the Catholic sense with the necessity absolutely of it, will
appear also yet the more clearly if we shall consider, that unless we do admit
the Church in the first place to be holy, infallible, and free from all manner
of Error imaginable, it will and must be impossible that the Catholic sense of
the Scripture should be absolutely True, Holy, Infallible and free from all
Error. Because the sense of the Scripture becomes thus Catholic, Holy,
Infallible and True, only as it is the sense of the Catholic Church first, and
as it is by this means derived to the Scripture it self. And for any to seek a
sense in the Scripture therefore that is Holy, True, Infallible and free from
all Error alone by the Scripture it self, without the Direction and Assistance
of the said Catholic or Universal Church is manifestly absurd. Both because
the Scripture has properly of it self no sense at all that is certain: and
because it is the immediate Authority of the Church only, upon which the sense
of the Scripture so far as it is properly Catholic, Infallible, and absolutely
True is wholly and entirely built.

And yet on the contrary, in regard it must be confessed that the Church could
not possibly have so much as either Name or Being, were it not for the
Scripture it self, and much less that it could have those Privileges, or that
Authority placed in it which it challenges above all others for being Holy,
True, Infallible and free from all manner of Error. Unless we admit therefore
the Scripture in the first place to be originally True, Holy and Divine, and
therefore to contain all Authority and Truth prmitively in it self, that is
Holy, Absolute and Divine: and that by reason of this its primitive Sanctity,
Divinity and Truth; it has a power simply and properly of its self to confer a
Divine Right, Authority, and Infallibility to the Church, it will and must be
impossible that the said Church, should be any way empowered or enabled either
to teach such Doctrines as are Certain, True, Holy and Divine, and without any
fallibility whatever; or that it should be able to declare, what that sense of
the Scripture is, which is absolutely Holy, True, Infallible and free from all
manner of Error. Because if the whole being of the Church is entirely from the
Scripture, then not only all the Holiness, Truth, and Infallibility of the said
Church, with the truth of whatever it teaches, but all the Authority also,
which it has or challenges by reason of any of these extraordinary
Properties, is, and must unavoidably be built upon the Scripture also, and upon
the primitive Truth, Authority and Sanctity of it.

Both which things now being admitted, it must necessarily follow, that if we
will fully comprehend the Divinity of the Catholic sense, and come to be
convinced of the necessity and absoluteness of its Infallibility, Authority and
Truth; we must grant, that the Truth, Holiness, Infallibleness and Authority of
the Church, was and could not but be before the Truth, Holiness, and
Infallibility, of the Scripture sense. And must also grant that the Truth,
Sanctity and Authority of the holy Scripture, was and could not but necessarily
be before any Truth, Holiness, Infallibility and Authority was or could
possibly be in the Church: and consequently we must grant that these were both
first, and so both of them were one before another respectively.

In like manner we must grant that as there is an absolute necessity that the
Church, and its Authority as infallible should be built upon the Scripture
entirely, and upon the Original Authority of it, so there is as great a
necessity that the Sense of the Scripture with the truth of it (wherein its
Authority does properly and principally consist,) should be built upon the
Church, and upon the Authority of it, and therefore a necessity, that both
these should be built each upon the other mutually and respectively, and
therefore a necessity that the Church should be the Foundation of all the
Scriptures truth, and that the Scripture should be the Foundation of all the
Church its Truth, and therefore that each of these, should be the respective
Basis or Ground of the other of these mutually.

The Clearness, Consonancy, Coherence and manifest Consistency, of all which
things, whoever does not understand, and does not also fully and unquestionably
believe, is neither a Scholar that is quick enough, nor a scholar that is
qualified enough for the sufficient and substantial comprehending, of the
Divinity of the Catholic sense. And therefore upon the consideration of the
whole we may conclude that if all these things now mentioned are substantially
true, and capable to be clearly understood by rational Persons, and that they
are consistent really one with another: Then it must be certain, that the
Church of Rome is both a true Church, and its Doctrines are all certainly and
unquestionably true, and all its followers must be true Christians also, and
free from all Error, for these things must be all of them true and certain
alike.

But if these several things above mentioned are manifestly contradictory and
absurd, and such therefore as are no way possible to be rationally understood,
or capable to be consistent any way one with another: then these things can
never be true, viz. Either that the Church of Rome should be a true Church, or
that its Doctrines should be all of them true, or that its followers should be
such true Christians as to be free from all Error. Seeing none of these three
things can be otherwise true, or certain, than as the several things above
mentioned are true or certain, which are manifestly absurd and utterly false.

The horrible Wickedness of the Church of Rome further manifested.
The Impiety and Wickedness, as well as Absurdity of the Church of Rome in this
invention of the Catholic Sense, and in her setting up of it, will be evident
also to any that will consider, that even while she goes about, not only to
corrupt but to defeat the Scripture of its proper Authority (as a Divine
Writing) by her denying that any Sense is capable to be had from it, but what
the Church only does give it, and by denying therefore that the Litteral or
Grammatical Sense or Construction of the Scripture is in any place certain, or
at least not so certain, as it may be said of its self to be simply, absolutely
or infallibly true, or so certain that it is in any place sufficient to give an
infallibility of truth to us, she does no other than discover by all this what
her drift is throughout all this Device.

For she would never run her self upon so many Rocks, to maintain things so
manifestly gross, and absurd as this Invention puts her upon, were it not that
her aim by all this is -- To spoil and deprive the Scripture utterly not only
of all power and Authority, but of all Right immediately and absolutely of its
self, to bind and oblige the Consciences of men to it, even though the sense of
it should, from the plain and genuine Construction of its words appear never so
strong, clear or coherent to them -- which Scope or Design of the Church of
Rome, for withdrawing our Obedience and Subjection wholly from the Scripture it
self, even in things that are plain, and can be no way doubted by us as we are
rational Persons, and understand well enough what the Nature and Import of
Sense is. I say this scope or design of withdrawing our Obedience from the
Scripture it self, and from the plain and genuine fence of it, is no other than
openly to withdraw us from the plain and express Mind of God, (the Scripture
being his Word) which is not only to offer an Injury to the Authority and
Council of God, but to his very Grace also, in giving his Word to us. And yet
that this is the Chief and Principal Aim of the Church of Rome in her
contending for the Catholic Sense, and in her disallowing all other Sense
whatever to the Scripture, is the more clear because it is matter of Fact, that
wheresoever she can or does exercise any Dominion either by her self, or by her
delegates, there she will suffer none, even not of her own Clergy, to depend
upon the Scripture strictly. But will have all men at all times, to submit all
their Judgments, and all their Consciences absolutely to her particular
Determinations, in all things relating to Faith, whether the things she does
determine be agreeable or not agreeable to the Word, or Rule of Faith it self.
And if all her own Natives are treated with this Severity, and Arbitrariness by
her, is is easy then to imagine what Strangers may expect from her, especially
if we consider that for the more effectual preventing the Laity also, to show
any manner of Duty immediately to the Scripture, and lest they should be
convinced even by the very sight of it, or should hold themselves obliged to
the things plainly and expressly commanded by it, she does throughout all
places, where she has any Power utterly forbid all use of the Scripture to
them, and will not suffer the Scripture so much as to be read, or heard by them
in a Vulgar or known Tongue.

By which Instances it may sufficiently appear, (seeing these things are
matters of Fact) that the Endeavor used by the Church of Rome to lessen the
Credit of the Scriptures Letter, Grammar or Word, as if there were no certainty
of sense in it, is not really grounded upon any thing which may justly be
attributed to the Scripture it self: * But is a thing absolutely plotted,
Contrived, formed or purposely Designed by the said Church for no other end,
but that men might not rely upon the Scripture, or trust to the truth of those
things that may be plainly and expressly founded in the very Letter of it; and
so might be moved to give Obedience to the Authority of it, and to be led by
it, NOR for any other end, but that Men might not be able to plead the said
Word, with the expressness of it against her, or have a just ground to examine
her Doctrines or Authority by it; and to withdraw from her or to assert there
is a necessity that diverse things should be reformed in her.

And for this Reason it is therefore, that she neither has any Subjects, nor
can, or will admit of any to be her Subjects, whether of the Laity or Clergy,
who will not withdraw their Obedience immediately from the Letter of the said
word, and from the Authority of it, and give it to her as a Church.

Which injury against the Authority of the Scripture, or written Letter of the
word of it, as it is therefore knowingly, wittingly and willingly committed by
the Church of Rome, must for this cause be much the greater. But the greatness
and heinousness of it, is made most manifest by that Argument which the Apostle
uses, Heb. 2.2, 3. Heb. 10.28, 29. Heb. 12.25. For if the Law or Covenant of
Moses how divine soever, was given to the Church nevertheless by one that was
no more than a Servant only in Gods house: And if that the Grace and Truth
which came by Jesus Christ, was given us by the only Son of God, who was
properly the Lord himself of the House: Then a Sin, or Crime done purposely
against the Gospel of Christ, and out of a real intent or design to turn men
from the express Word, or Letter of that Law or Covenant which was set up by
Christ, -- must be a far greater Evil, or Impiety against God, than the like
sin attempted against the Law of Moses, with a purpose or intent to turn men
from the Letter and express Word of it.

There is such Force and Strength in this Argument, added to what has been
already said, as there needs no more to be said, to manifest the abominableness
of this Evil, and therefore we shall herewith conclude this Discourse, as with
that great word of Truth, which ought in this case to be most of all pondered,
and considered by them whom it most concerns.

For if it were evil in any, (even in him that had the name of a Prophet,) to
turn men from the Law, or from the Word of Moses who was but the Servant of
God, with an intent that they should rely upon another word, different from it
even upon his Word, (or upon such a Sign or Wonder as was wrought by him) who
did desire so to turn them from Moses, and if this was such an Evil, as was by
Gods own Command -- to be punished absolutely with Death -- Then how much
greater evil must it be in the sight of God, to go about to turn men from the
express Word, and Law of the Lord Christ, who was the only begotten Son of God,
with an intent that they should rely upon another Word, different from it, and
to do this not only wilfully, but avowedly, and professedly, by preaching to
men openly; that it is not their duty to rely upon the Word of Christ, (as it
is immediately and expressly set down by the Holy Spirit,) but upon the Church
only, and what the Church shall declare to them concerning the said Word, and
when to effect this also the better, men shall throw so great Contempt and
Scandal upon the said Word, as to affirm it to be so dark and confused, that no
certain or infallible Sense either is in it, or can possibly be had from it.

And if this sin were the greater under the Law, because of those Miracles
which God had wrought by Moses, to testify him to be the Servant of himself,
Then it must be an aggravation of the said sin under the Gospel: Because God
has not only by Miracles, but even by Moses himself, and by many other means
and ways in his Providence, born a far greater Testimony to the Lord Jesus
Christ (than ever he did bear unto Moses,) and has abundantly manifested, That
he was the Only begotten Son of himself.

And if any man under the Law, that did attempt to turn men from the word of
the said Law, was to be accounted as a false Prophet, much more then ought he
to be so accounted, that does both with all Industry and set Design endeavor
to do this under the Gospel.

FINIS.

