A SERMON Preached at the Cathedral Church OF WORCESTER, On the 29th of May,
1684. Being the ANNIVERSARY DAY OF HIS MAJESTY'S Birth, and Happy Restoration.

By George Hickes, D. D. Dean of Worcester, and Chaplain in Ordinary to (...)
MAJESTY.

Published at the Joint and Earnest Request of the MAYOR, and ALDERMEN of
Worcester.

LONDON, Printed by R. E. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, and John Jones Bookseller in Worcester, 1684.

To the Right Worshipful FRANCIS HAINES Esquire MAYOR, And to the Worshipful the
ALDERMEN Of the City of Worcester.
Gentlemen,
THE style of the Paper, in which you sent me your joint and earnest Request to
publish this Discourse, was so respectful and obliging, that I could not deny
it without incurring the imputation of Rudeness, especially seeing it was the
first Request, of any Kind, that you ever desired of me.

I need not tell the world, how Loyal you are, nor how Active some of you have
been in Reforming this City, the very Approving of this Sermon, which all the
Enemies of the Government will be sure to Condemn, is a sufficient
Testification, that you are some of those Worthy Citizens, who in the late
distinguishing Times were too honest, and too wise to be misled by those subtle
and malicious Enemies of the Monarchy, who are generally known by this
Character, that they are for the King against his Evil Counselors, and for the
Protestant Religion against the Church.

I was very much pleased, as well as surprised, to find at my arrival on the
Evening of the Anniversary Day of our most Gracious Sovereigns Birth, and happy
Return, that this City, now restored to its self, had prepared to celebrate
that Auspicious day in a most Solemn, and Festival manner; and I must bear you
and your Loyal Citizens witness, that I never saw more Conduct and Order in any
Public Procession, more Gravity in any Public Joy, or more universal
Temperance, and Sobriety at any Public Feasting among all Sorts of Persons,
exactly agreeable to that seasonable Exhortation, with which I concluded this
Sermon, which now is no longer mine, but Yours. I am very sensible it deserves
not half of that great Opinion, which you have expressed of it, and if it
answer those Ends, but in any tolerable and competent measure, for which you
desired me to make it public, especially among the People of this City, to
whom I am bound to have a particular regard, I shall think my pains well spent,
and rejoice that I was so happy, as to testify in a way so serviceable to the
Public that I am.

Gentlemen, Your most Affectionate, and Faithful Friend, and humble Servant,
George Hickes. Psalm.


Psalm. XIV. v. 7. When the Lord brings back the Captivity of his People,
Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.

The whole Verse runs thus: O that the Salvation of Israel were come out of
Sion! when the Lord brings back, etc.


THIS and the foregoing Psalm, were composed by David in the Rebellion of
Absalom, when the People of Israel had Universally revolted from the Allegiance
which they owed to him, and the Duty which they owed to God.

In the first Verse he gives us an account of the Authors, and Ring leaders of
this general Apostasy, and Rebellion: They were, it seems, an Association of
Impudent, and Atheistical Men, who though they durst not openly deny the God of
Israel, with their Mouths, yet they denied his Being, and Providence, or at
least doubted of them in their hearts, The Fool has said in his Heart, there
is no God; meaning most likely the Fool Achitophel, or perhaps the Raw, and
Younger Fool Absalom. And then for those that were of their Party, they are,
says he, corrupt, they have done abominable works, there is none that does
good. And then in the third Verse, to show how the Generality of the Nation had
in a manner lost all Sense of their Duty, they are all (says he) gone aside,
they are all together become filthy, or putrid, there is none that does good,
no not one. In the fourth Verse, He expresses his astonishment at the
stupidity, and blindness of the Conspirators, that they should go on without
any Sense, or remorse, in their Atheistical Practices of Rebellion, and be so
unjust, and irreligious: Have all the workers of Iniquity no Knowledge, who eat
up my People, as they eat Bread, and call not upon the Lord. In the fifth
Verse, he tells us, that the Generality of the People, were moved with fear to
join with them, but that it was a causeless mistrust, and fear, for want of
considering, That God will protect Righteous men, and Causes. There were they
in great fear, He adds, in a Parallel place, Psalm. 53.5. where no fear was.
for God is in the Generation of the Righteous. i. e. they were in a great
fear, fearing men more than God, who takes part with the Righteous aginst the
Wicked. In the sixth Verse, he shows how the Conspirators laughed at the small
Loyal Party, which preferring their Duty, before their Interest, and trusting
in the Protection of Heaven, adhered to the King, You have shamed the Counsel
of the Poor, because the Lord is his Refuge. i. e. you have mocked and jeered
the Poor Despicable Loyal Party, because they make the Lord their Refuge. And
then in the last Verse, he expresses a great, and longing desire for that
happy time, when God, who dwelt in Sion, would arise, and show himself in the
Deliverance of him, and his People, O that the Salvation, (or Savior) of
Israel were come out of Sion! When the Lord brings back the Captivity of his
People, Jacob shall (or ought to) rejoice, and Israel shall (or ought to) be
glad.

According to this, which is the most genuine Explication of the Psalm, I may
without the least Violence to the Sense of the Royal Psalmist, make these three
Observations upon my Text, which will be suitable to the Solemnity of this day.

1. That the People in a State of prevailing, or successful Rebellion, are in a
State of Slavery, and Captivity. This Observation I ground upon that remarkable
Expression, the Captivity of his People. 2. That a People cannot be brought out
of such a State of Slavery, and Captivity, without the special Providence and
Assistance of God. As it is written, when the LORD brings back the Captivity
of his People. 3. That it is the Duty of a People so brought back out of
Captivity, to render Praise and Thanksgivings unto God. When the Lord brings
back the Captivity of his People, Jacob ought to rejoice, and Israel ought to
be glad.
First, that a People in a State of prevaling, and Successful Rebellion are in
a State of Slavery, and Captivity: for a State of Slavery and Captivity,
consists in being obnoxious to the will and pleasure of an Unlimited, Absolute,
and Arbitrary Power, such as was the Power of the Ancient Roman Emperors, of
whom as our Learned Lawyer Fortescue observes out of Justinians Institutions,
the Civil Law says, quod Principi placuit Legis habet Naturam, that the
Princes pleasure was a Law; Or, such as was the Power of all Kings in the
Kingdoms of Ancient Times, founded after the Flood, when, as Justin in his
Epitome tells us, arbitria Regum pro Legibus erant, that the will of the King
was a Law unto the People; Or lastly, such as is now the Power of the Turkish,
Russian, Persian, and Morocco Emperors, who rule purely by Regal Authority,
without any Political Regulation, having Absolute, Uncontrollable Power over
the Lives, Fortunes, and Liberties of their People, and of whom I may truly
say, as Daniel said of Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 5.19
for the Majestly that the High God has given unto them, all their People,
Nations, and Languages tremble before them, for whom they will they slay, and
whom they will they keep alive, whom they will they set up, and whom they will
they pull down.

I say Civil Slavery, or Capativity, consists in being obnoxious to such an
Unlimited Arbitrary Dominion, as this; which rather deserves the name of
Military, than Civil Power; but the People, that are Subject to a Conquering
Rebel, or Rebels, are subject to such an Unlimited, Absolute, and Arbitrary
Power, which is under no Civil Regulation, but as the forecited Fortescue,
wisely says of mere Regal Power, it can give Laws to the People, and lay all
manner to Taxes, and Burdens upon them without their consent, and let me add,
take away their Lives by a High Court of Justice, or by any other Arbitrary
way, without Trial by Law, or Peers, nay without any Trial at all.

For their Power is an Usurped Military Power, not under the wholesome regulation
of Laws, but as Arbitrary as the Sword, and as Tyrannical as their Lusts will
make it, and if they do not oppress the People, after they have mastered the
Lawful Government, it is generally because their Policy over rules their
Ambition and Cruelty, and not that they are truly good. It is seldom that
Rebels have any regard, or tenderness to the Peoples Blood, or Treasure; or if,
as Cicero says of men who make their Interest their Supreme End, the goodness
of their Nature, may chance to overruled their Evil Principles, yet the People,
that are subject unto them, are all the while in the Lions Den, the Beast may
perhaps be good humoured, and Generous, but still he may eat them, when he will.

Therefore every successful Rebellion makes the victorious Rebel a grand
Seignior, the Sword is his Title, and his standing Armies the Laws by which he
Governs; so that in the most absolute Monarchy that ever was, Rebellion may
alter the Governors, but not the Government, which will be still as Arbitrary,
as the will and pleasure of the Conqueror can make it, and all the Benefit that
People under such a Revolution, can possibly reap by a prosperous Rebellion,
will only be that of the Ass in the Fable, who complained, that though he had
changed his Master, and Paniers, very often, yet still the burden was the same.
I say in the most Arbitrary Government, where the People are perfect Slaves,
Rebellion will not likely mend their condition, because the Conquering Rebels
will still be their Lords and Masters, and they must still abide Slaves. They
change their Master, but not their Service, their Lords, but not their
Vassallage; all the difference is, that they have an Usurper, or Senate of
Usurpers, to rule over them, instead of their Natural Sovereign, and have set
up their Fellow Subjects in his Place.

This generally speaking, is so true, and so agreeable to the common report of
Histories, that would the Subjects of the most Absolute Monarch consider it,
they would never follow the most plausible Ringleader into Rebellion against
their Natural Sovereign; but most of all, would the People of a limited and
regular Government, who have their Properties, and Liberties secured by Law,
consider, That a Conquering is an Absolute, and Unlimited Power, they would
abhor the thoughts, and abstain from all appearance of Rebellion, which in the
end must either render their own Sovereign, or the Victorious Usurpers, which
is ten times worse, absolute Lords over them, and themselves, by consequence,
perfect Slaves. For if their rightful Sovereign against whom they rebel,
prevail, then they and their Estates must ly at his mercy, and they will be
content on any condition to redeem their forfeited lives; but if their
pretended Patriots, their Leaders into Rebellion prevail, then They become
their Absolute Sovereign, and may dispose of their Lives and Fortunes, without
asking their consent.

What can hinder a successful Traitor, at the Head of his Conquering Legions,
from doing what he pleases? And who, even among those who first set him up, and
lent him their Assistance, dares say unto him What do thou? 2 Samuel 15.5.
At first he was their humble Servant, he did obeisance unto them, and put
forth his hand unto them, and kissed them; at first he sighed for their
unhappiness, and bemoaned their Grievances, and begs but their own assistance
to set them free; but as soon as he prevails, then they must say unto him, as
the Trees said unto the Bramble, in the Parable of Jotham, Come thou and reign
over us; Judges 9.14, 15.
and when it is once come to that, then he will plainly say unto them, If in
truth ye anoint me King over you, then come and put your trust in my shadow,
but if not, let fire come out of the Bramble, and devour the Cedars of Lebanon.

Soon after Absalom had stolen away the hearts of the People, by his fair
Carriage and Speeches, the next News was, Absalom reigns in Hebron; and in
his short Reign, or Usurpation, he and his Captains did so enslave and oppress
the Subjects of David, after they had revolted from him, that he compared their
condition, under the Power of their young Idol, to Captivity; saying, When the
Lord brings back the Captivity of his People; Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel
shall be glad.

He had assured them before, that he desired nothing more, 2 Samuel 15.4.
than to be in a condition to remove their Grievances: Oh (says he) that I
were made a Judge in the Land, that every man that has any suit, or cause,
might come unto me, and I would do him justice. This and such like was his
Language at first, but when he had got a great Army at his Command, and had
beat the King out of Jerusalem, then he could lie with his Father's Concubines
upon the top of the House, in the sight of all Israel, and he, and his
Adherents, could eat up the people, as they eat bread. The poor oppressed
Commonalty saw their own slavery too late, and when God besides their
expectation had delivered them from it, they were so glad of it, that they were
at strife throughout all the Tribes, who should bring the King back. Oh (said
the men of Israel) the King saved us from the hand of our Enemies, 2 Samuel 19.9,
10.
he delivered us out of the hand of the Philistines, and now he is fled out of
the Land for Absalom, and Absalom whom we rebelliously anointed over us is dead
in Battle, now therefore why speak ye not a word of bringing back the King.

These Considerations of the great Blessings they enjoyed under David would
weigh nothing with them before, but after they felt the Calamities of War, and
the smart of Arbitrary Government under a prevailing Traitor, after they had
run into that under Absalom, which they had but feared under David, then they
saw their Error, and the men of Israel were angry with the men of Judah, for
not letting them join with them in bringing back the King.

And what happened unto the People of Israel and Judah, under the prevailing
Rebellion of Absalom, has happened, I believe, upon all the successful
Rebellions in the World. Did ever People rebel with success, and mend their
condition by it? Nay, did ever People succeed in Rebellion, and not afterward
groan under the Arbitrary Dominion of the Victorious Rebels? Or, were
Grievances and Oppressions ever sewer under Usurpers, than under the lawful
Head? It is, as I have shown, inconsistent with the Nature of that Arbitrary
and Military Power, with which Conquest does invest every prosperous Rebel; and
though it be easy to reply, that it is possible for one that rises up against
his lawful Sovereign to be free from self-interest and ambition, and purely to
design the Ease and Liberty of his Fellow Subjects; yet in all the Instances
and Examples of successful Rebellion, very few, or none such are to be found.
You see what Impostors Absalom and Achitophel were, and how they falsified all
their Pretensions to the credulous People, and would the time permit, and the
Solemnity of the day allow of it, I could verify the truth of my first
Observation in many such Popular Cheats.

But I will wave all Foreign, and confine my self to Domestic Examples, to
prove that a state of prosperous Rebellion is a state of Slavery and Captivity,
as King David in my Text, and our late Blessed Sovereign, who was wont to
bewail the sad condition of his People in the late prevailing Rebellion,
frequently observed. I need not tell you what fair Promises, and gilded
Pretenses the Ringleaders of it made unto the deceivable People. They first
possessed their Heads with imaginary Fears, and Grievances, and then promised
to secure them against all the Dangers which they feared. At first they
exhorted and invited the Common Citizens and People, and then Commanded them;
first they begged and borrowed Supplies of them, and took their Money by way of
Contribution and Loan; but afterward, when they had got the Power into their
own hands, they levied it as fast by their own Authority, and demanded it by
way of Tax. I shall say nothing of the illegality of their Rebellion against
their Prince, no Law being better known to the People than that which declares
it to be High Treason to Levy War against the King, but I design to set forth
their oppression of their Fellow Subjects, and show in a few Instances how they
inverted all the Fundamental Laws of the English Liberties, and how their
little Finger was much heavier, then their Lawful Princes Loins.

It is a Fundamental Law of the English Government, and the first Article of
Magna Charta, Quod Ecclesia Anglicans libera sit, and habeat omnia sua Jura
integra, and libertates illaesas, That the Church of England shall be free; and
have all her Rights kept entire, and her Liberties inviolable, and yet to make
Way for their Wicked, and ungodly Ends, they voted the Bishops out of the House
of Peers, where, as Mr. Pryn afterward told them, they had sat in their
Predecessors as long as the Lords Temporal had sat in their Progenitors, and
longer than the Representatives of the Commons of England, had sat in the House
of Commons. The Lords at first refused to consent to such a fundamental
alteration, perceiving very well what might be the consequence theoreof, upon
which the People were brought down in Multitudes to the Parliament Doors, to
Cry against the Bishops several days successively, till the Terrors of those
Tumults did force them to Consent.

After this was done to the Bishops, they did what they pleased to the Loyal
Clergy, and the Universities, Imprisoning, and turning them out of their
Free-Holds, in a most Arbitrary, and Tyrannical manner, as may be seen in a
little Book called the IIth Persecution, and many other Narratives of the late
Times, to which I refer you for the particulars, that you may see how little
regard these Patriots of England, falsely so called, had to the first Article of
the great Charter, which concerns the Rights, and Liberties of the Church.

But 2ly, It is a fundamental Law of the English Liberty, That no Free Man
shall be taken, or imprisoned, without Cause shown, or be detained without
being brought unto his Answer in due form of Law. This is part of the 29th
Article of Magna Charta, and the whole Subject matter of the 28th of Edw. 3.
and of the Petition of Right, which these very same Patriots, to endear
themselves unto the People, would not let the King rest till he had passed
again, and again. Yet after they had got the Sword into their own Hands, they
Imprisoned whom they would, thousands of Innocent Men, and good Subjects of all
Ranks, without assigning any Reason but the general Reason of Malignancy, and
without bringing them to answer for themselves, as the Law requires.

3ly. It is a fundamental Law of the English Government: That no Man shall be
disseized of his Freehold, or Liberties, but by the known Laws of the Land.
This likewise is contained in the 29th Article of the great Charter, and the
28th of Edw. 3. And it is that, which makes England a Paradise, and the English
the most happy People in the World: Yet these very Men from the moment they got
the Power into their hands against all form of Law disseized, sequestered,
decimated, and forced Multitudes of Freeborn Gentlemen of England to compound
for their own Hereditary Estates.

4ly. It is a fundamental Law of the Liberties of England, That no man shall be
Condemned, or put to Death, but by lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law
of the Land in an ordinary way of a Legal Trial. But these great Patriots, and
Patrons of the Peoples Liberties, condemned one of the Kings greatest Subjects,
by an Arbitrary Ordinance, made by the remaining Parts of both Houses united
into one; which made him say upon the Scaffold, that he was not only the first
Archbishop, but the first Englishman, that dyed by an Ordinance of
Parliament; if the two Houses sitting without the King, and in open Hostility
against him, much less, if a part of the two Houses so sitting, ought to be
called by that happy, and Honorable Name.

Lastly, It is a fundamental Law of the English Government, That if any other
case than what is declared in 25 Edw. 3. c. 2. which is supposed to be High
Treason, do happen before any of his Majesty's Judges, those Judges shall tarry
without giving Judgment, till the Cause be shown, and declared before the King
and his Parliament, whether it ought to be judged High Treason, or no: Yet
these Tyrannical Men, the remnant of a Rebellious House, vote, and declared
things to be High Treason, which could not be so by the English Laws, and which
had never been declared to be High Treason, neither by the Law (by which they
themselves were Traitors;) nor by the Judges, in any Case; nor by the King and
his Parliament; and by these, and other Arbitrary doings, they made the
Freeborn Subjects of this Nation, as mere Slaves, as the Subjects of the Grand
Seignior, and their Lives, and Liberties, their Goods, and Fortunes, as
absolutely depending upon them, as theirs depend upon him. It would be endless
to recite all their Sultanical Ordinances: Their Ordinances for Sequestring of
Delinquents, as they called Loyal Persons, Estates; for Taxing such, as had not
contributed to the War, or not contributed according to their Estates and
Abilities; for sequestring the Temporalities of many Bishops, and then for
selling all the Bishops, and Church Lands; for assessing all the Members of
either House, that absented from, or were in Arms against the Parliament, as
they arrogantly miscalled themselves; for voiding the places of Clerks of
Record, that did any thing in their Offices in Favor of the Crown; for
regulating, as they called ruining, the two Universities; for removing of
Scandalous, as they called Loyal, Ministers; for taking away the fifth part of
Delinquents Estates; for disabling of them to bear any Office, or Place of
trust, or to have any Voice in Elections; for setting free all Apprentices from
their Masters, that had served the Parliament; for Abolishing the House of
Peers; for selling the Kings Lands; not to mention all their new Devices, by
which they squeezed out of the People of this Land, above twenty Millions in
seven years Time: A Greater sum than all the Kings of England, had levied from
the Conquest until that time, or herhaps until this day.

Their oppressions in these and such like Instances were very visible, not
withstanding all their Religious disguises, and all their pretended Zeal for
the Glory of God, insomuch that great Complaints began to be made of them, by
those, who had set them up, and their Tyranny increasing, at length came out a
bold Remonstrance against them in 1647, in which they are accosted thus:

Seeing it is high time for the Free Commons of England, to look after the
enjoyment of that good Land, Peace, Freedom, and Justice, which you promised us
at the beginning, give us leave to expostulate a little: How comes it to pass,
that we reap not the Harvest of this promised Seed-time, and that such fair
Blossoms yield such slender Fruit? Whence comes this muttering, and groaning,
and these Exclamations against Oppression, Tyranny, and Injustice in our
streets? How comes it to pass, that we see Courts of Injustice (Justice we
cannot call them) even at the Parliament-Door, nay, within the
Parliament House? How comes it to pass that so many Irregular and Illegal
Votes, Orders, Declarations, and Ordinances pass for current one day, and
counterfeit the next? Whence proceeds this Spirit of Ambition, Contention,
Oppression, and Sedition, which Reigns so powerfully among you? Did you so
vehemently declare against Prerogative to destroy us by Privilege? Did you
Exclaim against Injustice in others, that your selves might be singularly, and
superlatively unjust? Must your Will be our Supream-Law? Was the taking a
little of our Estates illegal in others, but Justice in you to take all? Is
this the end of our Labor, the return of our Expectation, and the prize, for
which we have sweat so much Blood? We looked for Justice, but behold
Oppression; we looked for Liberty, but behold Slavery, and our end is worse
than the beginning. We beseech you to look to the Rock, from whence you are
hewn; were you not Fellow-Commoners with us, and are you not accountable to us,
by whom you are empowered, and entrusted? Have you not declared, that the Law
ought to be the Rule of the Kings actions, and must it not be Rule of yours?
Have you formerly declared, That they, who give Law to others, ought not to be
without, or above Law themselves? And therefore we the Free Commons of England,
expect reparation and relief against all your Arbitrary and Exorbitant
Practices. Have you not declared, That no Free Commoner ought, or might be
disinfranchised of his Liberty, without Indictment, and that the Fining, and
Imprisoning of Men, without due Process of Law, was a breach upon the Law, and
destructive to the Subjects Liberty? How comes it then to pass, that since the
time of your declaring of it to be so unjust in others, you have so frequently
used it your selves? What Prison is there free; nay, what County, or
Corporation, but has some Sufferers, being Imprisoned by the Arbitrary
Subject-destroying Power of you, and your Committees? Have you not complained,
that the Public Stock was converted to Private Uses, and do not you do the
same? And have you not often declared against the King, for keeping and
protecting Delinquents from Trial, and do not you your selves protect, and
defend many False and Traitorous Members, under pretense of Privilege.

There are many other Complaints in this Remonstrance against our Reformers,
which for Brevity-sake, I omit. And after they were thus openly rebuked for
their Oppressions, and Corruptions, their Credit began sensibly to decay, till
at last they were dissolved, or rather reformed into a new Council of State,
which called themselves the Keepers of the Liberties of England, which, after a
short blaze, resigned all their Power to the Victorious Rebel, from whom they
had it, under the style of Protector; and how the Nobility, Gentry, Clergy, and
the whole Nation were enslaved by him, his own Acts are yet extant to declare.
He and his Council made new Laws for Treason, and for levying and raising of
Money. He confined a great part of the Loyal Nobility, and Gentry, and such as
he suspected of Loyalty, to their Houses; he forbad them to wear Swords, and
all others to meet at any Huntings, Horse Races, and the like Diversions. He
made his Proclamations Laws, he tolerated all Religions, but Popery, and
Prelacy, which he craftily joined together, to make the People believe they
were both alike.

He was succeeded by his Son, who was deposed by the Officers of the
Rebel-Army, they call back the remnant of the Old Long-Parliament to the House;
the Parliament presently erects a Council of State, afterward they, and the
Army clash; the Army prevails, settles a Committee of Safety; this shortly
expires, and is succeeded by the Remnant of the Long-Parliament again. They
presently fall to Imprison several of the most Eminent Citizens of London; and
commanded the General, of happy memory, to take away their Posts and Chains,
and to destroy their Gates, and Portcullis's. As soon as he had done this, he
bravely turned them out of Doors, and re-admits the Secluded Members, who
seeing how the Kingdom was enslaved, and bent upon the King's return, presently
issued out Writs for a free Parliament; which brought back his Majesty upon
this Auspicious Day.

From this Enumeration of the Usurping Powers, you may perceive to what a
degree this poor Nation was enslaved, under so many Tyrannical Successions. It
is impossible to tell how many Souls, Lives, and Noble Families were destroyed
by them, and how many Millions spent; but from this short review, which I have
now given you, you may perceive, that first I undertook to prove, That a People
in a state of Prosperous and Successful Rebellion, are in a state of Slavery
and Captivity; but especially a free People, who of Subjects to a limited
Sovereign, under the Regulation of wholesome Laws, become Slaves to the
Arbitrary Power of their own Fellow Subjects, who Govern by the Sword.

And so I pass to my Second Proposition to prove, That a People cannot be
delivered out of such a state of Slavery, and Confusion, without the special
Providence and Assistance of God, as it is written, When the Lord brings back
the Captivity in his People. This David, who was so great a King, and so great
a Politician, acknowledges also to Zadock the High Priest, 2 Samuel 15.25. The
King said unto Zadok the Priest, carry back the Ark of God into the City, if I
shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me back again, and
show me both it, and his habitation.

Now this Religious way of speaking in David, proceeded not from Fear, or
Superstition, which is the Daughter of Fear, [for as Hushai told Absalom, he
was a Valliant and Mighty Man] but from the rational and experimental knowledge
he had of the Being and Providence of God. He knew God, as a Philosopher, and
he knew him as a Prophet: Reason and Revelation had both taught him, how God
cannot but be concerned in the most minute Contigencies, that happen to single
Persons, much more in the Revolutions of States and Kingdoms, according to what
he elsewhere says. The Lord is King for ever, and ever, he is a great King
over all the Earth. Ps. 47.2.
None but the Epicureans, that over acknowledged the Being, denied the
Providence of God, and their Opinion is more unreasonable, than pure Atheism it
self; and all that ever acknowledged the Providence of God, did believe that he
employed it in a most special manner, over Human Societies, and that the
greater any Human Societies were, they were the more special Objects of his
Fatherly Care.

Indeed all Wise Men, both among Jews, Christians, and Heathens, have thought
it very difficult, and ordinarily presurnptuous, to determine precisely what
things happen by Gods special Providence, and Assistance, and what do not;
because his secret Influences upon the Understandings, and Wills of Men, cannot
be distinguished from their own Judgment, and free Choice; but yet the Power,
and Wisdom, and Justice, and Goodness of God are so very discernable in some
Events, that we may without Presumption impute them to him, as Judicious
Critics do Beoks to such, and such Authors, and from something that is Divine
in the contrivance of them, pronounce at first sight, as a Limner did upon what
was done in his absence, on a Picture which he was drawing, that the hand of
Apelles had been there. If you ask me what that is, which makes a Man discern
the special hand of God in any Event, I might answer, without any prejudice to
the Cause of Religion, that I cannot tell, because the Characters of things,
though clearly understood, are many times hard to be expressed: As in the
appearance of a good, or bad Angel, that is inexplicable, which makes me
discern, at first sight, that what I see is not an ordinary Man.

But lest this should look like shisting, (as all lawful advantages will be
called in the cause of God) I shall give you the Marks and Characters, which
the Sense of Mankind, and the Common Divinity of all Nations has set down, as
Rules whereby to know, when any Humane Event is the Lords special doing, and in
so doing, I shall apply the Wonderful Revolution from our Slavery and Captivity
this Day, as a pat Example to every one of those Rules.

1. The first Character then, whereby we may know, when any Event is the Lords
special doing, or an Effect of his Special Providence, is, When it is brought
about by Invisible Means, or if by Visible, yet by unlikely Means, which are
Inadequate, Unsuitable, or Repugnant to the Effect. For this Reason the Romans
imputed that strange Revolution of their good Fortune after the Battle at
Cannae, to a special Overruling Providence, and acknowleged that Hannibal was
Defeated by the Gods. Moventi a tertio lapide Hannibali Deos iterum, Deos,
(inquam) necfateri pudebit, restitisse, faith the Historian, which in allusion
to the Psalmist may be rendered thus: If it had not been for the Gods, now may
Rome say, if it had not been for the Gods, when the Carthaginians under
Hannibal rose up against us, they had swallowed us up quick, so wrathfully were
they displeased at us.

Thus likewise the Jews were so amazed at the wonderful Manner of their
Deliverance out of Captivity, in which they had Lived 60 Years, that they were
like Men in a Dream, and could scarce Believe the Truth, for the Strangeness of
the thing. The Power and Wisdom, and Goodness of God was so Visible in that
unlikely revolution, that they could not hold from crying out among the
Heathen, The Lord has done great things for us, the Lord has done great
things for us, whereof we are glad. They esteemed their Return from Captivity
as great a Miracle, as turning back the Streams of Nile, and the Course of the
Rivers in the South, and though there was nothing so surprising in it, as in
our Deliverance this Day, yet God represented it to the Prophet Ezekiel by the
Resurrection of Dry Bones, to show it was his special Work. Son of Man (faith
he to him in the Visionary Valley full of Dry Bones) Prophecy upon these Dry
Bones, Fz^k. XXXVII.
and say unto them: O ye Dry Bones, hear the Voice of the Lord! Thus says the
Lord to these Bones, I will breathe upon you, and you shall live, and know,
that I am the Lord. So I Prophesied (says he) as I was Commanded, and there
was a great Noise, and behold a great shaking, and the Bones came together,
Bone to his Bone. And I beheld, and lo the Sinews, and Flesh came upon them,
and the Skin covered them above, but there was no Breath in them. Then says he
unto me, Prophecy unto the Wind, and say unto the Wind, Come, and Breathe upon
these Slain, and I Prophesied as he commanded me, and the Breath came into
them, and they lived, and stood upon their Feet, an exceeding great Army.
Whereupon he said unto me, Son of Man these Bones are the whole house of
Israel. And for the same Reason may we now say, that they were the Loyal
Captivated part of his Majesty's Subjects, whom God, as it were Raised out of
their Graves, like Men, that had been long dead.

The Prophecies are full of such ingenious Emblems, as these, and particularly
in the 17th Chap. of the same Prophecy, God represented to the Prophet the Ruin
and Restoration of the King, and Royal House of Judah, under the Parable of
the Cedar, and great Eagle, which is as fit a Symbol to represent what has
happened to our late, and present Sovereign, and the Princes of the Blood. The
great Eagle was the King of Babylon, who came to Lebanon, and cropped off the
Branches of the highest Cedar, upon which it withered and dyed. But I (says
God) will preserve the young twigs of the highest Cedar, and I will take the
highest branch of it, and plant it again in the mountain of Israel, and it
shall put forth boughs, and bear fruit, and become a goodly Cedar, and all the
trees of the Forest shall know (so signal was his Providence in it) that I the
Lord brought down the high tree, and dried up the green tree, and made the dry
tree to flourish again.

Was not this the condition of our late and present Sovereign? Did not an
Eagle, a Many-headed Eagle full of Feathers of diverse Colors, crop the top
Boughs of the Royal Prerogative, and make the Cedar wither away, and dye? Nay,
did they not do unto him, what was done to the Tree, in the vision of
Nebuchadnezzar, hew him down, cut off his branches, Dan. 4 14.
shake his leaves, and scatter his fruit? But did not God preserve his young
Twigs, and did he not plant his highest Branch again in the British Mountains,
and is he not become a mighty Tree? Yes, there are so many things, if not
plainly miraculous, yet so very admirable in the preservation, and replanting
of or Gracious Sovereign, that in Justice we ought to ascribe it to the special
overruling Providence of God.

For if we consider the Builders, who refused the Stone; which is now become
the head of the Corner, our Common-wealth-builders, I mean, who built with
untempered Mortar, Confusion came upon them, as upon the Builders of Babel,
none knows how, unless it was sent from above. Consternation suddenly fell upon
some, Repentance or Horror seized upon others, and Jealousies and Discontents
confounded the rest; the People in the mean while, as it were by Inspiration,
crying out in all places, Hosannah to the King. Then were strange things to be
seen, Republicans with Royalists, Churchmen with Church-robbers, Rebels and
Traitors with Loyal Subjects, Papists with Protestants, Episcopists with
Anti-episcoparians, all agreed to bring in the King, or let him be brought in.
That Ethiopians should thus change their Color, and Leopards their Spots, that
the Lion should associate with the Lamb, and the Wolf with the Kid, that things
on a sudden should change their Natures, or act against them, are Miracles in
the Moral, as well, as the Natural World, and ought to be ascribed to his
Power, and special Providence, who only does wonderful things.

That Panick Fears should also seize on those Legions, of whom the World was
afraid; and that they, who were Veterans in Blood, and Rebellion, should bear
the sight of the Royal Standard, and pray for the King, as he passed their
Ranks, must needs be imputed to his special Influence, Zech. 12.10.
who was able to pour out the spirit of grace and supplication upon them, that
they might look upon him, whom they had pierced with Repentance, and Remorse.
That so many different Elements should jumble into such an happy mixture, and
Causes so contrary conspire to one Effect, that all the Enemies of the
Government should be, as it were Planet-struck, and all the Interests against
it invisibly subdued, that scarce one Party, or one Man among them should
appear to oppose this Revolution, nor one Dog among them move his Tongue, but
that it should be brought about without Mutiny, without Murmur, or without a
drop of Blood, was an admirable Scene of Affairs, worthy the contrivance of
infinite Wisdom, and ought to be esteemed, as his doing alone, who can work by
repugnant Causes, bring Order out of Confusion, and take from men their Hearts
of Stone, and give them Hearts of Flesh.

II. Another Character of Gods special Providence and Assistance in any Event
is, The strange seasonableness of it, when it unexpectedly falls out in a time
of despondency, to prevent the destruction of a destitute Person, and the utter
ruin of a desperate Righteous Cause. God could prevent the fall of good Men,
and the ruin of Righteous Causes, but for just, and wise reasons he sometimes
lets them lie in the rubbish, till they seem irreparable, and then unexpectedly
raises them again, as our Savior raised Lazarus from the Grave, when every one
thought it was impossible to be done.

This was the Condition of the Royal Family, and Cause. God could have
prevented that stupendous Series of Calamities, which fell like Wave after Wave
upon them, he could have prevented the Designs, and have sooner blasted the
Success of their Enemies, but he let them prosper to that degree, that the
Spectators, as well as the Actors of this sad Tragedy, were ready to think,
that God had forgotten to be gracious to David, and had utterly forsaken his
Righteous Cause. But then at the moment, when the Wicked Blasphemed God, and
said, Tush! God cares not for him, in that Critical moment of Despair, when
God seemed to stand afar off, and hid, as it were, his face from him, then he
arose, and scattered his enemies, and broke the power of the ungodly, but like
the power of the Tyrant Antiochus in Daniel which was broke without hands. When
the Usurpers Will was a Law, when his Greatness made him defy his Enemies, and
say in his Heart, I shall never be cast down; then came a Disease, like an
Angel sent from God, to do the part of Brutus, and smote the Tyrant to the
Ground. Even then, when there were no Human means left to rend the Kingdom from
him, God rent him from the Kingdoms, and snatched his direful Soul from him, as
from the Fool in the Gospel, in the midst of his strength, and security, when
he had taken the Houses of God, and the Palaces of the King in possession, and
thought he had much Goods laid up for many years. When he said in his Heart, I
will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the Stars of God, Isa.
XIV.
I will sit upon the mount of the Congregation in the sides of the North, then
I say, when he thought to ascend above the clouds, (a Prophetical Symbol for
Great Monarchy) and be like the most high in Sovereign Power, then fell he like
Lucifer from Heaven, and was brought down to Hell, and then sang we for joy,
how art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer! Son of the morning, how art thou
cut down to the ground! Thou who did make the Earth to tremble, and shake the
Kingdoms thereof. Lastly, when he as brought to that prodigious Strength and
Greatness, as to be Courted by the greatest Monarchs, and thought to fix the
Succession in his tainted Blood; when he had been set by his Flatterers in a
Throne, and the Crown and Scepter laid at the Idols Feet, then came the hand
writing suddenly out against him; and the Stone, which he and the Builders
before him had rejected, like the stone in the Vision, cut out of the Mountain
without hands, smote the Image (that Prophetical Symbol of many Governments)
and broke in pieces the Iron, the Clay, the Brass, the Silver, and the Gold,
and they became like Chaff, and the wind carried them away, but the Stone,
which smote the Image became a great mountain, even like mount Sion, which
cannot be removed, and is the joy of the whole Earth.

To conclude, even then when the Royal Interest was desperate, and in Human
probability must have utterly perished, had not the deliverance happened when
it did, when not the People only, but the Princes of the Earth counted our
Sovereign smitten, and afflicted of God, and shunned him, as the Heard do an
hunted, or embossed Stag, then sudden confusion came upon his Enemies, as
sorrow upon a Woman in Travel; then God said of them, as of Cyrus his Anointed,
He is my Shepherd, and set him upon the Throne of his Father David, and made
his Enemies lick the Dust. When he was ready to sink under the Waves of
Affliction, upon which he had walked, not without a Miracle, so many years,
then did thou stretch forth thy Arm unto him, O righteous Jesus, when he was
become like a broken Vessel, and seemed cleam forgotten, as a dead man out of
sight, then did thou, O Lord, overtun, overturn, overturn, till he came,
whose right it was.

III. Another Character of Gods special Providence, and Assistance in any
Event, is. The mighty good, which thereby accrues to the public state of
things, and the persons upon whose welfare the public does depend. To ascribe
every petty Accident to a special Providence, would look like Lightness, and
Superstition, and it would be Profaness to father upon God the mischiess, which
we bring upon our selves, by our own Sin, and Folly, but that great and
beneficial Events ought to be ascribed to his particular hand, is the common
Creed of all Mankind. For it is demonstrable from the Nature, and Attributes of
God, that he does govern Human Affairs, and that being admitted, it must needs
follow in the Second place, that he takes special care in ordering those
Events, which are of public moment and benefit to Mankind, and peculiarly
those, which concern any People, that are of his Household, which is the Church
of God. There was never any thing, which seemed more contingent, than the
selling of Joseph into Egypt, yet God did order it by a special Providence,
that he might be an Instrument in the time of Dearth, of saving his Fathers
House. It was not you, (says he to his Brethren) but God, who sent me hither
to preserve you a Posterity on the Earth. Gen^ 45.5, 7, 8.
God sent me before you, to save your lives by this great deliverance, and has
made me a father to Pharaoh, and Lord of his hourse, and Ruler throughout all
the land of Egypt, which was then more than ever the Granary of the World. So
likewise in the story of Esther, that she should be chosen into the Seraglio of
Ashuerus among a crowd of other Virgins, seems a matter of Fortune, or common
Providence, and yet it was contrived by God, for the deliverance of his People,
and the Providential Scene, which depended upon it, was perhaps, as miraculous,
as ever was acted upon the Stage of Human Affairs.

But of all the remarkable Events in Sacred, or Profance History, none has
been a greater Blessing to any Prince, or People, than the Revolution of this
day has been to us, and our King. As for us, we were delivered by it from
Egypt, and Babylon at home, from dome-stick Captivity, from Servitude of all
Servitudes the most intolerable, under the Tyrannical Empire of our own
Mamalukes, and from that Evil under the Sun, when Beggars and Servants were
Lords and Princes, and Princes and Lords, Beggars and Slaves. We were delivered
by it from Military and Arbitrary Power indeed, from the Tyranny and Insolence
of Usurping Sultans in several Forms and Successions of Government, who broke
the bonds of Law in sunder, as Sampson did the green Withs, like Threads of Tow,
and made their Will and Pleasure our Law. In a word, we were restored by it to
our natural King, and Government to the Father of our Country, and in him to
our Lives, our Religion, our Liberties, and Estates.

As for his Majesty, he was restored by it to the Inheritance of Three
Kingdoms, where his Dominion is from one Sea to the other, and from the Flood
unto the Worlds end: Of Three Kingdoms, where his Subjects are his Children,
and where even his Merchants, as the Prophet Speaks, are Princes, Isai. 23.8.
and his Traffiquers the Honorable of the Earth: Lastly, of Three Kingdoms,
where he sits on his Throne, like God, holding the Balance of the World, and
represents him above all other Monarchs in this, that he is the Moderator of
Peace and War among Princes, and can Set up one, and Pull another down.

These are the Temporal Blessings, which he, and we enjoy by it, and the
Spiritual are no less considerable, than these. For after our return from
Captivity, the Temple was soon Rebuilt, the Altar speedily set up, and the
Lawful Priesthood restored again. Wherefore, since the revolution of this Day
was such an unspeakable Blessing to the Three Nations, and so highly beneficial
both to Church and State, common Reason, and Religion will Award the
Contrivance of it to Gods Wisdom, and the Execution of it in all its parts to
his Almighty Arm.

IV. Another mark of Gods Special Providence, and assistance in any Event, is,
When it falls out very seasonably for the relief, and Vindication of oppressed
Innocence, and brings along with it the just Execution of public Vengeance,
upon the Nimrods of Humane Societies, the Sons of violence, who live by
Oppression and Prey. God is naturally the Protector of Innocent Men, and
Righteous Causes, and though in Wisdom he cannot acquit, and condemn, reward, and
punish here, as he means to do hereafter, when the great Tragecomedy is done;
yet, lest in the mean time the Spectators should have Sinister Thoughts of his
Providence, he is forced to come as it were, from behind the Curtain, and kill
a Bloody Tyrant, like Herod, with Blasphemy perhaps in his Mouth, and sitting
in his Royal apparel upon his Throne. Though it would be inconsistent with his
Wisdom in the Present State of things, to extirpate the Bears and Wolves of
Humane Societies, yet, like David, when he tended his Fathers Flock, he often
smites the Lion, and the Bear, and rescues the Lamb out of their Paws; and though
the Nature of this inferior Economy obliges him to scourge Sinners by the
Hands of Wicked Men, yet the Rod of the Wicked shall not always rest on the Lot
of the Righteous, Psalm. 125.3.
lest they put forth their Hands unto Iniquity. He knows our Frame, and
remembers that we are but Dust, and therefore in his Punishments, he has
regard to the Strength of the Patient, as well, as to the merits of his Crimes.
Hence it proceeds, that in the midst of Judgment, he remembers Mercy, and that
afflicted Persons, and Nations, are so often relieved; as we were, in a Time of
Despondency, even then, when we feared, that his Mercy was clean gone, and that
he would be entreated no more. We had tempted, and provoked the most High to be
wroth with his Inheritance, so that he gave us over unto the Sword, and our
Glory into Rebellious Hands. He would not go forth with his Armies against
them, but let them persecute his Righteous Soul, and take it, and lay his
Honor in the Dust; Yet though all this came upon us, he did not forget us, but
after so many, and such long Miseries both in Church, and State, he awoke, as
one out of Sleep, and like a Mighty Man refreshed with Wine, he smote our
Enemies in the hinder parts, and put them to a perpetual shame: Though the Rod,
with which he smote us, seemed for some Years to Blossom in his Hand, yet, when
his Anger was over, he broke it, and threw the Pieces into the Fire.

The faithful Royalists, and their Prince were destitute, afflicted, and
tormented, they wandered some of them in Deserts, and Mountains, and some in
Dens, and Caves of the Earth. They had Trial of most cruel Mockings, moreover
of Bonds, and Imprisonments, being fast bound in Misery, and Iron, which
entered into their Soul. As it is written, for his Sake were they killed all
the day long, and counted as Sheep appointed to be Slain. Yet, for all this, he
arose in his Good Time and Delivered them; the sorrowful sighing of the
Prisoners, and Exiles came before him, as the Cry of the Children of Israel in
Egypt, and he delivered them, by the Death of Pharaoh, out of their Distress.
The Voice of their Blood, like that of Righteous Abels, cried unto him from the
Ground, nay the Soul of our Martyred Sovereign, not to mention the High
Priests, cried, like the Souls of the Martyrs under the Altar, cried with a
loud, and bitter Voice, How long, O Lord, Rev. 6, 10.
Holy, and True, do thou not Judge, and Avenge our Blood? And when he had
rested a little while, till the number of his Faithful Subjects, the true
Melchites of the Church of England, which should be slain, were fulfilled, Then
did thou, O Lord, to whom Vengeance belongs, show thy self, then did thou
lift up thy self, O thou Judge of the Earth. The Lord made himself to be known
by the Judgments, which were executed upon the Murderers of our Martyred
Sovereign, whom, though they prospered so many Years after, to the Grief, and
Astonishment of Good Men, yet Vengeance wonderfully pursued and suffered not to
live, but as they had shed the Blood of the Saints, so divine Vengeance in
retaliation gave them Blood to drink. Nay the Juslice of God signalized her
self on the Chief Contriver of the Royal Tragedy, whom his Patience had
suffered to go to the Grave in Peace. For he, and his Chief Fellow-Actor were
cast out of their Graves, like an abominable Branch, and as Carcasses of Beasts
they were drawn, and carried out beyond the Gates of our Jerusalem, and buried
again with the Burial of an Ass. The World indeed expected, that public
Justice, like the Angel in the Revelations, should have thrust in her Sickle,
and gathered the Clusters, that were ripe for the Wine Press of her Wrath, and
that she should have trodden them without the City, till Blood should have come
out of the Wine Press even unto the Horses Bridles, but being moderated by the
Mercy of our restored Sovereign, upon whose Throne she attends, she contented
her-self with a few of the ripest Clusters. Tho she expected to have washed her
Feet in the Blood of the ungodly, yet she satisfied her self with Drops instead
of Buckets, and like the Destroying Angel put up her Sword, when she might have
made it Drunk with their Blood.

Indeed there was enough of it shed, for the Vindication of Divine Justice, and
the full satisfaction of Christian Ghosts, yet however it is observable, and
perhaps too not without a Divine Providence, that some of those Arch-Traytors,
who owed their forfeited Lives to the King's Mercy, should remain in the Land,
like the Nations in Israel, to be pricks in our Eyes, and Thorns in our
Gracious Monarchs sides.

V. Another Indication of Gods special Providence, and Assistance in any event,
is, The Harmony of its parts, when various accident, happily conspire, as in
this Revolution, to produce the same effect. That one, or two things should
luckily hit in the Production of some notable Event, may perhaps be reasonably
ascribed to common Providence, or Chance, but that so many different Interests
should combine, and so many accidents at several times, and diverse places,
should all concur, as it were by design, to work the deliverance of this day,
cannot without manifest Violence to common Reason, but be ascribed to his
particular Contrivance, who was able to range so many Causes in Order, and
judge of the Seasons, and Junctures of Affairs. As Nature is nothing but Divine
Art; so such admirable revolutions can be nothing but Divine Artifice, and
Contrivance; unless it can be imagined, that a thing wherein there is so much
of Plot, and which was so curiously contrived, that no Human Wisdom could wish
it, or contrive it better, may reasonably be imputed to Chance. An ingenious
Spaniard, as a more ingenious Author of our own tells us, has written a Book,
to prove te being of God, from the admirable contrivance of that shadow of his
invisible Glory, the Sun, because, as he well observes, neither many Suns, nor
one any otherwise contrived, than this is, could have served the same noble
purposes so well. For had there been two, or any other number of Suns, or had
this stood still, or been bigger, or lesser, or set at other distance, or had
its motion been any other way ordered, than it is, great and manifold
inconveniences in Nature would have followed thereupon: Wherefore since it is
already contrived so well, both as to its bigness, distance, and motion, that
the wit of Men and Angels could not contrive it better, Reason must, and ought
to presume, that it was contrived by the infinite Wisdom God. In like manner,
had I time to set before you the several parts, and circumstances of this
wonderful Revolution, I am confident, I could make it appear, that it had been
attended with many notable inconveniences, had it happened at any other time,
or in any other manner, or by any other Instruments, than it did. Wherefore is
it not most reasonable to conclude, that it was the Consult of a special
Providence, since it was contrived in a manner so apparently worthy of the
Divine Wisdorn, and since the united Reason of Men and Angels, could not have
contrived it in a better way, than it really fell out. Certainly the seasonable
contrivance of so many wonderful Scenes into every Act, and of so many currious
Acts into one harmonious Play, must needs have been the study and invention of
a very skilful Author, even of the All-wise, and Almighty Dramatist; who has
the World for his Theater, and seldom less than a Kingdom for his Stage.

VI. Another sign of Gods special Providence, and Assistance, is, when a
remarkable Event happens to any, especially to Public, and Illustrious
Persons, upon the same day, in which another Accident, as remarkable, as that,
Exodus 12.41.
happened to them before. So the same day that the Children of Israel went into
Egypt; At the end of 430 years it came to pass on the self same day, that all
the hosts of the Lord went out from thence. So the Altar was providentially set
up by Judas Macchabeus, on the self same day it had been profaned by the Tyrant
Antiochus, and so, as our Church has well observed, it was not without a
special Providence, that on the self same day, in which our Sovereign was born,
he should, as it were be born again, in being restored to his Triple Crown.

VII. Another Rule whereby to know when any Event is brought about by Gods
special Providence and Assistance, is, the Correspondency of it to the Prayers
of Good Men, especially of the King, and the Church. The Prayers of the
Faithful, of Faithful Kings especially, as of Moses, David, and Jehosaphat, not
to mention others, both Jewish and Christian Kings and Em peroursavail very
much. Nay, we read of a Turkish King, who by a short Prayer to Christ in the
midst of a Battle, turned the fortune of it, when it was desperate, against the
perfidious Christians, who had horribly perjured their Savior's Name. But when
a King, especially a King so Holy, and Just as our late most blessed Sovereign,
shall Kneel before him, who sits upon the Throne, and cast his Crown at his
Feet: When a King so dear unto God, as he was, shall beg a Blessing of him,
almost with his last Breath, as he did the deliverance of this Day, there is
great Reason to look upon the performance of it, as a special Answer to such
prevailing Prayers. The King, O Lord, Ps. 21, 1.2.
shall rejoice in thy Salvation, for thou have granted him his Hearts desire,
and have not denved him the request of his Lips. But when not only the Beasts,
(those Prophetical Emblems of Kings) but the four, and twenty Elders, by which
are meant Christian Bishops, I say, when not only Christian Kings, but Bishops,
the chief Ministers of Christ, and the whole Church over which they preside,
shall cast themselves down before the Lamb, to acknowledge their sins, and beg a
deliverance of God, then, if ever, must the Kingdom of Heaven suffer Violence,
and God appear to be a God, that hears Prayers.

Wherefore, seeing it is the property of the infinitely Merciful God to hear
Prayers, especially the united Prayers of the King, and the Church, we have
just presumption to ascribe this deliverance, to his Special Favor in hearing
thheir Conspiring Sighs, and Devotions. For if two, as our Savior said, much
more if a whole Church, shall agree on Earth, touching any thing they shall
ask, it shall be done for them of our Father, which is in Heaven.

Such are the Characters of Gods special Providence, and Assistance, whereof
any one, appearing in any event, is sufficient to justify the imputation of it
to the special hand of God. But that they should all be visible in one Event,
that such a mighty Revolution should be effected by very improbable means, and
fall out so seasonably, to prevent the Destruction of a destitute exiled
Prince, and the utter ruin of a desperate Righteous Cause, and a pure
Apostolical Church; that so much unspeakable good does accrue by it to the
Public, and that Oppressed right and innocence were thereby relieved, and
public Justice done upon the Sons of Usurpation and Blood, that so many
various accidents should so happily conspire to bring it about, and that it
should happen upon the same day, which was remarkable before for the appearance
of the Star, and our Sovereigns Birth. Lastly, that it should fall out in
correspondence to the Prayers of good men, especially of the King, and of all,
that had kept their Garments unspotted in this suffering Apostolical Church:
Such a wonderful Complication of all these marks in one Event, must needs force
all, but Atheists, or Epicureans, who are more absurd than Atheists, to confess
with David, that it was the Lord, who brought back our Captivity, and cry out
with the Church in the 118th Psalm, This is the Lords doing, and it is
mavelous in our eyes. Which brings me in the third place to consider the
duty, which a People so wonderfully brought back from Captivity ought to
perform, which, I told you, was to render praises, and thanksgivings to God, as
it is written in my Text, When the Lord brings back the Captivity of his
People, Jacob shall, or ought, to rejoice, and Israel shall, that is, ought to
be glad.

This is the import of these Phrases of rejoicing, and being glad. They
signify Religious joy, and gladness, expressing it self, and exulting in
praises, and thanksgivings unto God. So in the 118 Psalm which the Royal
Psalmist made after he was Anointed King of Israel. The voice of rejoicing, and
Salvation is in the Tabernacles of the Righteous, the Right hand of the Lord
brings mighty things to pass, the Right hand of the Lord is exalted, the
Right hand of the Lord brings mighty things to pass. The Stone which the
Builders refused is become the Head-stone of the Corner, this is the Lords
doing and it is mavelous in our Eyes, this is the day, which the Lord has
made, we will rejoice, and be glad therein, bind the Sacrifice with Cords even
unto the Horns of the Altar, thou art my God, and I will Praise thee, thou art
my God, I will Exalt thee, O give thanks unto the Lord, for be is good, for his
Mercy endures for ever.

Almost all the Psalms of Praise and Thanksgiving are full of expressions of
Joy and Gladness, because Religious joy is the Fountain, from whence all
Praises and Thanksgivings do proceed, and the proper passions, and dispositions
of mind which make them acceptable unto God. Therefore says the Psalmist in
another Psalm, O le joyful in the Lord, O ye Lands! Serve the Lord with
Gladness, and come before his presence with a Song.

This we have done, and this still is our Duty to do on this auspicious Day. We
have offered up the Calves of our Lips, the Sacrifices of Praises and
Thanksgivings unto God with our Mouths, and I hope our Hearts are Unisons with
our Tongues. We have sung unto the Lord, as the Psalmist says, and heartily
rejoiced in the strength of our Salvation, we have sung Psalms and Anthems unto
him, because he has done mavelous things, and, I hope in this solemnity our
very Souls have magnified the Lord, and our Spirits have rejoiced in God our
Savior, and even hto te last moment of it, let every Loyal Person say, bless
the Lord O my Soul, Ps. 103.1.
and all that is within me, bless his Holy Name.

Certainly it is our duty on this happy day to extol God, and exult in the
Salvation, which he has wrought for us, and to acknowledge that this is the
day which the Lord has made, the day of our going out of Egypt, the day of our
return from Captivity, the day of the Dedication of our Temple and Altar, nay
the day of the British Purim in which we ought to rejoice, as being the day,
wherein we rested from our Enemies, and the month which was turned to us from
Sorrow to Joy, and from mourning into a good day, that we should make it a day
of Feasting, and Joy, Esth. 9.22.
and of sending Portions, and gifts to the Poor, For it is to the Mercy of
this day, that we owe our Lives, our Religions our Liberties, and Estates, that
every one of us can sit securely under his own Vine, and call what he has his
own, and therefore certainly, we that ejoy so great a Deliverance by this day,
and such mighty Blessings consequent upon it, as no other People in the World
enjoy besides our selves, if our hearts be not at discord with our Mouths in
our present Devotions, we cannot forbear to let the offerings of our Charity,
accompany our Sacrifices of Praise, and do something considerable to exhilarate
the Spirits of our poor brethren, and make them partakers of our joy. This day
the sorrowful sighing of the Poor, and of the Prisoners ought to come before
us, and more especially if we know any such, who wereruined by the late
Successful Rebellion, them we ought to relieve. They, more especially, ought to
be the Objects of your Charity upon this Solemnity, and therefore in the first
place let us do good, and distribute to those, or the Poor Relations of those
who were sufferers for their Loyalty, and bore the greatest and bitterest part
of that Captivity, from which the Lord brought back his People upon this day. I
suppose there are such to be found among you, the Monuments of your former
Loyalty in the bloody Worcester-fight, and I hope you will consider them as
Martyrs, and Confessors for our English Liberties, and open your hand liberally
toward them, who yet bear in their Bodies, or in their Distressed Families the
Marks of their Loyalty for the King, and of their Sufferings for the Church. We
cannot offer up unto God any Sacrifice more acceptable, than the supplies,
which, in gratitude to him for our Deliverance, we shall give to them this day,
and if our Charity be such, as becomes our present Devotion, we need not fear,
but that God will accept our Alms and Oblations, and that our Prayers and our
Alms will go up for a Memorial before him, who has done so great things for
us, and by his Almighty Power, and Allwise Providence turned our Captivity, as
the Rivers in the South.

These are the duties proper to this day, but then we must further understand,
that if our Joy be pure and genuine, and such as really proceeds from a
grateful, and Religious Sense of Gods Goodness, it will show itself in the
Fruits of true Piety toward God, and of True, and conscientious Allegiance to
the King, (whom God so miraculously restored unto us) all the Days of our Life.

He that pretends Religion toward God, and yet makes use of it, as a Cloak of
Maliciousness to Cover his Disaffection, and Disloyalty to the King, that Man's
Religion, let him show never so much Zeal for preserving the Protestant
Religion, is Pharisaical, and vain, and utterly unacceptable in the sight of
him, who will have every Soul to be Subject to the Higher Powers: And on the
other hand, he who pretends Loyalty to the King, and expresses it in such a
manner as must needs be offensive to God, and sober Men, that man's Loyalty
subverts the Kings Throne, and provokes God to let the Enemies of the Crown
multiply, and prosper, to punish the Wickedness of such profane Royalists, who
in that Bacchanal manner, by which they Testify their affection to the King,
disgrace his Majesty, and dishonor God. He that truly Fears God will Honor
the King, and not meddle with those, that are given to Change, and he that
truly Honors the King, in the Christian notion of a King, as the Image and
Lieutenant of God, will be sure to Honor him, by whom Kings Reign, and express
his Zeal for him, and his Joy for his Restoration in such Ways and Measures,
as shall not pollute any Festival Solemnity, or turn our indulgence into Riot
or Excess. God forbid that Loyalty more than any other Christian Virtue, should
be made a pretense for such unworthy Greek Practices, and God forbid, that any
of the English Melchites, or Loyal Subjects of the Church of England should
find no other ways of declaring their Zeal, and Affection for their Sovereign,
than such as will render them the Scorn, and Reproach of theirs, and the Kings
Enemies, and a Scandal to the Royal Cause. Let us in God's Name rejoice in the
Kings Salvation, but in such a manner, as will consist with the strict Rules of
Christian Sobriety. Let the Fear of God temper our Mirth for the Deliverance of
the King, let us wish him Health, and say with Daniel, O King live for Ever;
but at the same time let us remember him, who has Clothed him with Majesty,
and in whose Rule, and Governance the Hearts of Kings and Princes are. God
indeed has given Wine to cheer the Heart of Man, but then we must in our Mirth
remember what he has told us, that Wine is a Mocker, and that strong drink is
rageing, Prove. 20 1.
and whosoever is deceived thereby is not Wise. God indeed has given us leave
to Eat, and Drink, to kill Beasts, to mingle our Wines, and furnish our Tables
upon Festival Occasions, but then, as Christians, it becomes us to remember at
our Feasts, that whether we eat, or drink, 1 Cor. 10.31.
or whatsoever we do, we must do it to the Praise, and glory of God, who on
this day brought back the Captivity of his People, and therefore does expect,
that Jacob should Rejoice, and Israel should be Glad, for the wonderful
deliverance, which by his Special. Providence and Assistance he has brought
about Now to God, our Mighty Deliverer and Savior, who gives Victory unto
Kings; the God to whom alone our Gracious Sovereign is Subject, and next under
whom he is Supreme, within these Realms, unto the Allwise, and Almighty God, of
whose institution Kings and Kingdoms are; unto the Allwise Almighty God and
Creator, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, be ascribed, as is most due, Eternal
Praise, Honor. Majesty, and Glory by us, and by the whole Church Militant and
Triumphant, now and Evermore.

FINIS.
Page 17, line penult, for 60, read 70.

Sermons written by the same Author, and Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the
Bishops-head in St. Pauls-Church-yard.
1. A Discourse to prove the strongest Temptations are conquerable by
Christians. A Sermon Preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor of
London, and Court of Aldermen, Jan. 14th 1676/7 2. The Spirit of Enthusiasm
Exorcised, In a Sermon Preached before the University of Oxford, On Act-Sunday,
1680. 3. Peculium Dei, A Sermon Preached before the Honorable the Aldermen and
Citizens of London on February 6th, 1688/8 0/1 4. The true Notion of
Persecution, in a Sermon preached at the time of the late Contribution for the
French Protestants. 5. A Sermon Preached before the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Citizens of London, on Jan. 30th 1681/2 6. The Moral Shechinah, or a Discourse
of Gods Glory, In a Sermon Preached at the Yorkshire Feast In Bow-Church, June
11 1682. 7. A Sermon Preached at the Church of St. Bridget, on Easter-Tuesday,
being the first of April 1684, before the Right Honorable Sir Henry Tulse Lord
Mayor of London, and the Honorable Court of Aldermen, together with he
Governors of the Hospitals upon the Subject of Almsgiving.

