I DISSERTATION CONCERNING THE ANTIQUITY OF TEMPLES.

Wherein is shown, That there were none before the TABERNACLE, Erected by Moses
in the WILDERNESS: FROM HISTORIES, Sacred and Profane.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside.
1696.

HONORATISSIMO Do. Do. GULIELMO TRUMBUL,

Equiti aurato.

Non minus virtutibus, quam titulis ornato.

Apud Regem Galliarum, necnon Imp, Turcicum, Olim Legato.

Nuper Quaestorum aerarij Socio: Nune Gulielmo M. Brit. Regi Ab Epistolis, and
Sanctioribus consilijs.

Itemque In conventu Ordinum Regni, Senatori integerrimo.

Hanc qualem qualem Dissertationem, Quam humillime, D. D. C. L. Mq JOSEPHUS
HILL.

READER.
HAving a design to publish a few Dissertations, concerning some Opinions, that
have in the late Times been ventilated amongst us; I shall briefly show to what
Subjects they have relation: A long Preface being no ways congruous to a short
Treatise.

This First is merely Historical, referring to the Times of the Old Testament
concerning the Antiquity of Temples. Of which Subject, many Authors have spoken
by the by; but scarce any industriously and fully. Hospinian indeed has said
something thereof; but so little, and superficially, in comparison of his
copious handling other matters, that it is next to nothing for satisfaction
therein. And none in our own Language, that I have seen at least, has treated
of this Argument. There is one R. T. that published a small Tract in 12o. A. D.
1638. de Templis; wherein he discourses of the ancient Manner of building,
consecrating, and adorning of Churches, according to the Mode of those times,
but nothing of their Antiquity. Concerning which, I have from sacred and
profane Histories, said what I think sufficient for this preliminary
Dissertation.

The Second has reference to the Times of the Gospel, concerning Artificial
Churches; wherein the common Opinion of Protestants is defended. That the
Primitive Christians neither built, nor had any public separate Places,
appropriate for the public Worship of God, for above Two hundred Years after
our Blessed Saviors Ascension; but only such private Places of resort, as were
most convenient, and secure in those Times of Persecution. Which is also the
Opinion of the Ancient Fathers, and Historians generally, as shall in due place
be manifested. In after Ages, when Superstition and Popery prevailed, several
Authors, the better to maintain the Holiness of Churches, began to assert, That
from the beginning Christians had public Places, dedicated and consecrated to
their worshipping God; although, both then and ever since, all of this Opinion
acknowledge those Edifices were nothing so large, or stately, as the Temples of
the Heathens, or the Churches of Christians, in and after Constantine's time,
when Christianity was generally embraced. But I hope to make it apparent, that
this Salvo will not serve their tarn, nor all the Arguments that Bellarmine and
Baronius have brought; which some Learned Protestants of our Nation have made
use of, more especially Fuller in's Miscellanies, and Mode after him, (though
he mentions him not) who has a large Discourse on this Subject, yet not
sufficient to support their Opinion.

A Third Dissertation concerus the Holiness of Churches. Which not only the
Papists, but many good Protestants also contend for. Although our Savior has
taken away all Distinction of Places under the Gospel; as Dr. Sherlock in his
Disswasive from Popery, c. 4. has sufficiently proved. The (...), or chief
ground of their Mistake is, in resembling our Churches, to the Temple, which
have only Conformity to the Jewish Synagogues, as many Learned Men have shown.
For there was but one Temple for all the 12 Tribes, and none entered into it but
the Priests, and the High. Priest once a Tear into the Holy of Holies, on the
day of Expiation; the People assembling only in the outward Courts: Whereas the
Synagogues were for all the People's meeting therein, for the Moral Worship of
God, on such times as he had ordained. And as God's special Manifestation of
himself, in any place, intitles it to a relative Holiness for the time, Exodus
3.5. Josh. 5.15. Acts. 7.33. and 2 Peter I. ^ 18. so by his more especial
Residence in the Tabernacle and Temple, they became holy, Exodus 40.9, 10, 11.
and being typical of our blessed Savior, hallowed the Service of his People,
as he tells us, Matthew. 23.17, 19, 20, 21. But where read we of God's dwelling
in the Synagogues, or Christian Churches, more than in other places where he is
worcester shipped? only of his gracious Presence with his own Ordinances which hallow
the Place for the time, not the Place them. For even the Elements of the
Sacraments, consecrated by Christ's Appointment, have no other relative
Holiness, but in their Sacramental use. And the Church of England in some
cases, admits their Administration in private Houses, making no doubt of God's
Acceptance thereof there, as well as in the public Churches.

The last Task will be touching Priests and Altars: Showing that these properly
belong only to the Jewish, and not otherwise than improperly to the Christian
Religion; the former being never used otherwise in the New Testament, and the
latter only once for our Savior. And that most of the Allegations from
Antiquity for their use, are either from supposititious Authors, or such as
fall short of proving, that for which they are alleged.

INDEX.
OF Temples in general, Page 1-4. Their Antiquity from the Old Testament, p.
5.. 1-7. And from profane History,. 8. Their Original, amongst Ethiopians,. 8.
Grecians,. 9. Italians,. 10. Pelasgians, and other Grecians,. 11, 12, 13.
Egyptians,. 14, 15, 16. Osiris and Isis,. 17, 18, 19. The Assyrians and
Babylonians,. 20.
The Conclusion, p. 46.
ERRATA.
Page 11. line 32. for horum read harum. P. 17. l. 20. for and read of. Ibid.
l. 24. r. 2514. P. 18. l. 33. r. Tatianus. P. 21. l. 26. r. ademtis. P. 24. l.
23. r. Arcades. Ibid. l. 33. r. Lycaons. P. 32. l. 34. Lindus. P. 39. l. 34.
Exodus 12.12.

DISSERTATION I. Of the Antiquity of Temples; and whether there were any before
the Sanctuary.
IT is requisite to speak something of Temples in general, before we proceed to
treat of their Antiquity. It is needless to insist on the Etymology of the
word, or the Synonima's thereof, their general Parts or Utensils; which may be
seen in many Philologers, and even in English in the large Historical
Dictionary newly published. It is enough to my purpose, that they were Places
built for Public Worship. Concerning which, the Learned Antiquary Lilius
Giraldus (whose Works are lately printed at Leyden) in his History of the Gods,
Syntagm. 17 faith, Zenonis dogma fuit Templa Deorum non aedaficanda. It was
Zeno's opinion, that Temples ought not to be built unto the Gods. And dislikes
that of Clemens Alexandrinus, in his Admonition to the Gentiles, Superstitio
Templa condere persuasit. Quae cnim prius bominum Sepulchra fuerunt,
magnificentius condita, Templorum appellatione vocata sunt. Superstition
persuaded to build Temples. For those Structures, which were before Sepulchers,
being after magnificently built, were called Temples. But approves the Abbot of
Cluny's opinion, who writing against the Petrobusions (whom Morney accounts
good Christians, even the same with the Woldensians) imputes it is an error in
them quod dicunt, Basilicas vel Altaria fieri non debere, etc. to affirm that
Temples and Altars should not be made. But the Mass being the chief use of
their Temples in those times (as Bellarm. de cultu Sanct. l. 3. c. 4.) in this
regard they might well be opposed; for that they denied the lawfulness of
Edifices, for the solemn Worship of God, is no way credible. The first Founder
of Temples Clem. Alexandr. in's Admonition to the Gentiles, p. 28. Gr. Lat.
conceives to have been Phoroneus, or Merops. And so also Arnobius l. 6. Varro
in's Admiranda, Aeacus the Son of Jupiter. And Lactantius, Divin. Instit. l. 2.
c. 10. faith the first Temple was erected in the days of Jupiter. Joh. Leo
Baptista, in's Book of Architecture, thinks Janus's Temple the first. But the
same Clemens Strom l. 5. writing of Moses, faith, He suffered not Altars and
Temples to be erected in many places, having built one Temple (he means the
Sanctuary) did hereby declare unto all, that there was but one World and one
God; alleging Isaiah 66.1. and Acts 17.48. and commending Zeno for saying,
in's Book of the Commonwealth, non oportere Templa faccre, nec simulacra, that
Temples and Images ought not to be made. For a Temple is not of any great
price, nor an holy thing, being it is the Work of Artificers. And in his
Seventh Book distinguishes of (...), commonly rendered a Temple, which he takes
for that which is truly holy; and this he says is twofold; God himself, and
that which is built in honor of him; and this with him is the Church; which he
calls the Church of God, not made with hands, but made the Temple of God, by
the will of God. Non enim nunc locum, sed electorum congregationem appello
Ecclesiam. For I do not now call the place, but the Congregation of God's
chosen ones the Church. Origin also against Celsus l. 8. p. 390, 391.
professes, Christians beware of building liveless and dead Temples to the
giver of all Life. (...), etc. which he speaks to depreciate those Works of
men, that men might not think God is honored by such things, which for the
matter of them are common, and for the figure and shape, the works of men's
hands. As also to refute the Heathens, who thought God was more honored, and
better served in such Temples, than in the poor Conventicles, and Oratories of
Christians; and was in a more especial manner present in such Temples, then in
other places. For we know that now under the Gospel, God has determined his
Worship to no place, any more than before the Flood, or the days of the
Patriarchs before Moses. Who by God's appointment made the Sanctuary, which yet
was not confined to any place; but portable, and moveable to and fro for 400
years; till the Temple was built, in a place appointed by God, to which all
Sacrifices acceptable, were to be brought, and there offered upon his Altar.
And this was done, as Athanasius Epist. ad Adelph. contra Arrianos, and Austin
in Psalm. 64. for a figure of Christ's Body which was to come; and when that
Truth signified, began evidently to be preached, the Shadow was destroyed. So
Arnobius l. 6. says, We must not think, that God is delighted in Temples,
because built of Marble, and gloriously set forth with Gold: to overthrow the
opinion of the Heathens, who professed, that if their Gods were prayed unto,
sub axe nudo, and sub aethereo regimine, nihil audiunt, under the cope of
Heaven, and in the open Air, they would not hear. And Lactantius, Div. Inst. l.
6. c. 25. Non Templa illi congestis in altitudinem saxis extruenda sunt, in suo
cuique consecrandus est pectore: Temples are not to be built unto him of Stones
laid one upon another to a great height, every one ought to consecrate him in
his own heart. Not that these Ancients thought it unlawful, for Christians to
have Temples: but in opposition to the Heathens opinion, That God accepted of
no Worship, but that performed in Temples made with hands; and that the more
costly they were, the better he was pleased: as Lactant. l. 2. c. 6. Nec ullam
religionem putant, ubi illa non fulserint: They think there is no Religion where
these are not shining; i. e. with Gold, precious Stones, Ivory, etc. Itaque sub
obtentu Deorum avaritia and cupiditas colitur, credunt cnim Deos amare,
quicquid ipsi concupiscunt. Under color of Divine Worship, covetousness is
worshipped. For they think the Gods love, whatsoever they are in love withal.

Eusebius in like manner, in's Evangelical Preparation l. 1. c. 9. shows, That
men in most ancient times, took no care or pains about building Temples. And
that the first builders of them, were Heathens, with the occasion thereof. And
in very truth, we have not the least color of Evidence, for any built before
the Flood: though we read how God was served from the first by Sacrifice, in the
story of Cain and Abel; and was worshipped, no doubt, by the holy Patriarchs.
For though a degenerate condition increased, amongst the Posterity of Cain; yet
Adam and Eve, after the promise of Grace, continued in the same gracious
course, with others of their Off spring, who followed their Institution and
Religion, especially in the race of Seth. And in his days, especially about the
birth of his Son Enoch; for the Scripture testifies that, then men began to
call upon the name of the Lord. And near unto the Flood, we read of a
distinction, between the Sons of God, and the Daughters of Men: though afterward
this came to be exceedingly confounded, which ended in a natural Confusion of
them all, through God's just judgment. After the Flood 400 years, Abram by
Divine admonition left his own Country, and came into Canan; where he and his
Posterity lived long in Tents, like Strangers; and erected Altars, where God
appeared to them, and worshipped him in the open Air. And Lib. 3. c. 13. the
same Eusebius faith, That it becomes wise men, with open face to preach unto
all, that they do not reverence those things which are seen with bodily eyes:
but him alone whom no man sees, even the Architect and Maker of all, with much
more to that purpose, and that we should not think, to worship the Divine
Power, with building of Temples. And accordingly, in his first Book of
Evangelical Demonstration, p. 18. Graeco. Lat. To them who thought that God
ought to be worshipped only at Jerusalem, or on certain Hills, and in definite
places, our Savior for good cause answered, The hour comes, and now is, etc.
John 4.23, 24. And adds, that now in these times of Grace, we are brought to
the same manner of Worship, which was among the Patriarchs before Moses, which
he calls eadem benedictio, like that of Gal. 3.14. And p. 23. introduces the
Lord Christ speaking. The Law of Moses commanded men to go out of all other
places, to a certain definite place of the World, there to worship God: But I
command you, not to seek God out in any certain corner of the World, nor in
Hills, nor in Temples made with hands: but giving all men liberty from such
restraint, I command every one to worship, and adore God, at his own house and
home. Not that he held it unlawful to worship God in material Temples; but only
to show, that now there is no such necessity, as ties men to the Service of God
in Temples, as if he were better served there than in other places. Like as
Austin Tom. 6. contra Sermon. Arrian. cui Templum non facimus, sed nos ipsi
sumus; not as if no Temples were made by them, or ought to be; but in effect,
That we not only make a Temple, but are his Temples. As Xixtus Bishop of Rome
and Martyr said, Templum sanctum est Deo men's pura, a pure Mind is a Temple
holy unto God: This sanctifies all places, and the Prayers sent up unto him in
such a Temple, is always accepted of him. And how little Consecrated places
were insisted on, in Constantine's time, when Christianity was set up and
countenanced by Authority, may be seen in Athanasius's. Apology for his
preaching in such at Alexandria, as was neither finished nor consecrated;
alleging Alexander his Predecessor for doing the like; and others at Tryers
and Aquilea. We shall now proceed to enquire further into

The Antiquity of Temples.
Whether there were any before the Sanctuary made by Moses.
WE read in the Old Testament, of Altars very ^arly and frequently, without any
Temples. Employed in Cain and Abel's Offerings unto the Lord, Genesis 4. expressed,
of Noah's building an Altar unto the Lord, Genesis 8.20. so Abraham, Genesis 12.7.
Isaac, Genesis 26.25. and Jacob at Bethel, Genesis 35.7. Elias likewise in his
Contention with the Priests of Baal, 1 Kings 18.32. And in the New Testament,
of the Heathens Altar at Athens, Acts 17.23. (the Story whereof is related by
Diog. Laertius in the Life of Epimenides, and L. Vives on Austin de C. D. l. 7.
c. 17. and others) And Walafridus Strabo Writes, That at first both the
Worshippers of God, and of the Devil, performed their Service in the open Air;
but when they began to make Idols, then, and not till then, and upon that
occasion, they began to build Temples. I shall not trouble the Reader with a
multitude of Authors, that have written of the Original and Progress of
Idolatry. I think Mercerus judges right, that there was none before the Flood:
And though some Rabbis I know, and also Tertullian thought, there were Idols
and Idolatry in the old World; yet Cyril l. 3. against Julian, and Epiphanius
in's Panarium, with many others, the contrary. And that the Sin of those days,
which provoked God to drown the World, was Irreligiousness and Profaneness,
rather than Superstition and Idolatry. For the cause of the Flood is mentioned
in general, that all Flesh had corrupted their ways. It was very general, and
therefore the Lord resolved to corrupt the Earth. In Enoch's days, it seems by
his Prophecy mentioned by Jude, that profane Persons did spitefully speak,
and practice against God's Servants; with which reproachful carriage, carnal
Men being overcome, became profane also; and the good being taken away by
death, there was a general defection. In special we read, that the earth was
full of violence; and this increased upon the degenerate condition of God's
People. For the sons of God saw the daughters of Men that they were fair, and
they took them Wives of all that they liked, Genesis 6.2. which provoked the Lord
in an high degree, verse. 3. And hereupon there were Children born unto them,
which were mighty men, and men of r^. Then Carnal Security was very great, as
our (...) signifies Luke 17.26, 27. which proceeded from (...) contempt of
God's Word; and also of his Patience, and long suffering in his Works. For he
bare with them an 120 years, and (...) Noah a Preacher of Righteousness unto
them; thus the Goodness of God led them to Repentance both ways, but they were
disobedient, 1 Pet. 3. and thereby treasured up wrath against the day of wrath,
and the Flood came and swept them all away, save eight Persons. In all this we
have no Evidence of any Sin of Idolatry committed by them; and had that been
their sin, it is unlikely the Holy Ghost would have pretermitted the mention
thereof.

2. After this the experience of God's wrath breaking forth into so sore a
Judgment, and causing so great a Devastation, as to lay a whole World wast;
this I say might justly work in them the fear of God, and make them generally
become the more devout, while the remembrance of so general a Deluge remained;
and this might well be continued for so many years as they survived who had
seen the Flood. Now we read that Noah lived 350 years after the Flood, and Sem
his Son 498 years. How long Ham and Japhet survived after the Flood is not
expressed. This Devotion proceeding only from a natural cause, as in all
Persons unregenerate, could prove but natural, and therefore the more apt to be
corrupted with Idolatry: as indeed it was very timely, even in the days of
Terah Abraham's Father, as we read Josh. 24. though Noah himself, the Father of
them all, survived a 128 years in the very days of Terah; Abraham the Father of
the Faithful being born but the third year after Noah's death; Sem yet living
152 years after this, as who died but ten years before Jacob and Esau the twin
Sons of Isaac and Rebeckah were born. This Jacob with all his Children went
down into Egypt, whither Joseph was gone many years before, and in all the
Sacred History concerning Egypt, and the Children of Israel's dwelling there,
and the Egyptians vexing and oppressing of them, until the Lord's wonderful
Deliverance of them, though we read of the Gods of Egypt, Exodus 12.12. Numb.
33.4. as also how the Children of Israel were corrupted with their Idols,
Ezech. 20.7. yet we read of no Temples they had. And Pharaoh, though he would
have had them Sacrifice to their God, in the Land of Egypt, yet he knew full
well they had no Temple for this; and when he promised to give them leave to go
into the Wilderness to Sacrifice there, provided they went not far, he knew
there was no Temple for them. But the third month after their coming out of
Egypt, at Mount Sinai, the Lord took order for the building of a Sanctuary,
saying unto Moses, Let them make me a Sanctuary that I may dwell among them,
Exodus 25.8, 9. And I am apt to be persuaded, that hereupon the Devil wrought
upon the Gentiles his Vassals, to build Sanctuaries and Temples for their
Idols, as places for their habitation and dwelling among them.

3. For the Devil is commonly said to be God's Ape, he does affect to imitate
God. Mr. Mede has observed this in setting down his opinion concerning the
first plantation of America, which he conceives to have been wrought originally
by the Devil, by his persuasions drawing a Colony thither out of these Northern
Parts, and that long since the preaching of the Gospel began, yea, not very
many hundred years ago: The Spaniards not finding by any means of Tradition
from the Father to the Son, that they had been planted there above 400 years
before their coming amongst them, as the Mexican History does testify. And
like as when Idolatry at the first began to spread, and to corrupt the Family
of Terah Abraham's Father, the Lord called him away from thence into another
Country, who followed him, not knowing whither he went: So the Devil, when he
saw what a strange alteration was made in the World, by the preaching of the
Gospel, and fearing lest he should be turned out of all; he projected a course
of drawing some of his Disciples into a new World out of all danger, from the
sound of the Gospel, that so he might rule the more safely over them without
all control; as indeed he did, and that in such sort as never in the like
manner before, since the time that Mankind first fell into his clutches.

In all Ages, ever since his Fall, his practice has been to draw Man from his
Maker. Cupiunt perditi perdere (says Cyprian) and depravati errorem pravitatis
infundere, and cum sint ipsi paenales, quaerunt sibi ad paenam comites. And
accordingly as he finds them, by one way or other, most apt to be led away from
God; so his practice is to work upon them agreeably to their Natures. If he
finds them profanely disposed, his course is to confirm them therein, until he
has brought them to very Atheism, if God permit him so far to prevail: but in
case he find them awed with fear of a Divine Providence; then he labors to
work them to the service of himself; wherein he plays the part of a Thief as
well as of an Ape, laboring by all means to rob God of his Glory, as the
Apostle shows in 1 Cor. 10.20. where he faith, Know ye not that the things
which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to Devils and not to God. For
whether he draws them to worship the Sun, Moon and Stars, and all the Host of
Heaven; or their deceased Ancestors, he draws them from God the Creator, unto
the Creature; or under the pretense of these, to worship the Evil Spirits
themselves, especially when by giving forth his Oracles in such places, where
the Images of their Ancestors were worshipped, he had so infatuated them, as to
think that such Places were inhabited by God himself; and thus the Oracles
there given forth with great subtilty and collusion, were received as Divine.
Thus has the World been drawn from God, and the Worship which is due to him,
bestowed upon the Devil his professed Enemy, and as opposite unto him as Darkness
is to Light.

4. Now as for Inward and Spiritual Worship most proper to the Nature of God,
these Angels of Darkness know full well wherein it consists; as which was
sometimes performed by themselves, even then, when God laid the Foundation of
the Earth, and the Angels were newly created as God's first Workmanship. For
even then we read, Job 38.7. The morning stars sang together, and all the sons
of God shouted for joy. And this Worship by Prayer, Praise and Obedience due to
God, he practices to draw to himself: that Man made after the Image of God,
may conform himself to the will of the Devil. But as for Outward and Corporal
Worship, herein the Devil is to seek. For to prescribe that, is merely at the
pleasure of God, and according to his Wisdom, which is unknown to the Creature.
As namely, the worshipping of God by Carnal Sacrifices, according to all the
Variety thereof, as by offering Incense and sweet Odours; Meat Offerings and
Drink Offerings; Burnt-offerings of certain kinds of Creatures, Sin Offerings,
and Trespass-offerings; and lastly Peace Offerings, according to all the
several kinds of them. No Angels reason, whether of Darkness or of Light, is
able by convincing Evidence to conclude that any such Service is a thing
pleasing and acceptable unto God in it self; and unless God himself shall think
sit to prescribe it congruous in reference to such ends as shall be intended by
him. Rather Natural Reason is against it, God himself being a Spirit, and
therefore Spiritual Worship, and a reasonable Service stands in best congruity
to his Divine and Spiritual Nature: otherwise he could not be worshipped by
Angels, which are mere Spirits without any Bodies. The like may be said as
concerning a Temple, where all such Rites and Sacrifices are to be performed;
for albeit the Actions of Men cannot be performed, but in time and place, yet
this is to be understood of time and place natural. And indeed there is no time
but natural; but place is not only natural but artificial; as Houses built to
dwell in, and the use hereof, came not into the World, but by the Sin of Man,
whereupon his Body grew exposed to the Injuries of Wind and Weather, whereto
Angels are not: which is one end also of the use of Garments to cloth us. And
we know well, that albeit Sacrifices had their course by God's Ordinance (as it
seems) immediately after the Fall of Man, and that Promise made concerning the
Seed of the Woman, namely, that it should break the Serpent's head: yet these
Sacrifices continued to be offered for some thousands of years on Altars,
without any Temples erected for this, as appears by the Sacrifices of the
Patriarchs. And after their building, how different were they in their Figure,
some round, others long, etc. as also in their site, the Gentile Idolaters
worshipping the Sun, had them toward the East; the Romans at first toward the
West, which they changed before Augustus's time to the East, as Vitruvius l. 4.
c. 5. How much more the ordering of Temples according to the parts thereof, and
Utensils and Furniture, and Ornaments of all those parts, no wit (I think) of
Man or Angel, can conclude that any such thing becomes God to dwell in, or
there to hear Prayers, and accept the Service performed to him, more than in
other places. Unless himself shall be pleased, to confine himself for such
purposes, to one place rather than another; which in Scripture phrase is to
place his Name there, 1 Kings 8.16. or to record his Name, Exodus 20.24. or make
the memorial of his Name, which Piscator understands, de illustribus Dei
patefactionibus, as God should be pleased to manifest himself, in illustrious
manner, in one place more than another. And we know full well, that when such
Ceremonies and Place for the performance performance of them were appointed by
God; they were appointed in all the parts of them, for mysterious
Prefigurations; and therefore are called shadows of good things to come, Col.
2.17. Heb. 10.1. Yea and some of them, tending to the extreme confusion of
Satan, and his Kingdom, yet such as should be brought to pass by Satan's own
Counsel and Practices: as namely the betraying and crucifying of the Son of
God: and therefore the Lord saw it sit that the preaching and practicing of
such Mysteries, which in due time should be revealed, should be carried in the
mean time in the Clouds of Types and Figures, so that Satan himself should not
be able to discover the depth of them, until the time came wherein they were
accomplished. And indeed, there is no greater glory of God that manifests it
self, in the course of his Providence, than the glory of his Wisdom; 1 Cor.
1.10, 20.
and this is most seen in taking the Wise in their craftiness, and going beyond
them throughout, and making their Devices vain, that it may appear, the wisest
of them are but fools in comparison of him, not only amongst Men, but among the
Angels also. For the holy Angels are taken with a great desire to peer into
these Mysteries, and hereby is made known unto them the manifold wisdom of God;
1 Pet. 1.12. Ephesians. 3.10. Romans 11.33.
O the depth of the riches, both of the knowledge and wisdom of God, how
unsearchable are his judgments and his ways past finding out. For who has
known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his counselor.

5. Therefore it stood Satan upon it to observe what course the Lord would be
pleased to take for his outward Service, that so he might use his best
endeavor to oppose it: either by alienating the minds of men from that kind of
Service, or by corrupting it, drawing their hearts from God, and working them
to bestow that Service upon the Creature. An instance of the first kind, we may
observe in the Egyptians, in whom he wrought an extreme alienation from the
Hebrews, for such was their Superstition that they might not eat with the
Hebrews, Genesis 43.32.
for that was an abomination to the Egyptians. These Hebrews were the People of
God, so called from the Patriarch Heber, who was great Grandfather to Abraham's
great Grandfather, Serug. This Heber lived Nineteen years in the days of Jacob,
who came down into Egypt. It seems he had a numerous Posterity, and that might
make him and his the more known in the World, even to Pharaoh and the Egyptians
in Jacob's days: For one of his Sons, Joktan by name, had Thirteen Sons, as the
Scripture does express. And Sem, that holy Patriarch, is peculiarly noted in
Scripture to be the Father of the Sons of Heber, though he were Heber's great
Grandfather. And this notion had a mystery in the signification of it, as
Moulin conceives. For (...) faith he, is as much as Passengers. 1 Pet. 2.11.
And such is the condition of God's Children here; they are but Strangers and
Pilgrims. It is afterward said, Genesis 46 34. that every Shepherd was an
abomination to the Egyptians Vid. Cunaeus de rep. Hebr. l. 1. c. 5.
. This we must understand aright, namely of such Shepherds only as the Hebrews
were, who did kill and eat Sheep, or kill and sacrifice them. For it is
apparent, that the Egyptians themselves kept Sheep; and therefore when Joseph
bought their Cattle of them for Bread-corn, these are reckoned up to have been,
not their Horses and their Asses only, but their Flocks and Herds also. And
Exodus 9.3. God threatens to lay his hand upon their Sheep to destroy them; but
the sacrificing of them, this was it which the Egyptians accounted abomination.
And therefore when Pharaoh called for Moses and for Aaron, and said, Exodus
8.25, 16.
Go ye and sacrifice to your God in the Land; Moses forthwith answered and
said, It is not meet so to do: For we shall sacrifice the abomination of the
Egyptians to the Lord our God. Lo, shall we sacrifice the abomination of the
Egyptians before their eyes, and will they not stone us? Nor the sacrificing of
them only, but to kill them for Food was an abomination to the Egyptians. And
therefore whereas we read Genesis 39.6. that Potiphar left all that he had in
Joseph' s hands, save the bread which he did eat: this both Junius and
Schindler render thus, save the meat that he did eat; and Shindler gives the
reason why he would not have Joseph meddle with that, to wit, because he was
Carnis Esor, an Eater of Flesh, Quia eo tempore Egyptij non comedebant carnem,
nec lac, Schindler on the Root (...)
nec mactabant oves, and borum pastores, and comestores abominabantur: The
Egyptians in those days did not eat Flesh nor Milk, nor killed Sheep; and the
Keepers and Eaters of Sheep were an abomination unto them. And Eusebius in the
Second Book of his Evangelical Preparation, p. 49. Graeco-Lat. makes an
enumeration of the Creatures which are Sacred amongst the Egyptians, amongst
which are Sheep; and adds, That if any man do purposely kill any one of them,
morte damnatur, he is put to death. These Superstitions were very ancient among
the Egyptians, even in the days of Moses, and in the days of Joseph, before
Jacob's coming down thither, and how long before I know not.

6. Nevertheless, the Devil being not able to expectorate out of the hearts of
all men, that Opinion which had taken deep root, namely, That as there was a
God, one or more, which governed the World, and who brought sore Judgments upon
them for their sins, so this God or Gods, were to be appeased by some course or
other, and no such course for this as Sacrifices, a course whereof was derived
from Noah to all his Posterity. Therefore the Devil had another way to
dishonor God, by drawing them to Sacrifice to Idols, and to Creatures, instead
of the Creator; yea, and to the Devil himself (being deluded by his Oracles)
and that in most barbarous manner: for at length he brought them to Sacrifice
Men, Women and Children unto him, and that under great show of Devotion,
whereof we read largely in very many Authors, both Ancient and Modern. I will
only mention one notable Story in Pansanias; How when a Temple became polluted,
by the impure courses of a young Man and Maid, the Devil gave forth by his
Oracle, that this Profanation was to be expiated by Sacrifice; and no
Sacrifice would serve the turn but this: Every year a young Man and Maid must
be sacrificed to that God, whose Temple had thus been defiled. And this
barbarous course continued for certain years; only they bestowed a denomination
upon this God of theirs, calling him (...), the rigid or cruel God. And
accordingly I am of opinion, that like as Satan had never brought any to serve
him by Sacrifices (the ancient Heathens by Light of Nature, discoursing against
the unreasonableness of such a Service, as we read in Diodorus Siculus) if God
had not gone before them in this, instructing Adam and the Patriarchs, even
till the days of Noah, after this manner to serve him; and Noah leaving this
course by tradition to his Posterity, as Augustine writes to the like purpose,
Ep. 49. ad Deo gratias. Hoc sane praetereundum non est, this is not to be
omitted, Had not the Devils, those rebellious Angels, conceived that Temple,
Priesthood, Sacrifices, and all other things pertaining thereunto were due to
one, that one true God, they would never have urged their Worshippers to ordain
any of these things to them. In like sort the Devil had never brought them to
build Temples for this use and service, if God had not taken order with his
People to build a Sanctuary unto him that he might dwell amongst them. And
accordingly, though Heathens had Temples before Solomon built that Temple at
Jerusalem, (for this appears both by the high places which King Solomon built
for his outlandish Wives, 1 Kings 11.7, 8. and by the Philistims, who had an
House for Dagon, 1 Samuel 5.2. and Judges 16.27. and 9.27. we read how the People
went into the House of their God, and did eat and drink and cursed Abimelech:
and verse. 46. of the house of the god Berith, and Judge. 8.33.) yet I do not
find sufficient evidence of any Temples in use with any before the Sanctuary
was made, and that to this end, that God might dwell among them, Exodus 25.8.
And as Schindler writes on the root (...) that was aedificium instar templi ex
lignis confectum atque it a constitutum ut dissolvi in parts ac rursus
compingi, ac quocunque liberet deferri posset; a structure Temple-like made of
Timber, in such sort as it might be taken asunder, in all the parts thereof;
and again compacted together, that so it might be removed from place to place,
whithersoever it pleased God to have it carried. A notable instruction, that
God would be a Sanctuary unto them, and dwell among them in all places
whithersoever they should come, Ezekiel. 11.16. And among other Temples of the
Gentiles, whereof we read in History, one was portatile, a portable Temple, and
removed from place to place, (...), a Temple borne or drawn by certain Yoke of
Oxen, and that in Phoenicia, which is the Country of Palestine. This Eusebius
testifies in the first Book of his Evangelical Preparation, and Chap. 10. And
such a Tabernacle the Scriptures often call by such a word, as is usually
rendered by Temple, as 1 Samuel 1.9. and 3.3. and 2 Samuel 6.17. and in the Psalms
of David's enditing it is found very frequently. For we know that in his days,
there was no other Temple, than the Tabernacle. For though it was sometimes in
the heart of David to build a House to the Name of the Lord God of Israel, 1
Kings 8.17, 18, 19.2 Sam. 7.2.
when as yet the Ark of the Lord remained amongst the Curtains: yet we know
that the Lord answered him, He took it well that he was so minded (yet he had
consulted with the Prophet Nathan first, about the matter, before he grew to a
Resolution thereupon) Nevertheless thou shall not build me an House, says the
Lord; but thy son that shall come out of thy Loins, he shall build the House to
my Name. So that till Solomon's reign, there was only a Tabernacle for the Ark
of God, wherein was the Mercy Seat, and there the Lord is said to have dwelt,
and that in a Cloud, Lev. 16.2. Between the Cherubims. Neither have I yet found
any evidence to the contrary, either in Scripture or elsewhere. Before the
Flood no evidence of any; though Mercer observes, they had a place of Meeting
for the Service of God: as upon Genesis 4. where we read of Cain and Abel's
Offering, and God's acceptance of the one, and disregarding of the other, and
that (as it seems) in a visible and sensible manner: For hereupon Cain was
provoked against Abel. Likewise upon the birth of Enosh, when it is said, That
men began to call upon the Name of the Lord, Mercer makes the same observation.
Neither can we promise less unto our selves of Adam's care for the
disciplining, and instituting of his Family, and Seth's after him: and the like
may be said of all the holy Patriarchs. Genesis 6.
This also is manifest by the distinction made between the Sons of God and
Daughters of Men, until the degenerate condition came on, and the partition
Wall was broken down by promiscuous Marriages. But in all this, not any
evidence of Temples separate, and set apart for this.

7. After the Flood, when Noah came out of the Ark, there he built an Altar
unto the Lord, and offered a Burnt-offering of every clean Fowl and Beast:
After this, in the Story of Genesis, the Genealogies being dispatched, and the
dispersion of the People, by the occasion of Confusion of Tongues, we have the
erecting of the two first Monarchies, the Babylonian by Nimrod, and after the
same time the Assyrian by Assure, who built Niniveh, so called (as it is thought
by very probable conjecture) from the name of his Son Ninus: For it is apparent
in Scripture, that Places had their names from the names of some chief Persons
that dwelt there. Thus Egypt is called Misraim, from Misraim the Son of Ham,
and the Land Canaan from Canaan, and so Jonia from Javan, and Assyria from
Assure, After these particulars dispatched in brief, we have the Story of
Abraham his Peregrination, who built Altars, where the Lord appeared unto him,
and so did Isaac and Jacob; but we find no Monument of any Temple or separate
House they had for God's Service; Genesis 24.63.
but we read of Isaac's going abroad into the Field to pray. Likewise when
Abraham went down into Egypt, we find not the least indication of any such
thing there, nor among the Philistims, whilst Abraham sojourned a good while
with them, and Isaac after him: No nor among the Canaanites, though we read of
Melchisedek the Priest of the most High God, and good Correspondency between
Abraham and him; yet no mention of any Temple or House of God, wherein he
performed any Religious Duties to that great God, possessor of Heaven and
Earth, whose Priest he was. Indeed if we should credit some uncertain Relations
of fabulous Writers, we may find Temples much earlier mentioned. Albertus
Cognatus in the fourth Book of Narrations (cited by Hospinian Tr. of Images)
ascribes the beginning of Idolatry to Nimrod, who as he pretends upon the loss
of his firstborn Belus, to assuage his grief, caused his Image to be made of
Gold, which he set up in a Temple built by him, and worshipped it, and ossered
Sacrifices unto it. Aventinus writes, that Ninus the Son of Belus Jupiter (the
second King of the Babylonians the Son of Nimrod) caused his Fathers image to
be made in the midst of Babylon, and a Temple also, and Divine Honors to be
done unto his Father. Both which are fabulous, and all of this kind, in Pliny
and Victor Massiliensis. As also in the Apocryphal Berosus, that Ninus adorned
Nineveh, and was the first who built a Temple, and erected Statues to his
Father Belus, and his Mother Juno, and his Grandmother Rhea. For we have no
certainty of those early times, but from Scripture, which acquaints us, that
Nimrod was the Son of Gush, and Grandchild of Ham, and Founder of the
Babylonian Monarchy: as Ashur was the Son of blessed Shem, and built Nineveh,
the Metropolis of the Assyrian Monarchy. Which though considerably later, yet
soon overtopt the Babylonian, and continued its Primacy for the greatest part
of many Ages, and in the time of Esarchaddon, after Babylon had revolted,
reduced it again, and carried Manasses thither, 2 Chronicles. 33.11. Though shortly
after, about ten or eleven years, Nabopollasar (or Nebuchadonasor) having taken
Nineveh, and assuming his Son Nebuchadnessar to reign with him, the Babylonian
Monarchy started up again, and overtopt the Assyrian, through the
effeminateness of their Princes, as is plain in History, and the manner thereof
in Aristotle's Politics: which Revolution, was the immediate cause under God,
of Manasses Restoration. But leaving these Relations mentioned by the by, Genesis
47.28.
let us proceed in the infallible History of Truth. From the time of Joseph's
going down into Egypt at Seventeen years of Age, to the time of his first
standing before Pharaoh, the year before the Seven plentiful years began, at
what time he is said to be Thirty years old, and after Jacob's coming down into
Egypt, with his whole Family, until his death, who dwelt in Egypt Seventeen
years, and hence until Joseph's death, who dwelt in Egypt, an Hundred years
wanting seven; in the Story hereof I find no evidence of Temples among the
Egyptians. Nor from the birth of Moses, who was born (about Forty six years
after the death of Levi, who was his Grandfather by the Mother, and great
Grandfather by his Father) until his leading the Children of Israel out of
Egypt, the space of Fourscore years, we find no mention of any Temple or
Temples there. You will say they had Gods, for the Lord said, Exodus 12.12. He
would execute judgment upon all the gods of Egypt; and so it came to pass,
Numb. 33.4. But I answer, So Laban had his gods, which Rachel stole away from
her Father, and sat upon them to hide them from him, Genesis 31.30, 34. and in
the days of Terah, Abraham's Father, they served other gods: this we read; but
of any Temples they had, we read not. If you say these gods that Terah and
Laban had, were Household gods, and some room in their private Houses might
serve for them, and for the Devotions performed unto them: but the gods of
Egypt spoken of, were for Public Use and Public Service; and therefore they
had their Priests also. To this I answer, Pausanius in Corinthiacis, p. 54.
That we read often in Pausanius of Arae Jovis pluvij, which I understand of
Images of Jupiter, standing open without any covering. And p. 58. he writes
that in the Court of Priamus the Son of Laomedon, there stood the Image of
Jupiter Paleus sub Divo, under the open Heaven, and that to his Altar Priamus
sled when Troy was taken. And Alexander ab Alexandro writes, that the House of
Jupiter Pulverinus, in the Country of Attica, had no Roof, but was open above;
this he has in his second Book of Genial Days, and Chap. 22. So the Image of
Minerva Pavia was, sab Divo, in the open Air, as Pausanius testifies in his
Laconica, p. 90. and 95. The same Author tells us, that in a small Island were
the brazen Figures of Castor and Pollux, sub Divo in the open Air, nibilo
pedalibus majora of a foots length and no more; such belike were the Puppets
Rachel sat upon, called Laban's gods; and a number of such he mentions
standing in the open Air; and sometimes he makes relation of certain Delubra,
Temples which had no Roof, but were open above toward the Heavens, as in his
Boeoticis, p. 260. And p. 264. He makes mention of a Chapel of Ceres, surnamed
Europa, where there is sub Divo Jupiter pluvius, rainy Jupiter, standing in the
open Air. Coelius Rodigimus l. 10. p. 355. Jovi Fulguri, Soli, Lunae, Coelo,
Hypaethra, id est subdialia constitui debere Templa proponimus. Add unto this
subdiales statuas Levit. 26.30. as Junius renders it. And having Altars at such
Images where they offered Sacrifices, no marvel if they had Priests also.
Melchisedeck, we know, is called the Priest of the most High God, and King of
Salem; but I do not think any Man will avouch, that he had a Temple there.
Abraham was a Prophet, Genesis 20. and was he not a Priest also? it is clear he
offered Sacrifice to the Lord, Genesis 12. and Isaac, Genesis 26. so Jacob, and that
by God's commandment, Genesis 35. And whereas some are of opinion, that when Jacob
vowed unto God the Tenth of all that God should give him in Mesopotamia, Genesis
28. and hereupon a question is moved, To whom he should pay the Tenth of all,
that is, to what Priest? knowing no better Answer, are of opinion that he paid
it to himself, supposing him to be a Priest, and capable of receiving Tithes. I
willingly confess such a Devotion is very profitable as to Temporals: but I see
no necessity that casts us upon such conceits: For he might well Sacrifice unto
God the Tenth, or the worth of the Tenth, and all that he possessed. As yet the
Priesthood was not confined to one Family, and till then, Moses himself was a
Priest as well as a Prophet, even to the erecting of the Tabernacle, which by
Archb. Ushers computation, was in the year of the World 1514. But let us
proceed further, and take into consideration what we find in profare Histories
concerning Temples.

8. Diodorus Siculus l. 1. c. 1. reports, that in the opinion of some, the
Ethiopians were the first of Men, and he gives reasons for it, but in a most
atheistical and unreasonable way, feigning Men to have been (...) born of the
Earth and Air, in a natural manner, as Mice and other things of equivocal
Generation. And how this came to pass, he prosecutes in a most absurd and
brainsick Discourse, without taking notice of any Creator, who of one blood
made all mankind to dwell upon the face of the earth. And adds, that the
worship of God was first found out by them. Sacraque insuper, pompas,
celebritates, aliaque quibus diis honores impenduntur, ab iis fuisse reperta.
And what manner of Gods must they needs be, who are worshipped by those who
acknowledge no Creator? St. Paul tells us that the eternal power and Godhead is
known from the Creation, considered in his works. His best proof for this is
out of Homer, who brings in Jupiter, and the rest of the Gods with him, going
in Progress into Ethopia, both to the Sacrifices there made unto them, and for
the sweetness of the odours there. And surely it is most congruous, that such
Gods as are devised by the fancies of Men, and made at their pleasures, should
be well content to be served and worshipped according to the Fancies of Men,
and at their plea sure: for undoubtedly Man has as much power to devise a
Divine and Religious Worship, as to make a God; any Service being good enough,
and too good, to be bestowed upon the work of their own hands, yea or upon
their own Fancies either. Yet the truth is, there was a time when the
Bridegroom of God's Church was pleased with bodily Sacrifices offered with good
hearty, and had his abode in the Mountains of Spices. Cant. 8.14. Make haste my
beloved, and be thou like unto a Roe, or to a young Heart upon the Mountains of
Spices. But this was only for a time until the day did break, and the shadows
fled away, Cant. 2.17. The Lord Christ now adays is the most sweet smelling
Savor, both to God the Father and us; by whom alone the Father is satisfied,
and our Souls sweetly refreshed. Indeed I read that Hesiod and Homer, were
Primi Deorum opifices apud Graecos, the first Crafts-masters in coining Gods
among the Grecians, in Herodotus lib. 2. p. 124. Graeco-Lat. Hesiodus atque
Homerus, (qui quadringent is non amplius annis ante me extitere) fuere, qui
Graecis Theogoniam introduxerunt, eisque and cognomina, and honores, and
diversa artificia, and figuras attribuerunt. And p. 166. Ipsi Aegyptij
extiterunt principes conventus, and pompas and conciliabula factitandi, and ab
iis Graeci didicerunt. Cujus rei hoc apud me argumentum est, quod illa constet
priscis temporibus: Graecanica vero recens fuisse institua. And we know Homer
lived after the Wars of Troy, some say 80 years, some 100, others 140, others
180 years after the taking of Troy. Nay, there are that make him 200 years, yea
240 later than that, yea some 400, others 500 later; as Talianus gives instance
in several Authors, thus tar differing about the time of Homer, as any may read
in Eusebius his Evangelical Preparation, Book 10. p. 492. Graeco-Lat. We by the
Word of God are brought acquainted not only with the Creation of Man, but of
the World also, and how in 1656. it was drowned, and all Flesh perished by the
Waters of a general Deluge, in whom was the breath of Life, except those four
couple, eight persons in all, who were reserved for a Seed to sow the World
anew, and preserved in the Ark which settled in Ararat, commonly conceived to be
a Mountain in Armenia (though some think otherwise) and from those parts near
adjoining, and particularly from Babel, after the Consusion of Languages, began
the dispersion of the People. And as the Lord by his extraordinary Providence,
provided both for the making of the Ark, and bringing all sorts of Creatures
thereinto, and maintenance for them, and their preservation there, did make
himself known unto them, (after a degenerate time that came upon all) both as a
God of Vengeance in destroying others, and also as a God of Mercy and Salvation
in preserving them from that common Destruction; promising withal never to
destroy the World so again: so from them, and by them, was the knowledge of God
propagated to their Posterity; which about 101. years after the Flood, began to
be dispersed over all the World. And upon Nimrod's Usurpation, Rebel-like, his
Nature answering to his Name, it seems that both his Father and Grandfather,
and many of them separated themselves from him, Cush into Ethiopia, Misraim
into Egypt, Canaan into Palestine, where we find Sidon a principal City by the
Sea. And as Egypt is called in Scripture the Land of Ham, so by as good reason
Ethiopia also. Lydiat is of opinon concerning Ham, that he was the eldest of
Noah's three Children; and by the younger Son of Noah, Genesis 9.24. is meant
Canaan Noah's Grandchild; (for even our Grandchildren we count our Children)
and Noah's Curse we know, passed not upon Ham, but upon Canaan: which makes it
probable that the lewd prank which gave such offense to Noah, and he sound out
by examination, was played by Canaan; and by him his Father Ham came to the
knowledge of it, who told his two Brethren thereof, Sem and Japhet. And thus
indeed the Egyptians and Ethopians, and whole house of Ham, may be accounted
the eldest House of the World, if he were elder than his two Brethren Sem and
Japhet. But in this Lydiat is almost alone, most Authors being for Sem, or
Japhet (which is more likely) being the eldest, as may be seen at large in
Usher's Chronol. Sacra. c. 4. Japhet separated toward the North, both East and
West, but chiefly toward the West. Sem's Posterity continued in the East
toward the South; Assure his Son having erected a Monarchy in Niniveh. But as
yet no testimony for Temples any where.

9. Diogines Laertius an approved Writer, in his fifth Book of the Lives of
Philosophers, in the Life of Epimenides, says of him, That Construxit apud
Athenienses phanum verendorum Deorum, ut ait Lobon Argivns in libro de Poetis.
Fertur etiam primus domus atque agros expiasse delubraque erexisse. This
Epimenides of Crete built a Temple to the Gods, called (...), Dij reverends,
some that deserved to be reverenced (as he thought) more than all the pack, and
he alleges Lobon of Argos, in his Book of Poets, testifying this. This
Epimenides also is said to have been the first that showed a course for the
expiation of Houses and Fields, and that erected Temples. The expiation here
spoken of, was by Sacrifice, as appears by the Story mentioned a little before:
For having mentioned how the fame of this Man flying throughout all Greece, he
was reputed a Man most dear to God; thereupon an Instance thereof is given
thus: The Athenians were sometimes visited with a sore Pestilence, who
thereupon asking counsel hereabouts, as their manner was, at the Oracle of
Delphos, Pythia the Nun Priest answered them, That the City of Athens was to be
expiated. And they being ignorant, how this was to be performed, dispatched
Niceas the Son of Niceratus by Ship into the Island of Crete, to Epimenides, to
entreat him to come over unto them. Upon their entreaty he came, and expiated
or purged their City after this manner: He took Sheep, some white some black,
and brought them to Mars his Street, and there let them go whither they would,
sending some after them, to observe where they lay down; and wheresoever any of
them lay down, there he gave charge they should be sacrificed peculiari cuipiam
Deo, to some peculiar God. (...), says Laertius, to a fit God: his meaning
was, to the God that plagued them; but who it was they knew not. And therefore
Laertius adds, That even in his days there were to be seen in the Streets of
Athens, Altars without a Name, as a memorial of that expiation, and hereupon he
says that the Plague ceased. And in all likelihood the Altar that St. Paul
observed as he went in one of the Streets of Athens with this Inscription,
(...), to the unknown God, was one of those Altars Laertius writes of, though
the Inscription might be defaced in his days; for in Causabon's judgment,
Laertius lived not until the year 200. after Christ, that is about the time of
Tertullian; yet Altars with such Inscriptions were nothing strange; such a one
being mentioned by Pausanias in his Eliacks, p. 162. Adjacet ei ignotorum
Deorum ara. Now this Epimenides came to Athens about this business, by
Laertius's account in the 47th Olympiad, and others reckon him to be coaetaneus
to Pythagoras, who lived in the time of Servius Tullus, the fifth King of Rome
from Romulus. Now Rome it self had its Foundation laid, but in the days of
Jotham King of Judab, by Lydiat and Usher's account, and the very year after
Nabuchodonosor had inchoated his Kingdom of Babylon, which was a Type of Romish
Babylon.

10. Janus was a King in Italy long before Romulus; and unto him, a certain
Writer, Xenon by name, in the first Book of his Italica, ascribes the first
building of Temples, as Macrobius testifies in the first Book of his Saturnals,
Chap. 9. Now the beginning of Janus his Latin Kingdom, Lydiat reckons to be 150
years, before Aeneas his coming into Italy in the days of Latinus, the fifth
King after Janus; Aeneas his arriving there being the third year after the
taking of Troy, which yet by Lydiat's account was 60 years after the death of
Othniel, the first Judge of Israel after the death of Joshua, and 120 years
after the Children of Israel's coming out of Egypt. Now this Janus was the Man
that entertained old Saturn, when he fled from his Son Jupiter into Italy, and
admitted him in Societatem Regni, to reign with him. Thence Italy came to be
called Latium, as Ovid Writes, saying, Et dicta est Latium terra latente Deo.

And Virgil in his Aeneids 8. Primus ab aethereo veniens Saturnus Olympo,
Arma Jovis fugiens, and Regnis exul adentis;
Is genus indocile, ac dispersum montibus altis
Composuit, legesque dedit Latiumque vocari
Maluit, his quoniam latuisset tutus in Oris.
where I observe the Poet's wisdom, affecting to grace his Country; for he
feigns Saturn not to come thither flying from the Isle of Crete, but from
Heaven forsooth, to salve the Reputation of his Deity, and the Honor of his
own Country; and adds, that his days were the time of that golden Age of the
World, as Ovid and other Poets feign: His words are these; Aureaque, ut
perhibent, illo sub Rege fuere. In the days of Saturn was the golden Age of the
World. Now this fairly may revive the remembrance of a Note made by Servius
upon a Passage in Virgil, describing the goodly Temple that Queen Dido was
building, when Aeneas, after the taking of Troy, came thither, being cast by a
Tempest upon those Parts.

Hic Templum Junoni ingens Sidonia Dido
Condebat, donis opulentum and numine Divae:
Aerea cui gradibus surgebant limina, nexaeque
Aerc trabes foribus cardo stridebat ahenis.
Now whereas Virgil has aerea limina, brazen Thresholds, Servius makes a
question of the reason why he calls the Threshold brazen; it seeming unlikly
that they should be made of, or covered with Brass: his answer is, That Virgil
delivers it, allusione facta ad Saecula tunc temporis aerea, in allusion to the
condition of those times, the brazen Age being then on foot. Though for ought I
see, it might go for an Iron Age well enough, when such ado was made in the
World, such Wars raised for 10 years continuance at Troy, and all for the
Recovery of a Whore, if it be a true History, and not a Poetical Fiction, as
some conceive. In those days there were Temples, I nothing doubt, and before;
for the Trojans had theirs, as the same Virgil mentions in the person of
Aeneas, Nos delubra Deum miseri quibus ultimus esset,
Ille dies festa velamus fronde per urbem.
we poor Creatures made that day, a Festival day in our Temples; which alas was
to be our last day, their Funeral following immediately after. And not in the
brazen Age only can we well admit that Temples have been, but in the golden Age
also, as namely in the days of Saturn, which yet will be found 160 years after
the Children of Israel's coming out of Egypt. And if Saturn were the chief of
Heathen Deities, surely Moses is much more ancient than they all; how much more
ancient than Temples made to them. It is true Cicero makes mention of three
Jupiters, one the Son of Saturn and Ops King of Crete, whose Sepulcher is there
found; which Callimachus is impatient to hear, and therefore brands them for
liars, saying, (...)
(...)
The Cretians are always liars, for they have built a Sepulcher to thee, O
King, whereas thou die not, but live for ever-The other two, Cicero says,
were born in Areadia; the Father of the one Ether, of whom came Proserpina and
Liber, or Bacchus; the Father of the other Coelum, and he begat Minerva. In
like sort Japetus is said by Hesiod to be the Son of Coelum and Terrae, of
Heaven and Earth; as much as to say, they could not tell who was the Father of
them, and therefore they feigned them to have been brought forth by the Heaven
and Earth, and Sea and Rivers. But Virgil confounds these Jupiters which Cicero
distinguishes, and feigns Saturn the Father of Jupiter Cretensis to have come
ab Aethereo Olympo, that is, from from Ether and Heaven. And Japetus we see
how plainly it sounds Japhet, one of the Sons of Noah, as Mercer upon Genesis,
and many others observe. And as Hesiod relates very strange things of Saturns
dealing with his Father Coelum; so the Jewish Rabbis relate as strange things
(yea the very same) of Ham's dealing with his Father, supposing they have some
ground for it in the Scripture. And sure we are, that Noah himself had no
Children after the Flood, and this Ham was Japhet's Brother; and both better
known to the World than their Father Noah, who with his Son Sem (as it seems)
lived a private life; whilst his Children, and Childrens children divided the
World among them, calling the several Regions of it, after their own Names, and
erecting Monarchies; Nimrod in Babylon, and Assure at Niniveh. Horace makes
mention of A^dax Japeti genus, his Posterity were bold Creatures, that d^^st
venture in a Ship to make a way through the Sea, which fairly refers to the
Posterity of Japhet, of whose Children, the Isles of the Gentiles were divided
in their Lands, every one after his tongue, Genesis 10.5.
and after their Families in their Nations. And all the three Sons of Noah it is
likely were employed by their Father, in building the Ark; and by them their
Posterity might easily be instructed in that Art, the Lord himself first
instructing Noah. Especially considering how long both Noah and Sem lived after
the Flood: Noah 350 years, that is, not only after the Babylonian and Assyrian
Kingdoms erected by Nimrod and Assure, 235 years; but after the Posterity of
Misraim began to reign in Egypt, in several Principalities, 89 years; and after
Ogyges built Thebes in Greece, 41 years; and after Aegialeus the first King of
Sicyonians in Peloponnesus his beginning to reign, 23 years; and died but two
or three years before Abraham was born. And Sem lived 150 years after his
Father Noah; and Sem died but 10 years before Esau and Jacob were born,
according to Lydiat's Chronicle, which I take to be most accurate. And for
ought I know to the contrary, both Ham and Japhet, might live as long as Sem,
and the Grecians, and Isles of the Gentiles, might be well known to be Japeti
genus. Though I deny not but others of his Posterity might be called by his
name, like as we read of two Kings of Athens, each called by the name of
Cecrops, the one of Cecrops major, and the other of Cecrops minor; and the
younger of them diverse Ages after the elder. And the name of Iphitus, who was
but one Age before the Wars of Troy, does plainly carry the same Radical
Letters that Japetus does. But to proceed.

11. The Pelasgians are accounted by Strabo in his fifth Book, Populi Graeciae
vetustissimi, the most ancient People of Greece. And these He and Hesiod, and
Pausanias in his Arcadicis, testify to have proceeded from Pelasgus. Ac primum
omnium Pelasgum memorant Arcadi in illa terra extitisse; The Arcadians report,
that Pelasgus was the first of Men in that Country: which relation Pausanias
modifies thus, That he was the first King there, to wit, in Arcadiae; and who
first brought the rude People there, to build Cottages, to defend themselves
from the Injuries of the Weather. Lycaon was his Son, and him Pausanias makes
coetaneous to Cecrops, meaning Cecrops major, which Cecrops is commonly
accounted coetaneous with Moses; especially Eusebius in his Tenth Book of his
Evangelical Preparation, Chap. 19. and he adds this as a thing confessed by
all, Nemo non fatetur. Lycanon's youngest Son was Oenotrius, who went with a
Colony into Italy, and from him that Country of Italy was called Oenotria. Yet
there were no Temples till the days of Janus by the Testimony of Xenon formerly
mentioned, out of Macrobius his Saturnals, lib. 1. cap. 9. And this was the
first of all the Grecian Colonies in the opinion of Pausanias; and he adds
also, That neither had he found any Transmigration made by the Barbarians
before this. But therein we know Pausanias mistakes, and that Greece and all
Europe, after the Universal Deluge, was first inhabited by those of the
Posterity of Noah, and specially of Japhet, who came into the Western Parts
from the East. And the Jones, a People so well known both in Asia the less, and
in Greece, do fairly manifest by their very Name, that they were descended from
Javan, one of the Sons of Japhet. Now Janus, the first erector of Temples in
Italy, was near about 200 years after Cecrops began first to reign in the
Region of Attica. Yet I confess that Jupiter is said to have gotten Lycaon's
Daughter, Calisto, with Child; and besides Jupiter of Greece, Cicero makes
mention of two Jupiters born in Arcadia; I doubt one of them might be Lycaon's
Brother, for such incestuous Generations were too too frequent amongst those
Heathen called Gods.

12. But consider we what Pausanias writes in his Eliacis prioribus of Saturn,
Saturnum primum omnium Coeli Regnum obtinuisse. That Saturn first of all
obtained the Kingdom of Coelum, which we commonly render Heaven; but it might
be the name of a Country in Crete, like as Olympia was a Country in Greece,
where the hill Olympus was, which word Olympus is commonly used by Poets to
signify Heaven. Ei in Olympia homines eos (quod aureum genus nuncupatum est)
Templum dedicasse; To him the Men of the golden Age dedicated a Temple in
Olympia. After this Jupiter being born, his Mother committed him to the
Dactyles of Ida to be kept; these were four Brethren, of whom Hercules, called
Idaeus, was one, long before Hercules the Son of Amphytruo. This Hercules as
the same Pausanias writes, was great Grandfather to Clymenus, who coming out of
Crete, first instituted the Olympian Games, 50 years after Deucalion's Flood.
Now if we account 30 years to an Age, as Lydiat does, and that according to
Clemens Alexandrinus, if I mistake not; and that Clymenus was 30 years old at
the institution of these Olympian Games, from thence to the Birth of Hercules,
the sum of years arises but to 120. Now by Lydiat's account Moses led the
Children of Israel out of Egypt but 30 years after Deucalion's Flood; that is,
30 years before Clymenus his institution, at what time Moses was 80 years old.
Hence it follows, that Hercules was not born above 20 years before Moses, nor
this Saturn neither. For that Hercules to whom the tutalidge of Jupiter was
committed, might well be as old as Saturn himself, yet this Hercules Idaeus had
his name from the Hill Ida in Crete; and therefore in all likelihood Saturn his
Father, was the same that fled into Italy, and there was entertained by Janus,
many years after Moses. And whereas Pausanias gives much credit to Homer
concerning Matters of Greece, why should we not give as much credit to Virgil
concerning the Story of Italy? Yet that of Saturn's Entertainment by Janus is a
Story very commonly received. Yet I confess Diodorus Siculus makes mention of a
Saturn, and a Jupiter, and an Hercules, and Curetes Dactyli in Phrygia; but
upon what ground I know not, for Pausanias does not; and it seems from Curetes
by Contraction came Cretes, and thence that Island of Crete might have his
Name; but I stand not upon this: Nay, I yield rather that it had its Name from
one Cres, who reigned there at the same time that Inachus reigned at Argos in
Greece. It may be then the Curetes were the same with Cretes. But it is nothing
strange the Grecians should be found to run wild sometimes in their Accounts of
times, considering that Cadmus was the first, who coming out of Phoenicia to
Thebes, taught Greeks the use of Letters, as Eusebius writes in his Evangelical
Preparation, lib. 10. cap. 5. and Clemens Alexandrinus in the first Book of his
Stromata, p. 306. Graeco-lat. Though I know Diodorus Siculus minceth the
matter, saying that he brought amongst them only a new Character, belike for
the Honor of the Greek Nation, being loath that the World should take notice
that they were beholden to the Phoenicians for this.

13. Before I have showed out of Clemens Alexandrinus, that such Structures as
were first the Sepulchers of the Dead, afterward, being enlarged to a greater
Magnificence, came to be called the Temples of gods: And Arnobius, lib. 6. Quid
quod multa ex his templa quae Tholis sunt aureis, and sublimibus elata
fastigiis auctorum conscriptionibus comprobatur, contegere cineres atque ossa
and defunctorum esse corporum sepulchra. Nonne patet and in promtu est, aut pro
Diis immortalibus mortuos vos colere, aut inexpiabilem fieri numinibus
contumeliam, quorum delubra and templa, mortuorum superlata sunt bustis? What
shall we say to this, that many Temples which are built with golden Arches and
lofty Roofs, do cover Ashes and Bones, and that they are the Sepulchers of Men
deceased, as it appears by the Writings of diverse Authors? Is it not manifest
and prone to conclude hereby, that either you worship dead Men instead of gods,
or that you do the gods an Injury that cannot be expiated, in that you build
their Temples upon the Sepulchers of the dead? Now the first Instance given in
this kind by Clemens Alexandrinus in his Admonition to the Gentiles, I find to
be of the Temple of Minerva, which was the Sepulcher of Acrisius. Now this
Acrisius was the 14th King of Argos, by the Account of Appion the Grammarian,
alleged by Tatianus, and represented by Ensebius, in the ^^th Book of his
Evangelical Preparation, p. 493. Graecolat. And in the Fourth Generation after
Danaus, who came out of Egypt unto Argos in Greece, upon the Confusion caused in
Egypt, partly by the Slaughter of the First Born, and partly by the Destruction
of Pharaoh and his Egyptians in the Red Sea, when Moses led the Children of
Israel through it, toward the Land of Canaan; by the Account of Mr. Lydiat in
his Emendation of Times. And that which Appion writes hereof, was out of
Piolimaeus Mendesius. Pausanias in his Boeotica speaks of a Temple dedicated to
Hercules; but whereas some imagine, or might imagine that it was a Temple
dedicated to Hercules, the Son of Amphytrion, he professes that it was multo
vetustius, much more ancient than so; and therefore he conceives rather, the
Dedication of it ought to be ascribed to a more ancient Hercules, who was one
of the Idaei Dactyli, commonly called Hercules Idaeus. Now these Idaei Dactyli
were those Curetes to whose Care the Education of Jupiter was committed; to
wit, Jupiter Cretensis, the Son of Saturn, who flying out of Crete and coming
into Italy, was there entertained by Janus; which Janus reigned in Italy long
after Moses, as formerly has been showed. The same Pausanias in the first of
his Eliacks, affirms, Pelops was the first that erected a Temple to Mercury in
Peloponnesus; and in his Boeoticis reports that one Myron Byzantius, a Writer
of Heroic Verses and Elegies, had delivered that Amphyon was the first of all
Men that dedicated an Altar to Mercury. Now Pelops is accounted but of the same
time with Acrisius King of Argos, the Fourth King after Danaus, by Eusebius in
his Evangelical Preparation, lib. 10. p. 493. Graecolar. And the same Tatianus
in the same place of Eusebius, maintains Moses to have been before Amphyon. But
of all the Temples known to Pausanias, the most Ancient he professes to have
been the Temple of Apollo Thearius, which was the Troezenians. For albeit he
takes notice of two other Temples which were very ancient; yet this, he says,
was much more ancient than they, and was reported to have been built by
Pythius, and as it was built by him, so it was adorned by him also. Now what
time Pythius lived, he shows forthwith, when he says, that Bellerophon
coming to Troezene, where Pithias reigned, he required of him Aethra to be
given him to Wife; but Aegeus married her King of Athens, and she became the
Mother of Thesous, as Robert Stephanus writes; and Pellerophon was deprived of
his Kingdom of Ephyra by Praetos King of Argos, as the same Author writes. Now
this Praetus was the third King of Argos after Danaus, by Tatianus his account
related by Eusebius, Praeparat. Evangel. lib. 10. and Danaus is by Lidiat's
Account somewhat after Moses.

14. But we proceed from the Grecians to the Egyptians, because they are
supposed by some to have found out and communicated to others, the Names of
Heathenish Gods, and first erected Temples and Altars to them, for so writes
Caelius Rodiginus, l. 18. c. 37. Traditur porro Aegyptios primos Deorum
excitasse aras, conflasse simulacra, and Templa construxisse: But this learned
Antiquary (which is his usual fault) tells us not his Authors. Probably
Herodotus, lib. 2. Aegiptii primi and Deorum cognomina in usu habuere, and ab
illis Graeci fuerunt mutuati. Item primi Diis and aras, and simulachra and
delubra statuere. And Pausanias in his Atticis testifies, that amongst the
Grecians, the Athenians went beyond all others in Devotion toward the Gods.
Athenienses Deorum cultu, studioque Religionis long caeteras omnes civitates
anteire: And the Athenians had this from their King Cerops major, as Lidiat
writes, Emend. temp. p. 18. Erat vero etiam Cecrops Magnus auctor
superstitionis ac Idololatriae. This Cecrops was called Diphyes, because he was
genere partim Aegyptius; by Parentage an Egyptian, and Coquaeus out of Eusebius
relates this of Cecrops, That primus Jovem appellavit, simulacra reperiit, aram
statuit, victimas immolavit, nequaquam istiusmodi rebus in Graecia visis, Coqu.
in Augustine. de Civit. Dei, l. 18. c. 8. Porphyry, that enemy of the Gospel,
was wont much to magnify a certain Historian named Sanconiatho: His History was
much commended by one Philo Biblius, who added a Preface thereunto, wherein he
writes, Barbarorum Antiquissimi Phoenices imprimis and Aegyptii, (a quibus
caeteri deinceps populi morem illum accepere) in maximorum Deorum loco eos
omnes habuere, qui res ad vit am agendam necessarias invenissent, quique
beneficium aliquod in genus humanum contulissent. Eos nimirum, quod sibi
plurimorum bonorum autores esse persuaderent, Divinis honoribus coluere; ac
templorum usu, quae jam ante constructa fuerant, hoc ad munus officiumque
traducto; columnas insuper statuasque ligne as ipsorum nomine consecrarunt,
eoque precipue religionis cultu prosecuti; festos illis quoque dies long
celeberrimos dedicarunt. In quo eximium illud fuit, Regum suorum nomina
universi hujus elementis, ac quibusdam little quibus divinitatem ipsi tribuebant
imponerent. Naturales vero Deos Solemn, Lumam, reliquasque Stellase errantes,
cum Elementis and caeteris cum ei^sdem affinitate conjunctis, solos ex omnibus
agnoscebant; ut mortales quidem alios, alios autem immortales cos haberent.
Where observe four things: 1. That the first Founders of Idolatry are noted to
be Phoenicians and Egyptians, who were the posterity of Ham by Misraim and
Canaan. 2. That Temples were not at first built for the Gods, but having been
formerly built for other uses, were afterward turned to this use; and if you
ask for what use they were at first built, I have nothing to answer but that of
Clemens Alexandrinus, namely, that they were at first built for some great
Persons to lie interred in after their decease. 3. That the first Gods adored
by them, which he calls natural Gods, were the Lights of Heaven, especially the
Planets and the Elements; all which makes up the number of eleven, and they had
but twelve in all; now who might the Twelfth be? was he the first mover of all?
Aristottle I am sure, so interprets the Divinity of his Forefathers, as if by
Sun and Moon, and the rest of the Planets, they meant those pure Minds which he
calls Intelligences; and whom he conceived to be the Movers of these Orbs;
but withal he acknowledges a first Mover, in the Contemplation of whom the
Perfection of all the rest consisted. That was his Device by his Philosophy to
make the best construction he could of the religious ways of his Ancestors. But
might not Pan be one of their Deities, and that a principal one? yet this seems
to denote the whole Universe: For it is too too true, that soon they fell away
from the Acknowledgement of the Creator to worship the Creature. And Eusebius
says Praeparat. Evangel. l. 3. c. 9. That as Orpheus took his Discourse of the
Gods from the Doctrine of the Egyptians; so he would have the world to be God,
compounded of many Gods, according to the several parts of the World. Lastly,
They came about to worship their deceased Ancestors with religious Adoration.
And might not these be represented by the Images of those Beasts which were
consecrated by them? This surely is one special Interpretation, which Diodorus
Siculus makes of those Beasts, which were so religiously, or superstitiously
rather, esteemed and reverenced by the Egyptians. And Diogenes Laertius,
concerning the Devotion of the Egyptians this very way, says in the Proem to
his Book of the Lives of Philosophers, Statuas praeterea and fana a se
fabricari fatentur quod ignorent effigiem Dei: They make Images and Temples
because they know not the Shane of God. Gansabon, though he acknowledges the
Sentence to be defective, yet he persecteth it only thus; (...), they make
Images and Temples to them, that is, to the bruit Creatures which they worship,
because the Images of God they could not, forasmuch as they knew not the Shape
of God. And indeed, no man has seen God at any time, Joh. 1.18. No, not God's
own People, Joh. 5.37. Ye have not heard God at any time, nor seen His shape,
He is commended unto us as (...), the invisible God, 1 Timothy 1.17. Heb. 11.27
Thales Milesius was reputed wise in his time, Diogenes Laertius writes that he
had no Master, Nisi quod AEgyptiis Sacerdotibus, co profectus, familiariter
adbaesit: He was very familiar with the Egyptian Priests. Himself professes as
much in his Epistle to Phericides; and I willingly consess two things were
delivered by him concerning God very wisely; the one concerning his Providence,
for being demanded, whether a Man doing Evil might be hid from God, made this
Answer, Ne Cogitans quidem, No not so much as touching his Thought. The other
concerning the Nature of God: For being demanded what God was, he made this
Answer, Quod initio and fine caret; That which is without beginning and without
end. And indeed thus St. Paul seems to describe the Godhead; namely, by his
Eternal Power, when he says, The eternal Power and Godhead has been known
from the Creation, being considered in his Works, Romans 1.20. And Bradwardine
maintains that the first Attribute of the Divine Nature is Necesse Esse, of
Necessary Being; as much as to say, Eternal, without Beginning and without End.
Add to this what Eusebius writes, Evang. Preparat. l. 10. p. 451. Graecolat.
Athenienses Aegyptiorum Coloniam habitos esse, cum alii tum Theopompus in
tricareno confirmat: That the Athenians were a Colony of the Egyptians, both
others and also Theopompus confirms in his Book entitled Tricarenum.

15. Come we then to the Egyptians: Now Eusebius alleges the former Passage
out of Philo Biblius his Preface to Sanconiatho, to prove that at the first,
the very Heathens had no other Gods, but the very Stars and Planets appearing
and moving in the Heavens: And that the Name of (...) (God) at the first was
(...), a currendo, from moving or running, the Planets and Stars compassing all
in the Course of Twenty Four Hours. He adds, that the very Scriptures do
justify this, showing what was the Course of Gentiles in their Religious
Devotions; namely, to worship the whole Host of Heaven: And we know what
Lesson the Lord reads to his own People, Deuteronomy. 4.19. Take heed lest thou lift
up thine eyes to Heaven, and when thou see the Sun, and the Moon, and the
Stars, with all the Host of Heaven, should be driven to worship them, and to
serve them; which the Lord thy God has distributed to all people that are
under the whole Heaven. As much as to say, the Lord has made them thy
Servants: Nay, the Servants of all Men under the Cope of Heaven; therefore take
heed thou be not carried away in the Course of Heathenish Blindness and
Superstition, as to make them thy Lords and thy Gods. In the same place the
Lord gives them a Caveat, and admonishes them that they corrupt not
themselves, and make not a graven Image, or representation of any Figure,
whether it be the Likeness of Male or Female, the Likeness of any Beast that is
on Earth, or Likeness of any feathered Foul, or the Likeness of any Fish that
is in the Waters beneath the Earth; which gives shrewd Presumption, that some
such Creatures were worshipped among the Egyptians from whence they came, or in
the Land of Canaan whither they were traveling. And Eusebius, Prepara. Evangel.
l. 2. p. 49. Graecolat. Rehersing out of Diodorus Siculus, the several
Creatures which were consecrated by the Egyptians, makes mention of Apis and
Muevis Sacri Tauri, holy Bulls, and of Bosfemina a Cow; as also of Sheep; yea,
of the Goat, and Dog, and the Wolf, and the Cat; and amongst Birds, of Ibis,
and the Hawke, and the Eagle, and of the Crocadile that lives in the Waters:
And that it was a capital Crime among them to kill any of these. And p. 52. he
adds out of the same Diodorus, that the Grecians Theology began from Cadmus,
whom he says to have been after the days of Moses, and that he says may be
clearly and evidently confirmed; and hence concludes that all the Gods of the
Grecians were brought to light after the Days of Moses.

But concerning the Antiquity of Temples among the Egyptians, Diogenes Laertius
in the Life of Cleobulus writes, that he was of Lindus, or as some said, of
Carea, and that he restored the Temple of Minerva built by Danars; the Passage
is somewhat imperfect, but made complete by Causabon, with refeence to that
which Diodorus Siculur writes, lib. 5. cap. 13. where he writes, Danaus ex
Aegypto cum filiabus aufugiens in Lindiam Cypri appulit, susceptusque ab
incolis, erecto Minervae Templo, statuam ingentem dedicavit. He adds, that
Cadmus about the same time being sent to Sea to seek Europa, did perform his
Vows at the same Temple: Now Lidiat accounts Cadmus his leaving Phaenicia and
sailing into Greece, to have been at the same time that Joshua entered the Land
of Canaan with his Ifraclites, and on the same occasion, affrighted with the
Invasion made by Joshua; and that Danaus his Expulsion out of Egypt by his
Brother Aegyptus, was originally derived from the Confusion that was brought
upon the Land, by reason of the slaughter of the First Born among them, and the
Destruction of Pharaoh and his Host in the Red Sea. And in all likelihood this
brought great Consusion in Egypt, and amongst the Seed Royal, whereupon fore
Contentions might arise, the issue whereof was as some prevailed, so the
expulsion of the Opposites: Aegyptus himself being driven out afterward, as he
had been a means of driving out Danaus before. For so Pausanias writes in
Achiacis, Patrae and Aroe are all one.
Aegyptum Aroenvenisse tradunt Patrenses filiorum luctu confectum cum ipsum
Argorum nomen exhorresceret, and imprimis a Danao sibi plurimum metneret. And
after this there were two Temples of Serapis built, and in one of them was
erected a Monument of Aegyptus the Son of Belut. Herodotus ascribes the
building of this Temple at Lindus to Danaus his Daughters, about the end of his
Second Book. And whereas Diodorus Siculus reports the Temple to have been built
in the Island of Cyprus, Stephanus Bizantinus acknowledges no other City of
Lindins or Lindia, but that at Rhodes.

16. Eusebius in his 9th. Book of his Prepar. Evangel. and cb. 23. Writes, that
two Temples, one at Athens, another at Heliopolis in Egypt, were built by the
Children of Israel in the time of their Bondage there. But this he writes not
according to his own Judgment, only sets down the narration hereof out of one
Artapanus an Heathen Author. Now we have no Reason to give Credit to his
Relation in this particular; for albeit the Children of Israel were oppressed
with sore Bondage, and had Cruel Taskmasters set over them, who urged them to
the making of Brick in abundance: Yet the Scripture expressly tells us to what
use these Bricks were employed, Exodus 1.11. They did set Taskmasters over
them, and they built the City Pithom and Raaemses for the Treasures of Pharaoh.
Thus they made them weary of their Lives by sore Labor in Clay and in Brick,
and in all Work in the Field, with all manner of Bondage, which they laid upon
them most cruelly, as v. 14.

Herodotus makes relation of one Menon the first King of Egypt who built
Memphis, and therein Templum Vulcani a Temple to Vulcan great and memorable.
And this I confess was most Acient, and long before the days of Moses, if it be
true which there is reported to him from the Priests of Egypt; namely, how they
rehearsed to him out of a Book, the names of three hundred and thirty Kings,
beginning from this Menon, and ending with Mevis the Father of Sesostris, who
is supposed to be Shishak King of Egypt, mentioned in Scripture, who came to
Jerusalem with a great Army and took it, and carried away all the golden
Shields that King Solomon had made. The Providence of God being very remarkable
herein, as it is commended unto us 2 Chronicles. 12.5, 6, 7, 8, Now Shishak's
Depopulation of Judea, came to pass in the fifth year of Rehoboam and Jeroboam,
the year of the World 3029. by Lydiat, and 3033 in Usher. Yet this Shishak was
the Successor of Mevis, the last of those three hundred and thirty Kings in
Egypt, whose names were related to Herodotus by the Priests of Egypt. And this
Menon King of Egypt in Herodotus, is made all one with Amosis by Lydiat. Eusebius.
Prep. Evangel. l. 10. c. 9.
I do not here mention how Porphyry makes Moses more ancient than Inachus, who
is more ancient then this Amosis; nor how Africanus places him as Coaetaneous
to Ogyges. Nor how Appion the Grammarian makes him of the same time with
Amosis, Ibid. c. 10.
as in whose days he led the Children of Israel out of Egypt. Though in truth
the Pastoral Nation, which Manetho that Egyptian Historian mentions to have
gone out of Egypt, and planred themselves in the Neighbour-Country of Syria
about Jerusalem, were rather the Philistines, who came of the Caslucheans and
Caphtoreans, who were of the Egyptian Nation, and seized upon Palestine, and
Maritime Coast of Judea; whose Trade also was the keeping of Sheep. And to
these refers that of Herodotus in the beginning of his History, namely, that
the Phoenicians came from the Red Sea, by Phoenicians understanding Strians
dwelling by the Sea Coast from Cassiolis the border of Egypt. But these things
are more clearly and truly shown by Usher in his Annals from A.M. 2114. and
seq. And how this was done in the days of Abraham, many hundred years before
Moses. But if any Man shall hence conclude, that therefore Temples were in
Egypt many hundred years before Moses, by the Testimony of Herodotus. I answer,
That Herodotus's Testimony proceeded upon the Faith of the Egyptian Priests and
their Registers, which deserve no Credit with us Christians; they making the
King Menon to be many years more ancient than the World. Yet Lydiat shows how
to salve their Credit in a tolerable way; namely, by supposing that the first
reigning in Egypt (which he takes to have been sixty years after the Dispersion
of the Gentiles, which is a hundred sixty one years after Noah's Flood) by the
Computation made by George and Constantine Manasses (out of the Fragments of
ancient Historians, and set down in their Chronicles) all were not governed
under one King; but look how many Cities so many Kings; like as Joshua found it
in the Land of Canaan, when he entered among them with the Israelites: And the
Years of the Reigns of each King might be reckoned as succeeding one another,
whereas indeed they reigned together in several Dynasties at the same time. As
that which follows in the Relation of those Priests made to Herodotus;
namely, That in that vast space of time the Sun changed his Course four times;
as having twice risen where now he sets, and twice set where now he rises; to
astonish their Hearers with legends of great Admiration. They had an addition
also, which was, That, before all these Kings, their Gods reigned, conversing
familiarly with Men, and the last of them was Orus the Son of Osiris. The same
Herodotus writes, That the Egyptians much differed from the Grecians in the
Estimation of their Gods: For whereas among the Grecians, the last of their
Gods were Hercules, and Dionysius, and Pan: Contrariwise, among the Egyptians
Pan was Vetustissimus, the most Ancient, even of the number of the first Rank,
which were but eight; (and Latona was another of them, as elsewhere he tells
us) Hercules was one of the second Rank, which were twelve in number; and
Dionysius of the third Rank, which contained such as were begotten of the
former twelve: This Dionysius is Osiris, as he says, whose Son Orus was the
last of the Deities regnant among the Egyptians.

17. Of this Osiris, Diodorus Siculus writes, which is also related by Eusebius
in his Preparat Evangel. l. 2. c. 1. That babuit Jovi Junonique parentibus
sacram aedem, item Diis caeteris aurea Templa, which carry a very ill Accent,
that to Jupiter and Juno his Parents, he should dedicate a Holy House only, and
to other Gods golden Temples. And withal he adds, That whatsoever was indeed
verified of Osiris the Egyptian, that Orpheus the Poet transferred unto Bacchus
for the Honor of the Grecians; even to that Bacchus whom Jupiter begat of
Semele Cadmus his Daughter; as if Osiris were no ancienter than so; but that
Cadmus might have been his Grandfather. Whereas we have very good Ground and
Testimony, concerning the Antiquity of Cadmus, as a Man unknown to the
Grecians, till he left Phoenicia, which was at the time that Joshua entered the
Land of Canaan with his great Host of Israclites. And I do not think the Gods
of the Egyptians were a making in those days. He was a great and a proud King
that oppressed Israel, and we know what Mischief befell him and his People.
Manetho makes mention of one Amenophis King of Egypt, whose Fortunes were, to
be devoured of a Seahorse: Probably this was that Pharaoh who was drowned in
the Red Sea. Great Benefactors while they lived, were honored by Heathens with
Divine Honor after their Death; but this Pharaoh was a Plague to the whole
Land and People, and nothing likely that any of his Posterity came to be
deified by the Egyptians; and a long time after great Confusion seized upon
that Nation, witness Danaus flying out of Egypt into Thebes in Greece, from the
Fury of his Brother Aegyptus; and after that Egyptus himself leaving Egypt, and
coming into Patre in Greece, mourning for the loss of his Children. And we read
in Scripture of the Gods of Egypt while Israel lived under them, yea, and how
they were corrupted by them. Osiris was a great Euergetes, or Benefactor,
chiefly for the Invention of Tilling of the Ground, and Planting of Grapes,
that of Virgil Georgic. 1. -- Uncique puer monstrator aratri; touching the
first Inventer of the Plow. It was well, says Servius, that he mentioned not
his name, but in general says, The Boy that found it out. For it was not one
Body that acquainted all the World with the Plow, but diverse Persons in diverse
Places. And if you ask who is chiefly meant here: His answer is, That some say
Triptolemus, others Osiris, Which is the truer of the two in the Judgment of
Servius. So Sabinus Pliny relates, That Bizeser the Athenian some that
Triptolemus did this: But the Tradition is, That Osiris was the first of all
Mortals who Plowed with Oxen, in memorial whereof, two Oxen are honored of the
Egyptians, Apis in the City Memphis, and Meuris in Heliopolis; and in the
Offices of Isis Ears of Corn are carried before, and in the time of Harvest
Ears of Corn are consecrated unto her. Now Isis was the Sister of Osiris, says
Pomponius, though that by the way is but a Figment, and Probus confirms the
same. Nevertheless some have seemed to smell a Mystery in this. And Coelius
Rodiginus, lib. 5. c. 12. observes, That before the Temples of the Egyptians
was wont to be placed the Figure of Sphinx, to signify thereby, that the
Wisdom of their Theology was obscure, and vested in Fables; and that in the
City Sais there is a Temple of Palles (which some think to be Pallas) that has
this Inscription in the Face of it, I am that which was, and is, and shall be;
my Veil no Mortal Man has ever unfolded. Yet I conceive these to be but
Illusions of Satan, to blanch and set a fair Face upon foul things, under the
Pretense of Mysterious Significations. Coelius adds the Opinion of some to have
been, That by Osiris is meant no other thing than the River Nilus, the
overflowing whereof, and the Mud which it brings soiling it, is a great means
for the enriching of that Land. The same Interpretation is made by Eusebius,
Preparat. Evangel. l. 3. c. 10. p. 115. And Suidas on the word Serapis writes,
Hunc Deum alii Jovem esse dixerunt, alii Nilum propter modium quod in capite
habet, and cubilum, mensuram aquae scilicet, alii vero Joseph. And in Forsterus
there is a fair Derivation of Osiris from the Hebrew (...) bos ille; for under
such a shape he was worshipped; and (...) is in Hebrew the usual name of the
River Nilus, by reason of the blackness of the Mud which it brings with it.
Others conceive Osiris and Isis to signify the Sun and Moon; and first, these
natural things being glorious to behold, were adored and invoked by them,
according to that in Virgil,

Vos clarissima mundi
Lumina labencem Coelo quae dueit is annum
Liber and alma Ceres, vestro si munere tellus
Chaoniam pingui glandem mutavit arista
Poculaque invent is Acheloia miscuit uvis.
Here Liber and alma Ceres are no other than the Sun and Moon; and Isis and
Ceres are all one, Eusebius. Preparat. Evangel. l. 2. c. 1. and the same things
are attributed to them in their kind by the Martianus in Nuptiis ad Solemn, Te
Serapim Nilus, Memphis veneratur Osirim.
Poet, which are usually attributed to Osiris and Isis in their kind by
Historians. Namely, the Prospering and Maturating of Corn and Wine, according
to their several proper Seasons, wherein they are to be Sown or Planted, and
the Fruit thereof to be expected. But leave we the Mysterious Signification,
and come to the Historical Truth. Lydiat thinks that Menon the first King
reigning over all Egypt, by what variety of names soever called (wherein there
is found very great Variety as he shows) was the Man that married Isis, and
commonly received to be Osiris, or Serapis; for these two are both one. But
others conjecture, that Serapis being represented bearing a Bushel upon his
Head, does fairly signify Joseph, who was so great a Benefactor to the whole
Land of Egypt, and to King Pharaoh himself; and that especially in providing
Corn for them against the seven sore years of Famine; and that by a wise
managing of the abundance of the seven plentiful years. And this has peculiar
reference to that very particular which made Osiris so renowned, namely, the
Provision of Corn; and he was married to Asenath, which taking away the last
Syllable, founds very near to Isin; the Daughter of Potipherah Priest of On,
and the last two Syllables of his name comes near to Phorom the Argive, whose
Sister as some say, or Daughter as others say she was; and that from Pharoneus
the Argive, the Kings of Egypt took the name of Pharaoh, Lydiat conjectures,
Schindler says it signifies immunem esse, to be free from Taxes and
Impositions, which is the Prerogative of Absolute Kings; and it may seem to
some, that in the seven plentiful years, Pharaoh took up the fifth part of all
their Increase throughout the Land, by virtue of his absolute Regal
Prerogative. I am not acquainted with the manner of the Government of Egypt in
those days: But that the fifth part was rather bought by the King, to his
singular great Advantage (as appeared by the event) Corn being little worth in
those plentiful years; I have this reason out of the Holy Text. For we read,
that when the years of Dearth came, the Egyptians were at length driven to sell
their Land, after they had sold their Castle, and all means sailed them: And
Joseph bought all their Land for the King providing them Corn for their present
Necessity, both for Food and Sowing their Land; and the Bargain was this, They
should have the use of the Land still, only the fifth part of their Increase
they should pay unto the King. Now if he had but a fifth part of the Harvest
after the Land was his, and he gave them the use of it; How unlikely is it,
that by virtue of his Royal Prerogative, he either could or did take the same
Proportion when the Land was none of his, but theirs, for in this case it had
been but a very ill Purchase, if hereby he had no more than he had formerly
right unto, when as yet he had paid nothing for it. And this is the more
unlikely, considering what course was taken to make the Purchase good; and that
no Man might plead Right of Inheritance thereunto; for he changed their
Habitations, so that albeit they might have as much Land as they had before;
yet they had not each one the same Land which he enjoyed before.

18. Eusebius says, that Serapis had upon his Head discum, as the Latin
renders it: But Alexander ah Alexandro, l. 4. c. 12. of his Genial days,
Aegyptii Serapidi modium apponunt supra caput. The Egyptians represent Serapis
with a Bushel upon his Head, but like enough both took it from Suidas, and it
is mentioned by Ludovicus Vives upon Aust. de Civit. Dei, l. 18. c. 5. and the
truth is in Coquaeus upon Austin de Civit. Dei, l. 18. c. 5. writes the same in
these words, Nonnulli Serapin esse volunt Joseph consecratum, immani Sepulchro
and fano exornatum, in quo bos nutriebatur in agriculturae Symbolum, quod famem
septennem singulari prudentia ab Aegyptiis detulisset. And this might be a very
congruous Memorial of Osiris, of whom it is written by diverse, that primus
mortalium boves aratro junxit; the first who taught the World to Plow with
Oxen: And for this cause the Ox Apis, might be a fit Emblem of him, and of all
such who ever since have provided the People with Bread. Like as Menenius
Agrippa (if my Memory fail me not) was the Man who for the like Service was
honored by the Romans, with making Coins in his name, and the Inscription of
an Ox upon one side of it: And in this respect (as Dr. Reynolds observes)
might the Israclites think to represent God in the form of a young Bullock in
the Wilderness, to notify thereby, that God who provided Manna for them in the
Wilderness. And it is like enough, that if the Egyptians had an Apis in those
days, some Ox or other which they worshipped, they by the Egyptians might be
acquainted with the meaning of it, as a Memorial of Osiris who taught them to
Plow their Ground with Oxen, that so with greater ease they might have Corn
yearly in abundance. Yet I deny not but Joseph deserved to be in everlasting
remembrance with them for this very cause. But the Text says, A new King arose
that knew not Joseph; and though all Israel deserved well at the Egyptians
hands for Joseph's sake; yet we know how proudly they dealt with them, and how
barbarously they carried themselves toward them, not only oppressing them with
Burdens, but causing their Male children to be cast into the River Nilus, even
Joseph's, who was a greater Blessing to them, and to their King especially,
than ever the River Nilus was; and the People of Israel might have been so
still, had they used them well; for ten Persons such as Lot had saved Sodom;
how much more 600000. And truly Pineda upon Job is of Opinion, that this
Pharaoh was that Busiris King of Egypt, of whose Barbarousness in Sacrificing
Strangers that came into his Country, the World so much talked of. Surely had
they made a God of Joseph, they would not have played the Devils; yea, such
arrant Devils with his Posterity. But the Lord, to make them amends in a
congruous way, first turned the Water of Nilus into Blood, a fair means to
revive the remembrance of their Merciless Course in Drowning the Hebrew
Children; but when that would not serve the turn to bring them to Repentance,
the Lord drowned Pharaoh and his Host in the Red Sea: So perish all thine
Enemies, O Lord, but Grace, and Peace, and plenteous Redemption ever be upon
the true Israel of God.

19. Yet I rather think Osiris to have been more ancient than Joseph; Sure I am
they had their Gods in the days of Moses, Exodus 6.26.
by whom the Children of Israel were corrupted; and Hebrew Shepherds were an
Abomination to the Egyptians, Genesis 46.34.
not only in the days of Moses, but in the days of Joseph. And Herodotus.
writes, Non eosdem Deos similiter colunt universi Aegyptii praeter Isidem and
Osiridem quem Bacchum esse aiunt, Hos peraeque universi colunt. Herein they all
agreed in worshipping Isis and Osiris not so in the worshipping of other Gods.
So that I am content to tread in Mr. Lydiat's steps, that the first King of
Egypt Menon, or Ammon, or Amosis, or Amuris, or Amenophis, to have been the
Egyptians Osiris, whose Memorial was an Ox; because he was primus omnium
mortalium qui boves aratro junxerat, the first that taught Men to Plow with
Oxen; and thence might his name be derived, namely from (...) bos, as Forsterus
conceives; and Serapis, which at first was Sorapis, from (...) and Apis; for as
Suidas says, Sepulchrum bujus Apidis in quo est ejus corpus conditum,
Alexandriam translatum est; afterward by Corruption it came to be called
Sarapis, and last of all Serapis; and that Isis his Queen was Io Argiva, the
Story of whom the Poet calls Argumentum ingens in Virgil, wherewith drawn to
the Life, he feigns Turnus his Buckler was flourished, when he came into the
Field against AEneas; and that because he was the Progeny of Acrisius and
Inachus Kings of Argos; At laevem clypeum sublatis cornibus Io
Auro insignibat, jam set is obsita, jam Bos,
Argumentum ingens, and custos Virginis Argos
Caelataque amnem fundens Pater Inachus urna.


For whereas Poets feign, that Io was turned into an Ox by Jupiter being found
by Juno, the truth seems to be no other than this; Osiris was that Jupiter, and
being represented by Bos mas; no marvel if hereupon she becoming his Wife, they
feigned her to be turned into Bos foemina. And whereas it is further feigned,
that Argos was set by Juno to watch her; this Argos fairly represents Osiris
also her Husband, under another Notion, namely, as in an Hieroglyphical
Interpretation he is taken for the Sun. For such was the Ox representing
Osiris full of white Spots, and whose Hair was toward the Head; to signify
the Sun's proper Motion from West to East, contrary to the general Motion of
the Heavens from East to West, (though Astronomers think otherwise in these
days.) And the Stars of Heaven, by Aristotle's Doctrine, receive their Light
from the Sun. Afterward Poets feign that by Juno's means she was Oestro
percita, plagued with an Hornet, and driven to fly into Egypt; the Truth
whereof was no other than Ostris his marrying of her, and carrying her over
with him into Egypt, and there, says Servius, she was turned into Isis: Aug.
de Civit. Dei, l. 18. c. 3. Jo filia Inachi.
this is that Argumentum ingens Virgil speaks of, in reference to the true
Story obscurely carried, and dressed by the Wits of Poets. But some rubs I find
lying in the way, to hinder us in the Acknowledgment of so great Antiquity of
Isis and Osiris. For whereas Danaus that fled from his Brother Egyptus out of
Egypt unto Argos in Greece, is styled by Mr. Lydiat, a Belo Egyptio oriundus, by
this Belus meaning Osiris; as from whom Danaus was derived, but afar off, as
who is accounted but the 10th King of Argos, beginning from Inachus: Egyptus
the Brother of Danaus I find styled Beli filius the Son of Belus, in a Monument
of him erected, in a Temple of Serapis the City of Patrae, or Aroe a City of
Achaia, as Pausanias relates in his Achaicis. Yet this is not of force to take
me off from following Mr. Lydiate in this. I understand filius here in a larger
sense than to take it for a Son begotten of Belus, and that it is no more than
a Belo oriundus, one that was derived from Belus. For it is not credible that
Pharaoh, whom the Lord drowned in the Red Sea, or any of his Posterity, or his
Father was Osiris the great God of the Egyptians, as before has been argued.
As also that the Gods of Egypt in Moses his days, were not the same with the
Gods of Egypt in the days of Joseph. Another rub is cast in the way by
Ludovicus Vives upon Austin, de Civit, Dei. lib. 18. c. 3. Pausanias affirms,
(says he) that she was the Daughter of Jasius the sixth King of Argos. Yet he
confesses, that Valerius Flaccus in his Argonautes, lib. 4. calls Jovem
Inachidem; but withal he takes notice that he calls her Jastam virginem; as
much as to say, the Daughter of Jesius; yet she might be called Inachides
nevertheless, because she descended from Inachus, who was the first Founder of
that Kingdom, and Author of their Nobility. He gives also another Reason drawn
from the Testimony of Eusebius both in his Chronicles, and in his tenth Book of
Evangelical Preparation, testifying, that this Jo lived in the days of Triapas
the seventh King of Argos, 400 years after Inachus. And indeed thus I find it
in Pausanias in his Corinthiacks, 58. that Triapas had two Sons, Jasus and
Agenow; and that Jo was the Daughter of Jasus, and so two Ages after Triapas,
and but one before Danaus, who was after the time of Moses his leading the
Children of Israel out of Egypt, which I willingly confess is nothing probable;
and though this be to my greater advantage in this present Argument, yet I
choose rather to hold with Mr. Lydiate still; so utterly improbable and
unlikely it is t^a^ Pharaoh, who was drowned in the Red Sea, or his Father,
either was Osiris, the times of Moses and of Joseph are so congenerous as
touching the same Saperstitions in course among the Egyptians. And as touching
Pansanias this I find; that howsoever he writes thus in his Corinthiacks, yet
in his first Book called Attica, reckoning up the Statues which were found in
the Town of the Athenians, two were of Women, Jo the Daughter of Inachus, and
Calisto the Daughter of Lycaon; whose Fortunes, he says, were represented to
be much the same, both as touching Jupiter's Love and Juno's Wrath, and the
Metamorphosis of each, the one into a Cow, the other into a Bear. But then you
will say, the more ancient Osiris was, the more evident it is that Temples were
in use long before Moses, yea diverse hundred years. Whereto I answer, though I
grant the greatest Antiquity ascribed to them, and do not help my self with
Testimonies out of the ancient Fathers, as Clemens Alexandrinus, lib. 1.
Stromat. Tertullian in his Apology, cap. 9. Justinus in his Oration against the
Gentiles, and Tatianus in his Oration against the Greeks, and Epiphanius in his
first Book against Heresies, yea and of diverse profane Authors alleged by
Eusebius in his tenth Book of Evangelical Preparation, and third Chapter, all
testifying that Inachus King of Argos reigned in the days of Moses: because
Inachus, by the computation of times, was much elder, for which v. Usher, A.M.
2174. Yet Diodorus his Testimony, of a Temple built by Osiris himself, deserves
no credit; for he does but relate what he heard from the Priests of Egypt, who
told Herodotus, that between Orus his Reign, and that ancient Amosis we speak
of, (Contemporary to Inachus) there were no less than 15000 years. And as for
Jupiter and Juno, we know such Deities received by the Egyptians, were no other
than Osiris and Isis themselves, which all the Egyptians worshipped, as Herodotus
testifies; so did they not any other God. And if there were any such building
of Temples in Egypt in those ancient times, when the Israelites were so much
employed in making of such store of Brick, in all likely hood these Bricks
would have been employed about such sacred uses; but the Scripture testifies
that they were employed about the building of certain Cities, to be made Store
houses for the King. It is true, Clemens Alexandrinus was to seek whether
Phoroneus or Merops was the first Founder of Temples: Phoroneus, we know, was
the Son of Inachus, and second King of Argos, and Brother to Jo or Isis; but
who Merops was, I have had much ado to find, from the word (...) to divide, and
(...) a voice; of (...) we read in Homer, as an attribute of Men, who alone of
all bodily Creatures distinguish the Voice, into Words, Syllables, and single
Letters; whence it is called articulate, consisting as it were of several
joints, as Coelius Rodiginus writes; who by the way tells of a Cardinal (
Ascainus by name) who had a Parrot which cost him 100 Crowns, that could repeat
the Apostles Creed distinctly and accurately. I wonder of what Spirit he was,
that took such pains to teach a Parrot such a lesson: I presume he was none of
St. Francis his Auditors, a part of whose Legend it is, that he would preach
the Gospel even to bruit Creatures, so great was his desire of the Salvation of
all. The other Interpretation Rodiginus gives of the former Etymology is in
reference to the Division of Languages, upon the Building of Babel for years
after the Flood; and both of them are very ingenious in my judgment. But
concerning any Person whose proper name was Merops, I find nothing in Coelius,
nor in diverse others. But in Stephanus Bizantinus (...), I find Merops himself,
said to be the Son of Triopas, and from him the People of Coos called Meropes,
and that Island Meropis; and so, much about the time of Jo the second, whom
Eusebius observes to have lived in the days of Triopas, as Ludovicus Vives
relates upon the 18th Book of Austin, de Civitate Dei, and the third Chapter.
Antoninus Liberalis, in his Metamorphoses, makes this Merops to be cooetaneous
to Jupiter, for thus he writes, Number. 36. as it is translated (for he is a Greek
Author;) Jupiter postquam Titanibus pulsis, Saturno regnum ademit, Aegem (quae
mammam ei praebuit) immortalitate donavit, and ejus imago extat in astris:
aureum autem canem Templi Cretensis custodiae, praefecit. Hunc suffuratus
Pandareus Meropis filius in Sipylum adduxit, Custodiendumque dedit Tantalo
Jovis and Plutus filio; cum autem aliquanto post tempore Pandareus in Sipylum
venisset, canemque reposceret: Tantalus depositum ejuravit. So that the Son of
Merops by this Author's account was but cooetaneous to Tantalus, who was the
Father of Pelops, Grandfather to Agamemnon, chief of the Grecians at the Trojan
War. Now touching Clemens Alexandrinus, he was to seek whether it were
Phoroneus or Merops, or some other, qui eis posuerunt templa, who erected
Temples. Belike he had some evidence that made him incline to think, that
Phoroneus was the first; other evidence that swayed him another way, and made
him think Merops was the first; and thirdly, he had some ground to conceive
that neither of these but some other, after both these, was the first. Now of
these Evidences we can say nothing by way of examining them, because we do not
know them. Arnobius in his sixth Book specifies three by name, in question
about the primacy of building Temples, and they are Phoroneus not Argivus, (of
whom I understand Clemens Alexandrinus to have delivered his mind in this
Argument) but Phoroneus Egyptius; the other two mentioned by him are Merops,
mentioned by Clemens Alexandrinus; and the third and last Aeacus, who as he is
placed after the former two, ordered according to their Age; so it seems he was
later than both the former. And for the last of the three to be the first in
this kind of Devotion, he alleges no meaner Author than Varro; who was
commonly accounted the most learned of all the Latins. Now AEacus was but the
Grandfather of Achilles, and so but two Generations before the Wars of Troy,
which in common account, is not above 66 or 67 years; whereas Moses led the
Children of Israel out of Egypt above 300 years before the Wars of Troy.
Therefore when Varro writes, as Austin reports him, de Civit. Dei, lib. 18.
cap. 3. that the Sicyonians did sacrifice at the Sepulcher of Thurimachus, the
7th King of the Sicyonians; surely at that time there was no Temple built at
that Sepulcher, for ought Varro found in all his reading. And again, when
Austin says, in the same place, that when Phegous the Brother of Phoroneus was
dead, there was a Temple built at his Sepulcher, by reason (as he guesseth)
that Phegous was a devout Prince, and had in his time erected Chapels for
Divine Service, he had not this from Varro; nay Varro acknowledges no Temples
until many years after. Not to mention that both Clemens and Arnobius thought
it more likely that Phoroneus rather than his Brother was the first Erector of
Temples, yet neither of them had any sure and certain grounds for their
Opinions.

20. Thus much concerning the Graecians and Egyptians; something remains to be
added concerning the Assyrians and Babylonians, and the Original of Temples
amongst them also: Diodorus Siculus, lib. 2. cap. 4. writing of Semiramis and
her building of Babylon, adds that, In vrbis medio templum Jovi erexit quem
vocant Babylonii Belum; In the midst of the City she built a Temple to Jupiter,
whom the Babylonians call Belus: But withal he says that of this Temple, Nihil
certi pronuntiari potest, came and Scriptores discordent, and opus ipsum
vetustate collapsum sit; Nothing can certainly be affirmed, considering that
Writers differ, and the Work it self is fallen to decay through Age. Herodotus
also makes mention of the Temple of Belus, but he makes no mention of him that
built it; and as for Semiramis, Herodotus makes her to precede Nitocris but
five Ages, which is short of 200 years; for three Ages makes an 100 years by
his Account. And Nitocris he writes to have been the Mother of Labynitus,
against whom Cyrus waged War. No Cyrus we know took Babylon whilst Belshazzar
reigned, who also was slain that night wherein Babylon was entered into by the
Persians, through the Channel of the River Euphrates, whose stream was turned
another way by the Army of Cyrus; yet we confess the Babylonian Monarchy was
far more ancient than this Simiramis Herodotus writes of, (and that by
Scripture evidence) having been founded by Nimrod, that mighty hunter before
the Lord, whom some conceive to be Belus Babylonius; and I nothing doubt but
the remembrance of so great a Man, and the first Monarch, might be preserved by
figures made of him, and these figures become Idols; like as in the days of
Sem, yea, and Noah, also Idols were among the Posterity of Sem, in the Family
of Terah. The beginning of Nimrod's Monarchy is placed by Lydiat and Usher the
14th year after the Dispersion of the People through the confusion of Tongues,
that is 115 years after the Flood, 185 before the Death of Noah, and 335 before
the Death of Sem; which they ground on the Babylonian Antiquities, searched into
by Callisthenes the Philosopher, and Follower of Alexander in his Persian War:
for he found by his Calculation of those Antiquities, that the Babylonian
Monarchy began 1903 years before Babylon was taken by Alexander. A little after
the Assyrian Monarchy began, as Scripture testifies, Genesis 10. for Moses having
mentioned the beginning of Nimrod's Kingdom to have been Babel, and Erech, and
Accad, and Calne in the Land of Shinar, vor. 10. he forthwith adds, that out of
that Land (to wit the Land of Shinar) went Ashur and built Nineveh, and the
City Rehoboth, and Calab. This Ashur was the Second Son of Sem, ver. 22. It is
thought his Eldest Son was Ninus the First, from whose Name was the Name Ninive
given to the City built by him; and Ninive I find is all one with Ninus, in
Herodotus, whose Kingdom began 1360 years before Lycurgus gave Laws to the
Spartans, according to the Computation of George the Monk, mentioned by
Scaliger, with one years only difference, provided we understand Ashur to have
reigned 60 before his Son Ninus; and from the first of Ninus, to Lycurgus his
giving Laws, are 1300 years. And which Act of Lycurgus was 97 years before the
Account of Iphitus his Olympiads began. Now this was 1485 years before the
Reign of the latter Belus Babylonius, Beladan, or Nabonazar by Name, who in all
likely hood was that Belus which Herodotus speaks of, and Diodorus Siculus. For
this Baladan, or Nabonazar, the second Babylonian Belus, began his Reign but
the twelfth year of Iotham King of Judah, a little before the Foundation of the
Walls of Rome was laid by Romulus. But whereas Scaliger conceives there were
two Dinasties in Babylonia, one succeeding the other 368 years before the most
ancient Belus, whom yet he accounts more ancient by 125 years than the
Computation of Calysthenes does reach unto: This Lydiat conceives to have no
color of Truth. And thus I have dispatched this Enquiry about the Antiquity of
Temples, according to my Power, and present Leisure.

Yet I deny not, but that as Men, before there were any Temples, did worship
their deceased Ancestors, and offer Sacrifices at their Sepulchers; as
Augustine testifies they did, according unto Varro his Observations, de Civit.
Dei, lib. 18. c. 3. Apud sepulchrum septimi sui Regis Thurimachi; sacrificare
Sicionois solere, The Scythians were wont to sacrifice at the Sepulcher of
their Seventh King. Thurimachus, which Thurimachus is said to have reigned
amongst the Sicyonians before Inachus reigned amongst the Argives; tho others
make Inachus, the First King of Argos, to be more ancient than AEgialcus. First
King of the Sicyonians, as Ludovious, Vives relates, upon the 18th. Book of
Austin. de Civit. Dei, chap. 3. And Pausanias, in his Corinthiacks, page 54.
shows where was the Sepulcher of Phoroneus; and adds, Phoroneo quoque nostra
etiamnum aetate parentant, to this day they do offer Sacrifice to Phoroneus, to
wit, at his Sepulcher: And no marvel if they were of their Opinion, who knew no
other Gods, than the Ghosts of Dead Men, from whom they received Answers, lying
over their Graves, as Melo and others write of certain People of Afriea, called
Augitae. Likewise, I deny not, but that in process of time, the Sepulchers of
great Men were fair Houses or Structures, built to no other end, but that the
Bodies of great Personages might lie therein, as it were in State. Such were
the Mausolaea Regum Sepulchra, faith Caelius Rodigimus, l. 9. c. 10. the
Sepulchers of Kings; the first of them, Mausolaeum, having its Name from
Mausolus (as the same Author writes, l. 23. c. 6.) King of Halicarnassus, as
Pausanias relates in his Arcadia; and he adds, that it was built ea operis
magnitudine, atque omni ornamentorum magnificentia, ut Romani rei miraculo
adducti, magnificentissima quaeque apud se monumenta, Mausolea appellarint; So
great, and so adorned, that the Romans admiring it, afterward called all such
magnificent Monuments by the Name of Mausolaea: And he writes strange things of
the Sepulcher of one Helena an Hebrew Woman in Jerusalem, before it was
destroyed by Adrian. And Lilius Giraldus, in his Book de Vario Sepeliendi ritu,
writes, that Temples and Churches had their Original from hence; his words are
these, Fuit vero usque adeo antiquis sepulchrorum cura, ut non aliunde
templorum and sacrarum aedium originem deductam, diligentissimi scriptores
tradant, Eusebius and Lactantius. Qua de re and Clemens Alexandraeus in
adbortatione ad Graecos, si ita recte (...) interpretamur sic scriptum
reliquit; Superstitio (inquit) Templa condere persuasit quae enim prius hominum
sepulchra fuerunt, magnificentius condita Templorum appellatione vocata sunt.
Nam apud Larissaeam civitatem in arce in Templo Palladis Achrisii sepulchrum
fuit quod nune sacrarii loco calebratur. In arce queque Atheniensi ut est ab
Anticcho in nono Historiarum scriptum, Cecropis, sepulchrum fuit. In Templo
vero Palladis jacet Erichthonius. Ismarus autem Eumolpi atque Dairae filius in
Eleusine una cum Celei natabus sepultus, and reliqua, quae multa Clemens
collegit and ab eo Eusebius quae in Latinis codicthus non babentur. He adds,
That as Temples, so Images and Idols (as touching the public use of them) took
their Originals from Sepulchers also, and he alleges Diophantes the
Lacedemonian, in his Books of Antiquities, for the Proof of this. But whether
there were such in Egypt in the days of Joseph, or Moses, I am very uncertain:
Suppose they had their Bull Apis, severed and kept in a Place by himself; this
required only Septum, a Place compassed about with a Wall, where might be asso
some Place of Succor, with a Covering to resort unto in time of Rain, Hail,
Storm, or Tempest; though we read not so much as this, of those ancient Times.
Only we read of those Times, that some Creatures were accounted Sacred by the
Egyptians, and it was not lawful to kill such; nay, it was Abomination to
sacrifice any such. Or suppose they had Images of those Gods whom they
worshipped, yet Temples were not necessary for this; for, as I have showed
before, many such, together with Altars also, were erected sub Divo, in the
open Air. I will conclude all with that which Alexander ab Alexandro writes in
his genial days, lib. 4. cap. 7. Persae nec Deorum imagines habent, nec Templa
erigunt (crant enim aedium sacrarum and simulacrorum eversores) sed in loco
mundo and excelsorum, praecatione Diis victimas immolant, quod a plerisque
usitatum invenimus. Nam Carmeli Deus colebatur, cui nec Templum erat nec
simulachrum, sed ara tantum and divinus cultus. Iudaei mente sola, unum numen
colunt, ideo nulla apud eos simulachra non modo Templis, sed nec urbibus
insunt. Germani queque nullam humani oris speciem Diis, prae eorum magnitudine
dederunt, nec Templa dicarunt: sed lucos and nemora Deorum nominibus appellant;
illa velut sacra templa venerantur. And in his 2 d. Book, cap. 2. Nulla ficta
apud Lycurgum vel picta imago fuit: quippe hominum aut animalium species Diis
tribui vetuit. Templum vero in quo colebatur desuper patens foramen habuit,
quia nefas duxerunt Terminum Deum pacis and justitiae custodem, sub tecto
conspici. Sic Iovi, Soli, Lunae, and Deifidio in aperto mundo, Templa hypaethra
and sub divo veteres extruxere, quod a Graecis saepe factitatum novimus, ut his
Diis hypaethra templa constituant, sicut aedes Iovis Pulverii in Attica, semper
sine tecto erigebatur. Graeci vero Minervae in summa part aedium sine victima
sacrificant; AEsculapio in montibus. Apud Persas nulla dicabantur templa diis,
quia cum solemn praecipuun numen, and Deorum maximum colant, mundum universum
illi Templum esse dixerunt. A Bithynis usurpatum legimus, ut adoraturi montium
cacumina conscendant, and sine templis Iovem Pappam salutent, sicut Scythae
Pappaeum. Quae etiam Diogenis opinio fuit, qui mundum fanum Dei sanctissimum
existimavit. Fucre autem Termini, atque Fidei Templa juxta aedem Iovis optimi
maximi, in capitolio primum a Numa constructa, cui sacrum fest Terminalibus in
agris, sexto ab urbe milliario, sub patente caelo fieri solebat. With the
Englishing of this I mean to set a period to this Discourse, etc. The Persians
have neither Images of Gods, nor do they erect Temples (rather their course was
to pull down to the ground Holy Houses and Images) but in a clean Place, in
high Places, with Prayers they did sacrifice to the Gods, which we find to have
been in use with many. For at Carmel God was worshipped, where was neither
Temple nor Image, but an Altar only, and Divine Worship. The Jews in their
minds only worship One God, and therefore with them are no Images, neither in
Temples nor in Cities. The Germans also give no shape of Man to the Gods, by
reason of their Greatness, nor dedicate Temples to them; but Groves and Woods
they call by the Names of Gods, and they reverence them as holy Temples.
Lycurgus ordained no painted or graven Image, as who forbad to express the Gods
in the shape of Men, or other Creatures. And as for the Temple wherein God was
worshipped, that was open at the top, as thinking it unlawful that the God
Terminus, the Preserver of Peace and Justice, should be seen under a Roof or
Covering. In like sort, Men of ancient Times built Temples to Jupiter, Sol,
Luna, and to Deus Fidius, in the open Air, which they called Hypoethra, as much
as to say, under the cope of Heaven, open; which was the Graecians usual
course, as the House of Jupiter Pulverius in Attica was always without a Roof.
And the Graecians sacrisiced to Minerva on the tops of their Houses, without
slaughter made of any Beast; and to AEsculapius upon the Hills. Amongst the
Persians, no Temples were consecrated to the Gods; beeause being of Opinion
that the Sun was the chief Power Divine, and the greatest of Gods, they said
the whole World was his Temple. We read it to have been the Bithynians
Practice, that when they worshipped, they went to the tops of Hills, and there
saluted Jupiter Pappas without any Temple, as the Scythians did Pappaeus. Such
also was the Opinion of Diogenes, who maintained the World to be the most holy
Temple. As for the Temples of the God Terminus, and the God Fides, they were by
the House of Jupiter optimus Maximus, in the Capitol, which were first built by
Numa Pompilius; to whom Holy (or religious) Office was performed on the
Terminal Feasts in the Field, and under the open Heaven, six miles distant from
the City.

I might add our Learned Antiquary Inego Iones's Opinion, concerning that
strange Structure of Stoneheng on Salisbury-Plain, that it was originally no
other than Templum sub Divo, a Temple all open at the top, (such as are
mentioned by Alexander ab Alexandro;) but I reser the curious to his Book, and
conclude this first Disseratation.

Books sold by Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns near
Mercers-Chappel.
MR. Richard Baxter's Narrative of the most memorable Passages of his Life and
Times. Faithfully published from his own Original Manuscript, by Mat.
Sylvester. Folio.

Sermons and Discourses on several Divine Subjects. By the late Reverend and
Learned David Clarkson, B. D. sometime Fellow of Clare-Hall, Cambridge:
Recommended by the Reverend Mr. John How, and Mr. Mat. Mead. Fol.

A Body of Practical Divinity, consisting of above 176 Sermons on the Lesser
Catechism. Composed by the Reverend Assembly of Divines at Westminster: With a
Supplement of some Sermons on several Texts of Scripture. By Tho. Watson,
sometime Minister of St. Stephens Walbrook, London. Recommended by 26
Ministers, etc. Fol.

Forty nine Sermons upon the whole Epistle of St. Paul to the Colossians. In
Three Parts. By the Famous Minister of the Reformed Church in Paris, Mr. John
Daille, with two Epistles of Dr. Tho. Goodwin, and Dr. John Owen. Fol.

A Paraphrase on the New Testament, with Notes, Doctrinal and Practical, fitted
for the use of Religions Families, etc. By the late Reverend Mr. Richard
Baxter. Octavo.

Annotations upon the Holy Bible. In Two Volumes Folio. By Mr. Mat. Pool. Third
Edition, with an Addition of a Concordance by Mr. Sam. Clark; and Contents to
each Chapter.

Fierce Justification by the Lord Jesus Christ; written originally in Latin by
John Fox, Author of the Book of Martyrs. Translated into English.

A Brief Concordance to the Holy Bible, in a new Method. By Sam. Clark, M.A.
Twelves.

The Confirming Work of Religion, or its great Things made plain by their
Primary Evidences and Demonstrations: Whereby the meanest in the Church may
soon be made able to render a solid and rational Account of their Faith. By
Rob. Fleming. Published by Dan. Burgess. Octavo.

Husbandry spiritualized; or, The heavenly Use of earthly Things. By John
Flavel, Minister of the Gospel. Octavo.

A Brief and Plain Exposition and Paraphrase of the whole Book of the
Revelation, from Chapter to Chapter, and from Verse to Verse. By Sam. Cradock,
B. D. sometime Rector of North Cadbury in Somersetshire. Octavo.

The Gospel-Mystery of Sanctification, opened in sundry Practical Directions,
suited especially to the Case of those who labor under the Guilt and Power of
Indwelling Sin. To which is added a Sermon of Justification. By Mr. Walter
Marshal, late Preacher of the Gospel. Octavo.

Spiritual Songs; or, Songs of Praise to Almighty God, upon several Occasions:
Together with the Son of Songs, which is Solomon's first turned, then
paraphrased in English Verse. To which may be added Penetential Cries. The 4th
Edition, with an Addition of Dives and Lazarus. By John Mason, M.A. 8 vo.

The Good of Early Obedience; or, The Advantage of bearing the Yoke betimes. By
Mat. Mead. Octavo.

A Present for the Sick that have been recovered. By Nath. Vincent. Octavo.

Mr. Nath. Vincent's Conversion of the Soul. Octavo.

-- His Touchstone of Grace and Nature. Octavo.

-- Heaven or Hell upon Earth, or a Discourse of Conscience. Octavo.

Steel's Discourse of old Age, tending to the Instruction, Caution and Comfort
of Aged Persons. Octavo.

FINIS.

