AN ALLARM TO EUROPE: By a Late Prodigious COMET seen November and December,
1680.

With a Predictive Discourse. Together with some preceding and some succeeding
Causes of its sad Effects to the East and North Eastern parts of the World.

Namely, ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, IRELAND, FRANCE, SPAIN, HOLLAND, GERMANY, ITALY,
and many other places.

By John Hill Physician and Astrologer.

The Form of the COMET with its Blaze or Stream as it was seen December the
24th: Anno 1680. In the Evening.

astrological scene of a comet passing by Earth

London Printed by H. Brugis for William Thackery at the Angel in Duck-Lane.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER,
COurteous Reader, I shall wave the diverse Opinions of Philosophers, concerning
the generation of Commets, and proceed to my intended matter thus, Viz. That
the Romans who had the benefit of Christ's Doctrine long before we the
Inhabitants of these Northern Isles: (to whose shame be it said) that they are
now since become Christian Idolaters, and have shaken hands with that blessed
and saving Doctrine, and trod down those Pious Precepts of the Apostles, and
only use the Name of Christ, and his chosen Twelve, to in snare mankind into
their damnable Idolatrous and inhuman Principles; their Murders, their
Idolatries, their Blasphemies, their Actions against God, The Laws of Nations
and Nature enforces me to style her the very Essence of Antichrist: and surely
God has a scourge in store for this Monstrous Beast; but yet it has many
times fallen out that the Righteous and wicked have suffered together, and let
us remember the Frustration that the Ancient People called Jews, labored under
in Construing the Effects of those many Signs and Tokens that were visible to
them, to be a Forerunner of their Enemies destruction; let us not glory in the
Ruin, but rather in the Reformation of our Enemies, Protestant Christians have
offended, slighted, and committed sins against the God of Heaven that has
abounded in mercy toward them, therefore for the slighting of mercy, Judgment
is near taking place.

Let it be remembered that on the 18th. of May Anno 1680. That the Prodigious
storm of Hail fell in and about the City of London, and the Effects of such
kind of Hail, we have upon Record in the last year of the Reign of Queen Mary,
in and about the Town of Nottingham which was indeed a very great Mortality,
and in the same and succeeding year abundance of People dyed, amongst which the
Queen was one, and indeed this latter storm has had pretty smart E^s since the
above mentioned Date, and this prodigious Comet being of such signification and
concurring in Nature with that Hail, must of necessity have extreme Effects
upon the bodies of Mankind.

The Description.
THe first appearance of it was in the sign Sagitarius or the latter end of
Scorpio when we had Advice of it from Falmouth in the London Gazzet, about the
beginning of November, and since it has past Sagitarius and is now in the sign
Capricorn about the 23 Degree, for it was observed on the 12th. of December by
a very worthy Person to be about 5 Degrees of Capricorn and its diuerall Motion
about 1 Degrees. 30 minutes, and by the Addition of its diurnall Motion it reaches
to the 23d. as aforesaid, at the time of writing being the 24th. of December
the Starr has about 10 Degrees North Latitude, and about the bigness of a
Starr of the 4th. Magnitude with a Stream or Blaze pointing Easterly of about
60 Degrees in length, the Star of a Pale Leaner Color, and also the Stream or
Blaze by way of Judgment according to Art, there are two things to be
considered, first The place of the Comet in the Zodiac, secondly, where the
Stream points. To the first I do believe it has past part of Scorpio and all
Sagitarius, therefore let part of France, and part of Germany, and Spain look
to it, for they either offensively or defensively shall batter themselves or
some other People, and in as much as it is gotten into Capricorn, I pray, God
keep the Dominion of Great Brit^an in Peace because in (...) Capr^o^ is the
(...) part of Scotland, for it is much to be (...) that the (...) once more
Rebel against England, and I must farther take a Cognizance of its passing
Sagitarius, a sign opposite to London's Asdendant, where that great
^onjunction fell of Saturn and Jupiter in the year 1663. From which Mr. Richard
^lin predicted that great Plague which happened in 1665. In short I fear England,
but more especially London will be incident to an infectious Air, from thence
proceed Raging Pestilentall Diseases, Rumors and Real Wars and home bred
Divisions, poisoning open and private Murders, let England beware of Flatterers
and treat its Neighbors in a posture of defense. To conclude this part let the
Inhabitants of London prepare for Death, for indeed a Plague is threatened, And
God keep back the fury of bloody m^nded Men.

Then Considering that the point at its disappearing tended South-East, let the
Inhabitants of other place prepare to feel its Effects as well as we, but not
so soon by way of Digretion, if I consider the two great Conjunctions of Saturn
and Jupiter which fall in the sign Leo, the Ascendant of Rome in the Years
1682. and 83. I cannot but think there will be a Total Desolution of the
Popish power within a small time after, for I am persuaded that the work is
begun already as to the Humane part, and according to former Observations much
after the Nature as it was in one great Conjunction in Leo, when Rome was taken
and the then present Pope confined, but these two Conjunctions being in one,
and the same sign hapening in the space of one year, which configurations have
not hapened for the space of above 2000 years, therefore it must needs shake
Rome and change that place in quality, and indeed these Conjunctions have
Relation to all the whole World, for it is an undoubted truth that the
destruction of one State is the advancing of another, and by how much the
conquered lose in Power and Treasure, by so much may the conqueror behold his
own Victory. The World was never always in one Position, ^or hardly ever will.
The Reverend Mr. Perkins one of the Fathers of the Church in his Reading of the
Duration of Kingdoms and States, in many places that they do not for the most
part continue above 5 or 600 years at the most, without being Sacked by
Strangers, then let the Reader consider whether a great part of Europe is not
near great Alterations, England according to that Dostrine cannot but be very
sensible of the sad Effects. I shall now conclude with this Astrological
Prediction, that within this five years all Europe shall go near to be up in
Arms.

Multi, Multe, Sciunt, sed Nemo, Ommia.

FINIS.

