A TESTIMONY Against the People called RANTERS AND THEIR PLEADS, AND A Call or
Invitation to them to return to the LORD again.
REturn, and come down to judgment, for down to judgment you again must come,
that judgment may have its perfect work, to the bringing down of your
imaginations, (which is hip't above the light of Christ) leading and guiding
you to do such Works which you once would not have done, when the light was
your leader, which being turned from, you are become like the Sow that was
washed, which is again wallowing in the mire; and to the dog, which is swallowing
down his vomit which he once had vomited up; so the wicked spirit which was
once cast out, being entered again, has made you sevenfold the children of the
devil then before; for before when you had done wickedly, you would have
confessed it was so, and that you should not have done it; but now Wickedness is
not counted Wickedness by you, and so you are turned into the Way that leads to
hell and destruction; and you being turned from the light, with the light upon
your evil actions you do not look, but with that part which begets and brings
them forth; so looking with that eye upon the evil, which begat, moved, and led
into the evil, the evil to that part which begot it and brought it forth, does
not appear sinful, so you conclude it is not sin. Ephesians 4*18, 19, 20. Joh 12.40
And thus you being turned from the light of Christ, you are deceived by the
god of the World, who having entered in again, has blinded your minds, and
entangled you again with the yoke that bondageth the true seed; so instead of
being grown up in the Way, Work, and Truth of God, you are turned back into the
iniquity, and that in a higher degree of wickedness then before, swearing, and
pleading for swearing; acting, working, and doing other wickedness, and laying
it upon the Lord, as him to be the mover and leader thereunto; and they who
durst not go from the counsel of God to do such wickedness, you count them low,
and your selves high, (grown above such) but where you are high, it is in
iniquity and wickedness, where you being found, are found far below the least
of Gods dear and tender ones, who durst not yield their members servants to sin.

And with the light you are found to be below the least of Gods children, and
to this you shall confess when the light arises to your condemnation which
shall be when all the vviles and subtilties of the Devil cannot hide you, who
now by his subtilty has deceived you, and made you believe that sin is not
sin; and this he has done by drawing your minds from the light into the
imaginary part, where he works, and his vviles and snares are laid, who is
the Devil, that old Serpent, who has no part nor place in the light; and with
the light his subtilties and vviles is now seen, whereby he deceives you, and
thousands who are are turned out from the light.

And under the Name of light and darkness, the two states, births, seeds, and
conditions is declared, which either in one, or in the other of them, every man
and woman is; the swearers, cursers, liars, drunkards, adulterous, proud,
covetous, and all manner of evil workers are in the darkness, degeneration,
alienation, and transgression, children of darkness, who are wandered from the
spirit into the flesh, where, and in whom the works of the flesh is manifest,
whose seed, birth, and state is accursed; So they who are come out from sin
and evil, and abide in that power that keeps and preserves them so, are in the
light, children of the light, and of the daytime, and are lead of the spirit
of God, so in and among them the works of the spirit is manifest; and they are
they whose seed, birth, and state is blessed, and who are separated (not by the
self-seperation, but) by the power of God from the World, and from the ravening
Wolves, and wild devouring beasts, who not only destroyed the pure seed and
life in themselves, but also seek to do it in others, by laboring to draw
others minds from the light of Christ, into the liberty of the flesh, where
the devourer makes his prey, who has his servants for that end, who will
neither enter, nor suffer others who would, but lay wait for blood, yea for
their own blood, and lurk privily for their own lives; and they say, Cast in
thy Lot among us, let us all have one Purse; but woe shall come upon every
worker of iniquity; yea, although woe has been known, yet woe again must come
upon the transgressor, who again is gone astray from the Lord and his spirit:
And this is a sure word to all you who are turned from the light into the
liberty of the flesh, and liscentious walking again.

1. Now therefore you people called Ranters, who will swear and rant out one
oath after another, consider what, and whose work you are doing, for the Lord
will bring every wicked work into judgment, and return you a reward according
to your work, into your own bosom; for God is not pleased with wickedness,
neither is he the Author of sin; so you who will swear, and do, and act other
wickedness, and plead a motion of God to do so, you are abusers of God, and
false accusers of him who is holy and unchangeable, and cannot behold iniquity;
and therefore as he once called out from it* and then condemned it, he does not
now call into it, and justify it, which he once called out from.

2. And you who act, and do wickedly, and plead a cross in so doing, who when
you have done wickedly, say, therein you have taken up the cross.

To you I say, Consider what cross it is which you take up; for as the cross of
Christ the light, crucifies the world, and seed of the Serpent, so there is a
cross which crucifies Christ the true seed, and birth of God; when you were
coming out from wickedness and sin, then the light of Christ was a cross to
the sin and evil that you were to come out from, and to that part which was
loath to have you leave the Devil, which being taken up, redeemed you out of
the evil, so crucified that part which was loath to have you leave the evil, so
brought redemption to you; and this Light or Cross is not changeable, (as now
to lead into, what it before lead from) neither are they changeable who walk in
it, but you being turned out from the light, are gone into the imaginary part,
where you are lead by the subtilty of the Serpent, whose Wiles, Baits, and
Snares are laid there in the imaginary part, where he moves, who moves to lead
you into such Wickedness as you were once redeemed from, or durst not have
done when the light was your Leader; and as the light when it moved, it was a
cross to that part which would not have you leave sin, so now the Serpent by
his subtilty being got in again, and moving to his Works again, his motion is a
cross to the light and life of Christ which before was raised, which being
taken up, crucifies the true seed and birth of God; and so you have taken up a
cross of the Devils making, and not the true cross, the cross of Christ, which
breaks the Serpents head.

3. And you who say there is nothing sin, if a man himself do not account it
sin, and so make it sin unto himself, how is your latter end become worse then
your beginning? There was a time these and the like Words you durst not have
uttered forth; yet though the fear of the Lord be departed from by you, yet the
light of Christ is the same to day, yesterday, and for ever, and condemns that
to be pride and sin, which men who are out of the light do not count sin, but
call it decency, comeliness, and handsomness; and men and people who are
covetous, who being acted by that part which leads them into the covetousness,
will sell dear, and make hard bargains to others, though they would not have
others to do so to them; and to heap up riches thus, or by thus doing, is not
by such counted sin or covetousness, but good husbandry, and carefulness, when
the light of Christ condemns it to be sin, though they do not.

4. And you who say you can vvear gold and silver lace, and ribbans, and
points, and keep up the fashions of the World, though you once could not, (I
believe you can) but it is because you are departed from the light, so have
caused the glory of the Lord to depart from you, whose glory is not in gold and
silver, and earthly things; and you being given up to your own hearts lusts and
desire, have received the golden Cup at the Harlots hand that sits upon many
Waters, so are decking your selves with her glory who is arrayed in Purple and
Scarlet color, and decked with Gold, and precious Stones, and Pearls, the
treasures of the Earth

5. You who say it was a cross for you to pull and rip of your Laces, Ribbans,
Points, etc. but now it is a cross to you to put it on; and so tells them that
are in the coming out of those things, as their eyes, hearts, and minds had
been set in, that though they now be ripping, yet there will be a time they
shall be made to put such things on again, in the cross; telling them that you
witness this; so that now it is no offense to you to wear such things, nor to
see others do so; (and I believe you in this also) But it was an offense to you
when the light, (whose glory is not in earthly things) was up in you; and if
you can now put them on again, and you see it a cross to put them on, it is not
a cross to the Devil to be found putting on the Worlds fashions again, but to
the light which called you out of them; and woe is your portion who are found
Enemies to the cross of Christ.

6. And all you who are pleading a liberty and freedom to observe and do, and
walk after the manner of the World, in their Words and Fashions, who say you
have unity and fellowship with all sorts of people, you are Enemies to the
cross of Christ, which is a cross to the World, and to its fruits and lovers,
which you being in its fruits and unity, your unity is with death, and your
agreement with hell, and your liberty and freedom is bondage to the seed of
God; and between the Seed of God, and the seed of the Serpent, there is enmity;
and you who have unity where the seed of the Serpent is bowed unto, are in the
enmity against God, and them in whom his seed is raised, and have not unity
with them who are in the light, and walks in the light, as children of the
light, whose fruits are wrought in God.

7. And you who say, If every man have his Teacher within him, then to what
purpose is it, and wherefore do you, or should any else gather themselves in
company, and meet outwardly? And wherefore do you teach and preach to others.

Ans. This we do because our minds are turned unto the light of Christ (the
measure of truth in our selves) which leads us to meet together in the Name
and fear of the Lord, which they whose minds are turned from the light of
Christ in themselves, are not met in, though they talk often of the Name and
fear of God in their meetings, so wants Gods presence in their Meetings, and
are not of God's Worship, and such had need to be informed to their Teacher,
though for their age and time they might have been Teachers of others: And we
who meet in the Name and fear of the Lord, we durst not leave nor cease from
the assembling our selves together, as the manner of some is, and was; and the
fear of the Lord teaches us to be obedient unto God, and not to quench his
spirit when it moves to speak, whether in our Meetings, or among the Idolatrous
Worshippers, or in Markets, or Highways; and though some have their minds
turned to the light of Christ, where they find their Teacher within them, and
needs not any man to teach them, yet being met in the light and fear of God,
where each may feel his power and presence; that son or daughter amongst them
which is moved of God to speak, knowing his voice and motion, ought not to
quench his spirit, but give up to it, and when they have so done, it is the
spirit that speaks in them, (and so Gods teachings) for God is a spirit, and is
witnessed in the children of light, does answer where it is raised unto his
voice; and thus by giving up to the motion of Gods spirit, is the pure minds
which is after God stirred up one in another; and so our meetings together in
the Name of the Lord, and our speaking as we are moved of God, is profitable
and effectual; for being met together in the silence, waiting on the Lord in
the light, his voice is heard in each particular; and as he moves (in any) to
speak, then such are not to be silent, Eccl. 3.7 1 Cor. 13.23.
whether it be to exhort, pray, or prophecy; and the spirits of the Prophets
are subject to the Prophets, and they may all speak one by one, for God is not
the author of confusion, but of peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints;
and he gave some Apostles, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers,
for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the
edifying of the body of Christ, etc. Ephesians. 4.11 12, 13.
And this Light of Christ in man which every one should own for their Teacher,
destroys not teaching, or preaching forth words, except it be that preaching
which is not by the spirit of God, but by the words of man's Wisdom, after the
traditions of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ, and
this preaching it destroys, and leads out from, and so to be separated from all
them whose preaching is there, who are not guided by that of God in them, gone
from God's Covenant of light, into the darkness, wherein their knowledge is but
even as the brute beasts, and therein they corrupt themselves.

8. And you who say the word Thee and Thou (which is true language to any
particular person) is but a word of indifferency, and may better be omitted
then given to some, because it offends and angers them; But this saying when
the light was your Leader, you would have condemned it, but now you being
apostatized from the light, are become one with the children of the apostatized
Jews, so cannot speak in the Jews language, (the one people) who speak the
language of Canaan, but according to the language of each people, which is in
the fall, where you are returned to the building of Babel, putting things out
of their place; so your building prospers not, your Tower totters, the day of
the Lord is come, and is breaking forth more and more, and has discovered your
language and building, and your selves to be in the fall, where you are denying
the cross of Christ, and dares not take it up lest you should anger the enemies
of the cross; and so you being friends to the world, are enemies to God and his
truth, pleading an indifferency in speaking truly, as if there were no
difference between speaking words in their place, and putting them out of their
place; but the friendship of the world is enmity against God.

And if any say, That though Thee and Thou be the only proper wards for one
particular person, yet that language being it is not the custom or manner of
our Country to take it, we plead for the word You, accepting it instead of the
word thou, which being accepted for, or instead of the word Thee and Thou, we
hold it no offense for any to give it, but rather an offense to do otherwise.

To whom I answer; First, That where it is counted an offense, it is where the
pride of heart stands, (that would not take it) so the pride being up in the
heart, man has exalted himself above the Lord, whom he thou's and thee's
daily; and he that does not stand in the cross to proud flesh, is one with it.

Secondly; If it be no offense to thee to take or give the word you to one
particular person, yet it is an offense against God, and a lie, where any one
is calling another what he is not. And if any yet further object and say, But
it is not a lie, nor any offense against God at all to you a particular person,
whiles he that you's the particulars, intends or means but one by his you-ing,
and he or she you-ed accepts the word you as to one, and in the place of thee
and thou. To whom I answer, That thee and thou is the proper word to any
particular King or other; and he or she who gives a particular the word you,
instead of the word thee and thou, which is a word of the singular number, so
signifies but one, does not by his or her intending or meaning but one, make
that word you to be of the singular number, or to signify but one, which the
word thou does, which if thou by thy intending or meaning, and the other
accepting or taking it; cannot make the word you of the singular number, or to
signify but one, then have thou lied in putting the word out of it is place,
and so sinned against God, and all thy twisting and twining (Serpent-like)
cannot help thee.

And this in love to the truth of God, and his dear and holy seed, which has
not fellowship with the works of darkness, was I moved to give out this
Testimony against unjust works, ways, and Pleads, who am a friend to the
righteous souls of men, and a witness against all unrighteousness, called,

Richard Hickock.

THE END.
London, Printed for Thomas S^mmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Alde^sgate,
1659.


