THE HISTORY OF Isuf Bassa CAPTAIN GENERAL OF THE Ottoman Army At the Invasion
of CANDIA.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Kettlewel, at the Hand and Scepter over against St.
Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. 1684.

TO THE READER.
THe Novels and Romances of these times by mixing real things with Fiction,
have so corrupted History, that it is hard to distinguish Truth from Fable. Nor
is it only the Greek and Roman Story which have been so served, but the
Turkish too. For as we have had a Grand Cyrus and a Cleopatra, so there is an
Illustrious Bassa; the Authors of all which have prostituted Truth, to give
color and probability to their Inventions. But in this Relation, Reader, I
assure you there is not any thing of that kind. All here is matter of fact,
taken either out of approved Histories, or authentic Letters and Memorials.

Besides the Life of Isuf Bassa, which is full of surprising Events, you have
here the beginning of the War of Candia, of which he was a great occasion. Nor
have you only the Successes of that War, but the Causes of it, and the Motives
upon which it was undertaken. A War as memorable certainly as has been in any
Age, whether you consider the duration of it, which was Four and twenty years;
or the numbers of Men which perished in it, of which there is an account of
above Nine hundred thousand only of the Turkish side, who were buried in the
Fields and in the Seas of Candia; or the disparity of the Forces betwixt which
that War was made; a great part of the power of Europe, Africa, and Asia, being
engaged against the single State of Venice.

ERRATA.
PAge 19. line 5. for Ports read Posts. p. 20. l. 18. read and overcame. p. 47.
l. 17. for Discovering read Disserving. p. 58. l. 20. for Officers read others.
p. 60. l. 7. for Court read Covent, l. 10. read Alvisi. p. 78. l. 16. for Naris
read Nani. p. 89. l. 16. read was. p. 118. l. 6. read Cernide. p. 151. l. 4.
for so read to. p. 156. l. last dele out He. p. 158 l. 16. read Selectar.

THE HISTORY OF ISUF BASSA.
IN the Province of Dalmatia, upon the Confines of the State of Venice, lived a
young man called Isuf Vascouich, meanly born, and very poor; but having a great
heart, and impatient of the misery of his Condition, he resolved to put himself
into the World, and try what Fortune would do for him.

He set out of his Father's House in so ill equipage, that before he had gone
far, his feet were all cut with the stones: which moved an old woman, who was
touched with pity to see a handsome Youth in that condition, to give him a pair
of Shoes; a kindness which in due time he amply requited. Isuf (for by that
name he was afterward known) came first to Nadin in Croatia, where having some
knowledge of the Turkish Tongue, he put himself in the service of Sinan Bey,
one of the Governors of that Country, as a helper in the Stables: But being
taken notice of for a youth of more than an ordinary Wit, he was persuaded by a
Capigi, who was going to the Court, to get his Conge of Sinan Bey, and to
accompany him to Constantinople, the place for men to seek for Fortunes. Coming
to the Seraglio, the best Employment he could get, was, to cleave Wood for the
Grand Seignior's Kitchen; from which in a little time he was advanced to carry
Water into the Garden, and admitted there as an under-Gardner; a Post of all
inferior ones the most advantageous, since the Emperor passes much time
amongst those people, and often calls his Councils of State and War into his
Gardens; by which means those Gardners come acquainted with all the Grandees of
the Court, and are known to the Sultan himself; who having no Hereditary
Nobility, advances many times the meanest of his Slaves to the most eminent
Dignities of the Empire.

It happened that Isuf came into this Employment much about the time that Sultan
Amurat went for Babylon; who before he began his Journey, sent for his three
Brothers, Orcan, Bajazet, and Ibrahim, one after another; and discoursing to
them of the Expedition he was undertaking, did what he could to sound their
inclinations: and finding that Orcan and Bajazet desired Arms and Horses, that
they might wait upon his Majesty to the War, he thought it not safe to leave
such young men behind him; and so commanded that they should both be strangled.
But Ibrahim, who innocently, or rather, as it is thought, by the instruction of
the Sultaness his Mother, asked nothing of him but a few Aspers to buy Cages to
put his Birds in, was left alive; but out of all capacity to make any
disturbance in the absence of his Brother, being put under a strict Guard in
one of the Towers of the Seraglio, where he had no creature to serve him but a
woman-Negro, a Mute. In this Tower there was a window which looked into the
Garden where Isuf used to water the Flowers; from whence Ibrahim would often
peep through a Grate upon him, and listen to him as he sung, seeming delighted
with the Music of his Voice. Isuf perceiving he was taken notice of by
Ibrahim, and having compassion for this miserable Prince, would at certain
times when no body observed him approach the Tower, and tell Ibrahim all the
news of the Court, regaling him with such Flowers and Fruits as were in the
Garden. Ibrahim finding that Isuf was disposed to serve him, and thinking him
discreet, desired him, if he wished him well, as he pretended, that he would
talk no more at the Grate, since if it were discovered, it might be the loss of
both their lives. But (said he) when you have any thing to impart to me, sing
it in a tune as you pass under my window; which I shall understand as well as
if you spoke. By which means Ibrahim came to know all that passed in the
Seraglio, and whatever succeeded in the Army.

Amurat was now upon his march to besiege Babylon, when advice was brought him
that the King of Persia had taken the Field with one hundred and twenty
thousand Horse, and was encamped some leagues from Babylon, in a vast and
fertile plain, abounding with Forage and Provision; where he stayed to
countenance the Besieged, and to be ready upon occasion to give them succor.

Old Babylon was built by Queen Semiramis, upon both sides the Euphrates, which
cuts it in two; and was the Metropolis of the Assyrian Empire, and one of the
seven Miracles of the World: But out of its ruins is arisen another Babylon,
called Bagdet by the Turks, which stands not upon Euphrates, but fifty miles
off, upon the River Tigris, which runs into Euphrates. This City is very vast,
divided by the Tigris, and encompassed with an ancient Wall with some
Half-Moons about it. But its chief strength consisted in three great Ditches,
and in the number and resolution of the Defendants; of which were forty
thousand Garison-Souldiers, and as many Inhabitants bearing Arms, besides
Gunners and Enginiers, who came from several parts of Christendom to serve the
Persian.

Upon the news of Amurat's marching, the King of Persia commanded the Suburbs
of the City to be levelled with the ground, and put the place into the best
condition it was capable of to receive so formidable an Enemy. And that he
might omit nothing to stop this Inundation which threatened to overwhelm Asia,
he sent an Ambassador to Amurat with rich Presents, to sue for Peace. But the
Tyrant commanded, if the Ambassador did not offer the restitution of Babylon,
that they should cut off his Nose and Ears. This the Grand Visir dissuaded, as
an indignity not to be done to the Minister of so great a Prince, and one of
their own Religion. The Present was most magnificent which the Ambassador
brought: Eight Mules laden, forty Dromedaries covered with cloth of Silk and
Gold, eight Persian Horses with rich Housses, eighteen Carpets of Silk and
Seven of Gold, two hundred and forty Vests of Brocado and Velvet, two hundred
pieces of the finest Porcellain, forty Sable Skins, nine Persian Bows with
Arrows of most exquisite workmanship, great quantities of Musk and
Ambergris, and twenty five Bayls of Linen painted. Besides, the Ambassador
presented the Emperor with diverse delicious Drinks, as the most acceptable
things to a man so debauched and vicious; and last of all, the Alchoran written
upon Silken paper, which the Grand Seignior in reverence kissed.

Hardly had the Ambassador exposed his Presents, and delivered his
Credentials, but he was surrounded with Guards, and carried Prisoner to his own
House; contrary to the Faith given him, and to the Law of Nations. But Amurat
gave him to understand, that he would carry him back into Persia himself; who
to increase his Army, had made six thousand new Janissaries, though he had
decreed a little before, that their number should not upon any pretense be
augmented. And to sweeten their Order, which he had much exasperated, and to
oblige them for the future, he dressed himself in the habit of a Janizary, and
marched so all his Journey in the head of his Army. Nor was his care less of
his other Militia's: for he appeared personally at the Musters of his Timars,
to see that no man upon pain of death should decline the service. And because
the General of the Ordnance seemed to make some difficulty of getting along
four vast pieces of Cannon, by reason of the badness of the way, he immediately
caused his head to be struck off. So that after that, no creature durst
interpose the least obstacle or delay to the executing of Amurat's Commands.
Seeing Conservatories of Snow, which were to refresh his Wine, he would not let
them be filled; saying, he would have nothing of Luxury or Delicacy in his
Camp, and that he went not to carry Ice but Fire into Persia. He commanded all
the Takers of Tobacco who were in his Army to be fley'd alive, and to be left
exposed upon the Highway for an example. His chief Physician, a man learned in
the Persian and Arabian Tongues, making him a relation of the admirable effects
of Opium, he forced him to take so great a quantity of it himself, that he dyed
within a few hours.

All the way that Amurat went, his Army augmented, upon the arrival of new
Sangiachs, who all left their Governments to attend the Sultan; who though he
met with many disasters in his march, endured all with an invincible patience.
As he crossed the Euphrates, the Bridge over which he passed his Army broke,
not able to bear the weight which was upon it: Baggage, Horses, Camels, and
many Soldiers, being swallowed by the water, swollen with the rains which were
lately fallen. Besides this, a mortality reigned in his Army, which carried
away his Soldiers every day. But no misfortune could deject Amurat, or retard
his progress. The difficulties he encountered did but whet his Courage: and, as
if he were sure of conquering, he made a Vow that he would not change his
clothes till he was in Babylon.

But though his heart was so much set upon this enterprise, he often thought of
the state of his Affairs at home; and fearing Changes in his absence, repented
him of the humanity which he had showed his Brother Ibrahim; and therefore
dispatched away one of his Bassa's to Constantinople, with orders to see him
strangled. The Bassa could not come so secretly into the Seraglio, but it was
discovered by some of the Sultana's; who suspecting the cause of his Journey,
and having pity for Ibrahim, the only Prince left of the Ottoman Line, would
not let the Bassa touch him; but drove him out of the Seraglio in such haste,
that he hardly escaped to carry the news to his Master. Amurat, though his
heart boiled with rage for this Affront, did not think it a time to revenge it;
but suppressing his resentment till his return, continued his march with most
indefatigable pains; and the Ninth of November, in the year 1638, sat down
before Babylon.

Just before his arrival there, he was met by the Bassa of Cairo with rich
Presents, and four and twenty thousand Soldiers. And from Palestine and all
the Neighboring Countries came Recruits, which added considerably to the number
of his formidable Army. About the same time came Tarpos King of Arabia, with
his Mother, Wife, and Son, to lay themselves at Amurat's feet. He was
courteously received by the chief Bassa's, and feasted after their manner.
Thence he went to visit the Grand Seignior; but whether he were doubtful of his
safety, or repented him of his coming, it was observed that at his entering he
grew very pale. But finding Amurat's Favorite there to receive him, he thought
it a good Omen; and was presently out of apprehension, when he saw himself
presented with a Vest of Cloth of Gold lined with Sables, and a good purse of
Chequins, with thanks for the assistance he had brought the Emperor.

All the Troops of that vast Army being joined, there was a Council called, not
only of the chief Officers, but of the old Janissaries and Spahi's who had been
in the Wars of Hungary, to have their opinions concerning the conducting of the
Siege. After great debates, it was concluded that an assault should be made at
one time in three places: the first at the white Gate, under the Command of the
Grand Visir, with a Battery of twelve Cannon; the Second at the black Gate, by
Mustapha Bassa, with a Battery of ten Cannon; and the third at the Persian
Gate, by Chussain Bassa, Beglerbeg of the lesser Asia, with eight pieces.
Amurat visited all the Ports himself, promising his Soldiers vast Donatives;
and wrote to the Caimecan of Constantinople, that he should order Prayers to be
made throughout the Empire for his Success, he being resolved to conquer or to
die. He put on plain clothes, that he might not be distinguished from other
men; and that he might be present where danger presented it self, without being
observed. His horse stood always ready sadled at the door of his Pavillon, that
he might not lose a moments time where there was occasion for his presence.

Upon the opening of the Trenches, and the raising of the Batteries, he gave
fire with his own hand to the first Gun; which was followed with a furious
tempest of Canonades. In the beginning, the besieged sallied out in gross
Squadrons; but being repulsed with great slaughter, they grew more cautious.
There was a bloody Contest one day to get a Half Moon; and it was hard to say
whether the Aggressors were less expert in attaquing, or the Besieged in
defending. But the Turks vast numbers supplied their defect of Skill, overcame
all difficulties: so that they brought their Works to the edge of the ditch.
And though their Mines had no effect, the besieged began to abate of their
Courage, being in despair of succor. The Siege was carried on more with Swords
than Spades, since there being no Outworks, all was reduced to Assaults.

Amurat was so transported with a desire of carrying the place, that he would
have led his men to the Breach himself, but that he was stayed by his Captains,
who represented to him the extremity of his danger; offering to precipitate
themselves, and sacrifice their own lives, rather than he should adventure his.

Having passed the first and second Ditch, they met with desperate resistance
at the third; but with multitudes of men they filled that too, and lodged upon
it; so that now there was no defense remaining but the Wall, which, after they
had made a breach in it of fifty yards long, they furiously assaulted. And here
appeared a theater of death, not only in tempests of Shot, but showrs of
artificial Fire, Sulphur, and Bitumen. Both sides fought for Life; the besieged
expecting no quarter if the place were taken, and the besiegers no mercy from
Amurat if they did not take it. On Christmas Day the Turks made their last
attempt, led on by Mustapha Bassa, whose men mounted the breach with greater
bravery than it had been yet assaulted. The Persians with equal resolution met
them: and here began a Fight which was to decide the quarrel. As some men fell,
new ones still succeeded; the earth being dyed with blood, and covered with
carcasses. At last the besieged were forced to give ground, being quite tired;
and the Turks still reinforced with fresh Recruits, climbed up the breach over
heaps of bodies; and Mustapha being the first who entered, with his own hand
planted the Royal Standard in the City.

In this Siege, of diseases and wounds, there perished fifty thousand Turks,
and above ten thousand were wounded. Of the Persians, all the bravest men fell;
only some four and twenty thousand, who survived the slaughter, throwing down
their Arms, were by Amurat's command received to mercy. But Mustapha offended
at the clemency of Amurat, persuaded him to put them all to the sword:
remembering him how at Revan in Persia, where he gave the Conquered Quarter, to
requite his Mercy, as soon as his Army was gone, they rose upon his Garrison and
cut them in pieces, and restored the City to the Persian. This made Amurat,
notwithstanding his Faith passed, give order to his Janissaries to cut all their
throats; and, that the execution might be more terrible, to do it in the night,
by the light of lanterns and torches. Of all this number there were only seven
and twenty escaped, who were reserved by Amurat to be carried to Constantinople
to adorn his Triumph.

As soon as this bloody execution was ended, the sacking of the City was given
to the Soldiers; which continued three days, with all imaginable cruelty;
their avarice not distinguishing Mahometans from Christians, nor Friends from
Enemies.

The loss of Babylon was a greater mischief to the Christians than to the
Persian: for as long as this place stood, the Ottoman Forces were continually
employed upon this frontier, and wasted with long marches through desert and
uninhabited Countries; so that they did but now and then molest the Christians.
But from the loss of Babylon, and the Peace with Persia, the Calamities of
Christendom may take their date. From hence it is that Poland and Hungary have
been of late invaded, and Candia lost. And since this time the Persian has
attempted nothing considerable; but hanged up his Scymeter against the wall,
and let his Arms grow rusty for want of use.

This hazardous enterprise of Babylon being brought to so happy a conclusion,
Amurat would have pursued this Victory into Persia, but that he was stayed by
some indisposition of health; and at the same time he received a Letter from
the Favorite Sultana, being then upon the frontier attending his return; who
invited him from the assaults of War, to those of Love. A woman of a most
charming behavior, and so bountiful, that she gave the Messenger who brought
her the news of the taking of Babylon ten thousand Dollars.

Amurat, who was unbounded in his Rewards as well as Punishments, to requite
the Grand Visir, who was slain in the Siege, made his Son, though very young,
Governor of Mesopotamia, one of the most esteemed Commands in the Empire: and
Mustapha Bassa, who had been so great an instrument in the taking of Babylon,
he advanced to the supreme Visirship. He sent his chief Ecuyer with a rich
Present of Sables to the Queen his Mother, to acquaint her with his success;
having ever born her a most filial reverence. To reward this grateful News, the
Queen obtained of her Son the Bassaship of Bulgaria, and conferred it upon the
Messeger.

Amurat, at his departure from Babylon, left the Grand Visir behind him, with
secret instructions not to reject any reasonable offers of Peace: and then he
dismissed the Persian Ambassador, whom he had kept Prisoner with him all this
while; and delivered him a Letter in answer to that which the Ambassador had
brought him from his Master; the tenor of which was: I who am Lord of Lords,
and command Arabia, Persia, and Greece, exalted by the aid of God to the Empire
of the Universe, the invincible Possessor of the White and Black Sea, Lord of
the Divine House of Mecca and Medina, as also of Jerusalem, Aleppo, Damascus,
and of all those Holy and Venerable places, of Cairo and Babylon, of Ethiopia
and the lesser Asia, of the Georgians and the Tartars, and in a word, supreme
Lord of the seven Climates, Sultan Amurat Can, To the brave Soffi, to whom God
give peace if he deserve it. As soon as this my Imperial Letter, which is fit
to be obeyed, shall come to thee, be it known that the cause why I detained
till now thy Ambassador whom thou have sent to my happy Port to sue for Peace,
was, that I might subdue Bagdat; which I have done, thanks to the edge of my
Invincible Sword. If thou desire to be quiet, deliver up those Provinces
which were the Dominion of my unconquered Ancestors, putting them into the
hands of my Beglerbegs, who will advance thither with my victorious and
unresistible Army. Otherwise expect me in the Spring with my Troops, more
numerous than the sands of the Sea, in the bowels of thy Kingdom. That shall
succeed which is determined from eternity.

The destruction of Camels and beasts of burden had been so great in this
march, that there were scarce enough remaining to carry home the Baggage to
Constantinople, whither Amurat was now hastening, to solace himself after his
fatigues, and to refresh his Soldiers. The Sultana's and all the Ministers
vied with one another who should get the richest Regalo's to present their
Monarch; which, with those which were sent him by the Queen Mother, were in all
computed at above a Million of Gold.

Upon the way, his Majesty was seized with so violent a Headache, that he could
not stand: whereupon his Physicians were sent for. The next day he was taken
with a trembling, which at first was looked upon as the effect of a Fever; but
continuing, they apprehended it might turn to a Palsy or Apoplexy. With this
he had so great a swelling in his legs, that he could hardly sit on horseback;
the state of his health being utterly destroyed by his excesses of Wine and
Women.

The Sultana Favorite came before him into Constantinople with six Galleys;
and the Queen Mother, attended by all the Grandees, went out to meet him; and
then he made his entry with a number of Coaches covered with cloth of Gold. At
the end of the Cavalcade Amurat himself appeared, dressed in a Persian habit,
with two and twenty Slaves of the chief men of that Nation, whom he had taken
Prisoners at Babylon. His treasure carried by ten Galleys was landed at the
Seraglio: and that which he brought home, was calculated to be more than what
he took out when he began his Journey. Christian Princes grow rich by Peace,
but the Turk by War; who repairs his expenses out of the Avanies which he lays
upon his rich Subjects, and out of the Spoils of the Nations which he conquers.

Being now returned home, the first thing he did was to show that rage which he
had so long hidden, for the indignity which was done him in his absence in
saving Ibrahim when he had commanded his death. And therefore he gave orders
that those Sultana's and all their women who had a hand in that action should
be strangled, leaving the unfortunate Ibrahim alive but till he had a Son born
to inherit the Empire.

And now Amurat elated with his Victories, seemed to be above Fortune, and to
despise all things, even his own Law and his own Religion, and to care neither
for man nor God. He put his Mufti to death; which the most tyrannical of his
Predecessors had never attempted; laughed at all Devotion, and would not fast
at the Ramasan: but abandoning himself to all kind of dissolution, one night he
made so great a debauche, that they were fain to carry him to bed; though but a
little before, he had made a Vow, being very sick, that he would never drink
Wine more; and caused all the Cups and Glasses with which he had made his
debauches to be broke, though some of them were of Crystal of the Rock, and
others of Stones of great price. But this last debauch put an end to all his
extravagancies: for being seized upon by an unintermitting Fever, his
Physicians were in that fear, that they durst not direct any Remedies, lest if
they failed to give him Life, they should procure their own Deaths. But being
pressed by the Queen Mother and the great Ministers to do something, they
agreed to let him blood: which had an ill effect; for he died presently after,
in the flower of his age, having lived thirty three years, and reigned fifteen.

Amurat being dead, the chief Visir with all the Grandees of the Court repaired
to the Prison where Ibrahim was kept, the only surviving Prince of the Royal
Family. When they came to the door to salute him Emperor, he suspected it an
artifice of his Brother to take away his life; and lifting his hands to Heaven,
prayed to God to preserve the King his Brother, for the prosperity and glory of
the Ottoman Empire. But they all confirming to him with protestations the death
of Amurat, and the change of Ibrahims Fortune, which translated him from the
Grave to the Throne; after some resistance he let them into his Chamber, where
they found him almost stifled with stench and putrefaction; the Negro-woman who
attended him being dead in the Room, and no order taken to carry the Corpse
away. But still being jealous that the news which they brought him was not
true, he declared to the company, that if it were so as they told him, that God
had taken to himself the Emperor his Brother, he would not stir out of his
Chamber till he had seen his body. They seeing him resolute, to comply with his
pleasure fetched the Corpse of Amurat to the prison, and laid it down before
him. At the sight of which, Ibrahim had that horror, that he seemed to be
afraid of the very carcass; and not trusting to his eyes, would feel with his
hands if he were alive, who had kept him so many years in a kind of perpetual
death. Nor yet satisfied with feeling the body cold and stiff, he kneeled down
and put his mouth to the mouth of the Corpse, to try if he could perceive it
breathe. At last, finding that great Monarch dead and unmovable, who had held
in motion so long a great part of the world, he rose up, and said these words,
becoming the Majesty of a free Prince: There lies the greatest King and the
greatest Tyrant that ever was. And then walking out, they clothed him in
purple, and proclaimed him Emperor with loud acclamations of the Soldiers and
the People.

And so he began his Reign auspiciously, and had made his Subjects happy, if he
had continued as he began: for he confirmed the Peace with the State of Venice,
entered into an alliance with France, and had a fair Correspondency with all the
great Potentates of Europe. And to give the world an opinion of the clemency of
his nature, he commanded the Grand Visir that he should put no man to death but
for just and urgent reason.

The Grand Visir thinking this mildness of Ibrahim to proceed from his
simplicity, began to govern as despotically as if he had been Emperor himself.
He removed from the Court all the great Ministers and Servants of Amurat, upon
pretense of giving them Governments and Charges; and filled the Family of
Ibrahim with his own Dependants. Only the Selectar Bassa he had not power to
displace, nor to employ any where else, in regard of the nature of his Office,
which kept him always about the person of the Emperor: Yet he prevailed so far
with his arts and cunning, that he at last got his head, and so remained
Arbiter of all affairs.

During these changes in the Court, as Ibrahim one day was enjoying the
pleasure of his Gardens, which till then he had not of a long time seen but out
of a grate, one of the old Gardners of the Seraglio came and cast himself at
his feet: which he perceiving, stayed to speak with him, asking him what news
there was in the Court, and what the World said of his person. The Gardner
taking hold of the occasion, had the courage to tell him, that all good men
were troubled to see his Majesty more a slave to his own slave, than he had
lately been to the King his Brother. Ibrahim wondering at what he said, asked
him who it was that he was a slave to? To the Grand Visir, replied the Gardner.
See, Sir, said he, if in all thy Court there be the face of any Minister or
Servant of the Emperor Amurat. No, said he, there is not one: All of them are
banished by Mustapha; only the Selectar, who by reason of his Office could not
be taken from thy person, has lost his head, because he would not be an
Instrument of his Tyranny. Look about thee, and thou will see thy self
surrounded with his Dependants and Creatures; nor can thou move one of thy
eyes but he knows it. Thou art here shut up and lost amongst Women, whilst thy
Visir commands all the Men of thy Empire. Awake, and think of thy Brother
Amurat, who though for reasons of State he kept thee a Prisoner, was a great
and wise Prince, and would not let his Slaves be his Masters. He loved his
Subjects, and protected them from the oppression of his Ministers and
Soldiers. He would know every thing; and as he was the chief man in his Empire
for his quality and merit, he would be the chief in administering justice, and
concerning himself for the safety of his people. Make thy self a worthy
Successor of so great a Prince, who having with his arms subdued half the
World, has founded this mighty Empire upon the basis of Honor and Justice.

The words of this old man made an incredible impression in the breast of
Ibrahim, who being sensible that that was too true which the Gardner told him,
resolved to free himself from the subjection he was in, and do some surprising
thing, that the world might see he was master of himself, and knew how to
command without the help of others. The Office of Selectar was now vacant by
the arts of the Grand Visir, who had taken off the head of him who last
possessed it; nor was it known upon whom Fortune would confer this important
Charge, to which all the youth of the Seraglio aspired, as to the highest
reward of Virtue. Nor did the Grand Visir care for having any Selectar at all,
lest it should diminish his authority, and make one of those who were now at
his command, his competitor in the Government. However, Ibrahim resolved to
proceed to the election of this Officer, and commanded there should a great
Feast be made, such as is usual at the creation of the Selectar.

Upon the news of this, the Grand Visir was infinitely troubled; not so much
for the danger of having a Rival in the Emperors favor, as for finding in
Ibrahim a Genius to command, and an assurance in doing business of that
concernment without participating it to him. So that he durst not directly
oppose the Grand Seigniors resolution, which would have been a capital offense,
but artificially endeavored to discredit the election, by telling him that his
Highness needed not take care to make a Feast for the exaltation of one of his
slaves, since Feasts were most proper for the Triumphs of Princes. Ibrahim
heard him with much coldness, telling him that he would advance and depress
whom he pleased; and for all his remonstrances, would celebrate a Feast for the
Creation of the Selectar, according to the custom of his Progenitors. Mustapha
was silent, as if he had been struck with thunder; and amazed at so sudden a
change in the Sultan, found that he was mistaken in thinking Ibrahim an Idiot;
and that that dullness and stolidity which had appeared in him, was rather an
effect of his long imprisonment, and the continual apprehension he had been in
of death, than want of natural parts and understanding.

As soon as the Grand Visir was gone, Ibrahim commanded that they should look
him out a poor Gardner called Isuf Vascouich, and conduct him immediately to
his presence. Isuf understanding he was sent for by the Grand Seignior,
imagined that his last hour was come, and that he was fetched to be put to
death for discovering the late Emperor Amurat, and betraying his secrets to
Ibrahim, who might reasonably think he would do the like by him; since Princes,
though they make use of Traitors, do always hate them. But he was quickly
undeceived: for Ibrahim came out to meet him, and embracing him with open arms,
and kissing him, told the company that this was he whom he would make Selectar
Bassa; and that he thought it justice and gratitude to do it, since Isuf was
the only person in the world who had obliged him, having with the utmost
hazard of his life served him in his calamity, when none alive but he durst own
him. An heroical piece of Gratitude, and fit to be recorded to succeeding Ages!
If Ibrahim had not stained the luster of this action by other odious and
detestable vices, he had not gone out of the world as he did, with the opinion
of a Monster and a madman, but been eternized by Fame amongst the most
virtuous Princes.

Isuf, who but the day before had nothing in the world that he could call his
own, being now created Selectar, found himself in an instant, with what his
Master gave him, and with the Presents which were made him by the Sultana's and
the Grandees of the Court, worth a million of Gold. Some sending him Jewels,
others Money, some Horses, others Slaves, others Furniture for his house. And
that he might be as great as Fortune could make a Subject, Ibrahim declared him
Bassa of the Sea, and gave him to Wife a Lady of the Ottoman house.

But in all this greatness and prosperity, he was quickly weary of the Court:
for finding that Ibrahim's nature was so corrupted by his Fortune, that of a
hopeful Prince he was like to make a cruel Tyrant, being bloody, wilful, and
incapable of counsel; he resolved secretly with himself to retire from the
Court, to a private life, and to pass the remainder of his days in quiet in his
own Country. And because this could not be done by a man in his Post, without
giving some suspicion, he bethought himself of this pretense. It is a custom in
Turkey for men who are arrived to great riches, that they may lessen Envy, to
employ part of them in pious works. And because none can found Moschees but the
Grand Seignior himself, or such Bassa's as have conquered Provinces or Kingdoms
to the Ottoman Empire, he resolved to build and endow some houses in the
Country as Innes for Pilgrims, that Travelers might be entertained there in
their Journeys without expense; a thing of great convenience for strangers, in
that desert and depopulated Empire. Communicating then to Sinan Bey his first
Master his design of building an Inn for Pilgrims in his own Country, and in
the Territory of Urana where he was born, he assigned Sinan money to begin the
work, and sent down by him several Presents to his kindred, and five hundred
Royals to the good old woman who had given him a pair of shoes when she met
him barefoot on the way.

Now there arising some dispute betwixt Sinan Bey and other Agents of Isuf
concerning the covering of this new house, one thinking best to send into
Hungary, others into Apulia for Tyles; he sent to them to hasten the work,
bidding them not to trouble themselves about the covering, since he would be
there time enough himself to give order in it. The preparations for this
building, and these words of Isuf, that he would be there himself, coming to
the knowledge of the Venetian Ministers at Constantinople, who watch with
continual jealousy every thing that is done and said in that Court, made them
suspect that there was some mischief brewing against the Republic. For they
could not imagine that so great a man as the Selectar Bassa, chief favorite of
the Grand Seignior, and one who was thought to bear particular ill will to the
State of Venice, should leave the Court, and come down into Dalmatia, only to
give orders about a building. And therefore concluding that this was but a
pretense to cover some great design, they found a way by Presents to the Grand
Visir, and other means, in which above all Nations there the Venetians are
skilful, to stop the Selectar's Journey.

It may easily be conceived what a disappointment this must be to the Selectar,
who had set his heart upon retiring from the Court, that he might put his life
and fortunes in safety; for the accomplishing of which, he could devise no
other means but this. He could not but be troubled too, to be defeated of the
satisfaction he had promised himself in seeing his native Country, and showing
his Wealth and Greatness there, where not many years before he had been a
miserable Peasant. Indeed this so increased the aversion he had to the
Venetians, that it was not long before they felt most heavy effects of his
resentment. Of so much moment sometimes, in the greatest affairs of State, are
little disgusts given to the Ministers of Princes.

About this time Ibrahim was meditating a War against Malta, in revenge of an
injury which he had received from the Maltese upon this occasion: The Grand
Sultana amongst her Attendants had a Georgian Lady, a most gentile and charming
beauty, with whom Ibrahim took his pleasure, and had a Son by her. This so
disturbed the Sultana who governed his affections, to see her self Rivalled by
her own woman, who daily grew in the favor of the Sultan, that she caused a
slow poison to be given her, which destroyed her health, and preyed upon her
beauty; and had certainly carried her to her grave, but that Antidotes, joined
with youth and a vigorous constitution, overcame it. However, the Georgian
thought her self unsafe in the Court, having an implacable enemy of the
Sultana; so that one day she cast her self at Ibrahims feet, beseeching him to
give her leave to perform a Vow she had made to their great Prophet; which was,
to go in pilgrimage to Mecca, to carry her little Son there to be circumcised.
But Ibrahim was so fond of her, that he would not hear of it, till she told him
that it was not only the satisfaction of her Conscience, but the consideration
of her Health, that obliged her to make this humble suit to him; since her
Physicians had assured her she was in danger of death by her ill habit of body,
and that they knew nothing so likely to restore her as the Bathes of Rhodes,
which were in her way to Mecca. This made Ibrahim at last, though with much
reluctance, consent to her Journey. But he had that concern for her, that he
ordered the best ship he had to carry her; and appointed Gelis Aga, one of the
greatest Aga's of the Court, who had been a Favorite to three Grand Seigniors,
to attend and take care of her. And so in September 1644, this Georgian Lady
with her little Son imbarqued for Rhodes, with forty Women and thirty Pages,
and all other equipage suitable to the condition of a person who had the favor
of so great a Monarch. They had not been many days at Sea, when six Galleys of
Malta, who were cruzing toward the Isle of Rhodes, descried about break of day
a great Gallion bearing Turkish Colors; and making up to her, began a bloody
fight, which continued many hours; wherein Boisbodrant General of the Galleys
was slain, and several other Knights of Malta, with one hundred and sixteen
Officers, and two hundred and fifty six wounded. At last the old Aga being
killed, they boarded the Gallion, taking the Lady with her Son and her retinue,
and three hundred and fourscore other Turks, besides two rich Merchant-ships
which were in company. The Gallion was so torn with the shot received in the
fight, that she foundered in the Sea before they could get to Malta. And the
Lady oppressed with grief for her misfortune, and the captivity of her Son, dyed
in a little time after her arrival there. The Great Master gave the young child
to the Dominican Friars to breed him up in the Christian Religion; which they
did with that success, that when he came to years of understanding, he did not
only make profession of the Christian Faith, but entered into a Religious
life, and took upon him the habit of a Dominican, and the name of Father
Dominique Ottoman. In this Habit I saw him at Paris in the Court of the
Jacobins, in the year 1665, being carried thither by the Venetian Ambassador
Seignior Alvisi Sagredo, now Patriarch of Venice, to whom he gave a picture of
himself, which I now have. The Dominicans had taught him so well, that he had
the knowledge of most Sciences, and spoke five or six Languages. And though he
seemed under the habit of a Friar to have the mien of a Prince, he conformed
himself strictly to the Rules of his Order; nor could I see any distinction
betwixt him and others of the Convent, but that he left the Ambassador at the
stair foot, whilst the other Fathers attended him to his Coach.

Ibrahim hearing of the loss of his Ship and the captivity of his Mistress,
fell into such a rage, that no man durst speak to him; vowing he would be
revenged in the extirpation of the Maltese. And then commanded his Army to be
drawn together, and a Fleet to be made ready to besiege Malta. But his great
Ministers and Counselors, who understood the difficulty of this enterprise,
took a time to dissuade him from it; representing to him that the voyage was
very long, the season of the year spent, and that he had not Seamen ready to
man so great a Fleet as was necessary for such an Expedition; and above all,
they minded him of the strength of the place which he would besiege, which was
not only admirably fortified both by Art and Nature, but defended by the most
expert men of all Christendom, who having no employment but to fight, were bred
Soldiers from their infancy, and with a few Galleys kept the whole Levant in
awe.

Upon which, Ibrahim, who would not be contradicted, as knowing no reason but
his own will, grew into that fury, that he had like to have put them to death
who made this remonstrance to him; so that for some time no man durst open his
mouth to him any more upon this matter. At last, one of the Visirs who had more
courage than the rest, said, None of us know what Malta is, having never been
there; but it would be fit, before your Highness resolve upon so great an
enterprise, that you had exact information from some one who has been upon the
place; and then told him that he knew an Aga lately come from thence, who had
been a slave there four years, and could give a perfect account of all things,
if it were his pleasure to command him. Upon which the Aga being called,
Ibrahim bad him faithfully and freely relate to him the state of that Island.
The Aga with profound obeisance assured him that the strength of Malta was
considerable; that besides the advantage of the situation and double
fortifications, which made it almost impregnable, it was defended by men of
high resolution; that all the Campaign round the Town was nothing but a hard
rock, without earth to work on, so that it was almost impossible to make any
Approches; that the Fleet which should bring an Army there, could not stay
before the place, by reason of want of Ports, and the furious winds which
reigned in those Channels; that Italy and Sicily were so near, that the place
would continually receive succors; and last of all, that Malta was so far from
Constantinople, that his Army could not arrive there time enough; it being
necessary for whoever would besiege that place, to be there in June, since in
three months time they of necessity must retire, the tempests in those Seas
were so violent about the beginning of September.

These reasons, so contrary to the designs of Ibrahim, instead of satisfying
him, did but inflame his anger. But however, that he might know all that the
Aga could tell him, he asked him what People those Maltese were, who made the
Conquest of Malta so difficult. The Aga answered, that they were a body of
Nobility drawn from all parts of Christendom; and naming the Knights Nation by
Nation, told him that the major part of them were Frenchmen; that their Prince
the great Master who commanded them was a Frenchman; and that to make the
enterprise easy, it would be best for his Highness to try if he could prevail
with the King of France to call home the Knights of that Nation; without which
it would be almost impossible to take Malta.

At these words Ibrahim was so incensed, that he stormed as if he had been mad;
and hardly knowing what he said or did, commanded them immediately to bring him
the French Ambassadour's head: which had certainly been done, but that the
Chizlar Aga, a black Eunuch who was there, diverted him. This Aga being a grave
man, and of great reputation for his Judgment, as well as Zeal for the Grand
Seigniors Service, remonstrated to him, how that for above these threescore
years, in which he had had the honor to serve five Emperors, he had seen many
Wars, and great calamities had befallen the Monarchy; but in all the
Consultations of his time, he had never known so much as mention made of
cutting off an Ambassadors head: that such an indignity could not be done to
so potent a Monarch as the King of France, but it would be revenged; and if the
Galleys of Malta could give his Highness such disturbance, what might the King
of France do with the mighty Forces of his Kingdom? That this action was
contrary to all Reason of State and good Government, and would redound much to
the prejudice of his Empire, which his Ancestors had maintained from time to
time as well by prudence as by power.

This discourse was heard with applause by all the Council: but Ibrahim, who
measured the reason of all things by his own caprice, was so offended with him
who made it, that in a rage he commanded the unfortunate Eunuch to be put to
death. The Council, though they were sensible of the danger to which they
exposed themselves, were so touched at the injustice of this sentence, and had
that respect for the Chizlar Aga, that they interceded for him. But all they
could obtain, was to have the Judgment of Death changed into Exile. And so the
poor man was banished to Gallipoli, and in an instant despoiled of all which he
had been getting in the service of threescore years.

The enterprise of Malta being found not advisable, and Ibrahim still breathing
hate and revenge against the Christians, proposed in Council to fall upon
Sicily; which if they were once Masters of, Malta could not long resist, since
from thence it had all its provisions. Some Sicilian Bandito's, who commonly
are the most mortal enemies of their own Country, had suggested this to the
Grand Visir, persuading him that they would put Syracusa into his hand; which
he being once possessed of, might with little difficulty subdue the rest of
that Kingdom. Others advised an expedition into the Kingdom of Naples. But both
these Propositions being rejected, they fell into discourse of Candia; when
Isuf Selectar Bassa, to whom Fortune now presented an occasion to be revenged
of the Venetians, represented to them, that in his opinion that business was
the most feasible of any thing that had yet been thought of: And that it was
just too, since the Maltese, who took the Grand Seigniors Gallion, after this
exploit landed first in Candia, and were courteously received there by the
Inhabitants, who bought their Prizes of them.

But for the present, this was secretly diverted by the Grand Visir, who was a
friend to the Republic of Venice; and condemned by the Mufti as contrary to
their Law, which will not allow a War to be made against Christians when they
are in War amongst themselves, for fear they should unite together against
Believers. Besides, the Mufti said that it would be unjust to invade any Prince
before they had declared War against him. Upon which, there was nothing at that
time concluded. But Ibrahim in his own mind determined now to turn his Arms
upon Candia; which was a Secret he would deposit nowhere but in the bosom of
the Selectar; and therefore kept it from the knowledge even of the Grand Visir,
for fear he should discover his design to the Venetians, with whom he suspected
that he kept intelligence.

In a few days after this, the Ambassadors of France and Venice were sent for
to Court, and given to understand that the Grand Seignior desired to know of
them who these people were who had taken his Gallion; and why they the
Ambassadors had not advised him of it without being asked. To so impertinent a
question their answer was, that they knew nothing of it, and that it was
certain it was come to pass without the consent of their Princes, who desired
to maintain a sincere correspondence with the Grand Seignior. It was replied,
that his Highness was amazed to understand that the King of France his ancient
Confederate should send his Subjects to Malta to make war upon him under the
Banners of others; that he had always held the King of France for his very good
Friend, but that for the future he should look upon him as his mortal Enemy, if
he did not call his Knights of Malta home, and make them restore all that they
had taken upon his Gallion. To this the French Ambassador answered, that the
French who lived at Malta were out of the Kingdom of France; that the King his
Master had no authority over them, that Island being tributary to the King of
Spain, who was then in war with France; and as for the restitution of the Goods
which were taken by men who did not depend upon his King, there was no reason
why they should speak to him of it.

Then they began to reproach the Venetian Ambassador, that the Ministers of
the Republic, contrary to the Peace sworn with the Grand Seignior, had given
free ingress to the Malta Galleys into the Ports of Candia; and that after the
taking of his Gallion, they had there landed men and horses, and sold their
Prizes: And therefore to prevent the like inconvenience for the future, his
Highness demanded of them the Port of Suda, to secure his Fleet which he was
sending to besiege Malta. The Ambassador answered, That Candia had never
entertained the Galleys of Malta: That the Grand Seignior was misinformed, and
that he would acquaint the Senate with his demand; but that he did verily
believe they would never grant it.

In the mighty preparations which were now making for the invasion of Candia,
Ibrahim and the Selectar with most profound dissimulation endeavored to hide
the design; and to take all umbrage from the Venetians of a War with them, they
gave leave for two Drugger-men and a Janizary to pass to Venice with a
Safe Conduct to fetch Seignior Dolfino, who was designed Bailo to
Constantinople, as they were used to do in times of peace. And with Seignior
Soranzo the present Bailo at Constantinople they continued all demonstrations
of courtesy and friendship, to make him believe that Ibrahim intended a
sincere Correspondence with the Republic. But Soranzo, who was a man of an
acute and penetrating understanding, discerned that all this was counterfeit;
and that notwithstanding this appearance of good will, they were preparing to
sheath their swords in the bowels of the Venetians. But not being able to
penetrate the certainty of their design, he solicited the Senate to provide
for Candia. With this concurred the advice of Antonio Navagiero Proveditor of
Canea, who had information from some Spies of his at Constantinople, that the
preparations making were not for Malta. And at the same time Navagiero took
some disguised like Fishermen sounding the depth of the Water about Canea,
whom he kept Prisoners, and acquainted the Senate with it; taking occasion from
thence to give them an account of the condition of the place, and what
Soldiers and Provisions were necessary for the defense of it. Ragozzi
likewise, Prince of Transylvania, who had constant intelligence from
Constantinople, advised Cardinal Mazarine that the Turk had a design upon
Candia: which the Cardinal presently imparted to Seignior Battista Naris the
Venetian Ambassador at Paris. But the knowledge of this came not to Venice
till after the Venetian Bailo was arrested, and that the Turkish Fleet was
under sail for Candia.

The Senate of Venice being now alarmed, and fluctuating in their opinions what
to do, betwixt the fear of neglecting their own defense on the one side, and of
provoking the Ottoman power on the other, resolved on a middle way; which
commonly proves fatal to those who use it. And therefore they would not send
such a force to Candia as might make the Grand Seignior think they designed a
War with him, but only as much as was necessary to reinforce their Garrisons,
and so be only upon the defensive, without giving occasion of coming to a
rupture. So they fitted up two Galleazze, and elected thirty Gentlemen to
command so many Galleys; giving order to Cornaro General of Candia to make
ready the twenty Galleys of that Kingdom, and to keep them there to defend the
Port of Suda. They likewise laded two ships with Ammunition and Victuals,
which, as they were going for Candia, at the Cape of Mattopan were met with
five Vessels of Biserta, which engaged them in a bloody fight that continued
six hours. But at last the Venetians, notwithstanding the disadvantage of their
number, opened their way with their Cannon, and came well to Candia. But
Capello, who was sent with other ships which carried nine Companies of Foot,
with diverse Gunners and Enginiers, besides provisions of Victual and Powder,
arrived at Suda without any ill encounter. Upon which General Cornaro sent the
twenty Galleys of the Kingdom thither, with diverse other Vessels, for the
preservation of a place upon which it was thought the fate of Candia depended.
But experience has showed what a mistake that was, and that the preserving not
of Suda, but of Canea, had been the saving of that Kingdom. For Canea being
taken, which was upon the firm land of the Island, there was no force there
sufficient to resist the impressions of the Turks; so that to loose that, was
to loose all. Whereas the Fort of Suda was not of that consequence, being only
a Rock in the Sea, and at a good distance from the main land of Candia.

As soon as Ibrahim understood that his Fleet was ready, he declared Isuf
Selectar Bassa Captain General of the Expedition, giving him a Commission
sealed up, with express command not to open it till he came to Navarino in the
Morea; where he was to consult with his Captains what course to take for the
better executing of his design. And then he went in person to see his Armada,
where Isuf cast himself at his feet, with threescore and ten of his chief
Officers. It is reported, that Ibrahim being told how the Aga of the Janissaries
had said, that if the Army went for Candia, the Laurels which they brought
thence would be watered with Turkish blood; cried out, that they would meet
with no opposition, and that he had sent Isuf to take possession for him of
that Kingdom. When Isuf took his leave, Ibrahim presented him with a rich
Scymitar set with Diamonds; and prayed to Mahomet to give him a prosperous and
successful voyage.

The Venetian Bailo at Constantinople, who began now to get some light of the
design, went, according to the custom of that Court, to compliment the
Captain General at his departure; who received him with unusual courtesy. And
the Bailo with a dissimulation as deep as his, with his tongue wished him a
happy Voyage, when in his heart he would have been glad that he and all his
Army had been in the bottom of the Sea.

This great Fleet sailing out of the Hellespont, filled all the Kingdoms of the
Mediterranean with fear and terror, none yet knowing where the tempest would
fall. But it is very strange that the Mufti before they went should declare in
the Divan, that this War against the Christians was unjust, and against the
Laws of Mahomet. And when they told him that all things were lawful to the
Grand Seignior, because he could do whatever he pleased, and none could call
him to account for it; he replied, that the Ottoman Force was very great of it
self, but unequal to all Christendom united together; and therefore it was
rashness at this time to provoke the Christian Princes, who it was to be feared
might now make a greater league together than they had done in the War of
Cyprus. The Grand Visir reprimanded the Mufti for this liberty, telling him
that he was more zealous for his Law, than well acquainted with Reason of
State, the maxims of which have nothing to do with those of Religion.

Ibrahim hearing what had passed in the Divan, and of the Remonstrances the
Mufti had made there, deposed him from his dignity, to the great scandal of the
People, who murmured loudly at this action; and said, that God would never
bless the Ottoman House, as long as the chief Minister of his great Prophet was
thus used: so well-affected are those people, though ignorant and unbelievers,
to what they conceive to be according to Law and Justice.

The Selectar now being under sail with his vast Fleet, arrived at Scio, the
most delicious Island of the Archipelago, commanding all his Vessels to take in
Water. Here he landed; and after public Prayers made in a Moschee for the
success of his enterprise, he took a review of all his Forces, animating his
Soldiers, and filling their minds with great expectations. And being curious
to know the opinions of his general Officers and chief Captains concerning the
War he was going to make, he called a Council; and concealing the Orders he had
from the Grand Seignior to invade Candia, showed them only a Commission which
he had received to make War upon the Christians; and so desired their advice
where to begin the War most for the advantage and glory of the Ottoman Empire.
Assan Bassa, an Albanese of great reputation in the Army, began a discourse
about the attacking of Malta; and when he had set forth the hazardousness of
that enterprise, and the disastrous success of formerly attempting that place;
he concluded, that he did not approve of it. Amurat Aga of the Janissaries
concurred with him, adding, that there was no going to besiege any place in the
Western Seas, without good harbors to retire to: intimating thereby, that to
fall upon Candia would be more commodious. All the other Captains seemed to be
of the same opinion. But the General of Barbary could not contain himself from
falling soul upon the Venetians, remembering the defeat which the Barbary
Galleys had received at the Vallona, and not considering the vast sum which the
Republic had given to make up that breach. And to exasperate the Council, he
at last assured them that the only remedy they had to repair past injuries,
and to prevent future, was to despoil the Venetians of Candia, which was the
Sanctuary of the Christian Pirates; and that this was very easy at this time to
be effected, since the Inhabitants were desperately discontented, and the
Island unprovided of all things necessary for a defense.

The Selectar was much pleased to find the opinion of his Officers so well
quadrate with his design; and presenting them with Herns feathers for their
Turbants, as a mark of his esteem, he set sail for Negropont. As he passed by
Tine, the last Island of the Republic in the Archipelago, to make the
Venetians more secure, he sent a Frigate and two Saichs into the Harbor, to
demand permission to take water there; giving out that the Fleet was bound for
Malta. Staying here some days, and having received all sorts of refreshments
from Seignior Riva Proveditor of the Island, he came to Cape Colonna, from
whence he dispatched away a Frigate to Ibrahim, to give him an account of his
Voyage, and of the Courtesies he had received from the Venetians.

The cruel Prince seeing he could no longer hide his design for Candia, on a
sudden owned his treachery, and said, that the reason why he had so dissembled,
was to secure his revenge; and that he had but broken faith with those, who had
first broke it with him. And then he commanded to seize upon the Venetian Bailo
in his own house, and to put a guard of Soldiers upon him: excusing this
horrid violation of the Law of Nations to the Ambassadors of other Princes, by
saying, he did this to prevent the Bailo from discovering his designs to the
Republic.

As soon as it was known at Venice that their Bailo at Constantinople was
arrested, and a War begun, they sent to the great Potentates of Christendom to
solicit succor. The Emperor excused himself upon his inability to help them,
since he had occasion for his Troops himself. England was engaged in a
miserable civil War, so that nothing could be expected thence. Holland would
not meddle, out of consideration of the trade they had in Turkey; nor show them
any further favor, than to sell them ships for their money; a Courtesy which
they would not have denied their Enemies. But the Queen of France, for the
credit of her Regency, gave them four Fireships, and a hundred thousand Crowns
in money, with permission to raise what Officers and Soldiers they could in
France. The Spaniard, who was nearer the danger by reason of his Kingdoms of
Sicily and Naples, made magnificent promises, but furnished out only five
Galleys. The Pope set out five more, and published a Jubilee, giving leave to
the State of Venice to raise a hundred thousand Crowns in gold upon their own
Clergy. The Grand Duke sent two Companies of Germans, which he drew out of his
Garrisons; and five Galleys; which, with the Pope's and the Spanish Galleys, and
six Galleys of Malta, made one and twenty Galleys; and were commanded as a
distinct Fleet by Prince Lodovisio, as General of the Church. The Duke of Parma
sent two thousand men; and the Genouese made mighty offers, but upon such
conditions as were rejected. For they required to be treated with the same
respect as the State of Venice, and to have their Arms set up in the
Vatican-Hall at Rome, as the Venetians have, amongst the crowned heads: a
demand, which the State of Venice chose rather to be without their Succors
than consent to.

At this time the miseries of Candia were foretold by several strange Presages,
as great Earthquakes, and births of Monsters; and, which was most of all taken
notice of, the front of St Mark's Church, and part of one of the Bastions
called St. Mark, fell down to the ground of their own accord.

The fame of the Ottoman Fleet in the Archipelago being come to Candia, and of
their watring at Tine with so much civility, as likewise of several Turkish
ships having been entertained and regaled at Cerigo by the Rector of that
Island, to whom they brought respectful Letters from Coroaga Bassa of Rhodes,
made the people hope that the apprehensions they had conceived were without
ground, and that the Ottoman Fleet was designed for some other place than
Candia: Fortune does so delight to delude Mortals with some momentary quiet,
that the calamities which are to come may fall more heavy upon them.

Of all the Islands of the Mediterranean, Candia is one of the most famous, and
most considerable. No place has afforded more matter for the invention of
ancient Poets, who made it the Country of the Gods, the Kingdom where Saturn
reigned, and where Jupiter was born. It lies at the entrance of the
Archipelago, in almost an equal distance from Europe, Africa, and Asia. The
form of it is long and narrow, being near two hundred and fifty miles in
length, and not fifty in breadth; and the circumference about six hundred
miles. For fertility of soil, few Countries in the world exceed it; and though
it do not abound in Corn so much as some other places, it makes up that in
Pasture, Oils, and generous Wines, in which it has hardly any equal. By reason
of the narrowness of the valleys, it has no navigable Rivers; but is full of
excellent Springs and Fountains, Caverns and Grotto's, where the Inhabitants
repair in the furious heats of Summer, to refresh themselves. The hundred
Cities for which it was so much celebrated by the Ancients, at this day seems a
Fable, since there are now but four in being, viz. Candia, Sitia, Rhetimo, and
Canea.

At the time of the Invasion it had about two hundred thousand Souls, twenty
Galleys, a considerable body of Horse maintained by those whom they call
Feudataries, and who possess the Lands of the Country; and a Militia of Foot in
the nature of Trainbands. It has two principal Havens: Spina longa toward the
East of the Island, and toward the West Suda, both of them defended with good
Forts situated in Islands. So that till now it was thought so strong, that the
Turks had never the courage to assault it; nor probably had they done it now,
if some of the Inhabitants, Traitors to God and their Prince, had not invited
and opened them a way to it. It was first governed by Kings, then an
Aristocracy, after that made a Colony by the Romans; then it came to the Greek
Emperors; and last of all, upon the taking of Constantinople by the Latins,
and the dividing of the Empire betwixt the French and the Venetians, it came
both by purchase and right of Conquest to the Venetians, under whose Dominions
it continued till it was lately taken by the Turks.

As the Candiots were comforting themselves with the thoughts of the danger
they had escaped, believing the Turks gone for Malta; upon a sudden, by fires
from the hills where they kept Watch, they understood with horror and
amazement that the Fleet stood in for Candia. Navagiero Proveditor of Canea
immediately sent away diverse of the City to raise the Country, and warned in
the Gentlemen Feudataries of that part of the Kingdom, conjuring them to unite
themselves for the common defense: but there was not much fruit of that
Message, since most of the Gentlemen were Bandited, and gone from home in
contumacy to the Laws. But many of the Countrymen came running to Canea,
demanding Arms and Ammunition, and showing great forwardness to oppose the
landing of the Enemy.

The next morning, being the thirteenth of June, in the year 1645, the Turkish
Fleet appeared off of Cabo Spada; and sailing with a gentle gale with their
Galleys in the Vant-guard, came to an Anchor over against a place called the
Gogna, where they rode about two miles from shore. After they had refreshed
themselves some hours, they approached land, and imbarquing their men in little
boats, landed them without the least opposition. For such was the base
cowardice of the Country People who were drawn up in Companies to defend the
shore, that at the very first sight of the Turkish Vessels they abandoned their
Post, and ran away to the Mountains; choosing rather to meet death or slavery
in an ignominious flight, than by bravely hazarding their lives endeavor to
save their Country.

The Forces which were landed marched with flying Colors toward Canea, whilst
another part of them presented themselves before San Teodoro, where there were
two Forts; the upper of which had been lately visited by the General of the
Kingdom, and dismantled as unuseful. In the lower there were only forty
soldiers in garrison, which were newly reinforced with twenty five more, upon
the first advice of the Turks approaching. It was an easy thing for such a
Force, after a battery of many hours, to take this place by assault; and yet it
cost the Turks very dear. For the Captain who was in the Fort valuing his
liberty above his life, as the Turks were entered gave fire to a Mine, and blew
himself with his wife and children into the air, with above two thousand of his
Enemies. The name of this Captain, whose memory certainly deserves to live, was
Biagio Giuliani, a Subject of the State of Venice, and native of the City of
Capo D'Istria.

San Teodoro being taken, the Turks brought most of their Fleet into that Port,
and there continued disimbarking till they had landed the rest of their men,
with their Machines, Ammunition, and Artillery; in doing of which they had no
disturbance either from Land or Sea. The Fleet consisted of fourscore Galleys,
two Galeons, two hundred Saichs and Caramussals, with a vast number of Barks
and other Vessels. They landed, as the Turks themselves reported, sixty
thousand fighting men. With these were many French and Flemish Enginiers and
Gunners, Smiths, Carpenters, and other Artificers; and a stately Train of great
and small Artillery, with abundance of all other warlike provision. Two days
after their landing, appeared a Tartan and two Saichs, with ten Frigates of
Barbary; which were esteemed the best Vessels of all the Fleet.

At this time Antonio Navagiero was Proveditor of Canea, and Count Dominico
Albano of Bergamo Governor. In the place, besides the Townsmen, were fourteen
Companies of Foot, which made a body of about eight hundred men effective.
There was a Troop of Stradiots also in the Town, which was all their Horse; and
of the Country-Volonteers, not above one hundred men. Of the Militia of the
Country, five hundred thirty five Soldiers; which, with a hundred thirty two
Scholars of the Town, were then all the Defendants. Navagiero wrote to the
several divisions of the Country with all speed to send their men into Canea:
but their Leaders could not persuade them to come; only from Bicorno appeared
five hundred men; but as soon as they came in sight of the Enemies Camp, they
fled; and, for all the diligence the Officers could use, they could not get
above a hundred of them stay. Upon the first alarm of the approach of the
Turkish Army, there came many women with their children running out of the
Country into the Town: Upon which the Proveditor thought to choose some of the
most serviceable of them, and to turn out the rest: but the Citizens seeming
discontented at it, he consented they should stay; and it proved to good
purpose, since he afterward made great use of them in the Siege. These were
all the Forces which were in Canea when the Turks landed: But before they began
to attack it, there got in three hundred more of the Country-Militia, and a
Band of a hundred Caloieres, which are a sort of Greek Friars or Religious men
of the Order of St. Basil; who did excellent service, and were as forward to
expose themselves as any of the Soldiers, in all the most desperate exigencies
of the Siege.

Though Canea had the reputation of a strong Town of War, it was not so indeed:
For the Fortifications were irregular, it having five Bastions and four
Curtains of unproportionable length. In the mouth of the Harbor the greatest
part of the Parapets were wanting; nor had the Fosse either breadth or depth
sufficient, being without any false Bray, and with the Counterscarp ruined.
There was no covered way; and the natural situation of the place was extreme
defective, not only by reason of several eminences of ground which commanded
the Ramparts of the Town, but of certain Valleys by which a whole Army might
march up to the very Fosse covered by the hills from any offense. So that when
it was surveyed some years before, by skilful Captains and Enginiers, they
concluded it indefensible against any great Army, without a circuit of strong
Outworks, and at least a Garrison of four thousand men to defend it. Besides
these inconveniences, a great part of the Artillery was dismounted, and there
were neither Beds nor Wheels to be found for the great Ordnance.

In so great defect of all things, and with so small a number of Defendants,
was Canea invested with a great Army abundantly provided with Artillery and all
other instruments of death; with a vast number of Pioniers, by which means they
incredibly advanced their Approaches; and adding Art to Power, made abundance
of artificial Fires, to hide their men as they worked, from the sight of the
Town. And at the same time they beat Drums and Kettledrums, and set up Tents in
diverse places where they had no Soldiers, to make the Garrison spend the shot
of their Cannon and Muskets in the air, and shoot at places where there was no
body to hurt.

About three days after their landing, the Enemy began the first Battery with
six pieces of Cannon; and in two days more, they had raised three other
Batteries, with which they continually beat several parts of the City; which
was more and more infested, as the Turks advanced their Approaches, with
Musket Shot and Arrows. The Cannon indeed at first did no great effect more
than frighten the people with battering down the Steeples and the Townhouse;
which, by reason of their height, were most exposed. But on the other side, the
Cannon of the Town did terrible execution upon the Enemy; so that they had not
the courage to attempt an Escalade, though they had brought almost all the Oars
of their Galleys on shore, to make Ladders of.

It was now eight days since the beginning of the Siege, without any news of
Succor, and many of the Defendants were already killed and wounded; which gave
great apprehension to the people, when they considered how few Soldiers they
had, and how those few were already diminished. In the midst of this
perplexity, came Letters from General Cornaro, which assured them he was
preparing to come in person to relieve them, and was now drawing together the
Militia of the whole Kingdom for that purpose. But Fortune soon deluded the
endeavors of the General, since the new Levyes, when he should have marched on
for Canea, most cowardly abandoned him; so that he was forced to retire to Suda
with his own followers.

At this time, Seignior Angeli making use of the silence and obscurity of the
night, passed with three hundred men through the whole Turkish Army; and though
they were saluted with showrs of shot as they went got well into Canea. But
this Succor was far inferior to the necessities of the place, which had
already lost more than this Relief supplied; so that their number still
diminishing, they could make no Sallies upon the Enemy, who were now with their
Approaches come near the Fosse. But when Seignior Angeli was got in, who by his
authority, being Major of the Garrison, had composed several differences in the
Town, it was proposed by the Officers to make a Salley, that they might see the
Works of the Enemy. This was done with that vigor, that they penetrated into
the Turk's Trenches, slew many, and put more of them to flight; and came back
into the City with great spoils, and no loss. But desiring afterward to try
their fortune again, they found the Enemy better upon their guard, and returned
with nothing but blows. So that considering the condition they were in, and
what scarcity there was of Defendants, they did not only resolve to make no
more Sallyes, but to abandon the Half Moon, and draw all their men into the
Town, to defend the Walls. And now Canea began mightily to be straightened: for
the Turks being come to the Fosse of the Bastion of St. Demetrius, fell on
raising earth about the Counterscarp; which Were, the chief Engienier in the
Town, thinking to disturb them in, made two Mines below, but with no success.

Whilst things went on thus by Land, the Turkish Fleet at St. Teodoro did send
out most of their Gallyes every morning toward Capo Spada, to make discoveries
at Sea; so that from the other side any Vessels might have come from Suda to
Canea with safety. And indeed, Navagiero every day wrote to Capello Commander
of the great Ships which lay at Suda, Soliciting him for Succor. But Capello,
whether it were that he had no mind to expose himself to an engagement with the
Turks, as some accused him; or that really it was his opinion, as he pretended,
that the preserving of Suda was of more importance than the succouring of
Canea, he would never be prevailed with to stir. Though the Town was now much
pressed, it was not so shut up, but that the besieged found ways, either with
small Boats, or expert Swimmers, who knew all the Creeks upon the Coast, to
advise General Cornaro of their danger, and of the wants they were in not only
of Soldiers, but of Pioniers, and Gunners, and of Beds and Wheels for their
Artillery; but above all, of Ammunition, of which there was a daily
consumption. And because they had not Mortar-pieces for their Bombs, and that
it would be too long to stay for them from Candia, they invented some of Wood,
bound about with Hoops of Iron, which did great service, though they lasted but
a little while. But as there was a penury of all necessarys in the Town, so was
there a vast abundance in the Turkish Camp; and there was not a day that there
did not arrive Vessels from some part or other of that vast Empire, either with
Men, or Victuals, or Ammunition, for the service of the Leaguer. For Candia
lies so in the Turkish Dominions, that from some place or other Vessels might
come there with any wind. The difficulties and distresses of the Town more and
more increasing, Navagiero sent Vincent Michele, a noble Venetian, and
Chancellor of Candia, to inform General Cornaro of the condition Canea was in,
and of the necessity there was of a considerable and present succor. Upon
which Cornaro resolved to dispatch thither Count Fenarolo, one of his chief
Officers, with three hundred paid Soldiers, and five hundred of the Bands of
the Country, who are called there the Carnides; and twelve Cannoniers commanded
by Benedict Canale a young Gentleman of Venice of great expectation, who
carried with him three thousand Chequins for the Soldiers. As they came near
the Enemies Trenches, where they should have passed with all the silence that
might be, the Country-Bands, who were but ill disciplined, made such a noise,
that they awaked the Turks; who stood to their Arms, and presently invested
them. Count Fenarolo, who led the Vantguard, bravely charged through, and with
a few men with him got into the Town. But young Canale, whilst he was fighting
with his Sword in his hand, was most traitorously murdered by one of his own
Servants, who stripped him of his Chicquines, and immediately ran over to the
Enemy, where he met with that Justice which he fled from. For the Selectar
Bassa being informed of the treachery of this Villain, had so great a
detestation of him, that he commanded him to be put to death.

Navagiero understanding that there were several Companies of Albanese in the
Turkish Camp who had formerly served under the State of Venice, and not
thinking themselves well dealt with at their Disbanding had taken Conditions
under the Turk, thought to try if by Rewards he could gain them back. And
meeting with one in his Garrison of their Countrymen who undertook to carry his
Propositions to them, he offered to settle better pay upon them than they had
under the Turk, if they would return to the Service of the Republic; and to
encourage them to it, he obliged himself that every man should have over and
above his pay Ten Crowns a piece for a gratuity. But the Albanese would not
accept of this offer, for fear of ruining their Relations and Kindred who lived
in the Turkish Territories.

This attempt of putting in Succors by land having succeeded so unfortunately,
there were Letters immediately sent to the General, to make known the
deplorable condition of the Town, and to press him to send away the great Ships
and Galleys which lay at Suda for their relief. To this the General answered,
that it was against the opinion of Capello, who commanded the Ships, to
adventure them for Canea, and leave Suda exposed; and that since the
Feudataries and all the Militia of the Kingdom were not able to relieve the
place, how should he alone do it? This Answer being come, the Proveditor and
Governor called a Council of War, and communicated it to them; who all
concurred to write once more to General Cornaro, to conjure him to send them
succor; with a Protestation that they had done their duty, and that if the
place were not presently relieved, it must fall. Upon this, Cornaro, being
stimulated to it by Malipiero Proveditor of Suda, who was for adventuring all
to save Canea, resolved to send another succor of five hundred men by Land,
under the Command of the same Count Fenarolo, who in Turkish Habit conveyed
himself through the Enemies Guards, out of Canea to Suda, to hasten Relief, and
to offer himself to conduct such men as should be ready. And at the same time
Conaro intending to try what might be done at Sea, commanded three hundred men
to be put upon three Galleys, with Ammunition, and such other things as the
Town most wanted, with order to endeavor to pass through the Turkish Fleet,
and land their Succors. Upon these three Galleys, as Commanders, and as
Hostages of greater succors, were three of the chief Gentlemen of the State of
Venice; young Cornaro the Generals Son, Barbaro Badoaro, and George Morosini,
who commanded the Squadron. Cornaro was of a Family which had brought a Kingdom
to their Country, by the resignation of Katerina Cornaro Queen of Cyprus.
Badoaro was of the House of Participatio, who had been Hereditary Dukes of
Venice, before that Commonwealth was settled in that form of Government it now
is. And Morosini was no less Illustrious than either of the other, as being of
a House in which there have been several Princes of their Country, four
Duchesses of Venice, three Cardinals, two Queens, five Patriarchs whereof one
of Constantinople, four and twenty Procurators of St. Mark, and eleven
Captain-Generals.

The seventeenth of July, Brocobard, a Captain of great name, with three
hundred chosen men, Sallyed out of the Town into the Trenches to meet the
succor: and Proveditor Navagiero himself in person went to defend the
Counterscarp. And at the same time, as had been concerted, Count Fenarolo
appeared in sight of the walls with the succor which he had brought so far
without any opposition. But the Turks who lay in some houses hard by, hearing a
noise, stood to their Arms, and chargeing the Venetians, put them in some
disorder. Count Fenarolo, who again led the Vantguard, advanced with some few,
the greatest part of his men forsaking him, and many of them leaping into the
Sea to avoid the Turkish Scymeters; amongst whom was lost one of the chief
Enginiers in Candia; which was fatal to the Town, at a time that they had so
much need of him for their Mines. Of all the Officers, only Captain Morat a
Frenchman kept his Company together, and brought it entire into the Town. But
with that, and all the rest of the Succor, there got in but two hundred and
nine persons, part of which were wounded. The night after, the three Galleys
which Cornaro had sent from Suda, came before Canea; and it is hard to say,
whether with greater bravery or success passed over the Prowes of fourteen
Turkish Galleys into the Port. But by reason of the streightness of their
Galleys, all they brought with them was two hundred Pioneers, some Chests of
Fireballs, Planks for their Artillery, and fifty thousand weight of Powder. If
the Siege had been raised, there could not have been greater joy in the Town,
than was at the arrival of this Succor; which was testified by loud shouts,
and firing all their Guns: which the Selectar Bassa wondering at, asked what was
the cause of that noise in the Town; and being told that there were three
Venetian Galleys come in with Succors, he sent for those who were Captains of
the Guards that night, and commanded their Heads to be struck off.

These Galleys making their way so bravely into Canea in spite of the Turkish
Fleet, made men see what might have been done if all the other Galleys and
Ships which vainly wasted their time at Suda, had come with them. But the
Venetians had not then tried the goodness of their own Vessels with the Turks,
who were so cowed after two or three Battles lost at Sea, that in the progress
of the War, they every where fled before the Venetians, and durst not stand
them though they were double their number.

These three Captains with their Galleys being got into the Port, drew their
Ciurmes on shore, who did extraordinary service; the greatest part of them
being afterward consumed in the Siege. And that they might employ their times
as usefully as they could, Cornaro undertook the defense of the Bastion of St.
Demetrius, and Badoaro and Morosini each of them of another Bastion; standing
there day and night, exposed to the greatest dangers.

To hinder the Turks who were now advancing to the Bastion of St. Demetrius,
the Enginier Were made a Gallery in the Fosse, which as soon as he had
finished, he found was unuseful, in regard there was no standing there to
defend it. So that he was advised to set it on fire. But whilst the Officers
were debating how to do it, the Turks charged them furiously, and made
themselves Masters of the Gallery, with the slaughter of the greatest part of
the Defendants. And so this Gallery became a double damage to them; not only
as they were deprived of it themselves, but as it proved of use and service to
the Enemy.

By this time the Turks had made two Mines in the front of St. Demetrius
Bastion; which the Defendants by their great diligence met with, and drove them
thence, remaining Masters of the place. But they were not so fortunate in the
countermining of a third Mine; for Were finding the ground Sandy, and therefore
thinking it impossible that the Enemy could make use of it, neglected the
evacuating of it. But he quickly perceived the contrary by lamentable
experience; for fire being given to the Mine, with a most terrible commotion it
tumbled all the flank of the Bastion into the Fosse, making a breach wide
enough to enter. Whereupon the Turks with many Ensigns suddenly marched to the
assault, which was most resolutely and with much effusion of blood sustained by
the Defendants, who forced them to pull up the Ensigns which they had planted
upon the Works, and to retire with great loss and confusion into their
Trenches. But this succeeded not without much harm to the Venetians, who lost
Valentini a Corsican Captain and several others of their best Officers; the
Proveditor Navagiero, who was in the thickest of the danger, being sorely hurt
with a stone. In a word, the Churchmen and the women did wonders in this
occasion. The Wall was not only ruined with this last Mine, but the Parapet
fell down; so that the Bastion on that side was open for an Assault: whereupon
Seignior Broazzo, who had performed all the parts of a good Captain, to
encourage his men to follow him, took a Spade in his hand, and began to throw
up earth to make up the breach; which he filled up with Buts and Sacks of Earth
and Wool. And because they found the Turks at work upon another Mine at the
point of the Bastion, Were thinking it impossible to countermine it, bethought
himself of another way, which was, to make a Well above it, that it might
evaporate without effect. But before this Well was half made, the earth about
it fell in, and buried the Workmen; so that then they had no way but to throw
in a vast quantity of water, which penetrating into the Powder, and moistning
it, hindered the Mine from taking fire.

The Enemies finding their Mines not so successful, betook themselves again to
their Batteries; in order to which, they filled the Fosse with Bavins, and made
the way even to the Town; and then gave another terrible Assault, but were
stoutly repulsed by the Defendants.

That evening an Arrow was shot into the Town, with a Letter in it, which
seemed to come from the Selectar Bassa to the Governor, inviting him to
deliver up the Town, and promising him good Conditions if he did: but declaring
there should be no mercy, if he persisted to resist him. The Proveditor sent
away the Letter to the General, and without making any Answer to the Enemy,
continued to defend the place with his wonted diligence. The Selectar Bassa
enraged that he had no Answer, gave order to prepare against the next morning
all his Forces both by Land and Sea to give a general Assault. Presently after
break of day, threescore and ten Galleys, with a hundred and fifty Barks full
of Soldiers, appeared before the Port, with design that whilst the Galleys
were battering the Town, the Barks should with the Soldiers surprise the Mole,
and at the same time the Land-Army should make an Assault in four several
places. The Proveditor did all that man could to animate his Soldiers, though
weak and languid with labor and watching: and it happening by the favor of
Heaven, that the Sea-Forces could not land by reason of a strong wind which
blew from shore, he turned the force of the whole Garrison to the defense of the
Land-side; in which the very Women had a part, who with mighty boldness mixed
themselves amongst the Soldiers, to defend their Houses and their Altars. The
Constancy of one of these women was most remarkable, since though she saw her
Father fall dead before her, she never went back till they had quite repulsed
the Enemy from the place where she fought. The Turks who came out of their
Trenches with Scaling-ladders to assault the gate of Saboinera, were so plied
with Musket Shot, that they threw down their Ladders and ran back. They who
assaulted the gate of Rettimiotta, bore all down before them, and entered with
four Ensigns at the breach; but they were so ill treated with the shot of the
Town, and of the Cannon which thundered upon them from the next Bastion, that
they were forced to retreat in that have, that they left three of their
Ensigns behind them. They who assaulted the breach of St. Demetrius finding
themselves exposed to the Cannon of the Bastion of St. Salvador, after great
slaughter of their Men were also constrained to retire. But they who mounted by
the fourth Breach, planted their Ensigns, and maintained their ground some
hours; but were at last repulsed with shame and confusion. As the destruction
of the Assailants was very great, so was the loss of the Defendants; many of
their best men perishing in this encounter, and the Governor Albano, and the
Captains Brocobard and Palma being dangerously wounded.

About this time there was an expectation of Succor from General Molino, who
sent from his Fleet which lay at the three Islands four great Ships filled with
Soldiers and Ammunition, to relieve Canea. But such was the fate of Candia,
that they who had the conducting of these Ships, either through Cowardice, or
want of judgment, instead of taking the right way to Canea, sailed to the
Southward, and came to Giropetra on the other side the Island, where they were
at too great a distance to have any opportunity of doing service.

The Turks now came to employ their Spades again, and to fall on working new
Mines. Whereupon the Proveditor, having no hopes left of success, was thinking
to set fire to the Arsenal, and to sink the Galleys and Ships which were in the
Port, that they might not be of service to the enemy. But before he would do
it, he wrote to General Cornaro to acquaint him with his resolution; who not
believing the place to be in that desperate extremity, or not knowing what to
do, returned him no answer. But Proveditor Navagiero, that he might omit
nothing which care and prudence could do, finding that a Traverse which the
Enemy had planted in the Fosse threatened instant ruin to the Town, made a
Mine, to see if he could break it: which being filled with sixteen bags of
Powder, succeeded so fortunately, that upon the firing it blew the Traverse all
in pieces; which the next night was made up again by the vast multitude of the
Turks, who had so many hands to employ, that nothing was difficult to them. The
next day the Turks gave fire to a Mine within the breach near the Traverse,
under a weak Rampart of Earth; which being carried into the Air by the violence
of the fire, fell upon the Defendants who were there, and buried them all
alive: at which the Soldiers upon the Guard were struck with that terror,
that they abandoned the Post, and two thousand of the Enemy immediately rushed
through the breach upon the Bastion, and there planting their Ensigns, made
themselves Masters of all the retreats into the streets; so that now Canea
seemed irreparably lost.

But for all this, the besieged no way dismayed, marched to the Walls to give
the last proof of their courage. On the one side came the Proveditor, with
Seignior Angeli and diverse Captains; on the other came the Governor Albano,
who, though grievously wounded, with a Pike in his hand charged the Enemy,
being seconded by Michieli Rector of the City, and by Chancellor Michieli, and
by Bon the chief Magistrate, all noble Venetians. To them came running George
Morosini, and young Cornaro, who did actions surpassing his age, and carried
back with him as a Trophy of his Valor a Musket Shot in his Face. And after
all, came the Bishop of Canea himself, to animate the Combatants with his holy
Exhortations, and to give them an example of Christian fortitude. Upon which
the Defendants, so vigorously assisted on all hands, beat the Enemy with
infinite slaughter from off the Bastion into the Fosse, with all the Ensigns
that they had planted there. This bloody Conflict continued near seven hours;
all the Garrison having fought there, and all the Ottoman Army. And so great was
the slaughter of the Turks, that the ground was covered with heaps of their
Carcasses. On the other side, such was the loss of the Christians, that the
greatest part of the Garrison perished in this Encounter. Albano, besides his
former hurts, had a wound in his mouth; and one Musket Shot in his Arm, and
another in his side. Bon was mortally hurt; Michieli, Brouazzo, and almost all
the Officers in the Garrison wounded, as well as the Gentlemen, Citizens,
Soldiers, and all Orders of men.

This Assault being over with so great destruction to both sides, Were, unable
to walk by reason of his many wounds, was carried in a Chair into the
Council Chamger, where the Governor languishing too with his wounds, was
already come; and there, in presence of the Bishop, the Proveditor, the
Rectors, the Counselors, and chief Magistrates of the City, and all the
Officers of the Garrison that were considerable, he proposed, since the Breaches
were open, and the Ramparts down, scarce any Captains or Officers left, their
Militia almost consumed, no Powder, the Townsmen and Countrymen cowed; since
there was neither hopes of Succor, nor any possibility of subsistence, That
they would be pleased no longer to delay to make Conditions with the Enemy, and
thereby prevent the slaughter of so many innocent People: telling them, that it
was not only necessary, but that it would be Pious to do it; and that they
might have justified it by the Laws of War, if they had done it much sooner.
The Governor concurred with him in his opinion, which was approved by all the
chief Captains. Only Proveditor Navagiero opposed it, saying, they had to do
with an Enemy who kept not Faith; so that to render the place, would be to
deliver themselves up to death. Were replied, that if they by their obstinacy
should stand out to no purpose, it would be a justification of any cruelty the
Enemy should use to them; who if he did break his Faith, let the infamy of it
fall upon him: That they ought to submit to what God Almighty pleased, when
they had done all that discreet men could do for their preservation. But the
Proveditor broke off the discourse, exhorting every man to return to his Post,
and to do his duty. That night they sent again to General Cornaro, once more to
acquaint him with the miserable state of the Town, which was without Officers,
without Soldiers, without Enginiers, and reduced to the last desperation; and
that after this time, they should never write to him more. All night long the
Enemy continued their Batteries, to hinder the besieged from making up their
Ramparts. In the morning Were returned to renew the instances which he had made
the evening before; and at the same time came Deputys from the Commonalty of
the Town to Navagiero, to supplicate him, since it was the opinion of all the
Captains that the Town could no longer be defended, their Men and Ammunition
being spent, and the Enemy lodged upon their Ramparts, that he would be pleased
to have commiseration of them, and not expose to the rage of a barbarous Enemy,
a People who had so freely spent their Blood and Fortunes in the service of
their Prince and Country. The Proveditor and all the Officers were touched with
pity at this Address, and went away immediately to the Bastion where George
Morosini commanded, to have his opinion of the business; who told them that he
being sent thither with three Galleys to Succor the place, when he had done
it, stayed to defend it; but that now they were deliberating about the
rendition of it, he would have nothing to do with that, but leave them to
resolve of what they thought best for the Public service, whilst he would
consider what belonged to him to do for the preservation of his Galleys.

The same morning the Captains came again to the Proveditor to press him to
Treat, telling him that Malvezzi Master of the Fireworks, who had done such
important service in the Siege, was newly dead of his wounds. Whereupon the
Proveditor entreated the Bishop to Celebrate the Mass of the Holy Ghost, to
implore the direction of God in this so great tribulation; and calling together
all the chief men of the City, that they might have their part in what was
treating by the Officers of War, desired to know if any man there could propose
any way to prolong the defense of the place. But the Condition of it was so
deplorable, that they all cried out it was no longer to be defended; and that
there was a necessity of making suddenly some Composition, unless they were
resolved to give their Wives and Children up to be slaughtered. Whereupon the
Proveditor was fain to consent that there should be an Instrument in writing
drawn up for the Rendition of the place; which was to be subscribed by the
Proveditor, Governor, Bishop, and all the Military Officers. When this came to
be signed, the Proveditor was so grieved in his Soul to see to what a pass he
was reduced, that he would have put off the doing of it: thinking to set fire
to the Arsenal, to sink the Ships and Galleys in the Port, and so break in
pieces the Artillery. But perceving the Soldiers would not have obeyed him if
he had given any such command, nor put a thing in practice which would have
deprived them of all hopes of quarter; and considering that if through his
occasion not only the Garrison but all the People in the Town should have been
put to the Sword, it would have been no advantage, but rather a prejudice to
his Prince and Country; and that the sacrificing of so many persons would not
preserve the place; he forbore putting those thoughts in execution.

After Dinner, the Deputys of the Town came again to press the Proveditor to
Parley, conjuring him no longer to expose the honor of their Wives and
Daughters to a licentious and incensed Enemy. The Proveditor received them with
much courtesy, giving them hopes of what they desired; but would come to no
resolution, till he had once more sent to General Cornaro: which he did that
night, acquainting him with the desperate extremity they were in, and that yet
he would expect till the next day before he Treated, to see if there could be
any hopes of Succor sent him that night. But receiving no answer from Cornaro,
and being summoned again next morning by the Enemy, who were preparing for
another General Assault, and going to give fire to Nine several Mines, he was
at last prevailed with to command a White Flag to be put out upon the Breach.
Upon the sight of which, immediately the Cannon ceased, and they heard a voice
saying, What would you have?

Then Angeli and Bacchieli went out to Parley, telling the Aga, who asked them
what they would have, that they desired a Cessation of Arms of the Captain
Bassa, and that he would be pleased to send some one of Authority into the Town
to Treat. Presently a Cessation of Arms was granted, and the Turks came out of
their Trenches in vast numbers upon the Bastion of St. Demetrius, where they
sat themselves down upon the ground with so profound a silence, that in such a
multitude there was not one word to be heard: and a Turk who by chance shot off
his Musket, had immediately his Head struck off. Some say that the Turks were
resolved, if the Town had not Treated when it did, to have raised the Siege,
their Army was so shattered, and their men so cowed with the resistance they
had met with. But certain it is, that they much admired the bravery of the
Defendants; and Assan Bassa was heard to say, That the great Amurat had never
taken Babylon, if there had been such men in it as were in Canea.

The Cessation of Arms being begun, the Aga immediately gave advice of it to
the Selectar Bassa, whose Head. Quarters were at St. Constantin, where he was
lodged in a stately Pavilion. Upon notice of the Cessation, the Selectar Bassa
bid them tell them in the Town, that they should make ready Hostages to be
Caution for the performance of the Treaty; and that for his own part, they
should find him disposed to give them all reasonable satisfaction. Within a
little time, Bacchieli and Captain Brocobard, men considerable amongst the
Christians, passed out of the Town into the Camp for Hostages, and were
received there with much courtesy At the same time came from the Camp to the
Town, sent as Hostages by the Selectar Bassa, Zembis Zaccaia Nephew to the
Selectar, and Ibrahim Maga. Zembis came armed after the Turkish fashion,
attended by two Soldiers armed with Swords, Bucklers and Pistols: Upon his
back he had a Vest of Crimson-Sattin which reached the ground, and upon it a
rich Mantle embroidered with Gold. He and Ibrahim were not suffered to enter
the City, but had a place prepared for them to sit in the Casemats along the
walls. Where Zembis declaring that he was the Nephew of the Selectar Bassa,
with great veneration he pulled out a Paper with the Imperial Seal, which he
said was the Commission given by the Grand Seignior to his Uncle, authorizing
him to make what Capitulations he pleased; and then told them that he was come
from the Selectar Bassa to know what it was that they demanded. Angeli made
answer, that they desired a Cessation of all Hostility for fifteen days; at the
expiration of which time, if no Succor came, they would surrender the Town.
Zembis replied, that the Venetian Fleet was so far from coming to succor them,
that to his certain knowledge they were returned from Zant to Corfu. Angeli
replying, that however they might stay fifteen days to see if they would come
or no; Zembis swore a great Oath, that he was so sure that they would not come,
that he would engage himself, if they did, to change his Religion, and turn
Christian: and therefore if they had nothing else to propose, he would take his
leave, and return from whence he came.

Angeli and the rest hearing this, thought it best no longer to defer
Capitulating, but immediately sent away a Draught of what Articles they
desired, to the Electar Bassa; who required for Hostages Proveditor Navagiero
himself, and young Cornaro the Generals Son. But Captain Brocobard by his
dexterity overcoming this difficulty, it was concluded that he and Bachieli
should remain Hostages as they were, and that there should be added to them
Seignior Premarini and Seignior Barozzi, two noble Candiots and Gentlemen of
Venice; as on the other side, there should be four Turks sent into the City.

The next morning Zembis returned with the Capitulation, acquainting them that
the Venetian Hostages had been brought into the presence of the Selectar Bassa.
But I, said he, know not with whom I treat, and therefore I desire that I may
see your Proveditor. But that the Turks might not discover the misery of the
Town, Navagiero came to the place where the Turkish Hostages were kept, but
attended with his Guards, and all the pomp he could appear in. Zembis saluting
him with great Courtesy, took notice that Navagiero seemed to him much
disturbed: but, said Zembis, You ought to submit to the will of God, and
comfort your self, since you have so bravely and so long defended Canea against
the puissant Forces of the Grand Seignior. Navagiero answered, That the reason
why he was no better provided to defend the place, and that it was so soon
taken, was the confidence he had, that the Grand Seignior would not have broke
the Peace which he had made with the Republic without any cause given him.
Zembis not willing to enter into a discourse which tended to reproach his
Master, said, Well, for all this, I doubt not but we shall yet be friends. And
so they took leave for that time, one returning into the Town, and the other to
the Camp. Now the Terms of the Capitulation were these.

1. That Canea should be delivered up within six days.

2. That all men of what rank soever, who desired to depart from Canea and the
Territory thereof, should have liberty to carry all their Baggage and Personal
Estates with them, without the least molestation; and to leave their real and
unmovable Estates to such of their Kindred as they pleased.

3. That such as would stay in Canea, should enjoy their Houses and Lands in
the same manner as they did under the Venetians, without being obliged to pay
any other Tax than the ordinary Caraggio which the Subjects of Scio and other
places pay, which is the tenth part of their Estates.

4. That in matter of Judicature, the People should have power to choose them
three Judges, by whom the Inhabitants should be Judged according to their own
Laws: and in case of Appeal, there should be a Turkish Judge, who should be
resident there for that purpose.

5. That all Religious men, as well Greeks as Latins, should enjoy their
Churches, Covents, and Revenews, in the same manner as they did under the
Venetians; and that the Latin Christians should keep a Bishop after their
Rites, and the Greeks another after theirs.

6. That the Jews may live there as they were wont to do, without any Tax or
Imposts but the ordinary Carraggio.

These were the principal Articles which were granted to Canea by the Selectar
Bassa; which, though they much pleased at present, were in process of time but
ill kept.

Now because the Selectar pretended that the Proveditor Navagiero should come
in person to visit him and deliver him the Keys of the City, Navagiero being
concerned to decline that Office, dispatched Antonio Zancarolo, a noble
Venetian, and Commander of the Feudatory Horse, to the Turkish Camp with four
Horses, whereof he ordered him to present the two best to the Selectar Bassa,
and the other two to the two next General Officers. Zancarolo set out of Canea
accompanied with an Aga belonging to Assan Bassa of the Land; and when he came
near to the Pavillion of the Selectar Bassa, who was Generalissimo both by Sea
and Land, and first Page of the Grand Seignior, he sent word by a Calabrian
Renegado to the Selectar, that he was there to wait upon him. The Renegado,
after he had stayed about an hour, returned to Zancarolo, and told him he might
come when he pleased: who thereupon walked up to a great Tent standing betwixt
two lesser ones. These three Tents were surrounded by a deep and broad Ditch,
and at the entrance were placed ten Sacres upon wooden Frames, with a pole
behind every one of them like that of a Coach, to which they might set Horses
to draw them with ease from place to place. The Ditch was set round with a
thousand Archers, all with Turbants and glittering Scymitars; which seemed to
be the flower of the Army. These Archers had made themselves Cabins of boughs
of Trees neatly interlaced in one another, and placed them in that order, that
they made a most delightful show. As Zancarolo approached, they drew from the
Ditch, and made Lanes for him to pass through; every one having an Arrow in his
Bow, as if he had been going to shoot.

As he entered the Tent, he found the Selectar Bassa sitting Cross-leg'd upon
the ground after the Turkish manner, and leaning upon a Cushion of Sky-colour'd
Velvet embroydered with Gold. He was clothed with a Sky-colour'd Vest lined
with Ermins, and had a Sword at his side set with Jewels, the floor being
covered with Persian Carpets. He seemed to be about thirty years of age; his
stature was ordinary, his complexion fallow, his eyes black, his beard thin,
and he looked like a man who was naturally obstinate and cruel. He was
encompassed with several Turks of a Venerable presence, and advanced in years,
and most of them clothed in fine white Linen. Behind them stood eight beautiful
Boys in Liverys of Green cloth, holding their hands on cross. Coming up to the
Selectar Bassa, the Aga who was Zancarolo's Guide fell upon his Knees; and
Zancarolo presenting himself to him, kissed his Vest: which complement was
received by the Selectar with very little courtesy. Then Zancarolo told him by
an Interpreter, that he was come from the Proveditor of the City to kiss his
hand; who would have been now in person to have done that Office, but that he
was hindered by the Gout; and humbly beseeched him to accept of those two
Horses which he had brought him; which though they were not such as his
Greatness deserved, were the best that could be found in a besieged City. The
Selectar's answer was, that he held himself obliged to the Proveditor for his
good affection, and that he willingly accepted of his Present. At these words
the Aga rose up; and going to the Boys who stood behind the Selectar, they took
from under a Carpet a Vest of Cloth of Gold, and delivered it to the Aga, who
gave it to Zancarolo to kiss, and then put it upon his back. After this, he
fetched, three other Vests of less value, and presented them to three Gentlemen
who accompanied Zancarolo. Then he lifted up a Carpet which was at his feet,
and taking two handfuls of Dollars, he gave fifteen to the Gentleman of the
Horse, and the rest amongst the Grooms who looked to the Horses.

Zancarolo when he took his leave, desired a Pass, that he might safely depart
from Canea. But the Selectar answered him, that God was one, and his word was
one; and bid him go where he would without fear. But said the Selectar, Why
will you go away? I will continue you in your charge of Spaghilar Aga, that is,
Commander of the Horse, and will be glad of all occasions to see you. Zancarolo
giving him thanks for the honor he offered him, told him that he was a Noble
Venetian, and could not be wanting to the obligations of his birth. Raghem,
said the Selectar; which is as much as to say, Very well: and so dismissed him.

The Aga came out to guide Zancarolo further, and making the Turks stand off
who flocked to see him, carried him on purpose through a Meadow where lay a
number of Heads of Christians lately slain; and then led him down into the
windings of the Approaches, and thence into the Trenches: A vast immense work,
and full of inextricable Labyrinths, containing many subterraneous Rooms,
Lodgings, and Alleys, through which their Soldiers could pass covered from the
Cannon and Musket Shot of the City.

Through this way the Aga conducted Zancarolo to Assan Bassa his Tent, who had
about him a number of Janissaries; and in his company was the Aga of the
Janissaries himself. This Assan was a little old man, of a ruddy complexion, of
a cheerful and jovial countenance, and a very cunning politic man. He wore a
Crimson Vest with straight sleeves, and a Turbant of the same color. When
Zancarolo presented himself to him, the Aga fell upon his Knees as he had done
to the Selectar Bassa, and Zancarolo kissed his Vest. But Assan received him in
another manner than the Selectar had done: for rising from a Bench where he
sat, and not upon the ground, as the Turks use to do, he kissed Zancarolo's
forehead, and made him sit down by him; telling him, that he took most kindly
the Horse which he had brought him, and thought himself much obliged to the
Proveditor, esteeming more the affection of the giver, than the value of the
gift; and that he desired some good occasion to requite his Excellence for this
honor he had done him. Then he made them bring in two Silver Cups a most
delicious Drink; and presenting one of them to Zancarolo, would have him drink
first; which he with many Complements refusing, at last Assan began; who fanned
Zancarolo all the while he was pledging him, with the wing of a Vultor,
expressing great satisfaction in seeing him. From thence Zancarolo went to the
Spaghitar Aga, and presented him the fourth Horse. This Aga was a young man of
no Civility, but in appearance proud, treacherous, and cruel.

In the Articles of the Capitulation, it was agreed, for the convenience of
those who would go away, that the Turkish Fleet should retire to San Teodoro,
and the Land-Army withdraw farther off the Town. But this was not executed; and
when the Captain Bassa was moved to do it, he answered, that he did not mean to
draw off his Armies both by Land and Sea for six days together, thereby to make
way for the Venetians from Suda and other places to clap Succor into the Town;
but that they in the Town should make ready to march out at the same time both
by Land and Sea, and give him notice of it; and then to make way for their more
convenient passing, he would draw off his Armies on all sides.

Hereupon they began to imbark the Arms and Ammunition, and sick and wounded
people, with their Fireworks, and all that the streightness of the time would
permit them to carry away. And order was given the tenth of August to such as
were sound and able to walk, to prepare themselves to march out under the
Conduct of Seignior Angeli by Land: of which at the same time they advised the
Captain Bassa, desiring him to withdraw his Army and his Fleet as he had
promised; to which he returned answer, that it should be done. But the next
morning the Garrison, when they expected the Armies should have been drawn off,
and the Coasts clear, perceived upon the seaside the guards of the Galleys and
ships doubled, and upon the Land-side the Army drawn up in Battle about the
City in the form of a Half Moon with the points drawing together, as if they
intended to enclose the Garrison, as they marched out. This sudden alteration,
with the Message which was sent them by the Captain Bassa to march out, for he
would march in, gave them a reasonable jealousy that the Turks would break
their Faith, and either put them all to the Sword, or make them Slaves.
Hereupon Morosini ran to his Galleys, intending to get out to Sea, or to dye in
the attempt. And Navagiero and Albano intended to leave a memory behind them to
posterity, and with their Swords in their hands to sell their Lives as dear as
they could. But the retiring of the Turkish Fleet and Army presently dissipated
this umbrage: whereupon the three Galleys sailed away for Suda; and at the same
time that the Galleys put to Sea, Segnior Angeli marched out by Land with the
remains of the Garrison, which did not amount to five hundred.

It was a spectacle of astonishment to the Turks, when they saw that they who
had resisted them were but such a handful of men, as it was of glory to Angeli
and his Soldiers to find themselves so admired by their Enemies. For the
Selectar Bassa saluted Angeli with great courtesy, and did him much respect as
he passed, applauding his valor, and giving him two old Aga's for his Guard,
and commanding them to be careful of him, and not to leave him and his
Soldiers till they were out of danger. And thus ended the Siege of unfortunate
Canea; which would have sent the Ottoman Army home with disgrace, if either the
numbers of her men had been equal to their Courage, or that she had been as
well succored as she was defended.

The Selectar Bassa in the mean time had the less satisfaction in his Victory,
because it had cost him so much blood; and that he apprehended in his absence
his Competitors at Court might represent things to his disadvantage, and
possess Ibrahim that he had been too prodigal of his men. Therefore as soon as
he had taken order for the repairing of the ruins of the Siege, and putting
the place in defense, he picked out several of the finest Boys and most
beautiful Girls that were in the Town, and adorning them with rich Vests and
the best Clothes that could be got, sent them of a Present to Ibrahim. The best
of those which were left, he retained for his own service, making them so fine,
that they were envyed by their Neighbors; as if good Clothes could cover the
miseries of Servitude, or that Chains were less heavy for being gilded. Two
Churches he turned into Moschees, and filled them with most magnificent
adornments. He gave the Christians Liberty of Conscience, and behaved himself
at the beginning with such humanity and mildness to them, that they were in no
fear of him at all. Insomuch, that few of the Inhabitants would go away, but
resolved to settle themselves in Canea under their new Masters. But this gentle
Government did not continue long: for in a little time he returned to his
nature, and showed himself a Turk. So that when Gentlemen came to visit him, as
they were fain to do who lived under his power, he would put them to do very
mean Offices; saying, that the necessity which there was of present fortifying
the Town, would not permit him to make any distinction of persons.

And having it in his thoughts to make himself Master of Suda, without which
Canea was not secure, he commanded Premarino a Gentleman of the Venetian Colony
to go thither from him, and to let the Governors of it know that they would do
well to deliver it up voluntarily; which if they did, they might be sure to be
well used and respected as prudent Commanders, who knew how to comply with the
times, and with the fortune of the Conqueror; but if they did not, they must
expect to feel the cruel effects of his indignation. Premarino would have
excused himself from so unworthy an Embassy; but the Selectar telling him that
it was his duty as well as his interest to obey his new Prince, and threatening
him if he did not, the poor Gentleman, for fear of death, at last undertook so
dishonorable an employment. Imbarquing then upon a Galley he went for Suda, and
showed the Commission he had received from the Selectar to Seignior Malipiero
Proveditor of that place. Malipiero with great gravity told him, that he being
entrusted by his Prince with the defense of Suda, would never part with it as
long as his Soul was in his Body. And then with a fierce and incensed
Countenance he reproached Premarino with his unpardonable Treason in coming
upon such a Message; telling him, that he was unworthy the name of a Christian,
much more of a Noble Venetian, which was an Order of men so devoted to their
Country. This Answer he accompanied with a Cannon-shot, which broke the stem of
Premarino's Galley, and put him into great confusion. But at his return to
Canea, the Selectar Bassa gave him a Scymitar, and two rich Vests, and other
Regalo's, as marks of his favor.

The Selectar having now settled all things at Canea, and seeing no appearance
at present of any trouble from the Christians, prepared to return in Triumph to
the Court; first taking a general review of his Army of which he found wanting
some seventeen thousand men.

When he came to Scio he met Orders from the Grand Seignior which commanded him
to hasten to Constantinople, that he might be present at the solemnity of the
Bairan. Upon which he quitted the Army, and imbarking upon a fleet Galley,
arrived there eight or nine days before it.

Never man made his entry with more universal applause, or was received with
higher demonstrations of respect by all people, even by the Grand Seignior
himself, who rose from his Throne, and ran to meet him, extolling him to
Heaven, and loading him with Praises and Promises that he would never forget
his Services, or ever have any Favorite that should be so dear to him as he.
But see the instability of Humane things! In the revolution of a few days, this
Favorite, this Conqueror, and Darling of Fortune, by the instigation of some
of the women, and the cruelty and ingratitude of Ibrahim, fell into the last
disgrace.

The first thing these Enemies of his insinuated to Ibrahim, was, that this
great Bassa of whom his Majesty made such account, and whose name was so cried
up by the People, did not take Canea by his own valor and conduct, but by the
bravery of the Barbary Pirates, without whose assistance he had been repulsed
with shame. When by this invention they had undermined the esteem which the
Grand Seignior had for him, they began to talk of the vast riches Isuf had
gotten, how Canea was full of Silver and Gold; and that of so mighty a prize as
he had met with, he kept all to himself, and had not presented the least part
of it to the Sultan his Master; so that it would be thought weakness in his
Highness if he did not call him to account.

It was not hard, with such discourses as these, to work upon the jealous and
mutable nature of Ibrahim, especially where there was any concern of profit, he
being the most avaritious creature in nature. And now being angry with Isuf,
and inclined to quarrel, the first thing he took occasion to reproach him with,
was, that he had kept his Faith with the Christians at Canea, who all deserved
to be hanged for their presumption in resisting his Arms. To which Isuf
answered, that the Town being rendered upon Articles of War, he thought it
necessary to make them good, not only to avoid the infamy of breaking Faith,
but to invite other places to submit to the Ottoman Government; which if they
saw Conditions were not kept, would ^^'d out to despair, and never yield. But
Ibrahim being brutal, and ignorant, and understanding no Reason but his own
will, was not capable of such arguments; but every time he saw him, would cavil
at some thing or other; and at last told him plainly, that he must find him
some money; which if he did not do suddenly, he should pay for his disobedience
with his Head. To this Isuf made no reply, but withdrew himself from his fury.
Some days after he sent for Isuf, and with Outrages and Threats commanded him
to bring forth his treasure, declaring that if he did not, he would have him
strangled. At this language the Bassa was so disturbed, that loosing at once
both his patience and respect, he made Ibrahim this Answer: All the Treasure I
have, is the glory of my Actions. As for your menaces, they so little move me,
that I see nothing in the world which can make me desire to live. But I am not
surprised at this usage, when I consider that I have served a Prince who is a
Fool. Scarce was the words out of his mouth, but the Grand Seignior inflamed
with rage and indignation commanded he should be strangled. Being carried away
into another room, the new Grand Visir, who was Isufs creature, came to him,
and entreated him to beg Ibrahim's pardon, which he was confident would be
granted him if he implored it. But Isuf would by no persuasion be prevailed
with to do it, nor to ask any thing but three hours time to settle his Affairs;
at the end of which he was strangled, devoutly invoking the Name of God as he
was dying.

To this sad Catastrophe came Isuf Bassa, having lived thirty five years. He
was a man of extraordinary great sense, valiant, courteous, discrcet, just, and
adorned with such qualities as made him worthy of a happier end, and of a
better Master. In a few years he was come to that greatness, that he commanded
all the Ottoman Empire, and had been one of the greatest Subjects it ever had,
if it had been his fortune to meet with a worthy Prince. As he was on a sudden
exalted from nothing to the highest honors, he was as suddenly deprest, and
that with the compassion of all who knew him, even of him who commanded his
death. For Ibrahim when his rage was over had a mind to see him, and made his
Body be brought before him with the Bow-string about his neck. And when he
found him warm, hoping he had been alive, he rubbed his feet and his hands, and
commanded him to rise. But when he perceived for certain that he was dead, he
fell into ridiculous lamentations, and throwing himself upon his Body, kissed
him, and called him his Child, tormenting himself, and saying he was deprived
of the only person who was fit to govern his Empire.

But it was not long before vengeance fell upon Ibrahim, whose mind was so
mutable and full of contradiction, that it was impossible to please him;
ravenously covetous, and senselesly prodigal; so that no Treasure could suffice
his Expense, nor no Rapine his Avarice: so capriciously cruel, that he was
equally terrible to those he loved and those he hated. Nor was he only odious
to the People and Soldiers, but even to his own Ministers and Servants. But
that which most contributed to his ruin, was the discontent of the Janissaries,
who mutining that they were not paid, exclaimed against the Emperor, imputing
their sufferings to his folly in entering into an unjust War with the Venetians,
in which they said he had not only wasted the Treasure of the Empire, but the
blood of his best Soldiers, who perished every day in the Ditches of Candia.

At this time the Janissaries were very numerous in Constantinople, there being
no less than fifteen thousand of them there, which made them the more insolent.
And it happened that the Spahyes were as discontented as they; so that they
easily agreed to remove the cause of their grievance, and to depose Ibrahim.
The first step they made to this, was to demand one of his Favorites; which
with rage and menaces he refused to deliver them. But finding that would not
do, he at last gave him up, who was instantly torn in pieces. But that was not
a Sacrifice sufficient to appease their fury, which like an enraged Sea grew
higher and higher; some reviling Ibrahim, others crying up Mahomet the now
regnant Emperor of the Turks, who was then but six years old. The Child in
that noise and confusion was so affrighted, that he fell a crying, and ran
toward another room, and Ibrahim after him, with an intention to kill him,
that the Janissaries might not set him up. But he was prevented by the women,
who conveyed the little Prince from his fury, and put him into the hands of the
Janissaries, who immediately placed him upon the Throne; and girding a Sable to
his side, the chief Ensign of Majesty in that Government, proclaimed him
Emperor.

Ibrahim being thus dethroned, the Authors of it could not at first agree what
to do with his Person. Some, out of reverence to the Ottoman blood, would not
lay hands upon him, but rather have him end his days in prison. But others, who
thought they could not be safe till he was dead, not knowing what revolutions
might happen, let loose some of the Soldiers upon him, who first pulled him
down upon the ground, and then strangled him. To this disastrous end came
Sultan Ibrahim, not having so much as the comfort of being pityed, but dying
abhorred of all men, as an abortive of Nature, and the reproach of Fortune.

FINIS.
The INDEX.
ADvice given by a Gardener to Sultan Ibrahim, Page 41. Amurat Emperor of the
Turks puts his two Brothers Orcan and Bajazet to death, p. 4, and 5. Besieges
Babylon, p. 16. Takes it, p. 23. Makes his Entry in Triumph into
Constantinople, 32, and 33. Dies of a debauch of drinking, p. 35. Amurat Aga of
the Janissaries, p. 88. Ambassador of France in danger, 66, and 67. Ambassador
of Persia imprisoned, p. 11. Angeli passes with 300 men through all the
Turkish Camp into Canea, p. 112. Assan Bassa, p. 87. his great Courteousness,
p. 172.
BAbylon described, p. 8. Taken, p. 23. The Garrison put to the Sword after
Quarter given, p. 24. Consequences of the loss of it, p. 25. Biagio Giuliani
Governor of San Teodoro, blows up himself, with 2000 of the Enemy, p. 102.
Boisbodrant General of the Galleys of Malta slain, p. 58.
CApello General of the Ships refuses to succor Canea. p. 115. Canale a
Gentleman of Venice slain and pillaged by one of his Servants, p. 119. Candia
situated betwixt Europe, Africa, and Asia, p. 96. Its Qualities and Forces, p.
97, 98. Candiots surprised at the appearance of the Turks Armada, p. 99. Canea
Besieged, 109. Surrendered upon Articles, 161. Cornaro General of Candia, raises
the Militia of the Kingdom, to relieve Canea, p. 111.
DOlfino fetched to Constantinople by a Janizary and two Druggermen, p. 76.
Dominique Ottoman, Son of Ibrahim, p. 59. and 60.
GEneral of Barbary advises to fall upon Candia, p. 88. Georgio Morosini with
three Galleys makes his way through the Turkish Fleet into Canea, p. 126. Gelis
Aga as he was sailing for Rhodes, set upon by the Galleys of Malta and slain,
p. 59. Genouese offer assistance to the Venetians, so they may be treated with
the same respect as the Venetians, but rejected, p. 94. Georgian Lady taken at
Sea and carried to Malta, p. 59. Grand Vizier suspected to be a friend to the
Venetians, p. 72.
IBrahim imprisoned in a Tower of the Seraglio, p. 5. Ordered to be strangled.
p. 15. Saved by the Women of the Seraglio, p. 16. Saluted Emperor, p. 36.
Begins his Reign with great Reputation, p. 39. Informed by one of the Gardiners
of the State of his Affairs, p. 41. Grows bloody and uncounsellable, p. 50.
Designs a War against Malta, p. 55. Is diverted from it by his Ministers, p.
61. Thinks of Invading Sicily, p. 69. But resolves to turn his Arms upon
Candia, p. 72. Hides his design with deep dissimulation, p. 76. Makes Isuf
Bassa General of the Expedition, p. 82. Deposes the Mufti for being against
the War, p. 86. Owns his breach of Faith, and justifies it, p. 90. Isuf goes
barefoot to seek his fortune, p. 2. Made an under-Gardiner in the Seraglio.
Gives Intelligence to Ibrahim, p. 6, Sent for by the Grand Seignior Expects to
be put to death, p. 47. Is declared Selectar Bassa, p. 48. Made Bassa of the
Sea, p. 49. Is weary of the Court and thinks to retire, p. 50. Incensed against
the Venetians, p. 54. Persuades the War of Candia, p. 70. Is made Captain
General of the Expedition, p. 82. Arrives with his Fleet at Scio, where he has
public prayers made for his success, p. 86. Comes to an Anchor before Canea,
and lands his Army without opposition, p. 101. Besieges Canea, 109. Draws
together all his Forces both by Land and Sea to give a general assault, p. 134.
After many repulses has the Town delivered him upon Articles, p. 161. Takes
the most beautiful Boys and Girls in the Town to present to Ibrahim, p. 179.
sends to demand Suda, 181. Returns in triumph to Constantinople. p. 18.
Received with joy by Ibrahim, who rises from his Throne to meet him, p. 18.
Falls into disgrace, ibid. Will not ask his life, and is strangled, p. 190.
LIberality of the Sultana to him who brought her news of the taking of
Babylon, p. 27.
MAlipiero Proveditor of Suda, p. 122, 182. Mufty declares the War unjust, p.
84. Is reproved by the Grand Vizier, p. 85. And deposed, p. 86.
NAvagiero Proveditor of Canea, takes Turks in disguise sounding the depth of
the Sea before Canea, p. 77. His great resolution, p. 146, 151, 152.
OMinous Presages of the War of Candia, p. 94.
POpe sends the Venetians five Galleys, and publishes a Jubilee, p. 93.
QVeen Regent of France sends four Fireships and 100000 Crowns to assist the
State of Venice, p. 92.
RIva Proveditor of Tine, receives the Turkish Fleet as friends, and furnishes
them with all sorts of refreshments, p. 90.
SOranzo Ambassador at Constantinople, discovers that the preparations
pretended for Malta were designed against the State of Venice, p. 77.
Dissembles with the Captain General of the Turks, p. 83. Is arrested and made a
Prisoner, p. 91. Suda demanded by the Selectar Bassa, p. 181. Sultana's, who
saved Ibrahim from being strangled are strangled themselves by the command of
Amurat, p. 34.
TArpos King of Arabia waits upon Amurat as he goes for Babylon, p. 17.
Trenches of the Turk before Canea, p. 171.
VEnetians fearing to come to a Rupture with the Turk, are remiss in Arming, p.
79. Solicit Succors, p. 92.
ZAncarolo sent from Navagiero with a Present to the Selectar Bassa, p. 164.
Zembis, Nephew of the Selectar Bassa sent for a Hostage from the Turkish Camp,
p. 156. His generous deportment to Navagiero, p. 160.
Books lately Printed for Robert Kettlewel at the Hand and Scepter in
Fleetstreet.
1. THe Measures of Christian Obedience: Or, A Discourse showing what Obedience
is indispensably necessary to a Regenerate State, and what Defects are
consistent with it, for the Promotion of Piety, and the Peace of Troubled
Consciences. By John Kettlewel, Vicar of Coles-hill in Warwickshire, the
second Edition with large Additions. In Quarto, price bound 8 s. 2. A Journey
into Greece by Sir George Wheeler, in company of Dr. Spon of Lions, in six
Books. Containing, 1. A Voyage from Venice to Constantinople. 2. An Account of
Constantinople, and the adjacent Places. 3. A Voyage through the Lesser Asia.
4. A Voyage from Zant through several parts of Greece, to Athens. 5. An Account
of Athens. 6. Several Journeys from Athens into Attica, Corinth, Boeotia, etc.
With Variety of Sculptures. In Folio, price bound 15 s. 3. A Vindication of the
Primitive Christians, in Point of Obedience to their Prince, against the
Calumnies of a Book, entitled, The Life of Julian, written by Ecebolius the
Sophist. As also, The Doctrine of Passive Obedience cleared, in Defense of Dr.
Hicks; Together with an Appendix, being a more full and distinct Answer to Mr.
Thomas Hunt's Preface and Postscript. Unto all which is added, The Life of
Julian, enlarged. In Octavo, price bound 2 s. 6 d. 4. A Sermon Preached at the
Worcester-Feast, by George Walls Master of Arts, and Student of Christ-Church,
Oxon. Quarto, price stitcht 6 d. 5. The Treasures of the Sea, a Sermon preached
to the Mariners, by William Thompson. In Quarto, price stitcht 6 d. 6. An Help
and Exhortation to Worthy Communicating: Or, a Treatise describing the Meaning,
Worthy Reception, Duty and Benefits of the Holy Sacrament, and answering the
Doubts of Conscience, and other Reasons, which most generally detain Men from
it; together with Suitable Devotions added. By John Kettlewel, Vicar of
Coleshill in Warwickshire. In Twelves, price bound 3 s. 7. Two hundred Queries
Moderately propounded, concerning the Doctrine of the Revolution of Humane
Souls, and its Conformity to the Truth of Christianity. In Octavo, price bound
1 s. 6. d. 8. A Sermon Preached at the Church of St. Bridget, on
Easter-Tuesday, being the first of April 1684. Before the Right Honorable Sir
Henry Tulse Mayor of London. By George Hicks D. D. Dean of Worcester, and
Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty. In Quarto, price stitcht 6 d. 9. A
Spelling Book for Children. In twenty fours, price bound 6 d. 10. A Good
Subject: Or, the right Test of Religion and Loyalty. In a Sermon, Preached July
the 17th at the last Summer-Assizes held at Buckingham, for the County of
Buckingham. Before the Lord Chief Baron Mountague, and Sir Richard Holloway,
Knight, John Culling Esquire, High Sheriff. By Lewis Atterbury, D. D.

