A PLAIN and TRUE RELATION Of a Very Extraordinary CURE OF Mariane Maillard.

In a LETTER to a Friend.

Licensed,

December 21. 1693. Dan. Popler.



LONDON: Printed for Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall* 1693.

A PLAIN and TRUE RELATION Of a very Extraordinary Cure OF Mariane Maillard.
In a Letter to a Friend.
Dear Sir,
I Received yours of the 20th Instant, in which you desire to be Informed of
the Truth of a Story, which you say, you have seen in a small Printed Paper,
called, The Happy Virgin, of a French Girl lately Cured after an extraordinary
manner in a moment of time of an old inveterate Lameness, which has been
always thought Incurable by any Art of Man; as she was Reading the Story of our
Saviors Healing and Pardoning of the Paralitic; being therefore always ready
to serve you in what I may, and being my self also much affected with the
thing, I have enquired fully into the Matter, and do not in the least doubt of
its Truth and Certainty; though I am very much concerned and scandalized at
that Relation, which you have seen in that Printed Paper, because it is not
only untrue in many things, and particularly in what it says of an unhappy Fall
from a Table, which bruised and broke the Child's Hip and other Bones; which are
nothing so, but do very much disparage the Story it self in the Account it
pretends to give of it; and therefore having Informed my self sufficiently (as
I think) about it, I shall give you a Plain and True Relation of the matter of
Fact, without any Remarks, or Observations of my own, for the thing being
undoubtedly true, needs nothing to set it off, or recommend it to the World,
there being no Parties of Men that I know of that endeavor to serve themselves
by it any further than to be satisfied of its Truth, and give Glory to God for
the things that he has done; and indeed you are your self too great a Judge of
such watters, for me to Attempt any thing more than the Relation it self, which
in Obedience to your Commands, for such all your Requests are with me, I here
withal send you, and give you free leave to impart it to as many of your
Friends as you think fit.

MAriane Maillard, the Person of whom you desire an Acconnt, is the Daughter of
one Mr. John Maillard a French Protestant, of the Town of Cognar, in Saintonge,
where he Lived in good repute, being a Sword-Cutler by Trade, and a very Honest
Man, and had four Children, of which this Mariane was the Eldest, who when she
was Six Months Old, became Lame by an accidental Fall out of her Fathers Arms,
who being very fond of her, would be frequently playing with her, tossing her
up, and catching her again, till at last he very unhapyily let her fall to the
Ground, where she received, as it appeared afterward, a very considerable hurt
in her left side; which he not then apprehending any danger from, thinking that
it might be only a little Bruise that would be soon well again; and being
unwilling to tell his Wife of it, for fear of frighting, or troubling of her,
took no further care about it, till at last perceiving that her Hip was out, by
the wryness of the Leg and Foot, and very distorted motion when the Child began
to go, the Heel turning almost quite forward, he became extremely concerned at
it, and desired the help of several Surgeons, who after they had seen it,
declared it to be incurable, as did also diverse other Surgeons, both in
Switzerland and London; and particularly Mr. Dubatt, a very Eminent Surgeon in
Green-Street near Leister-Fields, to whom it was shown by her Parents
afterward, and that the Cure of it could not be attempted without endangering
the Life of the Child, and exposing it to the most exquisite Pain and Torture,
which the Parents by no means consenting to, chose rather to submit to the Will
of God, than try so cruel and desperate an Experiment: And by this means the
Child continued Lame, growing still more and more crooked and deformed as it
grew up, being always ready to fall as she went along; and thus she continued
till she was 6 or 7 years old, when her Father was forced to fly out of France,
upon the Dragooning part of the French Persecution, choosing rather to do so
than change his Religion; and so taking his Wife and Four Children with him, of
which this was the Eldest, he fled first into Switzerland, traveling only by
Night, enduring great hardships, and escaping many dangers; where having staid
some time, he came from thence through Germany into Holland; and at last came
over into England about the time of the late Revolution; but being extreme
poor, and not able to maintain his Wife and Children, he obtained to be made a
Sergeant in one of the French Regiments that went over into Ireland, under the
Command of Capt. De Lasherosi, in Col. Corbon's Regiment, where he served the
Regiment Two Years, but the Pay not answering his Expectation and Necessities,
he was forced to quit that Employment, and return to his Trade, and went over
every year with the Army into Flanders, there to mend and sell Swords. His Wife
also being an Industrious and Skillful Woman, went amongst the French Refugees,
to make the Beds, and clean the Rooms of those that were sick, by which means
she got a small subsistence for her self and Children, being paid an half penny
for each Room. And in this sort of Service she continued for some time, taking
this Girl, for the most part, along with her, who used, as far as she was able,
to assist her Mother, and soon became very serviceable to her, till one day as
she was attending thus upon one Madam Laulan, who fled hither from the French
Persecution, and formerly, for about 12 or 13 years together had been a
Domestic of Marshal Turene; during his being a Protestant, waiting upon his
Lady (a Person of Eminent Piety, Charity and Wisdom, and a great Patroness of
all of the Reformed Religion in France that needed her Countenance and
Assistance) in the Quality of her Woman, who perceiving the Girl very towardly,
and willing to do any thing she could for her Mother, was so pleased with her,
(being then very ill her self, and having a Son also sick at the same time, who
is since dead) that she took her to look to them both, and to go about upon
Errands as she had occasion, instead of a Nurse, or other Servant, which she
was not able to maintain; And with her she lived Three Years, doing all things
with greater care and hardiness than could have been expected from her Years
and Condition, being then but a little above nine years old, and withal so much
afflicted with extreme Pains by reason of her Lameness, that she rather seemed
to need one to attend upon her, than to be put to attend upon an other; and
indeed if mere poverty had not forced her to it, she might well have been
excused from that sort of Service; but her Parents not being able to maintain
her better, were glad of the opportunity to dispose of her so well, knowing
Madam Laulan to be a very pious and good tempered Woman, and indeed the Girl
was so pleased with her New Service, and took such a liking to her Mistress,
that she seemed well contented with her Condition, and bore her Affliction with
the greatest patience (tho she often felt great pain in her Hip and Leg on that
side on which she was Lame, especially in Foggy Misty Weather.)

The only thing that most sensibly Afflicted her, was the scoffing persecution
which she daily met with from the Boys in the Streets; who seeing her strange
distorted manner of goiug (which was indeed very unusual) were wont to follow
her, and pull her with great Rudeness, calling her Crooked Monster, etc. of
which she frequently complained to her Mrs. who being a very good Christian,
gave her still the best Advice and Comfort that she could, telling her, that
there was no help for her. and therefore she must bear it with patience; which
indeed she did for a long time.

But on Sunday, the 26th of November, last past, as she returned home in the
Evening from Church, she was much concerned to see a Man, as she judged, about
Forty years of Age, join with the Boys in abusing and tormenting of her,
telling her Mistress when she came home, with many Tears, that she thought he
might have been better Employed than to Laugh at her, who had already but too
much Sorrow and Affliction from her Condition; her Mistress endeavored to
Comfort her again, as she used to do, and told her, That if she would thus
trouble her self every time she was so used, she would have euough to do, and
never want for Vexation, since her Lameness was Incurable, and would remain so
all her Life long, and that therefore she must resolve to be Patient, and to
Commit her Cause to God, using several other Arguments with her to the same
purpose, to pacify her Mind, and allay her Trouble, and the more to put these
thoughts out of her head, having eaten a little Supper, she bid her take her
Bible and Read a Chapter to her, as she used to do every day in the New
Testament. The place that she was then to Read, in the course of her daily
Reading, was the 2d of St. Mark; but opening the Bible, she happened to meet with
that place of St. Matt. where the Evangelist speaks of St* Peter's Mother, who
lay sick of a Fever, and was by our Savior's touching of her immediately cured.

Her Mrs. liking that place, because it had some relation to her present
distemper, which was an intermitting Fever, and r^turn'd every day, and
continued for a long time, bid her read that out before she turned to her own
Chapt. Which she did, and when she had done they had some discourse upon it,
the Mrs. saying, Oh* how happy should I be if I were thus delivered from my
Fever: And I (adding the maid) if I were Cured of my Lameness. After this she
turned to her own Chapter, which hepned to be the 2 d of St. Mark; where upon
reading the Story of the man that was sick of the Palsy, whose Faith our
Savior there commends; amongst the rest that assisted in letting him down
through the Roof into his presence, and whom he not only cures, but grants
besides the forgiveness of his sins too: She made a stop, and began to exclaim
against the Scribes, not only for persisting in their incredulity, but for
accusing our Savior also of Blasphemy, saying to her Mrs. Oh how wicked were
these unbelieving Scribes to speak so of our Savior, when he had done so many
Miraeles; I am sure I should have done quite otherwise; and if I should hear of
such a thing I should immediately run to him and believe. And whilst she was
thus speaking, she had her leg stretched out toward her Mrs. who bid her pull
it back, telling her it was not decent to put it so near her; to whom the maid
replied, Mrs. I did not complain much to day because you forbad me, but I do
assure you I have felt a great deal of pain, as I use to do in all misty
weather. And at the same time as they were thus talking together, they heard
suddenly a great snap, which they both perceived very plain, the Mrs. thinking
it had been something in the fire that made that noise; but the maid rising up
very hastily, cries Out, Mrs. Did you hear the noise? It was my Hip-bone that is
certainly restored to its place; and throwing her self upon her mrs. with such
transports of Joy, as if she had been beside her self; she embraced her knees
about so fast, that she could not get her off, saying, my dear mistress, I am
well, my pain is all gone, and I hear something that says, thou art cured, my
joy is so great that I cannot tell where I am, nor what I do: pray feel your
self and see here the hollow place is filled up, and the swelling quite gone;
Oh God be thanked; pray let me go and show it the Landlord and Landlady, and
the Maid below Stairs; and so walked several turns about the Room without any
pain at all, her foot being now strait as the other. And thus she has continued
ever since, only that leg being a little shorter than the other (perhaps
through the long continuance out of its place which hindered its due growth, and
the necessary extension of the Nerves and Sinews; She therefore halts a little
still, but has nothing at all of that monstrous distorted lameness which she
had before, and which all that knew her then, and have seen her now, cannot but
extremely wonder at, and praise God for.

Her Mrs. seeing her in these transports of joy, was afraid at first that she
was or would be quite beside her self; but considering the matter well, and
seeing with her own Eyes the wonderful change that was made in her condition,
the hollow place which she had often, and but that very day seen and felt,
perfectly filled up, the bone in its proper place, and her leg and foot now
strait and right as it should be; She bid her not think of going down stairs
that night, but rather fall upon her knees, and give God his due praise, who
had done so much for her, and who in a minutes time had cured a pain and
lameness that had been of 12 years continuance, which no Art of man could do;
and so they accordingly did, it being then late, went both to bed, where the
poor Girl could hardly rest or sleep for Joy. The next morning she showed it to
as many of her acquaintance as she could meet with, who could not but wonder at
so strange and unlooked for a thing. Her Parents savv it with tears of Joy,
and have, as they ought, sent Bills into the Churches, that God might be the
more glorified, and his praises be set forth the better by whole Congregations.

Thus, Sir, I have given you a plain, but very true and exact Account of this
Matter, in compliance with your earnest and well intended enquiry after it, to
which I might indeed add, for the full Confirmation of it, a great number of
Certificates and Affidavits (having some by me) from many hundreds of Persons
that have seen and known this Girl both before and since her Cure, and are able
to give a full and satisfactory Account of her, to all that shall be desirous
more particularly to be Informed about her; but to what purpose should I give
my self and you that Trouble, since the same enquiry into the Truth of those
Certificates and Affidavits, which is necessary for the confirmatiod of them,
would be sufficient to satisfy any body of the Truth of the thing; let it
suffice therefore to show you that she was Personally known to Mr. Du Batt,
whom I mentioned before; to the Lady Sunderland, and her Family, whether she
often resorted, and where she was always well accepted, and received many
Charitable Kindnesses, both in Meat and Money, and who will all Testify to the
Truth of her Lameness; as will also most of Mr. Hampden's Family, whither she
also went very frequently to sell some little things for her Mrs. which they
used in Charity and Compassion to Buy of her; to these I might add above 100
persons more of this Nation, besides an innumerable company of her own, who all
knew and pitied her sad condition, and who now rejoice and wonder to see her
so perfectly Cured in so short a time. One thing indeed will be necessary for
me to give you a little account concernidg the place of her abode, and where
she may be found, that so all doubting persons may be fully satisfied in the
Truth of this matter that are any ways desirous to be informed of it, and when
this strange and amazing Cure was Wrought, she lived with her Mrs. who Lodged
at an Apothecary's House whose Name is Tent, in an Ally at the East end of S.
James's Church, that goes up from Germain-Street into Pickadilly; but Tent
being behind hand with his Rent, went away privately with his Goods on Sunday
Night, the 17th instant, which the Landlord hearing of, came the next day to
the House, and finding Mrs. Laulan in it, Seized her Goods, supposing them to
be Tents, and turns her and the Girl out of doors; upon which they were forced
to part, till Mrs* Laulan can get her Goods again. In the mean time she lodges
among some of her acquaintance, but as yet at no certain place. The Girl is now
with her Father, at the corner of Newport-Ally near Soho, and may be seen and
spoken with at any time by any that desire it. Her Father is a Sensible Good
Man, and no vvays exalted above what is fitting for a Good Christian upon such
an Extraordinary Occasion, being more Glad and Thankful in the Mercy, than any
ways officiously concerned to have any body believe it; whicb does indeed seem
to me to Give no little Credit to the truth of the story it self.

I shall now conclude, Sir, in the words of the Parents of the man that was
born blind, who told the inquisitive and unhelieving Pharisee, That he was
their Son, and was born blind, but they could not tell how he came to see. The
same, in a manner, may hundreds say about this Child, That they knew her to be
lame, and now see her cured, but how she came to be so they know not, and can
believe it to be no other than a very extraordinary and amazing thing. Which is
all at present from,

Sir, Your humble servant, E. H.


