A Christian SALUTATION AND GREETING Unto all the True Christian People of God
(Often in scorn called QVAKEKS,) Who are the true Church of Christ, the
Firstborn in England, In this latter AGE and GENERATION. From a Friend,
Brother and Companion with all the Saints and Children of Light, in their
Sufferings and Tribulations; And also a Partaker (through the Grace of God) of
the Blessed Inheritance with all the Saints in Light. John Higgins.

LONDON, Printed, for Robert Wilson, 1663.

A Christian Salutation and Greeting, unto all the true Christian People of God
(often in scorn called QVAKERS) etc.
MOst dear and well-beloved Friends and Brethren, who have received Grace,
Mercy, and Peace from God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, in this the
glorious Day of his blessed Appearance, with the dayspring from on High, unto
the turning of your Captivity, and freely ransoming your Souls out of the
horrible Pit and Gulf of darkness and misery, which is the dwelling (you know)
of all the Children of disobedience.

O ye dear Children of the Light, and true born Sons of the Morning; you above
all the Families on the Earth are known unto the Lord, through your Faith and
Obedience unto Christ, the true Light and Power of God, who is indeed become
the Captain of our Salvation; and you whose Souls are made subject to the Light
and Power of his eternal Spirit, and become Followers of the Son of God, the
Lord from Heaven, who is a quickening Spirit; here his precious Life is felt,
known, and enjoyed by all his faithful Followers; and blessed are you, ye dear
and well-beloved of the Father, who are become willing and obedient Followers
of the Lamb in Righteousness, in this the day of his mighty Power and blessed
Appearance unto you all, who were once (as well as others) scattered upon the
barren Mountains, and knew not the voice of the Shepherd of Israel, and then,
Oh then, what were your Travels, your Sorrows, and Weepings, and Mourning,
because of the want of your Beloved! This was once my state with you, O ye that
were oppressed, and afflicted in spirit, and traveled in pain, until the
dawning of the Light and Day of the Lord, that we came to see Him whom our
Souls loved, and to follow him faithfully in Righteousness, who is now become
our Leader and Commander, and the Captain of our Salvation: Oh! what might we
now say of the wonderful Works of the Lord our God, which he has wrought for
us, and in us, since the day of his blessed Appearance, that our Souls became
subject unto his Power, and Followers of Him in Spirit and in Truth? Oh! how
did he utter his Voice against the man of Sin, insomuch that the Earth did fear
and tremble at his Appearance? And how caused he the Rocks and the Mountains to
melt as wax before Him? for his Appearance was to Ransom his own Seed that was
then in great Captivity and Bondage, and to chain the Devil and Satan, that
crooked Serpent, never more to Deceive. Oh, this is He whom we have seen and
known, leading Captivity captive; and He it was that wounded and healed, that
killed and made alive, that the living might praise and magnify his Name, that
now lives and reigns for ever, and for evermore.

O ye Children of the Light, and Sons of Sion's King, there is none knows the
Womb of your Conception, but the Children of her own Bowels, who is the Mother
of us All; nor none of the Sons of Bondage knows the Royalty of your Birth and
Generation, but those of the same Offspring and Lineage, of the everlasting
Seed of blessing, unto which all the Promises of God are Yea, and Amen for
evermore.

And, O thou Daughter of Sion, there is no Stranger that ever knew the Travel
and Sorrow of thy day before Conception, and now indeed there is none of the
uncircumcised Children of Bondage that can inter-meddle with thy Joy, and the
Lot of thine Inhe itance.

O thou that wast once as a silly Dove in the Wilderness, and as an Owl in the
Desert, and even as a Pelican in the most desolate places, and then did thou
travel on, as in a vast howling Wilderness, beset with sorrow and travels on
every hand; and then, Oh, how did all the Egyptians and the Uncircumcised
rejoice at thy sorrow, and sported themselves with the brokenness of thine
Heart, and the travel of thy Soul, not considering that all this came upon
thee, as the disposings and orderings of thy Maker, thy Husband, the Lord of
Hosts is his Name, so as to humble, and sanctify thy soul, and to cleanse thee
from all Fornication, that thou might be his own Beloved, and his peculiar
Treasure, and the choicest of ten thousands.

O ye dearly beloved of my Soul, surely that eye which has seen the great and
wonderful Works of the Lord our God, wrought in us and for us, cannot but
admire his infinite glorious Acts, even with great Admiration. And certainly
that Heart that understands these things cannot but fear, and dread, and
reverence his holy Name and Power, even from henceforth and for evermore.

Now at his first Appearance (dearly Beloved) you know, it was he that made us
to differ from the world of Ungodly, he made us sensible of his eternal Light
and Truth shining in our hearts, and thereby he gave us an understanding to
eschew the evil, and cleave unto that which was good, and thus he changed our
minds, and converted our hearts, from the darkness unto the Light, and from
Satan's power unto the power of the Lord our God. And in this eternal Power and
Spirit, in the Light of the Lord Jesus Christ, we have waited upon him, and he
has been with us, and answered us, and now dwells in us and amongst us,
according to his Promise, and he is become our Teacher and Leader, and the
Captain of our Salvation.

And thus he becomes Wisdom, Sanctification, and Redemption, unto all his
faithful Followers, whom he has led, and is leading, (as his ransomed Ones)
out of the great Captivity, and Bondage, and Servitude of the Devil, the power
of Darkness, who has ruled in times past, as Lord and King over them, and has
led them (also) captive at his will, into the disobedience against God. And now
blessed are all ye that are come to know him whom the Father has ordained to
be the Messenger of his everla^iing Covenant, and that is leading on unto
Salvation.

And blessed are you that follow him in faithfulness whither soever he goes;
for now he is not only leading of you out of the sin and Pollution that once
lodged in your own hearts, but he is also leading of you, by his eternal Spirit
and Power, out of Antichrist's Kingdom, out of Babylon and Egypt's Darkness,
that ye may be a peculiar People, a Royal Nation, and a chosen Generation,
faithfully holding fast the Testimony of the Lord, your God in Righteousness,
against all the Impositions and carnal Commandments of Babylons Merchants. Oh,
this is your duty, ye called and chosen of God, and that which is your
acceptable obedience with him for evermore, That you Fear, and Reverence, and
Worship him, who is the Lord God everlasting, and him only to serve, not to bow
down to Antichrist, nor any of his carved Images upon any pain or penalties
whatsoever; for if you should, the Lord would not hold you guiltless, but he
would enter into Judgment with you. Now then follow your Leader, Christ, the
Captain of your Salvation, and mind the leadings of his Light, Power and Spirit
in your own hearts, and your feet shall not err from the way of peace, but he
shall be your safe Conducte^, and a sure defense round about you; so that when
Storms and Tempests, Temptations and Tribulations do beset you on every hand,
yet fear you not, but turn in quietly unto him that is your strength, and fear
his name, and grieve not his Spirit by murmuring, but repose your whole Faith
and Confidence in him for evermore, and so he will never leave you nor forsake
you, but will go before you, leading on, conquering and to conquer, and he will
fight your Battles, and work all your works in you and for you.

And thus dearly Beloved, we are Witnesses of that great Engagement of the Lamb
and his Followers against Antichrist that man of Sin, and his whole Train of
Idolaters; and behold, the Word is gone out from him that is higher then the
highest, The Lamb and the Saints shall get the Victory. And now my dear
Brethren and Companions in the Lamb's warfare, think it not strange if the man
of Sin muster up all his Forces against you, for to cause you (if it were
possible) to bow down unto his Image; and for to cause you to bow under his
Rule and Government, he shall use great violence, instruments of War, and
carnal Weapons shall be formed against you, but behold those are not the
Weapons of your Warfare, but you are to make desence in the Name, and Power,
and Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose Weapons are not carnal, but
Spiritual and Mighty, through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, etc.
And behold, here is the Faith and Patience of the Saints.

And in this Faith and Patience, Good men, Holy men and Prophets of God, in
former times finished their course, and kept the Faith, and thereby obtained a
good Report amongst the Generations of the Just, and are set down in the
Kingdom of their Father, having overcome, through Faith and Patience in the
Spirit and Life, which is the blood of the Lamb. And now though Antichrist may
have so much power as to cast some of you into Prison, and exercise great wrath
and cruelty toward you; yea, though it might extend so far as to take the
lives of some from the earth; yet you are not thereby overcome, but therein you
are made Conquerors, even through death to Reign in the Kingdom of the Father
for evermore.

And now my dear Brethren and Companions, in the Faith and Patience, in the
midst of Tribulations, put on Boldness and Confidence in the Name of the Lord,
and in the Godly Resolution of your upright Hearts, follow the Lamb through the
loss of all, rather than to be ensnared to fall and be taken, for that will
bring sorrow and misery into your Dwellings. O ye Dear, and Called, and Chosen
of God, he has long been preparing you, for the mighty day of his Conquest of
Antichrist that Man of Sin. Oh how powerfully has he Appeared, even the Lord
our Righteousness, to draw and to lead away your hearts from the Pleasure,
Riches and Vanities of this World, that those things might not be as
Temptations unto you, so as to look back, be ensnared, and taken; yea he has
already proved and tried you, and your faithfulness is known unto the Lord, and
altogether acceptable with our God, and he will seal you up for his own, and
will crown you with the Beauty of his own Image, and with Glory, Honor and
Praise, and that in the sight of his Enemies: Wherefore blessed are you all,
that continue Patient in well-doing, and saithful Followers of the Lamb unto
the end; ye shall receive a Crown of immortal Life, and Heavenly Blessings in
this Life, and in that which is to come.

And so dear Friends and Brethren every where, herein the Lord has Honored
you, and Blessed you, that have waited upon him in the Light, his blessed
Presence, Power and Life, is with us, and dwells in us, and amongst us, who is
our Strength and Rock, and heavenly Bl^^sedness, both in this World, and that,
which is to come. And now unto him that is come unto us, and has pitched his
Tent in us, and that is able to keep unto the utmost, is my Soul and Body also,
with yours freely offered up, unto his Heavenly Protection, who is worthy to be
Feared, Reverenced and Obeyed, and his pure Holy Name to be Blessed, Praised
and Magnified over all, even from henceforth and for evermore,

Amen.
I am your dear Brother, and Companion in Tribulations, and in the Kingdom and
Patience of our Lord Jesus Christ. John Higgins.
London 24th. of the 7th. Month, 1663.
THE END.

