APHORISMS UPON The New Way of Improving CIDER, OR MAKING CYDER-ROYAL, LATELY
DISCOVERED For the Good of those Kingdoms and Nations That are Beholden to
Others, and Pay Dear for WINE.

SHOWING, That Simple Cider, frequently Sold for Thirty Shillings per Hogshead,
(viz. Three-half-pence a Quart) may be made as Strong, Wholesome, and pleasing
as French Wine usually Sold for Twelve-pence a Quart; Without Adding any thing
to it, but what is of the Juice of Apples; And for One Penny or
Three-half-pence a Quart more Charge, may be made as good as Canary commonly
Sold for two Shillings. As also, how one Acre of Land now worth Twenty
Shillings, may be made worth Eight or Ten Pound per Annum.

To which are Added, Certain Expedients concerning RAISING and PLANTING OF
Apple Trees, Gooseberry-trees, etc. With Respect to Cheapness, Expedition,
certain Growing, and Fruitfulness, beyond what has hitherto been yet made
known.

By RICHARD HAINES.

LONDON: Printed by George Larkin for the Author, and are to be had at the
Marine and Carolina Coffee-House in Burching Lane near the Royal Exchange;
Until our Royal-Cyder-Office be Erected for Granting of Licenses, of which we
shall give a further Account shortly. 1684.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY, TO ALL Kings, Princes, and States, Who have No Wines
of their own Production; ESPECIALLY To the most Sacred Majesty OF HIS SOVEREIGN
LORD THE King of Great Britain, etc.
AS ALSO To their most Excellent Majesty's, the Kings of the two Northern
Crowns; And to the High and Mighty Lords; the States General of the United
Provinces.
May it please Your Majesty's and Lordships:
FOod, Drink, and Raiment, are the prime Requisites of Humane Life. Of Drinks,
the Juice of the Grape is esteemed the most Generous; But since Providence has
not Indulged every Nation with That of its own Growth; and for that, though the
more Southern Countries Enjoy it, yet the more Northern that are without it, do
by the Coldness of their Climate most stand in need of strong Drinks; And since
Ale and Beer is too Cloudy and heavy; and to furnish themselves with Wine, they
exhaust yearly a great part of their Treasure and Native Commodities; I
thought, if I could find out and inform that part of the World, how to prepare
a sort of Liquor which might Answer all the Ends and Advantages of Wine, and
yet be of Your own Countries Production, and afforded much Cheaper, I might
Deserve well of Your Majesty's and Lordships, and all Your Subjects, both now
and to Posterity.

That which nearest approaches the Nature of Wine, is the Juice of Apples,
Wildings, Pears and other Fruits, (commonly called Cider, Perry, Current,
Cherry and Gooseberry-Wine etc.) And with all or some of these, Your respective
Territories are, or may be plentifully Furnished. The Defect hitherto has been,
First, That few have applied themselves to making of Cider. Secondly, Much
fewer are Those that know how to make even tolerable common simple Cider.
Thirdly, Their Cider who made it Best, Falls short of the Goodness of Wine in
strength and Delicacy; and besides, by reason of its Coldness and Crudities,
was apt to Generate Wind, and other Distempers, and so proved not so wholesome
to the Body.

For all these Inconveniences, Here is found a proper and certain Remedy; The
SECRET is brought home to Your Doors, and in the Following Papers spread before
You; So that hencefoth, after a little Industry, You need not ( for General
use) be beholden to any Forreiner, for their Wines but Furnish Your selves as
well, and abundantly Cheaper, at Home, and Drink for Your own Healhs, without
Despising the Discoverer in Variety of Liquors of Your own Production,
altogether as good and Satisfactory.

How this Overture may be Resented, I am not Prophet enough to foresee; The
Incredulity of our King Henry the Seventh (tho justly numbered amongst the
wisest Monarchs of that Age) is reported by some Authors to have cost him the
Immense loss of the West-Indian Treasures, which have since Enricht all the
Kings, Princes, and States of Europe: And even Ferdinand of Castile was
beholding to the Importunities of his Lady Isabella, for accepting that
proffered Prize, and the Discovery of that New World, from a despised Columbus.
And however this Present thing, or my self may be Censured or Contemned at
first; yet without the least doubt I believe, that a time will come, wherein
all or most of the Kings, Princes, and States, or at least their Subjects, in
those Nations that have no Wines of their own, may have Cause to Rejoice either
in the Use or Advantage, which themselves may make thereof; And that too,
without Raising any Burdensome Taxes, or putting their Subjects to heavy
Charges.

For as it must undoubtedly be of great Profit to all Nations that are
unfurnisht with Wine of their own Production, especially, those whose Soil will
afford the Materials (In which respect I forget not the Kingdom of Poland, to
whom I made my Endeavors to transmit my Proposals, but by reason of the remote
distance and small Intercourse from hence thither, I could not gain an
Opportunity; However I cannot but Recommend it as a thing of great Moment to
that Renouned King and Nation, their Country being as proper for it as any in
the World) so as for Climates which yield not Fruits Necessary, they will yet
however Fare much the better too, since less VVines being spent in those
Nations that used to take off the greatest Quantities ( viz. two or three
Millions worth of Wines and Brandy's per Annum) The French, etc. must then be
necessiated to force a Trade, by selling them much Cheaper, than ever they
would have done, were it not for this Discovery.

Upon the whole matter, as Your most Excellent Majesty's, and Your renowned
Lordships, have by Your several Letters Patents, Contracts, and Resolutions,
given me Assurances of a Proportionate Reward and Encouragement; If upon the
Discovery, the thing should prove Feazible, and be Accepted, or Suffered to be
practiced in Your several Dominions, so Relying upon Your Royal and Honorable
Words (than which nothing here below can be more Sacred) to Your Justice
Wisdom, and Goodness, I Humbly referr my self, and these my well-intended
Endeavors, Remaining

To Your Majesty my dread Sovereign, a most Humble Loyal and Faithfully Devoted
Subject. And to you the other most Excellent Kings, and Honorable Lords, A
most Humble, And Ready Servant, To my Power, Richard Haines.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO ALL LOYAL SUBJECTS IN HIS Majesty's Kingdom of England AND
Principality of Wales.
Whereas our Sovereign Lord the King, has been Graciously Pleased by his
Royal Letters Patent, to give and grant unto Me and Partners, the sole Use and
Benefit of my Invention in the ensuing Treatise Discovered; With all the
Profits and Advantages that may, can, or shall be made thereof; With
prohibition to all others from doing or imitating the same, within all His
Majesty's Dominions; For and during the Term of Fourteen Years.

And forasmuch as such our Invention may be very desirable, useful, and
beneficial to all or most part of his Majesty's Subjects; Therefore to the
intent, They may not be withheld from the same, Notwitstanding it might be
abundantly most for our particular advantage to keep it in our Hands, and
Reserve it wholly to our selves, since it is, That we might gain Five or Six
Pound by every Hogshead, when no such is made in our Nation, but by our selves.
Yet nevertheless to demonstrate the Greatness of our Zeal to the Public; and
how ready we are to postpone our private Interests thereunto; That no
reasonable person may have any Color to Complain; And that all that are
willing, may have the opportunity to make sufficient Benefit of this our
Invention; We do by these Presents declare, That we are willing and content,
That this our said Invention shall be free to all His Majesty's Subjects in
England and Wales, Upon the Terms, Limitations, and Conditions following, viz.
1. That every Person that shall or will sell the said Cyder-Royal, or other
Liquors herein after mentioned, either by Wholesale or Retail, shall yearly
have a Deputation or Allowance from us so to do, paying us One and Twenty
Shillings and Sixpence per Annum. 2. That any of His Majesty's Subjects in
England or Wales, paying the like Sum of Twenty One Shilling Sixpence, shall
for the whole Term of Fourteen Years have the like Deputation or Allowance, to
practice or use the same for his particular use, viz. so far, as to make
Cyder-Royal, and all or any the aforesaid Liquors, to be spent by themselves
and their Respective Private Families. And to entertain their Friends therewith
in their own Houses; provided they do not fell, or otherwise dispose thereof.


This is the method we propose, The Terms whereof are so easy and profitable
to those to whom they are offered; That we hope no Loyal Subject may have the
least Cause to dislike; Nor any be found so unreasonably perverse, as to oppose
or contemn the Authority of His Majesty's Gracious Letters Patent, or to envy
the Patentees so small a Consideration and Acknowledgment, who out of Love and
Good Will to the Public, are contented with that which will not amount to one
tenth part of the benefit we might make thereof, if we kept the thing wholly
in our own particular Hands and Management.

And supposing these our reasonable Terms may be readily Embraced, we shall be
Content to abide by and continue the same. But however, forasmuch as we know,
That there are a discontented troublesome and envious sort of people in the
World, who are naturally apt not only to envy and abuse them whom they are
beholding to, for their own VVelfare; but also delight to affront and contemn
the Authority of His Majesty's Laws and Royal Prerogative therefore, as to
Venders, viz. All such as sell either by VVholesale or Retale, we intend their
Deputations or Licenses shall be but from one year to another; To the intent,
that in case the method we have proposed be thwarted and endeavored to be
obstructed, we may the next year, take to our selves the sole benefit of our
Invention granted; And those only to have the selling and uttering thereof as
shall give security to take it of our selves and no others.

But for those that sell it not, they upon sending in their money as aforesaid,
shall freely enjoy the same, for our whole Term, upon the condition before
offered.

If it be objected, That this way of improving Cider, etc. by me discovered, is
so obvious and easy, that it deserves not the Honor of being called a Project
or Invention.

To this I crave leave to answer -- 1. That every thing seems easy when it is
known, and yet if it be a useful thing, those that knew it not before, will be
ungrateful not to Acknowledge an obligation to him that first taught them. 2.
If it seem now so plain when you find it here discovered, it was lately not
so; for else how came it not to be practiced before? Nay, (though it is not
difficult to add to things once found out) yet the ordinary Objector, even
after I have given the hint, and in general disclosed the thing, would perhaps
find it not very easy to advance his Liquors to the proposed perfection,
without consulting those Rules and Instructions which I have here laid down,
having by frequent Trials and Experiments found them most effectual. The Old
Fable is significative, of the Mag-Pye reaching the Wood Pigeon to build a
Nest; to every Direction the other contemptuously Cried -- This I can do, and
This I can do; which at last so incensed the Pie, that she left her in the
midst of her work with this Reprimand, -- Then do it, then do it; and ever since
the simple Pigeon for want of a little patience and gratitude is forced to be
content with a sorry imperfect Lodging for her young ones. So in the present
Case, suppose any shall say, this is easy, I doubt not but to do it and mend it
too my self -- Be it so, yet still I know not that you have more reason to
Boast, than the Cobbler, who says he mends what the Shomaker makes, whereas had
not the latter first made the Shoe, the former would have had no occasion for
such a Vapor.

3dly. Inventions are to be honored and esteemed for that Usefulness and
Benefit they afford, rather than for their uneasiness to be found out at first,
or their difficulty to be practiced afterward; Whether a man by sagaciousness
of Judgment, or a long Industry and frequent Essays, find out a thing; Or
whether it occur to him suddenly by the friendly suggestion of his good Genius,
it is all one to the rest of the world. Nay, whenever the thing is really
useful, the more easy it is in practice, the more ought it to be valulued,
because thereby it is likely to be more publicly beneficial, and consequently
the people are the more beholding to the Inventer. Especially he if be such an
one as this Discoverer; who has at his own cost and charge, (besides this
thing) found out and contrived certain Expedients by which not only the Wealth
of the Kingdom of England might increase at least Twenty, if not Thirty Hundred
Thousand Pounds, and His Majesty's Revenue at least Five, Hundred Thousand
Pounds Per Annum for ever; But also all poor People not having any Habitations
of their own, or wherewith to Live of themselves, may be so provided for, That
there shall not be one Beggar in the Nation, nor any have reason to Complain
for want of a comfortable Employment, Food, Raiment or Habitation.

As my several Printed Proposals presented to his Majesty and both Houses of
Parliament, do most plainly demonstrate; Insomuch that I having presented my
Petition to the Honorable House of Commons, the thing was so readily approved
of. That an Order was made for bringing in a Bill Pursuant to the effect of my
Proposals, Nemine Contra-Dicente; Which Bill I at my further Charge, procured
to be drawn and prepared; And had not the Person whom I first entrusted, and
who promised to read my Petition in the House of Commons, from time to time
delayed so to do, till within a week before the Dissolution of the Parliament;
there is no reason to doubt but it had past into an Act, and at this day been
practiced, to the Inestimable benefit of the Nation.

So that it will be very hard, and the highest discouragement imaginable to all
persons in future times, to study to promote the Welfare of their Country, by
new and profitable Inventions and Expedients, If a person who has thus for many
years made it his Business to serve the Public so considerably, to his great
expense of time and charge, to the value of diverse Hundred Pounds, may not
without being Envied, repined at, or obstructed, be afforded and allowed to
reap the benefit of his Majesty's most Gracious Grant (whose Goodness never is
wanting to any that find out Improvements advantageous to his People)
especially this present Discovery, being such as not only tends so much to the
Public Utility, but also to the great Profit of all that please to make use of
it on such easy and condescending Terms, prejudicial to our own Interests, as
those herein before offered.

Which as they are heartily tendered for a General Good, so we hope they will be
received with that Acceptance and Gratitude, and Respect to His Majesty's Royal
Grant, as becomes all Considerate Men and Good Subjects.

APHORISMS Upon the New Way of Improving Cider, etc.
THe Secret by me proposed to the before mentioned most Excellent Princes and
Honorable States, and for the Discovery of which, They have been severally
pleased, by their Gracious Letters Patent, Contracts, or Resolutions, to
Promise me a Reward or Gratuity, is as follows; that is to say,

To make the Cider, Perry, Juice, Wines or Liquors of Apple, Pears, Wildings,
Crabbs, Cherries, Goose-Berries, Currants, and Mul-Berries, to he as Strong,
Wholesome, and Useful, as French, Spanish, and other Wines now in frequent Use;
And that thereby the Revenues of the said Kings and States may severally be
Increased more than One-Hundred-Thousand Pounds per Annum. And yet the said
Cider, etc. So Improved, to be made and afforded for 3. d. per Quart, as good
as the Wine now usually Sold for 12.d. per Quart. Which Cider so Improved, for
its Excellency, and to Distinguish it, in Name, from Common simple Cider, may
fittly be called, CYDER-ROYAL.

All which I now come to Explain, and Demonstrate in the following Aphorisms.

I. To make Cyder-Royal, or raise Ordinary Simple Cider, to be full as good or
better than French Wine, or to make the best simple Cider twice as strong as it
is (and so the like of any the aforesaid Liquors) by putting the strength and
Goodness of two Hogs-heads into One; which for to do, first put one Hogs-Head
of Cider, and some part of the other, into a Copper-Still, and draw off all the
Spirit: After which Distill the said Spirit a second time, and then put the same
into your other Hogs-Head and fill it up, stir it about well, and keep it
close-stopr, except one day in Ten or Twenty, let it lie open five or six
hours. The manner of doubling the strength of Cider, or making it as good as
French-Wine.
And within one Quarter of a Year, if the ensuing directions be observed, this
Cider will be full as strong or stronger than the best French Wines, and
altogether as pleasing, though it may be some what different in Taste.

II. If you would have it Drink more like Canary or other Sacks, How to make it
as good as Canary.
you must add more of the Spirit, and as much Sugar or Sweets (the making of
which is herein after taught) as will best please your Palate; And is the
proportion of one Pint of good Spirit to a Gallon, will make it as strong as
French-Wine; So one Pint and a half will make it full as strong as Spanish
Wine; And by this means in like manner, Perry and the Juice of Cherries,
Mal-Berries, Currants and Goose-Berries, (especially Goose-Berries) may by
adding thereunto their proper Spirits, or any other Convenient Spirits, be made
as good and pleasi^g as the Winer made in the Canaries. The quantity of Spirits
to be used.


I mention other Spirits, because upon Trial I have observed, that Brandy,
Spirit of Wine, and of Grain, and other Spirits, may be of good Effect in this
Business, provided they are drawn Fine; yet by Experience I have found, the
Spirits of the same kind, or at least of some other Fruits, to be the best and
most natural; And the Spirits raised from Ale or Beer to be most Improper;
unless the Ale and Beer be mixed with Cider before the Spirits be drawn off.

III. That One Acre of Land planted with Apple Trees, may be worth by this
means to the Planters at least 8 l. per Annum; And yet the Cider thus made to
the goodness of French-Wine, be afforded at 2 d. per Quart; As is thus
Demonstrable. One Acre of Land to be worth 8 l. Per Annum, (besides the benefit
of Corn and Pasture,) and yet Cyder-Royal Sold but for 2 d. per Quart.


1. Eight-soore-Trees, viz. Red-Strakes and Golden-Pippins, may conveniently be
planted upon one Acre of Land; each standing sixteen Foot distant. 2. These
Trees cannot be supposed to bear less than one Bushel on each, Tree, one with
another, that is, eight score Bushels; And it is well-known that twenty Bushels
of Apples will make an Hogs-Head of Cider; So that there will be yielded eight
Hogs-Heads on an Acre. 3. These eight Hogs-Heads of simple Cider, will make
Four Hogs-Heads of Cyber- Royal, full as good and strong as French-Wine; which
at 2 d. per Quart, is 2 l. per Hogs-Head; and so the Four Hogs-Heads yield 8 l.
The Product of one Acre -- Which is what was to be Demonstrated.
But in case it be Sold at 8 d. per Quart, as most certainly it may, during the
Term of Fourteen Years: Since it is so that this Cider- Royal will be as good
as Wine Sold at 12 d. per Quart: Then the Product of this Acre thus Planted,
may be worth 32 l.

Besides the profit of the Grass or Corn, growing the same Year on the same
Acre of Land: For if you Plant your Trees at the Distance of twenty Foot one
way, and but twelve the other (Which is all one with sixteen Foot before
mentioned) you may well enough Plow between them.

IV. But further, If Goose-Berries and Currants be Planted amongst the
Apple Trees (as very well they may, and that will prove much the better
Husbandry) then there may be more than four Hogs-Heads of Wine-Royal; made in a
Year of Them, and much better than the other; So that at the same price, viz. 2
d. per Quart, there will thereby be. 8 l. more raised, that is, 16 l. per Annum
from the same Acre of Ground. The same Acre to yield 8 l. per Annum more, by
Goose-Berry and Currant-Wine.


V. But since it is usual for Apple Trees to Bear, some Four Bushels, some Five,
Six, Seven, and upwards, to Twenty Bushels, it is very probable that one Tree
with another, may bear four Bushels; whence may be Produced 16 Hogs-Heads of
Cyder-Royal; which at 3 d. per Quart (that is, 3 l. the Hogs-Head) comes to 48
l. That probably one Acre may produce as much Cider and Wine-Royal, as may come
to more than 50 l. at 3 d. a Quart, and at 6 d. per Quart, more than 100 l. per
Annum.
Nor is it unreasonable to believe that the Product of Goose-Berries and
Currants may amount to much more than the 8 l. per Annum at which we have
Computed it. For I know by Reason and Experience, that Currant-Trees and
Goose-Berrie-Trees, one with another well-Husbanded, may yield One Gallon a
Piece: And upon One Rod of Land may be Planted 16 Trees, each 4 Foot from
another (which is a competent distance) so that One Rod may produce two Bushels
of Currants and Goose-Berries; And consequently there being Eight-Score-Rods in
an Acre, there may 16 score Bushels grow thereon; Which yielding 16 Hogs-Heads
of Simple Wine, makes eight Hogs-Heads of Wine- Royal; which at 3 d. per Quart,
comes to 24 l. Which being added to the 48 l. made by Cider (according to the
last Computation) makes 72 l. per Annum, at 3 d. per Quart: But Sold or valued
at 6 d. per Quart, the total Product from one Acre of Ground (now worth not
above 20 s. per Annum) will amount to double the aforesaid Value, that is to
say, to 144 l. per Annum.

Nor do I know why any should Contemn, or deny this, as an Extravagant
Calculation; however a thing impossible it cannot be, for these two Reasons:
First, That one Apple Tree may bear 30 Bushels at a time; and One Currant-Tree
six Gallons, and One Goose-Berry-Tree 4 Gallons; whereas here I Reckon but 4
Bushels instead of 30, and but one Gallon instead of 4, or six. -- And as for
Selling it at 6 d. per Quart, this I am sure of, that the Cider and Wines made
as aforesaid, are as good, and as well worth 12 d. per Quart, as the Wines
generally Sold in Taverns. Secondly, For that this Cyder-Royal being as good as
Wine at 12 d. per Quart, the Price cannot fail of 8 d. per Quart, until by a
very considerable Increase of Plantations, the thing be made Cheaper through
the Greatness of the Quantity.

VI.As this Method of Improving Cider and other Liquors before mentioned,
renders them more strong and delicious, so it also makes them much more
wholesome for the Body than simple Cider; The heavy, Cold, and Sickly parts
being either wholly taken away, or so corrected that it becomes no way
prejudicial to the Stomach, nor any longer apt to Generate Wind; And I think
none will deny, that the Juice of Vegetables growing in our own Soil, and under
the same Influences with our selves, being thus honestly Improved with their
own Spirits only, or the Addition of a little innocent Sugar, are as agreeable
to our Bodies, and must needs be as good and wholesome, as those that are
brought from Regions remote, and Climates vastly different, and afterward
Brewed again with variety of unknown, and perhaps, dangerous Ingredients. This
Cyder-Royal much more wholesome than simple Cider.
And much more is the former to be preferred, than the latter, in another
respect, viz. Because if Ten times more of it be spent than there is of
Foreign Wines, the Nation will be never the Poorer for it, but on the Contrary
much the Richer. The more Drank, the richer the Nation.


VII. For there is in this Invention not only Strength to Cheer the Heart of
the weak or wearyed, Delicacy to please the Palate of the Curious, Cheapness
to render it Familiar to the Poor; Private profit to Gratify the Rich, and
wholsomness to Indear it to due Observers of their Health: But also public
Advantage to Recommend it to the Regards of Princes, and engage Kingdoms and
States in a Concernment to Advance and put it in Practice. Cyder-Royal of
National, as well as private Advantage.
For by this Expedient, the wealth and Treasure of those Realms and Nations to
whom it is proposed, may be greatly preserved and Augmented; And particularly
England and the Territories thereunto belonging, may save at least Six, if not
Eight-Hundred-Thousand Pounds Sterling per Annum. (And the other Nations
proportionably) by saving so much Treasure as goes out every Year to the
Enriching of other Nations, and Impoverishing of their own. The more Drank, the
richer the Nation.


To this there may be some Objections.
First, Those whose Lands are Employed in Raising of Barley, will fear that by
this Expedient Rich Liquors will be so plenty and Cheap, and raised by every
Body for their own use, That Beer and Ale will be neglected; And consequently,
they will in some measure lose their former Benefit arising by Barley. The
Farmers Objection.


To this I Answer; First, It Is as reasonable, that all others should make the
best Improvement of their Lands in an Honest way, for their own and the Nations
good, as that these Men should make the most of theirs for their private
Interest. Answered.
Secondly, Most Lands kind for Barley, are proper for such Plantations, and the
Owners thereof, as well as others, may make the like Profit in this way, and
much more than they did by Barley: For that, one Acre of Land so Planted as is
beforementioned, when grown upp, will (without Charge of Plowing and Sowing)
produce more Hogs-Heads of Cider and Wine-Royal, worth Sixpence a Quart (or
Threepence at least) than it would strong Beer or Ale, worth but Twopence per
Quart, if it had been sown with Barley. Thirdly, As for several Years yet to
come, there will be little danger of the Objected Inconveniences, viz. until
those Trees hereafter to be Planted, shall be grown upp; So in the mean time,
until then, there will be more Beer and Ale spent than was before this SECRET
was discovered: Because that Cider which was Sold for twenty or thirty
Shillings per Hogs-Head, and spent instead of Beer, will now be advanced to the
Price of Five or Six, perhaps Eight or Ten Pound per Hogs-Head, and so be drank
instead of Wine. And lastly, When the Plantations shall be grown numerous, the
Public Wisdom of each Nation, may easily prevent any such Inconvenience as is
Feared, by laying such an Imposition on all Home-made Wines and Cyders, as may
keep them from being Sold too Cheap, which yet will be no Burden to the
Planters, nor they have any Reason to Complain thereof, though it should be
Twenty Shillings on every Hogs-Head, so great will their Profit be,
notwithstanding.

The Second Objection, as it more immediately concerns England, is more
Considerable, viz. Objection touching Loss of Customs.
That this Invention of improving Cyders, and other Liquors of our own
production, hindering the Consumption and Importation of foreign Wines, will
much diminish his Majesty's Customs.

To this is humbly Answered, That the loss of Customs by decrease of Foreign
Wines may easily be made good; nay the profit to His Majesty more than doubled,
by an Imposition on these Domestic Liquors which come in place of them.
Answered.
And as the Public National Interest will readily Embrace and afford such an
Imposition, which tends to the stopping of that vast Sluice of Treasure, which
Foreigners yearly drain from us; so may the same be laid without any Grievance
to the particular Subjects that are to pay it; Since notwithstanding the same,
it is evident every Acre may be made worth at least Six Pound per Annum (after
all Charges deducted) better to the Owners than it was before: And every one
for his own use may make or have that for Threepence at most, as good as what
he paid a shilling for before. Besides the public profit of Enriching the
Nation several Hundred Thousand Pounds every Year.

For Example (keeping to our first, and the meanest Calculation that can in
reason be imagined) suppose but Four Hogs-Heads of Cyder-Royal, and as many of
Current and Goose-berry-Royal be made upon an Acre; These at threepence per
Quart make the product of that one Acre for that year Twenty Four Pound. An
Imposition of 20^. per Hogs-head may be laid on Cyder-Royal, without
impoverishing the Planter.
Now suppose further, That an Imposition were laid of one penny per Quart,
which is Twenty Shillings per Hogs-Head; Then the Kings part or profit from
that Acre will be Eight Pound Per Annum, and the Planters Sixteen Pound. And
sure the latter has no Cause to Complain, since that may be more than Two
Cropps of Grain would have brought in.

And at this Proportion in any Country where there shall be
One-Hundred-Thousand Acres Planted, the King or State may Raise to themselves
Six or Eight Hundred-Thousand Pounds per Annum. Thus Six or Eight hundred
Thousand Pounds per Annum may be raised to the Government.
And yet at the same time much Benefit and Enrich their Subjects, as keeping
their Treasure at home from being Exhausted by Foreign Nations, and Enjoying
for their use at 3 d. per Quart, altogether as good or better Drink than that
for which before they paid 12 d. And as for those that Plant it, especially
such as have Land of their own, they may by this means keep their Houses always
Plentifully Furnished with Variety of Rich Delicate Liquors for themselves, and
their Friends, and if there be no Imposition, the same will Cost them nothing
but the Labor of making it: And if there be such an Imposition, yet (besides
their Labor) it will stand them in but one penny a Quart.

Again, The Decrease of Customs on Foreign Wines may be supplied by laying
double or trebble Customs on what shall for the Future be brought in; for since
there will be no need of it, it is but just that those that will Gratify their
Fancies to the Public Prejudice of their Countries, should pay for their
Humor, which perhaps will make their Outlandish Drinks Relish the Sweeter;
And yet even they will have no Reason to grudge at it, since (supposing them
Persons of Estates) their Lands by this Improvement of Cider at home will be
much Augmented in Value. Customs on Foreign Wines may be doubled.


If it be Objected that the Customs already on Wine, are twice as much per
Hogs-Head as what is proposed to be laid on Cider. Customs on Cider may amount
to more than those on Wine, because more will be Drank.


I Answer, Suppose the Customs on Wines be 8 l. per Tun, and on Cider but 4 l.
yet since Cider may be made for 3 d. per Quart, as good as French Wine at 12 d.
per Quart, it may be Concluded, that there will be 4 times as much Cider Drank
as there is now Wine; which if so, then for every 100 l. the King or State did
receive for Wines, they may receive 200 l. by Cyder-Royal.

There is yet another Objection, -- Many People are much against Mixtures in
Drink, and will be ready to say, Here is a Mixture in Your Cyder-Royal, and
therefore we will not like it -- To which I Answer: First, It Is not all
Mixtures, but Dangerous or improper Mixtures which ought to be avoided.
Secondly, This in Truth is not any Mixture at all, since only the better part
of the same thing or kind is added to it, and when all is done, it is but
Cider, or Wine Refined and made better, without any Composition, but what comes
from the Apple, unless you will (which is left to your own free Choice) to
Gratify Your own Palate add a little Sugar, which all Men know to be Wholesome
and Nourishing, especially when it is first so Purged and Ordered as herein
after is set forth; Nor is such Spirits in such Liquors any ways worse than
Gravey with Meat, which makes the best sauce for the Flesh whence it proceeds:
And as the Gravey is the Vital and Nourishing part of Meat, so is the Spirit of
Cider to Cider. But if our Cyder-Royal he to be refused, as being mixed, I
desire to be Informed, what Liquor (except fair Water) there is in Common use,
not much more justly liable to the like Exception? Cyder-Royal is no Mixture.


But perhaps our greatest Wine-Bibbers will by no means Change their
Outlandish Liquors for Domestic Cider: Because, say they, the Quantity we are
to Drink, will make us Sick, before it will make us merry etc. The Reason why
simple Cider makes the Stomach Sick; No such thing to be feared from
Cyder-Royal.
To which I Answer, This is undoubtedly true of your Common simple Cider, but
if you please to Consider the Cause, you shall find no room for this Exception
against our Cyder-Royal, for that which uses to cause this Sickness in the
Stomach, is the Chilly, Cold, Phlegmatic part of the Cider, viz. That which
has least Spirit in it, is most hurtful; That this is so, nothing can be more
Evident, for that the strongest Cider is most free from Occasioning this
Distemper. Now this we know, that the Spirits of Cider are no other but the
purer part of it, viz. The strong, warm, and lively part, separated from the
weak, cold, and melancholy dead part; so that Reason must needs yield, that
the Spirits of the Cider being mixed with Cider, cannot but make it both more
strong and Pleasant, and also more wholesome, for that by this Expedient the
Sickly cold and windy part is Cured.

Moreover for want of strength and Life, simple Cyders are apt to Decay and
Dye; this we see by Experience; for that as the strongest simple Cider has
most Spirit in it, and therefore Lives longest; So the weakest Cider that has
least Spirit in it, will soon grow Sickly and Decay; Therefore this Expedient
must needs be so far from rendering Cider more unwholesome and unkind, that it is
rather to be esteemed its most infallible Physician or Remedy, for that it
Corrects all the ill Humors that cause its Sickness, or Ill-Effects on Humane
Bodies. Cyder-Royal will keep better than simple Cyders.


And this much I can honestly and truly averr, from a long continued
Experience, that a Glass of this excellent refined Cyder-Royal, drank half an
hour before Meals, procures a good Appetite; and after Meals, helps Digestion:
That it Chears the Heart, and Revives the Spirits. Some of the Virtues of
Cyder-Royal.
And as for its Operation upon the Brain, when too much is Drank at a time, the
same is less hurtful, than Excess of strong Beer, Ale, Canary, or
High-Country-Wines: For it is so far from Clogging the Stomach, or Clouding the
Brain with thick muddy Vapors, that I do believe a Man may (WERE IT NOT A SIN)
be Fuddled and Sober two times in a Day with this Liquor, without mischief to
his Health; and the Reason in my Opinion, is, because it so admirably Provokes
Urine, and carries with it such foul and Ill matter that Offends the Head,
Stomach, and Belly; The Truth of all which, I doubt not, will be soon attested
by the Experience of those that shall make Trial.

VIII. A Bushel of Currants ripe and good, will make 6 or 7 Gallons of Wine; To
every Bushel of Currants, so soon as they are Broken to pieces, put in 12
Quarts of Water, and in 12 or 16 hours after, press it, and strain it, put it
into a Cask, and let it stand until it begin to be Clear, than Rack it off from
the Gross-Lee, and put to each Gallon a Pint of good Spirit, and as much as
best pleases your Pallets of Sugar, or Sweets, (here-after mentioned) stir it
well together for one quarter of an hour, then stop it up close for about a
quarter of a Year. How to make Royal-Currant Wine, etc.


In like manner is made Wine-Royal of Goose-Berries, Mul-Berries and Cherries;
but of all these, that of Goose-Berries excels the rest, and does resemble
Canary the most.

If it be Objected, that the foregoing Calculations are partial, because I
have not cast up the Charge of Converting the Fruit into Cider, nor the Charge
of Sweets or Sugars -- To this it is Answered, That there is enough to be saved
to defray all such Charges, viz. By saving the Spirits that may be drawn out of
the Apples after the Cider is Pressed out of them, as in the 15th Aphorism is
herein after mentioned; But that which is much more Considerable is, that here
may be made double the Quantity of Goose-Berry and Currant-Wine-Royal as has
been Reckond upon ih the 4th. and 5th. Aphorisms, in this respect, viz. Because
I there allow 20 Bushels of Currants and Goose-Berries to an Hogs-Head, Whereas
every Bushel will make six Gallons; so that 20 Bushels will make 120 Gallons,
which is two Hogs-Head, so that there, may be at lest 4 Hogs-Heads on an Acre
more than was Reckoned, which may much more than pay for all the Charges of
Sweets, and of converting the Fruit.

IX.The last Year, viz. 1682. good simple Cider was frequently Sold in the west
of England for 10^ per Hogs-Head, viz. an halfpenny per Quart. And this Year
by Reason of scarcity of Fruit, at 20 s. per Hogs-Head; which is but one Penny
per Quart. The Common price of simple Cider.


X. When Cider comes to be plenty, there may be as much good Brandy made
thereof, as may Furnish those whole Nations to whom this is Addressed, both for
Land and Sea-Service, which perhaps may save them several Hundred-Thousand
Pounds per Annum; For which use the most Stale and Sour Cider, which is scarce
fit to be Drank, will make the greatest Quantity, and best tasted Brandy, being
twice Distilled. Brandy to be made of Cider.
Of this Cyder-Brandy I have kept some four Years, and better than it was at
first making, and without doubt would keep four Years longer.

XI.The best known Fruit that is only for Cider is Red-Streak, which is a kind
of Wilding; What Fruit best for Cider.
but for both Uses, viz. for the Table and Cider, the best and Golden Pippins,
because they are both quick Growers, great Bearers, yield the greatest quantity
of Liquors, and the best in Quality; And their very Husks after the Cider is
Pressed out, especially the Golden-Pippin; will yield more Spirit than any
other I have yet found out; Nor is it harder to Raise the best Sort of Fruit,
than the Worser. Golden-Pippins Excellent.


Some other Wildings I have sound that are as good as the other, but they are
as yet unknown by Name; but this is most certain, good Wildings, and good
Crabbs, are better for Cider than the most delicious Summer or Winter
Table-Fruit, or sweet Apples, ( Golden-Pippins Excepted) yea the bitter sharp
Crabb is much better than a bitter Sweet-Apple, because the Juice of the first
will afford twice as much Spirit as the latter; Nor are the Spirits of the most
pleasant Apples in the World, better than those of crabbed Fruit, for be they
sweet or sour, neither of those tastes do arise with the Spirit, but is left
behind in the Earthy Phlegmatic Part of the Cider: For Example, Suppose you put
10 l. of Sugar into your Still, amongst ten Gallons of sour Cider, the Spirit
will be never the sweeter; Or suppose you fill your Still with new sweet Mead (
or Metheglin) made of Honey, Sugar, or Molosso's, you shall have neither
Spirits nor Sweets come out of it, but only fair Water; but if you let it stand
until it be well fermented, and become sour, it will yield Spirit in abundance.
When Cider it fit to make Spirits.
So likewise Cider, Perry, or Juice of Crabbs, Goose-Berries, Currants,
Mul-Berries and Cherries, will yield little or no Spirit, until it be passed
the Fermentation (or working) and then the more sour it is ( Provided it be not
Vinegar) the more Spirit it will afford: nevertheless this observe, Apples of
bitter taste makes the Cider bitter.

XII.As to the time of putting your Spirits into your Cider, Observe, that the
Staler your Cider is before the Spirits are added, the more time they require
to Incorporate; and the sooner they are put in, the sooner is in fit for Use
The time for putting in the Spirits to Cider.
. But in case you put your Spirits into the Cider, before it has fermented,
they will Evaporate, and be cast out; therefore be sure, that your Cider be
Rackt off the Lee, once, twice, or three times, as you find occasion, and being
indifferent fine, then put in your Spirits, either with or without Sweets, well
Beaten together with a certain Quantity of Cider, and after it is put into the
Cask stir it very Well together again, and Bung it close up, and about 2 or 3
Months after, it will be sit for Use; But the longer it lies, the better,
especially if your Cider be Stale er'e your SpiritS are put in, for as this
Cider Drinks very unpleasing when first mixed together, so no Wine can be more
strong and pleasing than this, when it has Stood its due time to Incorporate
and Meliorate, and in the mean time to be kept close stope without drawing any
out. When Cyder-Royal is fit for use.
Unless the season of the year be warm, then to prevent its fermentation, let
the Cask be open as you find occasion.

XIII.The first and worst Infirmities that Common Cider is subject to, are of
two sorts, either being musty, or fretting it self until the Spirits are spent,
and the Cider become weak and unpleasant. The Infirmities of simple Cider.


If Apples be gathered into the House whilst they are wet, they will be Musty,
and so will the Cider; again, if the Vessel wherein it is made, or that you put
it into, be Musty, so will be you Cider: If none of these happen, you need not
fear any thing of that kind: But if Cider be Musty, so will the Spirits that
are drawn from it. The Causes of Musty Cider.


To Cure Cider that is subject to Fret is somewhat difficult, but the best way
is to prevent the Causes; Which are, either the Gathering of the Fruit before
they are Ripe; or making the Cider before the Apples have lain long enough, for
until Apples have lain in an Heap while they have sweat, and are dry again,
they cannot be fit for the Press. The Causes of Cyders Freting and Cure.
But if by Reason of warmth, and mildness of the season, or any other Accident,
the Cider should fret and destroy it self, the best way is to draw it off into
another Vessel; And do so once in six or ten days, as you see cause, always
taking the Lee from it, as often as it is Rackt. Let not your Vessel be full by a
Gallon; Nor yet stopped close, until by drawing it off, it be made to leave
Huzzing and sputtering; for the fuller and closer it is, the more it frets.
When your Cider is thus quiet then have a care to keep the Vessel full and
close stopped; yet lest you should stop it too soon, open it once in two three or
four days, and if you find it is not yet quiet, let the Vessel lie open an hour
or half an hour at a time.

Omit not to burn a match of Brimstone, dipped in Coriander-Seeds in your empty
Cask, just before you put in your Cider, and do this as often as your Cider is
Rackt, it is an Excellent Expedient to prevent ill tastes and Fermentation. A
persume for the Cask not to be neglected.


XIV.The best way to Order your Sugar before you put it into your Cider, is to
make it into a kind of Syrup or Sweets, by Dissolving of it in Water; one
hundred weight will make 16 Gallons, and so proportionably; But before you put
your Sugar into the Kettle, take the whites of 30 or 40 Eggs, the more the
better, which being well Beat with a thing like a rod or whisk in eight or ten
Gallons of Water, then put 4 Gallons of this Egg-water so prepared into your
Kettle or Vessel where your Sugar is to be dissolved; then hang it over a
Gentle Fire and stir it about until it be Dissolved: But be sure when it
Boils, put in more Egg-water to keep it from Boiling to high; and so continue
putting it in, one Quart after another, for an hour together, until all your
Egg-water be spent: but to prepare your Egg-water in parcels, viz. a Quart or
two at a time, as you use it, is the better way. The way to make Sweets for
such Cyder-Royal as you would have as Rich as Canary.
Now the use of these Eggs is only to raise such a scum as will carry away not
only all the foulness and grosness of the Sugar, but all the Egg also. And when
the scum has done rising, and is clean taken off, then fill up your Kettle
with as much Water as will make up your Quantity, and let it Boil to the size
of a Syrup, and being cold put it into your Cider: But to put in a little
Coriander-Seed bruized, and tied up in a fine linen Ragg whilst it is Boiling,
will give it a fine grateful scent.

Of these Sweets you may put in 2 or 3 Gallons more or lest into an Hogs-Head
as your Palate invites you, or as the tartness of the Cider requires: But, put
them not in till you have Rackt your Cider the last time, and that it be past
the Fermentation. The Quantity of Sweets, and when to be put in.
And before you put your Sweets into the Cask, mix your Sweets and the Spirits
you intend to put in, together; with a like Quantity of Cider, and stir them
well together, then put all into your Cask of Cider and stir them with all
your strength, with a strong staff in the Bunghole for one half quarter of an
hour; After that stop it close, and draw none off till 2, 3, or 4 Months; By
which time it will be Answerable to what has been proposed; Only remember that
if you will have it to resemble Canary, you must add the greater proportion of
Spirits and Sweets, but if French-Wine, then the less Sweets, or none at all.

As to the sort of Sugar, if the Sweets be made with white, the Cider will
remain Pale, if of Brown Sugar, it will raise it to an higher Color. What
Sugar to be used.
And in my Opinion the latter is as good, as well is the cheapest, since the
coursest by the aforesaid preparation, becomes as pure, as the finest; And
Sweets being thus made, will cost but 5 d. per Quart.

And thus every man may merryly make his varieties of Drink, with that which he
knows to be good cheap and wholesome, which is more than he is sure to have at
every Tavern, although he Pay three times as much for it: Nor has he so much
Reason to suspect these Liquors in those Houses to be so much Adulterated as
the others, because none of like goodness to the Eye, Scent, and Palate, can
be afforded so cheap to the Pocket.

XV.The Husky part of the Apples, after the Cider is Pressed out, being steeped
2 or 3 days in as much water as will cover it, and then Pressed clean out, and
kept in a Vessel until it has well Fermented; As also the Lees of all your
Cider, will afford Spirit or Brandy, so much, that being added to the Cider of
the same Apples, will make it almost as strong as French-Wine: which is a thing
of great Advantage. An Advantage For making Spirit.


XVI.Spirits being put into Bottles amongst Cider or any of the aforesaid
Liquors, Will not Drink well. Spirits mixed with simple Cider in Bottles, will
not do so well.
I was a long time troubled to find out how to make this Drink as pallatable
and pleasing as it was become strong and Chearing, until I put both Cider and
Spirits into a Wooden Cask; The first I Completed Was in a Vessel of six
Gallons; Into which I put 2 Quarts of Sweets, and 3 Quarts of the Spirits of
Cider, which after it had lain 2 or 3 Months, I found to be as strong and
pleasing as Canary.

XVII.By adding Wormwood to Cyder-Royal, as you do to Wine, you may make it as
good and grateful to the Stomach, both for procuring Appetite and causing
Digestion, as the best Purl-Royal or Wormwood-Wine. Wormwood Cyder-Royal.
Thus may you have or your own Growth, Cyder-Royal, Goose-Berry, Current,
Cherry, etc. from the size of the smallest Wines, to the strength and goodness
of the best Canary, suitable to all Seasons of the Year, and to the
Constitutions of all Persons, and Humors of all Pallates, and agreeable to all
Ages from Children of 12 Months Old, to the height of Old Age.

XVIII.This Cyder-Rayal or New Wine, thus prepared, may be kept in the Cask 2
or 3 Years, and be bettered thereby; Provided you keep the Cask full; which to
do, you must Observe, that in 2 Months time, the Liquor will waste a Quart more
or less, as the Vessel is bigger or lesser; which you ought to fill up again,
with Liquor of the same strength, or if; stronger, the better. Touching the
keeping of Cyder-Royal.
And by this means it may keep and grow better and better some Years, without
putting into it (as some are said to do into their Liquors) Stum, or other
unwholesome Ingredients.

Suppose by keeping cyder-Royal too long, it should become unpleasant, and as
unfit to Bottle as Old Hockamore, take but one Hogs-Head of that, and one of
Tart new Cider, and before the latter be quite clear or fine, mix them together
in two other Hogs-Heads, well-Perfumed, and add Sprits and Sweets a due
Proportion, to the Quantity of your new Cider, Suppose it be in the Month of
october or November, you may be sure to have it full as good, if not better
than ever it was, and a most Excellent Cyder-Royal to Drink, or to Bottle, by
or before Christmas. If Cyder-Royal be kept till it is too Stale, there need be
no loss by it.
And this I know by repeated Experience and Practice, nor can your New Cider be
made half so good by that time of the Year.

An Appendix further Demonstrating, that the Treasure those Kings and State,
who have respectively by their several Letters Patent, Contracts or
Resolutions, promised me a Gratuity, may by this Invention amount to more than
Four-Hundred, Thousand Pounds Sterling per Annum, over and above several
Hundred-Thousand Pounds that will be Saved at Home, which before was carried
out, to the Enriching of other Nations and Countries.
l. s. d. FIrst, Suppose one Penny per Quart Custom be Paid for Cyder-Royal,
and a man Drink a Quart per day, that makes by the Year. 2 -0- 5 Secondly, A
thousand Persons at the same Rate and Proportion must Pay, 2004 3 4 Thirdly,
And consequently 400000 Persons must Pay, 801661 13 4

So that in any Nation that yields 100000 Acres of Land fit to be Planted with
Apples, Currants, Goose-Berries, etc. and wherein there may be found 400000
Persons that may one with another, Drink a Quart a day (of a Drink so Rich, and
yet withal so cheap, and of their own Production) The Supreme Magistrate of
that Nation may have and raise hereby 800000 Pounds per Annum (which is as much
again as above proposed) to the Public Exchequer: Besides 1661 l. 13 s. 4 d.
toward the Charge of Collecting it.

If it be still Objected, that this will be a Grievance to the Subject? -- It Is
Answered (besides what has before been said on that Subject) that
notwithstanding such Imposition, it may be Raised by those that make it for
their own use, much cheaper then Beer, since one Acre of Land ( take one with
another) will yield at least; half as much more of the former, as it will of
the latter, and with less Labor and Charge.

Nor can it be well Imagined but that there will be found in either of those
Nations, 40000 Persons who one with another will not Drink less than a Quart a
day a piece, when they can have it upon the matter as cheap or rather Cheaper
then Beer, though it be altogether as good as Wine; And especially since such as
have Land in their own Possession, may have plenty of it for their own use, for
nothing but a little of their own Labor and paying a Penny per Quart to the
King or State.

If be Objected, that this Cyder-Royal will be of low esteem amongst the
Nobility, who are Accustomed to the most costly and curious Wines -- I thereto
humbly Answer; That the Objection is built but upon a Supposition, for no man
is sure, that Princes whose Dominions, yield not Wine, may not be as much taken
with these Drinks instead thereof, the rather for that besides their variety,
pleasantness and wholsomness, 'twill be so much their Interest to permote and
Recommend the same to General Use, whereby not only the wealth of their
Kingdoms or States may be Preserved and Increased, but their own Revenues
greatly Augmented.

Secondly, Though Princes and Nobles are the Highest and more Refined part of the
World, yet they are but few, Comparatively, in Number: The great Benefit
depends on the Greatness of the Consumption of Liquors, and that depends, upon
Persons of an inferior Sphere, and middle Fortunes; so that although Princes and
Persons of the first Rank should still delight in Champaigne, Burgundy,
Frontineack, Greek or Florence-Wines, of any Other costly Foreign Liquors, yet
this will signify little to hinder the General Use of Cyder-Royal, etc. Since
it is not to be doubted, but thousands of good Country-Gentlemen, multitudes of
Citizens, substantial Yeomen and other Persons, may for Interest and
Good-Husbandry be content to make themselves and their Neighbors merry with
these cheaper, and altogether as good, strong, and wholesome Drinks, with which
they may so readily furnish themselves. Nay, there is scarce, a Cottager,
having but one Acre of Land, but may have as much of these excellent Liquors as
may be worth him 8 l. per Annum; so that the Persons of inferior Condition that
may make use thereof, in comparison of the Nobility, who it is Objected are not
like to use it, will be at least 5000 to One; And consequently the profit
proposed, may not fail or come short, notwithstanding it should so happen, that
neither Kings, Princes, nor Nobility should ever vouchsafe to Taste thereof.

The best and quickest way of Raising a Nursery, etc.
THe raising of Nurseries for Orchards being so Essential to what has been
proposed, and since by Experience I know, that these following Difficulties and
Inconveniences do happen therein, viz. That 2 Trees of one sort of Fruit, and
both well Rooted alike, and Planted in one and the same Soil, many times the
One will grow bravely, and bear a Bushel at a time, within 6 or 7 Years, and
the Fruit good and pleasant, when the other shall be a small shrubb, and
produce small unpleasant Fruit, and not half a peck for the others Bushel.

Again some Trees though they are Planted on very good Land, and Husbanded never
so carefully, will yet never become good nor long lived Trees. Whereas other
Trees Planted in the same Land shall grow apace, be very Fruitful and long
lived. The want of knowing the Causes and Remedy of these things, has not only
Discouraged many from Planting, but has spoiled many hopeful Trees and
Orchards.

As for the Remedy it is (in it self) both PLAIN and EASY; and therefore since
many People think that they need not be taught any thing that is so, and are
unwilling so acknowledge any Obligation to those that inform them thereof, what
need I say any more? Let them find it out.

However, for the Satisfaction of Person more modest and grateful, I will at
present show you the best Expedients to prevent both those mischiefs, which are
the great Cause why in most Orchards little more than half of the Trees prove
Good.

As to the First, Supposing 2 young Trees being both very good, let one of them
be set shallow, viz. the upper Root not more than an Inch or two at the most
under Ground, and the deepest not above 8 or 9, and Suffer no downright Root
to be upon it; Then shall you have it a thriving Tree and bearing good Fruit,
If it be Carefully preserved and kept clear from Suckers and superfluous
Branches, which are apt to Sprout up at or near the Root. But the other Tree
being set too deep never thrives, nor proves Fruitful.

As to the second Inconvenience, by which the Planter misseth his Expectation,
that does arise from the Stock or Kernel, on which the Graft is placed; and
this I take for a certain Rule, that the Kernels of Fruit produced by a shrubb
or imthriving Tree, very rarely prove good, and indeed the like may be said of
Apple-Kernels in General.

Wherefore in raising of Nurseries, rather take your Kernels from a Fruitful
Crab-Tree that has a clear Body, a great spreading Head, and full of Boughs
and Branches; For it may be observed, that as the Head is full of Boughs and
Twigs, so proportionably that Stem abounds with Roots and Fibers; and as is the
Tree, so will its Product or Seed be. I have so much remarqu'd this, that I
would much rather give 12 d. per Tree for those so raised, then a Penny a Tree
for such as are raised from Shrubs or Apple Trees.

From such Kernels as aforementioned, I do knew, Trees may be raised ready to
be Transplanted into Orchards, and Produce a Bushel on a Tree within 10 or 12
Years after the Kernel is put into the Ground; For the doing of which, and to
raise a Nursery to the best Advantage, I will show you the best Expedients my
self have Experienced by the following Aphorisms.

I.As to the Ordering of your Kernels of such Crabs as aforesaid, either put
them in the Ground so soon as they may be taken out of the Crab, or else so
soon as the Winter Will give Leave, the sooner the better; But if you Keep them
till the Spring, take care they be kept neither too moist nor too dry; If too
moist, they will Heat, etc. If too dry, they will not grow, therefore keep them
in a mixture of dry sand within Doors.

II.So soon after January, as the Season will permit, sow your Kernels in
Ordinary good Ground (that lies as warm and Lue from the VVind as may be:) Let
the Ground be will dugg, and the Kernels be Raked in so as they lie not too
deep; an Inch, as near as you can guess, is enough; and when they are come up,
preserve them clear of Grass and Weeds, until you have them Transplanted.

III.The next Spring, viz. About 12 Months after your Kernels were sown, you
may draw those that are best Grown, and Transplant them into a Nursery.

IV.Let your Nursery-Ground be made good with Dung, and well dug, and mixed
together, and set them in Rows so far apart as that you may digg between viz.
the Rows at 2 foot distance: But in the Rows the Plants may be placed within 9
inches of each other.

V.Before you set your Plants in the Nursery, be sure Crop off the
down-right-Root, spread the small Roots, and close up the Ground very well
about them.

VI.The next Spring after this, you may return agnin to your first Plantation
of Kernels, and draw forth, and Transplant into your Nursery as aforesaid as
many more as have made a good shoot, Ordering them as the first, and so you,
may do from year to year; But observe the last of all are not so good as the
first although for the second or third Year they may do well enough.

VII.Having thus Transplanted your Kernels into a Nursery, they ought still to
be kept clean from Weeds, and also the Ground to be kept loose, that the Roots
may spread the better, and therefore in the next Autumn before the leaf is off,
your Nursery ought to be dug; But never amongst them but once a Year; Only
pull up the Weeds in Spring and Summer, as often as Occasion requires. And here
note, the difference between digging your Nursery and all other Trees whilst
the Leaf is yet on, and afterward, is greater than you may at first Imagine;
For that if it be done whilst the Sapp is up, if a Root should happen to be
cut, the same will shoot out again, perhaps two for one, But after the Sap is
once down, if a Root be Cut, it will not shoot forth that Winter, neverthelese
be not too early in the Season, nor yet too careless of the Roots.

VIII.By that time your Plants have had one or two Summer Growth in your
Nursery, the next Winter, or rather near the Spring, cut off all their Tops,
about a foot above Ground, and the next March or April after, the biggest of
them will be ready to be Grafted.

IX.A Tree that is Grafted, having made two Summers shoot, is fit to be
Transplanted into an Orchard, because there is far less danger of a young
Trees not growing or Thriving, than is of an Old One.

X.In Transplanting be sure do not set too deep, To prevent which, this I do,
First digg my holes 4 foot square, but no deeper than one Spit, or there
abouts, viz. no deeper than the Roots of the Trees should Lie; For if the Holes
be dug deep, and filled up again before the Tree is Planted, the Tree and
all will sink together and never Prosper.

If it be Objected, That if the holes be no deeper they will not contain the
Roots of many Trees, for some have Roots as downright and long as a Parsnip;
some are single, some double, and some trebble, and all downright long ones,
and such an hole will not receive them.

I Answer, Away with such Trees, I would rather give 2 d. a dozen for them to
Burn, than 6 d. per Hundred to Plant; and though there is scarce one of an
Hundred but proves thus bad, if they are never Transpanted, (especially if they
come from Apple Kernels) yet if from Crab-Kernels, and Transplanted as before
is Ordered, there is hardly one of 400 will prove so improper.

XI.Now as to the Charge of all this; One man's Labor upon one Acre of Land
with Crab-Kernels may after 3 or 4 Years raise 10000 Trees every Year, which at
3 d. per Tree, comes to 125 l. which will well pay the Rent of your Land and
the Gardeners wages; so that the Charge of Planting your Orchard will be very
Cheap and Easy, for that an Acre of Land Planted with six score. Trees, as for
the Trees they comes but to 30 s. and the Planting about 18 d. per Score, which
is 9 s. So that by this Expedient, Nurseries may be raised so as to afford an
Acre of Land to be Planted with the best sort of Trees, and of the best Fruit
for less then 40 s. per Acre.

XII.After your Trees are Transplanted into Orchards, the greatest Care and
Charge is to keep them safe from being abused, either by Weeds that may grow
about them, Suckers that may grow out of them between the Root, and spreading
Boughs, and from all Cattle, Coneys and Hares. And in case they are dug
about the Roots (where you may, if you please, Plant Turnips, Beans, Peace, or
any other thing that may destroy the Grass or Weeds,) your Trees will thrive
much the better, and grow twice as fast; But in case you Plant Currants and
Goose-berries amongst your Apple Trees, you may place 4 of them in the same
Hole with your Apple Tree (that is, making the hole about 4 foot square, Plant
your Apple Tree in the middle, and a Current or Goose-Berry-Tree at each
corner) and keep them from Weeds, and all will thrive together. But note that
for Goose-Berries and Currants, you had need bestow more Dung than Apple Trees
require; And also forget not to mix your Dung and Earth together before the
Trees are Planted; For if a Tree stand in all Dung, it is destructive to the
Root: Mudd and Soil of Ponds, Ditches, etc. is as good for this purpose as any
Dung, provided it be Sunburned and dried before it be used.

XIII.As to the Soil most proper for Orchards, I do observe that all Land
proper for Corn, as Wheat, Barley, Rye, Beans, Pease, etc. are kind for that
use. But the most Improper is extreme hot and dry Sands, and on the other side
Grounds very wet and Cold.

XIV.As for Currants and Goose-Berries, very great may be the profit that may
be raised by Planting them amongst your Apple Trees, because they will thrive
there better than elsewhere. But because the Currants love the shadiest Ground
most, let the Goose-Berries be Planted in the midst of your Ground, between
your Rows of Apple Trees in the most Sunny part.

XV.As for raising of Current and Goose-Berry-Trees, its very easy and speedy,
as thus: Take either of the said Trees about the End of February or beginning
of March, lay down every Limb flat with the Ground, cover every Twig with good
Earth, and turn out the Tops that they may lie above Ground, and every Twig
will both Root and shoot forth, so that by the next Winter you may have of one
Tree, 40 or 50, perhaps an hundred, well-rooted Plants, fit to be so
Transplanted. Take Care to keep the uncovered Stock, which is between the old
Root and the covered part, that it run not out in Branches; for if it do, the
Twigs will be robbed of that Nourishment as should feed them. Also remember to
keep them clear of all Grass and Weeds that may Annoy them.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IF any think it too much trouble for themselves to prepare the Spirits herein
before mentioned; These are to give Notice, that they may have them ready made
and well prepared at Mr. Woodward's, a Distiller in the Old Baily: And Sweets
at almost every Sugar-Bakers in London: But for such Spirits, I have not heard
there is the like, neither for Quantity nor Quality, in all the City, as at the
Place aforesaid.

FINIS.

