A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF THE Right Honorable ROBERT EARL and
VISCOUNT Yarmouth, Baron of PASTON, and Lord Lieutenant of the County of
NORFOLK.

By JOHN HILDEYARD D.LL. Commissary of the Arch-Deaconry of Norfolk, and Rector
of Cowston in the Diocese of Norwich.

Mors aequo pede pulsat Pauperum tabernas Regumque Turres. Horat. LONDON,
Printed by S. Roycroft, for George Rose Bookseller in Norwich, and Robert
Clavel at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard in London. 1683.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The Truly Virtuous, and Regularly Pious Lady, THE LADY
REBECCA COUNTES DOWAGER Yarmouth.
The Author wishes all Prosperity on Earth, and Eternal Happiness in Heaven:
And in all Humility, as a Testimony of his Gratitude Dedicates this Sermon,
owning himself

Her Honors Most Faithful and Ever Devoted Servant and Chaplain JOHN HILDEYARD.

Revel. IV. 4. And round about the Throne were four and twenty Seats, and upon
the Seats I saw four and twenty Elders sitting clothed in white Raiment, and
they had upon their Heads Crowns of Gold.


IT is our Christian Privilege that sometimes we May, and when Spectacles of
Mortality lie before us (as now) it is our Christian Duty that we should take a
View of the Top of Tabor; even whilst we dwell upon this our Native Calvary,
mount up our Thoughts, and fix our Meditations on the Thrones in Heaven, whilst
we have our Conversations on Earth: It Is true, the Excellency, Glory, and
Splendour of Heaven, no finite Brain, no created Understanding can possibly
perceive or comprehend according to its full Proportion; for it is a Fruit of
our Fall with Adam, and an Inseparable Adjunct of this mortal and unglorified
State here below, concerning things Celestial, That what we know we know it
but in part. Yet as a tender affectionate Father by giving of his Child a
Glimps of some Rich and Orient Pearl, makes the Child big with Desire and
Impatient for a full Sight thereof, and a grasping of it in his own Hand: So
our Heavenly Father full of Compassion to the Sons of Men, though he detains
from the Eye of our Sense a full Comprehension of that Glorious State while we
are in the body, yet now and then, he is pleased to give us a glimpse, to let
fall in his Word some Sparkles of it, that he may Inflame our Affections, and
set our Faith on Tip-toes, that so we having the Eyes of our Souls within the
Vail, in this Valley of Tears and Troubles, may always be refreshed with the
very Remembrance of those Glories that are about His Throne. A Telescope is an
Instrument of Man's Invention, that he may take a better View than his weak
Eyes of themselves can have, of those splendid Lamps that so much beautify the
Cope of the nearest Heavens: Whereto the Apostle seems to allude, when he tells
us that we can only behold the things placed above this Region of our
Mortality, as through a Glass: Such a Glass, such a Telescope, is this my Text,
which gives a general Description to us of that great and unexpressible Glory
which the Saints have, who are glorified with God in Heaven. There were some
indeed called Chiliacts, whom later days by exposition of the Name, have styled
Millinaries, who looking for a New Heaven on this Old Earth, would have these
words understood of the Church Militant: But I could produce a Cloud of
Witnesses to make good his Words, who tells us it is not imaginable that any
Company of Men, any Congregation of Saints, should ever be found on Earth of so
unmixt a Purity, and so exact Perfection as is here described. The words then
must be understood of the Church Triumphant, as clearly appears from the 2d.
ver. of this Chapter, which testifies, That the Throne about which the Seats of
these Elders stood, was fixed not on Earth, but in Heaven. And round about the
Throne were four and twenty Seats, etc.

From what has been said, you see my Text is a true Jacobs Ladder, on which
our Souls in their Meditations may ascend from Earth to Heaven.

And in this Ladder I shall remark to you five most beautiful Rounds, or
Staves, which in plainer Terms I would call the Parts of the Text. First, The
transcendent Excellency of those Places in which the Saints were made
Conspicuous to St. John, 24 Seats. 2dly, The Transcendent Dignity of the
Persons upon those Seats, they were Elders. 3dly Their Posture, they were
sitting; the Saints of God were represented to St. John in the same posture our
Creed describes the Blessed Jesus, sitting in Heaven, to express their
permanent, perpetual, and unalterable Rest; they are at Quiet, they are at
Ease, without Molestation, without Trouble, and that to all Eternity. 4. Their
Vesture, clothed in White: Whence we note, that however Foul-mouths may bespot
it, yet White Raiment is the fittest, most comely and significant Habit for
those that wait at God's Altars, yea, for them too to be represented in, that
sit about his Throne. 5thly. Their Ornament; And they had upon their Heads
Crowns of Gold. We in England borrowed our Proverb from the Latins, That The
End Crowns the Work; give me leave here too to borrow from a Latin Author, the
Observation, That a Crown ends my Text; importing that the greatest Men, Kings
on Earth, can have no greater Glory than to be Saints in Heaven; And Saints on
Earth, shall have so much Glory as to be Kings in Heaven. And being met to
Celebrate the Funeral of a Person, Great Indeed, Great in his Descent, Great in
his Worth, Great in the Favor of his Prince, and (what is best of all) Great
in the Favor of God.

I shall not doubt with all your Approbations to determine his Earthly Coronet
is changed into an Heavenly Crown, and so the Text and the Occasion will
friendly conclude alike.

From the first General of the Text, the Transcendent Excellency of those
Places in which the Saints were made Conspicuous to St. John, I must denote
unto you Three eminent Circumstances: First, Their. Names, Seats. 2dly. Their
Situation, Round about. 3dly. Their Number, Their Names.
Twenty Four. First, their Names, Seats; So indeed our English Translation
renders it, and so the Vulgar, with respect, I presume, to the following word
Sitting: But Cornelius a Lapide, Beza, Complutensis, Regius, with our own
Learned Hamond, and a Multitude more, express them by the Name of Thrones,
according to the Original, and agreeable to the Title our Blessed Lord gives
them, St. Matthew the 19th. where telling his Disciples it is equally
impossible for a Camel to be squeezed through the Eye of a Needle, as for a Man
whose Heart is swelled with pride of, and enlarged with desires after Riches,
to enter in at the straight Gate of Eternal Life. At which Doctrine whilst the
Disciples stood mute and astonished, St. Peter breaks silence, and says, But
we have forsaken all and followed thee, and what shall we have therefore? What
Reward, what Compensation shall be given us for this? To whom our Savior makes
Reply, ver. 28. Verily, verily, I say unto you, that ye who have followed me in
the Regeneration, when the Son of Man shall sit in the Throne of his Glory, you
also shall sit upon Thrones. Oh the high Dignation of God! and oh the high
Dignity of Man! Men are advanced to Thrones, and that with God in Heaven; what
Imperial Majesty like this? But to come closer, these Thrones or Seats were
about the Throne, of whom? of the Blessed Jesus certainly, who is styled in the
Book of Wisdom Copartner with his Father in his Throne of Glory, and so is the
Holy Ghost; the Glory of these three is equal, the Majesty Coeternal, the
Godhead all one and the same, and therefore, the Throne upon which they are
here represented, is but one also. Well therefore was that Portion of Scripture
chosen by our Church for the Epistle on Trinity Sunday, but of the three Christ
is chiefly, say the most Orthodox Interpreters, intended in the Representation;
and therefore it follows in the 3 d ver. That he which sat on the Throne was to
look upon like a Jasper and a Sardine Stone, and there went a Rainbow round
about the Throne, in sight like unto an Emrald: The Rainbow fairly
emblematizeth, the Reconciliation which Christ wrought with God for Man, being
at the first, placed in the Clouds as a Sign of the Covenant of that
Reconciliation: And it appeared here in sight like unto an Emrald, more fully
to explain that Christ was meant, in whom, and from whom, we have our Spiritual
Life. The Emrald being of a most comfortable Color, and making all things look
most fresh and lovely that are about it. And all Divines I have met with, have
discerned the Face of Christ's Divinity in the Green and Lasting Color of the
Jasper, and the Face of his Humanity, in the Sardine-stone, which is of a
Fleshly hew and complexion: All put together, show that it is Christ's Throne
that gives Denomination to the other; and his sitting upon that Throne, that
makes the Saints so Glorious. The other in the circumference, derived their
names and splendour from the Throne that stood in the Center, and that leads me
to the second Circumstance in the first General of the Text, their situation
round about. Situation.
The Glorified Saints were made conspicuous to St. John sitting in Heaven, not
in a square nor angular, nor, as some contend it, in a semicircle, but in a
complete and exact Circle, which of all others, is the most perfect and most
capacious Figure, well translated in our English Round about: Round about the
Throne of Christ; from whom Beams of Glory are darted circumferentially, and
their Angle of Incidence being straight and directly level to the Angle of
Reflection, the Glory must needs glance upon all: For Mathematicians tell us,
that the Center is Perpendicular to every Point of the Circumference. Christ's
Throne is represented here in the midst of the other, as the Tabernacle of the
Congregation the Symbol of God's Presence amongst the Jews, set forward in
their March (Betoke Hamakanoth) in the midst of the Camp. And the Psalmist's
saying, Promise unto the Lord and keep it all ye his Rounds, or all that are
round about him, as we render it, has Relation, say Interpreters, to that
Encamping of the Israelites in the Wilderness: And hereto it is thought also,
our Savior alludes, where he promises, That when two or three are met
together in his Name, he will be in the midst of them. And wheresoever Christ
is in the midst, these that are round about him must needs (like the Woman that
touched the Hem of his Garment) draw Virtue from him. For as the Children's
sitting round about the Table, argues their mutual participation of their
Father's Love; so the Saints sitting round about the Throne of Christ, proves
the Communication they have in their Saviors Glory, with which they shine
above. Shine! Yes, and that with the same Glory that Christ himself shines
withal. How, the same? Not by way of Reflection as the Stars borrow their Light
of the Sun, but in their Measure, with the same Essential Beams: Otherwise the
Saints would be so far from shining about Christ, that they must vanish, and
disappear in his Presence as the Stars do at the rising of the Sun. Again, I
cannot but observe, that this Glory of Christ is communicated to the Saints
glorified, in a due Proportion, but not in an equal Measure unto all; though
they all surround the Throne, yet there is more than one Round about that
Throne: There are higher and lower Rounds of Saints, as well as of Angels, in
Heaven. Imagine several Vessels of several scantlings cast into the Ocean, of
which some hold a Pint, some hold a Pottle, some hold a Gallon, they will all
be filled, but yet a respect must be had unto each of their Capacities. Thus
filled indeed are all the Saints in the Beatifical Vision, but it is in the
Apostles Phrase according to the Measure of the Fullness of which they are
capable: And yet you believe, when both are in the Sea, it is as true Water
that fills the Pint as that which fills the Pottle: No more is it a different
Image which we stamp on a Penny from that, which is stamped on a Shilling, the
Image of Caesar is on both, and may be applied by the meanest Logician to prove
that there is a True community of the same Glory, but no Equality, which a good
Bishop once of this Diocese reports thus; In Heaven there is one Life, one
Felicity of all, but diverse Measures. Our Heaven begins here on Earth, and even
here, varies in Degrees, one Christian enjoys God above another, as his Grace
his Faith is more. And Heaven will be still like it self, not another above
from this beneath: He that improved five Talents was more recompensed, than he
that improved but one, yet both rewarded with their Masters Joy. And why should
we incur the check our Savior gave to his Disciples, asking, Who shall be
greatest in the Kingdom of God? Let us all strive to get a Place about the
Throne; What would we more than to be Happy? Though some may shine like the
Sun, others like the Moon, others like the Stars, and one Star may differ from
another Star in Glory, yet all about the Throne shall shine, and that for ever
and ever: Nor, need any despair of Room in Heaven, of having a Seat about the
Throne, though the Text mentions but four and twenty, the Third Particular or
Circumstance to be spoken to. Their Number twenty four: Their Number.
This is a finite and certain Number, put for an uncertain and infinite, which
is most frequent in the Holy Scriptures, nor was there need of mentioning more
Seats than Elders. Who these Elders were, and why no more, you will see by and
by: In my Fathers House, says Christ, are many Mansions; Many, how many, Oh
Blessed Jesus? Nay, that no Tongue can tell, and therefore he expresses them
by a Word, indefinite, to show that they are Infinite. Gods Hand unto his
Children is not scant, like Isaac's, he has more Blessings in store than one:
For the Welcome, recorded by St. Matthew, is general to all, Come ye Blessed of
my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you; A Kingdom larg enough for all,
no fear of straightness there, where St. John whilst yet in the Spirit, beheld
and saw a great Multitude, which no man could number, of all Nations, and
Kindreds, and People, and Tongues; And of all these says St. Paul, Whosoever
shall call upon the Name of the Lord, shall be saved: And of this Number were
the Elders in the Text most certainly; which naturally brings me to the Second
General.

The transcendent Dignity of the Persons placed upon the Throne; They were
Elders. But alas, their Number was small, they were but twenty four, answerable
to their Seats. I have read, That under this Number St. Jerome understood the
Jewish Division of the Old Testament into twenty four Books: Others have
thought here meant, The Distribution of the Sons of Aaron into twenty four
Classes, by King David: Others say, That the Saints in Heaven, were represented
here under the Form of the Governors in the earthly Jerusalem, anciently
composed, as the Jews relate, of twenty four Rectors or Heads of the twenty
four Quarters of High Streets of the City. But herein I willingly close with
Primasius, That the Catholic Congregation of all Churches which issue from the
Uniting of Jews and Gentiles, when the whole Body, whereof Christ is Head,
fitly joined together, and compacted by that which every Part supplyeth, shall
have its Consummation in Eternal Bliss and Glory, is here set forth by the
Twelve Patriarchs, the Founders of the Jewish, and the Twelve Apostles the
Founders of the Christian Church, in Robes of Purity, and with Crowns of Glory;
They making up our number of twenty four, by whom principally, and chiefly, the
Saints of the whole World were converted. And therefore being such glorious
Instruments, it has pleased the Holy Ghost to make them Representatives of the
Church, which Christ has redeemed unto God by his Blood, out of every Kindred,
and People, and Tongue, and Nation; and placed about his Throne of Glory. And
now these Representatives, are here styled Elders, First, Negatively, not in
respect of Age, for there are no Gray Hairs in Heaven; the Soul waxes not old
when in the Body, much less when in its Glory: No Elders in the Resurrection;
Children that died in their Cradles, shall then step over to Perfection of Age,
and old decrepid Bodies, be restored unto Strength and Vigor, both made
Perfect in the full measure of the Stature of Christ; Young or Old, Maimed or
Perfect whilst in the Body, at the Resurrection, we shall all arise in the
vigorous and flourishing Age which Christ himself arose in, and that was about
thirty three: We are told by some, That all the Angels that have appeared under
both Testaments, have appeared in such an Age. And others say, that this our
Savior meant, in that saying of his, That in the Resurrection, we shall be
like the Angels of God. But secondly, and positively, they are styled Elders in
respect of their Dignity, to show the Honorable and Venerable Estate of the
Saints in Heaven. Elders is a Title of Honor, and has been in all Nations and
Languages, given unto Men Eminent in Place, both in Church and State. Thus the
Representatives of the Majestic People in Old Rome, had the Name of Senators,
which signifies Elders. Thus the Judges of the great Jewish Sanhedrim were
styled (Zekenim) Elders. Nor does that known Title of Aldermen, by which we
dignifie the Governors of our Metropolitan Towns and Cities bear any other
signification, which in right Orthography should be Eldermen. Nay Bishops, and
Superintendants of the Christian Church, are frequently in the New Testament
expressed by the Name of Elders too. But perhaps there is more than an
Expression of Dignity aimed at in this Title of Elders when ever applied to the
Saints in Heaven, even to intimate who they are that shall have a Place there,
(viz.) Such as walk in the good old Ways, and maintain the good old Truths of
the Prophets and Apostles. Without doubt that which in Religion is most
Ancient, is most True, and Divine: Of whatsoever it may be said, It was not so
from the Beginning, may well be rejected for spurious and forged. It cannot be
concluded to be from him that is the Ancient of Days, but from the spirit of
Novelty, who endeavors to make men change their Religion as they do their
Fashion, that he may plunge as many as he can in the same Damnation with
himself; but for them who hold fast the form of words received, who contend for
the Faith anciently delivered, who keep close to the good old Path of
Righteousness, and Religion, My other three Generals in the Text do tell them,
There are Seats about the Throne prepared, White Garments of Honor and Purity
fitted and made ready, and Crowns of Gold held forth; to all which having
spoken something in the opening of the Text, I pass them over, and shall now
pass on to a new, but sadder Subject.

It is Comfortable and Glorious for a Christian to consider the Joys of Heaven;
but when it is remembered that before his Entrance into them, he must twice put
off the Old Man, once with its Lusts of the Flesh, and afterward with the
Flesh of Mortality, it is a putting Mirrh into his Wine; to remember that we
must all lie down in the Dust, and in the Dishonor of the Grave, is a great
allay to all Delight we have in the Expectation of the Glories above. But none
can reverse the Sentence, no Man can escape the Doom, Witness the Spectacle
before us.

If Honorable Birth, and Ingenuous Education, if Wit and Learning, if Courage
and Greatness, if Loyalty and Piety, if any thing could have given Immunity,
have gone for a good Plea, have put in a Bar against a Sad Day, this sad Scene
of Sorrows had not been the Entertainment of this Assembly, nor we at this time
with Sorrow in our Faces, met to Celebrate the Obsequies, who have so often met
with Joy in our Countenances to welcome the Arrival amongst us, of the Right
Honorable ROBERT Earl and Viscount YARMOVTH Baron of PASTON.

Of whom to speak fully and satisfactorily, is fitter for a History than a
Sermon. But though I cannot draw his Image in full Proportion, yet some
Glimpses I shall give you of his Virtues, that they may find a Place in your
Memories, and live in your daily Imitation.

It is expedient, nay expected, that somethings should be said, though all
cannot. For my own part, he was pleased to give me so intimate Acquaintance
with him, and that so filled me with just Arguments of his Praise, that I am
more at a loss to determine, what to leave out, than what to say. Therefore
begin I would, but where shall I begin, or how shall I make an End? they seem
alike difficult. But to pursue my proposed Method, I will begin with that from
which he took his Beginning, his Descent.

He was Great in his Descent; His Descent.
At this Quintilian advises us to begin, when we commend to Posterity the
Memory of a Friend that is dead. And I can produce many Authors that say that
St. Luke begins here, when he speaks the Praise of St. John Baptist: But this
is the Work of an Herald, not a Preacher, and the Escoucheons speak enough, if
I be silent. They speak him a Branch of an Honorable Stock, a Gentleman of an
Ancient Race, whose Family ever flourished in the First Rank of Norfolk Gentry,
and is now admitted into Alliance with the Blood Royal: Whose Name came into
England three Years after the Conquest: Lord Cokes Collection of the Pedigree
of the Paston Family. Mss.
The First of them was Wolstanus Paston, who was Buried at Backton, and after
translated with William de Glanvill his Cousin, to Bromhall-Abby, Founded by
the said William.

This Family was possessed of the Manors of Paston and Edingthorp, in the time
of Richard the 2d. In the Year 1314 there was a Grant to Clement Paston to have
a Chaplain in his House, a thing very rarely allowed by Authority, and without
it, never.

In the 8th. Year of Henry the 6th. William Paston was made Judge of the Common
Pleas, to whom the King granted as a special Mark of Favor 100 l. and 10 Marks
a Year, with two Robes more than the ordinary Fee of the Judges.

This Judge married the Daughter and Heiress of Sir Edmond Berry, by whom he
had the Manors of Oxnead and Marlingford, and diverse other Lands in Norfolk.
William Paston Knight. the 8th. Son of the Judge, married Anne the Daughter of the
Duke of Somerset. After this I find, Sir John Paston by several Adventures
there, achieved great Reputation in France, and was chosen to be on the Kings
Side in the Days of Edward the 4th. at the great Turnament against the then
Lord Chamberlain and others; and was sent to conduct the Kings Sister, when she
was to be married to Charles Duke of Burgundy.

Why should I name another Sir John Paston who was appointed, amongst others,
to receive the Princess Catherine from Spain, afterward married to King Henry
the 8th. From which King there is a Letter of Thanks to be produced, to Sir
William Paston, for his Care in his Preservation of the Emperors Vice Admiral,
and other Matters of Courage and Prowess.

I will but name Clement, the Son of Sir John Paston, who being Captain of a
Ship in a War with France, brought the French Admiral St. Blaukert home with
him, and kept him Prisoner at Castor, till he ransomed himself with seven
thousand Crowns. He was Pentioner to four Kings and Queens, and in his
declining Years, built Oxnead-House, and lived in it till Fourscore years Old:
One of his Daughters was married to Thomas Earl of Rutland Knight. of the Garter.
This Clement was called by King Henry the 8th his Champion; by the Protector in
Edward the 6th's time, his Soldier; by Queen Mary, her Seaman; and by Queen
Elizabeth, her Father; And what need of more?

This minds me of the Father of our deceased Lord, who was a Knight. and Baronet,
whose Fame both at Home and Abroad was as great as his Original, and who left
in the Place he lived in, a fresh Memory of his great Parts, and Abilities, and
lasting Monuments of his Travels and Foreign Acquaintance. His Mother was the
Lady Catherine Bertue, Daughter to the late Loyal, Valiant, and thrice Noble
Earl of Lindsey, whose Renown shall flowrish as long as our Chronicles shall
remember us of Edg-hill Fight, where he being General, valiantly fought, though
with the loss of his Life, the Battle of his Sovereign.

No wonder then our Lord was so great, so eminent an Assertor of Majesty and of
the Religion in the Church of England as established by the Law, as a late
Dedication justly styles him, when sprang from such Progenitors; From two
Families mixed with the Noble Blood of many others, neither of which was ever
sullied with Faction or Rebellion, taunted with Error or Schism, or blackned
with Irreligion or Atheism; and to a Mind inclined to Virtue, it avails much
to be born well.

The Place in which he was born was Oxnead; Lift up thy Head then, Oh Happy
Oxnead; yea, grow Proud, and boast that it can be said, This Good, this Great
and Noble Lord was born in thee. More Reason have thou for thy Ostentation in
this, than any of the seven Cities had, which challenged and laid claim unto
the Birth of Homer. But bar thy Gates against Men of Levelling Principles, who
deny all Deference and Honor to such as this Lord in his Descent, whose Veins
were filled in succession of many Ages with Heroic and Generous Blood. The
glorious Deserts of Honorable Parents are no small Patrimony, and ought to be
had in Reverence and Esteem. But as for me, I must confess, I have much more
delight, much more satisfaction in blazoning the Virtues of any Man than his
Arms; I hasten therefore to the Greatness of his Worth, which shall be my
second General upon this Occasion.

He was Great in his Worth; His Worth.
And here oh for the Apelles, that I might be able to promise a Draught
something worthy the Original.

The only Commendation of his Picture would be its Likeness to him; and this
puts me in mind to say something of his Face, which will be ever before me,
which God had adorned with an exact Symmetry and Pleasant Countenance, so that
every Look was a Prevailing Argument to beget Love and Admiration in the
Beholders. But the Cabinet is not so Beautiful as the Diamond that shines in
its Bosom; And it will please me, and profit you most, to speak of his
Intellectual Worth, whereof I might mention as many Branches almost as I have
Minutes left for the Remainder of my Discourse. To avoid Prolixity what I can,
I will reduce all to these; His Friendship, his Affability, his Learning, his
Prudence, his Magnanimity.

His Friendship toward Men was as general as his Acquaintance with them.
Friendship.
He was of a Nature so Kind, so Sweet, so Courting all; of a Disposition so
Prompt, so ready, so cheerful in receiving all, that he had no Enemies except
such as deserved no Friends. Where he placed Affection and allowed of Intimacy,
his Friendship (let my Experience give its Grateful Testimony) was as firm, as
immovable as a Rock; It was not all the starched Stratagems of Politic Heads,
nor crafty Artifices of pretending Admirers, that could unsettle him to his
Friend. He was very unapt, very uneasy to hear Ill of those, of whom himself
had conceived Well. It was a Disease to him and made him Sick to have an
Accusation brought against any whom he had set his Love on; the Accuser in thy
kind always lost himself, but our Good Lord kept his Friend: Nothing would make
him desert his Friend, unless it were his Friends deserting him and his
Majesty's Sevice.

For this he shak'd off many, or rather they shak'd off themselves, and yet
pretend to be as true Servants to the King as himself was, or he that speaks;
but observe, they will serve the King, as the Fanatics say they serve God, not
according to the Ancient Institutions of Religion, but their own Way, according
to their Humor. So these pretend to serve the King, but not according to the
Ancient Fundamental Laws of the Realm; and if they were let alone, they would,
I fear me, do the Kings Business their own Way too.

Conversation was always pleasant, unaffected toward his Betters, familiar
toward Inferiors, undissembled toward any, Assability.
and of easy Access toward all; and to none more freely than to the Clergy of
the Church of England, whom he loved, whom he welcomed, and to whom he opened
his Embraces always, upon the very account they were such. He gave Respect to
the Lowest, Honor to the highest; always begging the Bishops Blessing upon his
Knee, That he would pray to God for him.

He was of so great Comity and Civil Vrbanity, that as it is said of him in the
Comedian, Never any departed Sad out of his Presence, unless it was to depart;
and as the same Comedian speaks it too, None ever came at him, but they might
learn something from him.

His Learning was very Comprehensive, extending Learning.
for he dived into the Bottom of whatsoever he set himself to enquire into. He
was no Smatterer or superficial Sciolist, but had digested the whole
Encyclopedy of Arts and Sciences, and was fully accomplished with all that from
Studies at home or Travels abroad, could be expected in a Person of his Rank.
He was, if not initiated, yet perfected in the Rudiments of Learning, under
that most Eminently Learned, and fully Experienced Schole-Master Dr. Richard
Busby, at St. Peter's College in Westminster; and that Master has often, and
to this day will, (for as I take it, he yet lives, and long may he live to the
Good of after Ages) tell how Pregnant this Young Plant was, and what great
Hopes he gave of succeeding Fruit. From thence he went, and enrolled his Name
in Trinity College in Cambridge, where he heightened his Parts by such
Exercises as were suitable to his Quality, and perfected them by Conversation.
And leaving there a Good Name behind him, he crossed the Seas, and after some
few Months spent in the Court of France, where he received many Remarks of
Favor from the King and Queen, he returned well skilled in the Lingua, and
furnished with a keen and sharpened Wit; with a Wit very Great, but Innocent;
very Smart, but Harmless.

His Discourses were well imbelished with quaint Stories, and witty Jests, and
yet never did he spend his Jest to lose his Friend; and, what is not usually
met with, though he was generally full of Discourse, yet was he always
inoffensive, and never impertment.

In Poetry he was very dextrous, and when he repeated any thing out of the
Greek, Latin, French Italian, or other Poets, which he did frequently, it was
hard to say whether the Author or he made the Sense. And when any began any
thing out of the Ancient or Modern Historians, he seldom failed to go on and to
tell what followed: So happy was he in his Memory, even to Admiration: Nay the
common Observation failed in him, and he was a remarkable Exception to that
General Rule, That a great Wit, and a good Memory, are seldom accompanied with
a sound Judgment.

The Wise settling Affairs in the County, must make his Enemies confess he
neither wanted Judgment nor Prudence, Prudence.
nor Conduct; by which he reduced things to a much better Condition than he
found them; brought many back unto their Loyalty, confirmed others in it; and
when the Times looked grim upon him, stopped the Career, and put Spoaks into the
Chariot-wheels of those that drove Iehu-like toward a Commonwealth. And though
in Popular Appearances, the Kings Friends and his with Tricks and Artifices
have been outnumbred, yet he had Gold always to set against their Dross, and
with his Weight much outdid their Number in all Elections.

But I am not willing, no not to mention our then Divisions and Confusions,
when we seemed all broke in Pieces, each fixing upon other Names of Reproach,
even then by advancing the Kings Honor and Interest, he gained the Affections
of the Loyal Party, made them all his own, and at his death left the Number of
them almost double to what he found them.

Thus by his Prudent Management, he acquired great Fame to himself, great Peace
to the County, and great Satisfaction to all Good and Honest Men. Nay hereby,
even whether they would or no, he took possession of many Hearts, to the
Admiration of all that would not love him: Would not love him, did I say? Yes,
it is true, some did not, they loved not him, that did not love the King, they
loved not him that did not love the Church, and his Service to the King, and
the Church, he valued more than he did their Love. Sure I am, they did not love
him that vilified his Person, lessened his Parts, undervalued his Prudence, and
reproached his Religion; That mercilesly and unchristianly, without color of
the Laws of Man, or Conscience toward God, pierced the Sides of his heartiest
Friends to give him a Wound, a Stab. When his Friends for his Sake must be
taken into Custody, and squeezed in an Arbitrary Skrew, or Hands as harsh and
cruel: They persecuted his Friends for his sake, and with double Spite
prosecuted him, because he owned them for his Friends; but to proceed. When Men
in great Place began to write after the Copy of Forty One, when Accusations
were invited, Calumny rewarded, nay, managed with great Art and Power, Then was
this Noble Peer threatened with an Impeachment, Articles, as the Common Vogue
went, were ready; and such was the height of Malice, that his Friends were to
be made, yea, forced to be Witnesses against him. Then was he threatened with a
Stone-doublet (as the ruder Language of Norfolk phras'd it, with Confinement in
the Tower, as the finer Phrase of London styled it.) Yet, in all this, I never
saw him daunted, his Countenance fall, or his Courage fail. He out-brayed his
Enemies with his Innocence, and even then was more than usually constant in the
House of Peers, to testify, that he was not by all the Noise they made, broke
into any Affrightment for Shame or Fear of what he had done.

And when his Enemies, 5thly.
like Aesop's Viper, had licked the File till their Tongues bled, Magnanimity.
he remained invulnerable. They accused him for going about to subvert the
Fundamental Laws and Liberties of the People, the way by which great Stassord
fell, and Canterbury, who both, in their Stations, like this Noble Lord,
supported nothing more: For the Rule is sure, the Axiom infallible, To defend
the Kings Prerogative is the best way to secure the Peoples Liberties, nay
Lives. But then, such is the blind Zeal of Malice, He must be impeached for
Invading the Kings Prerogative, the Honor and Maintenance whereof was dearer
to him than his Life. Nay themselves had just before, made, his advancing it
too High, his Crime. Their own Surmises were the Bills of Accusation; but the
Splendour of his Integrity to the King and Government, soon dispersed all these
Clouds, and set him in a higher Sphere, as we shall hear presently.

I have read that Hippasus the Pythagorean, being asked after his Advance, what
he had done, made Answer, I have done nothing yet, for no man envies me. They
that do Great things, as this our Lord did, cannot escape the Tongues and Teeth
of Envy; but if Envy be the Accuser, there is no defense for Innocence; if
Calumnies must pass for Evidence, the bravest Heroes, the best Men in the
World, shall always be the most reproached Persons.

Well! in despite of all they said, and of all they did, this Magnanimous
Hero remained firm in his Worth, unblemished in his Honor, and, what I must
speak to as my third General, unshaken, and therefore Great in his Loyalty.

Here I heartily wish that Speech he made, To justisie the Succession of the
Crown in its Lineal Descent, when (...).
it would loudly have proclaimed his Parts and Loyalty together.

His Loyalty, which he brought into the World with him, which he derived from
his Ancestors, Loyal Blood running in their Veins through all Successions: This
he improved in his Education, it being (to my knowledge) the great Endeavor of
his forementioned Schoolmaster, even in the worst of Times, to plant Loyalty in
the Hearts of the Youth under his Tuition and Care, where he found kind and apt
Ground. This (his Loyalty I mean) he consummated by his own Judgment and
Approbation: he thought of nothing, he valued nothing that concerned himself,
when the Kings Honor or Interest fell in his way.

His Father yet alive, and his Domestic Circumstances very straight, out of
his Superfluities (shall I say) yea, Necessities, he supplied his Majesty with
Money whilst in Exile; Nay, I had it from himself, That he borrowed to give,
fearing his Sovereign might Want.

His Father being dead, at his First Step into Public Affairs, when he entered
the Honorable House of Commons, and took his place as Burgess for Rising-Chase
in this County, the First Parliament after his Majesty's most Happy
Restoration, he was the Member, he the Person, that moved and put to vote, A
Supply proportionable to His Majesty's Great Necessities at that Time; upon
which, that Parliament, to their Eternal Honor be it spoken, gave the King,
Two Millions and an Half of Money.

Sometime after this, he entertained the King, Queen, and Duke, and all their
Nobles and Servants in Attendance, a Night in Oxnead-House, where was prepared
a most Sumptuous Supper, which cost him three times more than Earls Daughters
had heretofore unto their Portions: Provisions superabundantly Plentiful, and
all Accommodations answerable. Thus, as it is said Araunah did to David, did he
as a King give unto the King. Nor can I omit to remark from his own Mouth, that
the King had no sooner put himself under his Roof, but he told this Honorable
Baronet, That he was now Safe in the House of his Friend.

The Tables being spread and Sideboards richly adorned with Plate, the King
took Notice of some more Remarkable Pieces, which gave occasion to Sr. Robert
to tell him, That his House was once better furnished, and he could have
welcomed his Majesty with greater Plenty of it, had not a Blew Ribbon that
attended on his Majesty with a White Staff, plundered it from his Father by
Trunks full. Here the King diverted himself with a delightful View of the House
and its Situation, and what he found within: Left many Gracious Acknowledgments
of Kindness from his Host, and next day took his Leave. But not long after, as
an honorary Reward, his Majesty by Letters Patents changed Sir Robert Paston
into Viscount Yarmouth Baron of Paston, the Ancient Seat of this Family; and so
he qualified him for what in a short space he put into his Hands, his own
Vicegerency, and made him Lord Lieutenant in this County of Norfolk: In the
Conduct whereof his unusual Diligence, and unexpected Zeal in Public Affairs,
begat Wonder and Admiration in most, and by his great Care and noble Designs
for his Majestics Interest and Service, he soon made himself great and dear to
the King his Master.

I have often heard him tell with great Complacency, The Free Access he had
unto his Majesty upon all Occasions: What a Kind Ear his Majesty gave unto all
his Addresses. Proud of nothing, that ever I observed, but that great Trust and
Confidence his Majesty placed in him. Proud! And well he might; for when all
others frowned upon him, the King smiled, and Publicly Embraced him in the
House of Lords more than once, declaring, He had found him Trusty and Faithful:
Nay, some that hear me, heard the King say, That whatsoever Service and
Respects they showed the Lord Yarmouth their Lord Lieutenant in this City, he
took it done to himself, or to that purpose. In a word, such was his Loyalty,
he valued not his Ease, though his Body was unwieldy; he spared not his Cost,
though his Pocket did not overflow; he regarded not his Health, though for many
years it has not been much, when Public Occasions called him forth to his
Princes Service.

But whatever Wonder and Admiration all this had raised, it soon passed into
the natural Daughters of Envy, Suspicion, and Detraction; into the Spirit of
Obloquy and Slander, and brought upon him great Vexation and many Troubles.

Envy, that l^ke the Fire of Vetruvius broke out upon him, and might with the
very Ashes have buried another, inclined and enspirited him with the more real
and greater Vigor.

And now though his best Actions had an ill Name, and an ill Sense put upon
them by others, yet his Majesty, who sees as an Angel of God, made better
Constructions of them, and as a further Testimony of his Royal Favor, gave him
another Title yet more Honorable, and made him Earl of Yarmouth, and so
restored him to that Fame and Reputation in which his first Procedures had
invested him.

And because both the Daughters of Envy have blown upon it, I will be his
Assertor, That great was his Love to the Ancient, Loyal, and Honorable
Corporation of Norwich, because the Members of that Body (generally speaking)
loved the King.

This one Qualification was enough to Entitle an Enemy to his Love: But I am
sure they found him their Friend, and manger the blasts of Calumny, the New
Charter shall remain a Token of it. I must say, he spared no Cost, no Pains, as
themselves can witness, to make the World believe that he loved them. Most of
the Tables in his House have been often spread together for their
entertainment, and all his Friends employed to bid them welcome. Nay, his very
Sleep, to my knowledge, was often broke to find out ways how best to serve
them. And he commended the Care of the City with his last Breath to all his
best Friends, and the Blessing of God, who takes care for their Reputations as
for their Lives; and by the Orders of his Providence confutes the Slanderer,
that the Actions of the Just may be had in Everlasting Remembrance: Therefore
the Mouths of Slanderers stopped, the Memory of our Lord shall be Embalmed in
Honor; And so I am methodically almost at unawares brought to my last General,
his Piety.

his Piety: Piety.
Such was his Piety, that he always, whatsoever Business happened, opened and
shut the Day with the same Key of Prayer in private unto God, and seldom mist,
whatever Company he had, Public Service in his Chapel, where, without regard
to his Ease of Body, or greatness of Quality, I never saw him otherwise than
Kneeling at Prayers, and Standing at Hymns, well knowing, that the first
resembles our Fall with Adam, and must be humble; the other puts us in mind of
our Rise with Christ, and so must be a Posture of Praise and Thankfulness.

And what, in this profane Age, wherein Men generally neglect it, or if not,
only take it to qualify themselves for some Place or Preferment, will hardly
be believed, yet can be proved by many Witnesses. What great strictness he did
use, what holy Preparation he did make when Sacrament days came, (and to him
they never came too often:) He always sequestered himself from all Business and
Company a day before at the least: And these were his own words, That he feared
that Act of Parliament which designed so much good, would in time take away the
Reverence due to that Holy Ordinance, and make it a formal thing only to be
done of Course: But it was not so with him, for as my instructions tell me, he
received this Holy Communion as his Viaticum just before his Passover, not long
before his death, with as much Comfort as Devotion.

Had I not Been too long already, I would branch his Piety into as many
Particulars as I did his Worth; But why should I mention the Parish Church at
Oxnead, where he lived, which he adorned and beautified? Why should I speak of
the Chapel in the House, which he built and consecrated to the Service of God?
Why should I mind you of that Rich and Noble Plate he furnished God's Altar
with? were I silent they should remain, as Jacobs Pillars, lasting Monuments of
his Piety, and to the Generations yet to come, the Stones out of the Walls
shall speak his Praise, as the Noble Fabric of the Free School in
North-walsham, plentifully endowed, does to this.

And the weekly Lecture maintained there by the Bounty of his Ancestors, has
transmitted the Honor of their Piety down to us: Let the Tongues of the Poor,
the Relief of the Widow, the Succor he gave the Fatherless, the Clothing of
the Naked speak his Charity. Indeed he was made up of Pity and
Tender-heartedness, of Christian Kindness and Compassion.

As to that Charity which implies Forgiveness of Injuries, he was most Eminent:
Injuries and Unkindness at present made deep Impressions, gave sudden wounds
to his tender Heart, where all things were so contrary, but upon his
recollecting of himself, whether they were by mistake or out of Malice, it was
the same thing, or the same nothing in his Account or Memory.

I told you how Tenacious his Memory was, but if it were to lay up an ill turn,
it took no hold, but let that slip into Forgetfulness. After some (as I
intimated) had set to work all their Engines, and like the Roman Retiaries
spread their Nets to entangle him, whom otherwise they could not destroy: He
often protested to me, Though he feared not their Contrivances, yet he heartily
forgave the Contrives. And when I saw him last, he repeated the Saving with
this Addition, So far he forgave them, that he had forgot the Particulars. And
at his very Hour of Death, it seems, declared, He was in perfect Peace and Love
with all the World, and so was ready to resign his Soul to God that gave it,
his Life to God who had preserved it with particular Marks of Favor and
Providence; None of the least whereof, was that wonderful Rescue, which was
effected for him by no less than a Divine Hand, when on the ninth day of
August, about eight years ago, a knot of Villains beset him in the Night, shot
five Bullets through the Coach, and one into his Body, but proved not Mortal:
For which Deliverance he kept an Anniversary Thanksgiving upon that day unto
his death, and now keeps a Jubilee with his Deliverer for evermore.

But you will ask, Had this good Lord no Faults? was he all Virtue, all Sweetness,
all Goodness? I answer, He had Infirmities, he was no Angel; yet let not that
Customary Sin, contracted in his younger time, of Swearing, be his Reproach,
for he has often bewailed it, and with abundance of Tears in his Sickness
about four years since lamented it in himself, and ever since utterly abhorred
it in all others: I have seen him shake his Head, sit Uneasy, and at last
withdraw, when he has heard some Young men extravagantly imbellish, or rather
imboss their Discourse like a Face with Carbunkles, with wicked and
unprofitable Oaths. He did it more than once, when last amongst us. He had his
Failings, and indeed were it not for some Grains of allowance given, in what
Pieces could there be weight? in none of Mortality, surely; but they are impure
Flies that feed upon other Men's Sores; and they have too much Corruption in
themselves, that love to hear of the Corruption of others.

His Faults, Frailties, Sins and Infirmities, so much by him bewailed, and
through his True Repentance buried in the Grave of Christ, in whom was his
Strength and Hope, his Faith and Salvation, I doubt not but your Christian
Charity will think fit to bury with him in a deeper Grave, the Grave of
Oblivion, whilst his Virtues shall live and flourish, and find a perpetual
Monument in every one of your Hearts.

And here now I bespeak my Excuse for not insisting much upon the great
Affections he bore unto all his Relations: None understood Relations more, non
observed them better. I left it to the last, because my Instructions tell me,
after he commended his Soul to God in the Church her Prayers (which during his
whole Sickness, he devoutly heard twice in his Chamber every day) he gave
Counsel, and administered Comfort to them about him, his dear Consort, his
beloved Children, his respected Servants, as if they had been the sick and
dying Persons, and he the well and sound.

He received with great desire the Absolution of the Church, from the mouth of
the Minister, who sat up all night with him, and some few hours after: About
eight a Clock in the morning, fetching one single Sob, he died, and sweetly
reposed himself in the Bosom of the Blessed Jesus.

He died a Good Christian as he had lived like a Gentleman, his own wish, and
often repeated Expression: He died a True, and Loyal Protestant, a sound Member
of the Church of England; he departed in her Faith, which they of Rome call
Heresy, and they of Geneva, Popery.

His Death was such as Augustus used to wish for himself, an Euthanasia, a
Civil, Easy, and Well-Natur'd Death. Thus was he taken from our Eyes, in the
same manner the Jews say Moses was, by a Kiss of Gods Mouth; A Death indeed,
but Gentle and Serene, without Trouble and Amazement, without Impatience and
Temptation: And in the very Point of Death, he seemed to taste of the Sweet of
Eternal Peace, that Happy Rest of the Life Above, where he sits among them,
That are about the Throne, clothed in White, with a Crown of Gold upon his
Head: And let it be our Care so to live, that every one of us may have a Place,
within the Rounds there, to sing Eternal Halelujahs to him that siteth upon the
Throne; To whom, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, Three Persons and One
God, be all Blessing, and Honor, and Power, and Glory, for Ever and Ever. Amen.

Glory be to God on High!
POSTSCRIPT.
READER.
IT not being in may Power to keep this Sermon any longer from going abroad, I
thought good to Advertise Thee, now thou have perused it, that there is nothing
omitted nor added to what was: said in the Pulpit: But having there not said
all that was in my Papers, I present thee with this Postscript, to show thee,
That the Five Corporations in the County of Norfolk as earnestly strove to have
a Share in this most Noble Peer, as those Cities intimated in the Sermon did to
have a Right to the Birth of Homer. Thetford.


The First that called him Hers, was Thetford, who chose him her Representative
in that Happy Convention. that brought in his Gracious Majesty (whose Reign God
grant may be Long and Prosperous) out of his almost Twenty Years Exile; where
this Honorable Lord then Sir Robert Paston, offered up his First Fruits of
Loyalty, in putting it to Vote, (as I am credibly informed) What Day should be
set for his Sacred Majesty's Restoration.

His Majesty being set upon the Throne, our Noble Earl served in the succeeding
Parliament for Rising; Rising.
where (as the Sermon tells thee) he put the Vote for two Millions and an half:
For which he was celebrated in a Peotical Pamphlet, under the Character of
Maximillian Paston. The Honorable House of Commons having that Bill, sent it
up by him to the House of Lords, at whose Bar he presented it to His Majesty's
own Hand; and that Night received Thanks for it from the Kings own Mouth.

Not many Years since, he made a Visit to Kings-Linne, Kings Linne.
where he was welcomed with a most extraordinary Reception and Magnificent
Feast; and upon their Invitation given him, he honored that Loyal Town, with
taking up his Freedom amongst them.

Yarmouth enjoyed him several Years their Lord High Steward, and gave him, when
admitted, Yarmouth.
a Reception answerable to that Character, and made him a very Noble Present.

Norwich was as near in Service and Affection to his Person, as it stands in
Situation to his House, Norwich.
took all Occasions of manifesting their High Esteem of him, always gave him a
Welcome in a Body when he came into the County. Four times chose his Eldest Son
William Lord Paston (now Earl of Yarmouth) their Burgess in Parliament; and at
last Unanimously resigned their Charter to their Most Gracious Sovereign, by
the Hands of this Noble Lord and his Son; Whose Affections are as great to that
City as his Fathers were. And in Memory of their many Obligations to his Father
and himself, is pleased to own himself their present Recorder. It were but just
here to tell thee, with what Courage this Young Gentleman in all those
Parliaments, opposed the then growing Faction, who, as it now appears, had then
contrived a most Bloody Conspiracy against the Sacred Life of our King and his
Royal Brother, together with all that dared (when they were in the height of
their Ruff) appear to be Loyal.

But being to give the Just Praise of the Dead, I shall only tell thee, that
the whole County of Norfolk showed at once the Value and Honor they had for
this our deceased Lord, when in their Address from Thetford Assizes 1682. to
his most Sacred Majesty, to Congratulate his Royal Highness the Duke of York's
Return to Court; the whole Body of the Gentry subscribed their Thanks for
setting this Lord in Lieutenancy over them, owning the Happiness of the County
to the Prudent Management of this their Loyal Lord Lieutenant.

Thus died our Noble Earl upon the 8th. of March 1682. who was born upon the
29th. of May. 1631. As if Nature had eminently designed him to follow his
Sovereign in all Future Services: Whose Birth was on the same Day in the Year
preceding. He lived most Beloved of all, and died by all most Lamented, and
with great Appearance and Concourse of all Degrees of Men, was Honorably
Interred at Oxnead, WHERE GOD GIVE HIM A JOYFUL RESURRECTION.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 27. line 3. for inclined read enlivened. The same Page line 4. for real
read zeal.


