THE SPEECH OF Mr. HIGGONS IN PARLIAMENT At the Reading of the BILL FOR THE
MILITIA The Twenty Second Day of MAY.

LONDON, Printed by ROGER NORTON, 1661.

Mr. Speaker,
YOu have a Bill of extraordinary importance now before you, and there are many
points of Law in it, which I will not presume to speak to. I shall leave them
to the Learned Gentlemen of that Profession, who have spent their time in that
noble study. But because all Laws either are, or ought to be grounded upon
reason, and all Laws are to give place to that supreme Law of public safety,
I will make bold to speak something to this Bill, though not to the Law, yet to
the reasonableness and necessity of it.

I believe there is no man but is sensible of the mighty mischiefs that the
late dispute of the Militia brought upon this Nation. For what was the fruit of
that Dispute, and what liberty did the Contenders purchase, but a liberty to
destroy themselves and ruin their Country? a liberty, Mr. Speaker, worse than
the worst sort of servitude. If the Question of the Militia had been rightly
stated, if it had been declared to be wholly in the King, as without doubt in
reason and nature it was, and been settled in him with that latitude and those
powers as were requisite for protecting himself and his people, for ought I
know, the late war had been prevented and all the calamitous consequences of
it. I have ever been of opinion that they who are born under a just,
legitimate, and hereditary Monarchy have the same obligations, and owe the same
service to their Prince, which the Ancients who lived in Commonwealths did to
their Country. It was an ordinary thing with them to prefer the public good
before their own, and to devote themselves to death, that the place which gave
them being might be happy. That zeal which inflamed them with a love to their
Country ought in my judgment to operate in us for the service of our Prince.
For in a Monarchy, the Prince represents the Country; the Majesty of the
Country is in him, his welfare is the welfare of the Country, and of every
particular person in it: It was a celebrated saying of Artabanus Captain of the
guard to Xerxes, when Themistocles fled out of Greece to the Court of Persia,
Stranger, says he, the Customs and manners of men are different, and that is
laudable in one Nation which is not so in another. You Greeks affect liberty
and equality, and to be one as good as another. But we who are Persians think
nothing so great and so honorable as to serve and obey our King, who is the
image of the living God. If to serve our King be to serve our Country, if the
interest of the King be the interest of the public, if all our lives,
safeties, and fortunes are bound up in his, certainly we can not make him too
great, or be too concerned for his preservation.

That which first brought men into Societies was the fear they had of one
another, and a desire of safety. This made them content to pass away that right
which by nature they had to all things, that they might be assured of
something: this made them transferr and give up the Dominion of themselves to
others. And hence it was that Government arose, from hen^^ it was, I mean from
the disposing of this ^inion, that all Governments were denominated; for where
the Dominion is placed in many, there it is a Popular State, where it is in
some of the better sort, there it is Aristocracy; where it is in one alone,
there it is Monarchy. Now all these Governments may be convenient in their
proper places. But certainly the most absolute, the most noble, and to use the
words of Plato, the most divine form of government is that of Monarchy. Under
this form of Government, Sir, it is our honor to be born; to this form of
Government we have the happiness to be restored from one of the vilest and
miserablest Anarchies that ever any Nation was under. Nor is that all our
happiness; we are not only restored from the worst fort of Government to the
best, but by the great mercy of God delivered from the worst men that ever
ruled in the worst kind of Government into the hands of one of the best of
Princes. Now Sir, the Question before you is, What power you will allow this
Prince for his and your own preservation.

The power of the Militia is a thing so inherent in the King, and so
inseparable from his person, that without it he cannot perform the ends for
which he is a King. He can neither protect us ^m the attempts of Enemies, nor
from the violences of one another. So that of necessity the Militia must be in
him, and in him alone: for to divide it betwixt him and any other is a
contradiction in the very nature of Government: since where there are two
coordinate powers in one State, where there are two pretending an equal power
to the same thing, and no Superior to appeal to, the question can not be
decided but by force, this force will introduce a war, which must end in the
dissolution of the Government.

But the Question is not so much where the right of the Militia is (for I find
none expressly deny it to be in his Majesty) as how far the power of it shall
extend, and what restraints and limitations shall be laid upon it. The King, it
is confessed has power to Levy and Array men, but if he have not power to arm
and appoint them as he please when he has levied and arrayed them, to what
purpose will they be levied and arrayed? or if he have power to levy, array,
and arm them, and can not lead them out of one County into another, as occasion
shall require, and danger call them, to what purpose will they be armed? or if
he have power to lead them where he please, and can not raise money to maintain
them, to what end will he lead them any where? without pay there will be no
Discipline, and Forces without Discipline will be worth nothing. It is as good
have no Militia as an ineffectual one, as a Militia which will only trouble
the people and not secure them.

It is a vulgar error Sir, that the power of the King is incompetible with the
liberty of the people. The restraining of the King does not make the people
great, but makes the King and the people both little. It distracts and
disunites the Sovereign Power, whereas it is in the union of Power that all
Empire consists. And therefore it is my opinion that this Bill as it is penned
should pass. If I have said any thing, Mr. Speaker, contrary to the sense of
this House, as soon as you declare your opinion I shall retract mine. In the
mean time I submit my opinion and the reasons of it to your more venerable
judgment.

FINIS.

