BONASVS VAPVLANS: OR, Some Castigations given to Mr. John Durell, for fouling
himself and others in his English and Latin Book.

By a Country Scholar.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1672.

ERRATA.
Page 3. l. 25. r. reproved p. 12. l. 15. r. bear. p. 13. l. 16. r. hasp. 16 l.
7. r. whether. p. 21. l. 18. r. nor should have. p. 26. l. 26. r. Phrases. In
ons. p. 28. l. 21. r. Salmurienses. p. 30. l. 17. r. operous. p. 39, l. 25. and
41. l. 10. r. Nonconformist. p. 44. l. 22. r. That, and l. ult r. there is. p.
49. l. antepen. r. the more. p. 53 l. 11. (...) Tithes. p. 59. l. ult. r. bring
us. p. 63. l. 25. r. there called p. 64. l 26. r. world. p 72. l. 21. r. was.
l. 25. r. Aquila. p 79. l. 1. r. of such. l. 9. r. strongly. l. 17. r.
Episcopacy p. 94. l. 26. r. Consecration, though p. 114. l. 7. r. there p. 119.
l. 3. r. all p 128. l. 3. r. in p. 136. l. 20. r. Ecclesiae p. 138. l. 20. r.
down; and p. 145. l. 13. r. will find p. ult. l. 10. r. in the behalf of l. 11.
r. done, you will.

SIR,
I ^^ve of late so wholly addicted my self to practical Theology, and taken so
huge a pleasure, in reading those Authors that never espoused the petty
interest of the Times, that next to wishing for Mr. Durell's sake, his
Eristical volume had never been written, I wish for my own sake you had never
sent it me, or at least sent it me under such circumstances, that I might have
laid it down as soon as it had given me enough of it, i. e. as soon as I had
read the Title page. Certainly if you had left me to pay the Stationer for it,
if I had not returned it, it should only have stood in my Library, to increase
the number of my Books: nor should I have ever taken it down, unless when I
take down Bonarscius his Amphitheatrum, i. e. when I have a mind to discover
unto my self, or others, unto what a height of bitterness, corrupt nature, not
restrained by Grace, will transport men even in controversies relating to
Religion; which of all others require to be managed with exemplary moderation
and meekness: but seeing you have thought meet to be so bountiful as to bestow
a Book on me, which must needs cost you sundry shillings: and seeing you have
desired of me (for a requital of your cost and charges) to throw away some time
upon it, I should be extremely uncivil and unthankful, if I should not bestow a
few hours in reading of it, or so much of it, as may be sufficient to pass a
judgment upon the whole, the which yet I cannot so well do, until I have first
given my censure of that English Treatise printed, 1662 the answering whereof
in a Latin Apology for the Nonconformists, has produced these voluminous
Vindiciae, and of that Treatise my censure in brief is this, that a
Noncomformist cannot better secure himself against it, then by standing at the
mark, at the which its Author pretends to shoot all his Arrows; The
controversies betwixt Conformists and Non-Conformists being brought to their
true State, it will appear that Mr. Durell either never knew them, or was
afraid to come near them: To instance in a few particulars of many.

Several hundreds of Ministers during the late distractions, were ordained by
mere Presbyters, they only having courage enough to confer orders publicly,
and solemnly with Fasting, Prayer and imposition of hands: None of these would
the Bishops admit to Ecclesiastical employment, unless they would submit to be
re-ordained with and by that very form of Ordination, which is used for the
Translating of Laics into the state of Clergymen: Here two Questions arise,
first, Whether a valid Ordination may be repeated? and that the far greater
part as well of Conformists, as Non-Conformists deny: the second therefore and
only remaining Question is, Whether an Ordination by mere Presbyters be valid?
if it be not, we nullify the most famous Churches beyond the Seas, whom God
has so remarkably owned and supported amid all the troubles and persecutions of
their Popish Adversaries; if it be valid, then by the judgment even of the
very Conformists, no other Ordination can be received: Mr. Durell was unwilling
to annihilate those Churches in which he was baptized, and yet was as unwilling
to justify the English Presbyterians in not submitting to Reordination, and
therefore wisely passed over these Questions in silence; but being by the Latin
Apologist reprove for omitting so Capital a controversy, he grows more hardy,
and adventures to affirm the Case of the Presbyterians beyond the Sea, and
those in England, is not the same: because among them there are no Bishops, as
among ours there were, and so they are defended by necessity, which ours
cannnot plead. How much better had it been to have left this sore naked and
exposed to the Eyes of all, than to have used a Plaster that can neither Cure,
nor cover it? Is the Case of Transmarine and English Presbyterians so vastly
different? Why is the same hard measure meeted out to both? How comes it to
pass, that if a man ordained at Rome, could obtain leave of himself to assent
and consent, he were capable of the highest Ecclesiastical dignities: but if a
man were ordained at Geneva, the most unfeigned assent and consent will not
qualify him for Ecclesiastical dignities, unless he will also receive new
Orders. Was it so from the beginning either of our first or second
Reformations? were any of those, that either in the persecutions of King Henry
the eight, or Queen Mary, fled beyond the Seas, and received orders in reformed
Churches, looked upon at their return as mere Laymen? our Histories tell us
they were not: nor would the right Reverend and Learned Bishop Morton so far
scandalize the Neighbor Churches, as to re-ordain one of their Ministers,
though strongly importuned so to do, by a Letter of the dissembling Archbishop
of Spalato. Nor could Bishop Bancroft be induced to give way, that the Scotch
Divines should first be made Priests before they were Bishops, although it was
alleged that they had never been made Priests, but by Presbyters. So as this
custom of Presbyterifying de novo those that before had received the gift of
Presbytery, must needs be an innovation here in England: of the which I wish I
could give a more fair and plausible account unto Foreigners, then for the
present I am able; For it would greatly dishearten those renowned Ministers
abroad, who live under a King of a different Religion from them, to come over
to our Nation for a Sanctuary, if they must when come hither, break the Seal
that God has set to their Ministry, before they be admitted to any cure of
Souls.

2. I say this pretended difference is no difference at all, for what though
there were Bishops in England, yet did they not appear to magnify their
offices And it has been wont to be accounted the same thing not to be, and not
to appear: and if they had appeared, their appearance might perhaps make those
Presbyters who gave orders without them Schismatics, it could not possible
make their orders null: for as formerly where our Church thought that Baptism
administered by a Midwife was valid, and allowed and enjoined her in Case of
necessity to baptize, the Midwife had offended, if she had baptized where there
was no true necessity; yet this offense notwithstanding, her baptism would
have been reputed valid: so here, if our Presbyters could confer a valid
Ordination, when Bishops were not at hand, their Ordination must needs be
valid, though Bishops were at hand; and therefore all the dust that is raised
by Mr. D. to show some difference between the Presbyters of our own and other
Churches, could be designed to no other end, but to blind his own and his
Readers Eyes, that so no notice might be taken how he got off this
controversy: it may be he may come nearer the mark in the point of Episcopacy
it self, but of that also we shall find that his Arrows fall Heavenly wide: For
the Nonconformist has again and again professed in conference and writing,
that he can and would for peacesake receive a Bishop, that should have as great
a superintendence over Presbyters as ever Cyprian had over his, but they say
that by assenting and consenting to the present Book of Ordination, they must
acknowledge a Bishop to be by divine Institution, of a superior order to a
Presbyter; and for this they say they can find no Foundation in Scripture, and
less then none in any writings of modern reformed Divines: If they are mistaken
either in setting our Bishops higher then they have set themselves, or in
making a Bishop when set to such a height, to be an Officer unknown to
Primitive or Modern Churches, Mr. Durell had done a very Christian work: if he
had taken pains in the Spirit of meekness, to show them their mistake: but he
cannot sure think that he has endeavored any such thing: He tells us page
4th. and the 5th. that all the Lutheran Churches have a subordination of
Pastors, and that those who are in them called Superintendents, or Bishops,
have the power of Ordination as the Bishops of the Church of England have.

But does he believe what he himself writes? does he not know that they all
found their Superintendency on a human and not on a divine institution? does he
not know that some Lutheran Divines of eminent note, do with full mouth declaim
against us here in England, because we so much appropriate the power of
Ordination unto Bishops? Tobias Major I am sure on this very score calls us
Angli Papizantes: let all Scholars consult Chemnitius, Gerard, Brockmand, or
any other Lutheran that writes common places, or if they be too many to
consult, let them consult Hunnius's demonstration of the Lutheran Ministry, in
which they shall find him, though himself a Superintendent, making a Bishop in
Ordination to act only as the Churches instrument; and averring, that if the
Church should delegate her power to a Presbyter, or to a Layman, the Ordination
would be as valid, as if performed by a Bishop. The Non-Conformists have no
quarrel against the name, either of Superintendent or Bishop, nor will it be
any satisfaction to them, to show them Ecclesiastical Persons in the Lutheran
Churches, dignified by the name of Superintendents or Episcopi, unless it could
also be showed, that they claim that dignity by divine right, and are received
by the Elders, as an Order of men superior to them: the which will never be
showed: nay it will easily be proved, that mere Presbyters have ordained those
who in Germany and Denmark go by the name of Bishops and Super-intendents:
Nicholas, Amsdorft, as appears in his Life written by Melchior Adam, was
created Bishop; but by whom was he created? by Martin Luther the Pastor of the
place where the Ordination was solemnized, and two Pastors more. Now did these
set this Bishop into an order superior to their own? if they did, who gave
them authority so to do? if they did not, then his Title notwithstanding he was
still of the Order of Presbyters, and those that were afterward ordained by
him, were ordained but by a Presbyter. Likewise in Denmark when Reformation
there first began, seven Bishops of the Kingdom being cast out, there were
seven Super-intendents ordained, who were to do the work of the expelled
Bishops, and to be Executors of the whole Ecclesiastical Ordination; but by
whom were these seven ordained? even by John Bugenhagh, who was but a
Presbyter, as may be seen in his Life, written by the forementioned Author; so
that such Episcopacy as is scrupled by the English Nonconformist, has no place
in any Lutheran Churches: and if not in the Lutheran, I am sure not in the
reformed Churches.

Yet Mr. Durell in many places of his Book, makes show as if the Episcopacy
quarrelled against here in England, had place in some reformed Churches, and
that those very Churches among whose Ministers there is an equality, do not
condemn Episcopal Government: the French Churches he is certain page 13. are so
far from averseness to it, that they rather wish they were in a condition to
enjoy that sacred order.

Now what means he by that sacred Order? if he do not mean an Order by Divine
appointment, superior to the order of Presbytery, he does most egregiously
trifle; If he do mean such an Order, I say that as many French Divines as do
desire such an Order, are manifestly fallen off from the confession exhibited
to Charles 9th. 1561. the 30th. Article whereof is this.

We believe that all true Pastors in what place so ever they are set, are all
endued with the same and equal power among themselves, under that one head and
chief and sole universal Bishop Jesus Christ. And if any Ministers of the
Belgic Churches do either desire or could approve of the English Hierarchy,
they also must fall off from the Belgic Confession, which in the Synod of Dort
was reviewed and approved: for if that Confession, had no inimicous aspect upon
the Church Government in Britain, why did our Divines of England approve only
that part of it, which related to Doctrine, not that which related to
Discipline?

Our Prelates and their Friends in England do very much build their Hierarchy
upon Ignatius his Epistles. If the French Churches did not dislike the
building, why do the most Learned of them take so much pains to ruin and pull
up the Foundation? why have Blondel, Salmasius, Dally, so long employed their
Pens to prove the Epistles even in the best Edition to be spurious; I know Mr.
Durell tells a story concerning Blondel, that in his Apology for the opinion of
Hierom, he had inserted a passage, which some Scotch Ministers prevailed with
him to blot out: in which he declares himself to be no Enemy unto Primitive
Episcopacy: if that be true, he did not sure think our Episcopacy to be
Primitive, for Doctor Hammond in his Answer to Blondel complains of him, as if
he were so far from being touched with any care of our Church, or sense of our
miseries, that he thought meet contrarily more sharply to prick those that were
already oppressed, and endeavored to triumph over our Church when it was sick
and staggering, and ready by reason of inward troubles to give up the Ghost;
let Mr. Durell now consider, whether he will make his Countryman Blondell an
Enemy to our Hierarchy, or make our Countryman Dr. Hammond a Calumniatour; one
of the two he must unavoidably do: And for the future let him bethink himself
how to wipe off that great and black blot, which he has let fall upon some of
the best and most obedient of the Sons of the Church of England, page 2. viz.
that they weakly suffered themselves to be brought into a bad and false opinion
of the Transmarine reformed Churches, mee^ly by the reports given them by the
new Presbyterians.

For certainly it is little to their credit, when they had the Confessions and
Symbolical Books of the reformed Churches in their Libraries, never to consult
them, but to take up reports concerning their Neighbors, from Men, whose
interest did lead them to make the world believe, that they had a many Friends
abroad, though but few at home. Doubtless our Episcopal Divines knew well
enough, that the Hierarchy they aimed at was not countenanced by
Sister-Churches; and long before Smectymnuus was heard of, or ever such a
creature as an Ordinance of Lords and Commons saw the light, one among us had
said publicly, perfecto odio odi. Calvinum: and Bishop Laud had inured his
tongue to say Ecclesia Romana, and Turba Genevensis: he had also told Bishop
Hall, that though he did well to put a difference betwixt the Scottish and
other Churches, yet he had written more favorably even of other Churches, than
their cause would then bare; and the good cause then in hand did work so
powerfully even upon the Holy and Learned Bishop Hall himself, that he
adventured, as Mr. Prin tells us, to reordain Mr. John Dury, though he had been
before ordained in some Reformed Church. Such an Episcopacy as was claimed by
Archbishop Cranmer, the far greater part at least of present Non-Conformists
could admit but such an Episcopacy as Archbishop Laud was introducing they
cannot yet digest, and that is the Episcopacy that the present book of
Ordination, if assented and consented unto, would engage us in: and let it not
seem strange that the present Non-Conformists startle at it, when as Dr.
Holland the Kings professor of Divinity in Oxford, was so much offended with
Dr. Laud for asserting it, that he did not stick to affirm he was a
Schismatic, and went about to make a Division betwixt the English and other
Reformed Churches: yet though the Non-Conformists do not like such a kind of
Hierarchy, they will if they consult the peace of their Consciences, use no
such incivil language against it as some of Mr. Durells Countrymen have done:
they will not be so uncivil as to call Dr. Hammond Knave, which is the English
to Salmasius his Nebulo: they will not say as Maresius does in his Examen of
Dr. Prideaux his four Questions, page 1. That Dr. Hammond as proceeded to such
a degree of fury, as professedly to propugne the cause of the Pope. Much less
will they say that the English Bishops had better consulted their eminence, if
they had acted more moderately in it, and had rather with the rest of
Protestants made it to be of humane institution, than so stiffly to assert the
jus divinum of it: for as a bow by too much bending of it is broken, so they
too much stretching their Authority and dignity fell, quite from it, like the
Camel in the Fable, who because he affected horns lost his ears, page 68. least
of all will they say, as the same Author says page 71. (which I tremble to
English) Praesules Angli ex part collimarunt ad Papismi restitutionem jure
postliminii: and page 111. Vt dicam quod res est, haec defensio temporalis
Jurisdictionis pro Ecclesiae Ministris portio aliqua est illius fermenti
Papistici quo Hierarchiae Anglicanae massa paulatim se infici passa fuit, dum
magis ambit Typhum Seculi, quam humilitatem Crucis meditatur.

To conclude all, when the Learned Gataker was most bitterly railed upon by
Lilly for being a Presbyterian, he answers in his Apology, page 24. A duly
bounded and well regulated Prelacy, joined with a Presbytery, wherein one as
President, Superintendent, Moderator (term him what you please) whether Annual
or Occasional, or more constant and continual, either in regard of years or
parts, or both jointly, has some pre-eminence above the rest, yet so, as that
he do nothing without joint consent of the rest: Such a Prelacy I never durst,
nor yet dare condemn. The like he says for diverse others, if not the greater
part of the Assembly, page 26. And the same dare I adventure to say, in
reference to the far greater part of the present suffering Ministers; nay I may
further undertake for them, that if any one should publish in print, that the
difference betwixt a Bishop and Presbyter is by divine institution, they would
not think themselves any way concerned to have such a one suspended from his
Ministry: yet if my memory greatly fail me not, Mounsieur Peter Moulin in his
first Epistle to Bishop Andrews, making Apology for some passages in his Tract
of the Vocation of Pastors, excepted against by K. James, uses these or the
like words; That if he had made the difference betwixt a Bishop and Presbyter
to be founded on a divine Law, his own Churches would have inflicted
Ecclesiastical censures upon him.

It will concern Mr. Durell highly, either to prove that Moulin wronged his own
Churches, or that they have abated of their zeal against Episcopy; for if he
prove neither of these, he will lose (that which is better then all his
Ecclesiastical revenues) a good name, and when his hand is in at this work, he
may also do well to take Bishop Mountague to task, who in his appeal to Caesar
by his Majesty's special direction and command perused by Dr. White, and
approved as fit to be Printed, says p. 70. That the Discipline of the Church of
England in the Synod of Dort, and other Dutch Synods is held unlawful.

If it be held unlawful in the Synod of Dort, it may be presumed it was held
unlawful by almost all other Reformed Churches; for, almost all sent thither
their Delegates: and these Delegates approved the confession of Faith, in which
only the Discipline of our Church can be thought to be condemned. Now let Mr.
Durell bid his zeal awake, for certainly Hannibal est ad portas: either he or
Bishop Mountague will be found false witnesses against the Reformed Churches, I
will not determine whither must be branded for a Caluminator. Bishop Carleton
has written an examination of Mountagues appeal, And page 111. gives us to
understand, That instead of yielding his consent to that strange conceit of the
parity of Ministers to be instituted by Christ, which was inserted into the
Belgic Confession; he openly protested his dissent thereunto: And I believe
that such protestation was by him made in his own name, and the name of those
sent out of England with him. But I would willingly be satisfied, why the
Divines of other Churches did not make such protestation also? Did they think
the parity of Ministers a strange conceit? If they did not, down falls the
whole structure of Mr. Durells Book: if they did, why did they enter no dissent
to this strange conceit? And I would also be satisfied, what might move our
Reverend and Learned Carleton to say, That the cause of all the troubles in the
Belgic Church was this, That they had not Bishops amongst them, who by their
Authority might repress those who brought in novelties. Sure I am, that not
long after the sitting of that Synod, the Arminian novelties were broached to
purpose in England, and yet we who wanted not Bishops, either would not, or
could not, repress the broachers of them. This Reverend Prelate was Diocesan to
Mr. Mountague, who made it his business to infect us with Arminianism: If his
Episcopal power were so sovereign an Antidote against the spreading of this
infection, why did he never make use of it? or how came it to have so little
success? Oh that it were not too manifest, that errors may grow in a Reformed
Church where Hierarchy is established.

I have one thing more to add which it may not be amiss here to relate. The
Ministers of the Palatinate being brought into a great deal of distress, his
late Majesty thought meet under the Broad Seal, to grant them a Collection here
in England for their Relief. The Letters Patents being Sealed, Archbishop Laud
thought meet to have an Alteration made, in the form of the Letters, and
obtained of the King to have it made. It had been said, that the Ministers
extreme miseries fell upon them for their sincerity and constancy in the true
Religion, which we together with them profess, and because they would not
submit themselves to the Antichristian yoke: our most Reverend Primate thought
not meet to have Popery called the Antichristian Yoke, though it had been so
called here in England by Persons as great as himself. Nor did it relish with
him, that the Religion of the Palatinate Churches should be called the same
with ours. Dr. Heylin in the History of his Life, page 306. gives the reason:
Because by the Religion of those Churches the Calvinian rigors about
Predestination, etc. are received as Orthodox, and because they maintain a
parity of Ministers directly contrary both to the Doctrine and Government of
the Church of England. Either therefore what Mr. Durell says from the
Palatinate Ministers in favor of our English Hierarchy is a mere falsity, or
else there is some such Alteration made in the Judgment of those men of late,
as the world formerly knew not of; or else the Archbishop and his Second laid
to the charge of the Palatinate Ministers, what they were not truly to be
charged with.

I have insisted too long on this point, and shall conclude it with a
profession of my persuasion, that if a Synod should be called, made up of the
most sober foreign Divines, they would advise his Majesty to establish a
moderated, limited Episcopacy, as more suited to the Generality of our English
tempers, than that Presbytery which the two Houses, to satisfy the
importunities of the Sects, rather made a show they would establish, then did
establish: but I can as soon believe they would publish to the whole world
their own Hypocrisy, as advise to settle a Government by Bishops, pretending
to be Jure Divino, superior to the Presbyters, claiming sole power of Order
and Jurisdiction and exercising their Jurisdiction by Lay-Chancellors: and if
they would not advise this, much less would they advise to silence every one
that should not assent to, and approve of such a Government. If you can think
that Mr. Durells Testimonies prove they would; I beseech you then make use of
your Logic, reduce his Testimonies into the form of a Syllogism, and if the
conclusion follow from every one of his premises, or from any one of them, I
will then humbly beg your pardon and his too: Indeed some of his Testimonies
are such, as I much doubt, whether he brought them in jest, or in earnest.
Peter Martyr and Bogerman are made to approve the English Hierarchy, page 252,
268. Because the one did write, the other speak to English Bishops by those
names and titles by which they are commonly notified here in England. But is
not this to affront us, as if we were quite void of Learning? may we not as
well argue from Mr. Prynn's un-Bishoping of Timothy and Titus, that he also
approved the English Hierarchy, because he dedicates a Book with that name to
the two Archbishops by the Titles of Right Reverend Fathers in God, Primates
and Metropolitanes of all England: Is not this to lay a stumbling block in the
way of the blind Quakers, and to make that silly Generation yet more averse
from giving men those names, by which they are dignified in the places where
they live? To suggest that a man cannot call one by the name commonly given
him, but he must be interpreted to approve his office, and the way of coming to
his office, and the claim he makes to his office? But it is also said of Peter
Martyr, that he submitted to the Bishops whilst he was in England, page 252.
Did he so? In what I wonder? Had they any power over the Kings Professor? Could
they either visit him or silence him? And what if he had submitted to them?
must he needs submit to them as to an order of men superior by Divine Law? to
that Order of which he himself was? Cranmer most familiar with Martyr, never
claimed to be of such an Order, as his Manuscript kept by Dr. Stillingfleet
will witness; much less did he desire Martyr, or Bucer, or Fagius, to be
reordain'd by him, that they might be capable of Ecclesiastical preferments; so
as submission then was quite another thing to what it is now. Yet even the
Non-Conformists of that age thought they had wherewith to justify their
Nonconformity, and to speak as softly as is possible, they did as much credit
the cause of the Protestants by suffering, as did any of the Conformists. And
if I might make comparisons, none of them ever recanted for a time, as Cranmer
did; none of them during the time of imprisonment went to Mass as Ridley had
begun to do, and probably had continued so to do, had he not been recalled from
that abomination, by the Letter of his Nonconforming Friend Mr. Bradford. And
the exemplary courage and constancy of our Protomartyr, John Rogers, a very
rigid Nonconformist, did greatly animate Bishop Ridly, as he himself
acknowledges, I please not my self in these comparisons, should not have made
them, had not Mr. Durell's pen dropped somewhat a foul blot upon the name of
Bishop Hooper's friend Peter Martyr, whom he will needs represent to be so
simple, as to scruple the Cap, because of its Mathematicalness: But he was too
wise, to scruple the Cap on any such account; And has better deserved of the
English Church, than that he should so many years after his death be so flouted
at, as also Bishop Hooper should have had more reverence showed him, than to be
charged as he is page 239. with a strange weakness, for sticking at our
Ceremonies.

Let us now see how well Mr. Durell has acquitted himself about forms of
Prayer: It must be acknowledged he has sufficiently proved from the
Testimonies of Reformed Divines, that forms of Prayer of humane composition are
not unlawful; but the same thing had been long ago proved to his hand by a
Nonconformist Minister, Mr. John Ball in his Discourse against Separation, as
also by Dr. John Hoornbek in his Epistle touching Independency: so that I
cannot well tell what it was that made Mr. Durell so copious on this subject,
unless he thought it wisdom to drive that nail which would go. I do assure him,
I never yet met with a Presbyterian that thought forms of Prayer unlawful, or
that thought it simply unlawful for a Church to agree upon forms of Prayer to
be used by Ministers in the Public Congregation. But if he can either prove
that it is lawful for the Church to allow her Ministers no Liberty to use their
own gifts for Prayer in the Public, or prove that our English Church has left
her Ministers any such Liberty, then shall he do Knight Service.

In the first undertaking, he will have the Presbyterians his adversaries; In
the second, he will have Dr. Heylin, and many others as Canonical as himself to
cope with. I have heard a Presbyterian disputing against sundry Passages in the
Common Prayer Book, and wondering why the Convocation should tie all Colleges
and Halls to make use thereof, without any omission or alteration, when as
there is not in the whole Book any one Petition for the Universities, and I was
heartily troubled that I had not wherewith to remove my Friends admiration: But
had I ever heard him say that a Form of Prayer was a breach of the second
Commandment, I should have pitied his Ignoranc, as I unfeignedly do the
Ignorance of all those who account it any glory to a Reformation to leave in it
no helps for some Ministers Infirmities. In this number cannot be placed either
the Assembly of Divines, or the two Houses of Parliament that convened them.
They both intended the Directory that Ministers might, if need were, have some
help and furniture in their Administrations; and truly it was so sufficient an
help and furniture, that he who needed other, could scarce be thought worthy to
be a servant of our Lord Jesus Christ in the work of the Ministry. Here I must
be pardoned, if I reprove the presumption of Mr. Durell, who trembles not page
3. to lay to the charge of Lords and Commons, and Assembly of Divines, the
delivering of manifest untruths: The untruths are there said to be,

First, That the Common Prayer Book had proved an offense to the Reformed
Churches abroad.

Secondly, That it was abolished to answer the expectations of other Reformed
Churches.

I say those are no untruths; The Common Prayer Book had proved an offense to
the Reformed Churches abroad. Apollonius has signified so much in reference to
the Walachrian Churches, and others as famous as Apollonius have given us to
understand as much in relation to the Churches of which they were Ministers; as
the Latin Apologist has too plainly proved: and can any one imagine that some
Ceremonies prescribed in the Liturgy, were not an offense to Martyr and Zanchy?
Perhaps those learned men did not count them simply unlawful, but certainly
they were offended with them, and wished them removed: Was it no offense to any
Reformed Churches, that so many Legends out of the Apocrypha were appointed to
be read in our Temples? No offense to Reformed Churches, that Infants Baptized
were affirmed to to be undoubtedly saved? Less color is there to say there was
a manifest untruth in asserting that the Common Prayer Book was taken away to
answer the expectation of other Reformed Churches; For it is notorious that the
Churches of Scotland and New England, did expect from the Parliament the
abolition of the Liturgy; and certainly, they might with propriety enough be
called other Reformed Churches, if none besides them had expected the said
abolition, as we can prove some others did: I must also crave leave to censure
the Manifesto of Mr. Durell, published with a Noverint universi. Let all the
world know that there never was, nor is yet any Reformed Church, that has
only a Directory and not a Book of Common Prayer for the public worship of
God. I ask, were there no Reformed Churches in the times of the Apostles, or
men Apostolical? I trow there were, Yet it is certain, says Capellus, that
then there was no Prescript Form of Liturgy; nor does that Author give us any
notice of any Prescript Liturgies, until Leaders and Doctors grew idle: were
there when his Manifesto was published no Reformed Churches in New England? or
had these Churches Books of Common Prayer? and why I strange are Directory and
Book of Common Prayer made opposite? were there not in some Reformed Churches
Books of Common Prayer, that were appointed to be used but as Directories, it
being left free to the Ministers, either to use those Printed Prayers, or any
other agreeable to them; this freedom I am sure sundry eminent and worthy
Divines in Holland have all along used: Mr. Durell indeed says, that there is
not one Minister in all Franoe but has made unto himself a set Form which he
uses always, and no other; page 18. which is certainly a bold assertion and
supposes him to have had conference with every Minister in France, or to have
received Letters from every one, or at least to have employed Agents that had
made enquiry concerning every one; which if true, would argue him a man of
wonderful intelligence: Did never any one Minister in all France, make unto
himself above one set Form of Prayer. Did, and does every one of them precisely
keep himself to those very words which he put together when he first entered
into his Ministry? Did never any one after God had restored him to his
Congregation from some eminent sickness, put in any one word to express his
sense of Divine Goodness? I will here suspend my belief till I have received
some farther Information, or can better tell in what sense Mr. Durell would
have his words taken; for it may be he would have his own Phrases expounded as
he himself, page 17. expounds some Phrases in one of the French Rubricks upon
Sundays in the morning, the following Form is commonly used; The meaning
whereof he tells us there, is, That it is to be always used, and no other: A
gloss that sounds mavelous strange to our English ears, which have been
accustomed to distinguish betwixt Commonly and Always; and will not easily
unlearn that distinction: and so when we hear out of the Harmony of the Belgic
Synods a Minister shall pray either by a certain Form proposed to himself, or
else the Spirit shall dictate; we are wont to imagine that the meaning is not
that a Minister shall never pray but by a Form; it may be Mr. Durell is of
another mind: if he be, he may do well to communicate to the world the grounds
of so singular an opinion, and when he shall so do he may do well also to give
us his thoughts concerning the practice of the Bohemian Churches, where it
seems the Ritual Books or Formula's are delivered only to the Pastors, the
Reason whereof Comenius in his Annot. page 101. says is, That the Auditors
might be more attent, and more profoundly admire the grace of God, for (says
he) if only prescribed things are always recited, what is there that may stir
up attention, Curiosity rather will be stirred up whilst this and the other man
attends, whether the Minister reads exactly the same things which they behold
in their own books; nor (adds he) must we think that the Ministers are tied
to the very words and syllables of the books delivered to them; it is free
according to variety of occasions to use any thing drawn out of the Treasures
of mystical wisdom which makes for the exciting of zeal, whence it eomes to
pass that pious Auditors are scarcely ever present at holy Mysteries without a
new motion of heart.

My imagination on the reading of these words is, that Comenius was not hugely
fond of prescribed Formula's in which the people were as well versed as the
Minister: he seems rather to be of opinion, that if words flow from the mouth
of the Minister which the People had not seen before hand, they will be heard
with the more Devotion: whether Mr. Durell's imaginations agree with mine, time
may discover; mean while I may have leave to guess what it was that moved Mr.
Durell's pen to run into such excess of riot against the two Houses and
Assembly, and I conceive it was the extravagance of his Countryman Ludovicus
Capellus in his discourse about Liturgies, unhappily inserted into the Theses
Dalmurienses; for his words Mr. Durell has punctually transcribed and done into
English, a Scholar may find them in the third part of those Theses, p. 707.

I shall follow Mr. Durell's own Translation page 15.

One hundred forty years ago when the separation was made from the Church of
Rome, and that the Christian people coming out of Babylon, did cast off the
Popes Tyranny, the sacred Liturgy was purged of all that Popish Superstition
and Idolatry, and all such things as were overburdensom, or which did
contribute but little or nothing to the edification of the Church. And so were
framed and prescribed in several places, diverse set forms of holy Liturgies, by
the several Authors of the Reformation that then was; and those simple and pure
in Germany, France, England, Scotland, the Netherlands, etc. differing as
little as possible from the ancient set Forms of the Primitive Church; which
set Forms the Reformed have used hitherto, with happiness and profit, each of
them in their several Nations and districts; till at last of very late, there
did arise in England a froward scrupulous and over nice (that I say not
altogether superstitious) Generation of men, unto whom it has seemed good for
many Reasons, but those very light and almost of no moment at all, not only to
blame, but to cashier and abolish wholly the Liturgy used hitherto in their
Church, together with the whole Hierarchical Government of their Bishops;
instead of which Liturgy they have brought in their Directory as they call it.

On the words thus translated I adventure to say.

First, That I am not much in love with the Professors Chronology; He gratifies
the Papists too much to say, or but to intimate that no secession was made from
their Church till an hundred and forty Years before he put forth those Theses,
some Churches had gone out of Babylon much sooner, some not so soon.

Secondly, I am less in love with his jumbling together of the Liturgies of
Germany, France, England, Scotland, Belgia, for if the Germans did purge their
Liturgy of every thing that was over-burdensom and troublesome, or which did
contribute but little or nothing to the edification of the Church, let a reason
be given me why we leave any thing out of our Liturgies which they retain? did
this Professor of Divinity think that nothing is retained in the Lutheran
Liturgies that is burdensome and operosous or that makes little to edification,
or did he conceit that none of the Lutheran Churches are German? do the
Lutherans Latin Songs contribute much to edification? are their Images apt to
teach the soul? did ever any one get much good by having the bread put into his
mouth instead of having it broken and delivered into his hand? what is I wonder
the advantage of Exorcism? certainly if the Lutheran Liturgies recede as little
as may be from the Forms of the Primitive Church, other Churches have receded
very much from them.

Thirdly, It was a great misadventure to affirm that the Reformed had with
profit and happiness each of them in their several Nations and Districts, used
set Forms till lately the Liturgy was Cashired in England.

Had not Calderwood told the world long since, that for many years he had not
used set Forms whilst he was Minister in Scotland? was not the Liturgy laid
aside in Scotland before in England.

Fourthly, It is a sign of no great humility, for one Professor so severely to
censure the actings of a whole Assembly of Divines, in which were many
Superior to himself in Learning; but let not Episcopal Divines much glory to
find the Assemblies Reasons so vilified, they will find the Reason of Mr.
Hooker, their Oracle, as much vilified in this Censor's Thesis de Festis.

Fifthly, It is very Probable the good Professor had never read the Directory,
else he would not have left it on Record, that the Directory contains only the
Arguments of things to be said and done in the Administration of the
Sacraments; for in the Directory, the words for Administration of Baptism are
prescribed, so are the words for the Administration of the Lords Supper.

Mr. Durell therefore by translating Capellus into English, has but uncovered
his nakedness, exposing him to contempt, who was before become too
contemptible, by decrying the Hebrew points and Scripture Chronology, so
opening a door to downright infidelity: Yet as if he had not done him spite
enough, He not only gives us his Text, but also draws six Observations from it,
page 15, 16. in five of which he most grossly abuses him. The first is, That all
Reformed Churches have Liturgies: This I say follows not from any words of
Capellus, if Mr. Durell say it does, his Logic is his own, let him make use of
it. The second is, That the Liturgy of the Church of England is judged by this
great man to be not only pure and free from all Popish Superstition and
Idolatry, but also from all such things as were onerous and troublesome, or
which did contribute but little to the Edification of the Church, as well as
other Reformed Churches. Twenty Cart-ropes will not pull this observation out
of Capellus his words. He only speaks of the Liturgy made by the first
Reformers of our Church, which vastly differs from the present Liturgy that Mr.
Durell takes upon him to defend. The third Observation is of all most
mavelous, thus worded; If these Liturgies ought to recede as little as
possible from that of the Primitive Church as he does intimate, undoubtedly the
Liturgy of the Church of England is the best and most perfect of them all.

If Mr. Durell will have this observed, we will observe it as the issue of an
over-confident fancy, yet humbly praying that he would allow us to think that
this observation has no relation in the world to any words of Capellus; If he
may be judge, our Liturgy differs more from the Primitive Liturgies, then the
Liturgy of any Reformed Churches; for he says, Primitive Liturgies were most
brief and most simple, consisting of a few prayers, etc. Now if we should grant
our Liturgy to be very simple, certainly it is not very brief, nor does it
consist of but a few Prayers: let Mr. Durell officiate according to it Morning
and Evening, which I never knew any Conformist to do, and I will be bold to
say, his Sermons afterward shall not be over tedious: The fourth Observation
is, That of all who call themselves Reformed, the Presbyterians are the first
that ever left off the use of set Forms of Prayer. Capellus has not the word
Presbyterians in his work; nor am I certain whom Mr. Durell understands by
them; perhaps he means the English Presbyterians, but how came they to be
Presbyterians (...)? Capellus was too wise a man to say, that they were the
first that left off set Forms of Prayer; he knew well enough unless he only
was a stranger in Israel, that many years before the Assembly met at
Westminster set Forms of Prayer had been laid aside and condemned as unlawful,
by huge multitudes who were angry with the old mere Nonconformist because he
would not separate from the English Church, as well as endeavor a Reformation
of some things. The fifth Observation is, That the many reasons for which the
Presbyterians had rejected the Common Prayer Book, are very light, and almost
of no moment at all: It Is true that Capellus has written something to this
purpose, but it is the same Capellus who has written so many bugbear words
against our English Bishops, in his Theses de descrimine Episcopi and
Presbyteri, and de vario Ecclesiae regimine, the former Theses he concludes
thus, That there was no cause why the Bishops and their Patrons should so
greatly insult, and only not grow insolent against those whom invidiously they
called Puritans and Presbyterians.

And let it be observed; that if the Presbyterians had only reproved, and not
cashiered the Common Prayer Book, their Reasons might have been sufficient,
notwithstanding any thing Capellus says to the contrary. Sixthly, Mr. Durell
would have it observed, That the Presbyterians themselves who are the known
Authors of the Directory, are in Capellus his Judgment a froward, peevish and
superstitous Generation of men. Capellus does indeed call the Composers of the
Directory morose and froward, but seems unwilling to call them superstitious;
and the same Capellus had commended them for shaking off the Yoke of Episcopacy
in his Theses de Vario Ecclesiae regimine Sect. 24. Let Mr. Durell when he puts
out next, English these words, for they seem framed according to the Heart of
the Presbyterians, and let him then also tell us, why he calls the
Presbyterians the known Authors of the Directory. That Assembly that presented
the Directory to the two Houses, was as to most of its Members, when first
called, Hierarchical, and under an Oath of Canonical obedience; there are not
very many of them living at present; of them diverse conform, and are as deeply
engaged to use Liturgical worship as Mr. Durell himself; let him therefore when
he has opportunity, enquire of them, whether they consented to have the Liturgy
cashiered? and how they came to fall in love with it again? and what made them
so fearful least the old subscription should choke us, when as they themselves
can swallow these new ones that are far bigger and more bulky?

By this time I hope it is come to my turn to make some observations upon the
Theses of Capellus, and my Observations may be the fewer because I have already
suggested so many, and the first thing I observe is, That the men against whom
Capellus was so not, could not be the English Presbyterians, unless they were
falsely represented to him: for these are his words, page 710, 711. They with
whom we have to do, bewray a manifest enough hatred against Formula's of
Symbols or Confessions of Faith, and of Catechism, and the both ancient and
recent use and custom of them received in the Christian Church. If these are
the men he had to deal with, then had he nothing to do with the English
Presbyterians, no men having more contended for Confessions of Faith and
Catechisms in set words than they. Secondly, I observe that he represents
himself and his fellow Professors as not condemning or inhibiting a free use of
Prayers composed by Ministers themselves. Nay these are his words, page 713. We
plainly think it both lawful and consentaneous that they who can do it, should
discover their gift and industry in praying, as in preaching, this only we
will, that the use of such prayers ought not to hinder the Liturgy constituted
by public Authority, and to take away and abrogate all use of it out of the
Church. And a little after he adds. We deservedly condemn the rigor of those,
who under pretext of a praescript Form of Liturgy, do study to eliminate out of
the Church all use of Prayers conceived by Ministers themselves. Let Mr. Durell
consider, whether this Damnatory sentence do not fall upon many of his own
Patrons and Abettours. Thirdly, I observe that when the Professor comes to
contract what he had said, he determines concerning Formula's, as if
Smectymnuus had too much influenced him, for he says first, That they are not
absolutely in every time and place, and with all men necessary, because the
Christian Church wanted them for some time; and it does not appear from sacred
or exotic History, whether the Jewish Church did not want them before Christ,
and Ezra, and from the time of Moses. Secondly, That they are not commonly
necessary but for order and Decorum. Thirdly, Where and when there cannot be
had learned Pastors who are able to teach, the people by their Sermons and
proper Prayers, that there Formula's are plainly necessary. Fourthly, Where
there are learned and skilful Pastors, a public Form of Liturgy is very
profitable, and necessary to the Common Edification of the Church in the same
Communion of Divine worship. Fifthly, That the use of such Forms cannot justly
be condemned or disaproved, nor ought it, seeing it may be always and every
where profitable and most convenient, and has obtained in the whole Christian
Church all the world over, for above 1300 years, and does every where now
obtain, but with those Independent Novices. Let Mr. Durell after this, take
heed how he commends Liturgies, by the pen of his most applauded foreign
Divines: and let him know, that all the pains he takes, to make the French and
Dutch Liturgies the same, or near a kin with and to ours, does indeed tend to
the reproach of Archbishop Laud. For if there were no difference, or but small
betwixt them, why was he so zealous as his Historian represents him, in
prosecuting and pressing the French and Dutch Churches, to have our Liturgy
translated into their Language, and used by them in all their Churches granted
them in England? however, let me warn Mr. Durell to take heed, that he do not
go on with that design he has so often acquainted us with, I mean the design of
Printing together the Formula's and Agenda's of all the Reformed Churches in
Christendom: for though this design might perhaps please himself (as who is
not pleased with the issue of his own Brain) yet I much question whether it
would be any way pleasing to the most Reverend and Right Reverend Prelates of
our Church. Certain I am, that it is not many years, since some of our greatest
Ecclesiastics plainly enough declared, that such a design would not much
relish with them, for when the Prince Elector Palatine came over to visit his
Uncle, King Charles I. in England, which was about 34 years ago, some busy
heads (as Dr. Heylin calls them) published a book entitled, A Declaration of
the Faith and Ceremonies of the Palsgraves Churches. What was the effect of the
Publication? a course was forthwith taken to call it in for the same cause, and
on the same prudential grounds (adds Dr. Heylin) on which the alteration (I
before mentioned) was made in the Letters Patents. But I needed not so long to
have insisted upon Liturgies, having before told you what he must do that hopes
to bring the Nonconformist to subscription; he must prove that the Church of
England has left Ministers any power to make use of their gifts in prayer, for
if that be not proved, they will shrewdly argue against the lawfulness of
promises to bury their gift in a napkin, but whether this be proved or no, the
Nonconformists that I speak with, will be but Nonconformists; not forsaking the
public Assemblies, but rejoyceing to hear Christ Preached, though not without
some bitter reflections upon themselves.

I come to Ceremonies, and the first of them that occurres, is the Surplice,
concerning which, my Nonconformists Friends say, That if they used it as
enjoined by the Liturgy, they must receive it; as a vestment apt by some
notable signification it has, to stir up the dull mind; Now that I might
satisfy their Scruple, I have gone to some Conformists and enquired of them,
whether ever they experimented any such aptness in it to stir up their dull
minds; they most of them wondered at my Question, telling me that by assenting
and consenting, they meant no more but only to promise, that they would not
openly contradict any thing in the Liturgy; you may easily imagine what motion
this reply stirred up in my dull mind; only one answered, that though he would
not boast of his own experiences, yet he doubted not but the holy Vestment had
a fitness in it to stir up the dull mind; but I asking him further, whether it
was apt to stir him up as a man, or as an English man? he gave me to understand
that he was not willing to be pressed further. I comforted my self however in
this, that Mr. Durell would tell me some stories, of some great liveliness put
into men by the wearing of the white Garment, but he quite deceived me, only
giving me to understand, page 24, 25. Of some of other Reformed Churches that
to comply with the Lutherans, do sometimes wear Surplices. This is but cold
kindness, and that I may not be in debt to him for it, I give him to
understand, That no Lutherans in the Low Countries do wear Surplices; and they
forbear to wear them, not because the Magistrate would not give them leave to
wear them, but because they want a will to wear them, which makes me think that
they have no high opinion concerning the usefulness of them; nor can I think
that our own Ministers have any huge apprehensions of this exciting virtue of
the Surplice, for whereas they are enjoined to wear it as often as they
officiate; I find few of them so to do, many of them never wear it, but when a
Sacrament is to be Administered. Perhaps I shall be able to afford my
Nonconformists more help and assistance against his Scruples about the Cross in
Baptism: His Scruples are founded upon this bottom; That the Cross is made
asign of the Child's Dedication to God, and also a sign of his perseverance in
Grace, and such a sign they say is Sacramental, which kind of sign the Church
has no Commission from God to institute; I have taken some pains that I might
be able from the writings of Conformists to assoile this Objection. Mr. Durell
tells us, Sermon. page 29. That the Cross is indeed a visible sign, but there is
no invisible Grace answering to it; and so no Sacrament. I could not acquiesce
in this, for I thought Dedication to God, and Perseverance were graces; and if
they be Graces, I am sure they are invisible Graces; I have also sometimes
wondered, seeing Baptism it self was instituted as a Dedicating sign, and seeing
by it we engage our selves to perseverance, and God also engages to give unto
Believers the Grace of Perseverance; what might move our Church to institute
the Cross as a new sign of any of these things? especially seeing yet I never
had the hap to meet with any who could from their experience aver unto me
that the sign of the Cross with which they were signed at Baptism, had added
to them any degree of manfulness: nor by comparing several Baptized persons
could I ever observe, that persons Crossed at Baptism, were less inclined to
be ashamed of Christ Crucified, than those that were Baptized, not being
Crossed. Indeed this sign of the Cross has Ministered more matter of Scruple to
the Nonconformists, then any other Ceremony besides; and therefore Mr. Durell
should not have dealt slightly in this matter, which yet any one may observe
that he does, for instead of giving us instances of Reformed Churches that use
the Cross in Baptism. He contents himself to give us a few instances of
Reformed Churches, that use the Cross out of Baptism; the Church of Geneva, he
says, Makes the Christian Religion in a picture, to lean upon the Cross, page
21. and page 31. Does not think the Christian Religion sufficiently represented
without the figure of a Cross. And the French Churches agreed Anno 1609. That
they would not debar from the Sacrament, such as should wear Crosses upon
their Cloaks; in case the King would not allow them the maintenance for maimed
soldiers until they did wear such Crosses; He might also have added that the
Erectors of the short lived Commonwealth among us, did appoint a Cross to be
set upon that Money which they presumed to Coin, and also put the figure of a
Cross into the Flags of those ships which they set forth against his Sacred
Majesty; and had he so done, would not any one at last have asked him to what
purpose is all this waste of Examples? never did sober Presbyterian or
Independent question such kind of Crosses, many of them perhaps will be found
to have them in their Coat of Arms, and in their Signets with which they use to
Seal their Letters; and yet would at no hand be induced to suffer their
Children to be Baptized with the sign of the Cross, as a sign of their
Dedication to God, or as a token that afterward they should not be ashamed of
Christ Crucified, etc. Mr. Durell had sure forgot that the Cross our Church
appoints is a Transient Cross (by which Bishop Sanderson would have it
distinguished sufficiently from the Cross of the Papists which is permanent)
else he would not have brought so many instances of permanent Crosses which
being the Objects of sight, may occasion in us some good thoughts and
meditations concerning the Cross on which our Lord Jesus did suffer, but the
Transient Cross leaving no visible impression on us, has no such aptness
objectively to stir in us any good thought concerning Christ Crucified, and it
is hard to conceive how it should be useful in the way of admonition, unless we
had some one to admonish us that we were Crossed with such a Cross: I know that
dipping, or sprinkling the Water, upon the body, leaves no visible impression
upon it neither, but the spirit who always abides in believers, has an office
to bring baptism to their remembrance, and has so effectually brought it to
remembrance that they have from considerations drawn from it, quenched the
fiery darts of Satan, that this blessed Spirit will concern himself to bring
our being Crossed in Baptism to remembrance Mr. Durell will not hastily
affirm: what then? would Presbyterians better approve of the making of a
permanent Cross on the forehead of newly Baptized Infants? surely no. But they
sometimes argue thus, ad hominem, and think that their is strength in their
arguings. Mr. Durell has no where that I can find, showed their strength to be
but weakness; rather he has strengthened their hands by some expressions used
in his Sermon, page 23. Where he places Chrism used in Confirmation amongst
superstitious or superfluous Ceremonies: Now why the Chrism in Confirmation
should be accounted superstitious or superfluous, and the Cross in Baptism not
be so accounted, there can no good reason at all be assigned. Is the Cross
ancient, so is Chrisme; the Cross as much abused by the Papists, as ever was
the Chrism: the Cross made significant of what Baptism it self signified; and
signified more clearly than the Cross can signify: and therefore superfluous
enough, if that be superfluous which is used for the doing of that which was
sufficiently done before; whereas in Confirmation there is no outward visible
sign to signify that which Chrism signifies; viz. Anointing with the Holy
Ghost inwardly, as may be collected from a Petition yet retained in the Liturgy
for Confirmation.

I am not now at leisure to enquire strictly into the usuages of Reformed
Churches abroad, nor into the Sentiments of their Divines concerning our
Ceremonies; but this I have found, that those who have gone from our
Universities and traveled into foreign Reformed Churches, and Kingdoms, have
generally returned to us again with very little fondness for our Ceremonies;
now it seems very strange, that if the same Ceremonies be used abroad, that are
used here, or if they abroad count them as indifferent as we do them at home,
that Travells should ingenerate in any a dislike of them: and it is strange
also if Mr. Beza had no worse thoughts of out Discipline and Rights, then Mr.
Durell would make show of; that he should have so good thoughts of Mr. Travers,
and several other chief Nonconformists in England, as to make them his greatest
Correspondents; for so I can prove he did by Letters still extant.

Hitherto I have showed you, how much Mr. Durell has mistaken, and
misrepresented the state of those Controversies that are on foot among us; I
will now give you in a short Catalogue of Impertinences, by which you shall see
that he has stuffed his Book with Testimonies, to prove that which never any
Presbyterian denied, or ever gave him the least occasion to think he denied;
The first place in this Catalogue is due to his Testimonies mustered up, page
51, 52. relating to Sacrilege, a Species whereof he says is the purchasing
and detaining of Church Lands: I for my part think so too, and never yet met
with a Presbyterian that thought otherwise: if there be a true superfluity of
Church Lands, then the Magistrate doubtless may out of that superfluity take
for any other good use, though it be not directly Ecclesiastical. In cases also
of great necessity Church Lands seem not to be privileged from sale; nor can
any wise man doubt but that it is the Magistrates duty to convert such Lands as
were given to the Church by a Zeal without knowledge, and to promote Idolatry
and Superstition, unto such uses as are truly pious and acceptable unto God.
These, and other such like Cases excepted, the Presbyterians would as willingly
have a Noli me tangere upon every parcel of the Church Lands as Mr. Durell
himself. He tells us indeed, page 51. That many here among us and some of them
Presbyterian Ministers made nothing of purchasing and detaining Church Lands;
and another, as very a Scribler as himself, has told us, That in the
Annotations commonly known by the name of the Assemblies Annotations he could
never meet with any thing against Sacrilege in any of those places where he
had consulted them; the first edition of those Annotations I have not by me,
but if that Edition had nothing in it against Sacrilege, let the Saddle be set
upon the right Horse, and the blame laid upon Dr. Daniel Feately, who
Commenting upon Romans the 2d. where the word Sacrilege occurs, would let it
pass uncensured; but I have heard that in our latter Editions of the English
Annotations Dr. Feateleys Notes are not altered; if so, the Debator has reason
to be ashamed of his impudence, and railing accusation, for any one may see
that Sacrilege is sufficiently condemned at Romans 2.22. and it is severely
Censured Acts 5. as also Prove. 20.25. and if that be not also censured Ezekiel
48. who must bear the blame, but Bishop Richardson to whose share it fell to
Comment on that portion of Scripture: Certainly the second and third Editions
of the English Annotations were Printed in times in which it was all out as
dangerous to reprove Sacrilege, as in those times in which the first Edition
was put forth. In those Editions I have already referred to enough that makes
against Sacrilege, yet if need were, I could referr to much more, and possibly
should so do, were it not that the work had been long since done to my hand by
an Episcopal Divine, in a Discourse Printed 1648. with this Title, Church Lands
not to be sold. He that will be at pains to peruse that book, shall soon find
that no one could keep the Covenant and not be against the alienating of Church
Lands, page 27. he quotes these words from Mr. Gearee an holy Nonconformist: To
abolish Prelacy, and to seize the Lands of Prelates to private, or civil
Interest, undoubtedly could neither want stain nor guilt; adding, I am
confident, by the discourse I have had with the most able of the Assembly of
Divines at Westminster, that at the least three parts, if not all of them are
of the same Judgment with Mr. Gearee, and that they would openly profess as
much if they were put to answer the Question. But says Mr. Durell, some of the
many who made nothing of purchasing and detaining Church Lands, were
Presbyterian Ministers, and to prove this, in the Margent he puts Dr. Burgess
never so much as adding an etc. so that in his Arithmetic Dr. Burgess is some
Presbyterian Ministers. But he should first have proved that he was one
Presbyterian Minister before he had gone about to persuade us that he was
sundry Presbyterian Ministers. He is not that Dr. Burgess who defended the
three Ceremonies against Dr. Ames, but yet he is the Dr. Burgess that took care
to have that Defense Printed, and beautified the Margent of it to make it he
more pleasing to the Readers eye; and he is the Dr. Burgess that did write for
Baptismal Regeneration, which the Presbyterian can by no means swallow. I have
heard indeed that he took the Covenant, but not till he saw that it was
dangerous not to take it. I have heard also that he was employed to make a
Speech in answer to Dr. John Hackett, who was to plead for the continuance of
Deanes and Chapiters, but in that Speech he openly declared the utter
unlawfulness of converting Dean and Chapiters Lands to any private persons
profit: so that he then delivered the same Doctrine with Dr. Hackett, only
differing in the Application, as Mr. Fuller words it, book 11. page 179. It
seems afterward he himself was a Purchaser, and a great Purchaser contrary to
the Doctrine delivered by him, for which I leave him to his own Master, unto
whom he has some years since given his Accounts. Mr. Durell as if he were a
Privy-Councellor in Heaven, presumes in his Latin book to say, That the Cancer
of which he dyed, befell him for his Sacrilege; I dare not so say, the
Providence of God are too great a deep for any man to venture himself into,
and methinks Mr. Durell might have been deterred from such presumption, by the
example of Gods dealing with Bishop Gawden, who after that he had written for
the Liturgy, and against Sacrilege, dyed not long after of a Disease as
loathsome, and far more painful than that which brought Dr. Burgess to his
Grave, and this Disease was that very Disease unto which he had compared the
Presbyterian Sermons, and befell him in a very short time after he had made the
Comparison; yet all these Circumstances notwithstanding no man shall ever hear
me say That the sickness was a stroke of Divine Justice inflicted on him for
his fierceness against the Presbyterians. Indeed the Providence of God is to us
so hidden and secret, that there is no concluding from it either love or
hatred: and therefore the Sons of the Church have no reason to thank Mr. Durell
for saying, page 17. of his Sermon, That the wonderful manner of raising our
Church up again is an evident proof that she is her Beloveds, and her Beloved
hers, and an Argument that her Reformation (since neither men's Craft nor
violence which so far prevailed against it were never able to destroy it) is
certainly the work of God and his Counsel which shall stand. Non tali auxilio,
nec defensoribus istis. Our Church needs no such Tophicks, she will think that
he has a mind to betray her, who uses them on her behalf, for who knows how
soon God provoked by our sins, may turn the stream of his Providence, and
bring our Church Governors under as great poverty and reproach as ever: If the
stream of Providence should never turn, yet all Theological ears will abhor to
hear our English Reformation called the Counsel of the Lord which shall stand.
That is a Scripture Phrase and Printed as such by Mr. Durell, and therefore
ought not to have been so palpably wrested by him: Dare any man think that the
Decrees and Counsels of God are changed, unless our Reformation as attended
with all its Rites, and Cermonies, endure from generation to generation? But I
have almost run away from the business of Sacrilege. If any man desire to know
how zealous Reformed Divines have been against this sin, he may quickly inform
himself from Dr. Hornebeckes Examen bullae Papalis. I only add, that some men
have been so hardy, as to to say that our Impropriations are a kind of
Sacrilege. The Lord Bacon seems to be of that mind, and charges all the
Parliaments since the 31. of Henry VIII. with debarring Christ's Wife of a great
part of her dowry: if so, Mr. Durell may find more Sacrilege among his friends
then he is aware of, and he may do well to enquire whether the impropriations
of the several Cathedrals, to which he himself belongs, are so disposed of, as
that the Incumbants residing upon them have a sufficient and honerable
maintenance allowed them. His Majesty has graciously emitted a Letter, that it
might be so; if the Letter have been universally obeyed, I rejoice in the
obedience given to it, but I am sure heretofore no Impropriators allowed less
then Clergymen; no parishes were worse supplied, than those in which the
Titles went to the Cathedralls, unless Mr. Durell be sure that he and his
Fraternities be free from this sin, it will not be seasonable for him to throw
stones at other sinners, least it should be said, thou Hypocrite, first, etc.

A Second of Mr. Durell's Impertinencies, is his Quotation, page 40. of the
Bohemian Churches, for the peoples saying Amen at theend of Prayers. Did the
Presbyterians ever say, the People might not say Amen at the end of Prayers?
are they not rather judged by their Adversaries, to err by affirming, that it
were meet for the people to say nothing else but Amen?

Thirdly, What made him, page 43. Waste paper to prove that Confirmation is
used in most Reformed Churches? Did not Mr. Hanmer, and Mr. Baxter, write whole
books in the commendation of Confirmation? Did the Presbyterians ever more
heartily desire any thing, than that adult persons might before they were
admitted to the Lords Supper, he ordered to make a Confession of Faith, and to
declare their Resolution to own that Faith, and to walk according to it? Did
they not always with grief of heart complain that Confirmation had never been
practiced here in England, or else had been turned into a mere form?

Fourthly, Wherefore are we told page 37, 38. That the Lords Prayer and Ten
Commandments and Creeds, are sung in some Reformed Churches; as also the
Magnificat, the Benedictus, and the Nunc dimittis. Do the Presbyterians
question the lawfulness of singing any of these? or do they require any more
than that they should be put into Meeter, and set into such tunes as ordinary
people might follow? I my self have hear an eminent Presbyterian Divine on a
day of Humiliation, read and sing the Lords Prayer, as it is Translated and
Printed at the end of our Psalm books. Yea, where as Mr. Durell tells us That
the French Church does not sing the Lords Prayer, and the Creed of the
Apostles, because both the Rhyme and Language were something course and old.
Presbyterians never left off to sing according to the Vulgar Translation, its
oldness and coursness notwithstanding, and if hymns should be made out of other
places of Scripture by men wise and skilful, who is there that would blame them?

Fifthly, Who ever quarrelled with the French Churches, for having great silver
Chalices for the Communion, as he tells us they have, page 32.

Or who would be offended if richer Churches had the ten Commandments in
Letters of Gold, and the Creed, and the Lords Prayer in the same form. I have
heard one of the chief Presbyterian Ministers did rejoice, that the Lords
Prayer was by the Painter drawn in very visible Characters upon a wall, just
over against his Pulpit, for by that means, if at any time he happened to be as
much out in repeating of that form; as Mr. Durell lately was in the repeating
of the Belief, he might help himself, and not put himself and others to shame,
as Mr. Durell did.

Sixthly, He tells us page 32. That in all Reformed Churches men used to enter
into the place of public worship with their hats off, which is as great an
untruth, as ever dropped from writers pen, unless it be understood of places of
public worship, whilst public worship is actually performed in them, and if
it may be so understood, then the Presbyterians would hugely approve of it. By
the Directory it was enjoined that, all enter the Assembly not irreverently,
but in a grave and seemly manner: gravity and seemliness do include putting off
the hat, which yet would be a ridiculous action, if a man should use it, as too
many now a days do as often as they go through the Church, though none be met for
worship, and though they themselves intended no worship: nor does the Directory
any where condemn the manner which Mr. Durell tells us has obtained among the
French Ladies, viz. to unmask themselves when they come into the Temple;
provided they do not unmask themselves out of a vain or wanton design; if they
should do so, they know by whom they are condemned. [ I but says Mr. Durell,
the devoutest sort both of men and women, use to kneel and make a Prayer for
Gods blessing, before they sit down, and this the Directory prohibites.] Had he
said that the devouter sort use a short Prayer when they took no seats, and
came to perform no service to God; then he had said something to excuse the
actings of some among us. The peoples making a secret Prayer before they sit
down in their seats, is not forbidden by the Directory, unto all, or unto any,
but these who come into the Church the public worship being begun, and whether
it be more meet for such to betake themselves to their private devotions, or to
join with the Assembly in that ordinance that is in hand, let the learned judge
for they are wise.

Seventhly, All might have been spared that is brought, page 33. Of Peoples
standing bare in time of Divine Service, and at the Administration of
Sacraments: In the very Church of Scotland all are uncovered at the
Administration of the Sacraments; here in England men had left off to put on
their hats in time of Sermon (which Mr. Durell seems to distinguish from
Service) had Mr. Calamy and others been hearkened to.

Eighthly, Above all, what need we be told, page 22. That Calvin wore a Gown
and a Cap: Were not Presbyterians accustomed so to do in the Universities?
Those sent down by the two Houses to Cambridge, did all of them preach in the
University Church in their Gowns, and in their Hoods; and I never heard of any,
but Brownists, that questioned the using of the very same Churches that the
Papists had used; yet we have fine stories of that, page 28. As also of the
Ring in Marriage, as if there were some odd Nonconformists that did scruple
being Married with a Ring. He tells us also of Matrimony in the public
Congregation, page 47. celebrated also by a Minister just according as the
Directory orders; but if he would have gratified us here in England, he should
have told us that all Reformed Churches do count Marriages valid, though made
without and against the consent of Parents, as also that they have Officers,
whom they allow to give Licenses for Marriages, though there have been no Banes
published, nor any thing equivolent thereunto, but to affirm this had been
somewhat too gross. Page 48, and 49. He minds us, that in most Reformed
Churches the dead are buried with great solemnity, singing of Psalms, and
Funeral Sermons; as if Presbyterians had scrupled the Preaching of Funeral
Sermons, or had not been wont when desired to Preach them. I believe if
Comparison were made, Presbyterians formerly preached more Funeral Sermons,
then Prelatical men do now, and that very many of those for whom Sermons are
now Preached, are addicted to Presbytery. Mr. Durell should have called to
remembrance, that our Church has appointed no Funeral Sermons, nor required
any more of her Ministers, save only to meet the Corpse at the Church Style, and
so go either into the Church, or toward the Grave, to say or sing some
versicles out of Holy Writ: I do not find that by the old Liturgy it was
required that the Corpse should be brought into the Church, though now I find
one or two Psalms appointed to be read after the Minister and people are come
into the Church, and by Comparing the old and new Liturgy together, I find
where in the old was the word [Minister] in the new there is constantly the
word [Priest,] so that whereas a Deacon may preach to us, and Baptize our
Children, he may not bury our dead, which seems to be a Mystery worthy Mr.
Durells unridling. Our Clergy men themselves seem Strangers to this mystery,
for nothing is more usual among them, than to set Deacons to bury their dead;
nor can I in that old Liturgy which I follow, find any notice given, that the
office for the burial of the dead, is not to be used at the burial of such as
die unbaptized, in the new Liturgy such notice is given; the reason whereof I
am not so happy at present as to know: why should Infants that die unbaptized,
through no fault of their Parents, be denied such a burial as Baptized Infants
have? Mr. Durell is a knowing man, and can satisfy us about these matters, and
brings us, no question, many Reformed Churches where the same usage obtains;
but why did he bring in his Friend, Mr. Drelincourt, saying page 49. That he
should account the Custom of the Ministers of the Reformed Churches in France,
being silent at dead men's burial, unsufferable, were it not for their present
condition.

That learned worthy Divine knows, that the Reformed Churches in Holland, are
under no such condition as the French Churches, and yet their Ministers are
perpetually silent at the burials of dead men; Is their Custom unsufferable? I
believe he will not so pronounce, and therefore will scarce think himself
civilly dealt with, to have a Fragment of a private Epistle thus published,
especially seeing it reflects disgrace upon the Ministers of his own nation,
who are Pastors in Holland; I have been too tedious in examining this
impertinence. The Communion also he tells us, page 44. Is constantly celebrated
at certain set times in all Reformed Churches. And is there any thing in the
Directory against the celebrating of it at certain set times? Does it not say,
that it is frequently to be celebrated? And take order that notice shall be
given before hand of its celebration? nor does the Directory any where forbid
the Administering of the Communion unto those that are sick in private houses,
though if it had so done, it might have justified it self by the Example of
many of the best Reformed Churches. Let Mr. Durell when he is at leisure,
enquire whether one of the Assembly of Divines did not Administer the Sacrament
to Captain Hotham when he was just going to be Beheaded? or whether he was ever
censured for so doing?

I will enlarge my Catalogue no farther; by the instances already produced, it
appears, that Mr. Durell may well be called Mr. Impertinent. But I shall now by
sundry instances make it evident also, that he has thrust sundry things into
his book, that are like enough, if they fall into the hands of a weak Reader,
to be prejudicial and pernicious, and to alienate him from our Church. He tells
us page 8. the Hungarian and Transilvanian Churches are as Pure and Reformed,
as any whatsoever; but page 10, and 11. he spoils all, and takes a great deal
of pains so to do, borrowing a book very rare and scarce; and out of it
acquainting us, That in those Churches Ministers swear obedience Canonical unto
Presbyters as well as Bishops: and, That Ministers are to be governed by
certain Laws by an eminent sort of Presbyters, called Elders, as well as by
Bishops. Then which, what can be more derogatory to the Episcopal Power, Place,
Juriisdiction, and Ordination in Presbyters as well as Bishops? and what
Eminence will there then be left for Bishops? what will there be left to a
Bishop, more than what the Presbyterians have a thousand times over
acknowledged themselves ready to yield him? It may be he thought he should heal
his wound by saying as he does, page 8. That these Elders are indeed Bishops,
and the Bishops Archbishops. But I say they are indeed but a more Eminent sort
of Presbyters; so they are expressly called, and they can be no other; because
they were never by Ordination put into an Office, or Order superior to that of
Presbyters; and observable it is (vid. page praedict.) That the Minister
acknowledges himself in his Oath, to receive the function of the sacred
Ministry from the there present Ministers of God, and most Faithful dispensers
of his Mysteries. Which are Phrases agreeing unto all that are entrusted with
the word of Reconciliation: So that this Testimony looks with a very evil eye
upon Episcopacy: and so does much more the Testimony of the Bohemian Churches,
related page 11, 12, 13. for in that we have Presbyters Ordaining Bohemian
Bishops, a thing that sounds dreadful to an Episcopal ear. This story will
strengthen the Presbyterians, and be a second unto that with which they are
wont so much to confirm themselves; I mean the History of Pelagius Bishop of
Rome being ordained by two Bishops and one Presbyter. These Histories do at
least prove that Presbyters and Bishops were of the same Order, and that
Presbyters as well as Bishops, may lay hands upon Bishops, and confer the power
of making Ministers. Indeed the man makes himself ridiculous who goes about to
look for any Bishop properly so called among the Waldenses; and he does
gratify the Presbyterians not a little, page 38. whilst he tells them, That
the French Churches sing at the end of the Commandments, these four verses
which answer to our Lord have mercy upon us and incline, etc. for this is the
very thing that Presbyterians desire, that these words might be uttered at the
end of the Commandments, and not at the end of every particular Commandment:
page 45, 46. he takes Mr. Calvin's pen and drops a very foul blot upon our
Church; for the custom of Receiving thrice a year, which is known to be our
custom, (for no man is bound to Receive oftener) is by him the called vitiosus
mos, (i. e.) a vicious custom at least, if not a custom full of vice. But
page 53. he calls us all, Fools by Craft; for these are his words, That every
National Church ought to have Uniformity within it self, has always been the
judgment of all sober and wise Christians, and is at this day the good example
of all the Reformed Churches in the world. I assume, that there ought to be
Uniformity in every National Church, has not always been, nor yet is the
Judgment of the Church of England; what Conclusion hence arises every one
sees, but the Conclusion is so horrid that I will not form it. My Assumption I
prove from the Canons of 1640. which are so far from determining that there
ought to be an Uniformity, that they expressly allow a Difformity, desiring in
reference to the Rite of doing Reverence and Obeisance toward the East at our
coming in, or going out of the Church, that the Rule of Charity prescribed by
the Apostle may be observed, (i. e.) That they which use this Rite, despise not
them who use it not; and that they who use it not, condemn not those that use
it. And how will the Presbyterians rejoice to read those high commendations of
the Bohemian Churches. It Is said page 64. That they are the first that Reformed
Religion from Popery to True and Primitive Christianity: and page 99. it is
said, Happy had been all the Christian word, if, as the said Churches were the
first that Reformed themselves from Popery, the way of their Reformation had
been followed by all others who Reformed after them. This his high Opinion he
confirms by the Testimony of Learned Za^chy, and might also have confirmed it
by the Testimony of Luther. Well! this being supposed must not the
Presbyterians carry the day? they think they must, and therefore one of them,
not many years since, Translated Comenius into English, as making very much for
that Platform they aimed at. Indeed in the Order of those Churches I find
Lay-Presbyters, and which is more, Lay-Presbytresses, and Eleemosynaries
answering to the Presbyterians Deacons. Officers I know they have called by the
name of Antistites, which may be rendered Bishops; but every one of them to
submit himself to the judgment not only of his Colleagues but also of the
Conseniours, and to admit admonition, Counsels, and reproof from them, and
these Conseniours are together with their Antistites to exercise Discipline
upon Ministers. The Lords day those Churches keep as strictly as the
Presbyterians contend to have them kept. Baptism they administer without the
sign of the Cross; with them none are thought to belong to the Pastoral Cure of
Ministers, but those who do with good will submit themselves to that Unity and
Order; whereas among us every one must be a Church Member or else go to the
Common Goal; and that which answers unto Confirmation amongst them is performed
only by the Minister; and before every Sacrament, the Master of a Family and
his Household come to the Minister and are by him examined; some few Holy Days
indeed are kept in these Churches, but so, that when Divine Service is ended,
people go to their work as upon other days: There is no order among them to
abstain from the works of their Calling on the Saints day, or to keep the
Evening before, Fast, so that these Churches are as Presbyterian as
Presbyterians themselves can desire; what was it then that moved Mr. Durell so
transcendently to extol them? page 46. He tells us, That those Churches that
first Reformed from Popery, receive the Communion kneeling, and it is true,
they do so; but they did not do so from the beginning. In the year 1494. they
received the Communion standing, but were forced to leave off that gesture,
because their Persecutors were the more bitter upon that account, and would not
this be a goodly Argument think you? the Bohemian Church to avoid persecution
receives the Sacrament kneeling, therefore it is conformable with the English
Church, that persecutes all who do not receive the Sacrament kneeling. I but,
when these Churches did join with those of Major Polonia and Lithuania, it was
unanimously forbidden to receive that blessed Sacrament sitting, because among
other Reasons, that unmannerly and irreverent gesture was peculiar to those
Miscreants the Arrians amongst them, and they made this observation, That the
custom of sitting at the Lords Table was first brought into some of their
Churches by those who most miserably falling from their Communion did renounce
the Lord who redeemed them, wherefore they entreat and exhort all their Company
and Brethren, that they would change sitting, into standing or kneeling. For
this Mr. Durell refers us to a general Synod celebrated 1583. But every one
that looks into the Harmony of Confessions will see that Mr. Durell has not
dealt fairly; for first, He leaves out a Parenthesis of the Synod, in the which
it is expressly said, That that gesture of Session with others is free.
Secondly, Whereas the Synod says that Session was brought in potissimum malo
Auspicio. This Mr. Durell Translates was first brought in. I grant indeed that
in another Synod, to which this Synod does refer, celebrated 1578. it is
expressly said, That they who fell off to Arrianisme were the first Authors of
sitting in their Churches; but that Synods words Mr. Durell does not Translate,
and therefore has Translated either ignorantly or dishonestly. Let it also be
observed, that this Synod does pray and beseech people to leave off sitting,
not command them under the pain of Excommunication; yea this Synod by allowing
what was done in the former Synod, does determine, That it is unlawful to smite
Godly men with Ecclesiastical Descipline because of external Rites. Let me also
add, that the Fathers of this Synod were under a mistake when they said, That
no Church in Europe anno 1583. did use sitting at the Lords Table, and Mr.
Durell is much more mistaken if he thinks that any Socinians first brought up
the custom of sitting amongst us here in England, for what if Dr. Owen said
truly when he confuted the Socinians, That Socinianisme had generally spread it
self into the Nation; yet sitting had been used before Socinianisme so spread
it self, I never heard that there was a Socinian either in the Assembly, or in
the two Houses until that one Mr. Free got among the Commons, who for his
Blasphemies was cashiered that House, as I have somewhere read.

Had Mr. Durell pleased, he might have consulted a Catechism made by Thomas
Beacon Prebend of Canterbury, and Printed cum Privilegio 1563. in which
Catechism, the Learned Divine and Godly Confessor says; That if sitting at
the Lords Table, which was then used in certain Reformed Churches, were recived
by public Authority, and common Consent, and might be conveniently used in our
Churches, he could allow that gesture best. And Mr. Robert Nicholls, in a
Discourse of kneeling in the act of Receiving, long since presented to Bishop
Morton, but not printed till 1660, would have informed him; That in the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, standing was Ordained at Coventry and
Northampton, by her Majesty's Commission, and kneeling abolished.

But there was another thing perhaps, that might move Mr. Durell to be so
superlative in the commendation of the Bohemian Churches; namely, a Crotchet
got into his head, of calling an Assembly of foreign Divines that should all
give their suffrage for the Discipline and Rites of the English Church: which
Crotchet did so please him, that he begins to call that Assembly, page 200 and
Comenius, the only surviving Bishop of the Bohemian Churches, he will give the
Honor to speak first; and accordingly does bring him in, page 202, 203, 204,
205. with a long Harangue of words in the commendation of Unity or Order; but
is so uncivil to the aged Bishop, as not to allow him liberty to speak all he
had to speak: I must therefore, out of the Reverence I have for his gray
hairs, and the respect that all Christian Churches bear to him for his
Learning and Piety, do him so much right, as to let him speak farther about
the Controversies agitated among us: he has a Paraeness to the Churches, and
by name, the English Church; in that page 146. he tells us what he would have
taken from Episcopacy Secular Dominion, Terrene Riches or Wealth, and the Pomp
of Ceremonies: and in the next page, brings in the Papists laughing and jearing
at us for the Ceremonies that we retained here in England, since our
Reformation; so that I may well conclude, that it had been more for the
interest of the Church, to have passed over the Bohemian Churches in silence;
and it had been well also, if the Consensus Poloniae had never been mentioned;
for in that we shall find a Synod at Cracovia, anno 1573. disputing de Choreis,
and when some had alleged that there were honest as well as dishonest
dancings, it was at last concluded by the suffrage of all, as well Seculars as
Clergy, that they were to be condemned according to the Scripture, and to be
forbidden unto all that profess true Piety. Will it much please some of our
Governors that young Students are by Mr. Durell directed to read the
Determinations of this Synod, but this is one of the least of the mischiefs
that he does us; page 93. being surprised with a pang of vain glory, and
designing to acquaint us with his own Sufferings, he does not stick to deliver
that which involves the far greater part of his present Conforming Brethren
under the guilt of Rebellion and Schism, for these are his words, page 93. It
is known how great the Persecution was against all Ministers who adhered to the
King and Church of England, during the late troubles, those who were more
gently dealt with, were only plundered, turned out of their Livings, or
imprisoned; there were others, whom it was thought fitter to cast out of the
Land, etc. Out of these words, supposing what is manifest, that they who
adhered not to the King and to the Church, are Traitors and Schismatics, thus
I argue: All that adhered to King and Church suffered, either to Deprivation or
Banishment, most of the present Conformists, neither suffered to Deprivation
nor Banishment; therefore most of the present Conformists neither adhered to
King nor Church, and by Consequence were Traitors and Schismatics. The Major
is Mr. Durells own; The Minor is known to all the Nation; most of the present
Conformists either enjoyed their own Livings during the late troubles, or were
put into new Livings. If Mr. Durell had enquired of him who Licensed his Book,
he would have told him that he enjoyed a very good Fellowship in All Souls,
during the late confusions, but it is usual with Mr. Durell, where he thinks
any Presbyterian is within his reach, to lay about him, though he must needs
strike through the love of most of his own Friends. So page 44 (...) tel^^ us,
That those who profess themselves to be Orthodox had either altogether
neglected the Sacrament in most Parishes of these three Kingdoms, or else had
ministered it only to some few choice persons. Which is to throw dirt into the
faces of his Epispopal Brethren, for they possessed most of the Parishes in
this Kingdom to be sure, and as for the Kingdom of Scotland, there war no
neglect of the Sacrament, until that our English Armies had made it impossible
for them to exercise their Discipline. But Aquilla non capit muscas, it is a
small thing with Mr. Durell thus to scratch our English Clergy unless he also
wound the whole English Nation, and that we find him doing; for after he had
told us that he would set down out of Monsieur Le Moyne's Letter as much as
fitted his purpose, he sets down this, page 136. The English have a Natural
fierceness, and withal a natural inclination to Superstition; Does this
Character of our Nation fit Mr. Durell's purpose? then certainly it is a wicked
purpose, which cannot be managed but by the causless aspersion of a whole
Nation: Usually Superstition dwells in the timorous and dastardly Nature. We,
unhappy Mortals that we be, are naturally fierce, and yet naturally
Superstitious; he that had observed this concerning us, should have been so
friendly as to tell us what kind of Superstition it is, that we are so
naturally inclined to, that so we might have known how to have watched, and
prepared Antidotes against it, if there be any Antidotes strong enough to
expel that which is natural. The Author of this Letter whom Mr. Durell calls
one of the ordinary Preachers to the Reformed Congregation of Roan, (which
certainly is a Phrase of disparagement to English ears) thinks that upon
account of our Natural fierceness and superstition, We stand in need of a
Government somewhat Despoticall, that is, of a Government by Bishops; but I
would query what kind of Bishops we must have: Nature teaches us to desire
some of our own Nation, and if they be of our own Nation, are not they
Naturally Fierce and Superstitious too; if they be, what Despoticall power
shall we have to cure them; if they be not, then it seems the Episcopal
Character expells the Natural Fierceness and Superstition that dwells in
English Natures; but we never yet had any experience, that a man's being made a
Bishop in England did work any cure of his Natural Fierceness and Superstition.
Some men have thought that diverse after they were advanced to Episcopal Dignity
grew more fierce and more superstitious, but this I neither affirm nor deny. In
the same Letter page 134. it is said, That it cannot enter into a Rational Man's
Imagination, that a great Kingdom should come by custom to be content to see
its Bishops no more, having honored and reverenced them for the space of one
thousand four hundred years. This is good news to the Bishops, and if they can
believe it, they may in utramque aurem indormire, for Episcopacy it seems as
well as Superstition is grafted into the Natures of the members of this great
Kingdom, and they can neither suddenly, nor by custom be brought so much as
to a contentedness to want their Hierarchy. The Author of this Epistle is famed
to be a great Historian, and I doubt not but he is so, but methinks he is
mistaken in his Chronology, whilst he makes this great Kingdom to have
reverenced and honored Bishops for one thousand four hundred years. I find not
any good evidence that there were any Bishops among us, till Augustine the Monk
was sent to us from Rome, and it is not one thousand four hundred years since
Augustine came hither. I say there is no good evidence of Bishops till then,
for Venerable Bede the only Author to be regarded concerning matters
Ecclesiastical, preceding Augustins mission from the Pope, tells us indeed of
British Bishops, but after he has said Episcopi he adds seu Doctores which
renders it very uncertain, what kind of men he means by Bishops: And Mr. Petoy
a late Historian has adventured to say, That our Church as well as the
Scottish Church was at first planted and Governed without Bishops, till Bishops
were sent to us from Rome. But be this as it will, certain I am, our great
Kingdom could not be said to honor and reverence Bishops, till by the
Preaching of Augustine and his Associates, the Nation ceased to be Pagan; since
which time, Bishops have not always been so reverenced and honored as the
Reverend Author of this Epistle pretends. Their disloyalty and pride rendered
them so odious in the Reigns of many Kings, that had it been put to the Vote,
whether there should have been Bishops or no Bishops, it is easy enough to see
how it would have been carried. Nor is it truly said page 133. That we owe our
Reformation to the Care and Zeal of our Bishops, who did so wonderfully well
repurge the Church of England an hundred years ago.

The first dawnings of Reformation we owe under God, to Wickliff, who was no
Bishop, nor friend to Bishops; as Bishops signify men of a superior Order to
Presbyters, those who sealed the Truth with their Blood, in King Henry the
eighths days, were none of them Bishops: We can prove from the writings they
have left behind them, that they were against Bishops. Seeing this Letter is so
well penned Mr. Durells anger will not wax hot; if I dwell upon it a little
longer The Author of it tells us page 139 That he fears not to say, if the
French had kept Bishops and as many Ceremonies, as would serve to fix the
attention of the people without Superstition, they should have seen for certain
far greater progresses of Reformation, and the resistance of a great many
persons overcome, who are frighttd from their Communion by the irregularity of
their Government, and the bareness of their Service. I design not to put this
Reverend Pastor into any fright because of any thing that he has said, but
really I do not understand what he means by [ the Reformed French keeping their
Bishops] for I never heard that they had any Bishops of their Religion to part
with; much less do I understand upon what he founds his certain asseverations
that more Papists would have come over to them, if they had had Bishops and
more Ceremonies. We had before the Wars Bishops in our Nation, and Ceremonies
enough; yet did we not find any great additions made to our Churches by the
coming in of Recusants. I hope they in France can reckon up more Converts from
Popery, than we can here in England, or else Conversions have been but rare. I
also hope, that so many have not apostatized among them, as have apostatized
among us: If they have, Rome has more to boast of than I could wish. But there
is one thing more mavelous than all this; The Author of the Letter thinks,
That if the English Dissentors have any Charity, they would consent to the
Reestablishment of the Episcopal Government, though there were something in it
they could not approve of: if it were but for the sake of those that follow the
Confession of Aspurg. For can this learned man think, that Hierarchy, as an
Order superior to Presbytery, and as founded upon a Divine Institution, would
be an Offering well pleasing to the Lutheran Divines? he is not so unacquainted
with their Writings as that he can so think. If Episcopacy upholds the Lutheran
Churches, as he tells us page 138. I am sure it is not such an Episcopacy as we
have here in England; for such an Episcopacy has no place among them. And oh
that it could be said, That they in Denmark, Norway, Sweden, and Germany, were
very quiet under the Episcopal Government, seldom seen to slander and tear one
another. We know they have their differences, and that none are more molested,
than the moderate party among them: so far was Episcopal Government from
keeping us quiet in England, that the Divisions and Animosities did arise and
grow to a great height among the Bishops themselves. Some were told that
nothing but their Bishoprics kept them from being Puritans: Others were told,
that nothing but their Wives kept them from being Papists. Sundry Parliaments
complained to the King of the growth of Arminianisme, and what did the Church
do, to prevent or take away the ground and cause such Complaints? truly Dr.
Heylin in his History of Laud, tells us, that there was a Consultation whether
it were meet to bring the thing to a Convocation; but it was concluded, that it
was not safe so to do; because there were too many Members of the Convocation
inclined to Calvinisme, though there were some that were as strangly inclined
to Arminianisme, our Pulpits had not failed to ring with Declamations against
Pelagianisme in some places, and against Stoicall Fatality in others, had not
the King by a Proclamation, put some stop to those Controversies: so that the
quietness which the Church enjoyed, was rather due to Monarchy than Epispacy.
Now of late indeeed, Arnold Polenberg in his preface to the second Tome of
Episcopius his works, gives us to understand, that he designed to dedicate that
great Folio to our English Clergy, and particularly to both our Universities;
promising himself, that almost all the Bishops of our Churches do defend that
Opinion concerning Predestination, which was condemned in the Synod of Dort:
Whether he be out in his account, it is not for me to enquire, who have work
enough to do at home, but it seems even in this Gentleman's account, all our
Bishops are not become Episcopian, and therefore preserve Unity among
themselves, by having their knowledge in those matters unto themselves. Now if
it be found necessary to tolerate difference of Judgment among the Bishops
themselves in Doctrines of so high concernment? it may be worth the
Consideration of those who are in Authority, whether they also may not be
suffered to enjoy Ecclesiastical preferment, who differ from their Brethren
only in some few points of Discipline: I say in a few points of Discipline, for
as to the essentials of Discipline I am not so quick-sighted, as to find that
we disagree. The things that breed discord among us, are said, by those who are
the chief causes of their imposition, to be Adiaphorous, (i. e.) such things as
are therefore good because imposed, rather than imposed because good. On the
other hand, those who suffer for not yiedling to the Impositions, do judge
there is some evil in the things imposed, and desire they may be indulged not
to Practice them. A Bookish man who is not much versed in the Intrigues of
Ecclesiastical Policy, would think no bigger a breach than this, might easily
be stopped up.

I shall dismiss this Letter, only adding, That I would not have Mounsieur
Le-Moyn estimated by it, having certain knowledge that he has both with his
tongue and pen declared, that Mr. Durell has much abused him, in leaving out
sundry passages in his Letter wherein he did moderate and regulate the Episcopal
power, which if they had been inserted, the Letter would not at all have fitted
his design.

Lastly, it plainly appears, that Mr. Durell is no observer of the Act of
Uniformity, for he over and over confesses, that he has suffered those to
preach in his Church, who had no Episcopal Ordination, which is a Crime
severely to be punished by the Act. And I much doubt whether Mr. Durell himself
be qualified to be a Preacher in England; for though he make shift to tell us,
that he was Ordained by a Scotch Bishop, yet it is probable enough, that that
Bishop was Ordained Presbyter, by Presbyters; or at least by those, who never
had themselves any Ordination to be Presbyters, but by Presbyters: and if so,
there was an error in the first Concoction, and we know that is not to be
corrected. Our Bishops lately took care to prevent this scruple, and
consecrated Mr. Sharp first Deacon, then Priest, then Bishop, etc. But we are
sure from History, that the first Bishops who came over hither to receive
Ordination, were not so dealt with: and therefore Mr. Durell may do well to
consider upon what ground he stands, and whether according to the Principle now
prevailing, he be not still a Laick.

I have one Catalogue more to give you still, and that will consist of things
which Country men call Whiskers; you may if you please more civilly call them,
Durellisme, I shall not reckon up all, but yet I must be allowed to mention
some.

The first occurs, page 31. I know none that did ever so much as move the
question, in what place, and which way the Communinion Table ought to stand, so
it be seated where the people may hear and see, except the new Scotch and
English Presbyterians.

A man must have a large measure of Charity that can think him ignorant, that
there were great questions moved among our Bishops themseves, concerning the
placing of the Communion Table: and some did urge Ministers to read Service
there, though it was demonstrated that the one half of the people could
neither see nor hear them.

A second I find page 32. In all Reformed Churches men use to enter into the
places of Public Worship with their Hats off.

This is a most notorious -- nothing being more usual in some Reformed Churches
than to pass through and through the places of Worship, never stirring their
Hats: But if he would have the saying understood of men's putting off their Hats
when they enter into the place of Public Worship, whilst the Congregation is
Worshipping, then must this speech be placed where it is already placed, among
the Gentleman's impertinencies.

Thirdly, page 44. he averrs, That those who profess themselves to be Orthodox,
either altogether neglected the Lords Supper for many years in both
Universities, that of Oxford having had no Communion for above 12 years; or
only admitted some few choice persons to the same, refusing it to all others,
though their outward carriage were sober, honest, and religious.

There are hundreds of Scholars and Citizens know this to be an untruth; no
Presbyterian in the University of Oxford, that had a Pastoral Charge, or any
thing like it, neglected to administer the Sacrament for many years, or for any
one year; or refused any whose conversation was sober, honest, and religious.
Some of them were blamed for admitting such whose conversation was not so sober
and religious, as all Rules of good Discipline do require in Church Members.
The phrase, That of Oxford having had no Communion for above 12 years, perhaps
was intended only to bear this sense, That the University did not for above 12
years meet together to receive the Sacrament in St. Mary's before the Terms: If
this be any fault, the Presbyterian is not concerned in it. In those 12 years
time, there were but four Vice-Chancellors, all of them right-worthy persons,
but not one of them professing himself a Presbyterian. But indeed it may be
questioned, whether it was very nominis crimen, not to keep up that Sacrament.
For I wonder who made the University, as the University, a Church? or who is
the Pastor of that Church? what Bishop has Jurisdiction over it? or who shall
Excommunicate those Members that come not to the Ordinance? I never heard that
ever the hundred part of the University was at that Sacrament when administered,
or that any one man was ever censured for being absent from it: nay I believe
the Statute injoyning this Sacrament in that Church, will be found a spick and
span new Statute, coined on purpose to inure the Scholars to Bowing toward the
Altar.

Fourthly, In the same page, and the very next words, we have an Assertion as
void of all Truth, viz. That all the Reformed world over, no man that is not a
notorious ill Liver is debarred from that Comfort which Christ has left to his
Church for the sick and weak as a Medicine against their Diseases.

Had it been said that all the Reformed World over, no one is to be debarred
from the Sacrament by the Rules of Discipline, but a notorious ill Liver, the
Assertion had had some modesty, but what intolerable impudence is it for any
man to arrogate so much to himself as to adventure to say no man is debarred
indeed in all Reformed Churches: others are to be debarred besides notorious
ill Livers, namely the ignorant and those that have any heretical opinions,
which they make known, yea, and all those who cannot satisfy themselves to
conform to all the Rites and Ceremonies used in the Churches, if we may believe
Mr. Durell himself. Yet I trow, there is no necessity such should be notorious
evil Livers.

Fifthly, Page 61. He finds a forehead to leave these words on Record, It is
said that the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas take those things in which they
differ from the Reformed Church of England, to be sinful and that therefore
they would have her to conform to them. By whom was this ever said? either in
so many words, or in any expressions tantamount? and how would Mr. Durell have
this uncouth affirmation to be understood? universally, or particularly? It
should be understood universally, or else Mr. Durell's going about to prove the
Negative is very needless; and if it be so understood, he might as well have
charged us to say, that the Reformed Churches count it a sin in the English
Church to use her own Native Language. The French Ministers preach with their
Hats on, did ever Nonconformist say, that they count it sinful in us to preach
with our hats off? or did ever Nonconformist go about to bring the French mode
into his Church?

Sixthly, Page 85. he acquaints us, That the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas
are told, that the Convocations of the Church of England consist only of
Archbishops and Bishops, and that the inferior Clergy are not admitted to sit
and vote in them.

Till any persons be produced who told the Reformed Churches any such tales,
Mr. Durell must be content to be thought a spreader of false informations; if
he can produce any such, by my consent let him have the whetstone and keep it
until he can find Mr. Durell telling something that will make him deserve to
have it returned. But he shall not need to keep it very long: For

Seventhly, Page 86. he tells us, That the Bishops in England are to rule by
the Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical, and by the Laws of the Land and no
otherwise; calling always to join with them in imposition of hands, and other
matters of weighty concernment, some of the Prebends of their Cathedralls, or
other gra^^ Ministers of the Diocese.

Where was shame when this was penned? do the Canons require any Bishop to call
any one Minister to join with him in imposition of hands upon a Deacon, or in
the Confirmation of persons before they are admitted to the Lords Supper? or
does the Bishop offend against any Law or Canon, if he call none of his
Ministers to join with him, when a Presbyter is Excommunicated? or is it so
much as necessary, that the Bishop himself should be present, when
Excommunication is decreed? Is any thing more usual, then for Lay-Chancellors
to decree Excommunication? calling only some Minister for fashion sake to
pronounce the sentence: I would Mr. Durell would show us any Reformed Church
that has any such custom; and I wish also he would tell us, what those Canons
and Constitutions are, according to which our Bishops are to rule us: For some
tell us, that they are to proceed not only according to the Canons of 1603. but
also according to sundry other Canons that ordinary people know not, nor ever
had an opportunity to read of; provided they be not repugnant to the Laws and
Statutes of the Nation. Mr. Durell it is like has all the 77. Legatine Canons,
as also the 212 Provincial Canons, at his fingers ends; If he can find any
Canon among them all, commanding our Bishops to call in some of the Presbyters
to join with them in imposition of hands, and all other weighty matters, let
him discharge it in their faces; yet taking heed left it recoyle, and do
himself some mischief: For Bishops do not love to have their power limited, or
the Canons relating to it expounded, by any but themselves. I hope no Canons
are in force but those of 1603. and by them I am sure the Bishop is not
required, to call in Presbyters to join with him, in every imposition of hands.
In the 31 Canon indeed, he is appointed to celebrate Ordinations on the four
Sundays after the Ember weeks, and in the Cathedral or Parish Church where the
Bishop resideth, and in the time of Divine Service, in the presence not only of
the Archdeacon, but of the Dean and two Prebendaries at the least; or if they
be let or hindered, in the presence of four Grave persons, Masters of Art, and
allowed Preachers. The 35 Canon also says, That the Bishop shall diligently
examine him that is to be admitted to Holy Orders, in the presence of those
that shall assist him at the imposition of hands; or else cause the said
Ministers carefully to examine every such person. All this does not amount to
the calling in of Presbyters to join with him in the imposition of hands. The
Book of ordering Priests and Deacons, does indeed require, that the Priests
that are present with the Bishop, shall together with him lay on their hands
when a Priest is ordained; but how if no Priest should lay on his hand, the
Ordination is valid however, as is again and again determined by Bishop Tailor,
in his Episcopacy asserted. Yea he says, page 197, 198. That it was declared
Heresy to communicate the power of giving Orders to Presbyters, either alone
or in conjunction with Bishops. What he says concerning the Decree of the 4th.
Council of Carthage, page 189. I leave to others to examine, confessing that I
innocently thought, that when our Presbyters laid on hands together with the
Bishop, they as well as he had conferred Orders; Dr. Heylin in his History of
Episcopacy, page 162. has undeceived me, for these are his words: The
conjunction of the Presbyters in the solemnities of this Act, was more for the
honor of the Priesthood, than for the essence of the work: Nor did the laying
on of the Presbyters hands, conferr upon the party that was ordained any power
or order, but only testified their consent unto the business, and approbation
of the man.

I must also confess that I did not apprehend things aright, in reference to
the Bishop and his Presbyters, until lately I read in the foresaid Bishop
Tailor, p. 257, 258. That to the Bishop is committed the care of the whole
Diocese He it is who is appointed by peculiar designation to feed the flock.
The Presbyters are admitted in partem sollicitudinis, but still the
Jurisdiction of the whole Diocese is in the Bishop, and without the Bishops
admission to a part of it, per tracit onem subditorum, although the Presbyter
by his Ordination have a capacity of Preaching and Administering Sacraments, yet
he cannot exercise this without designation of a particular charge, either
temporary or fixed, and p. 262. after he had mustered up many Testimonies, he
tells us, They show that the Presbyters in their several charges, whether of
temporary mission or fixed residence, be but Delegates and Vicars of the
Bishop, to assist the Bishop in his great charge of the whole Diocese, And p.
282, 283. he has these words. As I have shown that the Bishop of every Dss.
did give Laws to his own Church for particulars, so it is evident that the Laws
of Provinces and of the Catholic Church, were made by Conventions of Bishops,
without the intervening or concurrence of Presbyters or any else, for sentence
and decision; The instances of these are just so many as there are Councils,
and more plainly 287. Till the Council of Basil, the Church never admitted
Presbyters, as in their own right to voice in Councils and that Council we know
savor'd too much of the Schismatic. Nay Mr. Jeans tells me, That in the
Convocation which was the last before the late wars, Bishop Pierce told the
Ministers of his Diocese, that it was an unquestionable Privilege due unto his
See, for him to propound unto them the Clerks that they should choose, unto
which he expected their Conformity, part. 2. page 131. Now if all this should
be true, it might be a kind of a Quodlibetical Question, whether in our
Convocations any do sit and vote beside the Bishops, for they that sit not in
their own rights, but in the right of others, and as they are Delegates and
Substitutes, are scarce said to sit: And so the men whom Mr. Durell so much
condemns for false accusations will be found rather to have spoken
incautelously than falsely: As for the other false accusation relating to
Archbishop Laud, that he should make a Liturgy differing from the Liturgies of
Q. Eliz. and K. James, and K. Charles I. I must needs say, that is no false
accusation. Mounsieur Chabret in his Letter recorded, page 82. Does not say
that it was reported Archbishop Laud had compiled a new Liturgy for the Church
of England, but only that a new one was compilled by him: which had occasioned
much clamor, and been the ground of fears and jealousies. Now I beseech Mr.
Durell to tell me. Did not Archbishop Laud compile a Liturgy for the Scotch
Nation? if he did not, let those who have charged him so to do, in allowed
writings be confuted; If he did compile that Liturgy, or which is all one,
direct those who compiled it; I am sure it did differ from ours, and occasioned
much clamor, raised many fears and jealousies, which at last ended in a war
betwixt the two Nations. Yea, there were some few alterations made by the said
Archbish. or some of his Creatures in the Liturgy for our own Church, which
were not very well relished by those that never were enemies to the legally
established Government, what those alterations were may be seen in the
Dedicatory of Mr. Prynn's Quench Coal.

But I must give check to my running pen, and take notice of some ^^ner
failures against truth p. 8. Mr. Durell thus P^^^sifieth, Oecolampadius who
reformed the City of Basil, is styled Bishop of that Church upon his Tomb, of
which Bellarmine himself was an eye witness in his time much against his will,
for this we are referred to Bellar. de notis Eecles. l. 4 c. 8. where Bellarm.
indeed does tell us, That he was at Basil, and there saw the inscription on
Oecolampadius his Tomb, and read it not without laughter. Now it is hard to
conceive that he should see that much against his will, the sight whereof
caused laughter in him, but the truth is, Bellar. laughter was ridiculous, for
the words upon the Tomb are not Primus hujus urbis Episcopus, as Bellarm.
quotes them, but Author Evangelicae doctrinae in hac urbe primus: Episcopus
indeed he is called, but how? Hujus Templi verus Episcopus, and if such an
Episcopus will do, Mr. Durell any pleasure, he most be a very humoursome man
that will envy him such a pleasure.

Ninthly, Page 13. He fears not to affirm, That all understanding men among
the French Churches say plainly, that if God Almighty were pleased that all
France should embrace the Reformed Religion, as England has; the Episcopal
Government must of necessity be established in their Churches. That all
understanding men should say this and say it plainly, is certainly a -- all
understanding men were never heard to speak about this matter; and should they
be called together to speak, they would not utter any such speech as is here
fathered on them: it is scarce sense, to say if all France should embrace the
Reformed Religion as England has; for certainly all England has not embraced
the Reformed Religion, the more the pity: and what necessity could there be if
France should generally embrace the Reformed Religion, that Episcopal
Government should be established in it? I am not more certain that ever I saw
the Sun, than I am certain that many understanding Frenchmen will never be
brought to say, that Episcopal Government must necessarily be established.

Tenthly, Page 27. Having told us the Helvetick Confession does vehemently
approve of the observation of some Holy Days, he dreads not to tell us, That
the Ministers of the Church of Scotland subscribed that Confession An. 1566.
the Ministers of that Church being then of another Judgment, and of a temper
far different from that their Successors have showed of latter years. Whereas
the Scotch Ministers who subscribed the Helvetick Confession, subscribed it
with express exception of that part of it which concerns the observation of the
Holy Days; and so as to that matter plainly showed themselves to be of the same
temper and Judgment with their Successors, as plainly appears from the Records
of that Church. Let the World judge what credit is to be given to Mr. Durell
concerning remote Churches, who relates things so contrary to truth about a
neigbour Church.

Eleventhly, Page 28. He would persuade us, That the Crosses have not been
pulled down from the top of Churches, unless perhaps in some popular Storm; but
we can tell him of Crosses that have been taken from the top of Churches by the
Magistrates appointment, and with the Ministers aprobation, which things are
not to be found in a popular Storm.

Twelfthly, P. 29. He bears us in hand, That the Bohemians have solemn
dedication of Churches, which Ceremony is to be performed with them by the
Bishop in the same manner as with us here in England. Which words I know not
how to reconcile to truth: For what Law is there among us enjoining Churches to
be Consecrated by a Bishop; or where may a man find the form and manner of
Consecraring a Church here in England, or read the Prayers with the which the
Consecration is to be performed: how shall I be able to convince Parishoners
that they are bound to desire the Consecration of their newly built, or newly
enlarged Churches, or the Bishop that he is bound to undertake this Consecra..
I though he be not desired, and must the Diocesan bear the charges of his
journey, or have them born by the people, sundry such questions as these need
resolution, which is a sign that the Laws and Canons now in force, concern not
themselves at all in this business of Consecraition.

13thly. Page 30. Mr. D. bears witness against the Directorians, which is
either nonsense or a falsity, for these are his words; At Bazil in the
Cathedral Church they have their Fonts of Stone, and use them for the baptism
of Infants as we do here; they have and use them alike in the City of Breme;
and so in other places; by which we see they are not of the same judgment with
the Directorians, who find Popery and Superstition in the very placing of them:
If the meaning of these words be, that the Directorians find Popery and
Superstition in placing of Fonts as they are placed at Bazil and Breme, it is a
perfect calumny; if the meaning be that the Directorians find Popery and
Superstition in some kind of placing of the Fonts, how can a man thence gather,
that they of Breme and Bazil are not of the same judgment with the
Directorians: all that the Directory orders is, that Baptism be administered in
the face of the Congregation, where the people may most conveniently see and
hear, and not in the places where Fonts in the time of Popery were unfitly and
superstitiously placed: Here is no finding of Popery and Superstition in the
very placing of Fonts, but only a prohibiting the administration of Baptism
in the places where Fonts in the time of Popery were unfitly and
superstitiously placed; and what, I wonder, could move the Papists to place
their Fonts where the Congregation could neither hear nor see the Minister,
what I say, but mere Superstition?

14thly. Page 42. He falls again to the abusing of Presbyterians, saying, That
they ought to have as bad an Opinion of the Trine aspersion of the Cross in
Baptism: adding toward the end of that Page his confidence, That if the Trine
aspersion were used in our Church, or if she had retained the Trine immersion,
as at the beginning of King Edward the Sixth's Reign, it would be counted a
great Superstition. This is a great slander, no Presbyterians that ever I heard
of, have any such Principles from which they can charge Superstition upon Trine
immersion, or upon Trine aspersion: they say, it is the command of God that
water should be applied to the Baptized, had he commanded that this application
should be by dipping or sprinkling once or twice, his command must have been
observed; seeing there is no such Command, they say, that Superiors are at
liberty to appoint which they please, provided nothing be appointed that is
imprudent or uncharitable: and now that we are fallen upon this point, I would
gladly know what it is that our Church has appointed; by the Liturgy. I see
the Minister is appointed to dipp the Child in the water, if the Sponsors
certify that the Babe can well endure it; but if they certify that the Child
is weak, it shall suffice to pour water upon it; so that here is no allowance
of any Rite but Dipping, unless there be a Certificate of the Child's weakness:
But when, I wonder, did any Baptist demand such a Certificate? as for the
Quoties no meaner a man than Bishop Mountague in his Articles of Visitation
positively asserted, that the Child is thrice to be aspersed with water on the
face: So that the Act of Uniformity notwithstanding, it seems the Doctors of
the Church were not agreed, and for ought I can observe notwithstanding any
Rubric or Canon now in force, Ministers are at their Liberty to apply the
water once or thrice, though I think Bishop Mountague was much mistaken, when
he said that the Child was thrice to be aspersed; the Church has not commanded
Trine aspersion, but there is no constat that she has forbidden it. Nor is
this the only thing in our Administration of Baptism, about which I am at a
loss. Immersion I do hugely approve, yea, I cannot see how it can be forborne,
unless charity or modesty, on something of that nature do forbid it. But what
may be the Reason that our Church allows not pouring water upon Infants without
a Certificate that they are weak; and yet in the form of Baptism appointed for
adult persons, leaves it wholly at the Ministers discretion, either to dip them
into the water, or to pour water upon them. There is another thing in which
aqua mihi haeret. I am marvellously also perplexed about the Administrator or
Administratrix of Baptism. In the Hampton Court Conference, K. James stumbled
something at some expressions in our Liturgy which seemed to give Liberty to
women and Maids to Administer Baptism in case of extreme necessity, and he was
then answered by Archbishop Whitgift, that Baptism by Women and Lay-persons,
was not allowed in the practice of the Church, but was enquired of, and
censured in the Bishops Visitations, and that the words in the Book inferred no
such meaning. But Bishop Bancroft declared, that the Church by those words did
intend in case of necessity, a permission of private persons to Baptize, and
that this permission was agreeable to the practice of the ancient Churches:
Withal opening the absurdities and impieties of their Opinion who think there
is no necessity of Baptism: I confess, I could not but wonder that they who
had so strongly pleaded for the Liturgy, and pleased themselves in silencing
those who could not conform unto it, should be as contrary as North and South
in expounding a material passage of it: But however for the credit of the
Ordinance, I rejoiced greatly to find that at the motion of the King, it was
ordered that the words, A Lawful Minister, should be put into the Rubric, for
by this means I thought us sufficiently secured against any female Baptizers.
But he who does not love to conceal any thing Dr. P. H. in his necessary
Introduction to the History of Bishop Laud, page 27. has quite took away the
cause of my rejoicing; for he says, The alteration was greater in sound than
sense, it being the Opinion of many great Clerks, that any man in cases of
extreme necessity, who can pronounce the words of Baptism, may pass in the
notion of and account of a lawful Minister. By any man, I suppose, he means any
one that is de humano genere, and by consequence either a Child or a Natural;
but I hope some one will give check to this extravagant Notion, that so a stop
may be put to the Licentiousness of those, unto whom God has no more given a
power to Baptize, than to Ordain Ministers. And therefore I wish that to stop
this gap, instead of the Minister of the Parish, or any other lawful Minister,
it had been said, the lawful Minister of any other Parish; and then I should
have thought it impossible for any man to be so impudent as to opine that our
Church had not restrained Baptism to the Clergy. But they who made our new
Liturgy were wiser then I; and some that have subscribed it, it seems had got
some such way of Interpretation as no Logic ever led me into.

15thly. Page 103. He makes bold with the whole Church of England: For of her,
these are his words: She holds subordination of Ministers in the Christian
Church to be of Apostolical, nay, of Divine Institution, having as she
conceives for Grounds of this her Judgment besides Scripture, the Practice of
the Holy Apostles in their time, of the Universal Church ever since, until this
later Age; and which is more, of Christ himself, who ordained the Apostles, and
the Seventy Disciples in an imparity as two distinct Orders of Ministers in his
Church. I suppose this Reverend Praedicant does not pretend to any faculty of
discerning the secret thoughts and inward conceptions of our Churches heart,
farther then when she discov'rs them by some words or other signification; let
him therefore tell us where the Church has declared her self thus to hold,
thus to conceive as in the fore-quoted words is represented, That the Church
holds subordination of Ministers to be an Apostolical Institution is plain
enough; and therefore Mr. D. beats the Air as often as he brings any Testimonies
for Episcopacie, which do not place it among Apostolical Institutions: but I
cannot find that the Church any where distinguishes Apostolical and Divine;
much less does she say, that she has besides Scripture the practice of the
Apostles, and of Christ himself. The Practice of the Apostles and Christ
himself are recorded in Scripture, and be a part of Scripture, and therefore it
is not sense to say that she has these Arguments besides Scripture, unless she
thinks that these are not Scriptural Arguments: Besides, where does our Church
say, Christ ordained the Apostles and Seventy Disciples in an imparity, as two
distinct Orders of Ministers in his Church; possibly some Writers of our Church
may so say, our Church, I believe will never be found to have said any such
thing: if she have, the Speech has given her Adversaries too much advantage,
for they will ask in what order Christ placed the Seventy? If in the Order of
Presbyters how came some of them afterward to be made Deacons as it is
generally held that some of them were in the Acts of the Apostles.

16thly. Page 144. He leaves upon record 4 great Untruths, and yet makes them
or 3 of them to be Truths known to all the three Kingdoms: they all relate to
the Presbyterians, the first is, That they had no set Forms, nor indeed would
admit of any whether for Common Prayer, or Administration of the Sacraments,
Matrimony, etc. How does he know they had no set Forms for these, or some of
these? I believe sundry of them had Forms, or quasi-forms for all these, and I
am confident the Major part of them would, if need required, swear that they
never declared that they would not receive any set Forms for these. But
Secondly, he says, That for a long time many of them had left off using that
very Form our Lord has taught us: Page 37. he had said, That most if not all
the Directorians had for a long time here in England left it out of their
Service: But wisely then adds, It will be hard to make Transmarine Brethren
believe, that there were any such men among us. And certainly it will be
impossible to make our own Nation believe that this had any truth in it; for it
is known all the Nation over, that those whom he must mean by the
Presbyterians, did many, if not most of them, and that very often, use the
Lords Prayer, though they did not think it their Duty to use it every time they
officiated in public. I my self for some years attended upon a Lecture in this
Nation, carried on by thirteen persons, as^ of them used the Lords Prayer, and
usually concluded their Prayers with it. I should wrong the English
Presbyterian Nonconformists should I not here acknowledge that they have very
well deserved of the Church of Christ by their Pious and Learned Discourses and
Sermons upon the Lords Prayer: I believe no Church can show a more full and
profitable Treatise of it than that composed by Mr. John Ball, and published by
his loving Friend Mr. Simeon Ash, toward the end of a Book, Entitled, The
Powwer of Godliness; nor do I know that ever the use of the Lords Prayer was
more fully Apologiz'd for, against the Exceptions of the Brownists and others,
than by Mr. Paget, and Mr. Thom. Hodges, the one sundry years since dead in the
Lord, the other still in the Land of the Living. Oh that I had so much reason
to commend the Zeal of all the Episcopal Ministers of my Acquaintance! But
indeed I have not; Sundry of them whose parts I greatly esteemed I have known
to conclude their Prayers before Sermon without any use of the Lords Prayer, as
often as they could conceive that there was any Great Person in the Congregation,
who would think the worse of them for using it.

To conclude this business, I Question not but it is both lawful and expedient
to use the Lords Prayer, as a Prayer as well as a pattern; but let not Mr. D.
too severely censure those who cannot as yet obtain leave of themselves to use
it as a Prayer, especially at such times when they have before prayed largely
both for themselves and others; for where can he find a Law making it our duty
to use those words commonly called the Lords Prayer, any otherwise than as a
pattern and example of our Prayers. I know he somewhere produces the words of
St. Luke, When ye pray, say, etc. But were those words brought into the form of
a Syllogism, it would not to the Brownists themselves appear very formidable;
for they will ask what the words be that Christ there commands to use: if it
should be answered them, the words that follow in St. Lukes Gospel, then would
they reply, that all who tie themselves to the use of our English Liturgy would
be transgressors of this Law; for no where in all the Liturgy does the Lords
Prayer occur as it is recorded in St. Lukes Gospel. Indeed the Compilers of our
Liturgy do neither follow St. Matthew nor St Luke, but vary from them both, as
will appear to any that shall compare the Lords Prayer in the Liturgy, with the
Lords Prayer in the New Testament, whether of the last or former Translation.
But if it should be said to them that the Commandment requires only that words
be used to the same sense and purpose with those in St. Luke; then is the
Brownist at as great Liberty as he could wish; They who lay it as a burden upon
our Consciences to use the same words in English that the Evangelists used in
Greek, should do well clearly to satisfy us, what words were used by the
Evangelists, for in no other matter do the Copies more vary. I have enough to
satisfy my self, that the Doxology in Matthew was not added in later times, as
some think; but if any one should differ from me in this Opinion, I should be
loath to tie my self neither to eat nor drink, till I had convinced him.
Grotius tells me that it is in the Syriack and Arabic Translations, yea, and
in the Latin too; but I am sure it is not in that Arabic Translation
exhibited to us in our late Polyglotts, and it is in very few Latin
Translations, if any that are considerable. Amen is wanting in the very Syriack
Translation, which all Scholars acknowledge to be ancient; but how shall I be
able to persuade a dissenter, that this Syriack Translation, which we follow,
is the Ancientest in that kind; If it be the Ancientest, then must I needs
acknowledge that from thence may be fetched a very good Argument for the
Antiquity of Holy Days: But perhaps it is not the Ancientest: that which
Immanuel Tremelius followed, having no such Inscriptions and various Titles; by
which is signified that these and the other things were done certain days in
the Year; How should I convince him that would say, Our Father only, and not,
Our Father which art in Heaven, or him that would use fewer Petitions by two,
then we commonly use, or him that would not say, Amen, at the end of the
Prayer. Above all things this makes me that I dare not too confidently assert
that our Lord Jesus intended to make it the Duty of his Disciples after his
departure to use those very words which he delivered to them, because I do not
find in those words any mention of his own most sweet and precious Name:
whereas when he comes to give them a standing Directory for Prayer, he enjoins
them, John 16. to ask in his Name, assuring them that Prayers made in his Name
should be answered, but letting them know withal, that at that time they had
never asked any thing in his Name, what shall we say to this? If we should say,
that the Apostles, Christ's Directions notwithstanding, had never used his
Prayer, the Brownists will make an advantage of such a Confession; if we should
say, that though they used the Lords Prayer, yet by using of it they had not
prayed in the Name of Christ, i. e. explicitly, and so as they were to do,
after they had a more explicit knowledge of the Nature and Offices of Christ;
then though this prayer will still contain all needful matter to be prayed for,
yet it will admit of Dispute, whether our prayers are not to be tendered unto
God in such phrases and forms as do more distinctly mention the Death,
Resurrection, and Intercession of our Blessed Mediator. Granting the Doxology
to be a part of the Lords Prayer, as I am of a strong Opinion it is, it is
plain that is is not so distinct and particular as some others in the Epistles
and Revelations be, which offer and ascribe praise and Glory unto God by
Christ, as Ephesians. 3.21. or unto Christ, as 1 Timothy 6.16. or to God and the Lamb
Christ Jesus, as Rev. 5.13. Later Doxologies do make an acknowledgment of the
Blessed Trinity as to every Person. Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and
to the Holy Ghost: and it seems but meet that the Doxologies of Christians
(properly so called) should have something in them, to distinguish them from
the Doxologies and Supplications not only of Heathens, but also of Jews. There
be some that say our Lord took this form of prayer out of the Jewish Liturgies,
and one undertakes to give us an account from the Jewish Liturgies, of that
variety and difference that is to be found in the recital of it in Matthew and
Luke, viz. he would have us think that the prayer, as in Matthew was intended
for the Disciples more public use, as in Luke for their more private use: But
in all this that Learned Man does need a credulous Reader, who will not too
strictly enquire into the grounds of his asseveration; Most plain it is, that
our Savior made this Prayer for his Disciples, whilst they were Members of the
Jewish Church, and before he had blotted out the Handwriting of Ordinances, or
had sent the Spirit to lead them into all Truth: let it therefore be
considered, whether we are not rather ordinarily to express our selves in a
Dialect more suitable to the New Testament Dispensation, than is used in the
Lords Prayer, yet using that prayer also, as a prayer, and making it the pattern
and example, as to the things to be prayed for, in all the prayers that we
make; and let men have a care how they adventure to conclude their own
prayers:] thus we further pray unto thee in that very form of words which
Christ himself has taught us,] till they have made themselves certain what
form of words Christ did use when he directed his Disciples. 3dly. he says,
Most of them had likewise wholly neglected the use of the Lords Supper for many
years. He might with as much truth have said, that most of them for many years
had lived without eating and drinking; The most of them ministered the
Sacraments frequently, and I know where they have been blamed for administering
it too frequently; if this Characterizer say this is not a truth, he may chance
in a short time by printed Testimonials to see himself confuted: But he has
not done, but for a Conclusion tells us, There was a great irreverence at
Prayer in their Congregations, very few kneeling, many not so much as putting
off their Hats, and of this, he says, he was an Eyewitness. I demand only
whether he think it be irreverence for a man not to kneel in the public
Congregation in time of Prayer? Whether standing be not a posture of Reverence?
Whether in the London Churches it be not morally impossible for the one half of
the Congregation to kneel in time of Prayer? Into how many Congregations he
went where many did not so much as put off their Hats in the time of Prayer?
And whether he either saw or heard that the Ministers of those Churches did any
way countenance that irreverence? If he cannot answer these Questions roundly
and readily, oh, what work has he made for an accusing Conscience! For ought I
know those in whom he observed this irreverence, might be Sectaries, who did
more bitterly inveigh against Presbyterians than against any other men
whatever; perhaps also they might be Episcopal-men, who designed to put an
affront upon the Presbyterians Prayers: just as now some are observed to sit
upon their Breech all the time of Pulpit-prayer, unless when just the Lords
Prayer is repeating, because forsooth Pulpit-prayer is not allowed by the
Church, but only bidding of Prayer. I write it with grief, but I must write
it, I never in any Congregations where I have been, observed so much
irreverence as I have observed in those in which there is the greatest
abundance of such as always pretended a love to the English Liturgy;
particular Stories I might relate, and would relate did I not fear to set
deluded people at a greater distance from our Assemblies; but if Mr. D. will
call for them, he shall have them by the peck and by the bushel; I need not stay
about these particulars: the World I trust will not long want sufficient
information how much the Presbyterians have been abused by Mercenary Pens.

I have only two Animadversions on this Authors Sermon, and then your trouble
will not be much longer continued. Page 20. He tells us, That those who have
Devotion and leisure enough to come to Church, and be present at Divine Service
may hear the whole Bible read every year, the Old Testament once, and the new
no less than thrice. A man scarce knows where to be present at Divine Service
every day morning and evening, unless at some Cathedral or Collegiate Church;
for though all Priests and Deacons are appointed to say daily the Morning and
Evening Prayer, either privately, or openly, not being let by Sickness, or some
other urgent cause, and though Curats be appointed being at home, and not
otherwise reasonably hindered, to say the Prayers in the Parish Church, or
Chapel, and to toll the Bell that the people may come and hear the word and
pray with them, yet the Assenters, and Consenters that do this, are as rare as
black Swans, and if a man had health and Devotion so much as to enable him to
attend upon the Cathedral Service Morning and Evening from the first of January
to the last of December, yet should he not by that means hear the whole Bible
read, either the Old Testament once, or the New Testament thrice, there being
several Chapters ia both, that are never agpointed to be read.

Whether the Church do well to appoint above an hundred of Apocryphal Chapters
to be read, and about an hundred eighty eight Canonical Chapters, never to be
read, is (...), certainly he that would adventure, in a Sermon to say, de
facto, That the Church had appointed the whole Bible to be read over once a
year, had taught his tongue not much to regard Truth: So had he also who
adventured to say, page 23. That it is required of the people that they repeat
aloud the Confession of sins; No such thing is required of the people, rather
it is required that they should repeat the Confession of sins with a lowly and
submiss voice; Should all lift up their voices aloud, there might be more
confusion then Mr. D. is aware of.

But though I am confident Mr. D. is mistaken about the two last mentioned
particulars, yet I must profess I am not clear about the Churches meaning in
either of them: After order taken for the reading of the Psalms, we are thus
directed, Then shall be read distinctly with an audible voice the first Lesson
taken out of the Old Testament, as is appointed in the Calendar (except, etc.)
Any man by this would think that the first Lesson were always by the Calendar
appointed to be taken out of the Canonical Scriptures of the Old Testament; yet
the Calendar appoints many Apocryphal Chapters to be read for the first Lesson:
Is Apocrypha become a part of the Old Testament? I know our Church had no
intention to make it so, yet the Phrase used by her in a Complex Notion, sounds
as if she did; I suppose therefore she calls all Books preceding the New
Testament, whether Canonical or Apocryphal by the name of the Old Testament; If
this supposition hold, than the admonition to all Ministers Ecclesiastical
prefixed to the Second Book of Homilies will warrant them to change all the
Chapters Apocryphal that shall fall in course to be read on every Sunday or
Holiday into a Chapter of the New Testament; for in that Admonition such
Liberty is granted, or rather such course is prescribed in reference to the
less edifying Chapters of the Old Testament. But perhaps by assenting and
consenting to all and any thing, Ministers have given away their liberty to
make any such exchange. Let those whom it concerns consider. Where I live I
have little opportunity to hear Apocrypha read publicly, and if in my Family I
make choice of Divinely inspired Writings to read, I hope I am no transgressour
of the Law.

Nor really do I know what is meant in our Liturgy by a loud voice; In the old
Common Prayer Book after the absolution the Minister was appointed to begin the
Lords Prayer with a loud voice, In the new, loud is changed into audible, and
we are also required at that time to repeat it after the Minister, which was
not required in the old. But now coming to look upon our directions for the
rehearsing of the Lords Prayer, after the repeating of the Creed, I find that
not only the Minister, but Clerks and people are appointed to say it with a
loud voice. I cannot think the phrase is merely varied by Chance, nor yet do I
see the Reason of the variation, nor do I observe any, either Priests or
people, thus to vary by straining their voice higher at one time than another.
Perhaps our last Amenders of the Liturgy did put audible, instead of loud, in
some places; that we might know that voice was loud enough on the Ministers
part which the people could hear; but what shall be called either an audible or
loud voice on the peoples part? Are those people that kneel at one end of the
Church to speak so loud as they may be heard of those who kneel at the other
end, or loud enough to be heard of the Minister, or only loud enough to be
heard of those who are next to them. Mr. D. has had many occasions and
opportunities to assent and consent to all and every thing contained and
prescribed, and therefore is ignorant of none of these things; Let him be him
be entreated to help us poor Ingrams; for our Country Priests are as unable to
untie these knots as our selves.

All this I have written, not out of any dislike to those who put out their
Books in the defense of the English Liturgy, for I should be right glad of the
pains of any who would justify it against all the Objections with which it is
pressed; provided he would do it like a Scholar and like a Christian, grounding
whatever he writes upon such Reasons as are apt to move those who have
Consciences, and do remember that God will bring them to a strict account for
all that they do in his Worship; but Mr. D. evidently is no meet person to make
our Churches defense; for he has been so highly rewarded, is so overwhelmed
with Ecclesiastical Preferments, and Dignities, that the World will hardly
think any thing put him upon writing besides filthy lucre. If he would have
done our Church service, be should have contented himself with some one
Ecclesiastical Preferment, spending himself in that, going to his people, from
house to house, persuading them to credit the Liturgy, by excelling all those
in Virtue that used no Liturgy; he should have conjured them to deny all
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to use their best wisdom so to order their
affairs, as that they might have leisure to come Morning and Evening every day,
and receive the benefit of their Churches Liturgy: but as the Apostle said,
That they who themselves were circumcised kept not the Law: so we say, that
they who have assented and consented, do not observe the Orders and Rules to
which they have given assent and consent, nor yield that Obedience which they
have sworn to yield: How few be they that Catechize half an hour every Sunday
and Holiday? How few be they that have called and advertised notorious
evil-livers not to approach the Lords Table, until they have truly repented and
amended their naughty lives? How many have subscribed the Articles who never so
much as read the Homilies that by the Articles they are to approve? I once
happened into the Company of the Rectour of a Parish, who signifying to me that
he had lately been with the Bishop to receive Orders from him, I asked what
things were required of him in order to Ordination? He told me among other
things, he had subscribed the three Articles in the 36 Canon: but when I
demanded of him what those Articles were, he confessed he knew not what they
were, nor had he ever seen them, but followed his Leader: and not long since,
one had confidence enough to come to a Reverend Minister of my acquaintance
with a purpose to persuade him to Conformity; but my Friend arguing for his
Nonconformity from a very plain passage in the Liturgy, he denied that there
was any such passage to be found; and had not this man then well read and
studied the Book, to which he so solemnly gave assent and consent. I profess
wherever I come, I make it my business to reconcile people to the public
Assemblies, my Conscience would fly in my face if I should do otherwise; but I
find my self unable to prevail with them through the prejudice they have taken
up against the Liturgy, and their prejudices are grounded for the most part
upon the wicked lives of those that are the most constant Readers and
frequenters of it. I shall never upon this account cease to join in prayers and
to hear Sermons; but yet I rejoice that a great Prelate lately in his
Visitation openly declared in his Speech, his resolution to proceed, and deal
more severely against those who should be found loose and profane, than against
those that differed from him only in Ceremonies, The Lord give hearts to those
whom it concerns, to think immorality worthy of presentment, and to set a mark
upon all whose feet run into all excess of Riot, and whose Tongues are set on
fire from Hell, that so we may have wherewith to stop the mouths of those who
are bent upon Separation, and employ their Rhetoric in nothing more, than in
persuading the people that God is departed from us: It would be a small trouble
to me to find the Non-conformists disarmed, did I find the Weapons of their
Warfare put into the hands of those, who would use them more, to the
disadvantage of the World, Flesh, and Devil.

I have mentioned one thing that makes Mr. D. not the fittest person in the
World to manage this Controversy, that is, his not being free from, at least
the suspicion, of Covetousness. I will suggest one or two more: He seems to be
very injudicious, and therefore puts into his Book such cold Commendations of
Church and Liturgy, as do only not dispraise it. I instance only in Monsieur
Vauqueline, whom he brings in Page 189. thus extolling our Liturgy, The Book of
Common Prayer is very far from any Idolatry, and there is not in it any formal
Superstition. Is not this a rare Elogium? But above all he disparages himself
by giving flattering Titles unto men, Page 87. he tells us that Monsieur Goyen
is as versed in Antiquity as possible; a Commendation too high to be given to
any man, and such as that Reverend persons worth will never suffer him to
accept of, or so much as to commend the love of him who gave it; let any one
read the Epistle Dedicatory to his Book, he will find the Lord Chancellor so
highly commended, that any one may see the Commendations were rather given to
his Place, than to his Virtues; all the Authority of the Nation has lately
sentenced him to Banishment, and yet Mr. D. could not find so much humility, as
either to bewail his fault, or his unhappiness, who had bestowed such praises,
in a printed letter upon him, whom the Kingdom has declared to have deserved
ill of it, and of the Church too.

I may well think you will begin to say what is all this to the Latin Book
that I sent you? Or how can I by all you have hitherto writ, perceive your
Judgment about it? Surely, Sir, the things I have noted out of the English
Book, are sufficient to let you see, that his 2d. Book is not worth your
reading; Scarcely can you find more words put together to less purpose. The
very Title Page sufficiently exposes him either to the scorn, or pity of those
whom he chose for his Adversaries. Vindiciae Sacrae Ecclesiae Anglicanae: What
is this Holy English Church? Does he mean that Company of men and women in
England who exercise themselves therein, that they may be holy as God is holy:
Quis Lacedaemoniorum vituperat? Why is this Church vindicated that no sober man
ever went about to accuse? If by the Holy Church of England he mean the late
Convocation, then he has written as our Episcopal men are wont to write; and
by the Canons of 1603. it is made a very dangerous point, to deny that a
Convocation is the Church of England by Repraesentation; and I have no mind to
try how near I can come to that danger without incurring it; Seeing Mr. D. has
professed with thankfulness, that he learned Divinity under Amyraldus; he may
do well to try whether he can confute his Master in his Theses de Ecclesia
nomine, ac definitione, and, de ratione convocandorum Conciliorum; which do not
look very smilingly upon that form of Speech which we use in England, or upon
the way of constituting our Convocations. Mr. Jeanes a man of a very
Scholastical Head, had called the Convocation, The Church of England: but in
the Second part of his Divinity, he wonders upon what account he or any one
else could think it to be the Church of England; he instances in his own
Diocese, in which there was one Dean, one Prebend, three Archdeacons; whereas
the whole Clergy of the Diocese chose but two; so that he thinks our
Convocations may be rather called Repraesentatives of the Bishops and
Cathedrals, than of the Church of En-England: And he asks whether if the King
should choose two hundred into the House of Commons, and the people one, that
Meeting could be called the Representative of the People of England? Mr. D. who
has used this Title should have done well to give satisfaction to such kind of
Questions is these, and to have showed us Synods in other Churches, the Major
part of the Members whereof, are neither chosen by the people, nor by the
Clergy; instead of doing so, he has left it doubtful, what he means by the
Church: And it is much more doubtful to me whom he means by his Schismatics:
against whose vociferations he pretends to defend his Church: When you have
called a man Schismatic, you have called him every thing: but I believe no man
in the world thinks that all those against whom he vents his spleen in this
Book, deserve to be called Schismatics. I am sure according to the definition
of Schism, that is given by Dr. Hammond, they are not Schismatics: Mr. D.
seems to thrust out his sharpest sting against Mr. Baxter, Now it is
notoriously known that he constantly went to the public Congregation: its
known also that he has in the public Congregation received the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper according to the form that is by Law established: he has
Communion with the Church of England in all Ordinances, takes a great deal of
pains to resolve the doubts of those who scruple Communion with her, and yet is
in Mr. D's account one of the Heads of the Schismatics; Let him take heed that
he do not throw this dirt into such men's faces, if he do, it will fly back into
his own. The Case of hundreds of Non-conformists stands thus: When they were
School-boyes, or Under-graduates in the University, the King called the so much
talked of Long-Parliament; in which both the High Commission Court, and
Star Chamber were taken downa; nd the High Commission Court was taken down in
words so general, as were interpreted to reach all other Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction and coercive power of Church Consistories: by these two Statutes
Dr. Heylin says. That the two great Bulwarks of the Church were beaten down;
In the same Parliament also passed an Act disabling the Bishops to sit as
Members in the House of Peers; in this condition stood things until an unhappy
War was begun betwixt the King and the two Houses, during the beat of which
War, the two Houses Voted away the Episcopal Government established in the
Nation; and Bishops, in the places where their Forces prevailed, either were
not at all, or showed not themselves; Divine Providence so ord'red it, that the
Kings Forces were at last quite overcome, and with them Bishops also were
overcome; so as they no where publicly and solemnly owned either their Power
of order, or Jurisdiction: so stood affairs until that his Majesty was
restored; but in the mean time young men that had applied themselves to the
study of Divinity, were under necessity either by the Statutes of Colleges, or
by accepting of Livings, to enter into Holy Orders, and to receive those Holy
Orders from mere Presbyters; by which Orders they acted for many Years, the
Lord accompanying their Ministry with great success, the people every where
receiving the Eucharist at their hands, and bringing their Children also to be
baptized by them; the Parliament which had the happiness to bring in the King,
confirming them in their Livings; but the present Parliament has thought meet
to en-act that all should be incapable of Cure of Souls that had not Episcopal
Ordination; so as they finding themselves under this Dilemma, that either they
must nullify their former Orders by Reordination, or else quit their Livings,
chose to relinquish their Benefices, and so made way to the preferment of many
every way of Mr. Ds own mind; He himself perhaps he had not had so many
Ecclesiastical Benefices, and Dignities, could they have satisfied themselves
to keep their stations; this is the Schism of a great many of those with whom
he is so angry: And can be not forgive them such a Schism which proved so
beneficial to himself and others? It will be more difficult to forgive Mr. D.
the Schism that he himself endeavors to make contrary to the Intent of the
Act of Indemnity, and Oblivion, by which we are commanded to bury the Actings
of those that were indemnified in the Grave, so as not to mention them to the
disparagement of any, but leave them wholly to the Judgment of the Great day;
but this bitter man, as if he envied Church, and State, the Peace, and
Quietness they both enjoy, will needs open the Grave of Oblivion, rake into the
dust, and bring all old Stories and Transactions upon the Stage again. Would
any man be like minded; how easy were it to recriminate; Who knows not that a
Primate of England, and Metropolitan took up Arms in the Cause of the two
Houses, and had Money Voted him for his good Service? Was not the Author of
Politica Sacra and Civilia, an Episcopal Divine? Does he not at present
Conform? Is he out of his Living, who writ the Jus Divinum Regiminis
Ecclesiastici? If we should make search into our Bishops, Deans, Prebends,
Priests, might we not find such as took the Covenant themselves, and persuaded
others to take it? Nay, might we not among them, even among them, find those
that took the Engagement, and came into the Livings of those that were outed
for not taking the Engagement? Nay, if a man would make enquiry for Bradshaw's
Chaplains, are they not among the the Conformists? Be they not also among them
who justified the Murdering of the King? And if it were allowable to Glory,
how many Non-conformists had suffered deeply in the Kings Cause before Mr. D.
in the Isle of Jersy was either banished or molested? but these are things
wholly Heterogeneous to Conformity, and Nonconformity; So is also the whole
series of the late War: It has been my hap as yet to know but of four mere
Non-conformists, that were aged experienced Divines at the beginning of the
Wars; and they four so far as I can learn, were all in their Judgments
unsatisfied in the Parliament War; It is like enough that there were many
others that were satisfied in their Cause, and acted for it: But what need Mr.
D. or I be sollicitous about this? Does not the King understand his Supremacy?
Has not the Parlialiament declared it unlawful upon any pretense whatsoever to
take up Arms against him? After such Declaration, who is he that will dare to
call the thing in Question? I do not know that since his Majesty's Return any
Book has been printed, asserting the Lawfulness of Subjects taking up Arms
against a King, unless that which was published as Mr. Hookers, by Dr. Gawden,
and dedicated to the King himself; nor do I find any English Divine, whose
testimony the Writers for the Parliaments Cause did more build upon, than
Bishop Bilson, the Great Propugner of Hierarchy, whose words it would be
Treason now to transcribe. Mr. D. knows where to find them; let him take them
into his consideration, and see how he can qualify them; for my part I do not
love to exercise my self in things too high for me: this I must take leave to
say. That Mr. D. has manifested himself very grossly to be a respecter of
persons: for whereas he pours out contempt upon some now alive, for expressions
that fell from them in a time of trouble and confusion, there is scarce one of
his Beyond Sea Divines, whom he does not quote with much Honor and Respect,
though they did in their Systems of Divinity, and Comments on Scripture lay
down the same Doctrine quarreled at in Mr. Baxter? Does he not know what pains
David Owen has taken to make his honest Calvin, and his Learned Beza, and
Danaeus, etc. as guilty of delivering Traiterous Doctrine as the Jesuits
themselves? At least he knows that Paraeus his Book was appointed to be burnt
at Oxford, and yet him he makes use of Page 8th. and page 337. etc. Andrew
Rivet also he chooses as a man fit to be of the Synod, and yet this Rivet in
his Exposition on the 68 Psalm. determines very peremptorily for the lawfulness
of defensive Arms, and to the Ephori he allows a liberty to take up offensive
Arms. Peter Du Moylin, and Spanhemius he would also have Chieftains in his
Synod, And yet these two, the one in his Anatomy of Arminianisme, the other in
his Dubia Evangelica on Matthew 5th do make the Right of Civil things to belong
only to the Godly, or to the Elect, then which nothing could be said more
dangerous to greater or lesser Societies. I know they both distinguish of a
Right in respect of men, and of a Right in respect of God, denying only the
later unto the wicked, but giving them this grain of allowance, their position
though well meant by them, will be found neither sound, nor safe; Let Mr. D.
therefore warn those for whom he designed his Book against this Tenent; and let
all men understand that the English Non-Conformists are of a quite contrary
Judgment; For they say unanimously, that all wicked men have a true Right, to
all that, whether Authority or Estate, unto which they came by due and lawful
means, and that God will never punish them because they had no right to the
Estates they came honestly to, but because they did not use their Estates
aright. I have only one request more to make to you, and by you to all your
Friends, and it is a very reasonable one, namely, that you, and they, would
rather credit the Kings Declaration concerning the English Presbyterians, than
Mr. D's either English or Latin Book; This one desire being granted, the
Presbyterians are as safe as an Amulet can make them.

Object. You will say, If they only suffer beyond the Seas through Mr. D's
misrepresentation, why have not I so much Charity as to reply upon his Book,
and make in Latin, as once Mr. Nichols did in English, a Plea for the Innocent?

Answ. Truly Sir, because I have found by Observation that it is in vain to
disarm him, who has a Panoply in the very next Dunghill to which he comes,
there is no dealing with him; who,

First, Will deny matters of fact without Reason.

Secondly, Will not take notice of the true state of the Controversy.

Thirdly, Will never yield though he have nothing to say for himself. Such an
one is Mr. D. For if you look into his Book, you fill find him charging the
Apologist with Fables and Legends, that is, in plain English, giving him the
Lie, and yet never giving the least Reason to persuade the World that the
things written by him were false. He calls it a Fable that any man should be
reported to give Counsel and advise to have the surplice after it was worn out,
burnt to ashes, the Ashes put into an Urn, and buried under the Altar; and yet
this very thing I have heard strongly and stoutly asserted by more than one
Conformist, who if need require would not be ashamed to testify it publicly.
Also he would have it a Fable that a man who had threatened a Minister for not
reading the Common Prayer, should being sick send for him, and desire him to
pray for him, not making use of the Common Prayer; but this as it was long
since Printed by Giles Firmin, so it will be verified when he pleases. That
Bishop Saunderson should desire to have Prayers read him out of the whole Duty
of Man, he would also have to be a Fable; but the Chaplain who read them, told
me and others so, and I suppose is too honest a man to deny what he said before
so many.

As for his not taking notice of the true state of any Controversy, I refer
you to his Book to what part or parcel soever of it, you shall please to choose:
If I mistake not, very near his Conclusion, he has a Chap. with this Title,
Whether Calvin more favored Schismatical Presbyterians, or Prelates? Can you
think that ever there was such a Controversy on foot in England? Did any one
offer to say, that Calvin had favorable thoughts of Schismatics? The Question
is, whether Calvin ever thought Prelacy to be by Divine appointment, an Order
Superior to Presbytery? And whether he would have all those thrown out of the
Ministry, who cannot acknowledge it so to be; if any thing of Calvin's be by Mr.
D. brought to this purpose, then will I have a quarrel against him that first
taught me to construe Latin: Take another instance, the Apologist had wondered
that the Non-Conformists were put upon promising, That they would read the
Psalter according to the Old English Translation, when as we have in our Bibles
a New one that is much better: he instanced in a few odd and uncouth
Translations; Now what does Mr. D. upon this? Why, he asks whether if the
Translation be corrupt a man ought rather to forsake his Ministry than to read
a corrupt Translation; as if the Non conformists had had nothing required of
them but only to read the old Translation of the Psalms; Yet I confess all
these things would not discourage me from taking him to task, had I any hopes
that he had not taught his forehead not to blush; but who would shoot at him
that is become unpenetrable? I will tell you one Story: Mr. D. in the presence
of a Noble Person of this Nation, said, That all the French Ministens disowned
the Presbyterian Non Conformists in England: that Honorable person presently
replied, To my knowledge that is not so, Nay, Some of the French Ministers look
upon you as a kind of Apostate for doing what you have done here in England.
Mr. D. replying, They be only some few hotheaded men that so think: it was
presently returned by the same Noble Person, Nay, the men that think so are
very Reverend and worthy Divines. Yet our Vindex never changed the Copy of his
Countenance, and what then can you think is to be done with such a man? Besides
he has abused Dr. Manton, the Author of the Comment upon James and Jude; and
Mr. Baxter the Author of the Saints Everlasting Rest, and of the Learned
Discourse against Atheism and Infidelity: and which will render him more
odious beyond the Seas, he has most shamefully abused Mr. Gattaker, than whom
England has not had a more Learned Critic, or profund Divine: nor does he
spare the gray-hairs of old Gisbert Voet, the only surviving Member of the
Venerable the Synod of Dort; and he that shall dare to touch such as these,
wlll not long want a man that shall let him know, quid distent era lupinis.

For your part, my Worthy Friend, all you can desire of me in requital of your
Civility is but this, that I declare my self ready (as by these presents I do)
to remove any scruple that is left in you by the reading of that grand Volumne;
send me that passage in which you think Mr. D. has the Non-conformists at the
greatest disadvantage; If I do not return you a sudden and satisfactory answer,
then say I have not judged fairly and heartily concerning your Author. If you
are not at leisure to take this pains, employ our worthy friend S. E. who is
grown sufficiently zealous for Conformity, through whose Pen Mr. D. to be sure
will suffer no disadvantage: Let him cull out the very best Argument in all
this Vindex his Book, if I do not forthwith reply to it, and that rationally
(provided the Argument be directed against the Cause, and not against
particular Persons) I will then set a Seal upon my Lips, so as never more to
plead in done, you of Nonconformity; till that be the behalf will give me
leave to remain, what I am

A peaceable desirer of some indulgence for those whom I never found to be
humor some, but Conscientious, and Your humble Servant, W. B.


