A SERMON PREACHED Before the QUEEN, AT WHITE HALL.

On Sunday the 26th of October, 1690.

By CHARLES HICKMAN, D.D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's.

By Her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1690.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN.
PSALM IV. iv. Stand in awe, and sin not; Commune with your own heart, and in
your Chamber, and be still.


THE Holy Ghost who sanctifies the hearts of Men, is mighty in operation; but
then his Motions are unaccountable. He pierces like the lightning; but like the
Wind he blows where he lists. And this is one cause why so many Men are the
less sollicitous to procure his Gifts, and neglect the means of their
Salvation: They stand gazing when the good hour shall come, that some kind
light from Heaven shall convince them of their Errors, and some powerful
influence shall reclaim their Sins; and in the mean while they give a loose to
their own Inclinations, and think they have no more to do.

But it is a dangerous and a great mistake. For as all other excellencies in Man
require industry and practice to bring them to Perfection; so Religion also,
amongst the rest, is to be improved by exercise and application of Mind; and
there is a certain Art of Virtue. Though the Principles of it were born within
us, yet it is a diligent laborious Education that must make them serviceable and
fit for use. The Foundation indeed was laid by God, but for the Superstructure
we must be beholden to our selves.

And in this Art no Man was ever so well accomplished as the Holy Psalmist, nor
ever left us so perfect Rules. The method which he here proposes in my Text, is
very excellent and worthy of our imitation; wherein he has discovered to us the
gradual progress which a good Man makes in this Art; the several steps and
advances whereby he arrives to a mastery in his profession. As,

I. That the great business of Religion is, to teach us not to sin.

II. That the way not to sin is, to stand in awe.

III. That this religious awe is to be wrought in us by Communing with our own
hearts.

IV. That if we would have this Communication with our own hearts to be
effectual, we must retire into our Chamber, and be still.

I. The great business of Religion is to teach us not to sin: to subdue our
unruly Lusts, and reduce our troublesome affections, and to bring every
rebellious thought into subjection to the will of God: To restore Virtue to its
proper place, and Reason to its due Command; and to recover the natural freedom
of our Will, from the tyranny of our Passions, and the usurpation of Vice.

There is nothing in Nature of greater moment to us than to form our minds
aright; to keep a strict hand upon our manners, and critically to confine our
selves to the paths of Life. And yet there is nothing in nature that requires
greater pains. How easy is it for us to be drawn aside upon the lest
intermission of our care? and how hard is it to be reclaimed again? If we would
return, we find it a difficult, tedious thing; and yet the greatest difficulty
of all is, to find out our mistake. For when we have gone so far astray, we are
apt to lose, not our way only, but our selves. We find some little satisfaction
in roving about, and then never think of our Journeys End.

To correct this Extravagance of ours, and to keep us within the bounds of
Wisdom, is the proper work of Religion. It Is a great work indeed, as much as
all the Religion in the World can do, or rather more; and yet without Religion
we can do nothing toward it. For Vice no sooner takes possession of our heart,
but it depraves all our Faculties, disarms our Will, and darkens our
Understanding; and every sin that debauches us, disables us too. It seizes upon
our affections first; and then how weak an opposition is our reason like to
make, when our affections are engaged against it?

And what is Man when he is brought unto the power of Lust, but an impotent,
abandoned Creature; harrass'd without and tortured within; and after a shameful
Life here, condemned to a miserable Life hereafter? How does Sin debase the
Soul of Man, and make him degenerate from the great rule of his Creation, and
so forfeit his title to that happiness for which God sent him into the World?
It Is an ill habit of Soul, like ill health unto the Body, that takes off the
relish and enjoyment of all the other Blessings which we possess. It Is a Curse
which we have brought upon our selves, and yet all our industry can never work
it out; a burden which we have entailed upon our Estate, and till this accursed
Entail be cut off, our estate it self will be but a burden to us. What
signifies all the Plenty, and Power, and Pleasures of this World, to a Man that
is going down in horror and disgrace to a wretched Portion in the next? It is
but like Achan's Babylonish Garment, a goodly sight, but an accursed thing: and
though he looked upon it with a covetous, greedy eye at first, yet it soon
brought him to a heavy heart, and administered but sorry comfort to him at his
Execution.

Just such are all the Enjoyments of a Sinner; his Guilt makes him always
restless and unquiet, uneasy in every posture, and dissatisfied in every
place: and though he has worn out all the pleasure of his Vice already, yet he
is fain to beat over the same filthy Tracks again; and in the loathsome
repetition of his Sin, he flies for shelter against the terrible Convictions of
his Conscience.

Surely for a wicked Man to reflect upon the state of his Soul, and consider
into what a helpless, forlorn condition he has brought himself, is enough to
make him either ashamed of his folly, or a-weary of his Life, and repent that
ever he was made. To see how miserably we have corrupted our selves, and
defaced the glorious Image of God within us, is enough to make him also repent
that he has made man. Our Lusts are now so interwoven with our nature, that we
are grown into an intimacy with Vice, a familiarity with Perdition; and our
Passions have got so much the ascendant over us, that they are grown above the
reach of reason, or any other human means.

In this miserable lost estate, whilst we were tied and bound with the Chain of
our Sins, and by that Chain lead toward our destruction, God in his mercy
instituted a holy Religion to set us free; to rescue us from that Captivity,
which our own Fault, and our Forefathers Folly had brought upon us, and once
more to restore us to that Paradise of Innocence from whence we fell: And if we
look upon Religion in its whole progress and extent, we shall find that this is
its whole design.

For this it was that God revealed himself to the Patriarchs in ancient times,
and conversed with Men Face to Face, that he might instruct them in his holy
Will, by his own Presence, and teach them Virtue from the original.

For this it was that he appointed all the Sacrifices under the Law; namely, to
purge his People from their Sins; till they had learnt the art of retaining
their sins in spite of all their Sacrifices; and then God cried out, Bring me
no more vain oblations.

Then came our Savior to show us a more excellent way, and therefore this was
the only design of the publication of the Gospel too: not to indulge our
sloathful Vices, and give us a lazy Inheritance in the Kingdom of God; but by a
severe Repentance to atone for our sins past, and by an active Faith to
preserve us from them for the time to come; that we might improve our Virtue by
the preaching of his Word; and by the power of Prayer might bring it to some
perfection.

Without this improvement all the attempts of the Gospel are but thrown away
upon us; our Faith is dead, and our Repentance vain; the preaching of God's
Word is ineffectual, and our Prayers can have no return; As we increase in
Knowledge, we do but increase our Sorrow; and the Sacraments themselves, those
means of Grace which have been so often administered to us, will prove but so
many aggravations of our Sins. So far as we have amended our Lives, so far are
we advanced in Christianity; but to expect Salvation upon any other terms, is
imposing upon our selves, and mocking of our God.

To think, with some, that a superficial attendance at the Altar, an outward
compliance with the formalities of Religion will serve our turn, is such a
slight Notion of religious Duty, as would disparage the worship of a Heathen
Idol. To fancy, with others, that an implicit Faith will make us whole, and
that we shall be saved by believing as the Church believes; is making our
Religion to be we know not what, and expecting to be saved we know not why.
Nay, to suppose, that any Faith whatsoever can do us good, but only that which
works a Reformation; to imagine, that a strong presumption can make us Saints,
in spite of all our sins, is like the rest, an absurd Opinion devised by wicked
Men, to delude the World with a show of Godliness, and under that color to
disguise a wicked Life.

St. Peter tells us, There is none other name under Heaven given unto man,
whereby we must be saved, but only the name of Jesus Christ: And St. Paul
assures us, that in Jesus Christ, neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but only a new Creature. It is not holding with this or the
other Church; neither the using, nor the forbearing of any Rites or Ceremonies,
though it be by Gods own appointment, that can entitle us to the benefits of
the Gospel, without the Concurrence of an industrious Virtue, and an obedient
Life. He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord require
of thee, but to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.

This is our duty; here lies the main stress of our Religion; for this it was
that God spoke in times past to our Fathers by the Prophets; for this it was
that he sent at last his own Son into the World; and by this test we must know
whether we are his Disciples: for whatever Doctrine does not naturally lead us
to newness of Life, is not the Wisdom of God from above, but the vain
suggestion of our own Lust, or the false insinuation of the Devil. Thus we see
that the great business and concern of Man is to preserve himself from Sin, and
yet against sin we have no Antidote but in Religion. How Religion comes to work
this Cure upon us, is the

Second thing observable in my Text. That we may learn not to sin, it teaches
us to stand in awe. We have already seen what a powerful influence our Passions
have upon us; how they lead us into Vanity, and drive us into Sin, and do so
tyrannize over our Reason, that we have no remedy left, but to combat one
Passion with another, and by a Religious Fear, to overcome the extravagance of
a senseless Joy. We cannot choose also but perceive how subtily Lust insinuates
itself into our affections, and by degrees gets the dominion over us: how
artificially it closes in with our Flesh, and so overtops our Spirit, that we
stand in need of some supernatural assistance to subdue it, and all the
succors of Religion are little enough to cast it out.

Some may think perhaps that natural Religion it self, those notions of a God,
which are born and bred within us, and are so deeply imprinted in the hearts of
all Mankind, should be sufficient to secure our Virtue, and force us to stand
in awe. But by universal experience we find, that these notions are apt to
degenerate into superstition; and superstition leaves us naked and exposed only
to our fears, but takes away all our security.

Others perhaps may conceive, that our own rational fears, the necessary sense
of our weakness, and the natural apprehension of our danger, might be a
sufficient guard unto us, and teach us to avoid those practices which do but
weaken and expose us more; but what can our nature do when it is corrupted it
self, and grown impotent and unable to relieve us. Nay what is worse, it is
grown obstinate and perverse, and most commonly takes part against us. For
though our reason sometimes keeps us in, and confines us to the Rules of
Virtue; yet how often does Passion break the Chain, and turn us loose to our
own inventions.

Others there are who depend upon their own honor for the security of their
Virtue, and would have us depend upon it too. But alas, what is the honor of a
Man when his Religion is lost? it is but the staff of a broken reed, that has
just strength enough to pierce through our hand, but not enough to support our
Body.

In short, there is nothing but an awful regard for God, and a just respect for
his holy Attributes, that can effectually put a restraint upon us, and
overruled the violence of our Passions; and this awe we owe purely to our
Religion, which for that very reason is called the fear of God, Genesis 20.11.

To what purpose else did God reveal himself to the Patriarchs and Prophets of
old, but to put this fear of his name into their hearts? and what other use but
this did they make of those his Revelations? We shall surely die, says one, for
we have seen the Lord. Woe is me, for I am undone, says another, for I am a man
of unclean Lips, and mine eyes have seen the King the Lord of Hosts.

To what purpose did God appoint the Sacrifices under the Law, but to give us a
dreadful instance, that death is the natural consequence of our Sins, a
necessary tribute which we owe to his Justice, though his Mercy allows us to
commute for the punishment, and the Beast suffers for the Man's offense?

What is the meaning of all the Rites and Ceremonies of Worship, but that the
sense of our Sins teaches us to keep our distance; and this appointed distance
makes us the more sensible of our Sins. These are the bounds which God has set
about his holy Mount, the necessary fences of our devotion, that we might not
rudely and familiarly break through upon the Lord, and perish in our
uncleanness.

Nay what other design had God in imposing Religious Worship it self upon us
(which is more particularly called in Scripture the fear of God, 2 Kings
17.28.) but that it might bring us to a religious awe, that having God more
immediately in our thoughts, and all his holy Attributes before our Eyes, we
might learn to purify our selves, even as he is pure; and to abhor those sins
of ours that make us unworthy of his presence. It Is this worship that strikes a
reverence into us, and sets us as it were before Gods Tribunal, where the sight
of his Majesty must needs affect us with a sorrowful sense of our own
Corruptions, and this godly sorrow will soon bring us to Repentance.

With what other intention do we meet here in our Religious Assemblies; to what
purpose do we attend to the word of God, but to work our Souls into pious
resolutions, and to improve those resolutions into an actual amendment of our
Lives, that when the Judgments of God are here declared unto us, the Vengeance
which he denounces against our Sins, we may hear and fear, and do no more such
wickedness amongst us.

There is indeed an antipathy in our nature against this manner of correction;
and as we were born free, so we desire to preserve our liberty, and look upon
all fear as a servile thing. Had we preserved our Innocence, we might have
maintained our freedom still, but where there is sin there must be punishment,
and where there is punishment there will be fear.

Nay it is our happiness that we have this Curb upon us, for fear is now become
a necessary qualification in Man, not only to preserve his Virtue, but to
accomplish his Nature too. It Is this that must give weight and moment to our
thoughts, and poize our Souls, which are light and airy, and full of Vanity of
themselves, and require such grave serious reflections to make them steady and
considerate.

There is a giddy heedless intemperate Spirit in the generality of Mankind,
which nothing but Religion can fix; nothing but the fear of God can humble.
There is a sort of Men whom Mercies only encourage to be more wanton still:
indulgence does but make them arrogant; and as they are untractable to all
gentle means; so nothing but a strict rein, and a heavy hand, can bring them
into order. But this Discipline will certainly reclaim them: divine worship
must needs inspire us with diviner thoughts. For how dare we offend in the very
face of an angry God? how can we provoke him any more, when we see his hand is
already lifted up against us; and, for ought we know, the very next provocation
may bring it down in vengeance upon our heads?

But if this is true; if the fear of God is able to produce such wonderful
effects, to turn the tide of our affections, restrain the overflowing of our
Lusts; and say to our unruly Passions, thus far shall ye go and no farther. If
Religious Worship necessarily puts an awe upon us, and that awe naturally
restrains us from committing sin; it may be objected, How comes it then to
pass, that notwithstanding the frequency and solemnity of religious worship,
yet so many Men lead irreligious Lives, that they can frequent the Altar of
God, and leave their Sacrifices there, but carry their Sins back again to the
place from whence they came?

It Is pity indeed that such an objection should be made; but to our shame we
must confess, that there is too much reason for it; and we must needs perceive,
that this nonperformance on our parts, does effectually bring a reproach upon
our Religion; and yet the fault is not in our Religion, but in our selves: The
best Medicine in nature may fail us, if our Bodies are not well prepared. And
the best Religion in the World may be ineffectual, if we do not come to it with
a due preparation of Mind. If therefore we find, that the public worship of
God does not make us stand in awe, we must call in the help of our own private
Devotion, and this brings me to the (...)

Third Rule observable in my Text. We must commune with our own hearts. It Is a
great Art and Excellence in Man, to know how to Think: To look into the nature
of humane Actions; to weigh well the Causes, and compare the consequence of
things, and to exercise that reason which God has put into us, on purpose for
the government and direction of our Lives. It Is what he himself will exact from
us at the great Account; when he will certainly judge of all our works,
according to this very Standard which he has put into our hearts.

We may neglect this duty if we please; and as we our selves make no scruple of
what we do; so we may think that God also will accept of all our actions in the
gross; but when the fatal doom shall come, he will bring them all to that
righteous Balance, where there are no grains of allowance to be made. Since God
has given us a discerning Faculty to distinguish between good and evil, what
strange perverseness is it in us to return it back upon his hands, as a useless
thing, and manage our Lives without it? to commit our ways to blind Chance, and
trust Fortune for the event?

When God reckons with the World for Sin, Ignorance indeed may be some excuse,
but inconsiderateness is none at all: it is a fault it self, and an aggravation
of all those faults that follow from it. We might have known our duty, but we
purposely shut our Eyes, for fear the light should be offensive to us. The
temptation was inviting, and the bait was pleasant, and therefore we would not
stand to deliberate upon the thing, but boldly swallowed the Bait, without
considering how we could digest the Hook.

We think perhaps there is no resisting a temptation when it comes upon us so
powerfully recommended. We think so because we are loath to try; and it is
easier indeed to yield, but it is much safer to resist, and more honorable too.
We cannot tell what efficacy and power there may be in our Soul, till we come
to put it to the stress. We know not, but we may be able to stand it out; or if
we should chance to fall at last, yet then our Virtue has something to plead in
its behalf; we did what Men could do, and then no doubt but God will supply the
rest. If we are infirm he knows whereof we are made; and does not expect from
us the steadiness of a Rock, when he remembers that we are but dust.

There is a natural frailness and inconsistency in our Flesh, which makes us
always subject to fall away; but yet God has given us a Spirit, that in some
measure is able to support us; and where it is not, the Holy Spirit will help us
out. But they who will contribute nothing toward their own safety, must
inevitably fall. If we let our Spirits languish for want of use, refuse to put
them upon their trial, or to perform that part which God has put into our own
Power, we have little reason to expect that the Holy Ghost should take upon
himself the whole concern and trouble of our Salvation.

Therefore to comply with the Rule in my Text. Whenever we find our selves
tempted unto Sin, and see our Virtue strongly beset from without, let us retire
within our own Souls, Commune with our heart, and see what assistance we can
fetch from thence. Let us deliberate with our selves what will be the
consequence of our Sin, and impartially examine the present conveniences which
we propose in it, and the inconveniences which we know must follow from it; and
having set the one fairly against the other, let us prudently weigh the
Pleasure against the Pain, and see which has the over-balance.

As for instance, we would comply perhaps with some boistrous Passion, or
gratify some extravagant desire. Covetousness, or Lust, Ambition or Revenge, or
some such unruly Affection, is ever and anon attempting upon our Soul, and
claiming the precedence of our Virtue. And to an unwary Man it cannot fail of
many plausible Arguments to plead in its behalf. That the desire is natural,
and the satisfaction great; that revenge is pleasant, and stolen Waters sweet;
but that Virtue is a severe, melancholy institution, an unnatural Discipline,
an unnecessary restraint, that debases our Spirits, robs us of the enjoyment of
our Youth, and is an entertainment proper only for a sedentary, decrepit Age.

If these persuasions prevail, in all likelihood the Man is lost, and never
lives to that Age when Virtue comes in Fashion. But if Virtue were allowed to
speak for it self, it would make a very good defense, where Vice should be
ashamed to show its Face. The time will come when we shall understand the force
of Abraham's Argument, My Son, remember that thou injoyedst thy good things in
thy life time, and Lazarus evil things; but now he is comforted, and thou art
tormented. Then we shall see the difference between Abraham's Bosom, and a
sumptuous Feast; the short tumultuous interrupted Entertainments of the one,
compared with the spiritual Eternal Pleasures of the other.

Nay that we may not go so high for a comparison, we shall find the poor Man
that lay begging at the Gate, in more happy condition than he that feasted
sumptuously at the Table. Take him with all his Poverty and Wounds about him,
yet his Faith and Virtue will make him whole, and his Conscience affords him a
better Feast, than all the rich Man's Estate can purchase. An honest faithful
heart is a sure Retreat, where we may find safety and satisfaction too, against
all the Calamities of this Life; and he that has so good a refuge, can never
complain that he is destitute and forsaken. He carries his Comfort with him in
his Breast, which can never be taken from him; whilst the Sinner carries his
torment there; and what gaiety soever may be in his outward show, yet at his
heart there grows a worm which will never die, and in his Entrails he has
already kindled that fire which never goes out.

With such considerations as these let us fortify our Virtue in the time of
Trial, and when the tempter comes upon us with all his deceitful Colors, and
flattering Promises, to put us into a state of ease, and make us truly happy;
let us not give credit to his words, but Commune with our own hearts, whether
it be so or not. When he tells us, as he did Eve before us, that we shall not
die, let us consider which is fittest for us to believe, the Father of Lies, or
the God of Truth. Surely where there is so vast a difference between the
Competitours, there can be no difficulty in our determination: No nicety of
Judgment is here required; no Grains and Scruples to decide the Cause; but the
Competition lies between Light and Darkness, the Shadow and the Sun; all Vanity
and Emptiness on the one hand, all Glory and Substance on the other. So gross
and palpable is the difference, that we need not spend time to judge. Ask but
our hearts, and our own hearts, deceitful as they are, cannot choose but give us
a faithful Answer. Where the cause is of so great importance, and we have so
little a way to go for a determination, who would think that Man should be so
negligent and remiss, as to involve himself in dangerous Sins, fatal Errors,
only for want of asking himself one easy Question?

But perhaps we have no leisure for such inquiries, our thoughts may be so
taken up, and our Minds so full of other matters, that either we have not the
heart to ask, or at least have not the heart to Answer. Indeed there is nothing
so apt to fill as Vanity, and no Man is more busy than he that has least to
do. And yet one would think, that amidst all the Crowd of trifling Imaginations
which flock about us, there might be room left for one serious thought: But if
not; if our Minds are so unfortunately prepossessed, so deeply engaged, that we
find it difficult to draw them off, then we must apply the

Last rule in my Text; we must retire into our Chamber and be still. There we
may learn to compose our thoughts, and bring our selves to a better temper;
give our Passions time to cool, and then our Affections quickly will be
changed. There we may see our Sins stripped of all their deceitful Garniture, the
Vanity all worn off, and nothing but the vexation left; and so ghastly a Figure
will our Vices make, that to abstain from them will hardly appear a Virtue.

There is nothing like solitude and retirement to recollect our thoughts, and
make us come unto our selves, after we have been seduced by conversation, and
enchanted by the multitude. Whilst we are in the World we must expect a whole
torrent of evil Customs, and corrupted Manners to come upon us, and shall be in
danger to be carried away with the tide: With such a violent force does it
overwhelm our Virtue, and overpower our Reason, that it is very difficult to
bear up against it. But if we would have our hearts at our own command, we must
retire out of the Crowd, enter into our Closets, and sometimes give our own
sedate thoughts leave to play their parts.

There may be Seeds of Virtue and Honor in us which we know not of; that have
lain stifled all this while under the rubbige of the World, and choakt by other
Men's inclinations against our own. When we have got our selves in private, then
is the time to ransack our hearts; to throw off all that lumber that has
clogged our Religion, and give our Virtues room to grow. This is the only place
to rally the scattered Forces of our Soul, to view all our strength, and see
what supplies are to be raised out of our own Spirits, and what recruits are to
be begged from the Holy Spirit of God.

It Is a shameful thing to think how long some Men can live, and yet never know
themselves. How they can be so earnest in prying round about them, that they
have no leisure to look nearer home; so inquisitive after other Men's affairs,
and so much strangers to their own: But the truth is, they suspect the poverty
of their stock, and therefore are loath to look how near it is to the bottom.
To find out their own faults they think is all irksome ungrateful pains; and to
search for their own Virtues perhaps is not worth the while. And hence it is
that they dare not reflect upon their own actions, nor so much as venture
themselves alone, for fear their sins should stare them in the face, and for
that little knowledge which they have of themselves, they are commonly beholden
to the standters by.

But whatever our condition is, it is good to be acquainted with it in time,
that we may be able to supply what is wanting, and reform what we find amiss,
and to examine the state of our accounts before we come to give them up to an
Impartial Judge. If therefore we would know our selves, and have an exact
survey of our own estate, we must withdraw from the multitude, and stand alone:
Retire into our Closet, and there we may learn to know, not our selves only,
but our God. There we have an easy access to Heaven; and whilst we commune
with our own hearts, and in our Chamber, and are still, God himself is pleased
to enter into the Conference with us, to assist our Contemplations, remove our
Doubts, and encourage our Endeavors. And when we and our own hearts are met
together again in his name, he will not fail to be in the midst of us.

For such Conversation as this, who would not set aside all the Pomps and
Vanities of the World, and think it his greatest freedom to be so confined, his
greatest happiness to be banished into Paradise? Here we cannot choose but look
down with scorn upon our former sinful delights, and with pity upon those who
know no better Recreations. When our retirement has weaned us from that
fondness which we had for the common road of practice, and our Closet shows us
all the actions of Men in their own proper Colors, our very inclinations will
be altered, and we our selves shall wonder what pleasure we could ever have in
those things whereof, upon second, upon cooler thoughts, we are now ashamed.

When we have thus prepared and qualified our selves in private, then we may
expect that our public devotion shall be effectual. But to come into the House
of God with all our vain imaginations and Worldly thoughts about us, is
invading of his Presence, and affronting of his Courts. It Is not only an
indecent, but a dangerous thing. God once set bounds about his holy Mount, that
Men should not break in upon him and perish. Though the bounds are now removed,
yet the reason of them still remains; and so much ceremony we owe him at the
least, as to make our sins keep a distance; not to touch his Ark with polluted
hands, nor approach his Throne with Unsanctified Hearts: That we should deck
our Souls also in their best attire, when we come to present them before our
Maker, and recommend our selves to his Acceptance, under the Ornament of a meek
and virtuous Spirit; which is, in the sight of God, of great price.

When this is done, then is the time to go to the Altar, and confirm those
pious resolutions which we began at home. Then the Word of God will come like
good Seed upon a fruitful ground, and bring forth a wonderful increase; then
all our Prayers will make their own way to the Throne of Grace, and all bring
us a good return. To conclude all in one word; The Church is the nearest way to
Heaven; but our Chamber is the only way to Church.

God grant that we may all follow this way; and then, no doubt, but it will
bring us to a happy end.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in St Paul's
Churchyard.
BIshop Overall's Convocation Book MDCVI. concerning the Government of God's
Catholic Church, and the Kingdoms of the whole World, 4to Dr Falkner's
Libertas Ecclesiastica, 8vo -- 's Vindication of Liturgies, 8vo -- 's Christian
Loyalty, 8vo Dr Scott's Christian Life. In three Vol. 8vo Dr Fowler's Libertas
Evangelica, 8vo Mr W. Allen's Tracts, 8vo Mr Raymond's Pattern of pure and
undefiled Religion, 8vo -- 's Exposition of the Church Catechism. Mr Hesketh's
Piety, the best Rule of Orthodoxy, 8vo -- 's Serious Exhortation to frequent
Communion, 8vo -- 's Case of eating and drinking unworthily, 8vo Faith and
Practice of a Church of England Man, 12. The Third Edition. Dr Pelling's Sermon
before the King and Queen, Dec. 8. 1689. -- 's Vindication of those that have
taken the Oath, 4to Mr Lamb's Dialogues between a Minister and his Parishioner,
about the Lord's Supper, 8vo -- 's Sermon before the King at Windsor. -- 's
Sermon before the Lord Mayor. -- 's Liberty of humane Nature, stated, discussed
and limited. -- 's Sermon before the King and Queen, Jan. 19. 1689. Dr Grove's
Sermon before the King and Queen, June 1. 1690. Mr Jeffery's Religion the
Perfection of Man, 8vo Dr Worthington of Resignation, 8vo Dr Kidder's Christian
Sufferer, supported, 8vo Dr Sharp's Discourse concerning Conscience; The first
Part; wherein an account is given of the Nature, and Rule, and Obligation of
it. And the case of those who separate from the Communion of the Church of
England, as by Law established, upon this pretense, that it is against their
Conscience to join in it, is stated and discussed. -- 's Discourse of
Conscience: The second Part; concerning a doubting Conscience. -- 's
Fast-Sermon before the House of Commons, April 11. 1679. on Revel. ii. 5. -- 's
Duty and Happiness of doing good, in two Sermons, the former Preached at the
Yorkshire Feast, Feb. 17. 1679. on Eccl. iii. 10. the other before the Lord
Mayor at the Spittle, Apr. 14. 1680. on 1 Timothy vi. 17, 18, 19. -- 's Sermon at
the Election of the Lord Mayor, Sept. 29. 1680. on Psalm. cxii. 4. -- 's
Lent-Sermon at Whitehal, March 20. 1684. on Luke xvi. 31. -- 's Sermon before
the Queen at Whitehall, Apr. 11. 1690. on Gal. v. 13. -- 's Fast-Sermon before
the Honorable House of Commons, May 21. 1690. on Deuteronomy. v. 29.
Reflections on a French Testament, Printed at Bordeaux, An. Dom. MDCLXXXVI.
Pretended to be Translated out of the Latin into French, by the Divines of
Louvain. By Richard Kidder, D. D. and Dean of Peterborough.


