SOME Legible Characters OF FAITH and LOVE Toward the Blessed CAUSE and
KINGDOM OF CHRIST: Worthy to be known and read of all men.

Being Some of the last Meditations of that Faithful Servant of the Lord Mr.
Thomas Higgenson, lately deceased a very firm friend (both living and dying)
unto the Interest and Work of the Lord Jesus in these last days.

Isaiah 42.9. Behold the former things are come to pass, and new things do I
declare before they spring forth, I tell you of them, sing unto the Lord a new
song.

Isaiah 43.21. This People have I formed for myself.

London, Printed by G. D. for Tho. Brewster, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Sign of the three Bibles in Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

THE EPISTLE To the READER.
THE Breathings of the Spirit of Christ in the Author of the ensuing little
Treatise, will certainly be very comfortable, and refreshing to all those, who
find any fresh Affections stirring in them to that Glorious Cause which has
been so unworthily and so shamefully entreated of late years, by an
Apostatizing Generation. The mystical Harmony of their Spirits, which the King
of Saints is now secretly putting in tune, in order to that harping and singing
mentioned Revel. 14.2, 3. and 15.3. will be so melodious in some competent
space of time, that many will be very desirous to learn to sing and play upon
those instruments, which David our King, the sweet singer of Israel, has
invented for his Victorious and Tryumphing Followers and Friends. But it was
revealed to the Apostle, that no man could learn that Song, but the hundred
forty and four thousand which were redeemed from the earth. That, this Servant
of Christ lately deceased was much Redeemed from the earth, and indeed from
among men, and so the more capable of singing that new song before mentioned,
is well known to many in this City and else where.

A true estimate of the Elevation of this Spirit above the base things of the
earth, may be easily taken by such Artists as are well skilled in the Celestial
or Evangelical Mathematticks; If they do diligently peruse a former Treatise of
his, called, Sighs for Righteousness, penned not long after the Cromwelian
Apostasy and usurpation. They will find the Spirit that appears in those
Queries, to be a very serious, a very savoury, a very penetrating At also in
those oother Treatises of his called, A Lamenting Word. Glory asar off, now
stepping in. The Indwellings of the Spirit. A Testimony to the True Jesus.
Spirit. And I could wish for mine own part, that the substance and series of
that Discourse were deeply imprinted in my mind, and in the minds of all those,
who do fixedly expect those most marvelous Productions, and Mutations which are
about to break forth, from the deep Counsels of his will, who is recapitulating
or bringing all things to a Head in his Son, both which are in Heaven, and
which are on Earth, even in him.

I was desired by some of the Authors Friends to perfix a Title and a few
words, to the Reader for his own good. But who or what am I? that I should hope
to promote any thing of this nature, my very Name being offensive to
multitudes, But the day will declare, That the cause wherein I have by a most
blessed Conduct embarked my Name, my Liberty, my Estate, my Life, my All, will
make a mends for all those scandalous, slanderous Reproaches, wherein it was
hoped I might have been buried alive, long before this time of the day. But I
know I am (with all I have) in the same ship with the Lord Jesus Christ, and
therefore I can Despise their Despisings, who after all their Insolent
Language, have cause to be ashamed of the mistakes and other pitiful products
of their own shallow fluid judgments, They must take their aim better the next
time, if they can. As for me, I bless the Lord, that I do sometimes meet mine
own Spirit touched with the Magnetic virtue of the Spirit of Christ in the
Discourses and Writings of others, whose Spirits were found faithful in the day
of Rebuke and Blasphemy, which has passed over us, in the number of whom I
reckon this dear disceased Friend to be one. And could have wished, that the
Following Papers might have been perfected and published by himself, before his
departure: In regard that several advantages, and elegancies will be found, by
judicions Readers, to be very much wanting, through many mispointings,
mistakes, and errataes, which were past cure before they came to my hand.
Nevertheless, I shall do the best office I can to serve in love, both his
living Readers, and my deceased Friend, by rectifying some things which are
amiss, as in the Errataes following.

All is commended to the Blessing of him, who works all things after the
Counsel of his own will, no more at the present, Reader, from

Thy Friend and Servant for the Lords sake, CHR. FEAKE.
London this 6th of the 4th month, 1659.
Errata.
PAge 10. line 36. read one of the lorns. page 11. l. ult. r. against Babylon.
p. 12. l. 19. r. whereof p. 9. l 1. dele as. p. 20. l. 14. for as r. and. l.
ult. for off r. of. p. 21. l. 11 dele how. p. 22. l. 12. r. with clay. l. 21.
make a (,) at law. l. 33. r. unsuitable. p. 23. 2. r. near. l. 32. r. when p.
25. l. 32. r. alone. p. 32. l. 25. r. loss. l. ult. dele of.

SOME LEGIBLE CHARACTERS OF FAITH and LOVE toward The Blessed CAUSE and
KINGDOM OF CHRIST, Worthy to be known and read of all men.
AS God has in every Age had some special work upon the wheel, and as the same
has ever been attended with much opposition, difficulty and offense, so he has
always given to some of his Servants an eye to see and be affected with it,
and to put their helping hand unto it: Although the things, which have been of
late the Travel of many, and yet are of some amongst us, being of such weight
and worth, of such blessed and glorious consequence, would require men of a
more excellent spirit, and skilful hand, to set them forth in their proper
beauty and luster; yet such service as I had, love constrained me to offer,
especially at this time, wherein the Exigencies of Truth call for somewhat at
our hands. If unbelief, security and revolt had not choked that Faith, Light,
and Love, unto the Lord and his present Works in the World, whereby many among
us were led out to undertake and effect great things in pursuance thereof, that
Truth would by this time have been witness of it self in real effects to the
face of the world, and would not have needed a vindication of this nature by
word or argument, to wit, That God is doing new and extraordinary things in
this day in the earth: To obtain clearness and certainty in which point is of
high concernment, unto all such as would not be left in the dark, concerning
the great designations of Providence, and their own duty, and as would be led
out through that confusion at this day among us, of contrary principles,
affections, and interests, unto a right Judgment therein; it being to be
rationally concluded, that if all things are to continue as they were, and no
new thing to be done, that then those high Interests lately contended for, and
all ways and means put in practice for the obtaining thereof, are to be
condemned, as which had a tendencie to introduce a new state of things, and the
present course into which things are since put is rather to be justified, as
tending to reduce us unto the old; as on the other hand, if the Lord has not
yet brought forth that which he intended in his mighty Works among us, and has
further things to do, this may be a foundation of encouragement unto all the
Friends and Followers of Christ, to proceed in their former Faith, Fervency,
Prayer, and in all suitable ways and means for the help and furtherance
thereof, notwithstanding the unbelief, opposition, and advantage of present
visible proceedings contrary thereunto.

The grounds we have to hold out for our belief and hope in this thing, that
God has been, and is in these days, doing some new and extraordinary things,
are,

First, A freshness of spirit that has been among us: Zech. 4.6. Not by might,
nor by power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts: The experience of
former and latter Ages may tell us, that God has had his times of going away
and returning to his Place, leaving his People and the World without any
visible tokens or eminent appearances of his Power, in such seasons the Spirit
has run low and faint, only in such a measure as might preserve his People in a
life of conflict and warfare; and his times of coming forth again out of his
Place, when he has had some new work to do, and then has he always given a new
and fresh Spirit, suitable to the work he had in hand: It is said, 1 Samuel
16.13, 14. The Spirit of the Lord came upon David from that day forward, but
the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an evil spirit from the Lord
troubled him. The like was seen in our days: While the Lord took away his
Spirit from many Wise, Mighty, and Noble among us, and sent darkness, famine,
and withering into their hearts, and confusion upon their counsels; at the same
time he put a Spirit of Faith and Power upon a despised sort of men, which was
as marrow and fatness to their bones. There is a word in Isaiah 10.27. The yoke
shall be destroyed because of the anointing. The principal end and effect of
the diverse and sundry Dispensations of Spirit, which God has renewed to former
Generations, at least in later times, has been to regain unto Christ and his
Church, out of the hands of Antichrist, some of those rights and concernments,
which during the long time of darkness and tyranny, have been concealed, or
forcibly detained from them: The like effect had that Spirit that was put upon
a People among us: Many precious Truths and Privileges, the light and comfort
whereof was denied to our forefathers, were discovered, and many heavy yokes
of spiritual and civil bondage, long continued upon their necks, were broken
and destroyed by that Spirit that remained among us: Oh what blessedness did
this Spirit bring with it, if it be but remembered, what light and certainty it
gave of the presence of God with us? what discerning of the time? what a strong
savor and relish of spiritual things? and what earnest longings and pressings
after a better state of things built upon the foundations of Righteousness and
Truth? The clear shining forth of new Covenant light out of the former mists of
Antichristian obscurity, was that which begot this Spirit in the hearts of
many; the setting up of Christ in the more full and unlimited exercise of his
Kingly Power and Authority over all things, both in Church and Nation, was that
end it pressed after; the taking out of the way all Parties and Interests that
had or might hinder the obtaining of this end, was that work it was with much
zeal and success exercised about: Such a freshness of spirit was never, nor can
it be conceived was of late given forth, but in order to the ushering in some
new and further work into the World.

Secondly, The works of Providence drawn out in a continued line and series of
deliverances unto a praying People, next unto those inward impressions of the
quickening Spirit, are a signal testimony unto us, that God is doing some new
and better thing in the World: When the Works of God in a Nation grow up to
that height and eminency, as like a tide to bear down all before them; then
they are to be observed and heeded as signs and tokens, as the Voice of God
unto that people, signifying what are his present Counsels and Works he is
determined to do: It is said in the Psalm 105.26, 27, 28. He sent Moses his
servant, and Aaron whom he had chosen, they showed his signs among them, and
wonders, in the Land of Ham: He sent darkness and made it dark, and they
rebelled not against his Word: The Signs God wrought for Israel upon Egypt, and
his Appearances for them in the Wilderness, did show, that the time of their
Redemption was come, that he would bring them to the promised Rest: Once it was
that the Lord kept us under a low condition of spirit, faith and courage, and
as to the outward Man under a state of subjection and suffering, under the
heavy yoaks of the Antichristian Taskmasters, and for a long time held his
peace, leaving us without any signs and tokens in a visible way; then was a
time for us to sit still, things being dark while the Lord was silent; but
having been since raised up into hopes and expectations, that a day and time of
great things was at hand, and this not the work of fancies, but of the Spirit,
of Faith and Prayer, upon the foundation of glorious Promises; and God also
having gone before us in many eminent appearances one upon another, all tending
to make way for the bringing in some better thing then yet is seen: This is
unto us, one among other, the sober and good grounds we have, to proceed in
prayer and waitings for that Excellent State of things to break forth, whereof
some former tastes and glimpses we have had already, the present interruption
and stop put upon the work to the contrary notwithstanding. Isaiah says, Chap.
43.3. I gave Egypt for thee, Ethiopia and Sheba for thee: May it not be said,
that the Lord gave whole Nations into our hands, and all those parties that
rose up one after another, upon this account, because they set themselves
against a Cause and People that God had among us? Let us but observe who all
those that have appeared in evil will and designs against this Cause, have
been sadly left of God, unto darkness, and wasting in their spirits, counsels
and proceedings, the very report whereof put a fear upon the Nations about,
while lie owned, and blessed, and comforted his People, by a glorious leading
Presence among them: What is the meaning of these things? Is there not a far
other more Excellent State of things signified, and intended hereby, then the
present frame of things of late set up, under which worldly pomp and policy,
the old oppressive and corrupt Interests of former worldly States and
Governments, with a too general defection of many from their first light, love,
and purity, is springing and growing up again in the Land.

The changes that of late have passed over us, are a further Testimony from God
unto us, that he is doing some new thing in the Earth: It is said, Genesis 49.10.
The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet,
until Shiloh come. The first coming of our Savior was ushered in by a change
upon all Nations, the Romans possessing themselves of the Kingdom of David,
and of the Government of the whole World: Joel says, chap. 2.30, 31. I will
show wonders in the Heavens, and in the Earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of
smoke; the Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood, before
the great and the terrible day of the Lord come: We are to know the second
coming of the Lord Jesus to set up his Kingdom on Earth draws near, when we see
changes coming upon the whole frame of things, both in Church and State: This
Nation, a Nation wherein Profession is reformed unto the greatest degree of
Light and Purity of any Nation in the World; yet how has it been turned upside
down? How have the Heavens of our more reformed, as well as the Earth of our
more loose corrupted Church State been shaken? How has the Sun of Monarchy,
Kings and Nobles, been darkened, and the Moon of our Civil State been turned
into blood? How have forms of Government, and Authorities, hastily risen up
one after another, and have as fast dissolved in weakness and confusion: Revel.
21.1. I saw a new Heaven and a new Earth, for the first Heaven and the first
Earth were passed away, and there was no more Sea: When the Governments,
Kingdoms, and Commonwealths, throughout both the Antichristian and the more
Reformed Nations, become unsettled, shaken, and falling in pieces, it is a sign
they are grown old in sin and guilt, and as fit for no more use are ready to be
done away: The time for the fulfilling of that Prophecy seems at the very
door, Revel. 14.15. Thrust in thy sickle and reap, for the time is come for
thee to reap, for the harvest of the earth is ripe. Who ever saw the Nations
round about us in such a posture of war and wrath as at this day, so fitted
for destruction? What Earthquakes, Eclipses, Comets, raining of Blood, and
raging Pestilences, have there been of late? How is the whole Creation sensible
of the drawing near of the Lord Jesus, whose coming in the Spirit of Grace and
Glory in his People, and in Wrath and Judgments against his Enemies, is that
which causes all these changes which have been, and are yet to be in the World.

It is well known to many, that both the spiritual and visible Interest of
Christ has begun to shine forth more of late in this Nation, and God has
given more visible testimonies in a way of owning of it here then in any other
Nations besides: So soon as this Interest and Cause was placed among us, what a
series of changes did presently flow in upon us? What commotions were stirred
up against us from abroad? and how are all the Nations about us since put into
a flame? Nations long settled upon their lees of Antichristian blindness and
corruption, when God begins to empty such from vessel to vessel, to bring upon
them one breach and change after another, it is a sign he has some new and
special thing to do with such People: Oh that we might see the Lord Jesus, as
he comes forth through these things, and lifts up himself still more and more
by them.

The Refinings that have attended our changes have a fresh significancy with
us, that God is about some new and extraordinary things among us; every change
was as a fire purifying the succeeding parties into a more refined Spirit and
Principles, then those that were before; as new work and new difficulties were
presented, while many went off, their hearts failing them, through darkness,
weariness, or fear, a new Spirit was put upon others in a fresh supply of light
and strength, giving a more piercing sight into the excellency of the interest
and cause in hand, and further Resolution to press forwards toward it.

Principles in the beginning of the day were dim and weak, both in the Civil
and Military Instruments, carrying them forth a little higher then unto the
Interest of mere civil right and freedom, against the Arbitrarines and excess
of Monarchy and Prelatical Church state; these Generations being most of them
laid aside, a choicer People were raised up in their place, of clearer
Principles and higher Aims, calling for Impartial Justice, removal of burdens,
dethroning of Kingly Power, abolition of Worldly Pomps and Splendor, a
Religious Magistracy, a Spiritual Ministry, liberty of Worship, etc. they had
so much light, as to discern the present frame of things to be exceedingly
corrupted with Antichristian mixture, and to see there was a better state of
things to be had framed and acted, not according to Humane Reason, and
Prudentials of State, in the hands of men, as men, but according to the Decrees
and Laws of Christ, in the hands of men, as spiritual and Saints.

Further, changes so far heightened this Principle, as that the Interest and
Right of Jesus Christ, to exercise a Kingly Authority over the Kingdoms of
men, was publicly and solemnly owned for a reason among us; let it be
observed, how the Lord winnowed and purged one party after another; how the
said old, dark, and corrupt fashion of things was a going away, and a new face
of things began to appear with a new luster, both upon Church and State, upon
Doctrine and Worship; garments of mourning and bondage formerly upon the People
of God, changed into a state of liberty and gladness; a loose and worldly
Church reformed first to the letter, after to a degree of spirituality; the
contest begun for a civil Interest, refined into a contest for spiritual Faith,
Prayer, and expectations in many rising higher and higher, first for civil
liberty, then for a spiritual, after for the Kingdom and Government of Jesus
Christ: And here that word may not unseasonably be minded, Psalm. 68.13, 14.
Though ye have lain among the pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of a Dove
covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold; when the Almighty
scattered Kings in it, it was white as snow in Salmon; When the time came, that
the Lord would scatter and bring down all those Authorities, Powers, and
Parties, that had held his Church in this Nation at the Brick-kills, in the
condition of Servants and Bondmen, then did he take off our filthy garments,
and clothed us with change of Raiment, high Reformation, Victories, and many
visible Testimonies of his Presence among us, and all these as Earnests or
first fruits of that flourishing State, which shall be brought forth in the
Coming and Kingdom of the Lord Jesus.

In Isreal's Redemption out of Egypt, mention was first made of a civil Interest
only, of their deliverance from the burdens and oppressions of that King, but
the principal thing intended was, that God himself would be their King: If this
was a typical Preludium of the State of the Church in these last days, as that
Prophecy seems to imply; I will restore thy Judges as at first, and thy
Counselors as at the beginning: If so, then a deliverance from the yoaks of
Tyranny and Persecution, unto a condition of mere outward liberty and quiet,
was not the chief Result in ended us in our changes, but that God would thereby
bring us both Church and State under a more immediate Government to his Son,
that he alone should be our Lawgiver, King, and Judge, ruling us according to
his own Word and Spirit, not according to the Prudentials and Policies of this
World: If the Lord has thus kindled a Refining fire among us, let us take heed
how we quench it, till our purification, thereby preparing us unto that Kingdom
and Glory that is drawing near.

The Lord has taken new and extraordinary ways with us; besides that peculiar
eye that has watched over the English Nation, in former times, to save it from
the bloodthirsty Rage of Antichristian Adversaries, their Invasions from
abroad, and Conspiracies at home: God has of late made this Nation, as it were,
a Stage, whereupon he came forth, and began that Cup of the Wine of his Wrath
against the Kingdoms and Monarchies of Babylon, that is determined against
them; here began the Horns of Antichrist to be thrown down; here the spiritual
and civil Liberties and Rights of Saints and Men were more visibly owned of
God, against the Injustice and Usurpations of Ecclesiastical and Temporal
Rulers, then had been before; here the Office of Christ, as Prophet and Head of
his Church, was vindicated and advanced above the Commandments and Laws of Men
to the contrary. The Authority of Christ, as King of Saints and Nations, and
the right of Saints with him to Rule and Judge the World, has gained more
Reputation and acceptance with us then all the World over: God speaks
concerning his Church in the latter days, Isai. 43.18. Remember ye not the
former things, neither consider the things of old, behold I will do a new
thing: And what was that new thing? For your sakes I have sent to Babylon, and
have brought down all their Nobles, ver. 19. I will even make a way in the
wilderness, and rivers in the desert, Chap. 44.3. For I will pour water upon
him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground; I will pour my Spirit upon
thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring: The Lord had a People among
us, who he formed for his praise; how did he for their sake bring down our
Princes and Nobles, the Paramours and Lovers of Babylon? How was our Land,
which had layen like a wilderness for want of Gospel light and administration
of Justice, turned into Rivers of water, through Righteousness, Knowledge, and
the Presence of the Lord, shining forth among us? And in that day what a
sprinkling of the Spirit was there upon the dry ground, upon many Sons and
Daughters among us, of simple and low capacities, weak and foolish things,
whereby many wise, mighty, and honorable, were put to confusion, and brought to
nothing? Let us call to mind what a Presence was with us in the fields; what
impulsions of the Spirit, as of a mighty wind, were upon many, carrying them
up, beyond themselves, through difficulties and dangers? What a Spirit of
Judgment was put upon many, to bind Kings in chains, and Nobles in fetters of
iron? What a light of the Gospel of the Glory of Christ shined round about us?
What meltings and yernings were seen throughout all, even the darkest corners
of the Land, under the sense of a crucified Savior? What Lightenings among the
People of God, and what Earthquakes upon their Enemies? Such things as made us
a terror and wonderment to all the Nations about us; speak oh ye Virgins that
are fallen asleep, if these be ordinary Dispensations, if ye have read or heard
of a parallel? if not, then look upon them, as beginnings of greater things yet
to come to pass.

But if any shall say; Why may not this glory set in a cloud, as great things
were done, and as great hopes and expectations raised in Germany, yet all came
to nothing.

I answer; Luther lived to see his Doctrine prevailed over many Cities and
Countries, and soon after his death brake out the War in that Nation, for the
punishment of them that were Adversaries to the Gospel; when that Light was
quenched there, it sprung forth with renewed strength in this our Island, and
has ever kindled such a fire, as has at sundry times cousumed the chiefest part
of the Riches, strong Holds, and Yoaks of Antichrist that were among us.

God has begun the influences and effects of some of the last and glorious
Promises in our Nation; Providence and Prophesies have been as teeming wombs,
bringing forth the first fruits of great things amongst us; The Promises that
concern the Church of Christ, toward the end of her wilderness state, do speak
of great changes and revolutions to come to pass about that time in the
Antichristian States and Kingdoms, with their Governments and Affairs, that by
these tempests this old corrupt frame of things may be broken, and fall, and
way made for a glorious State of things, to be brought forth in the fuller
exaltation of Jesus Christ; A Stone shall be cut out without hands, that shall
smite the great Image upon his feet: Upon the servants and upon the handmaids
in those days will I pour out my Spirit, and these shall hate the Whore, and
shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with
fire; then the earth shall rele to and fro like a drunkard, and shall be
removed like a cottage, and the Lord shall punish the Host of the high ones
that are on high, and the Kings of the earth upon the earth: Then the Moon
shall be confounded, and the Sun ashamed. If these Promises have begun their
effects upon us in this Nation, then let us know, that the way of the Lord
amongst us is new, and his work extraordinary; let us remember what a
sprinkling of a gracious, choice and active Spirit has been among us: what
excellent things were done while it was fresh upon us? How Monarchy and Prelacy
was cut off, as out of the horns of Antichrist? How the Stone has been at work
among us, whereby that whole Church and State, with the pomp, power, and
greatness of it was overturned? What Parties and Instruments were laid aside,
as being short of spirit for the business of that day? and what Laws,
Constitutions, and Customs were cast off, as Antichristian, and opposite to the
work then in hand: Add to all these, what a mighty Witness of God unto all
these proceedings in a continued series of Salvations and Victories over all
that rose up against us; and then may we not conclude, That the things that
were then on foot among us, were the first fruits and earnests of those
precious Promises, and not (as too much cause has of late been given to say)
the productions of policy, headiness or delusion; to say nothing, what most
deep and sweet impressions were upon our hearts from the word of promise,
concerning the Kingdom of Christ, and downfall of Babylon, we have had two
observable signs, that the time, or the Promise, wherein the Lord will do great
things, is at hand; the one is a most peculiar and distinguishing presence of
the Lord, by inward Refreshings of Spirit, and outward Dispensations of Mercy,
which was with us whilst our hearts went after the Lord; and our Principles and
Proceedings were in a subserviency to his Cause and Kingdom; when others, whose
aims and ends were more National and mixed with worldly interest, were laid
aside, left in the dark, and under visible rebukes. So great a difference has
the Lord made between these, who sat down in a mere civil and worldly
Reformation, and others, who pressed after better hopes, (viz) the fulfilling
of Promises, and a full subjection of all things to the Word and Spirit, must
needs be taken for a singular Evidence to give light unto us, which way the
work and design of the Lord lies at this day. The other sign is, the sad clouds
of displeasure that are now upon us; that gracious and lively presence that
brought us out from our former Egyptian darkness and slavery, and by a strong
hand led us through many dark and difficult paths in the beginning of the day,
is much departed from off our Councils, Camp, and solemn Assemblies; Laws are
given unto us that are not good, and Statutes whereby we cannot live; our
Rulers are many of them such as know not Joseph, the faithful Servants of
Christ, such as had no heart unto or communion with that great Affair and
Interest of Christ once on foot; the Military Power, which was as a new sharp
threshing Instrument against us: Babylon is now become a prey to the Heathen,
or as Hirelings under a foreign Prince; the cause and truth once so dear and
highly owned, now as to any visible progress of it, under a sentence of death,
so that we may say, we have sown much, and bring in little; we looked for much,
and lo it comes to little; the Lord has blown upon it, because his House lies
wast. Haggai proved to Israel, That the visible discountenance that was upon
all their public and private concernments, from the Lord, was a sign, That the
time was come, that the Lords House should be built; even so clouds of
displeasure from God returning again, after such a morning of successes and
blessings as has been upon us, ought to be a sign unto us, that the Lord has
great things yet to do among us; and that it is time for us to awake, and go on
with the Work that has been begun among us.

Now let us enquire what Works the Lord is about, and wherein his Saints should
be found waiting upon him at this day; there are some Rules, which in this
Point have given light unto the Church of God in former Ages, and lately in our
time, and may be further useful to us in this day for our satisfaction herein.

First Rule. The Word, upon which we were made to hope in the day of our
greatest difficulties and straits, and in the strength and comfort wherein we
suffered so many things; when God sets it upon the heart of his People to wait
for some word, some spiritual Promise to be made good, and to undergo many
things for the obtaining thereof, that is the Work of that day; God made a
Promise to Abraham four hundred and fifty years before it came to pass, when
the time of the Promise drew nigh, God put it upon Moses heart; after him upon
Joshuah, to go up and possess the good Land. David had a Word that he should be
King, he bore up himself upon this word through a long series of conflicts and
troubles, till the things was done. In the late Wars, those who bare the
burden and heat of that day, had a Word, whereupon they leaned, which consisted
of many Promises, showing a more full and glorious Reformation to be set up in
the World, wherein Jesus Christ in all his Offices, Laws, and Commands, should
be more visibly owned, and exalted, and Babylon in all her interests thrown
down: This was that Word that was a Guide and a Strength to many among us in
the troubles and perplexities of that day, and not the Policy and Power of this
World.

Second Rule. Observe of what nature were these breathings of the Spirit, and
the impressions that were wrought thereby upon the most enlightened, faithful
and praying part of the People, while we were following God in the way of his
Judgments among us; the Work God is about begins in the heart of his People,
for if the Secret of the Lord is with them that fear him; when a People are in
the Work of God, following Jesus Christ through many sore Trials and hardships,
then observe what things in that day lay with most weight upon their hearts,
and what the stirrings and movings of the Spirit with the Word were then
amongst them, and there the Work of God her: Psalm 102.13, 14. Thou shall arise
and have mercy upon Sion, for the time to favor her, yea the set time is come,
for thy Servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust thereof: When
God begins to awake the spirit of his People, to call them out of their
darkness, security, and carnal interests, and puts upon them a gracious sense
of the condition of Sion, and to look, and long, and cry to the Lord for her
building up, then is the time at hand; 1 Chronicles. 11. When the Lord would turn
the Kingdom from the House of Saul unto David, then he stirred up all Israel to
come and make David King: It may be observed, whilst the Spirit of the Lord
remained in the lively and fresh gales and actings of it upon our public
Instruments, and Camp, Council, and Assemblies, there was such a sense upon
their hearts, that the Kingdom of Christ might be promoted both in Civils and
Spirituals, and the remaining posts and pillars, all the limbs and branches of
Antichristianisme, might be broke to pieces, and carried them with a lively
zeal and courage through all oppositions, difficulties, and temptations in that
day to the contrary.

Third Rule. Consider which way the Works of Providence looked, that were
formerly done amongst us, and whither they tended, though Providence, when it
is alone, is not any certain Rule to go by; yet when the Works of God and his
Word and Spirit go altogether, when a People have his Word and Spirit stirring
them up unto a Work, and Providence coming in one upon another to carry them
out in it, then are Providence to be heeded, as signs of the times, and of the
Work God is about; Psalm. 105.26. He sent Moses his Servant, and Aaron whom he
had chosen, they showed his signs among them, and wonders in the Land of Ham.
The Works God wrought for Israel in Egypt and the Wilderness, was as Gods
manifestation to the Nations, who were his People, and what he was about; when
a People are engaged in a cause upon holy and righteous Principles, the
Promises, Prophecies and Truths of the latter days, and God is seen going
forth before them, working glorious Deliverances for them, this is a loud
Testimony: What is the Work God is determined to do in such a day? Psalm
105.14, 15. He suffered no man to do them wrong, yea he reproved Kings for
their sakes, saying, touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm: How
like to this the dealing of God with England of late have been may appear,
whosoever shall remember what an eye of peculiar respect and favor the Lord
had upon a People among us, what a choice and blessed Spirit a despised People
had, whereby many wise and honorable among us were confounded? What power to
bind Kings in chains, and Nobles in fetters of iron? How no weapon that was
formed against them could prosper: Moreover how the Lord stretched the line of
confusion and the stones of emptiness over all such constitutions and
interests as had been props and pillars for the upholding the old Antichristian
and worldly pomp, pride and greatness; if the aim and tendencie of these
Providence be considered, it is easy to guess what the Work of God is at
this day.

Fourth Rule. Take notice what things have fallen out upon a People among us
since they left the Work of the Lord, they were first about, to build their own
houses, since they left their first love, and labor, and patience, and zeal in
that Work, and are joined to another Interest: As soon as Saul failed in the
Work of the Lord, 1 Samuel 16.14. The Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and
an evil spirit from the Lord troubled him: That Spirit he had for the Lord, and
the work of Reformation, left him, and he was turned to hate the same Spirit
when it came upon David: It is a true observation, where the Spirit of God is
seen in the most gracious, lively and warmest workings of it, there are the
choicest Servants of God, and there is his Work carrying on. What a blessed
Spirit was there upon a People among us? What zeal did it work? what
indignation? what godly sorrow for miscarriages? what purging of themselves
from the old leaven? what pressing on toward a through Reformation, and the
good things of the latter days, how is this Spirit (I would I could not say
it) departed from them.

Object. But wherein does it appear that that Spirit has left them?

Answ. It appears by their principles and designs; the Spirit of God acts upon
holy and gracious Principles, and unto holy and noble ends; a People led by the
Spirit of God do act upon such Principles as are spiritual, the Word of God,
Faith in the Promises, Love to Christ, to his Saints, to the breathings of the
Spirit in them, to Righteousness and Holiness; now where you see these
Principles left and slighted, and others took up, worldly power, and policy,
and conjunction with them, that either left the Work formerly, or were enemies
to it, and practices tending to pour contempt upon the blessed Cause and
Interest of Christ among us, and upon all those that would still be faithful to
it, until the Kingdoms of this World become the Kingdom of our Lord; this is
not the Spirit of God you may be assured, that does such things: The spirits of
any thing are known by the breath or savor it yields; Thou savourest not the
things that be of God, but the things that be of man: where we find a strong
scent and savor in our own hearts, or others, of the fleshpots, and onyons,
an hankering after the treasures of Egypt, the pomp, preferments, titles, and
honors, the constitutions and interests of those that the Lord cast out before
us, to be like the Nations, in Government, State, Designs, and Manners, there
we may fear the Spirit of the Lord, as to any further work, is departed:
Moreover, since many left off following the Lord fully, we see not our signs
and tokens of Gods wonder working Providence as formerly; Exodus 33.16, Wherein
shall it be known here, that I and thy People have found grace in thy sight, is
it not in that thou go with us, so shall we be separated, I and thy People,
from all the People that are upon the face of the earth: Whilst there was a
People among us that were faithful with the Lord and his Saints, and had a
heart to the glorious things God has for his Church, the Lord Jesus went forth
before them as General, and put the feir of them upon all that were about them:
but since then, what frowns from Heaven? what tokens of displeasure have been
upon us both at Sea and Land? whereby all things drive heavily, at home fears
and confusion, abroad wasting and consuming upon their Armies; now observe, in
what walk and way we had the Lord present among us, and how since then he has
withdrawn himself from us, and thence we may gather where his Work lies at this
day.

Now then if you judge these Rules to be such, as may give any certain light to
resolve us in the question; The Work the Lord our God is about at this day is a
choice Work, and a great Work, and beyond the ordinary ways and Dispensations
of God in times past.

First, The Lord is forming a People for himself, purifying and fitting a
People to follow Christ in those special Services, wherein his Glory is more
eminently concerned; if the Works that God has done in the midst of us be in
order to some greater things he has yet to do, then will he sanctify and
prepare a People that shall understand the Work of the Lord, and serve him
therein; Psalm. 110.2. Rule thou in the midst of thine Enemies, thy People shall
be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of holiness: They that
shall be of the most ready and willing spirit to serve Christ in the Work of
his Kingdom, shall be a People of more grace and holiness then others, a People
that shall have Faith and Love to Christ, and Zeal for his Kingdom, and Glory,
burning more upon their hearts then others have. The Promises show of this
thing frequently; Isai. 4.3. And it shall come to pass, that he that is left
in Sion, and he that remains in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even every
one that is written among the living in Jerusalem: When the Lord is about to
establish his Church above all Mountains, all other Kingdoms and People in the
World, he will first cause them to separate and come out from the sins and
uncleanness of the World, and will make them a People fitted to enjoy the
glory of that day, to be as Saviors upon Mount Sion, and to judge the Mount of
Esau: The Wars and changes that have been among us call for this too, they
have been as fires to purify us from our sins and Idols, though many are since
gone back to commit fornication with them again: The desolations and troubles
that do at this time threaten the Nations all about us, seem to be as signs
and tokens to all that are wise hearted among us, to prepare to meet the Lord
Jesus in his Judgments; he is above, when ye see these things begin to come to
pass, then lift up your heads and look up.

This will be better understood, by making a more particular enquiry, what
manner of Work that is, wherein God will fit his People, and make them ready to
follow Jesus Christ in the things he is about:

First, We may look that he will put another spirit upon his People then that
is, which is generally found at this day among the People of God; a chosen
People, a picked People become those Works God has promised to do in the latter
days: If an Honorable Person had a Negotiation which concerned his Honor and
Estate, he would employ such Persons about it, as would become such a Master,
and of abilities for such a Service. Or if a great Prince were about to show
himself openly, to be seen before his Subjects, he would choose a Train of such
Persons, to attend upon him, as should set off the glory and splendour of his
Royal Person before the people: The Works wherein the Lord Jesus will glorify
himself, and be more eminently exalted, he will choose such choice and precious
Saints and Servants to be about him therein, as that by the Grace and
Blessedness which they shall show forth, his Glory shall shine forth the more;
there is so much dross and Tin mingled with our Gold, so much of worldly
spirit, in excess, pomp, designs, seeking and receiving honor and promotions;
so much of a carnal frame, in debates, envyings, stripes, backbitings,
whisperings, swellings, tumults; and so much of an Antichristian spirit is
found among us, in joining interests with Babylon, confederacies with her
Kings, building up again her horned power, hankering after her customs,
manners, laws, worldly splendour and greatness, that whilst we are in such a
condition as this, God will commit no eminent or special service or trust unto
us; such a people are not in a condition, fit to attend upon the Lord Jesus in
his great Works he has to do among us: Whilst the People of God among us were
seeking after some better things in the Spirit of Grace, with Faith,
Singleness, and Purity, the Lord was among them by a very gracious and
wonderful Presence, but since they have left their first Loves, and have forgot
their first Works, and are sat down in the middle way, the Lord is seeking a
People of another spirit, who will follow him fully in the Works he has
promised to do in these last days: Now we may know such a People, a People of
another spirit, where the following characters are found.

1. In days of division and distemper, of corruption and falling away from
their first Love, fervency of Spirit, the simplicity, savor and Spirit of
Christ, and Gospel-conformity, unto security and rest; from whence come
uncleanness, lasciviousness, strife, wrath, and heresies; a People that in
such days are growing in their Light, love, Purity, and Zeal for Christ, his
Work and Kingdom, are a People of another Spirit, of such a Spirit as the Lord
seeks for, for such a Spirit was Paul, and some few in his time.

2. After a Reformation has begun in the Churches of God, when the old leaven
the constitutions and customs made in the time of Antichristian blindness and
Idolatry are established and kept up among them; or when a People in a Nation,
who were coming out of Babylon, delivered from the yoaks, and by a great deal
of conviction, through many wonders of Providence, called to come out of the
corruptions of the World, shall return back again to bondage, either by
confederacies with Babylons friends, mingling with their manners, or taking the
golden wedge, if in such days as this there be any that continue in their love
and zeal to Jesus Christ, his Kingdom, a through Reformation of things, until
all power be put into his hands, and do show forth the same, by following all
holy and righteous ways and means, for the promoting thereof in the World,
such are a people of another spirit; such a spirit as this was in Elijah,
Phineas, David, Nehemiah, and some others in their time, and in the worthy
Reformers of later times: Zech. 12.10. I will pour upon them the spirit of
grace and supplication, and they shall look upon me who they have pierced and
shall mourn for him: The Lord will have such a people as shall be deeply
affected with Christ, and with a sense of the dishonor and reproach that lies
upon him, his cause and interest in these last times.

3. When the signs of the times are not discerned nor heeded, nor the Works and
Mind of God pointed at thereby is not closed withal, a great security and
unbelief, and a lazy lukewarm indifferency, generally prevailing, as to the
things which concern the promised Kingdom and Glory of Christ, and the
overturning of all that which lets; whosoever shall then be found upon their
watch, in supplications and searchings, mourning for the sins of the times,
refusing to bow to the Kings Image, opening their window toward Jerusalem,
that is, praying for the Redemption of the Church of Christ, and enquiring out
the time, such are a people of another spirit, such a people the Lord seeks
for, as a people fit to follow him, and wait upon him; of such an excellent
spirit was Daniel, and the men of Issachar, Noah, Jeremiah, and others: As he
is a man of a mean, low, base spirit, that can be content Christ should have a
little place in his heart, and the old Man a great deal, so it is a note of a
people of a low and unworthy spirit, not fit for any eminent service for
Christ, that are content with a little of Christ's Righteousness and Reformation
in a Nation, well satisfied so they may live in peace, and ease, and plenty,
though Christ have not the swaying, overruling Power in the public and
highest matters that are done among them: When a deep sleep of security in
present things has taken hold upon many, then to have the eyes open, and heart
awake, pressing forward toward things before, is a sign of a people of another
spirit.

4. A people that follow the Lord fully which way soever he goes, that whilst
others are taken off by fear of difficulty, worldly advantage, or some cunning
pretenses, will not be prevailed with to decline or cast off the Lord and the
Work he is about, such are a people of another spirit; whilst Rulers, Army and
Churches were all as one for the Work of the Lord Jesus among us, and many
outward successes and encouragements were cast in, and the owning thereof was
the way to advancement in the World, an ordinary and common spirit might follow
the Lord in such a day; but when all these props and foundations are shaken,
and the streams of interests and affairs is turned into another channel,
against the Work and Promise of God, then to be lovers and followers of the
Lord Jesus, his glorious Cause and Interest, when it lies under such contempt
and death, as this is the work of a very choice and excellent spirit, when the
Spies returned, Numb. 13.27. They told Moses, and said, we came unto the Land,
whither thou sentest us, and surely it flows with Milk and Honey, and this is
the fruit of it; nevertheless the people be strong that dwell in the Land, and
the Cities are walled, and very great; and moreover we saw the children of Anak
there; and all Israel cried and wept that night, and said, let us make a
Captain, and let us return into Egypt; but Caleb and Joshua were of another
spirit: By the tastes we have had of Gospel light and Reformation, of the
Government of Christ Kingdom of late, very many are ready to say, that the Land
is good and pleasant, for Gods People to be under a Government of Gods making,
under Rulers of Gods anointing is blessed; as it is but a reasonable thing;
but this Kingdom (say they) being not of this World, will not be received nor
subjected to by the World, nor can it be set up but by a shaking and pulling to
pieces the Kingdoms of the World, as to the foundation they now stand upon;
wherefore it being a business of so great trouble, difficulty, and danger,
before it can be attained, let us make (say many among us) a Captain, and let
us return into Egypt, or let us sit down on this side Jordan, with the
enjoyment of our ease and quiet, rather then seek or make out after such a
Kingdom with the loss of all: This is a low unworthy Spirit, having little
love to the Glory and Excellency of Christ and his Kingdom; the Lord will
prepare a People of another Spirit, that will strengthen one another to go on,
until all the Enemies of Christ and his People be put under our feet.

2. As the Lord will choose among his People such as are of another Spirit, so
he will have a People of more refined and excellent Principles then are
commonly found among us; Principles are the springs of Actions, no man can act
above his Principles; a man of gracious, noble, and refined Principles is
appointed for some excellent service and finer work then other men; now the
excellency of a man's Principles lies in their spirituality, in how much they
have of Christ and Grace above other men: A man that has more communion with
God, with free grace in Christ then others, is a man of more excellent
Principles. Men's Principles cannot always be judged by their Profession, but
their Profession may be judged off by their Principles: a man of low and
servile Principles may make a great show and high profession before the World,
as Israel when brought out of Egypt, having received the Oracles, having seen
great Wonders, no Nation like to Israel, yet had in them a strong sense and
savor of Egypt still in their hearts, they went back to Egypt; so we of this
Nation have been a People of great deliverances, under astonishing
Dispensations, so that it was said of us, what Nation like to ours? what
Mercies like to Englands Mercies? Yet we are generally of low, servile, slavish
and fearful Principles, savouring much of that state whereunto we were first in
Bondage; how and who in our Principles are below the Dispensations that have
been upon us, and the work of God has further to do in the World, may appear by
considering what Principles they are that do prevail most at this day among us.

1. They may be known what they are by our sitting down in an outward state of
peace, quiet, and safety, well contented and at ease therein, while a full and
through Reformation, and the Mercies promised to the Church in the latter days,
are not sought after: David was of far other Principles, of a choicer Spirit, 2 Samuel, 7.1, 2. And it came to pass, when the King sat in his house, and the Lord
had given him rest round about from all his enemies; yet the King said unto
Nathan the Prophet, See now, I dwell in an house of Cedar, but the Ark of God
dwells within Curtains: This Principle is wanting, where an outward
deliverance and peace is so used and sat down in, as yet the Work of the Lord
is not carried on; Though thou have lain among the pets, I will make thee as
the wings of a Dove; I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh; henceforth there
shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean: Great goodness
is promised to the Church in the latter days, the Spirit of grace,
deliverance, enlargement, dominion, and exaltation; these things were sought
after by the People of God among us of late, and in pursuance thereof they went
some days journeys, following the Lord through dark and dangerous paths, but
are now sat down by the way, in a low, wearied, unbelieving, and slavish
Spirit, having little or no spirit to the things formerly pressed after, Genesis
49.14, 15. Issachar is a strong Ass, couching down between two burdens: and
he saw that rest was good, and the Land that it was pleasant, and bowed his
shoulder to bear, and he became a seavant unto tribute: But Dan shall judge his
people as one of the Tribes of Israel: In like manner after a little breathing
space has been given us from our former troubles, finding that rest was good,
and a condition of quiet and peace was sought, so that we might enjoy our
ceiled houses, lands, offices, merchandising, etc. how are many among us
willing to put their necks again under the yoaks, and to deliver up, and let go
the opportunity and power that was in their hands to have redeemed themselves,
and to have raised up that Work and Building, the foundation whereof was laid
with the price of so much precious blood.

But you will say, What is that Work that is to be carried on? It is said, the
Iron was mixed without Clay; it should signify the heathenish worldly Civil
Power, and the Ecclesiastic State should mingle together, the Church should
borrow many corrupt constitutions, customs, and helps from the wicked and
worldly power; this mixture is yet found among us; the old leaven of
Antichristian pollutions, manners, and proceedings that was begun to be purged
out, is leavening us again, even the whole lump (if grace prevent not:) The
Basis upon which God will set up his Kingdom, namely, the Word of God, as the
Law and the Spirit of Christ in his Saints, as the Counselor, is not admitted:
Ezra 9.14. Should we again break thy Commandments, and join in affinity with
the people of these abominations? Whilst worldly aims and ends run along with
the Work of Christ, he had many followers; but now that the God of this World
has given to many the golden Cup, whereby they are overcome in security and
ease, to make another step in that Work, beyond what the present state of
things will bear, such love and zeal is found but with few amongst us, this is
a low unworthy Principle: If the blessed Reformers of former Ages, or more
later of our times, who always found every new step in Reformation to be
attended with difficulty and opposition, had been of this low and unsearchable
spirit, or could have been content for the enjoyment of their lives and
liberties, ease and pleasures, with the loss of the Gospel and Reformation in
the greater purity of it, we should instead of seeing the things we have seen
in our days, have been inheriting the blindness and bondage of our
forefathers: It is worthy to be remembered, while we were a people as one,
standing upon an Interest distinct from all Nations about us, the Lord was
graciously sought of us, and that his Presence was nearer his wonderful Works
declared, but since we have made peace with the Enemies of the Lord, this peace
has pierced deeper into our sides then ever their swords before could do; which
puts me in mind of what is said, Dan. 8.25. By peace he shall destroy many:
When Antichrist saw he could not prevail among us by the sword, through his
policy he prospers, and by peace, and ease, and quiet he destroys many;
wherefore the Lord will have a people of such light, sincerity and love, as
will not be contented with the peaceable enjoyment of Wives, Children, houses,
Lands, Honors, or Preferments, until the Lord Jesus in his Laws, Government,
Spirit and Saints be exalted over all the Earth, and his glory above the
Heavens.

2. Whilst there is a setting up the Maxims and rules of worldly corrupt States
and Kingdoms, yea though it were the most prudent and righteous Principles of
(Civil) Interest, when this is done to keep down the Work God is about in our
day, this is a sign we are a People of Principles low and unsuitable to the
Promises and Dispensations that we are under; as when the Kingdom of God comes
into the heart, the most rational and refined Principles or Nature that were
there before, must give place to the powerful convictions of Grace, and the
light of the Spirit; so when the Kingdom of God is come forth visibly in the
World, the fashion and frame of things in Kingdoms and Nations must pass away
before it; and when God is about to do such a Work as this, for any to insist
upon the most righteous and prudent Principles, to the hinderance of the Work
of God, cannot be justified: Exodus 1.9, 10, 11. Behold, the people of the
children of Israel are more and mightier then we, come on, let us deal wisely
with them, lest they multiply, and it come to pass, that where there fall out
any war, they join also unto our enemies and fight against us, and so get them
up out of the Land: Therefore they did set over them Task masters to afflict
them with their burdens: Herein they exercised their wisdom of State against
the Work God had in hand, and paid dearly for it: Judge. 8.22. The men of Israel
said unto Gideon, rule thou over us, both thou, and thy son, and thy sons son
also, for thou have delivered us from the hand of Midian. What a more just and
reasonable thing could have been thought upon, and more conducing to common
settlement and safety? But observe what answer was returned verse 23. And
Gideon said unto them, I will not rule over you, neither shall my son rule over
you, the Lord shall rule over you. A noble and choice Spirit, he looked upon
Israel as under Gods more immediate Government, and any other settlement by
humane and worldly wisdom, however pretending to common good, was not by any
means to be admitted: I shall add only one Instance more, Numb. 32.5. Reuben
and Gad said unto Moses, Let this Land be given unto thy servants for a
possession, and bring us not over Jordan: Their desire was just and reasonable,
for they had many Cattle, and it was a place for Cattle. But Moses answered,
Shall your Brethren go to war, and shall ye sit here, verse 6. behold ye are
risen up in your Fathers stead, an increase of sinful men: Moses having his eye
upon the Work the Lord was about, would not endure that any Civil Interest, how
public or just soever, should be taken into any competition with the Lords
Work, It was Reason of State that set up Ieroboams Calves for the preservation
of the Kingdom; that erected the Romish Chair for preserving of unity in the
Church and the peace of her Kings; that formerly imposed uniformity of worship
and other laws upon the Conscience, and of late new Lords over the Church of
God, all devised by the Man of Sin, thereby to put a check and stop upon the
blessed Spirit of Christ, and work of Reformation, that both these might be
kept under, and might not grow up to any considerable height, for fear of
bringing in a change of things into the World: During the time of the Churches
being in the Wilderness, Kingdoms, and States, and Churches have been left to
be ordered by carnal Force and Policy, and at the best by the Rules of Morality
and Civil Right; and these times of ignorance and corruption God winked at: But
now that the Kingdoms of this World are about to become the Kingdoms of our
Lord, and his Christ, it will be the wisdom of all that fear the Lord, to take
heed of sitting down in, or contending for any ways or interests, how just and
prudent soever, against the Work and Word of Christ that is about to be
fulfilled: When the Office and Right of Christ, as Prophet and Head of the
Church, was brought to light in our days among us, what a blow was there given
to that corrupt state that was before; so likewise when the Royal Prerogative
of Christ, as King of Nations, began to be owned in the Government and public
Affairs among us, how the Lord stood by a despised remnant of his People
therein, and how he left and laid aside all those that stick to their State
Maxims, to their old Rules, Customs and bounds ^to the hindrance of the Work
then in hand is well known, wherefore the Lord will have his people purged from
the old leaven of these low and carnal Principles, and that will not sit down
in any Interest or settlement, how just or safe soever, whereby a stop is or
may be put into the Work of God, in the exalting of his Son, in his Word,
Works, and blessed Spirit among us.

3. That we are a People of Principles below the Works of God in our day, and
unsuitable thereunto, may appear by the old pollutions entertained again; from
which many seemed to have been purged; there is a corrupt mixture with this
World, that has spread it self through the hearts and lives of most, and
through the Ecclesiastical and Civil State, whereby that holy frame of heart,
and work of Reformation, formerly among us, is much laid aside: A Church or
People is said to be holy, when the Word of the Lord is their Law, and when
they yield up themselves unto the Lord all one in all things, to be governed by
his Commandments: And on the contrary, it is a People corrupted and unclean,
when other Lords besides Christ have dominion over them, and the will and
commandment of men is set up. The Church of the Old and New Testament in their
beginning had more of this beauty of holiness and professed subjection unto the
Lord only, then was ever seen since: Moses said of Israel concerning their
first estate, Deuteronomy. 32.12. The Lord alone did lead him, and there was no
strange God with him: though he soon forsook God which made him, and lightly
esteemed the Rock of his salvation: So Paul said of the Church as it was in its
first estate, before the Man of Sin had deflowered it; I have espoused you to
one Husband, that I may present you as a chaste Virgin to Christ: A looking back
unto these things, together with a measure of the Spirit, vouchsafed in our
days, did work in the hearts of many among us strong convictions of much
blackness and deformity, of many pollutions contracted from Antichrist, yet
remaining upon us, and gave light and discerning of a more holy reformed and
happy estate, both commanded and promised; and upon this account was there a
separation made among us as to Worship; first from Prelacy, then from the
National way, and afterward as to Government from Monarchy, Gods People being
led all along herein, and pressed on from a Principle of Grace and Holiness,
and from some light in the Promises, which speak of a day when every po^ in
Jerusalem and in Judah shall be holiness unto the Lord, and the Idols he shall
utterly abolish: Whilst our hearts were under this holy and gracious frame, we
were going on to purge out all such mixtures yet remaining among us, as were
borrowed from corrupt and Antichristian States and Kingdoms, that we might
become a new lump, a holy People, a righteous State, just Laws and all things
reduced as near as might be unto the pattern; but instead of going on with
these first Works, we are mingled again with the Idols and uncleanness of
former times, the sad effects whereof do appear almost every where upon the
(...) and lives of most, and upon the Profession and Government that is held
out in the Nation: This was the evil of the Church of old, Psalm 106.25. They
were mingled among the Heathen, and learned their works: Hosea 7.8. Ephraim he
has mixed himself among the people, Israel is a Cake not turned: 2 Cor. 6.4.
Be ye not unequally yoaked together with unbelievers, for what fellowship has
righteousness with unrighteousness; wherefore come out from among them, and be
ye separate. When Gods People began to join with the World in Civils, they
afterward joined with them in Spirituals, until the whole lump was learned.
The Reformers of the Church in former and latter times, their Zeal was stirred
up against these minglings, both in doctrine and manners, against the
inventions and commandments of men in the one, against worldly pomp pleasures,
and sensuality in the other: Religion cannot be accommodated to interests and
respects of policy and serving (...), it cannot be mixed with error, no more
then oil with water, (...) and st^ with clay, Dan. 2.43. It is said, 2. Kings
^7.3^. the mingled people of Samaria feared the Lord and served their God after
the manner of the Nations: But what faith God, does he approve of this ^ture?
verse 34. God will no town his own commanded Worship, when mingled and
compounded with another. [Dr. Preston.] Wherefore before the Lord will go on
with any further ^t Mercies for his People, he will have a People that shall
purge out this old ^eaven from among them, that they may be a new lump, as it
is said, Numb. 23.9. Lo, the people shall dwell alone, and shall not be
reckoned among the Nations.

Another part of that Work the Lord is about among us, is to call his People
out from partakings in those sins that are more especially the sins of the time
and of this Generation. God may have a People subject to many infirmities and
sailings, and yea such as have overcome the sins of the times: Although Asa had
offended in diverse things, yet as to the times, the heart of Asa was perfect
all his days, 2 Chronicles. 15.17. So there are many sins that may be spoken
against without offense to the times, but the special sins of the Generation
are overcome and reproved but by a remnant of another spirit. Now if we would
rightly judge what are the sins of the times we live in, this may be propounded
as a sure Rule; observe what have been the more eminent and special
Dispensations and Works of God among us in our day, and such courses and
proceedings among us, whether public or private, as lie more directly cross
and contrary thereunto, are the special sins and evils of the time: This being
admitted for a good Rule in this place, what are the special sins of the time,
from which the Lord will have his People to come out of, and be separate from,
will somewhat appear by the Conclusions following.

First. After the Lord has begun to wash away the filth of the Daughter of
Sion, to purge the Church of Christ among us from the fifth of
Antichristianisme, and by overturning some great Pillars of the Antichristian
Church and State, has begun a Reformation of things, according to the pattern
of the Gospel and Scripture light, and also gave forth a portion of the Spirit
for this Work, after such a day as this, to join our selves again with the
people of those abomination, (as it is seen at this day) by marriages, leagues,
conjunction of their and our Interests, by reviving and setting up again that
old fashion of things in its constitutions, customs, worldly policies, pomp,
greatness and lusts, this is one of the special (...) of the times, and from
which the Lord will have his People to redeem and separate themselves from,
Ezra 9.2. The holy (...) have mingled themselves with the people of those
Lands, yea the hand of the Princes and Rulers has been chief in this
trespass; and when I heard this thing I rent my garment: And this was the
great sin of that time, and contrary to the Work of God in that day.

2. After that a public and solemn Testimony has been born among us, through
much blood and difficulties, and the same as eminently owned of God by a series
of deliverances against the great oppressive interests that were upon us, to
wit, the Law in the present constitution and administration of it, Monarchy as
a thing unnecessary, burdensome, and dangerous, a Court as the spring head of
oppression, pride and filthiness, with many other things that might be named,
to lay these heavy yoaks again upon the necks of our Brethren, under which we
our selves groaned not long ago, and thereby to sell the Lords People, with
their dear bought power and freedom, the people of the Land, with their just
rights and liberties, and the Cause it self so much contended for, into the
hands of the new Lords, standing upon the old foundation, and acting in most
points after the old corrupt fashion of things as formerly; this is a great sin
of the times, for which the Lord calls upon his People to mourn and be humbled,
and by withdrawing themselves as much as may be from such things, to bear a
seasonable and faithful Testimony against them: The Nobles and Rulers of Judah,
after they were delivered out of bondage in Babylon, oppressed their Brethren,
and laid heavy yoaks upon them; this was a special sin of that time, and the
Lord stirred up the spirit of Nehemiah against them: Neh. 5.8. And I said unto
them, we, after our ability, have redeemed our Brethren the Jews, which were
sold unto the Heathens, and will you even sell your brethren, or shall they be
sold unto us? Also I said, it is not good that ye do, ought ye not to walk in
the fear of our God, because of the reproach of the Heathen our enemies? When
God is breaking the yoaks of his People, to be then laying yoaks upon them, is
a special sin of the time.

3. Many among us have sinned in taking the accursed thing: the meaning
whereof, both in the Old and New Testament, imports a thing that is ordained of
God to destruction, a People, or things of Gods Curse, shut out of God
protection, and the prayers of his People. Now observe what things they were
among us that Gods People did formerly cast out of their hears and prayers,
that God did cast out from under his visible Dispensations of Mercy, that lay
under his frowns and terrible dints of his displeasure; as things opposite to
his Glory, the work of Reformation, and the prosperity and peace of his People,
the mingling again with these things is a taking the accursed thing, and one of
the sins of the times: Ier. 7 16. Pray not thou for this people, neither lift
up a cry nor prayer for them: We may remember what the Lords choice and
faithful Servants among us did formerly leave out, as things they could not
pray for, what constitutions and interests in the State? what pomp,
covetousness and excess among men in eminent place? What mixtures and
formalitie in worship? and what Idols and humane Statues in Gods House? and are
not these things, and that old Spirit that acted them, revived again, whereby
the Lord has been provoked to bring a cloud upon us, and upon that day of
Mercies and wonderful appearances, whereby his Work was carried on among us. So
then observe, what things they are that the Lords more peculiar and praying
People formerly, or at this day, under their more enlightened, holy and zealous
frame could not, or do not pray for, but leave out, and separate themselves
from, and they are that cursed thing which we ought to come out of and avoid.

4. The putting back of that blessed Work, that was in such a hopeful way to be
carried on among us, is a great sin of the times; when I consider what an edge
was upon the Spirits of good men, how quick and powerful were proceedings, what
a spirit for high and great Work, a reforming spirit for Reforming work, a
spirit of Judgment for the work of Justice, a spirit of Prayer for the breaking
of all yoaks and deliverance of Sion, the whole Church of God, and what a seal
Providence it self put upon all this in a series of wonderful successes; and
further, that these things were come to that height, that the People of God
begun to meditate and expect great things, men of low and common spirits were
laid aside, the old spotted and wrinkled face of things, unholiness and
formality in Religion; in the State, Monarchy its Friends and Paramouts, with
all its limbs and branches, and paintings begun to blush and hide it self; I
say, when I look back at these things, and consider how all this Work is
desorted and laid aside, covered under reproach, and buried out of sight and
mind, and only a few left to keep it upon the heart. I cannot but sadly reflect
upon that word, Hosea 9.1. Rejoice not O Israel for joy, as other people, for
thou have gone a whoring from thy God, thou have loved a reward upon every corn
floor. There is a nick of time, a special season, wherein God calls, and
employes, and spirits people for his Work; if this time be not observed, both
the Work and opportunity for it is lost, and things will go backward; When Saul
slipped in the Work God had called him unto, he lost the Spirit of the Lord,
and the work of his day also: So when Isreal's faith failed in the matter of the
Spies, and in their hearts gave back from following the Lord, the Work was put
back for forty years: in like manner let it be considered, what a door was
opened, by the mighty Works of God among us, to have let in a season of
Mercies, to have proceeded to a full and through Reformation, to have removed
all lets and obstructions, and to have set the highest and most public
Interests and greatest Affairs upon another, a better bast and foundation then
they had stood upon before, whereon the Interest of Christ, his Saints, his
Word, as the Law and Rule, might have been eminently owned and exercised among
us; the Promises, that the Saints shall take the Kingdom, and the Kingdom shall
not be left to another People, calling upon all Gods People to have respect
unto this, as the great Interest, to be above all other contended after; but
they who had this price formerly in their hand, and an hear unto it, have let
their opportunity slip, and that Spirit they had for this Work is departed, the
work is gone many degrees back, and because of their and our sins, the good
things that were in the birth are kept from us: When Israel desired a King, one
might have pleaded for them, and said, they think no evil, they do but desire
another form of Government, as more expedient for them then that of Judges: Nay
but says the Lord, They have rejected me that I should nor reign over them, 1 Samuel 8.7 They rejected the Dispensation it self they were under, as too holy and
divine; this was their sin, they said, Now make us a King to judge us like all
the Nations; they would not be a separate people they would look like the
Nations: Wise men do not look upon the change of persons, and names, and form
of Government that has been among us, so much, as that the Dispensation we were
under, in the very nature of it, as it was more holy, and spiritual, and
refined, is rejected; not the formality only of the Work among us is altered,
but the matter of it is gone, and another thing set up in its place, this is a
sin of the times we ought to mourn over and avoid.

5. To name no more; the heart of the people of that part of the People that
were forward and active in the Work is withered and sunk into a low and
unsensible frame; an impotent, low and unworthy spirit is fallen upon many,
willing to fit at ease, though in a low and slavish state, that can look upon
the despised, deserted Cause and Interest of Christ without any trouble of
heart, or a cry, or a prayer for it; there are but a few who have in them at
this day those workings and yearnings of heart, in looking upon a crucified
Cause, as Mary and the Disciples had over their crucified Friend the Lord
Jesus: When any eminent work was to be done in Israel, the Lord first set it
upon the hearts of some, and stirred up the spirit of the people unto it: Ye
that make mention of the Lord, keep not silence, and give him no rest till he
make Jerusalem a praise in the earth: The deliverance of the Church in the
Revelations, chap. 14.2. begins with a voice from the waters, the spirits of
the people are stirred up to stand up with the Lamb on Mount Sion: When there
was a raising and stirring in the spirits of many in our days, unto the work
of Justice and Reformation, how great things were brought forth in that day?
But now that pressing and stirring work in the hearts of most, and the good
things it tended to is cast off and gone, the less thereof is so far from
working any due resentment among us, as that where any remainders of that good
old Spirit are yet breathing in any, they are laid aside, and cast into
corners, as the firebrarnds and troublers of the times, though it is only
against the corruptions of the times; that they do appear, and that from their
love to Christ and holiness. These are some of the sins of the times, from
which we are to come out of and be separate.

FINIS.

