Imprimatur.

October. 18. 1682. SAM. CROBROW.

A SERMON Preached July 26. 1682. IN THE Cathedral Church Of St. Peter in YORK.

At the Assizes for that County.

By James Hickson, M. A. and Rector of St. Cuthbert's in York.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Lambert Bookseller in York, 1682.

To the Honorable WILLIAM LOWTHER, Esquire HIGH SHERIFF Of the County of YORK.
SIR,
HAD not your desire (which I shall always look upon as Equivalent to a
Command, such have been your repeated Favors) to have those unpolished Notes
made Public, delivered before you, (never calculated for the Press)
overpersuaded me, no other Motive should have prevailed. And for a Reason of
this my Resolution (once positively espoused and determined upon) I could tell
the World, as others have done, (if I had that kindness for it) for my
Inability, and draw up an Indictment against my own Imperfections; but these
(if ever) will be too soon discovered; and who will applaud that Man's
discretion who should knowingly uncover his Defects before those who instead of
Pity and Redress, would expose and deride 'em.

My Design, in the ensuing Tract, is Just and Honest; and the knowing Reader
will connive at, though he cannot commend the Method and Management of it. As
for the censorious, who are commonly prejudiced and disaffected (whose Bolts
are soon Shot) as it has never been my Practice either Publicly or Privately,
to Claw and Curry their Factions humors; so I shall not be concerned for their
Disrespect.

One thing will recommend the Discourse to the Generality, namely, its Brevity;
which in a great Measure will compensate for the coursness of the dress. I am,

SIR, Your real and obedient Servant, James Hickson.

PROVE. 20.8. A King that sits in the Tbrone of Judgment, scatters away all
Evil with his Eyes.


IN the Fourth Chapter of the First Book of the Kings, we there read the Wisdom
of King Solomon particularly discrib'd and charactered from the effects of it;
for if we consider him only quatenus Man, none of the Philosophers since Adam
may be compared to him, either for Ethics, Politics, Physics, or
Metaphysics. So great a Botanist, so curious a Simpler, that he writ from the
Cedar to the Hyssop; so admirable in Natural Philosophy, that he spoke of
Beasts, and Fowl, and Creeping things, and Fishes.

And though all his profound Commentaries upon Nature are withdrawn from
Mankind (which would but have fed their Curiosities) yet his Divine Morals, in
this incomparable Book of the Proverbs, are transmitted to all Ages, and shall
outlive the World. By these our Lives are directed, and the Enormities of them
curbed and condemned.

I find good Proverbs recommended (by one) above other Discourses for five
Excellencies, which we shall only Name. First, For their Antiquity, Antiquiora
nobiliora, and in this respect these of our Royal Author are especially
valluable. Secondly, Their Brevity does signallize their Worth, in that they do
not (like tedious Discourses) so burden the Memorative faculty. Thirdly, Their
Significancy in couching a great deal of matter in a few words, is no small
addition to their worth; and upon this account I find 'em called Mucrones
verborum, Pointed Speeches; whose succinct profoundness makes amends and
recompenseth for their plain, homely, and familiar habit. Fourthly, Their
Experience pleads fair for their entertainment: They have for the most part a
Probatum est, affixed to them, for their ground and rise was from experience,
and that many times woeful. So that we may be wise upon better and more safe and
easy Terms than those who made 'em, or from whom they had their rise. Fifthly,
They are to be reverenced for their Truth, and though Proverbs have their
limits, as well as General Rules have their exceptions; and though they do not
always hold good, yet there is presumption that for the most part they do.

The Greeks express them by the word (...), highway Expressions; because (as a
Father observes) such Proverbs, or Sentences, were written and engraven by the
Highways for the information, as well as for the delight and divertion of
Travelers; not only affording them matter of Contemplation, but also to confer
and discourse of with others as they Journy'd. The Proverbs of Solomon are
called his Sons, Reigning by them as gloriously in his Wisdom, as he ever did
over Israel by his outward Splendour and Magnificence. They are for the most
part independent and entire of themselves, without having any relation to the
precedent or subsequent Words, of which our Subject is one.

A King that sits in the Throne of Judgment, scatterth away all Evil with
his Eyes.

We shall First, Explain the particulars of the Proverb it self.

Secondly, Deduce those natural inferences from it, which may serve both for
our Admonition and Caution.

A King that sits in the Throne of Judgment. It Is a Hebrew phrase, and
Lavater upon the place makes the signifiation of it very large and extensive.
It implies to know Causes, to administer true Justice, to defend the Good, and
to force and compel the Refractory and Disobedient; and this (says he) is the
Duty of all Kings and Magistrates, This if they do impartially, and without
respect of Persons, then nutu oculorum, they will depress and run down
Wickedness and Vice with the greatest ease and facility. The Septuagint render
it, When a just King sits upon his Throne, Evil dare not face him; it dare not
offer or present it self before him. For the Generality, though they have so
little of Christianity (how great a Clamor and Noise soever they may seemingly
make about it) as not to obey the Public Magistrate for Conscience sake,
because it is their duty, and commanded them by the express Word of God; yet
when once Justice comes to be impartially executed, few or none (of such great
Pretenders) will endure the Lash of the Penal Laws. (A King that sits in the
Throne of Judgment,) i. e. says Lapide the Jesuit, A King who makes use of his
Regal Authority committed to him by God himself, by being a Father and a Tutor
to the Good, but to the Disobedient a Revenger to execute Wrath.

Great, (says another) is the Majesty of a King many ways; but he is in his
greatest Majesty, when he sits upon the Throne of Judgment; for when
Judgment is his Throne, then Glory is his Canopy. A Monarch is then in his true
altitude, his Luster is then vertical and in its full brightness. A King who
thus sits in the Throne of Judgment, who irrespectively commands that Justice
shall be executed, according to the demeris of those who transgress the Laws,
will scatter away all Evil with his Eyes. His angry Eyes against Evil being so
sharp, that the Transgressors dare not look upon him to appear before him. Then
are the Sun and the Wind met; the Sun of his Wisdom, and the Wind of his Power,
by searching and punishing, to drive away and disperse even all the Clouds of
Wickedness. [Scattereth away all Eveil with his Eyes.] His Eyes are the
beholding of Iniquity, and the punishing of it; the one whereby he beholds what
Iniquities are predominant which endanger and threaten his Throne, and the
other whereby he looks that Punishments be inflicted upon Malefactors; that
they be inflicted not only by the Sentence, but by the execution of the
Sentence. It Is the execution of the Penal Laws which destroys Evil; for a bare
beholding of Iniquity without punishing of it, is but to mock Justice.

One of the Fathers upon the Devils expostulating with our Savior, St. Mark,
Chap. 1. Ver. 24. [What have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth, art
thou come to destroy us?] says, upon our Saviors reply, [Hold thy peace.]
That our Savior would not be praised by the Devils voice, but by his Torments;
and one applying it to our Subject says, That their is no greater praise of a
King, than his sitting upon the Throne of Judgment, and destroying Wickedness
by punishing the Authors of it; for their Ruin, is his Glory.

In most Expositors which I have met with upon our Subject, I find 'em quoting
this Proverb, Oculus Heri saginat Equum; and thus they apply it, as the Masters
Eye fats the Horse, so the Kings Eye disperseth Evil, blasts the increase of
it, and by his Eye Justice flourishes.

Cyrus the first Persian Monarch, signifies the Sun in their Dialect, and thus
I find the King compared to the Sun upon several Accounts.

For First, As the Sun arising and being gloriously seated (as it were in his
Charitor upon his Throne) disperseth Mists and Darkness, and likewise causes
Thieves, Traitors, Murderers, Adulterers, and (whose works hate the light) to
conceal themselves least their Works of Darkness should be discovered, and made
manifest; so a Wise and Just King, by his Sun-like inspection, scatters by
his Justice the Ungodly and Workers of Iniquity.

Secondly, As the Sun in his course not only views successively the parts of
the Earth, but also makes them fruitful by his auspicious influence; so the
King by his Delegates and Representatives, suppresseth Iniquity by his
presence; composeth the Differences of Litigious men; helps those to right who
suffer wrong, and are oppressed; and puts a Curb into the mouth's of such
unreasonable men, who would (if let alone) turn Religion into Rebellion, and
Faith into Faction.

Thirdly, As the Sun is pleasant and delightful to sound Eyes, but to the
unsound, very troublesome and vexatious; so the King's Eye toward the good, is
pleasant, but to Malefactors it is terrible; though he only looks upon 'em
through his Delegates and inferior Magistrates.

The words of our Subject may be likewise mystically understood, as well as
literally; for as generally it belongs to all Kings, so peculiarly it is
appropriate to the King of Kings (our Lord and Savior) to whom God has given
all Power, all Judgment; for when he shall come to Judge all the Earth at the
great Day of Account, he shall have no need of Prisons, or Chains; he shall not
stand in need of Military Forces to compel them, but by his very look he shall
scatter and confound the Wicked in their own Devices.

The Proverbial sense of our Subject is this. That Authority being ready and
constant in doing Justice upon Malefactors, does drive away all Evil with the
very look of it. Or in a Phrase equally intelligible, the putting of the Penal
Laws in Execution, is the most proper, if not only method to restrain and curb
the growing Vices of the Age. From the Words themselves we shall deduce Three
Observables.

First, As the word King denotes Power so we shall remind you that Magistracy,
and especially Monarchy, is Gods Ordinance.

Secondly, We shall show you, that as the Kings Throne is Gods, so God has
constituted him over his People, for the punishment of Wickedness and Vice (to
execute Vengeance upon Malefactors) as well as for the praise of them that do
Well.

Thirdly, That none may flatter themselves (who make no Conscience to disoby
the Lawful Commands of a Lawful Authority) because of their present impunity;
we shall remind such, that although they may for the present escape the
Temporal Sword, by their Politic Contrivances, yet the Judge of all the Earth
shall meet with 'em; for as there is a Reward for the Righteous, so doubtless
there is a God that Judges the Earth.

First then, as the word [King] denotes Power we shall remind you that Majesty,
and especially Monarchy, is God's Ordinance. A King that sits in the Throne of
Judgment. In the eighth Chapter of Ecclesiastes, at the fourth Verse, the Wise
man tells us, that where the Word of a King is there is Power. Another
Translation reads it, [There is in the word of a King a kind of Power.] It Is
most true of God that his Will effects his Work, and his Word gives Power; and
God having made Kings his Vicegerents hear on Earth, has in some sort
communicated his Power to them.

Magistracy is an Office of Gods own institution, and there is Divinity
impressed and Stamped upon the very Face of it. As Moses, so every Princes Face
shines with the Glorious Beams of Divine Power communicated to them. He is the
Fountain of all Lawful Authority, for all Power belongs unto God, and he gives
it to whom he pleases. Such Promotion (says the Psalmist) comes neither from
the East, nor from the West, nor from any point in the Compass; but it is God
that sets up and appoints Magistracy: Therefore did S. Paul plainly tell the
Romans, in the Thirteenth Chapter, what Majesty was, (viz.) (...), the
Ordinance of God. And God himself declares in the Eighth Chapter of the
Proverbs, Verse 15. That by him Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice. For me
Kings Reign, (says another Vertion.) It is the Tenure but of some men to hold
their Lands in chief immediately from the King, but it is the Tenure of all
Kings to hold their Crowns in chief of the Lord of Heaven and Earth. It Is the
Royal Charter which God himself has granted to Kings, that they wear their
Crowns not by his Permission only, but by his Commission; they Reign not only
by his Sufferance, but by his Ordinance. And though St. Peter in his first
Epistle, Chapter the second, Verse the thirteenth, calls it, (...), an
Ordinance of man; yet it is not so to be understood as if it were of man's
invention: But because man is the Subject, man is the Object, man is the End of
it; because it is executed by them, exercised concerning them, and intended for
their good; so upon these accounts it is called an Ordinance of man. The forms
of Adminstrations indeed may be of man, but the Original institution is of God.
For (says the Prophet Daniel) it is the most High that Rules in the Kingdom of
men, and he gives it to whomsoever he will, Daniel the fourth. Nay even wicked
Rulers derive their Power from God: And thus our Savior himself told Pilate,
St. John the Ninetenth, Thou could have no Power against me except it were
given thee from above. He that gave the Sovereignty to Augustius, a Mirror of
Humanity, gave it also to Nero, a Monster, who delighted in Blood and Cruelty.
The Apostate Julian was vested with Imperial Dignity, as well as the most
Christian Constantine; though we must distinguish betwixt a Permissive and a
Commissive Power.

Sovereignty is a Ray of Divinity, and the Pedigree of it, like the Scepter in
Homer, (conveyed by inumerable Predecessors to Agamemnon) was first handed down
from Jupiter; therefore do the Grecians upon good warrant use the Word (...),
to signify Superiority or Government; which in its genuine acceptance
signifies the Beginning, to denote the antiquity of Government, which had a
being when the World was in its infancy. And I find it the opinion of some who
tell us that even in innocence (if Adam had not fallen) there should have been
Blandum Imperium, though not Onerosum; it is true indeed Servile Subjection came
in by Sin, but Civil Subordination was before the Fall.

Kings and Rulers (says one) may be said (as we find recorded of Melchizedeck)
to be without Father and Mother; not in respect of their Persons, but in
respect of their Office; that being an Emanation from the Deity: And as Kings
are not Filii Populi, but Filii Dei; therefore it is no other than the result of
Pride, Ignorance, Self-interest, and Ill-manners in those men (of what Party or
Faction soever they are) whether they be the Followers of Ignatius, or Bucanan,
who dare call Monarchs the Peoples Attorneys, and consequently to be deposed by
'em upon breach of trust. They who hold this, and such like pernicious
Principeles, may without Reflection or Satyr, be called the Devils Attorneys,
to do business for Hell. And such Factors in this Century have been, and (I
fear) still are so Numerous, that as they have once overturned the Nation with
Rebellion and Confusion, so nothing but the watchful Providence of the Great
Keeper of Israel can abate their Pride, assuage the Malice, and Confound the
Devices of such Contrivers.

But to proceed. That Magistracy, and especially Monarchy, is Gods Ordiance,
the Light of Nature has Disciplined the very Heathens into this great Truth;
one of their Poets making this ingenuous Confession, (...), that Kings and
Rulers are from God. And the Natural abhorrency of Anarchy Imprinted in the
Hearts of all men, does Implicitly Argue the Divinity of Magistracy. And no man
has a will to live where every man may do what is right in his own Eyes. The
most unruly know not how to subsist without a Ruler, and the Kingdom of
Darkness it self could not subsist without a Polity; and thus our Savior told
the Blasphemous Jews, If Satan be divided against himself, how shall his
Kingdom stand.

Why should men murmur against a Lawful Authority, seeing they cannot possibly
live without some Authority. For in the most Fatal and Bloody Rebellions which
have ever been Acted upon the face of the Earth, they have only ended,
Mutatione Domini, non Dominii; (as one Excellently) in the change of the
Person, and not in the extinguishment of the Office. The putting it into other
Hands, not the putting of it out of all Hands. The very first Rule that Nature
dictates to Man, is to seek a Ruler; therefore (says he) a Commonwealth without
a Governor, is like the World without a Sun, a Ship without a Pilot, or a Body
without a Soul.

When the Author of the Book of Judges, (whom some suppose to be Samuel, others
Hezekiah, others Ezra,) when the Author of that Book, whosoever he was, would
Pourtray to the life the sad and pittyable Estate of Israel, in the intervals
of Government; he adscribes this as the main reason for the Commission of all
their execrable Enormities, That there was no King in Israel; and consequently
no Peace, no Justice, no Religion: For every Micah will then have his Closet of
Idols, and every Man will Worship as it pleases the usurped Liberty of his
preverted Judgment, and ungovernable Affections. And without Magistracy not
only whatever is Sacred would be usurped, abused and destroyed, but also there
would be no such things as Liberty and Property in the Kingdom. (Though the
Generality make such a clamor and noise about 'em.) If Men therefore would not
have these entrenched upon, and abrig'd, they must take the right way to
preserve 'em. (viz.)

First, They must give the Tribute of Honor and Reverence to the King, the
Father of their Country, upon whom God has Stamped this his Image and
Superscription. It Is Gods positive Command in the Second Table, to Honor our
Parents; and it is a received Maxim, That our Political Parents are to be
preferred before our Natural. For (as one excellently) Gods Commandments are
like the Sciences, which are more or less valuable according to the Nobility
and Excellency of the Objects, about which they are conversant. For instance,
As that Love we owe to our Neighbors, gives place to that Love we owe to God,
so the Honor we bear to all Men, is inferior to that we owe the King;
therefore St. Peter places the Honor we owe to the King, next to the Fear of
God. It Is called a Jewish Proverb, (I am sure it is no despicable Counsel)
Migrandum est ex eo loco ubi Rex non timetur: We must avoid that Place where
the King is not Reverenced; for contempt of Authority bodes a Storm, (some
heavy Judgment) and indeed how should it be otherwise, for the levelling of a
Nation, and the Ruin of it, closely follow and attend each other.

Secondly, If we would have our Liberties and Properties secured to us, we must
render to the King the Tribute of Maintenance, as well as Honor. He (says one)
that is Righteous toward his Fellow Subjects, and makes no Conscience to wrong
his Sovereign, is a Rebel to the Crown and Dignity of Christ; for he is
undutiful to the King of Nations by whom all Kings Reign,) who pays not his due
to the King of that Nation where he lives. If we consult the Turkish History,
we shall find the loss of Constantinople, and thereby the whole Grecian Empire
was occasioned, thorough the insatiable Covetousness of the Inhabitants, who
though exceeding Rich, could not be moved by any Prayers and Entreaties, to
supply the Necessitous Emperor in order to their own safety.

Thirdly, If we would enjoy our Properties, and s^t Peacably under our own
Vines, we must render to the King the Tribute of Obedience; a Duty so truly
Christian, that we read the Apostles never urged any Duty upon their Auditors,
or to those they writ with, more cogent and binding Arguments than upon the
account of this. And that which should the more recommend this Duty to our
Practice is this: Because the Apostles both taught and practiced Obedience to
the Higher Powers, even then when the aspect and influence of Civil Authority
was the most malignant to Christianity. Nay, they were even then Obedient, when
the particular Cruelties against them gave the greatest advantage unto
Temptations of Disobedience. If we peruse the Acts of the Apostles, and the
History of the Primitive Christians, we may by the perspective of History
contemplate their Inprisonment, (though unjustly Committed) but not behold them
in the Camp to resist Authority; we may behold them drawn before Magistrates,
not drawing Magistrates before them, (as the Author to the Hebrews more fully
informs you.) They were Stoned, but we never find them Stoning. Stricken with
the Sword, but we never find them Striking with the Sword. We do not find them
(like our Saints of the late Edition) binding their Kings in Chains, and their
Nobles in Fettors of Iron. And though (as one says) all Christ's Subjects are
Free, yet it is a Freedom from Spiritual Bondage, not from Civil Subjection.
Christ's Freemen are obliged to Obedience for Freedom from Rule argues Slaves
to Sin. True Liberty is a Power to do what we ought, not what we will;
consisting in a Freedom from the Dominion of men's Lusts, not from Humane Laws;
a Freedom from Sin, not to Sin. In a word, it consists in a Liberty to serve
God, and not in disobeying the Lawful Magistrate. And 'twere well if all who
conceit themselves Saints, and Precious ones, were really so; for then they
would be better Christians, and better Subjects. And granting (for suppositions
sake) that these tender ones were really Saints, (truly and universally
Conscientious) yet they are not Angels; and consequently as they are but Flesh
and Blood, they may both do Wrong and suffer Wrong, and so stand in need of the
Public Magistrate to keep 'em right, and to do 'em right.

Fourthly, If men would enjoy those Properties and Privileges, which they keep
such a noise about; they must Pray for all who are set in Authority over them,
that under them we may lead quiet and peaceable Lives. Subjects should have
their Eyes up to Heaven for those who sit at the Helm of State; whilst they are
Consulting for our Safety, we should be Praying for them. And that God requires
this Duty from us is plain from St. Paul's command, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. I will
therefore that first of all, Prayers, Supplications, Intercessions, and giving
of Thanks be made for all men; and then comes to particularize, in Kings and
all that are in Authority. But as if these were no Apostolic Command, as if
this were no part of Gods revealed Will by which man must be Saved, the
Generality (what by the prejudice of Education, and the conduct and advice of
some Factious Shebaes) are strongly possessed that those plain Commands of
Obedience to Authority are cancelled, and may be dispensed with, if they be
persuaded in their Consciences that the Commands of their Superiors cross and
thwart with the Divine Laws, (they themselves being the Sole Judges) and must
they not keep their Consciences? Now it is notoriously evident, and in all Ages
has been demonstrated, by woeful Experience, that the pretenses of Conscience
have not failed to Patron and abet the greatest Villainies which have ever been
practiced upon the Face of the Earth. But the plain truth is, When People
pretend a tenderness of Conscience in Indifferences before they are Commanded
by Authority; and in the mean time make no Conscience of Obedience and
Subjection to the Lawful Commands of their Lawful Sovereign; they mean nothing
by their Consciences but themselves, the securing and advancing of their
Temporal Interest. And consequently, if you tell People of this Bran and
Genius, of the practice of the Primitive Church; tell 'em of Turtullian's
Apology for the Subjection and Obedience of those Christians (when at the same
time they wanted not Force, if they would have turned Rebels) and you may as
well tell 'em a Story out of any ordinary Romance, or out of the Legend. If you
can help such men to Wrest and Misinterpret the Penal Statutes; if you can
direct 'em how to elude the Penal Laws, so as they may continue in the open
breach and defiance of the Positive Commands of Lawful Authority, then you do
something, then you shall not want the reward of Divination. Give men thus
tenderly Conscienc'd a Lawyer better read in Tully's Offices than the Whole
duty of Man. Give 'em an Attorney of a Dexterous Application (which is only a
Periphrasis, or Modish Synonima for a Knave) who can provide for the nicking of
a Cause, that the Wicked may not triumph over the People of the Lord, and then
you please them.

We come now to the Second Observable inferred from our Subject; which is to
show you that as the King's Throne is Gods, so God has constituted him over
his People; for the Punishment of Wickedness and Vice, (to execute Vengeance
upon Malefactors) as well as for the Praise of the Good.

That the King's Throne is God's, we find demonstrated and plainly evidenced by
that Quotation out of the first Book of the Chron. Chapter 29. Ver. 23. Solomon sat
in the Throne of the Lord as King, instead of David his Father. The Scepter of
the King is Gods Scepter; and as it is given by him, none else can take it from
him. Those men strike at the Center of all Power, (God himself) who assert,
that the King's Power is of the Peoples Creating.

As some men have Atheistically Imagined, That the Soul of man is nothing else
but a resultance of the Temperement and Constitution of the Body of man, and
not an infussion from God. So (says one Excellently) for men to think (and I
wish it were no otherwise communicated) that that Power by which the World is
Governed, to be but a resultance of the consent, and the tacit voice of the
People, and no particular Ordinance of God, is an undervaluing, a false
conception, a misapprehension of those Beams of Power, which God from himself
derives upon those whom himself calls Gods in this World; and thus we find them
Styled in several Places in Holy Writ, I have said ye are Gods, etc. And it is
well (as one Excellently upon the 82. Psalm) that Kings are not the Children of
the most Voices, but of the most High; and though (says he) the Approbation of
the People may serve ad Pompa^^, yet not ad Necessitatem: They may add
something to the Solemnity, but nothing to the Essence of the Constitution.

That God has constituted the Supreme Magistrate over his People, for the
Punishment of Malefactors, is not only discribed at large by St. Paul, Romans 13.
but our Lord and Savior likewise assures us of as much, St. Luke, Chapter 22. Ver.
25. you read there that the Disciples contending amongst themselves which of
them should be accounted the Greatest, (the ground and bottom of the contest
had its rise from that Petition, which Zebedee preferred to our Savior at the
instance of her two Sons, St. James and St. John, that the one might sit on his
Right hand, the other on the Left in his Kingdom; (i. e.) be the greatest men
for Temporal Honor and Advancement) our Savior in taking down their Ambitious
Heats and Strivings about Superiority, convinces them of their Folly, by an
Argument drawn from the different Offices of Worldly Kings, and those of the
Apostles by an Antithesis of their distinct Constitutions, in these Words, The
Kings of the Gentiles exercise LordShip over them; and they that exercise
Authority upon them, are called Benefactors. By Kings of the Gentiles our
Savior not only expresses Heathenish Monarchs, but all Political Magistracy,
and they are expressed here (Synecdochice) by Kings of the Gentiles; either
because Gentile Monarchs did then especially Govern the Kingdoms of the Earth,
or else because the Word (Gentiles) denotes all People collectively, whether
Heathens or Christians. And he there expresses the Office of the Public
Magistrate in these two Words, Dominari, and Benefici; For the punishment of
evil Doers, and for the Praise of them that do Well.

That the Authority of the Supreme Magistrate is necessary for the punishment
of evil Doers, nothing is more clear; for without the Magistrates Sword, every
private Man's would be set against his Neighbors; and the excellent Seneca
could tell us, that the not punishing of Malefactors, is to Scourge and Torment
good men. And upon this account was it that St. Paul says of the Supreme
Magistrate, that he bears not the Sword in vain; by the Sword is understood the
Power of exercising and putting the Penal Laws in execution against
Malefactors, to give them suitable Punishments to their demerits; and by
bearing the Sword, he alludes to the custom of Princes and Majestrates, who
have the Sword and other Ensigns of Authority carried before them.

We need not urge quotations from Holy Writ, to show how much the impartial
execution of Justice exalts a Nation; nor need we enumerate those Positive
Commands from the Almighty, to those who are in Authority; That Judgment run
down as Waters, and Righteousness as a mighty Stream. Nor need we so much as
remind you what Comminations are denounced, what Woes are threatened to those
who turn Judgment backward, who make Justice stand a far of, etc. For it is
enough that we take notice how much the very Esence and Constitution of
Government it self is endangered, whilst the execution of the Penal Laws is
Balked, and Public Offenders in the very Face of Authority unpunished.

For First, if Malefactors be not Punished (by Malefactors I mean not only
Murderers, Fellons, etc. but all others who live in an open and wilful breach
of the known Laws) if these be not punished and suppressed by Authority, the
Natural good of men is endangered (i. e.) the Lives and Bodies of the Kings
good Subjects are continually hazarded.

Secondly, If Malefactors be not Punished, our Moral good is endangered, Virtue
will be discouraged, run down, and suppressed; and Vice will become no less
spreading than Fatal and Destructive.

Thirdly, If Malefactors are unpunished, our Civil good is endangered; our
Goods and Possessions cannot be called our own.

Fourthly, If the Penal Laws are unexecuted, our Spiritual good is most of all
endangered, our Religion (as now by Law established) will be made a prey to our
Enemies, who already laugh us to Scorn, and who would gladly be crying once
more (with those Impious men the Psalmist mentions) Down with it, down with it,
even to the Ground. But God we trust will defend this part of his Catholic
Church, which he himself has planted in these Kingdoms. And though She be
Militant against Principalities and Powers, against Spiritual Wickednesses; and
though She has so many incarnate Agents who causelessly conspire Her fall; yet
(as the Psalmist zealously) Let God arise, and all her Enemies be scattered;
and the joint contrivances of Devils and Men against Her shall be brought to
naught: And to this end, Let us beseech God (with the Church) that he would
strengthen the hands of our Gracious King Charles, and all that are put in
Authority under him, with Judgment and Justice, to cut of all such Workers of
Iniquity, (who would unhinge the present Government in Church, and State,) that
so they may never prevail against us, or Triumph in the ruin of God's Church
amongst us.

We come now in a word or two, to the Third Inference from our Subject; which
is, That none may ^atter themselves (who make no Conscience to disobey the
Lawful Commands of a Lawful Authority) we shall only remind such and leave it
to their serious Consideration: Although they may for the present escape the
Temporal Sword, by their Politic Contrivances, yet the Judge of all the Earth
shall meet with 'em (for as there is a reward for the Righteous, so doubtless
there is a God that Judges the Earth.)

At the entrance of Abraham's Expostulation with God in the behalf of Sodom,
and the other Cities, Genesis 18.25. he uses these Words, (Shall not the Judge of
all the world do right)? And Job tells us, Far be Wickedness from God, and
Iniquity from the Almighty; surely God will not do Wickedly, neither will the
Almighty pervert Judgment. Now though some men may hug themselves with that
Heathenish Divinity, (Prosper^m and Faelix scaelus virtus vocatur) though they
may Blasphemously Father the success of their unjust Proceedings upon the
Providence of God; though they may for the present so manage their Extortions,
Oppressions, Libels, Mutinies, Factions, Treasons, etc. as that no humane Laws
can hinder their Endeavors, Contrivances, and Caballs, in order to their
Rending the beautiful Frame and Constitution of Church and State, (and all this
to gratify their Pride, ill Nature, and Intrest) yet shall not God meet with
such, and pay them what they deserve? Though men may so Tamper with the
Country, as that they shall be brought off and cleared in this World, whilst
yet they live in the open breach and defiance of the known Laws, yet God will
not be mocked, (the Judge of all the Earth shall do right upon 'em.) And though
for a moment men may impose upon, and flatter their Consciences, having got the
weather gage of the Penal Laws; and have provided how to put by the Stroke of
the Magistrates Sword, and then say the Law is open, if any be grieved, let
them remedy themselves, we must endure it, and there is an End; yet assuredly
God will enter into Judgment with such* and there will be no error assigned in
his Judgment; For (says one) there is no appeal from God not thoroughly
informed, to God better informed, because he always knows all Evidence before
it be given; therefore however we may Juggle here upon Earth, yet when he comes
to Judge, all the Workers of Iniquity s^ confess his Judgment to be right,
though the re^t be their own Eternal Condemnation. Now that all of us in our
several Places and Callings, may so respectively discharge our Duties to God,
and our Neighbors, that this Life ended we may be received into Everlasting
Habitations, God grant, for Christ's sake. Amen.

FINIS.

