THE BELIEVERS DUTY Toward the SPIRIT, And the SPIRITS OFFICE Toward
BELIEVERS.

OR, A Discourse concerning Believers not Grieving the Spirit, AND The Spirits
sealing up Believers to the day of Redemption.

Grounded on Ephesians. 4.30.

Hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts
by the Holy Ghost which is in us,

Romans 5.5. The Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirit that we are the
Children of God,

Romans 8.16. LONDON, Printed for SA. GELLIBRAND at the Ball in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1665.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
HOw needful it is to have a right belief of the Holy Ghost, appears not only
from the Ancient Creeds, which in how few words soever comprehended did always
make mention of Him; but also from the wretched Socinians, who blasphemously
denying his not only Deity, but also Personality, and in their Catechism
roundly asserting the no-necessity of any operation of his in order to our
assenting to the Gospel, have been so filled with a Spirit of Delusion, that
they retain not truth enough to denominate them either Christians, or
Heretics. The text upon which the ensuing discourse is founded, afforded very
fair opportunity of proving the Personality and Deity of this blessed Spirit,
and of showing that our natural corruption cannot be cured but by his
inhabitation. But contenting my self to wave, or slightly to touch these
matters, I mainly insist on our being by this Spirit sealed to the day of
redemption; a phrase which (as most others that are metaphorical) has had the
hap to be many ways interpreted. Bellarmine, who seems to have read holy writ
only to serve a design, applies it to that indeleble character supposed by the
Romanists to be imprinted on all that are baptized; but how vainly, appears

1. By his own Cajetan, who says, Sacramenta imprimere characterem ex
scriptura non habetur, sed ex Ecclesiae authoritate, and non multum antiqua.

2. By the miserable shift he is put to, before he can find any imaginable
foundation for this Chymaera in the words; He is fain to read with the vulgar
Latin in the day, though against the Greek and Syriack; yea, and against
sundry latin Manuscript copies, as Estius tells us: yet this very writer,
Ephesians. 1.13. when he thought it would be more for his turn, forsaking the
vulgar Latin which reads in whom believing, flies to the Greek, after ye
believed.

3. Besides, how absurd is it, that any indeleble character or cognizance of
Christianity should be imprinted on all in Baptism, when as we see that many
after Baptism do utterly and maliciously renounce Baptism, and all the
Principles of Christianity.

Other Pontifician writers, do refer the phrase not to the Sacrament of
Baptism, but Confirmation. So Estius; so our Countrymen the Rhemists, who
have this note on Ephesians. 1.13. Some refer this to the grace of Baptism; but to
many learned it seems, that the Apostle alludeth to the giving of the Holy
Ghost in the Sacrament of Confirmation, by signing the Baptized with the sign
of the Cross and holy Chrisme. But they are well told by the judicious Dr.
Fulk, That the learned men they speak of must needs be Masters of the new
learning, for the ancient learning had no such interpretation, instancing in
Chrysostom, Ambrose, Theodoret, Augustine, Primasius, Hierome, Oecumenius,
Theophylact, who carry the text quite another way. All Protestant Writers are
not agreed what may be intended by this Sealing of the Spirit: (sure it is for
our credit that we can allow our selves to differ one from another in
expounding a place of Scripture.) I refer it not to the Holy Ghosts
regenerating or renewing us, but to his assuring us of the adoption of sons,
his creating in us a sense of Gods Paternal love toward us, and of our filial
love toward him: in so doing, I follow not only sundry learned sons of our
own Church, but also Cornelius a Lapide, whose comment on Ephesians. 1.13. being
translated is this, As by the impression of a Seal, the Letters of Kings and
public tables are sealed, that those which are authentic may be distinguished
from doubtful; those that are genuine from false, and it may be certainly
manifest, that these are the Letters and Tables of the King. So ye Christian
Ephesians, as it were The Epistle of Christ, written not with ink, but the
Spirit of the living God, not in tables of stone, but in the fleshly tables of
your heart, are signed with the Holy Ghost as it were with a Seal, that it may
be manifested that ye are the not feigned, but authentic Epistle of Christ,
that ye are truly the people and Church of the true and high God. Having thus
descanted on the text he frames against himself this objection, If this be so,
then may Believers be certain that they are in the true faith and grace of God;
and for answer, denies, the consequence, because this Seal is not altogether
and physically certain and evident to them, (for who certainly knows, who dares
swear that he is sealed with the Holy Ghost as with a seal) but only probable,
and morally, as it were, certain from signs and conjectures; so in like manner
it is not to them clear and certain that they are in the true faith and grace
of God. For the further clearing of this doubt, He refers us to what he had
said on Romans 8.16. Consulting him on that place, I find him to give this note:
That the testimony of the Spirit by which he witnesses that we are the sons of
God, is not certain with certainty of Faith, nor certain with infallible
certainty, as Catharinus and Cajetan would have it, but only with a
conjectural certainty, which certainty yet increases with Holiness: so that
Vega, and Ruard, and Pererius, following them, think, that some men very holy,
without the special revelation of God, from the signs and effects of the Holy
Ghost, which they find in themselves very frequent, clear and efficacious, have
a certainty, not indeed infallible so as they dare swear that they are in the
grace of God, but yet such and so great as excludes all fear of the contrary,
not only from the affection and confidence, but also from the understanding
and persuasion, so as such do as certainly know and believe that they are in
the grace of God, as we certainly know and believe that there is such a place
as Constantinople or Alexandria.

Let the Papists read this, and, if they have not lost all ingenuity,
acknowledge that some eminent Writers of their own go as high or higher then we
do: For we do not say, that we are certain with a certainty of faith, that we
are sanctified or pardoned; or if any do so say, it is only a Philosophical
mistake; for they do not intend, that it is to any one revealed by any vocal or
written testimony that he is sanctified or pardoned, but only that seeing
these Conclusions do arise from Premises, the one whereof is Scripture, though
the other be known only by inward sense, therefore the Conclusion may be of
Faith; so that they make such Conclusions to be of faith, not immediately, but
only by consequence, and that on supposition, That a Proposition certain from
inward sense, is stronger then a Proposition certain from Divine revelation,
which is not universally true: Nor yet do we say; that this testimony of the
Spirit does make us infallibly certain; only we say; that it makes those who
keep Consciences void of offense, and are zealous of good works, have such a
certainty as is not mixed with any actual tormenting doubt or fear, so as they
can, their hearts not accusing them, nor having any ground to accuse them of
presumption, call God Father, and Christ their elder Brother, and the Spirit
their Advocate: Yet after all this they will not swear that they are the
children of God; or if they should, they would thereby do an act sufficient to
darken all the evidence they before had of their Adoption; for no one has
power to require such an Oath, nor can any controversy be ended by such an
Oath, which could not be ended without it; otherwise we do swear in sundry
matters in the which we have not a greater or so great an evidence as it is
possible for a man to have of his Adoption. And in all Churches there is either
from the Parents or other Sureties required, as often as Children are baptized,
an abrenunciation of the World, Flesh, and Devil; and when the baptized
children come to be adult, and receive Confirmation, it is required of them,
that they profess before the Bishops and all the Congregation present, That
they do renew the solemn Promise and Vow that was made in their name at
Baptism, ratifying and confirming the same in their own persons, and
acknowledging themselves bound to believe and to do all those things which
their Godfathers and Godmothers then undertook for them. Vid. Engl. Liturgy of
the last Edition.

Now if so be persons could not be satisfied that they are sincere in their
resolutions, we should by calling them to make such Vows, but teach them to
dissemble and play the hypocrites.

Object. But do not some of our Divines speak of an immediate testimony of the
Spirit?

Answ. They do: But it is to be hoped that they mean no more then that the soul
is sometimes more then usually meet to receive the Seal of the Spirit, more
then ordinarily disposed to give in its witness with the witness of the Spirit
of God, i. e, sometimes it has so abased it self before God, or done acts so
apparently tending to Gods glory, so manifestly contrary to flesh and blood,
that it cannot upon the least reflection but discern the well-pleasingness of
such actions unto God, and consequently take comfort in them. If they intend
more then this by their immediate testimony, they must not blame others, if
they say they understand them not, or that they fear they understand not
themselves. Should any one hear a voice saying to him, Thy sins are forgiven;
yea, should he not only hear such a voice, but also see some glorious creature
uttering that sound, this would be an extraordinary testimony; but before a man
either could or ought to receive it, and take comfort from it, he must first
have some rational evidence that the apparition or voice is from God and not
from Satan, who both can and frequently has appeared and spoken not as from
himself, but from God. We have in Scripture an example of Zachary punished
because he did not believe the words of Gods Angel, Luke 1.20. there being
sufficient evidence that he was an Angel of God, and nothing in the Message
that should render it incredible. But we have also an Example of a Prophet more
severely punished for believing one that pretended a Message from God, whose
Message had every thing in it that might make it unlike to be from God. 1 Kin.
13.18, 22, 23. Wherefore to every young Convert, who not patient to wait for
his Assurance in a way of self-reflection and communing with his own heart,
looks for any thing like a vocal testimony, I may say as did Gregory to
Gregoria, Videat cui ad manus non sunt Gregorii Epistolae A Lapide in 8^. ad
Romans v. 16.
who had written to him, that she would not let him alone till he had obtained
a revelation that her sins were pardoned, Rem and difficilem, postulas and
inutilem. A difficult thing, because it is not like that God in these days
should so manifest his love; and unprofitable, because I should have as much
ado perhaps to distinguish that voice, as to discern the sincerity of my own
actions. Consult History, and it will be found, that where one has been
mistaken that did search and try his heart and ways, hundreds have been deluded
by voices, apparitions, impressions. These delusions have been most frequent
among the Romanists, the sense whereof made Luther, not many years before crept
out from among them, to say, Pactum feci cum Deo meo ne vel visiones, vel
somnia, vel etiam angelos mihi mittat, Com. on Genesis cap. 38. I have agreed with
God that he send neither visions, nor dreams, nor Angels.

Object. Do not very eminent Divines say, that Faith is general or special, and
that general Faith is little worth without special Faith.

Answ. They do so, and a good and convenient interpretation may be given of
that distinction, yea, is given by the learned Dr. Hammond as to all the
objects of Faith. But it may not be dissembled, that some of great note have
made the essence of Faith to lie in a particular persuasion that a man's sins
are pardoned; an error purposely refuted in the ensuing Treatise, and (which I
am glad to observe) rejected now almost by all Divines. Indeed it makes us
justified before Faith, and therefore tends manifestly to harden unconverted
sinners in their unbelief, and puts the maintainers of it upon most horrible
shifts in expounding sundry places of Scripture. I instance in one, which I do
in the following sheets make much use of; Ephesians. 1.13. In whom after ye
believed ye were sealed. Who would hence conclude, that Faith does, at least in
order of nature, if not of time, go before Sealing or Assurance? How can any
who places Faith in fiducial Assurance bring himself off? But poorly: For
Piscator, who is even by Arminius, a Professor of different persuasion from
him, much commended for solidity and clearness, Vid. Epist. Ecclesiasticas,
will not yield that (...) should be rendered having believed, but in the
Present, believing: So the Vulgar Latins, credentes, which Estius is fain to
excuse by Ampliation, a kind of Licentia Logica, must be the best translation.
Besides, we know that God makes use of the Ministry of men to work faith; but
if faith were an assent to this, that John or Thomas is pardoned, it will be
hard to explain how any man, who has not the gift of discerning Spirits, can
give any ground of Faith. Would the Papists but as freely censure the errors of
their former Writers as we do the errors of ours, soon would all the
controversies about Assurance come to an end; but that being an happiness
rather to be wished then hoped for, let all less judicious Christians satisfy
themselves to know,

1. It is the receiving of Christ that gives us a right to be the sons of God.

2. That he who receives Christ shall be by God owned as a son, whether he know
himself to have received Christ or no. The promises run clear, Whosoever
believes in Christ, shall not perish, but have eternal life, Joh. 3. Blessed
are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. Blessed are those those that
hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied, Matthew. 5.
The condition of these promises being fulfilled, the promises themselves must
be fulfilled, else God should be unfaithful and deny himself: For shall the too
hard thoughts, the too humble conceit of a man concerning himself wake void the
faith of God? God forbid: scarcely among ingenuous men does any one fare the
worse for an excess of modesty; and can the Father of Mercies shut a good man
out of Heaven, because that conscious to himself of daily weaknesses and
manifold passions warting within him, and frequently prevailing, he cannot be
firmly persuaded of his own goodness?

3. That it is the office of the Spirit to make us to know the things that are
freely given us of God.

4. That as he is ready to witness to carnal persons that their ways are ways
of sin and wrath, and that they are the men who (except they become new
creatures) are marked out for damnation; so he is ready to witness to those who
are spiritually minded the truth of their graces, and by that their interest in
the promises of Justification, Adoption, Glorification.

5. That our work lies in making our selves (which yet we cannot do but by the
almighty power of the same Spirit) fit and meet to receive this testimony of
the Spirit, which meetness we shall then come to, if 1. We well inform our
selves about the terms of the Covenant of grace: 2. Have frequent, serious,
abiding thoughts about the fullness and freeness of its promises. 3. Giving all
diligence, add to faith, virtue; and to virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge,
temperance; and to temperance, patience; and to patience, godliness; and to
godliness, brotherly kindness; and to brotherly kindness, charity. 4. By reflex
acts often compare the frame of our heart and course of our lives with the
rule. 5. Watch and pray, that we may be free from that (...), pride and
prejudice, which make us though so sharpsighted as to see a mote in our
brothers eyes, yet so blind as not to see a beam in our own eyes.

That thou may (Christian Reader) have some small help in all these matters,
was the end aimed at in making the following Treatise thus public. The Authors
name could not make it more acceptable, and is therefore concealed; but his
prayers are, that it may be effectual to beget in all those into whose hands it
shall fall, 1. A tender care not to grieve the Spirit of promise, by which they
who believe are sealed up to the day of Redemption. 2. A cordial respect to all
those upon whom the Spirit of the Lord is, and who are by the Lord anointed to
Preach good tidings to the meek, and sent to bind up the broken hearted: to
appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the
oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness.

Jan. 25. 1664. Farewell.
The Printer to the Reader.
THough great care has been used in publishing these Papers, yet by reason of
an ill-written Copy, and the Authors absence, some faults have escaped. There
is in some Pages a change of Persons; which though it might be defended, yet
was not by the Author intended. Those few Errata's that can be thought to
disturb the sense, thus amend.

Page 26. lin. 15. r. Praeposition. p. 28. l. 26. r. also that He. p. 30. l.
23. r. loose. p. 32. l. 17. r. (...). p. 35. l. 21. r. are the enticing. p. 36.
l. 7. r. more glorious. p. 44. l. 28. r. yet is He. p. 86. l. 13. r. speaks but
to. p. 88. l. 10. r. did not they sometimes. p. 152. l. 25. r. till he feel. p.
157. l. 9. r. and not heard of.

Ephesians. 4.30. And grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto
the day of redemption.


THese words are by some conceived to contain an absolute Independent counsel,
but the Greek Scholia's suppose them to be brought in as an argument to enforce
the immediately preceding dehortation, Let no corrupt communication proceed out
of your mouth: as if the Apostle had said, If you think it a small matter, to
allow your selves in such speeches as have no tendency to edification, as are
no way fit to minister grace unto the hearers; If you have no respect to your
own souls, nor to the souls of others, which must needs be offended by such
unprofitable communication, yet you will have some regard for the Spirit of
God, who is himself holy, and the author of all holiness; and he being, as he
is, grieved by all unprofitable discourse, you will account your selves engaged
to abstain therefrom. If we receive this connection (as why may we not, since it
offers no violence to the context, and is backed with so good authority) then
may we observe in the Text,

1. A reason by which the Ephesians are taken off from idle words, lest they
should grieve the spirit.

2. A description of this Spirit from his Nature Office.
Grieve not the holy spirit of God. The form of speech seems to be borrowed
from the Old Testament, Isa. 63.10. They rebelled, and vexed his holy Spirit,
therefore he was turned to be their enemy, and he fought against them. But
notwithstanding we have found out a parallel place, yet must we still inquire,

Quest. 1. How the Spirit can be said to be grieved? for seeing he is God, and
so infinitely perfect, how can we conceive him capable of grief, which is not
only a passion, but also of all passions the meanest, and lowest, as arising
from the sense of some present evil which we cannot master? And this objection
is the more considerable, because of the emphaticalness of the Greek word
(...), which, says Aretius, complectitur omnis generis dolores, and is
therefore used to set out that anguish and sadness of mind which our blessed
Savior did feel in the Garden, Math. 26.37.

But all this notwithstanding, we may give a very fair account of the phrase;
for,

1. There are, who by the spirit of God do understand the renewed part of man;
and indeed it is not unusual in Scripture for God to call his own work by his
own name; now the renewed soul, whether our own, or others, is capable of being
vexed in a proper sense: but this sense seems not here intended; yet this I
must tell you, that God interprets all that is done against his children, as
done against himself; and therefore do you beware how you grieve the Lords holy
ones, either by saying, or doing any thing, which you know their souls cannot
but abhor: perhaps it grieveth not some of your souls, nor grateth on some of
your ears, to hear the name of God taken in vain, or blasphemed, or the good
ways of God spoken against; but true Believers are of another temper, Psalm.
42.10. As with a sword in my bones, mine enemies reproach me, While they say
daily unto me, where is thy God. 2 Pet. 2.8. Lot vexed his righteous soul from
day to day with the unlawful deeds which he saw and heard in Sodom and
Gomorrah. Wherefore Sirs, be not ambitious to strike father and sons at one
blow; let it suffice that you dishonor God, but do not dishonor him at such
times and places, when and where his Saints may stand by, and see and hear the
wrong and dishonor that is reflected on their heavenly Father.

2. We may be said to grieve him, when we do that which would grieve him were
he capable of grief. The Scripture calls not things according to success, and
event; he that looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery in
his heart, though he never act that brutish lust, Matt. 5.28. He that hates
his brother is a Murderer, 1 John 3.15. not that every one that hates does
properly kill; but that he who hates his brother, had undoubtedly killed his
brother, could his brother have been thought to death; his hatred would have
brought forth murder, had not something strangled it in the womb, So we do by
the Spirit; we do that against him, which would grieve him, and more then
grieve him, were he capable of being grieved or any way altered for the worse.
O man! take it from me, every time thou sinnest presumptuously, thou do what
in thee lies to annihilate the fountain of all essences; thou do what thou
can to leave the world without a God. He will be in heaven maugre all the
malice of men and devils, no thanks to them; were he capable of being deprived
of life, they by their sins had deprived him of life long since. Hence he
complains, that he was broken in pieces by the whorish heart of Israel, Ezekiel.
6.9. So true is that of the Schoolmen, that omne peccatum, is, deicidium.

3. We are said to grieve the Spirit of God, when we make the Spirit of God so
to carry it toward us, as persons do toward those that have grieved them. If
by any unworthy carriage I have vexed my friend, he intermits all acts of
friendship and familiarity; So does the Spirit, when any thing is committed
contrary to his nature or offices, withdraw his benign influences and
consolations, which are better then life. I judge as do the generality of
Reformed Divines, that the Spirit of God does never forsake those totally whom
he has once chosen for his temple. In this we know we are not deceived, nor
can we deceive you, when we teach, that the faith whereby ye are sanctified
cannot fail, it did not in the Prophet, it shall not in you. They which are
born of God do not sin any such sin as does quite extinguish grace, clean cut
them off from Christ Jesus: because the seed of God abides in them, and does
shield them from receiving any irremediable wound says the judicious Mr.
Richard Hooker Sermon of the Certainty, etc. page 545, 546. But de non
existentibus et non apparentibus eadem est ratio, the Spirit may, when greived,
so dwell in a man, as if he did not dwell in him; he may be quite gone, as to
any present sense and feeling: he was so as to David, which made him pray,
Create in me a clean heart, and renew a right spirit.

Quest. 2. Why are we rather said to greive the Holy Ghost, then the Father, or
the Son?

Answ. No question we do by sin grieve the Father and the Son, as well as by
every Renewed act of repentance we do minister joy to them. Every wilful sin
is an high affront to the thrice blessed and glorious Trinity, Psalm. 78. v. 40.
How often did they provoke him in the Wilderness, and grieve him in the desert;
Psalm. 95. verse. 10. Forty years long was I grieved with this generation. But
the Divine Persons though agreeing in their common essence, are distinguished
by relations and operations, or rather by their manner of operation; the father
being unbegotten works of himself, the Son from the Father, the Holy Ghost
from both Father and Son: hence, though all works terminated on the creature
are common to all three Persons, yet each work is most commonly ascribed to
that person whose manner of subsistence does most eminently appear in that
work, It is the appropiate work of the holy Ghost, to reveal unto us the
mystery of godliness, to make application of the death and resurrection of God
the Son; and therefore when we do any thing contrary to the doctrine which is
according to godliness or unworthy of the death of Jesus, we cross the Spirit
in his work, and so are said to grieve him.

Quest. 3. What are the special sins by which we do more eminently grieve the
Spirit.

Answ. If the question were put concerning the general nature of the sins by
which the Spirit is grieved, soon might it be resolved; for it seems to be past
all controversy, that we grieve him not by sins of daily incursion, not by
mere unavoideable infirmities, such as by the measure of grace vouchsafed on
this side heaven we cannot escape; but by sins that are in some degree
deliberate and wilful: but seeing it is put, concerning the special kinds of
deliberate sins which are most grievous to the Spirit, it will deserve a larger
answer. I say therefore, the sins that are more then ordinarily grievous to the
Spirit are such as these.

1. All the (...), All those lusts of uncleanness, whether natural or
unnatural; the living in these is called walking according to the flesh, which
we know is made diametrically opposite to walking according to the Spirit, by
whose help we are to mortify the deeds of the flesh. This kind of sin has
something in it peculiar; for whereas all other sins that a man does are
without the body, he that commits fornication sins against his own body,
1 Cor. 6.18. A Graecis sexcentae dantur huic loco interpretationes, Vid. Dr.
Fea^ly in lecum.
says Clarius: that interpretation which seems most proper is, that other
sins, though acted by the body, and leaving an ill impression on the body, yet
have not that force over man's body as to enslave it to another, which yet
fornication has; for by fornication the fornicator is made a member of the
Harlot, seeing man's abuse cannot disanul the institution of God, by which two
are made one flesh. Now to take the members of Christ, and make them the
members of an Harlot, is that the Apostle could not think of, without
abhorrence, verse. 15. but there is also sacriledg in this sin, because the body
unto which it is so injurious, is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, verse. 19. To
pollute the holy place, was a crime of that magnitude that the Jews thought it
sufficient to stir up all the people to lay hands on Paul, when he was but
supposed to be guilty of it. Acts 21.27, 28. What outcries do the Papists make
against K. H. the VIII. for pulling down some consecrate places, after they
were become receptacles of idle drones, and witless and worthless creatures?
and yet these very men do make fornication a venial sin, and trick of youth;
but let them mince the matter as they please, we are sure, that if any man
defile the Temple of God, him God shall destroy, 1 Cor. 3.17. When there were
no Christian Magistrates to punish this sin, God gave his Church a power, to
deliver the unclean beasts that were guilty of it to Satan, for the destruction
of the flesh, 1 Cor. 5.5. Bodily torments as well as Soul agonies, did then
attend excommunication, which yet in its own nature, separated from all such
attendants, is not to be thought on without trembling, as being the Churches
giving up a man to the devil to do with him what he will. Excess in drinking
also is very contrary to the Spirit, and that as it does dispose to this sin of
uncleanness; so much we may collect from Ephesians. 5.18. Be not filled with wine
in which is excess, but be filled with the Spirit. Here are plainly two
propositions, and a reason assigned of the first: the propositions are, Be not
filled with wine, Be filled with the spirit; and there is an opposition betwixt
these two implied in the particle (...) but: as for the cause, in which is
excess, its not to be taken for excess in drinking, for then the sense would be
a little incommodious, Be not you drunk with wine, in which being drunk with
wine, Vid. Zanch. et Dr. Hammond.
there is drunkenness; (...), therefore here rather signifies excess of venery
and brutish lusts, the usual effects of following wine and strong drink, and
the common attendants of the heathenish feasts, if not integral parts of them,
yea, and of the Jewish Feasts too when they were become Idolatrous, 1 Cor.
10.7. They did eat, and drink, and rise up to play; where (...) may, and
perhaps must signify dancing in a light, youthful, lascivious manner.
Fornication, and all uncleanness are so unbecoming Saints, that they are not so
much as once to be named by them, Ephesians. 5.3. Therefore every filthy obscene
word, yea, and every unclean thought, if morose, must needs be grievous to the
Spirit, whose dwelling in Saints makes them to be Saints.

2. The sins of Anger, Malice, Bitterness, and which flow thence, Strife, and
Divisions: These are commonly numbered among spiritual sins; but I am sure that
the Apostle does reckon hatred, variance, strife, seditions, envyings, among
the fruits of the Flesh, Gal. 5.20, 21. and that he does call the Corinthians
carnal, because there was among them, envying, and strife, and divisions; one
saying he was of Paul, another he was of Apollos, 1 Cor. 3.3, 4. It Is thought
by some, that the Corinthians did not make Paul and Apollos the Heads of their
Parties and Factions, but that the Apostle does by a Figure transferr this unto
himself and Apollos, that they might collect, that if it were so foolish and
carnal to glory in them endued with extraordinary gifts, it was much more
foolish to glory in those ordinary Pastors by whose names they did call and
distinguish themselves: How carnal is it then for one to say, I am of
Aristotle; and another, I am of des Carts? In reference to which parties I
need not say, Was Aristotle crucified for you? Were you baptized into the name
Carts? but, does there in either of their Writings occurr so much as the name
of Christ crucified? Certainly, so to admire the Tenants either of the one or
the other, as to vilify and deny the parts of those who close not with them,
is very unbeseeming any that profess to be led by the Spirit. But let us allow
these sins to be called spiritual, as in a sense they may, that makes them
only Minoris scandali, less scandalous, not Minoris malitiae, less wicked; if
uncleanness and drunkenness make a man like a beast, these make him like a
Devil: If, as the Schoolmen say, that in some creatures there be the
footsteps, but in others the image of God, so we may be allowed to think that
in some sins be to be found not only the footsteps but also the image of the
Devil, it is as much in these sins as in any other; Be angry and sin not, let
not the Sun go down on your wrath, neither give place to the Devil, Ephesians.
4.25, 26. The order of the words implies, that so much place as we give to
Anger, so much place we give to the Devil. To be sure, these sins are so
contrary to love, which though it be not as Lombard thought, the essence of the
Holy Ghost, yet is one of his chiefest fruits, that they must needs hugely
grieve him. If a contentious woman be a continual dropping in a very rainy day;
and if any wise man would choose rather to dwell in the wilderness, then with a
contentious and angry woman; how can the Spirit think you delight to dwell with
those Salamanders that are never well but in the fire of contention, and count
themselves not to be in their element any longer then they are wrangling, and
disputing perversely about substantial forms and qualities, or about matter,
motion, and atoms?

3. The sleighting the divinely inspired Writings, or ministration of the
Spirit, and preferring thereunto the Writings of any men whatsoever. If a
person had taken much pains, and put together all his Learning to set out some
one Treatise, and should find, after it was published, that men neither read
it, nor much enquired after it, whilst the Pamphlets of some others were
greedily bought up, would not this grieve him? And must not then the Spirit,
after he has revealed unto us the deep things of God, the things which eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, the wisdom of God in a mystery, the wisdom which
God has ordained before the world, be grieved if men shall more value and
converse with those Writings that can only contain excellency of Speech, and
enticing words of man's wisdom?

Object. But can any professing Christianity so do?

Answ. Yes; St. Augustine confesses there was a time when Literarum typho
tumidus, he despised the simplicity of the Gospel style, Confess. lib. 3. cap.
5. So does Hierom, somewhat his senior, ad Eustochium de custodienda
virginitate. And Bradwardine acknowledges, that before it pleased God to touch
his heart, he did very much despise St. Paul's Epistles, because they did not
Sapere ingenium Metaphysicum. And you know what is commonly reported of Angelus
Politianus, that he should say, He never bestowed time worse then once when he
vouchsafed to read over the New Testament; yet is he said to have spent several
years in enquiring whether the famous Latin Poets name should be written
Vergilius or Virgilius Boxhornius indeed endeavors to wipe off this aspersion;
but Peucer plainly tells us, that he did not stick in express terms to say,
That what ever was in David's Psalms, was more clearly and sweetly in Pindar.
What need I speak of the Schoolmen? Lombard indeed is observed not once to
have the name of Aristotle in all his Books; but the Sententiaries and
Summulists so adored him, that they did not stick to take their Texts out of
his Ethics: and that they might not seem to be mad without reason, they gave
out, That as John was Christ's forerunner in Spirituals, so was Aristotle in
Naturals. A Scholasticis ejecto Platone Aristoteles in Prophetarum and
Apostolorum consessum cooptatus est, ipsi propemodum Christo de veritatis norma
controversiam movit. Just as now we are told, that Carts did write his
Meditations by inspiration, which made Fabricius, Vid. Appen. to Regius his
Medicine.
a Scholar of Regius, complain, That his Philosophy made men slaves to another
lust, and that his followers accounted him an infallible Master, and perpetual
Dictator. But why do I speak of these? Bishop Usher would complain, that he
could rise sooner on the Monday, then on the Lords day. And is it not too
evident, that Students flock in greater companies to an Oration or
Philosophy-Lecture in the Schools, then to the reading or preaching of the
divine Oracles in the Churches? Alas! do Angels vouchsafe you their presence in
humanity Lectures? do they delight themselves in Metaphysical speculations? Why
they are present at Christian assemblies, and desire to pry into the mysteries
of the Gospel, 1 Pet. 1.12. Is Philosophy become the power of God unto
Salvation? or is that which to David was sweeter then the honey, and the honey
comb, become now like the white of an egg in the which there is no favor? Did
Luther say, that he cared not if his own books were burned, lest they should
hinder men from reading Scriptures? and can we find in our hearts to let the
Bible lie by us unread, unstudied? Sure it must needs grieve the Spirit, to see
the ministration of the spirit thus undervalued; the doctrine according to
godliness, which is profitable for all things, as much disregarded as if it
were profitable for nothing. Hierome tells us, how an Angel came and cuffed
him, so as he felt the blows some time after, because he did so much dote on
Tully; and that he was told, Non es Christianus, sed Ciceronianus: may not we
also fear least, though not an Angel, yet our own consciences should smite us
with a Non est is Christiani sed Cartesiani; and let us not think that these
lashes will be avoided, though we do study Scriptures, if we study them only
in subservience to our other studies: To read the Scriptures, only to pick out
the Criticismes in it, or to find out the Phrases that make for or against the
annual or diurnal motion of Sun or Earth, is but to play with the two-edged
sword of the Spirit, and sure it is not good jesting with edge-tools,

4. The robbing the Spirit of his glory, and taking unto our selves the praise
of what we are, have, or do. When Virgil had made an excellent Copy of verses,
and a paltry fellow had given out himself to be Author of them, grief and
indignation made him thus to versifie, Hos ego versiculos feci tulit alter
honores
Sic vos non vobis,
Sic vos non vobis, etc.


Why, whether they be gifts, or administrations, or operations they are all
wrought in us by the Spirit: if we instead of acknowledging this, be so
arrogant as to say, Are not these the gifts that we have acquired, these the
graces that we have wrought in our selves, these the good duties that we have
done? we commit such a piece of Robbery, as God will most certainly punish,
either by recovering his lent gifts, or by permitting us to fall into some soul
sin: our evil works for which we are humble, do not do us so much mischief, as
do our good works of which we boast; and if God love us, he will rather let us
fall into some foul enormity, then not cure us of the sin of pride, then which
there is not a sin in his eyes more loathsome. Lest any should be offended at
such language, I judge here convenient to fortify my Reader against prejudice,
by quoting Mr. Hooker, and in him St. Augustine, writing to the same purpose:
Mr. Hooker Sermon of the nature of Pride.
What is Virtue but a medicine? and Vice, but a wound? yet have we so often
deeply wounded our selves with medicine, that God has been fain to make wounds
medicinable; to cure by vice, where virtue has stricken; to suffer the just
man to fall, that being raised, he may be taught what power it was that upheld
him standing. I am not afraid to affirm it boldly with St. Augustine, that men
puffed up through a proud opinion of their own sanctity and holiness, receive a
benefit at the hands of God, and are assisted with his grace, when with his
grace they are not assisted, but permitted, and that grievously, to transgress;
whereby as they were in over great liking of themselves supplanted, so the
dislike of that which did supplant them, may establish them afterward the
surer. Ask the very soul of Peter, and it shall undoubtedly make you it self
this answer; My eager protestations made in the glory of my Ghostly strength, I
am ashamed of; but those crystal tears wherewith my sin and weakness was
bewailed, have procured my endless joy; my strength has been my ruin, and my
fall my stay. Peter shall rather be permitted, to deny his Master, then to
retain too high an opinion of grace received: Detestabilis est cordis humani
superbia qua facit homo quod Deus in hominibus damnat, sed illa detestabilior
qua sibi tribuit homo quod Deus donat hominibus. Tanto enim deterioris
superbiae tenetur reus, quanto in melioribus donis existit ingratus. Detestable
is that pride, which makes a man do that which God condemns in man; but more
detestable is that, which causes man to attribute that to himself which God
gives to men. A man is guilty of so much the worse pride, by how much the gifts
are better for which he is unthankful. Surely God will deal with these men as
did our King with him who ventured hard to fetch up the crown that was fallen
into the waters, and when he had so done, put it on his own head; he had a
talent for his pains, but lost his life for setting it upon any head but his
Sovereigns: so they shall have honor for contending for the truth, but their
souls shall God require of them, because, they gave not him the glory of all
their zeal. Wherefore, as you would not grieve the Spirit, when you see a
drunkard, say, Who made me to differ; or say as the Holy Martyr Bradford was
wont to say, God be merciful to me a miserable sinner. When you hear of one
denying the Divinity of our Savior, say, Nor could I have said that Jesus is
the Lord, but by the Spirit of God. If either men or devil suggest that thou
have done well, say, It was not I, but the grace of God in me; I have nothing
but what I have received, and must not boast as if I had not received, but
ascribe all to him who works in me both to will and do of his own good
pleasure.

5. Fathering on him the ugly and monstrous brats of the spirit which works
in the children of disobedience. How much was the mother in Solomon's time
grieved when her living child was taken away, and a dead one laid in room of
it? More must the Spirit be grieved, when Humility, Obedience, Subjection to
higher powers, his natural issue, are taken away; and instead of these,
disobedience and rebellion laid at his door. To do wickedly, and to say that we
do it by the impulse of the Spirit, is to make God such a one as our selves;
and what a provocation that is, you may learn from Psalm. 50.21. These things
have thou done, and I kept silence, thou thoughtest I was altogether such a one
as thy self; but I will reprove thee, and set thy sins in order before thee.
Nor shall they fare better, who do not father their impieties on the immediate
impulses of the Spirit, but yet on the Word revealed by the Spirit. For causa
causae, est causa causati; whatever is found in Scripture, is conceived of the
Holy Ghost: if we do wrest and torture Scripture to salve our Phenomenon, we do
thereby injure, and lie against the Holy Ghost. This is the honor of Christian
Religion, that it can wound all other religions with their own weapons and
principles. They rob it of this honor, who go about to fight against is also
with its own Sword, quoting texts of Scripture to authorize such actions as are
perfectly destructive of Christianity. No sin so heinous as theirs who pretend
to sin by authority from God.

6. The ascribing that to the devil and his instruments, which is the work of
the Spirit. This is not only to grieve him, but also to blaspheme him. What
was the unpardonable blasphemy against the Holy Ghost mentioned Mark 3. but the
Pharisees ascribing that to the Prince of Devils, which was done by the finger
of God? Every work of the Spirit has not so clear an impression of the Spirit
on it, as had the miracles of Christ; and therefore to mis-call them renders
not ones case so desperate as was the Pharisees: But yet sure, after God has
by the conversion of so many, discovered himself to be in the ministers of the
Gospel, of a truth, for any to say that they were all literal, legal,
antichristian, which was the language of the late times, was a blasphemy of a
very high nature; and I have observed, that such men mostly have waxed worse
and worse, deceiving and being deceived: nor can I conceive much hopes of their
repentance, who do so far wrong the Spirit, as to ascribe all his works of
conviction and contrition, to the predominance of the melancholy humor, or to a
cracked brain; and all the fervent importunate expostulations of Gods devoutest
supplicants, to sauciness, such speeches do greatly dispose tot he unpardonable
sin against the Holy Ghost.

We may hence infer against the I say, the Judaizing Socinians, because this
seems to have been the opinion of the Jews, that the Holy Ghost was nothing
but the afflatus or energy of God; and therefore Lactantius, who denied the
substantiality of the Spirit, is said by Hierome to symbolize with Jews, Epist.
55. Yet the ancient Doctors of the Jews acknowledged and believed the Son to be
an eternal person of the Divine essence, and worthy to be called Jehovah, as
they who want other books may see proved by Julius Conradus Ouho; lib. 1. Gul.
Razia, cap. 4.
Judaizing Socinian, the personality of the Holy Ghost. Grief is a personal
affection. How a person should be grieved, we can understand; how a Divine
person should have that done against him, which would grieve him, were he
capable of grief, is not inexplicable: but how a quality, a power, or an
operation, should be grieved is unconceivable.

2. Hence may be inferred, the love and tender care the Spirit has for us, and
of us. Had he not graciously condescended to take on him the offices of
Advocate, Intercessor, Comforter, he would not have so far concerned himself in
our miscarriages, as to be grieved for, or by them.

3. If we are not to grieve the Spirit, then sure we are not to blaspheme or
offer despite unto him; which cannot be done, but by sins of the greatest,
and most hellish malignity, and in the highest degree wilful.

4. This will also inform us, what to think of them who take up their pleasures
in sin, which grieves the Holy Spirit of God; we may think, that either they
never were partakers of the Holy Ghost; or if ever partakers, that now he has
quite forsaken them, and an evil Spirit from the Lord has seized on them. If
Christ at his second coming would spare all other sinners, yet doubtless he
will damn all those that believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness, 2 These. 2.12.

But the main I intend to dwell on, is the counsel of the Text; propounded
indeed negatively, but yet must be supposed to include in it many affirmative
duties, indeed all by which that good Spirit can be pleased and delighted. I
will first propound some motives to persuade men to abstain from all sins by
which the Spirit is grieved; they shall be drawn from the person and office of
him whom they grieve, from their own estate who do grieve him, from the sad and
woeful effects of greiving him.

I. Consider who it is you grieve. Were he but some created Angel, you ought so
far to respect his ministry, as not to grieve him. The woman is to keep a
covering on her head, because of the Angels, 1 Cor. 11.10. lest the contrary
indecency should offend those pure Spirits. Nay, were He but a Saint compassed
with flesh and blood, we must not, no not by the use of a lawful thing, grieve
him, unless we will walk uncharitably, Romans 14.15. which would be to break the
bond of perfection. But he is greater then any holy man or Angel, even an
uncreated divine person. I know this is denied by Socinians, nor do I purpose
fully to refute their blasphemy; only I shall take notice of one Scripture,
because it not only proves the Deity of the Holy Ghost, but also shows the
exceeding sinfulness of doing any thing against him, seeing he is God. Wend. p.
248. Posteriora haec exaggerant and declarant priora, ut quando mentitus est
Spiritui sancto, intelligeret peccati magnitudinem; quod Deo esset mentitus
siquidem Sp. S. est deus (...) and (...) cadem sensu dicitur. Synonymum in
eodem loco est (...).
Acts 5.3, 4. Why has Satan filled thy heart to lie to the Holy Ghost? thou
have not lied to men, but to God. There are here three assertions: 1. Ananias
lied to the Holy Ghost. 2. That in so lying he did not lie unto man. 3. That he
lied unto God. Our argument lies in the opposition, of which no fair account
can be given, if the Deity of the Holy Ghost be not supposed; for if so be the
Spirit had been an Essence distinct from God, the Apostle, after he had said,
Thou have lied to the Holy Ghost, would not have said, Thou have lied not to
men, but to God; but thus, Thou have lied, neither to men, nor to the Spirit,
but to God. Nor will this argument be evaded by saying, (...) in the third
verse is joined with an Accusative case, and should be translated, to
counterfeit the Holy Ghost; for besides that in some Copies it is not (...), but
(...), and the propositions (...), or (...), after (...), make it all one as if
a Dative did follow; besides this, it is most certain, that sometimes with an
Accusative it signifies to deceive or cheat; and it must here so signify,
because this sin is called a tempting the Spirit of the Lord: How violent would
it be to expound that phrase by counterfeiting of the Spirit of the Lord? every
time we grieve the Spirit of God, we grieve God: And is that a small matter in
our eyes? Can there be a greater aggravation of sin? If one man sin against
another, the judge shall judge him: but if a man sin against the Lord, who shall
entreat for him, 1 Samuel 2.25. but this would also further be considered by us,
that though there be no difference as to the Essence of the Persons, yet there
is a difference in the economy; he that grieveth the Spirit, grieveth that
divine person against whom alone such a sin can be committed as is
unpardonable: Whosoever speaks a word against the Son of man, it shall be
forgiven him; but whosoever speaks a word against the Holy Ghost, it shall
not be forgiven him, neither in this life, nor in that which is to come, Mat.
12.32. To sin against Father or Son, is not so dangerous, as to sin against the
Spirit; because he acting not in his own name, but in the name of Father and
Son, from both of whom he is sent; to sin against him, is to sin against all
the authority of God, all the love of the Trinity, the lowest condescension
that divine goodness ever did, or can make.

II. Consider we how little the Spirit has deserved to be thus grieved by us.
Many good works (says Christ, John 10.32.) have I showed you from my Father,
for which of them do ye stone me? Many good works has the Spirit from the
Father and the Son done you, O Christians, for which of them do ye grieve him?
Did I say many? I might have said, all: there is no good gift that is either
wrought in you, or for you, or by you, but it is to be ascribed to this Spirit.
Is Christ precious to you? he was conceived by the Holy Ghost in the womb of
the Virgin Mary; he descended upon him in his Baptism, and anointed him to all
his offices, raised him from the dead, bears witness of him, and pleads his
cause against the unbelieving sinful world. Is there any sweetness in the
Scriptures? why these are all from this Spirit: Prophecy came not in old time
by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. Are you taken with those admirable gifts that you see in
your Ministers? All that diversity of gifts is from the same Spirit, 2 Cor.
12.4. called all therefore the manifestation of the Spirit, verse. 7. Or are you
more affected with the works of God in you? they are all the fruits and effects
of the Spirit, whether conviction, or contrition, or humiliation, or
regeneration, or consolation, they are all wrought by the Spirit; this is the
argument made use of in the Text, Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, by which
ye are sealed to the day of redemption. In calling him the holy Spirit of God,
he means not only that he is of essential, original, indefectible sanctity;
but also because he works all the holiness that is in any of Gods servants.
And when we are said to be by him seaed up unto the day of our redemption, by
that phrase is signified, that he does all that which answers to the nature
and various ends and uses of Sealing. But with that phrase I am not to meddle
as yet; nor list I to run over all his works, but pitch on that of comforting,
and press that, to keep men from grieving him. The Spirit is the Comforter,
sent from the Father upon the prayer of his Son, to supply the absence of his
corporeal presence, to open those wells of Salvation, that were hid, and did
lie under ground, in the days that the Messiah did dwell among men. In some
Churches they have an officer who is called Consolator Aegrorum, whose work is
to put the breasts of consolation into the mouths of those who have received
within themselves the sentence of death: should any, whilst this Officer is at
his bedside laboring to take out the sting of death, vex him with untoward
language, and not to give over till he had forced him to depart his room; would
not all say that this man were either in a frenzy, or else in the very gall
and bitterness of spiritual death. The wickedness of those who do grieve the
Spirit of God is far greater. For

1. This sick Comforter cannot always be with those whom he visits, but is now
discoursing with them, and anon gone either to some other languishing person,
or to his own relations. But the Spirit is a Comforter always abiding with you,
John 14.16. Not that he actually comforts at all times, but that he always
preserves the root of comfort, always tenders comfort, were not Christians
either so sullen, or so stupid as not to receive it.

2. The Comforter of the sick may endeavor to comfort, and not be able to
comfort; Men may not be so wise as to open to him the root of their fears; or
if they do, he may not be able to reach them; or if to reach them, not to pull
them out; There are perplexities of conscience which will puzzle and nonplus
the most experienced Christian or Teacher: But so strong are the Consolations
of the Spirit, that they break through all opposition of contrary grief and
trouble, whether arising from afflictions, or guilt of sin.

3. The sick Comforter may apply comfort unseasonably, and nothing is more
usual then to lose clave errante, to speak peace where God speaks no peace: but
the consolations of the Spirit, are never misplaced or mistimed; he pours not
the oil of gladness but into broken hearts; he puts not the garments of praise
upon any, but those in whom has been the Spirit of heaviness; he applies not
his strong consolations to any, but the heirs of the Promise, nor to them
neither, but only when they fly for refuge, and lay hold of the hope that is
set before them. Heb. 6.18, 19. When they fly, as men pursued by the Revenger
of blood did to the Cities of refuge, or to the horns of the Altar.

4. In the absence of the sick Comforter, another may do the work as well
perhaps as he: but the Spirit is so a Comforter, as none can comfort without
him; all consolation therefore is called the consolation of the holy Ghost,
Acts 9.31. Whilst the Spirit of the Lord did rest on Sampson; he could break
withs and cords; but the Spirit being departed, Sampson may go out and shake
himself, and think to do as at other times, but he shall soon find a
difference; the Philistines shall prevail, lead him away captive, and put out
his eyes. So those who by the help of the Spirit have in former tribulations
been made to rejoice and glory, may think when assaulted afresh to show like
cheerfulness; but if by any sin they have made the Spirit depart, they shall
find a little thing too heavy to bear, the loss of a child, which is but a
common temptation shall make them cry, and take on, more like men then like
Christians; yea, more like children then men. Now, put all these considerations
together, and when corruption next stirs, say, What! shall I grieve my
Comforter, my abiding, my strong, my wise, my only Comforter? This question
will strangle it in the womb, if any ingenuity be left in the soul: if is be
grown hard and carnal through the deceitfulness of sin, then nothing but
arguments drawn from wrath will work on it.

III. Let it be pondred, who they be that thus grieve the Spirit; all men are
not in a capacity so to do; they that are, have of all men least reason to do
it. Amyraldus in his Theses about the sin against the Holy Spirit, has well
observed, that a man may be considered under a twofold (...) or relation, one
merely natural or legal, having knowledge of duty, but no revelation of any
mercy or pardon in case he sin; he that in this case sins, sins rather
against the Father, then against Son, or Holy Ghost; or else, he may be
considered as under an evangelical dispensation; and that again two ways,
either so as only to have heard of remission of sins, but not at all to
believe it, or be affected with it; he that sins in this state, sins rather
against the Son, then against the Holy Ghost, or so as not only to have seen
the mavelous light of the Gospel, but also to have been refreshed with its
beams, and made to rejoice in it; if in this state he sin wilfully, he must
needs grieve the Spirit; but thus to sin, is to sin at a very high rate, when a
man has been made partaker of the holy Ghost, and tasted of the powers of the
world to come, and of the heavenly gift, the Spirit may say, What could I have
done more to endear religion, and inodiate sin, that I have not done? To grieve
the Spirit after all this by returning to folly and vanity, is an affront and
disingenuity not to be suffered, and which shall be most severely punished,
either in this world, or in the other, or in both. This leads to the Fourth
Motive drawn, from the sad effects and consequents of grieving the Spirit. I
will not say with Luther, that it may make God to carry it toward men, tanquam
si non esset Deus ipsorum, sed Diabolus; nor dare I so much as adventure to
English so harsh an expression: but I shall direct to one place of Scripture,
in which enough is said to terrify us from grieving the Spirit; They rebelled
and vexed his holy Spirit, therefore he was turned to be their enemy, and he
fought against them, (so far was he from assisting them against their enemies)
and he raised up enemies against them; and caused Rebels to fall before them
God's punishments under the Gospel are more spiritual, not less severe. As for
the temporary believer, the Spirit being grieved by him may so forsake him, as
that the unclean Spirit may return with seven unclean spirits worse then that
which was cast out; he may be suffered so to fall, as that it shall be
impossible to renew him by repentance. As for such as by the inhabitation of
the Holy Ghost are consecrated and made Temples of God, I am so strongly
persuaded of the doctrine of perseverance, that I do not think they ever again
become of the Synagogue of Satan, but their grieving of the Spirit may be so
punished, as that

1. They may be permitted to fall into very foul and dishonorable lusts. He
that complieth with the motions of the Spirit, is changed into, the image of
God from glory to glory, he renews his strength as does the Eagle; but give me
a man that grieves the Spirit, he shall in a short time fall into abominable
either opinions or practices: and when we do consider how ugly have been the
carriages, and how scandalous the Apostasies of some that doubtless were
enlightened, and made the highest profession of Religion, we cannot rest in any
other cause of them, then Gods judicial blinding and hardening of them, for
vexing his Spirit of truth and holiness.

2. All ordinances become unprofitable to them. Promises sometimes sweeter then
the honey and the honeycomb, have no relish in them. Commands and threatenings,
of which their hearts were wont to stand in awe, now affect them no more then
dreadful tales of men in another world. Were it not for shame, had they but any
handsome excuse, they would not come at ordinances at all: the Disciples are
told, John 14.26. that the Spirit shall bring things to their remembrance; by
which I would not understand a bare calling them to mind, but a bringing them
to mind in their full vigor, authority, evidence. It Is the Spirit alone that
sets home doctrines with demonstration and power; the Spirit grieved, the most
weighty truths are no more regarded then so many idle dreams, at least no more
then do the enticing words of man's wisdom (unto which the demonstration of the
Spirit is opposed, 1 Cor. 2.4.) the probable discourses of Orators, and
Philosophers, which at the utmost engender but opinion, perhaps it is so,
perhaps it is otherwise. Be it so, that the word of God is quick and powerful,
and sharper then any two edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of
Soul and Spirit, of the joints and marrow, Heb. 4.12. yet is it thus vital and
operative only as it is the Sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6. out of his hand it
will pierce no deeper then would the sword of Gideon in the hand of an youth.
Be it so that the ministration of the Gospel is more then that of the Law, yet
it is greater glory lies only in this, that it is the ministration of the
Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8. The Spirit withdrawing himself, as it may well be thought
he will do if grieved, even the Gospel quickneth no more then the killing
Letter did. Moses put avail over his face, that the children of Israel could
not steadfastly look to the end of that which is abolished: But their minds were
blinded; for until this day remains the same vail untaken away in the
reading of the Old Testament. 2 Cor. 3.13, 14 We think this vail is taken away
in the Gospel, and indeed it cannot be denied but that the Penmen of the new
Testament have used great plainness of speech; but there is still a vail on the
hearts of men, and if the Spirit of the Lord do not take away that vail, (as if
he be displeased, usually he does not) even the Gospel may be hid as much as
ever the Law was to the carnal Israelites.

3. Upon the grieving of the Spirit usually follow sad heart-distressing doubts
and fears in reference to our present and eternal condition. It Is the Spirits
office to make us know the things that are freely given us of God, 1 Cor. 2.12,
to witness to our Spirits that we are the Children of God, Romans 8.15, 16. to
shed abroad the love of God in our hearts, Romans 5.5, he is the earnest of our
inheritance until the redemption of the purchased possession, Ephesians. 1.14. If we
grieve him, we are lest in the dark, and see no light, and know not whether we
go. And how sad is this, to be at such a loss as to say, It may be I shall sit
down with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob; but it may also be, that I shall make my bed
in Hell with the Devil and his Angels where there is weeping, wailing, gnashing
of teeth? but upon our grieving of the Spirit we are, not only left under
doubts, but also under positive apprehensions, that the wrath to come shall be
our portion. How many have been heard to roar out, I am damned, I am damned?
which cries, though they maybe acknowledged sometimes to proceed from Melancholy,
or other bodily distemper, yet do they more frequently proceed from the grieved
Spirit's withdrawing of himself.

You see, whether you are acted from ingenuity, or from fear, there is great
reason you should cease from grieving the Spirit; and no less reason is there,
why you should not only not grieve him, but also rejoice and please him; the
which you shall do, if,

I. You grieve when he is grieved, and vex your righteous souls at every thing
that vexes him. This is an act of friendship we all owe to all those that are
of the same body with us, Romans 12.15, much more to him by whom we are all
baptized into one body. 1 Cor. 12.13.

II. If you bring forth all the fruits of the Spirit, i. e. all manner of
holiness, but more especially those mentioned Gal. 5.22, 23. Love, joy, peace,
long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance. When we
bring forth these, we not only live in the Spirit, but walk in the Spirit;
which whoever do, fulfill not the lusts of the flesh, Gal. 5.26. are not
desirous of vain glory, provoking one another, envying one another. And let it
be observed, that the Apostle reckoning up the fruits of the Spirit, does not
instance in prayers and supplications, though they, when made with faith and
humility, are undoubted evidences of the Spirits dwelling in us; but in
meekness, gentleness, love, and such other (...) as are opposite to sinful
passions; for by goodness we are to understand in this place, kindness, and
friendliness, or a readiness on all occasions to do good to others: And by
Faith, not that which is called faith on our Lord Jesus Christ; but fidelity or
faithfulness toward men, opposed to treachery and inconstancy. Believe it, to
take all opportunities of doing our brethren good, to be punctual in performing
our promises, patiently to bear all the injuries and provocations that are
offered us by others, and studying as much as in us lies to preserve peace with
all men, are greater evidences that a man is spiritual, then are long prayers,
or any thing of that nature, by which some of late have been so much puffed up.
Believers have the Spirit in them, and they are said to be in the Spirit, Romans
8.9. As he that is born of the flesh, is flesh; so he that is born of the
Spirit, is Spirit; and therefore, as they who are in the flesh, do in nothing
please God, do in all times and places mind the things of the flesh; so they
that are in the Spirit, they should do all things to please the Father, they
should spiritualize their very natural and civil actions, doing them unto the
glory of God. So shall nature as it were be adopted into grace, and every meals
meat become an holy and acceptable sacrifice.

III. If we pray to him, and for him, and bless God for all the good things
wrought in us by him. We should pray to Him, else how do we acknowledge his
Deity? how do we stick to our baptism, in which we were baptized into his name?
We should pray for Him, else how do we look upon him as the great gift and
promise of the new Covenant? We should bless God for Him, or else how do we
prize the benefits bestowed on us, and wrought in us by him? Shall we bless
God for some single good things, and not for the Spirit, who is every good
thing, (as appears by comparing Mat. 7.11. with Luke. 11.13.) that were an high
indignity offered to this divine person! That we may do all these the more
enlargedly, it were good often to meditate how great a condescension it is in
the Spirit, to dwell where he has the Flesh always lusting against him; to help
us in all our infirmities; to make intercession for us with groans that cannot
be expressed, to apply unto us the redemption purchased, and make us meet for
the inheritance of Saints in glory.

IV. If we honor his gifts in others, especially those which are bestowed for
the work of the Ministry. It Is the Holy Ghost which separates men to the office
of the Ministry; and when men are put into that Office, they do receive the
Holy Ghost, therefore they ought to be honored and had in esteem, for their
office and work sake.

Obj. But does not the anointing teach us all things, and so teach us as that
we need not that man should teach us at all?

Answ. So indeed it is said, and that by some pretending so much to the Spirit,
as that their usual compellation to others is Flesh; but we are not to believe
every spirit, but to try the spirits whether they be of God: and I heartily
wish the spirit from whence this Objection arises, did not too manifestly
discover it self not to be of God.

The Spirit that Christ promised, was to be sent from the Father in the name of
Christ, and was not to speak of himself, but whatsoever he had heard, he was to
receive of Christ, and glorify Christ, John 16.13.14. But the men who make
this objection do dishonor and decrey Christ, setting up Christ within them in
opposition to him that suffered at Jerusalem: the Spirit inspired Prophets,
Apostles, Evangelists, to deliver down unto us a rule of faith and life; but
these men do vilify this written word, and ministration of the Spirit, and
call on their proselytes to follow that light within them, and make that
sufficient for salvation. For my part I am so far from desiring that any should
envy for our sakes, that I could heartily wish that all the Lords people were
prophets, and that his Spirit were on them. Were there a Seculum Spiritus to be
expectted, I hope I should as sincerely pray for it, and as much rejoice in the
approaches of it, as another; but so far am I form finding in the Scriptures
any time in which the Ministry shall cease, and be useless, that I rather find
the Spirit is to be received by the hearing of faith, and that it is one great
work of the Spirit, to quicken and give life to the public Ordinances as
dispensed by the Ministers of the Gospel; it is the Holy Ghost that makes them
overseers of the flock. Acts. 20.28. As for that place, 1 John 2.29. it
carries it is answer in its own bowels, You shall not need that any one teach
you, but as the same anointing teaches you, (i. e.) not other things, nor in
another way then the same anointing teaches you; but do any ministers pretend
to teach other things, or in another way then this anointing teaches? If they
do not, as it is most certain they do not, why is this Scripture so frequently
urged against ministerial teaching? For ever let us abhor those who cry up the
Spirit, so as to justle out that form of found words which has been delivered
unto us by menguided by the Spirit; Be sure you quench not the Spirit, but have
a care you despise not prophecyings; God having put those two counsels
together, let no man put them asunder.

The Spirits Office toward Believers.
Whereby ye are sealed to the day of Redemption.
THe old Interpreter reads, in the day of Redemption; and by it Oecumenius and
some others understand the day of Baptism: but because in the Greek it is not
(...), but (...), and we have no reason to think that (...) is put for (...),
we shall by this day understand the day of Judgment, as most Interpreters do,
and as we are led to do by that twin-place, Chap. 1 13.14. where the Holy
Spirit of promise is said to be, the earnest of our inheritance until the
redemption of the purchased possession: The price of a Believers Redemption is
already paid, and accepted by God, and they are redeemed from their vain
conversation; but their day of redemption cannot be said to be fully come, till
this corruptible have put on incorruption, at least, not till this life be
ended; for till then

1. Their Redemption from the power and dominion of sin has not its full
effect: even a Paul, as long as he is in the body, has occasion to complain
that he is sold under sin, and that the law in the members warreth against the
law of the mind, and leads him captive to the commission of Sin, and omission
of Duty.

II. Till then, our Redemption, the forgiveness of sin, Ephesians. 1.7. is not
perfect. I know that upon our first closing with Christ, our transgressions are
blotted out as a mist, and as a thick cloud, and our iniquities thrown into the
bottom of the Sea, there is no condemnation to us, no obligation to Eternal
wrath; but yet I am also sure, that we are bid repent, that our sins may be
blotted out when the days of refreshing shall come from the Lord, Acts. 3.19.
Whence it may be inferred, that a Penitents sins are not so blotted out, as
then they shall be blotted out; indeed, upon the first conversion, a man is put
into a state of justification, which is inconsistent with obligation to Eternal
death, yet is he not freed from all punishment, nor from all obligation to
punishment, for where there is no obligation to punishment there is no justice
in punishing. The want of the Spirit is one of the punishments we have brought
on our selves by sin: this punishment is not taken away, but by restoring of
the Spirit; now though the Spirit be so restored, as to prevent the dominion of
Sin, and damnation for the time to come, yet is it not given in such a measure
as to prevent all sin, nor the contracting of new guilt; nor shall He be so
given in this world.

III. As to the Redemption of the Body, that is so far from being complete
before the Great Day, that till then it may seem not to begin: While it is
joined to an imperfect soul it is vile and mortal; when separated from it, then
it becomes yet viler, is thrown into a grave, and preyed upon by worms and
maggots: at the Resurrection it begins to be spiritual, incorruptible,
powerful, and like to the glorious body of Christ Jesus. The Adoption, the
Redemption of the Body, we do not now enjoy, but by Faith and Hope we do wait
for it, Romans 8.23. On all these accounts, there is reason why that Day should
be called, as it is, The manifestation of the sons of God, Romans 8.19. For
though we be now the sons of God, it appears not what we shall be, 1 John 3.1.
The best use that can be made of this Appellation, is that which is made of it
by the whole Creation; The earnest expectation of the creature waits for this
manifestation, that it may be delivered from that bondage and vanity unto which
it is subject, and under which it groaneth; much more should you, who have the
first fruits of the Spirit, groan within your selves, waiting for the adoption.
It Is utterly a fault among Christians, that they groan so much under the burden
of a few Taxes and Impositions, and so little under the burden and body of Sin
which they carry about with them. They should much and frequently bless God for
those enjoyments they have of him in this earthly Tabernacle; but yet not be so
satisfied with any such enjoyments, as not to desire it may be dissolved, and
so they put into the possession of that house in heavens not made with hands.
We that are in this tabernacle do groan, being burdened; not for that we would
be uncloathed, but clothed upon, 2 Cor. 5.4. I confess, in this I look on St.
Paul as our Pattern, rather then as our Standard: I dare not say, that all who
are partakers of the Spirit do thus earnestly groan after absence from the
body, and presence with the Lord; but all have reason so to do, else had not
all by Christ been taught to pray, Thy Kingdom come. As for you who live in
sin, I cannot exhort you to desire this day; rather you may pray as did the
Primitive Christians, though on a better account, Pro mora finis; for to you
this Day of the Lord shall not be a day of Redemption, but of Confinement to the
darkest dungeon; it shall burn as an Oven, it shall burn you up, and leave you
neither root nor branch: The Devils who believe it, do tremble at the thoughts
of it; and if you tremble not at it, it is because you believe it not. The best
and most seasonable advice I can give you, is, to kiss the Redeemer, and to
follow God with sighs and groans, till he has given you hearts soft as wax,
then shall you also be sealed to the day of Redemption,

Of this Sealing of the Spirit I am now to speak, and that somewhat largely:
being therefore to build high, it is good to dig deep, and lay the foundation
sure. The expression is undoubtedly Metaphorical, and must betoken something
that bears proportion to Sealing properly so called: What that is, we should
the rather enquire, because the Metaphor is so frequently used here, and Chap.
1.13. and 2 Cor. 1.22. He that shall read the Learned Zanchy on Chap. 1. verse.
13. will not lose his labor, nay, will think nothing can be added unto what he
has said. I shall from him and others, in a few words, lend light enough to
elucidate this matter to those that have a mind to understand. Two things among
us go by the name of a Seal.

1. The Signet that makes the Impression.

2. The Impression that is made by the Signet.

And sealing, if considered in its nature, is nothing else but the imparting of
the Image of the Signet to that which is sealed: But then the uses of sealing
are diverse; 1. For secrecy or security; 2. For ratification or confirmation;
3. For distinction or separation: Now the question is, Whether in allusion to
the nature, of some or all uses of sealing, we are said to be sealed?
Doubtless, the Spirit does work in us so as to communicate unto us the likeness
of God in holiness and righteousness. By him we are changed into the Image of
God from glory to glory, 1 Cor. 3. last. According to his mercy he saves us by
the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. We are
born again of water and the Holy Ghost, Joh. 3.3. We are washed, we are
sanctified, we are justified, in the Name of our Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit
of our God, 1 Cor. 6.11. But seeing the sealing here intended is in order of
nature after believing, Ephesians. 1.13. I humbly conceive, it is not the making of
the Elect to partake of the Divine Nature, but the assuring of them that they
do partake of it, the persuading our hearts that we have Gods mark on us. God
seals us with his Spirit, not that he may know us to be his, but that we may
know our selves to be his, and rest satisfied that we are his, and that he will
own us for his, when to others he shall say, Depart from me, I know you not. I
deny not, but we may be said to be sealed by the Spirit, when we are by him
regenerated and made new creatures; but I think Regeneration is rather the
Spirits writing the law in our hearts, and making us the Epistle of God; and
that the sealing in the Text intended, is the Spirits testifying unto us that
we are of the number of Gods redeemed ones, and have a right to the privileges
of Gods redeemed ones. Now there are five things of which the Spirit may be
thought to give assurance. 1. Election. 2. Vocation. 3. Justification. 4.
Perseverance. 5. Eternal life; but because of some of these there is dispute,
and because it is by all sober persons granted, that effectual vocation,
regeneration, conversion are the evidences of the other, of that chiefly, and
well nigh, only, I shall speak, and cast all I have to say about it into an
Answer to these six Questions.

1. Whether such Assurance may be had?

2. Whether the nature of Faith consist in it and whether it may not be
separated from Faith?

3. How the Spirit works it?

4. Why so many Christians are so long without it?

5. What motives there be to persuade us to labor after it.

6. What means are to be used, 1. to gain it if we have it not, 2. to keep it
if we have it, 3. to regain it if we have lost it?

1. In answer to the Question, Whether such assurance may be had, I say it may,
which I prove,

1. By arguing ab esse ad posse; Assurance has by many been attained,
therefore it may be attained. That it has been attained is so evident, that
scarce any thing can be more evident; there is not one Saint almost in all the
Scriptures, concerning whom much is said, of whom something is not said, from
which it may be collected that he had sometime or other good assurance of Gods
love. Was Job, think we, without assurance, who maintained his integrity
against the devil, and his uncharitable friends, clubbing their wits to prove
him an Hypocrite? Was not that the voice of assurance, I know that my redeemer
lives? Was not the Spouse assured when she said, I am my Beloveds, and my
Beloved is mine? Was not St. Paul assured, when he so triumphed in Christ? Romans
8.38. I am persuaded that neither life, nor death, nor Angels, nor
principalities, etc. shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is
in Christ Jesus. The Papists do not much deny but that these persons, and
sundry others mentioned in Scriptures, had assurance; only they say, they came
to it in an extraordinary way, by immediate revelation; which must needs be
looked on as a mere evasion and shift: there is not in Scripture the least hint
that these came to their assurance in any extraordinary way, but many things
there be in Scripture which make manifest, that they attained their certainty
in a discursive way, arguing from the effect, to the cause; from the fruits, to
the root; from their mortifying the deeds of the flesh, and walking according
to the Spirit, to the Spirits dwelling in them. St. Paul indeed had his
Revelations, but those were not the ordinary standing lasting ground of his
gloriation, but the testimony of his Conscience that in simplicity, and godly
sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, he had had his
conversation in the World. 2. Cor. 1.12. What that, we are bid by St. Peter to
give all diligence to make our calling and election sure. 2. Epist. 1.10. Which
implies that assurance is not only to be expected by extraordinary immediate
Revelation.

2. If we cannot have assurance, it is either because we cannot be sure what
puts us into a state of grace, or because we cannot be sure that we are in that
state of grace. To say, that we cannot know what puts us into a state of grace
or makes us children of God and disciples of Christ, is too great an absurdity
for the Papists themselves to swallow; it does indeed make the one half of the
Scriptures needless, for what does Scripture more design, then to lay down the
distinguishing marks betwixt sincerity and hypocrysie, faith and unbelief, the
power of Godliness and the form? It will therefore perhaps be said, that we may
know what true grace is, but we cannot know our selves to have true grace
wrought in us, because of the deceitfulness of our hearts. Now that the heart
of man is deceitful, deceitful above all things, will not be denied by any
who either studieth Scripture or his own heart. But we may well say, that the
deceitfulness, whether natural or acquired, is in part cured and removed by
sanctifying grace, and the Spirit also does assist (as is more to be shown
hereafter) the sanctified faculty to observe and take notice of its own frame;
and therefore, its remaining deceitfulness notwithstanding, it may come to some
certainty of its own condition. To make short, I ask, Was Conscience designed
by God to be a Witness, and a judge, did he intend it should sometimes justify,
sometimes condemn? If he did not design it to any such work or office, why then
all, both Heathens and Christians have mistaken its nature and office; if he
did, why then may not a renewed Conscience witness concerning a man's renewed
and justified condition? Doubtless it may witness and give such a Testimony as
God will own hereafter, and man may for the present comfortably acquiesce in.
As from our hearts condemning us, we may infer that God will condemn us; so
from our hearts not condemning us, we may collect, that God will not condemn
us; and that with such firmness or certainty, as will give us boldness in the
presence of God, and assure our hearts before him that we shall have the things
we ask of him. 1 John 3.20, 21. Had the Testimony been so obscure and uncertain
as Papists make it to be, St. Paul would not have so rejoiced and gloried in
it, as we before observed him to do, from 2 Cor. 1.12.

3. If no assurance were attainable then some duties enjoined us would be
altogether either unprofitable, or impossible; I instance in two or three: Why
are we bid to search and try our ways, if it cannot be known whether they are
right? Why are we bid to examine our selves whether we be in the faith, 2 Cor.
13. if it cannot be known whether we be in the faith? How should we rejoice in
the Lord, and glory in tribulation, if when we have done all, our title to
heaven must be uncertain, if we may at last for ought we know to the contrary,
have our portion in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone?

Set a man upon a very high pinnacle, and let him know he may fall from it, and
see whether you can persuade him to rejoice; the possibility, and much more the
probability of any danger that is intolerable, must needs damp all joy. Much
less could a Christian be earnest and vehement in his desires to be dissolved
and be with Christ, if he could have no sure hope that when he is dissolved he
should be found in Christ. Why has God set Promises as thick in the Word as
Stars in the Firmament, if by no means we can clear up our interest in them? If
the sweetness of all the Covenant were strained into one single Promise, what
would that avail me, if by no means I could be persuaded that I shall one day
be permitted to taste of it. This argument did horribly puzzle Bellarmine; and
in answer to it he recites three opinions of Catholics, (as he calls them)
according to none of which, he thinks, men will be left under any necessity of
doubting concerning their reconciliation with God; and at last he tells us,
that all they contend against, is only a certainty of Faith properly so
called: but we are wiser then to lay the stress of so material a question upon
a School-phrase. Let it but be granted, that the soul can have such a knowledge
of its own sincerity, as makes it certain that it is not mistaken, we shall sit
down under the shadow of that concession, and eat the sweet fruit of it,
leaving it to the Tridentine Doctors to determine whether this may be called
Faith Catholic; and if not, whether yet it may not be called Divine Faith,
differing from Catholic Faith; differing not in certainty and exclusion of
doubting, but only in universality. I must needs say, I understand not how any
man can be said to believe that he believes; and if any of our Writers have so
expressed themselves (which is more then I know) they spoke not properly.
Wendeline, in his larger System of Divinity, propounding against himself this
objection, as from the Papists; What is certain with the certainty of Faith, is
either expressly contained in the Word of God, or by due consequence may be
thence deduced: But that this or that man, I, or thou do truly believe, is not
expressly contained in Scripture, nor can by any due consequence be thence
deduced; therefore it cannot be certain with a certainty of Faith; does well
answer, The conclusion does not contradict us; for we do not in kind say, that
we can by a certainty of Faith be certain that we truly believe, but
indefinitely, that we may be certain. With what certainty then? I answer with a
certainty of inward vision, or the testimony of our mind enlightened by the holy
Spirit, who witnesses to our spirit, that we are the sons of God, and do truly
believe: This certainty therefore is not written in the book of Scripture, but
in the book of our heart, and that by the finger of the Spirit. Hence we
believe not that we believe, but see, feel; As we do not believe that we do
think of God, but know and perceive by our mind: quoting for the confirmation
of his answer, an elegant sentence of S. Augustine, lib. 13. De Trin. Fidem
suam quisque, qui eam habet, videt in cord suo, and tenet certissima scientia,
and clamante conscientia. In which way if he had proceeded in answering the
self same objection concerning particular remission of sin, page 1158. he had
given the adversary less advantage; for my part, I do not make it any Article
of my Faith that my sins are pardoned.

4. We argue the attainableness of Assurance from the weakness and rottenness
of the grounds on which the Papists, the greatest adversaries to this truth, do
proceed in the denying of it.

1. It Is not unlike, that the covetousness of the Pope and his Clergy is one
reason why the doctrine of Assurance is so denied: For this sect of men is
somewhat a kin to Judas, who was a Thief, and carried the Bag. Were the Pope to
pay as much for redeeming a Soul out of Purgatory, as he commonly gets by it, I
dare say, Purgatory before this had been reckoned amongst things that are not:
were they to loose as much gold and silver by keeping men in doubts and fears
as commonly they get, certainty had not been made so impossible as now it is.

2. Their own Hypocrisy and formality makes them, and that justly, to question
their own state present and to come, and therefore they think that none, how
sincere and upright soever, can be assured of these matters. Very apt we be to
measure other men's cloth by our own else, to make our own hearts and
experiences a standard and pattern to our fellow Christians. Many eminent
Reformers, who had perhaps the candle of the Lord mostly shining on them, and
lived perpetually under the beams of his countenance, did place Faith in
Assurance, and so discouraged some weak Christians. The Papists on the other
hand, being always void of assurance; would needs persuade us, that no Faith did
ever rise up to assurance, being continually tormented with shivering fears,
they envy all others who have more serenity and calmness then themselves. But
does it follow, that if an house built on the sands cannot stand, that it
cannot stand neither though built on the rock? A Papist, as a Papist, holds
no one doctrine by faith; for seeing, as Papist, he must needs take the Popes
infallibility in causes of faith for his foundation, which foundation being not
only untrue, but also heretical, cannot be apprehended by faith, it follows,
that he neither does nor can believe any point of says, unless perhaps the
conclusion can be of faith, when the premises or cause of assent to that
conclusion is contrary to Faith. Nor can they have any certainty of their
salvation; for that depends with them on their having the Sacrament of penance
truly administered, and this on his being a Priest that does administer it: now
that any one is a Priest, is that of which there can be no certainty; for, for
ought any one knows to the contrary, he that ordained him had not intent to
ordain him, or he that baptized him had no intent to baptize him; or if both
could be known to have directed their intentions aright, yet twenty other
things might happen that would nullify his priesthood, But no necessity is
there that Protestants should be uncertain of their right to, or meetness for
heaven, who reject all these errors, and are taught to believe, that no man
shall ever fare the worse for what never was in his power to prevent.

3. Papists much object the multitude of Professors, who have much boasted and
talked of assurance, and yet neither had it, nor could have it, as by their
manifold miscarriages, inordinate walkings, they have most manifestly
discovered. This no doubt they may have observed, and it has been, of late
years especially, a great stumbling block to some, to see and hear persons of
very slight and frothy spirits, tell so many and so high stories of their
enjoyments and experiences. But shall we say, that a man may not be certain of
that, about which multitudes have been mistaken? Who sees not then that we must
bring Pirrhonisme into the World? put our selves under a necessity of turning
Scepticks? Because some have phansied their chambers to be full of company,
when no person was nigh them, cannot I be sure that sometimes I see people
sitting in their seats to hear me? Because some have imagined that they sat
about richly furnished tables, when no meat was nigh them, cannot I therefore
be sure, that my meat is before me, and give God thanks for it. There is no
such great likeness betwixt Assurance and Presumption, that a man, if he will
be sincere, need mistake the one for the other. The rules given by Divines to
distinguish them, are such, that a man cannot be mistaken about them, unless he
have a mind to be mistaken.

1. Presumption is the daughter of Ignorance, so is not Assurance.

2. Presumption is got and maintained without any difficulty or pains, so is
not Assurance.

3. Presumption, unless in great extremities, when usually it turns into
despair, is always uniform and like unto it self, so is not assurance, which is
higher or lower, according to the influences of the Spirit, growth and exercise
of the habit of Faith.

4. Presumption is unwilling to be examined, so is not Assurance, but most
gladly joins with the most lively and searching Ministry; by these and many
other characters which shall be after suggested, Assurance may as easily be
discerned from Presumption, as may the true metal from that which does but
counterfeit it.

4. It is much urged that Assurance would breed Pride, security, carelessness,
the bane of all our graces and pious endeavors: but to this many answers may
be returned

1. By concession; it will not be denied, but that if God should pour this wine
into old bottles, there might be danger of their breaking; if he should give
these apples to those who were never sick of love, they might breed wind: but
God never gives the new name, but where he gives the new nature; He sets not
his Seal on a flint, but on the wax; In whom after ye believed, ye were sealed
with the Spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1.13. As for unbelievers, they are incapable
of it; and could they have it, they would turn it into wantonness, as they do
all Grace they receive: nay, nor does God set his Seal on every vessel of
Honor; He does not feed every child with hidden Manna, but only such as he
finds to hunger after it, and to be ready to faint and perish without it.

2. I say our Assurance is not perfect or free from all doubts, but has always
mixed with it some either actual or habitual fear. Perfect Assurance might
(such is the corruption remaining in us) be abused to security, and occasion
Pride; but our wine is mixed with water, on purpose, that it might not
intoxicate us. With such a measure of Assurance we are trusted, as keeps under
doubts and fears, not with such as quite expels doubts and fears. They go too
far, who say, That the assurance we have of the pardon of our sins, and right
to Eternal Life, is equal to the assurance we have of the common objects of
Faith, Christ's Resurrection, or Gods Omnipotence. That Christ is risen, that
God is Almighty, are Propositions and Principles that are expressly and
immediately contained in Scriptures, and therefore do the more easily gain
assent from our Understandings: But these Propositions, I am justified, I am
sanctified, I shall be saved, are Conclusions drawn from such Premises of which
only one is contained in Scripture, the other is made out by inward sense and
feeling, and therefore the Conclusion is not so evident, nor so strictly Dico
non esse adeo stricte de side, ne offendiculum creem Lectori in hisce
controversiis minus exercitato, alioqui mea sic stat sententia, istiusmodi
conclusiones non esse omnino de fide: Conclusionem sequi infirmiorem premissam
est e trivio dialecticorum Canon, quem et si aliqui dialecticorum filii de sola
affirmatione, aut negatione, universalitate aut particularitate Propositionum
intelligant, videtur tamen extendendus etiam ad praemissarum evidentiam and
inevidentiam; potest sieri ut propositio de side licet in se certior, quoad nos
tamen qui in arguendo sensu ac ratione ducimur, deterior ac debilior sit
propositione illa qua est evidens quoad rationem aut sensum prout accidit in
hoc syllogismo; Omnis homo resurget, Ego sum homo, Ergo, Ego resurgam, tum
Conclusio est de side: Major enim quae est de fide in dissereado est infirmior
praemissa, at in tali syllogism^. Quisquis diligit fratrem, traducitur de morte
ad vitam, Ego diligo fratrem, Ergo ego traducor demorte ad vitam, nemo nisi
valde Suffenus dicet se majorem evidentiam adeptum esse de sinceritate sui
emocis erga fratres, quam de testimonio illo Divino quisquis amat statrem and
quare neque conclusio censenda est de fide.
de fide, as is either a Scripture principle, or any conclusion that is drawn
from premises purely Scriptural,

3. I do utterly deny, that Assurance, as assurance, does breed security and
negligence; but rather in a meet subject it quickens to diligence. For what?
are not the Angels in Heaven assured of Gods love? do they not more then opine
or conjecture, that they shall never fall away from it? yet, I trow, they do
not therefore grow negligent, but continue to be ministering spirits, ready
pressed to go whether soever God sends them. Indeed were it so that assurance
either of Faith, or of pardon did bread slothfulness naturally and necessarily,
a man would be afraid to grow in grace; for undoubtedly, the more growth in
grace, ordinarily the more assurance; the faster hold I lay on Christ, the
greater evidence that I have him, the stronger the habit of Faith is, the more
vigorously it acts, and the more certainty it carries along with it, that it
is sincere and unfeigned: now if this evidence and certainty were such as did
of its own nature minister to security and negligence, better it were that I
should content my self with the Faith and Love of a Child, then of a grown and
perfect man.

II. In answer to the second question, Whether Faith do consist in assurance, I
answer by laying down this Proposition.

Faith consists not in Assurance either that a man loves God, or is loved of
God, or that God has pardoned him, or will save him; yea, true Faith may be in
him, in whom there is no such persuasion.

This Proposition seems most clear to me; yet I may fear it will not down with
all, because some are used to the definitions of men of very great name, who
make a Christian man's Faith to be a persuasion that Christ died for him and
has procured the pardon of his sins, and the salvation of his soul. Which
Phrases are in themselves capable of a good construction. Every Believer is
persuaded that Christ has procured Remission of his sins, and salvation to
be bestowed on him in Gods way, and upon Gods terms and conditions; but they
expound themselves thus, That it is of the nature of true Faith to make a man
persuaded, that remission of sins is not only by Christ obtained for him, but
also applied to him, and that God by an unchangeable decree elected him to
eternal salvation. Now this is an error, and such an error as though it has
had too many followers; yet has always, especially, in England; met with some
to oppose it as appears by Mr. John Foxe's Treatise De Christo gratis
justificante. But till of late no man took so much pains strenuously to refute
it, as did Mr. John Down, in Vindication of his Sermon from the Exceptions of
Mr. Nathaniel Baxter sometimes Lecturer of the City of Bristoll. The arguments
he then made use of, are so strong, that I need not put my self to the trouble
of excogitating new ones, but shall as to the substance of what I say, plow
with his heifer.

1. This persuasion and particular application they speak of cannot be Faith,
because it is frequently lost. This argument holds strong against those who
deny that true Faith can be lost, (such are all with whom I now deal) unless
they will say, that the persuasion of Gods special love is never lost, which is
contrary to manifest experience. For had not, Heman the Ezrahite lost it, when
he cries out Psa. 88, v. 3. My soul is full of trouble, and my life draws
nigh unto the grave, I am counted with them that go down into the pit, I am as
a man that has no strength, free among the dead, thy wrath lies hard on me,
thou have afflicted me with all thy waves, how many have we our selves known
delighting themselves with spiritual suavities, filled with joy unspeakable and
full of glory? yet within a short time down in the mouth again, questioning
whether ever they had the Spirit, whether all that in which they blessed
themselves were not a mere delusion.

2. Faith cannot be this persuasion, because some true Believers never did,
never can attain unto such persuasion. I instance in those who do maintain
principles quite inconsistent with it, viz. Lutherans. This is plainly
acknowledged by Laterman, a Lutheran Divine of Regiomount, for the which
concession he is censured and condemned by some of his own party, by none more
bitterly then by Walther, but certainly without a cause; for by the principles
they proceed upon, no man ordinarily can be certain of his Election, or
perseverance, till he be breathing out his last breath: let them frame what
practical Syllogismes they will, it will be found, that either the Major is
false or the Minor doubtful and uncertain, as will appear to any who will but
take the pains to form all the answers by which Brockman labors to quiet the
conscience of one doubting concerning his election, loco de Praed. page 689.
into Syllogisms; He there bids a Man be certain of his election that finds
himself to love Christ, and diligently to endeavor the reformation of his
life, thence the Syllogism will be. He that loves Christ, and diligently
endeavors to amend his life, is ordained to eternal life; I love Christ and
endeavor diligently to amend my life therefore I am ordained to eternal life:
Is the Major here true or false? if it be true, then it is their error to say
that love to Christ is not proper to the elect; if it be false, what becomes of
the conclusion inferred from it. If it be said, which is all they can say, that
if aman can feel in his heart a sense of Gods love, he may thence infer a
conditional certainty of his election viz, If he shall persevere in his love,
that is no more then what the non-Elect may have. Suppose we one of them to
know that he is a believer, yet cannot he thence infer that he is elected, or
shall persevere to eternal life, because he neither thinks true faith to be
proper to Gods elect, nor to have any promise of certain perseverance made to
it: to say that none of these brethren are true believers, is the highest
uncharitableness, for what Scripture is it says, that it is essential to
Christianity, to be rightly informed concerning the connection of faith with
election? or where is this doctrine so clearly revealed in the word, as that
all must needs be supposed to be wilfully blind who will not see and
acknowledge it.

3. This persuasion is in order of Nature after Faith, therefore the nature of
Faith cannot lie in it. The Antecedent is presently proved, because I must
first be in the favor of God, which I cannot be but by Faith, 'ere I can know
or be persuaded that I am in the favor of God; for a proposition is always in
order of nature true, before it is known to be true, as every man's reason does
tell him. And this order, as it has its foundation in reason, so also in
Scripture: 1 John 5.13. These things have I written to you that believe in the
name of the Son of God, that ye may know ye have eternal life. Bellarmine saw
this, and therefore inferrs, that according to the opinion commonly received
among Reformed Divines in his time, men are justified before they do believe:
and methinks the learned Chamier does not like himself, when he goes about to
untie this knot, for he says, that Faith does, if not in order of time, yet of
nature, follow justification; a saying contrary to the whole current of
Scripture.

4. If Faith did consist in this persuasion, it would follow that some who do
hear the Gospel, either were not bound to believe, or were bound to believe a
lie. That any who hear the Gospel should not be bound to believe, cannot be,
for then unbelief would be no sin to them; and if no sin, then could it not
deserve condemnation; when as we know from Scripture, that it is the condemning
sin: And that some, if obliged to believe that either they are elected, or
justified, would be bound to believe a lie, is as plain; for certainly, among
those that hear the Gospel, some are not chosen, nor pardoned. But what is more
absurd, then that any man should be bound to believe a lie? can any thing be
the object of faith but what is true? or any thing the object of Divine Faith,
but what is so true that it cannot be false?

More need not be said against this error. But it will be asked, whether,
though the nature of Faith do not consist in this assurance, yet it be not that
which every believer does some time or other find? or whether any Child of God
do so walk in darkness, as that the light of Gods countenance is never lifted
up on him, no not before his death.

This I shall endeavor to answer by the following conclusions.

1. No question, as the Sun, after it has for all the day been hid in the
clouds, does sometimes show it self and that gloriously just before it sets; so
the Faith of a Christian, after it has for the greatest part of his life been
clouded with doubts and fears, does near unto his death sometimes so manifest
it self by some lively acts, as that he can no longer doubt of its sincerity,
but cries out my Lord, my Savior. In that little, experience I have had in the
world, I have known sundry who have all their life been subject to fears, and
filled every Minister and Christian of their acquaintance with dreadful
complaints against themselves; who yet, when they have been on their
deathbeds, or have apprehended themselves so to be, have triumphed over death
in the Apostles language, O death, where is thy sting? O grave where is thy
victory? 1 Cor. 15. They that are in the least conversant in our English
Martyrology, cannot but know how usual it was with God to seal up his love to
his servants just when he called them out to set their own seals to his truth;
so high was their assurance, that you would have thought that they had heard
the Music of the Celestial Choire, when they heard the rattling of the chains
with which they were to be tied to the stake. When Mr. Robert Glover was
condemned to die, and was now at a point to be delivered out of the world, it
so happened, that two or three days before, his heart being lumpish, and
destitute of all true consolation, he felt in himself no aptness, but rather an
heaviness (I all along use Mr. Fox his own words) and dullness of Spirit, fall
of much discomfort, to bear the bitter cross of Martyrdom; whereupon fearing in
himself lest the Lord had utterly withdrawn his wonted favor from him, he made
his moan to a Minister, complaining how earnestly he had prayed day and night,
and yet could receive no motion nor sense of comfort from God: but so soon as
he came to the sight of the stake, he was so mightily replenished with Gods
holy comfort and heavenly joys that he cried out, clapping his hands, Austin,
(that was the name of the Minister to whom he had complained) He is come, he is
come. The Apostles that did always bear about in their bodies the dying of our
Lord Jesus, that were always delivered unto death for Jesus sake, had also the
life of Christ made so manifest in them, that though they were troubled on
every side, yet they were not distressed; did so constantly and assuredly know,
that he which raised up Jesus, would raise them up also by Jesus, and that
their light affl^ctions which were but for a moment wrought for them a far more
exceeding eternal weight of glory, that they did not faint, but rather waxed
more bold by their bonds. The same truth might also be compassed about with a
cloud of witnesses of such as did die a natural death: But that work is done to
our hands by Melchior Adam, and others, who have delivered to us the story of
the life and death of men famous in their generations for piety and learning.
Yea, so usual is it with Christ's Disciples to have their inward man renewed day
by day, when their outward man perishes, that the Psalmist speaks
indefinitely, mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that
man is peace, Psalm. 37.37.

II. Sometimes it falls out quite otherways; those who in their life time have
had much enjoyment of the sense of Gods love, and through it have comforted
themselves and others, have yet died with little, if any, assurance, or actual
comfort, this God suffers for many holy, wise ends and purposes; as,

1. To quicken others up to the greater preparation. When death is at a
distance, we are apt to think it is but an easy thing to die: But when we
shall see that the approaches of death have startled and grievously affrighted
those whom we ever judged to excel us in grace, we must needs, if not fast
asleep, begin to look about us, and to consider, whether we with our weak
imperfect graces are able to meet with that Prince of terrors? and the more
importunately to pray for, and depend upon some strength greater then our own.

2. God may permit it judicially, for the hardening of profane Worldlings and
carnallists; who seeing some of their loose companions to go out of the world
like lambs, to have no bands in their death, Psalm. 73. to depart quiet,
peaceable, confident, void of impatience, despair, or fear; and others, who
have made greater profession of Godliness, and endeavored after greater
exactness, die under many troublesome, disquieting thoughts, presently
conclude, that all which conscientious Ministers press upon their followers, is
but unnecessary sowerness, and melancholy simplicity. God counts not himself
any way engaged to remove such stones at which he foresees such self-deluding
sots will stumble and fall, and never rise more; rather he may seem on purpose
to order it so, that they who will get no good by his Servants life, shall
receive no benefit by their death.

3. As a punishment to his Servants for their declinings and fallings from
their first love, a sin big enough to provoke him to remove his Candlestick
from a whole Church, Rev. 2.4, 5. much more not to let his candle shine on the
tabernacle of some one single Christian, how eminent soever. As love perfects
its self, so fear is cast out, 1 John 4.18. but as love weakeneth or declineth,
so fear returns and tormenteth. Unto which three reasons, we may add,

4. Such is the nature of some diseases, that they do cloud the Fancy, and
muffle the understanding; and if so, it is no wonder that the best of men do
make false judgment of themselves, and fly away from death, as if Christ had
never overcome it. No wonder that a mind discomposed with bodily distempers
recoils at the sight of eternity; rather it is a wonder, that a believer, when
he is most himself, can think of that condition without astonishment; so
amazing is the contemplation of it to those who are accustomed to measure all
actions and perfections by time.

5. The Devil at such a time will be sure to stir up and make use of all his
malice and subtilty. It Is said of the natural Serpent, non nisi moriens in
longum producitur, it is never at its full length till it be dying. The old
Serpent never so much shows himself in his full dimensions, as when a Christian
is dying; when he is just on the borders of the heavenly Canaan, he will then,
if he he cannot trip up, yet bruise his heels, that he may enter in halting and
uncomfortable; as he would not be tormented before his time, so nor would he
that a Christian should rejoice, before his time, hence he casts a mist before
his eyes, that he may not see his interest in that place of bliss unto which he
is hastening apace; when his time of tempting is but short, then usually he
comes with the greatest fury.

III. I think it is rarely seen, that any understanding Christian, walking
closely with God, does run out the whole course of his life without some
assurance of the love of God. It Is not likely, that any one should for months
and years be joined to the Lord, and made one spirit with him, and the Lord not
let him know that he loves him; in Gods ordinary way of working, the spirit of
bondage does but make way for the Spirit of adoption. But yet,

IIII. It Is not impossible, that a Christian should live in ignorance of his
own estate all his days. I do not find, in my best search of Scripture, that
God has any where promised, that every true Faith shall bud and blossom, in
assurance, or that he who is a Believer shall some time or other know himself
so to be; and if God has made no promise to work assurance some time or other
in every one whom he converts, nothing there can be concluded to the contrary
from reason: for arguing rationally, why may not he who wants it one year, want
it ten? or he that wants it ten, want it all the years that he spends in the
flesh? If any one will contradict us in this, it behooves him to show us any
thing essential to a Christian, which may not in some sort be in the want of
assurance.

Obj. This leads to laziness and idleness; for if men may be in the favor of
God, and have a title to happiness, and not know so much, they will not care
though they live and die in ignorance of their condition.

Answ. 1. If such a Doctrine were delivered in another matter no such use would
be made of it. If I should say, that bread and water were as much as is
necessary to keep life and soul together, would men thereupon resolve to take
no care, or have any thoughts for any provision beyond bread and water? why
should Christians then, when they hear that the being of Godliness may be kept
up without assurance, take up there?

2. It Is a sin to want assurance: We should as well have peace in our own
Consciences, as peace with God; nor are our hearts sprinkled from an evil
Conscience, till we have so. I know active desertion, or Gods withdrawing of
his shining manifestation is not our sin, even Jesus Christ himself, who though
he was made sin, yet knew no sin, was deserted, which made him to cry out, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? When he so cried out, we may well
conceive, and most sober Divines do conceive, he was under the want of the
influence of actual vision, and of the actual joy and comfort of union; nor
will I deny but that God may withdraw out of Sovereignty, or for the mere trial
and exercise of our graces: but whether ever he did so, is more then I know; or
should he now do so, it would be but for a season: if for any long time we want
Assurance, it is through weakness of Faith, or through spiritual sloth, or some
other as sinful distemper. He that bids us work out our salvation, and make
our calling and election sure, would not let us be at uncertainties concerning
our selves, did we not slight some Ordinance or omit some Duty, or give way to
some Lust.

3. Though one may be a Child of God who does want this Assurance, yet is there
no Child of God who sits down satisfied under the want of it, who does not
desire to attain to the full assurance of hope? Uncertainty of our condition is
not so light an evil, as that a Christian can carry it, as if it were no
burden; nay, but he follows Christ with unutterable sighs and groans; he
travelleth from Ordinance to Ordinance, till his Evidences be cleared up, and
his Title to the Promises of Pardon be made out. If a Child should have some
doubt thrown into his mind concerning his Fathers love to him, would he be at
rest till it were removed? How then can any Believer be himself under
prevailing doubts concerning the good will of his Heavenly Father? Has God
promised us his Spirit to seal us up to the day of redemption; has he besides
his Covenant given us his Sacraments, that we might have the more abundant
consolation; and after all this shall we quietly sit in the dark as if nothing
ailed us? how then dwells the love of God in us? Especially those who have
sometimes had the light of Gods countenance shining on them, and have after
lost it, must needs be restless till they have recovered it. Thou did hide
thy face, and I was troubled, Psalm. 30. v. 7. Troubled with a witness, for it
was his daily sorrow of heart, yea, it was as death to him; for this he made
his tears day and night, he poured out his soul in him; and his upbraidings by
his enemies with this, were as a sword in his bones, Psalm. 42.3, 4, 10. As for
the Spouse in the Canticles, we do find Chap. 5. v. 6. that when her beloved
had withdrawn himself and was gone, her soul failed when she spoke; she sought,
but she could not find him; she called, but he made no answer: Hereupon she
goes to the Watchmen, to the Daughters of Jerusalem, charging them, if they
found her beloved, to tell him, she was sick of love, v. 7.8. He never duly
estimated the friendship of Christ, who can bear his strangeness without great
sorrow and heaviness of heart.

In answer to the third question, How, or in what way assurance is wrought by
the Spirit, I say,

His way of working is very dark and mysterious, and assurance it self is
better felt then expressed; compared therefore, as some conceive, Rev. 2.17. to
the Manna that is hid, and to the white stono, and the new name written in the
stone, which no man knows, saving he that receives it. The Spirit working in
our, regeneration is inexpressible; compared therefore, John 3. to the Wind
that blows where it lists, the sound whereof we hear, but know not whence
it comes, nor whether it goes: his working in assuring us that we are
regenerate, is much more inexpressible. There are two kinds of Acts in the
soul: 1. Direct Acts, such as is that by which the soul cleaves to Christ, or
lays hold on him, or believes in him for remission of sins and salvation. 2.
Reflex Acts, such as is that by which a man returns on himself, and does though
not believe, yet know that he believes, believes sincerely: Such reflex acts,
are the most noble royal operations' the most refined Spiritual workings,
sufficient, if we had no other arguments, to prove the souls immortality. But
such workings of the soul usually are but weak and transient; Radius reflexus
languet, is the rule in Optics; and which leaves us at a greater loss, those
places of Scripture from which we should borrow our light in this matter, are
so vexed with variety of descants and interpretations, that it is not easy to
know what to make of them; It would quite tire out the patience of an ordinary
Reader, if I should but recite the variety of Comments on that place. 1 John
5.8. There are three that bear record on earth; the Spirit, the Water, the
Blood; and these three agree in one. That indeed seems to be more plain, Romans
8.16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are the
children of God. But first Grotius will have (...) to be no more then (...) and
he brings for proof a place or two in Scripture, in which it seems to be so
used, because it is applied to the witness of Conscience; well, having no other
foundation to build his conceit on, we may easily rid our hands of him; for the
witness of conscience is a joint witness, it witnesses together with God, and
is therefore called as some think (...). But then granting that (...) does
signify a joint-witnessing, it will not be so easy to find out what the other
partner is that is joined with Gods Spirit in this action; as we translate, it
should seem to be our own Spirit; But the Rhemists translate, not with our
Spirit, but to our Spirit, which translation is put into the Margin of the
English Bibles now read, and was in the Text of those formerly used; and then
it will be a question, whether our spirit be not the joint-witnesser, but only
the recipient of this witness, and the joint-witnesser the Son of God, or that
voice caused in us by the Spirit of God. Yet because some do therefore want
assurance because they look for it in an undue and unwarrantable manner,
expecting some vocal testimony to tell them, that they are the children of
God, I shall therefore endeavor to unfold the matter as I am able. And this I
lay down in the first place.

That look in what way the Spirit of bondage does work Fear, in the same way
the Spirit of Adoption does work Hope and Assurance: now the Spirit brings
unconverted persons under fears and troubles concerning their estate, by
convincing them of the demerit of sin, and showing them that they are under the
power of sin, John, 16.8. He will convince the world of sin, (...) is errorem
pr^conceptum profligare, and (...) is (...), and that fallacy in which
something only seemingly and not really contradictory to the question is
proved, is called ab ignoratione elenebi. The secure unconsidering sinner lives
in sin, as if it were a very harmless innocent thing, he makes a mock of it:
The Spirit therefore to awaken him out of his security, and to put him under a
necessity of enquiring after a Savior, does, joining with his conscience,
bring him under a threefold conviction, of Law, of fact, of state, by some
such Syllogisms.

Every liar shall have his portion in the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone.

I am a Liar.

Therefore, I shall have my portion in the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone.

Or

He that believes not, is condemned already.

I believe not.

Therefore, I am condemned already,

Or

He that hates his brother is a murderer, and has not eternal life.

I hate my Brother.

Therefore, I am a Murderer, and have not eternal life.

These are all of them conclusions quite contradictory to the vain principles
that did dwell in the secure sinner; which being set home by the Spirit, must
needs make him fear what shall become of him. In like manner does the Spirit
bring the heirs of the promise, to the assurance of hope, by some such
practical Syllogisms as these.

He that loves the Brethren is passed from death to life.

I love the Brethren.

Therefore, I am passed from death to life.

Or,

He that repents and believes shall be saved.

I repent and believe.

Therefore, I shall be saved.

Now the Spirit has revealed, and inspired holy men to leave upon record to us
the Propositions in these two Syllogisms; the same Spirit also works in us that
Faith by which we are enabled to believe those Scripture Propositions to be
divine infallible truths; he also works in us every gracious habit, and
exciteth those gracious acts, which be the evidences and marks of our
conversion, justification, and title to glory; he also helps to feel and
discover those acts in our selves, and by comparing them with the rule, to find
their sincerity, which is his concurrence with Conscience in making the
assumption, and lastly he helps sanctified reason from the premises to infer
the Conclusion: whatever is beyond this is not essential to assurance, but
something separable from it. Sometimes our assent to the premises and
conclusion is stronger, sometimes weaker; hence the different degrees of
assurance; sometimes upon this assurance and peace of Conscience, we are
marvellously enlarged with consolations, called joy in the holy Ghost,
sometimes nor.

Obj. Some may say, Is there no other way of working assurance but this? does
not God sometimes testify without any such discourse and ratiocination? has
he confined himself to Syllogisms? does he not sometimes make some impressions
on us by which we are assured that we are the children of God, without the help
or use of any argumentation.

Answ. I have been always apt to think that there is no other ordinary way of
assuring the soul, partly because the Scripture no where encourages us to look
for assurance in any other way, and partly because to grant an immediate
testimony seemed to me to open such a gap to Euthusiasme as it was impossible
well to shut; and I am somewhat imboldned in that sentiment by the concurrent
judgment of a sober judicious Divine, Mr. Tho. Blake, who in his Treatise of
the Covenant thus expresses himself. They that go about to assert an immediate
testimony in any, will never secure the soul from delusion; Satan will soon
find an artifice to counterfeit this testimony, and bear witness in the Spirits
stead; and when we think that we have the Spirit of truth to assure us, we
shall have the father of lies to deceive. But in regard many of eminent piety
and learning do assert an immediate testimony, it may not be amiss to enquire a
little what they mean by it, and how they do bound it, and then to show what
may be thought of it. By this immediate Testimony they tell us, that they do
not mean any proper whisper or voice, such as young Converts, mistaking such
Scripture phrases as Say unto my soul, thou art my salvation, are apt to wait
for; but they say it is a persuasion impressed upon a man suddenly, and he
knows not how, quieting all his doubts and fears, and making him cheerful and
comfortable. If you ask them, How a Child of God, who is to try all things,
dare adventure to take any such comfort, how he knows it not to be a delusion
of Satan? they tell us, that as there is in the eye a certain inbred light, to
make it discern light and colors without; a sound and air within the ear, to
make it discern the sounds without; So there is in a godly man grace, a new
nature, and habitual instinct of heaven, whereby it discernes the consolations
of Gods Spirit testifying that he is the Son of God, some secret and
inexpressible lineaments of the fathers countenance in the child, that the
renewed soul at the very first blush knows, and owns it. Moreover they tell us,

1. That although the Spirit thus testify without application of any
particular word, yet he never testifies contrary to the word, he never speaks
to those who are regenerate though they do not know themselves to be such.

2. That the Spirit does not ordinarily thus testify, but after or in
attendance on some ordinance, or performance of some duty, or after some very
great abasement of a man's Spirit, and more then ordinary soul-humiliation, or
after some very hard adventure for God, or after some great combat and conflict
with temptation.

3. That such of the Testimonies of the Spirit do beget but an actual
assurance, during the present exigence, or in order to some present design that
God is working thereby.

Now to give my sense of this opinion.

1. The Authors of it seem so to bound it, as that it would be uncharitableness
to think that they have any ill or pernicious design in it.

2. The things which they say are done by impression, are not without
ratiocination, only the ratiocination is not so distinct and explicit as when
a man comes to his assurance by that difficult work of examination.
Philosophers say, that what is done by beasts through instinct and impulse, is
not done without something analogous to ratiocination; they commonly give us
the examples of such Syllogisms as they suppose to be made by beasts, as namely
lambs, when they come to their dams and fly away from the wolves. So I
conceive, that in all the impressions made on the soul, whether they be by way
of comfort or incitation to duty, there be some characters either in the matter
or manner of them, either in their holiness, or greatness, or vehemence, or
unusualness, by which a Christian knows them to be from God, and so accordingly
rests in them, the which characters did he not find, he would either not regard
them, or reject them with abhorrence.

3. I would not have any one lay the stress of his hope of heaven on any such
impression; nor upon the account of any such impression alter his opinion in
reference to any point of Doctrine, or adventure upon any practice that is in
the least questionable unto him. If he should, I take it, he would give the
devil great advantage against him, and subject himself to infinite delusions,
as will soon be manifest to him that will be at the pains to read over the
discourses of Dr. Casaubon, and Dr. Moore concerning Enthusiasme. Mr. John Fox,
our holy and learned Martyrologist, had many impressions, some of which are
taken notice of by his son in the History of his life; but did they not
sometimes fail him, and discover themselves to be neither Divine nor True? Let
any one judge by his Comment on the Revelations. He was much troubled about
that place, Rev. 13.5. Where it is said, that the Beast had power to continue
forty two months: after much prayer he had, though not a voice, yet, an
impression so strong, that a voice from heaven could scarce have made him more
confident, that he must count these months by Sabbaths, as Daniels weeks are
counted by Sabbaths; he did so by the help of some Merchants, and found the
years to be Two hundred ninety four, just the time of the ten first
persecutions, Doubtless therefore says he, that was the time of the Beast. But
who follows him in this? who almost, though he cannot confirm his own
interpretation, does not think himself able to overthrow this?

4. The most ordinary and safe way of coming to Assurance, is that I before
mentioned, The discursive way, in which a Believer from the fruits and effects
of grace inferrs he has the habit, and from the habit concludes his
justification and adoption. This is proved,

1. Because as it is a way least subject to delusion, so is it also most suited
to a rational creature, whose way of acting is by discourse and argumentation:
If any Problem be propounded to the Understanding which is not of it self
known and evident, the Understanding naturally falls to finding out some middle
term or argument, by which it may prove that the Predicate does or does not
agree to the Subject; let any man whatever try, and he will find he cannot do
otherwise: And how little would be the difference betwixt a man and a beast, if
a man should assent to a thing unknown through an instinct and impression, and
should to one who asks him a reason of his persuasion be able to return nothing
in answer but this, I am persuaded because I am persuaded.

2. We must also make Christ to have put himself to a very unnecessary expense,
in inspiring holy men to give unto us so many descriptions of Grace, so many
characters, by which the power of Godliness may be known from the form, if we
were not to come to the knowledge of our grace by making practical Syllogismes
before mentioned.

3. Nor should we so often and so earnestly be called on to try and examine our
selves, whether we be in the faith, if we were not to come to the knowledge of
our faith in a discursive way, arguing from the Effect to the Cause: Nor can we
give a better reason, why our good works are called fruits, then this, Because
as the Tree is known by its Fruits, (for a good tree cannot bring forth bad
fruit, nor a bad tree good fruits) so the Heart by what proceeds from it, is
known whether it be good or evil.

4. We find the Saints in Scripture coming to their Assurance this way: Our
rejoicing is this, the testimony of a good conscience, that in godly sincerity
we have had our conversation in the world, 2 Cor. 1.12. His joy was founded on
the testimony of his Conscience, but from what did his Conscience testify?
from his sincere conversation. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. I have fought a good fight, I
have finished my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth is laid up for me a
crown of righteousness. How plainly does he here conclude his right to the
Crown of Life from his having fulfilled the terms of the Covenant of Grace?
Nay, in Scripture we do find that men are exhorted to do good works, that by
them they may ascertain themselves of their Calling, Election, Salvation, 2
Pet. 1.10. Give diligence to make your calling and election sure by good works:
so it is in all the Latin copies, so in some Greek copies; not in those that
our English Translators followed, which is the reason why they are not in the
English Bibles, not as the Rhemists do slander us, because we do not like them;
for as Dr. Fulke well replies, the circumstance of the place does of necessity
require that good works be understood, though they be not expressed in the
Text. And the Rich, 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. are exhorted not to trust in uncertain
riches, but in the living God; to do good, to be rich in good works, ready to
distribute, willing to communicate; to what end? that they might lay up in
store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, and lay hold
of eternal life. The least that can hence be inferred is, that good works are a
foundation of evidence; or if any one dislike the term foundation, and shall
choose rather, with Petit, to translate, a Bill of contract, a Bond, or
Obligation, it comes much to the same; for thence it will be easy to infer,
That he who is rich in good works, receives and lays up an Obligation from
God, that this mercy of his shall have it is recompense of reward.

5. What need we go further then the experience of Christians? Do not all find
that their Assurance is higher or lower, according as they can more or less
discern the fruits of holiness? When they are dead, lumpish, does not Hope then
fail or flag? And if any after backsliding be as confident of his estate as
ever he was before such backsliding, do we not think that man's Faith was
Presumption?

Now of this that has been said concerning the way of attaining Assurance,
several good Uses may be made.

I. It confutes those who condemn all use of Signs and Marks, asserting that we
are presently to believe that God loves us with a special love. The late times,
among many other sad effects, produced or brought abroad sundry who in their
printed Pamphlets did make it a sin to doubt, or once to enquire whether we be
in Christ; saying, that we do never find that any in the course of Christ's or
his Disciples preaching that did ask the question, Whether they believed, or
whether their faith were sincere? But what if none did ask that question then,
must none ask it now? Are all the various conditions of troubled souls set down
in particular examples in the New Testament? If any one had then doubted of the
sincerity of his graces, could he (unless some one had been present that had
the gift of discerning spirits) have been cured of his doubts any other way
then by examining himself by marks and signs? But doubtless there were then
some who did doubt, or else the Apostle saw they had reason to doubt; for when
he exhorts, 1 Cor. 11.28. Let a man examine himself, and Gal. 6.4. Let every
man prove his own work, none can rationally think his meaning was, Let a man
take it for granted that his state is good, and force himself into a persuasion
that his work is acceptable to God; he that should so do would neither have
rejoicing in himself alone, nor in another. But this evil spirit of
Antinomianisme is pretty well (blessed be God) laid, and I will not dispute
against it, lest I should raise it again; only I judge it not unmeet to answer
one Objection.

Object. It may seem, that to take any evidence from our graces, is to receive
humane witness to the things of God, which is incongruous.

Answ. I understand not but we may receive an humane testimony to witness the
things of God, though the last resolution of Divine Faith must be into Divine
Veracity. But we need not enter into that dispute for the answer of this
objection; for our graces are not wrought in us by our own power, but by the
power of God; and if they were, yet they are only the means by which our
condition is known to us; the efficient cause of this knowledge is the Spirit
illustrating our graces, and making them visible, and enabling us to conclude
from them.

II. Here Is terror to all those wicked persons, who persuade themselves that
they are the Children of God, though they have in them none of the marks of the
children of God. I know we are apt to be deceived by others, and much more
(...) to use St. James his word, Jam. 1.22. to deceive, to put a fallacy on our
selves. Yet a man would wonder how they who pretend to reason, should be able
so to impose on themselves, or where they found the premises from which they
infer that conclusion that they are the children of God: Does the Scripture
any where say, that they who walk not after the Spirit, but after the flesh,
shall live? or that drunkards and swearers shall inherit the Kingdom of God?
if the Scripture say not this, but the clean contrary, how come they then to
promise themselves peace? Are they still to learn that God is not such a one as
themselves, or that they must be judged not according to the proverbs that pass
for current among men, but according to the law of liberty? Since this law does
every where condemn them, how is it that their own Consciences do not condemn
them also? Is it not only because they do torture and wrest the Scriptures,
and so to bring them down to their own humor and fancies? But do they not do
this to their own destruction? must not the great day of necessity shake, bring
down this house, which has no foundation but their own imaginations, exalting
themselves against the knowledge of God? Let all such, if they be not as
perfectly void of common sense and reason as they be of Divine Faith, but
consider these Scriptures, Gal. 6.7, 8. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, for
whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reaps for he that sows to the
flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Know ye not the
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither
fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of
themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor
revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. Or if they will
not hearken to the stiller voice of the Gospel, let them yet hearken to the
thunder of the Law, Deuteronomy. 29.18, 19, 20, 21. Lest there should be a root among
you that bears gall and worm wood, and it come to pass when he hears the
words of this curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have
peace, though I walk after the imagination of my heart to add drunkenness to
thirst, the Lord will not spare him, but then the anger of the Lord and his
jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that are written in
this Book shall light on him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under
heaven, and the Lord shall separate him for evil.

III. Let all that fear God be persuaded to make use of this way of getting
Assurance, and not think to get it by I know not what Enthusiastical
injections, or by going up and down with complaints against themselves, but
look for it in this way of trial and examination. Let not any one say, that the
Writing of God is so blurred and blotted that he cannot tell what to make of
it, the Waters so mudded that he despairs of ever seeing his face in them; for,

1. If some signs be not visible, others may, and they will suffice to lead
thee to the conclusion that thou art in the Bond of the Covenant; if thou can
not take comfort in some Qualifications, yet there are others that will afford.
If thou can not find Faith, yet can thou not deny but thou fear God, and
tremblest at his Word, why these are marks of a child of God, Isa. 50.10. Isa.
66.2. and so is a desire to fear God, Neh. 1.11. only be sure it be an
earnest, unwearied, industrious desire.

2. But if any man be under such sad dark temptations as that he can see no
light at all, if he be confusion all over, such a one I advise not to examine;
examination at such a time is not a duty, but serves only to breed further
fears and uncertainties: In such a case let a man put forth the first act of
Faith, cast himself on God, commit himself to him in well doing; he has a
command so to do, therefore he need not fear it will be an act of presumption;
he has a promise if he do so that he shall be safe, let him therefore so do;
and in continuance so to do, he shall, if by any way, come to find, that he
has laid hold on the Covenant, and that his condition before, though it was
not comfortable, was safe, and known to God, though not to himself.

Quest. 4. What Is the reason why the children of God do want Assurance? or how
comes it to pass that all who have grace do not presently know themselves to
have it.

Answ. This is not one Question, but two, and therefore without distinction no
one thing can be replied to it. The word Reason (all one with cause) may either
refer to the meritorious or final cause; either the meaning of the Question is,
what are the gracious Intendments and Purposes of God in permitting his
Children to want Assurance? or what are the ways by which they do sinfully
procure unto themselves the want of Assurance. Of these I will speak
distinctly, though, I take it, they are but rarely separated: God does not
usually let his servants be under darkness, but for sin; and he would not
permit them to fall into sin, but that he has an intent to make those very
falls, and the punishments he inflicts because of them, subservient to his
glory, and their good.

Quest. 1. Therefore enquire we why the Father of Lights suffers the Children
of light to walk in darkness? why he sets the seal and impression of the Spirit
so obscurely upon them, that they do not know themselves to be sealed with it
to the day of redemption? especially, seeing he does hereby lose a very great
tribute of praise and glory? For how can they praise God for this though
incomparable gift, if they know not themselves to have received it? How can
they rejoice in the hope of glory, if they find not in themselves the Spirit,
the only seed and root of this hope.

Answ. This notwithstanding, there are diverse good reasons why the Lord when he
has put grace into our hearts may yet not publish it in our consciences. For,

1. If we speak not of moderate, but of high Assurance, I think it is a wine
too strong for our weak heads, a wine too strong for our vessels to hold long;
a glimpse of it is enough to dazzle the eye of the understanding; neither our
bodies, nor our souls can long hold much of Heavens glory; consult experience,
and you will find it so. Peter, James, and John, were upon the mount of
Transfiguration, but they were then besides themselves, they knew not what they
said, Mar. 9.6. Paul, when he was wrapped up into the third Heavens, saw things
that he could not utter; but the sight transported him, whether he were in the
body, or out of the body, he could not tell, 2 Cor. 12.3, 4. Some Christians,
especially of the weaker sex, being all affection, do too much slight a settled
calm and peace of soul, as if it were little worth, falling upon such passages
as Romans 15. Filled with all joy in believing; and rejoicing with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. They think God has forsaken them,
and that they want faith, when they find not such a sugared joy and delight (as
the judicious Mr. Richard Hooker sitly calls it, page 546.) but to such I say,
they know not their own strength; should God so feast them continually, they
would be less healthy and sound, unfit for the duties of their ordinary
particular callings and employments; too much honey (as it follows in the same
Author, Ibid.) does turn to gall, and too much joy, even spiritual, would make
us wantons; yea, as the full spring tide is preparatory to a low ebb, so
usually these highest passionate joys do make way for, or at least go before,
the highest sorrows and fears: therefore it is well, all things considered,
that such cordials are not made our diet, that such suavities are not common.

But if we speak even of Moderate Assurance, there be sundry Reasons that may
move God to let his servants be without that, at least, for a season.

1. To keep them from Relapses. Should a Father, after manifold foul
miscarriages, upon the first submission of his Son, receive him to Table, and
entertain him with Paternal smiles, he would but encourage him to return to his
former disorderly conversation; but by keeping him at a distance, and returning
into favor with him by degrees, he makes him more watchful. Semblably, if God,
upon our first recovery from the sins into which we have fallen, should
presently pardon us, not only in the Court of Heaven, but also in the Court of
Conscience; if he should not only pardon us, but also let us have the
assurance of pardon, we might be apt to take up too slight thoughts of sins
guilt, and too easily run into the occasions of it; but by letting us feel the
smart and anguish of sin, for days, months, years, he makes us more watchful,
he causes us to make the straighter paths unto our feet for ever after. David
being left under the anguish of broken bones, under the quick and smart sense
of his Murder and Adultery, did more ever after dread those sins, then ever did
a burnt Child dread the fire: Let no man say, that it is a low and legal
business to keep from sin because of its bitterness; for though I grant that
the love of God be the most perfect motive, yet it is not the most proper and
powerful, for those who are flesh as well as spirit: and I verily believe, the
most refined Christians, had they not either felt the smart of sin themselves,
or conversed with those that had, would make too many bold adventures on the
patience, forbearance, and long-sufferance of God. After all this is come on us
for our evil deeds, aod for our great trespass, should we again break thy
Commandments? Ezr. 9.13, 14.

2. To keep them Humble. For though times of Assurance should be times of
Humility, yet few are of so strong a grace as to be able to digest so great an
happiness: Pride will not sooner breed in any thing then in those sweet
consolations that are shed abroad in our hearts by the Spirit of God, assuring
us of our interest in the Promises; that vision of God which is apt in its own
nature to make the soul abhor it self in dust and ashes, Job 42.5, 6. does,
through the corruption in us, but puff it up. When St. Paul had been in the
third Heavens, enjoying Revelations to an hyperbole, God then thinks meet to
buffet him with the Messenger of Satan: after such extraordinary Vision of
God, he was ready to look on himself rather as an Angel, then as flesh and
blood: therefore was there given him a thorn in the flesh. He had either some
very violent temptation to some fleshly lust, or some other very piercing
trial; and he tells us twice in one verse, 2 Cor. 12.7. that this befell him,
lest he should be exalted above measure. Also when Moses had been in the Mount,
and had acquired a luster by conversing with God, it is so ordered, that at the
very foot of the Mount he meets with something to humble him, and take him
down; Thy people have made a golden Calf: then which, no words could possibly
have more cut his heart. Our Savior who vouchsafed to be tempted like unto us
in all things, was then led of the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of
the Devil, when he had just heard the voice, This is my well-beloved Son in
whom I am well pleased, Matthew. 3.17.4.1. Happier a great deal is that man's
case, whose soul by inward desolation is humbled, then he, whose heart is
through abundance of spiritual delight lifted up, and exalted above measure.
Better it is sometimes to go down into the Pit with him, who beholding
darkness, and bewailing the loss of inward joy and consolation, cries from the
bottom of the lowest Hell, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? then
continually to walk arm in arm with Angels, to sit, as it were, in Abraham's
bosom, and to have no thought, no cogitation, but I thank my God, it is not
with me as with others: says the learned Hooker, page 546.

3. God may hide his face from his servants, and let them be in dark, to make
them the more earnest in their prayers and supplications. As among us, Fathers
do hide themselves that their Children may seek after them, and purposely make
as if they did not hear, that they may either come nearer them, or cry louder.
None more servent, none more frequent in prayers, then they who did once live
in the light of Gods countenance, and have lost it: Read but the Psalms of
David, penned by him when he was in any desertion, you will think that he breathed
out his soul with his petitions; such an (...) is there in his desires, as the
hypocrites conscience must needs tell him he was never acquainted with; then,
if ever, he was able to water his couch, and to make his bed swim with tears.
Like ardent desires we find in the Spouse, Cant. 5. upon the withdrawing of her
well-beloved. And cannot some of you tell me, how, when you have been in fears
about your condition, you have been all Prayer? have you not even envied your
selves the time you were forced to spend in eating and in drinking? Have not
your hearts been so full, that you have been fain to creep into a corner, and
pour out your souls in complaints? For my part, I have scarce known any, who
for prayer have been able to keep company with those who have been at a loss
about their eternal estate.

4. God may hide, for the trial and exercise of his peoples Graces. As there
would be no use of Candles if there were no night, no use of Cordials if no
swooning, so would there be either none at all, or but very little use of some
Graces, were it not for hidings and withdrawings of Gods gracious presence:
Faith, Patience, Courage, would not be much put to it, if God should always
smile on those who fear him; nor would their obedience, in comparison, be
praiseworthy: if when God looks more like an enemy then a friend, we can then
wait and depend on him, then is our faith faith indeed, our love love indeed.
Rev. 14.12. Here is the patience of the Saints; here are they that keep the
Commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus: here Faith and Patience do show
themselves. I reckon there is no surer sign of sincerity, then to have firm
resolutions of cleaving to God, and following after him when he seems to have
forsaken and cast us off. I am cast out of thy sight, yet will I look again
toward thy holy temple, (says Jonah, 2.4.) Though he kill me yet will I trust
in him. I will wait on the Lord that hides his face from the house of Jacob,
and I will look for him, Isa. 8.17.

5. God may permit one to want Assurance, that he may the more value it when he
has it. What sticks a little, and comes not till after much seeking, and
manifold prayers, is usually most prized and valued when we have it. Christians
will not carelessly lose that which they were sain to give all diligence to
attain to; they will not prodigally waste and crumble away their hidden Manna,
the fruit of so many sollicitous thoughts and fears; but should it drop into
their mouths upon every gaping, yawning desire, they might then as much despise
it as ever did the Israelites of old. Should Assurance come with those weak
wishes and velleities that are so frequent in the mouths of many, we might then
set no more by the light of Gods countenance, then we do by corn, wine, and
oil: as in temporals, so in spirituals, we learn to estimate our mercies more
by wanting, then by enjoying them.

6. God may let some want comfort, That they may be the more able to comfort
others. Should their mountain always stand firm, should God constantly smile on
them, and kiss them with the kisses of his mouth, and make known unto them the
most secret treasures of his goodness, how little compassion would they show to
over-clouded deserted souls? They would do by them, as did the Watchmen by the
Spouse, smite and wound them, instead of comforting them; they might quench the
smoking flax, break the bruised reed; say, as some have done, that not the
faith of adherence, but assurance, does justify: I, but being brought in their
own apprehensions to the very brinks of Hell, they will deal gently and speak
comfortably to those who are in darkness and see no light, and warn them of
those rocks at which they themselves were in danger to suffer shipwreck, when
under the same tempestuous thoughts; they will patiently hear all their
complaints, and answer all their objections how weak soever, remembering that
they themselves were once sometimes pestred with like scruples. Christ was
tempted like unto us in all things, even in point of desertion, for he cried
out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? and wherefore was he so
tempted, but that he might be able to succor those that are tempted? Heb.
2.18. He was touched with the sense of our infirmities, that he might be a more
merciful and faithful high Priest. So good reason had Luther to say that
temptation was one of the three things that made a Divine.

7. God permits the want of assurance, To make his Children the more long after
Heaven, where they shall see him face to face, and be perfectly freed from all
doubts and fears about Gods love to them, and theirs to him. Were our Assurance
uninterrupted, and were it such as to put us beyond all possibility of
miscarrying, what need we so earnestly to pray that we might be dissolved and
be with Christ? How little would the difference be betwixt Earth and Heaven? We
should walk rather by sight then by faith. But because our Assurance is at best
but imperfect, sometimes none at all, therefore do we groan earnestly that this
earthly tabernacle may be dissolved, that so we may attain the end of our faith
and hope, the salvation of our souls.

8. God may permit some of his Servants to want Assurance with relation to
others; For if they be good, they have hereby an example of patience and
confidence in God, unto which they may have recourse when God withdraws from
them, Job 17.8, 9. Upright men shall be astonished at this, and the innocent
shall stir up himself against the hypocrite; the righteous shall hold on his
way, and he that has clean hands shall be stronger and stronger. As for the
wicked, they usually take pleasure in their troubles and dejections; but when
they recover, as mostly they do, then are they filled with horror and
confusion. Mic. 7.8, 9, 10. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy, when I fall,
I shall rise; when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me. I
will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until
he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me: He will bring me forth to the
light, and I shall behold his righteousness. Then she that is mine enemy shall
see it; shame shall cover her which said unto me, Where is the Lord thy God.

9. God may permit his Servants to be without the sense of his love with
relation to himself, that his glory may the more appear: His power is more
manifested in preserving his Saints without then with Assurance. When Paul
besought the Lord thrice that the messenger of Satan might depart from him, his
suit is not granted, only this answer is returned, My grace is sufficient for
thee, for my strength is perfected in thy weakness: whence he resolves, Most
gladly therefore will I glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may
rest on me, 2 Cor. 12.9. Indeed, so vast a disproportion is there betwixt the
joys of Heaven, and the carnal pleasures of this World, that should a Christian
always have assurance of his title to the former, it would not be much wondered
at if he despised the later: but herein the power of Gods grace is seen, that
he brings a man into the strict despised ways of holiness, with a resolution,
if he perish, there to perish; that he keeps him from the pollutions that are
in the world through lust, even when he doubts whether he shall have a portion
among those that are sanctified. Herein is seen the power of the Devil, not
that he keeps men captive, whilst he has honors and pleasures to bestow on
them; but that he can make them to hold fast their sins, when Gods judgments
have laid hold of them in their sins. God speaks of such not without some
admiration, Amos 4.6. I have smitten you thus and thus, yet have ye not
returned unto me, says the Lord. And he sets a brand of infamy on Ahaz,
because be sinned yet more in the day of his distress, 2 Chronicles. 28.22.
Likewise the power of God is then most manifest, when he makes any to hold
their sincerity in the midst of tentation and opposition. Every Christian is
the workmanship of God created in Christ Jesus unto good works; but in none
does his eternal power so evidently appear as in such: God does even boast of
such, Job 2.3. The Lord said unto Satan, Have thou not considered my servant
Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and upright man, one
that fears God and escheweth evil; and still he holds fast his integrity,
although thou movedst me against him to destroy him without cause. And as his
power appears in preserving them in their low condition, so does his patience
in bearing with all their froward and passionate thoughts and speeches during
desertion, and his mercy and goodness in bringing them from under it. Isa.
41.17. When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue
fails for thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will not
forsake them: I will open rivers in high places, and fountains in the midst of
valleys, that they may see, and know, and consider, and understand together,
that the hand of the Lord has done this, and the holy One of Israel has
created it.

[Corrollary.] Seeing God may have all these gracious and holy ends in
withdrawing from us the light of his countenance, and suffering us to walk in
the dark; it will not become us to charge God foolishly, or to entertain any
hard thoughts of him, as if he had forgotten to be gracious, or as if his truth
and faithfulness were ceased for ever: such thoughts will be rising, for they
were the very thoughts of David, Psalm. 77. but we must chide our selves for
them as he did ver. 10. I said, this is my infirmity, but I will remember the
years of the right hand of the most High. As also he does in another Psalm, 22.
after he hid complained, ver. 1. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? he
proceeds, But thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel. This
is the conclusion we must hold, and not suffer our selves to be beaten from,
that God is Holy, Just, and Good; if we hold this fast, we shall do as
Christians; and though we see not how at present to reconcile Gods Providence
with his Attributes, yet hereafter we shall see he that can wait is blessed,
and shall not be ashamed of his confidence: for he that shall come, will come,
and will not tarry.

Second part of the fourth question.
The second part of the question is still behind; What are the meritorious
causes that do procure the want of Assurance.

Answ. The answer to this is wholly to be made up of particular observations
and experiences, which are so many and various, that I reckon it next to
impossible to put them into order: as for the more common sinful lets and
impediments of Assurance, they have been so fully and clearly handled by so
many already in print, that if I were not tied up by promise to say something
about them, I might pass them over in silence, or content my self to paraphase
on some Scriptures in Job, the Psalms, and Isaiah, relating to this head; but
the laws of method calling me to say something to this part of the question
also, I shall so do, but yet briefly.

1. The smalness and littleness of some men's graces is the cause why they do
want Assurance. The Kingdom of God within them being but as a grain of
Mustardseed, which is the least of all seeds, it is no wonder they see it not,
the root of the matter being but small, and covered over with many sinful
infirmities, it is not strange that they are not sensible of it. I must not so
far contradict experience, as to say that God does never make the time of
conversion, when grace is comparatively but small, a time of sealing; he did so
usually in the first preaching of the Gospel; for then men coming out of gross
darkness into mavelous light, and turning from serving dumb Idols to serve
the living God; their change must needs be of easier observation then it is
now, when persons having sucked in Christian Religion with their mothers milk,
turn only from a careless, to a more diligent way of serving the true God: And
besides, Religion had then nothing to commend it to men's affections, but only
its own beauty and loveliness; but now that Kings and Queens vouchsafe to be
unto it nursing fathers; and nursing mothers, we cannot have so little ground
of suspecting our unsincerity as might they, who did no sooner make confession
of Christ, but they became the filth and offscouring of all things. Yea, even
in these days, it pleases God sometimes, after great legal humiliations, to
let in some hope whilst grace is but low, lest his creature should be
swallowed up of sorrow: However, usually a little faith, as to any settled
lasting comfort, is as no faith, and time with weak Christians is more
profitably spent in multiplying those acts which may strengthen the habit, then
in enquiring whether it be already sincere: habits cannot of themselves be
felt, but they discover themselves by their actions; and weak habits put forth
such faint actions, and with so much interruption, that it cannot easily be
known whether they be the fruits of common or special grace.

Object. But cannot the Spirit of God so irradiate the very least measure of
grace, as to make it visible, and so the ground of Assurance.

Answ. No question, the Spirit can so do; but we now enquire not what he can
do, but what he usually does: and this may safely be said, that Gods Spirit
does not usually witness to those who have attained to the least measure of
saving grace, and must necessarily by their frequent failings and
transgressions make much work for an accusing conscience: nor indeed do I see,
that it would be for the advantage of less obedient and exact Christians, to
have Assurance; rather it might beget in them security and pride, sins to which
novices are prone.

Object. Is it not said, Gal. 4.6. Because ye are sons, God has sent the
spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying Abba, father? And if the Spirits
emboldning to cry Abba father, be given to sons because they are sons, then it
may be thought to belong to all sons, even new born babes, who are as truly
sons as those who are most grown in grace.

Answ. Some to avoid this difficulty, do not render (...), because, but, that;
and it may be so rendered, and a very fair sense given of the words; viz. the
Spirits being sent into their hearts, crying, Abba father, was an evidence that
they were sons; but let it be rendered, as by most it is, because ye are sons,
yet it must be granted, that by sons here, are to be understood, not all who
are born again, not all who are no bastards, but only such sons as have ceased
to be children, and are no longer under tutors and governors, such as have
received the adoption of sons; such are not those Christians of whom we are now
speaking; for though they be delivered from the observation of the Ceremonial
Law, yet are they as ignorant and Carnal as those who were in bondage to it.

Object. Does not this put the poor newly converted Christian into continual
doubts and fears, and strike at the very root of all his hopes and comforts?

Answ. We are not creators of comfort, but only dispensers; we cannot make an
easier or speedier way to Assurance then Christ has made, nor can we approve
of, or so much as excuse those who do snatch at comfort before they be meet for
it. It is sufficient, that we can assure all, that Christ has purchased
remission of sin for them, upon his own terms, the receiving of him as Prophet,
Priest, King, and that all who repent are justified in the sight of God, though
not justified in their own consciences; and that in due season their own
consciences shall justify them also; and that Christ will not break the
bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax; and that it cannot be that the
merciful God should condemn those who tremble at his Word, and lie at his feet,
enquiring the Law at his mouth, and grieved at nothing more then that they
cannot yield perfect and complete obedience unto it.

II. Another Reason why so many want Assurance, is because they seek not for it
with so much diligence as a matter of that nature requires. Some little pains
they will take to find out the marks of sincerity, and some little time they
will spend in comparing their hearts with those marks; but they will not
continue the great duty of self-examination till the matter be brought to some
issue; they will not behold their faces in the glass long enough to beget in
themselves a true notion or Idea of themselves, but go away and presently
forget what manner of persons they were. How few are there whom we can persuade
at a night to catechize their own souls, to criticize on the actions of the day
past? How few that can be prevailed with to spend any considerable proportion
of time in Closet devotions? yet better may we expect eminent skill in the most
abstruse Arts and Sciences without great labor, then expect Assurance without
all morally possible sedulity. Wherefore, the rather give diligence to make
your calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. Give the more diligence, so the
Old Translation. Indeed, the making of calling and election sure does deserve
all diligence, and require all diligence; it is not a little diligence that
will serve to find out the manifold subtilties of a deceitful heart, nor a
little diligence that will frustrate the devices of Satan, who will not fail to
join himself with carnal reason, and to beget in us hard thoughts of God. Psalm.
63.1, 2. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee: My soul thirsts for
thee my flesh longs for thee, in a dry and thirsty land, where no water is;
To see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the sanctuary. Like
care and desire expressed the Spouse in the Canticles, to recover the sight,
and to her apprehension, lost love of Christ, Cant. 3.1, 2, 3.

Object. If this be so, What shall become of those that are poor in the world,
who have but little time to spare from the duties of their particular calling,
either for the reading of the Word, or communing with their own hearts? Can
none of these have a sense of Gods love? must they perpetually lie under doubts
and fears about their eternal state?

Answ. God forbid I should so say, God has chosen the poor of this world, rich
in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom, which he has promised to them that love
him, Jam. 2.5. But there is no good man so poor, but he will find out some
considerable proportion of time to mind the state of his soul in: God gives
unto all such a contented mind, which makes them they do not desire much, nor
make haste to be rich; he gives unto them also wisdom and prudence, by which
they can husband their opportunities so as to keep themselves from beggary, and
yet give as many visits unto God as they do that have abundance. Besides, what
our Lord Christ determined in the case of the Widow, that the two mites she
threw into the treasury, was more then the much cast in by the rich, because
they did cast in of their abundance, but she of her want did cast in all that
she had, even all her living, Mar. 12.43, 44. holds true here also: the poor
man's hour is more then the rich man's two hours, because his hour is all that he
can tell how to redeem from the necessities of nature and relations, and
therefore he shall be so blessed and assisted by God in that hour, that he
shall reap as many comfortable fruits of the Spirit, as those who can spare a
far greater proportion of time.

III. Some do want Assurance through the ignorance that is in them, 2 Cor.
13.5. Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith, prove your own selves;
Know ye not that Christ is in you except ye be (...), void of judgment. It Is
only for them that are of full age, that by reason of use have their senses
exercised to discern betwixt good and evil, Heb. 5.14. therefore the Apostle
prays, Phil. 1.9. That their love might abound more and more in knowledge, and
in all judgment, that they might approve things that are excellent, or that
they might discern things that differ, as it is in the margin of our present
translation, and in the text of the former: let but any discourse with the
generality of troubled Christians, he shall find that many of their doubts had
never been, if when they had first given themselves up to God, they had then
also given themselves up to some judicious and pious Pastor, that would have
been at pains well to instruct them in the Articles of Religion, in the first
principles of the Oracles of God: some mistakes they sucked in when first they
began to be serious, which made them ever after to fear where no fear was. Had
their eye been single, their whole body had been full of light; but their eye
being evil, their whole body was full of darkness, and they could never know
whither they went. Three errors especially I have observed some unskilful in
the word of righteousness to have sucked in, which have occasioned unto them
much perplexity.

1. Error has been about the terms and condition of the Covenant of grace:
they make more necessary to their acceptance with God, then God ever made;
though their hearts be prepared to seek the Lord God of their fathers, yet
because they are not cleansed according to the purification of the Sanctuary;
though their works are done in sincerity, yet because they have not been found
by them to be full and perfect, therefore have they drawn sad and dreadful
conclusions against themselves: Ask them whether they do not believe the truth
of the Gospel, and whether they do not heartily consent that Christ should be
theirs, and they his, they dare not deny it; yet will they not be comforted,
because they suppose faith to be quite another thing, a firm persuasion that
they are already justified. Ask them whether it be not their hearty and earnest
desire and endeavor to obey the whole Law of Christ, they will answer, they hope
it is, and yet put away from themselves all the comforts and privileges of the
Covenant, because they find in themselves many sinful suggestions of the flesh,
or because it is not with them as it is with some others: as if the condition
of the Covenant were perfect and unsinning obedience, and not sincere
obedience; or as if all Gods children were of the same size and stature. Hence
sad dreadful complaints are made by men, that they do not believe, nor obey
Christ, when yet it is manifest they do believe and obey, only they are
mistaken in their notion about the nature of Faith and Evangelical obedience.

2. A conceit, That all who are converted, must needs know when they were
converted, and by what means, and how they were converted; whereas with some,
The Kingdom of God is as if a man should cast seed into the ground, and should
sleep, and rise day and night, and the seed should spring and grow up he
knows not how, Mar. 4.26, 27. As for knowing the time of Conversion, I am so
far from judging it to be necessary to all Christians, that I think it is in an
ordinary way impossible to any Christian: Those indeed whose lives have been
stained with enormous crimes do usually know when they first began to be
reclaimed, and what were the thorns with the which their ways first were hedged
up; but how they should know what was the Ultimum non esse of the Old Man, and
the Primum esse of the New Man; how they should understand the nick of time in
which they ceased to be natural, and began to be spiritual, without some such
assistance as is not usual, I conceive not. Yet even in this particular a
deluded heart has turned some aside, so that they cannot deliver themselves,
and say, Is there not a lie in my right hand? Men could not be held long in
such a snare as this, if they did not pin their Judgments on the sleeves of
some well meaning Teachers, all whose dictates they swallow without
consideration.

3. Some are hugely tormented because they mistake themselves about the way of
working Assurance, and about the nature of Assurance: They have thought that
Assurance is wrought by some vocal, or as it were vocal testimony of the
Spirit, which is not ordinarily the way of working Assurance; and they think,
that so soon as they be assured they must needs be void of all fears, and
filled with all joy in believing: hence, when they have Assurance, yet they
complain they want it; but this is a mistake, for glorious and ravishing Joy is
a separable accident from Assurance; nor yet does Assurance exclude all
doubting and fear, but only such doubting and fear as arises from infidelity
and reigning hypocrisy.

IV. Some are kept from Assurance, because they do keep the Devils counsel, and
bury those doubts and fears about their condition in their own bosoms, which
they ought to discover unto others. This is mostly the condition of those who
are pestered with the horribilia de Deo, buffetted with blasphemous thoughts,
or with temptations to uncleanness, these dishonorable loathsome workings of
soul they are unwilling to make known: hence they are like unto the troubled
sea that cannot rest, but is continually casting up its mire and dirt. If Women
when in their pangs should not send for the Midwife to deliver them, how few
would not miscarry? If Students should never have recourse unto their Tutors to
solve their doubts, how little would be their proficience? And must not they
who will not make use of the help and assistance of their spiritual Guides and
Teachers, go much about, and stay longer under bondage, and in the place of
bringing forth of children then they needed else to do? There are some, to whom
God has given the tongue of the learned, that they may speak a word in due
season to him that is weary, Isa. 50.4. some whom God has comforted, to the
end they may comfort others with the same consolations wherewith they
themselves have been comforted, 2 Cor. 1.4. some to whom it is said, Receive ye
the Holy Ghost; whose sins ye remit they are remitted, and whose soever sins ye
retain they are retained, Joh. 20. verse. 23.24. These God will have owned and
honored, not by confessing to them all the sins of our lives, but by opening
to them such doubts as God seems to deny us satisfaction to upon our own
private prayers and endeavors; for not doing this, many are kept a great while
on the rack, that else might soon find ease and relief. The Spouse in the
Canticles, chapter 3. verse. 3, 4. after she had enquired of the Watchmen, Whether
they had seen him whom she loved, had not passed far but she found him. But
then persons must make conscience of dealing plainly and truly with those who
do watch over their souls: which I do therefore suggest, because it is too
usual with those that are troubled, not faithfully to relate where the shoe
pincheth them, but with the Lapwing to make the greatest noise when they are
furthest off from the nest. Moses was troubled that God should think of sending
him into Egypt, and he would needs make as if his stammering uneloquent tongue
were the cause of his loathness to go about that message, Exodus 4.10. but the
truth was, Moses had killed an Egyptian, and he was afraid lest if he should go
back into Egypt, there might be there who would require blood for blood; and
therefore when God had satisfied him, That all the men were dead who sought his
life, verse. 19. he takes his wife and children, and without more ado sets
himself to return to the land of Egypt.

V. Some do keep themselves under doubts and fears by joining themselves to
unmeet company. There are that be carnal and sensual, the discourse of such
must needs be to such as are in trouble, but as the continual dropping of rain
on smoking flax. 2. There be some godly Ministers who have so accustomed
themselves to breath out thunder and lightning, that if they should be resorted
to, they would with the Watchmen in the Canticles wound the lovesick Spouse,
whom they ought to pity and comfort. 3. There be also who daub with untempered
mortar; who in order to comfort, deliver sayings worthy of all manner of
acceptance, but not faithful and true: How profitable are sound words? But
what do the arguings of such men avail? They will not do so much good while
they are supposed to have a foundation in Scripture, as they must needs do
mischief when they are upon examination found to be built on the sands. 4.
There be also who do love in all places and companies to be speaking of their
enjoyments, to be telling what great things they have done for God, and God for
them; of such I could scarce ever bring my self to have any charitable opinion;
for though a good man may sometimes lawfully glory, yet will he never do so,
but when he is by unavoidable necessity put upon it so to do, 2 Cor. 12.1, 11.
But I list not now to dispute the lawfulness or unlawfulness of commending a
man's self; expedient doubtless it is, not to glory before those who have the
arrows of the Almighty sticking in them; rather we should speak to such of the
infirmities we have felt, or do feel, lest we should discourage them. 5. But
that company which troubled clouded souls do most affect, (and yet which is as
dangerous unto them as any) is the company of such as are as much dejected as
themselves; but as drunkard did never grow sober by conversing with drunkards,
nor ignorant persons ever grow more knowing by communion with those who were no
wiser then themselves, so nor can desponding Christian grow more comfortable by
joining himself to such as are equally cast down with himself; nay, by such
means troubles are insensibly increased, fears multiplied, and hard thoughts
begotten of God who is grace and love. Converse in such cases should be with
those whose consciences do make them a continual feast, who are sober and
judicious, and will handle a broken or dis-joynted bone with the spirit of
meekness, Gal. 5.1. who being not ignorant of Satan's devices, will see that
they be not overwhelmed with sorrow, 2 Cor. 2.7, 11.

VI. A perverse, disputing, quarrelling, cavilling humor, hinders many from
Assurance. The breasts of Consolation do then satisfy when we put them to our
mouths and suck at them; the Word of Promise does profit us when it is mixed
with Faith. If in stead of receiving of it believingly, and meditating on it
delightfully, we put it away from us as not belonging to us, no support shall
we receive from it. Whilst the unregenerate condition continues, the Devil
will assist men what he can to thrust by and put off any thing that might beget
in them the least distrust of themselves; but when they are once begotten again
by the Resurrection of Christ from the dead, he will bestir himself as much as
may be to make them pause upon only that which is apt to cause fear and
bondage, and not once to mind any thing that has the least tendency to comfort
and quiet them. Thus was it with David, Psalm. 77.2. My sore runs in the night
season, my soul refused to be comforted. Never had Moderator in the Schools
more ado to stop the mouth of a wrangling Sophister, then Ministers usually
have to silence the reasonings of some people against themselves; they seem to
have searched the Devils whole Armory, to find out weapons to fight against
their own peace; not one place of Scripture sounding terror, but they have it
in a readiness; not any one harsh expression ever dropped from the pen or lip
of any eminent Divine in order to the awakening of sleepy sinners, but they
have it at their fingers end, and will urge and plead it to the full. Read the
speeches of troubled souls recorded in Scripture, especially Job and the
Psalms, you will easily observe there is something more then ordinary Rhetoric
in them; and he that shall deal with any such now, shall also find it so; yea,
he shall find them in some matters, to reason above and beyond their natural
parts, so as one can scarcely need any other argument to confirm him that there
is a Devil, who has but heard and impartially considered of their arguings. He
that writes the Life of Francis Spira tells us, with what subtilty and
wonderful sophistry he discoursed against the pardonableness of his sins, and
possibility of his salvation. Mira sagacitate ad singula respondebat,
quaecunque adferebantur torquebat, agebatque in contrariam partem magna
violentia argumentorum and admirando orationis impetu. Nihil potuit adeo apt
proponi, nihil tam accommodate adferri, quod non ille vel refelleret
argutissime, vel eluderet callidissime, vel dissolveret promptissime, saepe
intra meipsum cogitavi, eum nequaquam fuisse it a perspicacem in judicio
dogmatum, ita porro exercitatum in disputationibus Theologicis cum esset sanus,
are some of the Historians words concerning him, page 20, 21. Spira's case may
be thought to have something peculiar in it, but I have observed a like
sagacity in some of ordinary parts, whom none not void of charity would not
have thought to be good men: the which as I can in part ascribe to that
distemper of body which does accompany soul-trouble, so I think he that should
ascribe it to that only, and not at all to the evil spirit, (who loves to fish
in troubled waters, and to join himself as an assisting form to him that sets
himself to war against himself,) would rather show himself an Infidel, then a
Philosopher. Nay, it is not unusual with them to libel and bear false witness
against themselves, to lay such things to their own charge as they were never
guilty of, on purpose to hinder those who have to deal with them from giving
them any comfort, on purpose to make them alter the frame of their discourse:
Can it be wondered that such as these go mourning and hanging down their heads
all their days? if they will needs shut up all doors of hope that are opened to
them, can it seem mavelous, that they are troubled, and suffered to despair
everlastingly?

VII. Many are kept from Assurance through groundless irrational scruples,
causing them to forbear the use of Ordinances, and other sanctified means in
which Assurance is usually wrought. Would a sick man ever recover health that
should be afraid of Physic? or a weak man ever recover strength that should
abstain from the good wholesome food that is appointed to beget blood and
spirits? Why, no more will they ever meet with God, or enjoy the sense of his
love, who come not near the place where his honor dwells; they must needs be
in the dark, who will not open their eyes to behold the Sun of Righteousness;
needs be in a perpetual thirst, who will not draw water out of the wells of
salvation to quench their thirst. Yet how many are afraid to come to the fire,
because they are cold, and to put on their clothes because they are naked, or
to come to the Physician because they are so extremely sick. Tell them they
must pray; they will answer, no, because being wicked, their prayers must needs be
an abomination to the Lord; invite them to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
they will tell you, that finding not themselves to be in Christ, they should but
eat and drink judgment to themselves: put them upon hearing the Word preached,
then they have something to object against either the call, or the life of the
Minister. Such scruples as these are the Thieves that do wast the Candle of the
Lord, the Worms that eat up the hidden Manna, the Veils that hide the new Name
from our eyes. A Conscience truly tender is the fittest subject to receive the
seal of the Spirit, but a scrupulous Conscience is a very hell upon earth; for
it either quite takes a man from the direct immediate acts of Gods Worship and
Service, or else it confines him only to such, keeping him from the duties of
his particular calling. It is hard to say which extreme is more dangerous; the
one starving, the other surfeiting the Soul.

Obj. But can any one give God too much time, or be too Religious and careful
about his Soul?

A. Surely no; he cannot have too much of our time, unto whom all our time is
due; nor can any one have too much of that which is his happiness, or be too
careful about that, which if he should lose, nothing can be given in exchange
for; but yet it is possible for us to bestow too much time on some one part of
obedience; and we do so, as often as we suffer it to justle out all, or any of
the rest. The works of our Callings are the service of God, when done in
obedience to his Command, and with an eye to his glory; and for them, when so
done, we may from the Lord expect to receive a reward: and therefore when the
Devil transforming himself into an Angel of light suggests, What will thou eat
or drink, card or spin, study any humane Author, when thou know not but thou
may be in Hell the next moment? He must be answered, That obeying God sets no
one nearer Hell: and that though praying be in it self better then any either
natural or civil action, yet he that commanded it, commanded them also, and
therefore they also are in their season to be done. The Devil has that soul at
advantage enough, whom he can persuade either not to pray, or to do nothing but
pray.

VIII. The greatest and most common cause of the want of Assurance, is some
unmortified lust, some secret bosom corruption unto which men give
entertainment, or at least which they do not so vigorously oppose, and heartily
renounce as they might, Hinc illae lachrymae, this is that which casts them on
sore straights and difficulties; how should it be otherwise, seeing God being
infinitely wise and holy, either cannot, or will not reveal his secrets to
those, who harbor his known enemies in their bosom; either cannot or will not
regard the whinings and complainings of those who dally with that very sin
which galls their consciences, and connive at the stirrings of that very lust
for which he hides his face from them? Does any one come to his Minister, or to
his Christian friends, and say, Is it peace? they must all answer, What peace,
so long as thou live in commission of any known sin, or omission of any known
duty? All doubts and fears are begotten upon sin, either real or imaginary; if
the sin be but imaginary, a rectified judgment may scatter the doubts and fears
as the Sun does mists; if the sin be real, no curing the doubts thence arising,
but by an unfeigned repentance. If I would produce all the Scriptures that
prove this, I must transcribe the one half of the Bible: but it would be
needless so to do, seeing it seems to have been a notion engraven even on
natural conscience, That sin so defiles persons, that till they be washed from
it neither they nor their services can be accepted; from whence arose the
custom of setting Water-pots at their entrance into their Temples or places of
Worship; and those phrases, Eo lavatum ut sacrificem, and Number lavabis ut rem
divinam facias?

Quest. 5. What are the Motives or Arguments by which we may quicken our selves
to look after this sealing work of the holy Spirit of God?

Answ. Is there any need of Arguments to excite us to this Duty? Does not the
New Creature naturally pant after Assurance as the Heart pants after the
rivers of water? Yea, may not the rational Soul seem to desire it? Do not all
wicked men catch after certainty, and frame unto themselves some kind of
certainty? in this only miserable, that they either build on a false
principle, or on a true principle falsely applied. To doubt of happiness is an
heavy burden, but to fear extremest misery, that is intolerable; and yet thus
must every one do till he have either Assurance, or those probable hopes that
are next of kin to Assurance. Shall worldlings do so much to secure their
Lands, Goods, Estates, shall they require Bonds, Seals, Oaths, Sureties, and
yet think all too little, and shall we count any thing too much to assure unto
our selves the eternal condition of our poor souls? In the fear of the Lord let
it be considered,

1. It Is only the assured Christian that can either desire, or so much as
adventure in cool blood to die; all others must needs all their life time be in
continual bondage through fear of death. Tell not me, that some wicked ruffling
Gallants, who neither have Assurance, nor are in any near capacity to receive
it, are yet very prodigal of their lives; for I am speaking of men, and not of
brutes; of those who are guided by Reason, and not by Sense; of those who are
convinced that their Souls are immortal, and that it is their greatest folly
and misery to lose them, not of those who have banished all thoughts of another
world, and look not on Death as an inlet to Eternity; the instance of these
monsters therefore notwithstanding, I say only the (in some degree) assured
Christian can cheerfully look the Prince of Terrors in the face, only he can
triumph over this last Enemy: Not only the sinners in Sion are afraid,
fearfulness does not only surprise the hypocrite, but also the sincere
Christian, in so far as he does not know himself to be such. With what
shiverings must they needs enter into the chambers of darkness, who do not
know but that they may lead them into outer darkness? How unwillingly must the
Soul needs leave its old companion the Body, whilst it is uncertain whether it
shall stand or fall when it comes to give an account of all it has done in the
body. But now he that is come to a certainty about his estate, he can not only
not be afraid of death, but also desire it, and sweetly please himself in the
Fore-thoughts of it, yea, though it be not a natural but a violent death. Read
the Book of Martyrs, and you will think that our Witnesses to the Truth did
even complement with their Torments, and lie down in the devouring flames as
merrily as if they had been beds of Down. Or read the Scriptures, and you will
find St. Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7, 8. exulting in the thoughts of his approaching
violent dissolution; I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departure
is at hand: I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept
the faith; henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness which
the Lord the righteous Judge shall give to me, and not to me only, but unto
all that love his appearing. At another time indeed we find him in a strait,
not knowing what to desire, whether to abide in the flesh, or to be dissolved,
Phil. 1.23. but whence did this dispute arise? not because death would not be
to him more desirable and welcome and gainful; but because his abiding in the
flesh would be more profitable and serviceable to the Church. When he looked no
further then himself, then he groaned being burdened, desiring to be clothed
upon with his house from Heaven; knowing that if the earthly house of his
tabernacle were dissolved, he had a building of God, an house not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1.

II. Only the assured Christian can despise the world, and joyfully endure the
loss of his goods. He only that knows himself to be clothed with the Sun,
can trample the Moon under his feet; He only on whom God has lift up the
light of his countenance takes no care for corn and wine, has no anxious
thoughts what he shall eat, what he shall drink, or wherewithal he shall be
clothed. True indeed, such is the vanity of all things here below, such the
transcendent excellencies of the glory of the other world, that if a man had
but a possibility of attaining these, he were mad if he did not readily forsake
those; and doubtless, the Soul when it hears of the Jewel of great price,
does adventure all to buy it, before it has any certainty that it shall ever
actually have and enjoy it: I, but yet seeing we do naturally prefer one Bird
in the hand before twenty in the bush; seeing sublunary things have the
advantage, though not of splendour and magnitude, yet of naturalness and
nearness of operation; we should be in great danger to take up our portion in
this world, did not Faith give substance to the things hoped for, and evidence
to the things not seen, did not also the Spirit seal up unto us our interest
in, and title to the things hoped for and unseen. Those who have Faith, and
know not themselves to have it, do make a shift to crucify the flesh with its
lusts, and to overcome the world; but it is somewhat an hard shift; much ado
they have to keep themselves from envying the prosperity of the wicked; ready
they are ever and anon to cry out, In vain have we washed our hands in
innocence, and walked mournfully all the day long; ready to have questionings
and disputings, whether they had not done as wisely to have trucked with the
World for such an happiness as it can afford: But Faith in its vigor, Faith
seen and felt, easily keeps under all such carnal arguings, and so satisfies a
man in the choice that he has made, as that he is jealous and suspicious lest
the World should gain too much on his heart, and in the abundance of all things
rejoices as if he rejoiced not, and in the loss of all things weepeth as of he
wept not; the assured Christian after he has bought, is as if he possessed
not, 1 Cor. 7, 30. and when he has nothing, as if he possessed all things, 2
Cor. 6.10. Heb. 10.34. Ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and took joyfully
the spoiling of your goods, knowing in your selves that ye have in heaven a
better and enduring substance. He does not say, they know barely that there was
in Heaven a better and enduring substance, but that they themselves had in
Heaven a better and more enduring substance, that that eternal inheritance was
reserved for them, and that Christ had entered upon it as their forerunner; a
word which it had been presumption for us to use, if the Scripture had not used
it, Heb. 6.20. and if our Savior himself had not told his Disciples that he
went aforehand to prepare a place for them, Joh. 14.2. But how did the Hebrews
know that they had this better and enduring substance? They knew it within
themselves: that is, to find that they had a title to the more enduring
substance, they needed not to look any further then themselves. 1 John 5.10. He
that believes on the Son of God, has the witness in himself; the witness of
what? of eternal life which is in the Son, verse. 11. He that hears my word,
and believes on him that sent me, Has Everlasting life, Joh. 5.24. and Joh.
6.54. Whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life. The
first fruits of the Spirit do assure him of the whole crop. Has the Spirit
made known to me such things as flesh and blood cannot reveal, and is the
belief of these things so rooted in my heart as that I do make them my portion
and my treasure, as that I do heartily pursue after them, even to the
renouncing of carnal pleasures? then sure there is in heaven an inheritance
incorruptible reserved for me. Every man that is Christ's has the Spirit in
him, and this Spirit is the earnest, thrice is he so called, 2 Cor. 1.22. 2
Cor. 5.5. Ephesians. 1.13. the Greek word used in all those three places, and no
where else in all the New Testament, is (as all acknowledge) of an Hebrew
extraction, and with the Hebrews is a word of promise and engagement in
bargains, but yet is well translated in the forementioned places earnest,
though by the Rhemists constantly pledge, for it does among the Greek Fathers
so signify, and the Spirit is a part of that reward which is promised; he that
has this Spirit may (...), in St. Chrysostom's phrase. No wonder that he who
has this earnest of the true riches can part with the unrighteous Mammon; no
wonder that he who is secured of what is his own, can lose that which is
another man's, especially if called to part with it for the sake of Christ, who
with his own blood purchased the everlasting inheritance for him.

III. Assurance will marvellously strengthen against the censures and
reproaches of wicked men. For why should he count it any great matter to be
judged of men, who knows that God has justified him? What need it disquiet him
that the World accounts him an hypocrite, who has Gods testimony that he is
sincere? What need he be cast down that some do brand him for a factious
fellow, so long as he sees himself by the Spirit sealed for a son of peace? or
others call him a Tobias and Sanballat, so long as he is assured that he
opposes none but such as are building Babel and not Sion? It Is because our
Conscience gives but a dark testimony, that we are so disquieted with the
railings of those whose tongues are set on fire from Hell. Were we but once
sure that we are not the men we are represented to be, we might then glory in
our reproaches, and esteem them great riches, knowing that they shall work
together for good, and that they are the badges of our Sonship, and that there
is a time coming when our righteousness shall shine out as the light, and the
mouth of every adversary be stopped, 1 Pet. 1.14. If ye be reproached for the
Name of Christ, happy are ye, for the Spirit of glory and of God rests on
you. We may rejoice in as much as we are made partakers of Christ's sufferings,
and conclude therefrom, that when his glory shall be revealed, we shall be glad
also with exceeding joy. If any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be
ashamed, but let him glorify God on this behalf, verse. 16. He that has the
testimony of a good Conscience, not only that he is a Christian, but also that
he suffers as a Christian, he may glory that he is accounted worthy to suffer
reproach. But when a man has never so clear testimony that he is a Christian,
if he should suffer not as a Christian, but as an evil door, or as a busie-body
in other men's matters, if he should then rejoice, he would but glory in his
shame.

IV. Assurance will beget holy boldness in Prayer; it is therefore made one,
and indeed the chief effect of the Spirit of Adoption, to teach us to cry Abba
Father, Romans 8.15. to send us to God with as much confidence or more then we go
to our Fathers according to the flesh; to make us rest satisfied, that what we
ask according to the will of God, we shall have it in due season as surely as
if we had it already. If we are once assured that an Act of Indemnity and
Oblivion is passed, and that God is as much our Friend as if there had been no
variance betwixt us, we may then sure come with boldness to the throne of
grace, Heb. 4.16. (...), with a liberty to say what we list, provided the
matter we pray for be grounded on Divine Precept and Promise; provided also, we
remember that we have to do with him who abhors the sacrifice of fools, and
unto whom our words should be but few, full of weight and affection, void of
all heartless tautologies and vain repetitions: Whereas when Assurance is
wanting, a man is ready to faint, very pusillanimous, afraid to look up to God,
under doubts and fears whether ever any thing will come of the requests he
makes whether God would not be as well pleased if he should hold his peace as
if he spoke. There is as much difference betwixt a Christian with and without
Assurance, as betwixt a Tree in Summer and Winter, as betwixt Sampson when his
locks were on, and when they were cut off; he indeed thought when he had lost
his Hair to have done as formerly, but he soon found by the prevailing of the
Philistines that he could not: so he that has lost the witness of the Spirit,
may think to rub up his graces, and pray with as much life and boldness as
formerly he did, but he shall find himself mistaken. Whatever weakneth
Evidence, weakneth Prayer also. Prevailing of Lust darkneth our Evidences, it
also deadneth us in Praying, Psalm. 40.12. Innumerable evils have compassed me
about, mine iniquities have taken hold of me so that I cannot look up, they are
more then the hairs of my head, wherefore my heart fails me. His heart that
should have furnished him with matter and affection failed him, nor durst his
eyes look up to the place where Gods honor did dwell. In another Psalm he
tells us his mouth was shut; Mine iniquity is ever before me, I am so troubled
that I cannot speak. Words which at other times he had at his command were now
wanting, and he stood as it were a mute. O let all who complain of straitness
and deadness and dauntedness, remember what it is that must quicken, embolden
and enlarge them, viz. the witnessing, sealing act of the Spirit; that once
obtained, a Supplicant goes on as does a Ship with full sail where there is
Sea-room enough.

V. Assurance will sweeten the Reading of the Word, and the Receiving of the
Sacraments: For with what delight must he needs read over all the Promises of
the Covenant, who has the Spirit assuring him that they are all his? With what
comfort must he needs behold the Body and Blood of Christ, and meditate on the
benefits thence flowing, who is persuaded that he has an undoubted interest in
them, and that his sitting at the Sacramental Table is but a pledge of his
sitting with Christ in the Kingdom of his Father? and that when he eats the
Bread and drinks the Wine, he does but touch and taste of that with the fuller
meals whereof he must be satisfied to all Eternity? Yea, the Laws and
Commandments which formerly seemed burdensome, will, Assurance once gained,
be accounted not grievous, but easy and delightful; because a man then feels
that love in his heart which is the fulfilling of them; yea, the very
threatenings and curses of the Law, which before Assurance cannot but make the
heart exceedingly to quake and tremble, Assurance once obtained, are read and
meditated on with the greatest pleasure, because a man knows himself through
faith in Christ to be delivered from them. It is a kind of Hell on Earth, when
a man goes up and down fearing lest every place of Scripture he meets with
should kill him; but it is a very Heaven on Earth, when a man can look on all
things contained in Scripture as his own: when he can say, Whether it be the
world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come, all are mine,
and I am Christ's, and Christ is Gods. To such a one, if to any other, the
Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart, more to be desired then
gold, yea, then much fine gold, sweeter also then the honey, and the honeycomb.

VI. Assurance will wonderfully heighten and enlarge us in Praise and
Thanksgivings. If the Spirit do dwell in us, yet unless we have the sense and
feeling of him, scarcely will our hearts be filled with joy, or our mouths with
praise. Why I pray you do the Angels and Spirits of just men made perfect spend
eternity in Hallelujahs, but because they do walk by sight, are continually
beholding God, and in the possession of glory; sure also not to fall from it?
An assured Christian cannot make such sweet and uninterupted melody, because
alas his assurance is not perfect, but mixed with many doubts and fears; but
yet whilst he is under the actual sense and enjoyment of Gods love, he cannot
but break out into his Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs. Hear how David
rouseth up all his faculties to join and bear a part in spiritual praises,
Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3, etc. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me
bless his holy name: Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his
benefits; who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases, who
redeemeth thy life from destruction, who crowns thee with loving kindness and
tender mercies, who satisfies thy mouth with good things, so that thy youth is
renewed like the Eagles. Nay, Assurance will not let a man be alone in this
music, it will make him invite and call upon others to bear a part; if David's
cup do overflow, he calls on others to come and taste it; O taste and see that
the Lord is gracious: come and I will tell you what wonderful things he has
done for my soul. O praise the Lord for his mercy endures for ever. And again,
and again, Praise the Lord, for his mercy endures for ever. As good fellows,
when they are well heated with Wine and strong drink, begin to one another in
their filthy songs and ballads; so Christians, being filled with the Spirit, do
speak to one another in Hymns, Psalms, and spiritual Songs, singing and
making melody to God in their hearts, Ephesians. 5.18, 19.

VII. Assurance will further Repentance in both its parts and acts.

1. For Sorrow; Nothing sooner melts the heart then a beam from the Sun of
Righteousness; nothing sooner sends a man out with Peter to weep bitterly, then
a love look from Christ his Lord; one smile of his countenance on a sinful soul
not hardened, not asleep, is enough to make it weep rivers of tears because it
has transgressed his Laws. There is a repenting sorrow for, or in order to,
the obtaining the pardon of sin; and this is not (say the Antinomian what he
will to the contrary) unbeseeming a Saint; nay, it is that which he is in
hundred places of Scriptures called to: but there is also a repenting sorrow
arising from pardon, a striking on the thigh because we have quenched the
motions of so good a Spirit, and abused that riches of grace so clearly
manifested. Ezekiel. 16.63. That thou may remember, and be confounded, and never
open thy mouth more, because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee for
all that thou have done. This may seem an harsh paradox, and fantastic dream
to some, but they are such as are not partakers of the divine nature, which is
ingenuous, and afflicted with nothing more then the remembrance of unkindness
and unthankfulness.

2. It also furthers us in the forsaking and renouncing of sin. They that are
tied with this cord of love will not easily break it: it is made you know the
great aggravation of Solomon's Idolatry, That he turned from the God of Israel,
that had appeared to him twice, 1 King. 119. That manifestly implies, that the
manifestation of Gods love is not a spur to licentiousness, but a bridle to
keep from it. Indeed they who know their garments to be made white in the blood
of the Lamb, will not easily suffer them to be again defiled with the
pollutions that are in the world through lust: corrupt nature will be taking
occasion, as from the Law, so from the Gospel also to sin, it will be
suggesting sin that grace may abound; but renewed nature will be throwing back
such suggestions with abhortence, Romans 6.1, 2. What shall we say then? shall we
continue in sin that grace may abound? God forbid: how shall we that are dead
to sin, live any longer therein? How can we that know that our old man is
crucified together with Christ that the body of sin may be destroyed, serve sin
any longer? how shall we that be married to him who is raised from the dead,
bring forth fruit to our former dead husband? We do love our sins naturally, as
we love either right eye, or right hand; Will any thing but the sense of a
greater love, make us to cut them off, or to pull them out? Nothing more
constrains to the hatred of sin, then the love of Christ; nothing makes us more
to love him, then a sense that he loves us, and that with an everlasting love.

VIII. Assurance does marvellously deaden the heart to all needless disputes
and controversies, and settle the heart in the truth, and fortify it against
the subtilties of seducing spirits. They that can read the law written on their
hearts, do not dote on questions and strife of words, but avoid profane
bablings, and oppositions of sciences falsely so called; and if any will needs
show their wits and skill in disputing against any duty or act of obedience,
they have that within them which will not suffer them to hearken to him; they
care not to answer him any other way then Diogenes confuted Zeno's fallacy
against local motion, by walking up and down the room. Had men but felt the
power of those truths on their hearts which are commonly discoursed and
preached, they would not so easily have changed their minds about them as some
in the late times were observed to do; had but their hearts been established
with grace they could not so easily have been carried about with diverse strange
doctrines; there is no such preservative against Apostasy and Heresy, as
Assurance. No man that has drank old wine, will presently desire new, for he
will say that the old is better. He that has but heard of old Wine, and taken
his opinion of its virtue upon trust from the reports of others, may be induced
to drink new Wine; but so will not he who has tasted of it, and felt it making
glad his heart, and strengthening him against his many infirmities. Let the
Sophister first go and persuade the weary Traveller, that the appetites of
hunger and thirst are but fancies, or to throw away the bread and water
appointed by God for the satisfying of those natural appetites; then may he
hope to persuade the experienced Christian, that all his desires after Christ
are but the workings of a melancholy fancy, or to despise the Body and Blood
of Christ, the only things that ever he found to satisfy those desires.

Obj. What then, can the Assured Christian answer every question that a subtle
diputant makes? can he solve every fallacious argument of a cunning Sophister.

A. No: perhaps he cannot answer any one of his fallacies; but he has such a
sense of the reality and preciousness of the things against which the fallacies
are framed, that he knows them to be but fallacies, and cares not much, were it
not for others sake, whether they be ever answered or no. If a condemned
Malefactor, dead in Law, should have his Princes pardon brought him, and had
accepted it, and upon acceptance of it found himself restored to life again,
and every thing that made his life comfortable unto him, how little would he
matter it whether he were pardoned by an immanent or transient action, or
whether he did receive his pardon by an act of the understanding, or of the
will, by one act, or by many, or whether the acceptance of his pardon were the
instrument, or the condition of his pardon? As little will he who has a sense
of his faith, and of his justification by faith, matter it how those
controversies are decided, that have of late years occupied the pens and
tongues of so many both learned and unlearned: As little does he matter it, I
say, as to himself, though for the sake of others he rejoices to see truth
accurately handled, and rescued from those absurdities wherewith adversaries,
taking advantage from the less cautious expressions of her friends, had loaded
her.

What say thou now, O Christian? is this Assurance worth thy seeking after,
and praying for, or is it not? Will thou give all diligence to make thy calling
and election sure, or will thou still put all to the adventure, and leave thy
eternal condition at uncertainties? Methinks, after so many glorious effects of
Assurance have been opened, every one that names the name of Christ should be
restless till he have it, and should go from ordinance to ordinance till he
could say, I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine: Till he can see his name
written in the Lambs book of life: till he find the white stone in his hand:
till he taste the hidden Manna with his mouth, and find the Spirit witnessing
to his spirit that he may be of good cheer because that his sins are pardoned.
I would take it for granted that so it shall be, were it not that the flesh
will always be drawing back from, and framing objections against every thing
that requires diligence, and comes not till after many Prayers and
Endeavors. Endless it would be to attempt to answer all the cavils of
slothful persons against the work I have been pressing; two it may not be
amiss to take notice of.

Object. We have known those who have gloried much in their Assurance, whose
Assurance was never found to produce any of the forementioned blessed effects.

Answ. I have also known those who have boasted much of their great love to
Christ, and yet made no conscience of keeping his Commandments; this did never
make me think that universal Obedience was not the fruit of true Love, but
only that their Love was not true: Semblably, when I observe any who say they
have Assurance, showing forth their Assurance by none of the forementioned
blessed effects, I conclude their Assurance to be the counterfeit Assurance or
carnal confidence, known commonly by the name of Presumption; it is to me so
manifest, that he who has Assurance will

I. Be above the tormenting fear of death,

2. Despise the perishing vanities of the world,

3. Slight and despise the censures of the ungodly,

4. Express an holy boldness in his prayers,

5. Take comfort in the Word and Sacraments,

6. Abound in Praise and Thanksgiving,

7. Kindly mourn for sin and watch against it,

8. Not regard cavils against the Truths, the power whereof he experimentally
feels, that where I find not these, I adventure to say there is no Assurance:
and I would have all the forementioned particulars made use of in way of
Examination, as well as Motive, that if any one do not find his persuasion of
the goodness of his condition accompanied with them, he may thence, as he has
the greatest reason, infer that it is not wrought in him by the Spirit of God.

Object. But is it not time enough to get Assurance hereafter? Will it not
suffice if some time before a man do depart out of this world he be sealed by
the Spirit?

Answ. 1. Sure he that makes this Objection does not believe what I have been
all along asserting out of Scriptures concerning the benefits of Assurance,
else he would be hugely desirous not to want it for one moment longer; it would
be death unto him, to be without it till death seize on him.

2. No man can have this Assurance but by the Spirit; now he is a most free and
arbitrary Agent, blowing when and where he lists: He who now refuses his
consolations, may perhaps want them everlastingly.

3. The longer any one stays without Assurance, with the more difficulty will
he obtain it at last. The longer any one does walk in the dark, the more hard
thoughts does he insensibly take up concerning God, and the more unhappily
skillful does he grow in disputing against his own consolations; the longer
that the heart hardneth it self through the deceitfulness of si^, the more
unfit is it to receive the Seal of the Holy Spirit of God. Whatever is brought
against late deathbed Repentance, may be also brought against late deathbed
Assurance; with this only difference, that whereas Repentance is necessary to
the very being of a Disciple, Assurance is only necessary to his well-being.

Quest. 6. What means are to be used for the attaining of this Assurance?

Answ. Before I direct to means, it will be needful that I premise some things.

I. That I do suppose true solid Assurance to be intended in the Question. As
for Presumption, 1. It is needless to prescribe any means for the getting of
it; it is like some ill weeds, which in some soils will grow, do the Husbandman
what he will or can; Satan will both plant and water, and also give increase
unto it; and so deep roots it takes, that the very approaches of Death cannot
pull it up. Nothing more usual then for men that live under the Sunshine of
the Gospel, to drop out of a golden dream, out of a fools paradise, into Hell.
2. If it were in the least needful to give any Directions for the attaining of
this presumptuous persuasion, I durst not give them; for it is the work of
Gospel Ministers to throw down to the ground all those buildings that are built
with untempered mortar, and to pull those pillows from under men's heads on
which they do sleep so securely; we should by all good means labor to vanquish
Despair, but that is an enemy that does but seldom meet us in the field, it
has slain at most but its thousands; the greatest example of it, Francis
Spira, has not left some Divines without hope that he is among the Sheep, and
not the Goats: As for Presumption, it has killed its ten thousands; it is the
epidemical disease, and strengthens it self by almost every thing that we can
say for the comforting of the truly tender conscience.

2. That for the attaining of Assurance there is no need that any new Rules
should be prescribed, but only that the old should be put in practice: it is a
sinful curiosity in people to look after, and in Ministers to advise to only
or chiefly that which no man ever thought of but themselves; or to account a
Promise the less savoury, because another has smelled to it before them. In a
matter that almost all practical Divines have handled, I should suspect what is
new and had not heard (...) and account that best which every one has hit on:
And it has been some trouble to me to observe, 1. how some have made it the
whole drift of their Sermons, only to lift up Saints above their
discouragements, as if the generality of the very best Congregations did not
more stand in need of a Purge then of a Cordial; 2. how the very same men,
through a desire to deliver something singular, have most strangely tortured
Scriptures, and built their notions upon such loose and illogical Coherences,
such uncouth Translations of the Original, as could not settle any but such
whose trouble was seated only in their fancy.

3. When all Directions are given and used, yet Assurance will not be had
ordinarily, but by reflecting on the drift and course of our affections and
actions. He therefore that will not make a set and solemn business of it to
examine his own state, must needs remain in uncertainty, or something worse
then uncertainty. It must therefore be supposed, that all other Rules are given
only to fit and prepare the Soul for Examination: I say to fit and prepare for
Examination; for though Examination be a duty to all, yet is it not proper or
seasonable for all times: It Is no wisdom to behold a man's face in troubled
waters, nor booteth it to look for the sincerity of a small grace, amid many,
and those frequently prevailing corruptions, any more then to look for a Needle
in a Bottle of Hay. We are then ripe for examination, when we have well
informed our selves about the terms of the Covenant of Grace, and know what
makes a Disciple of Christ, and when the hurry and violence of temptation is
pretty well over, and when by frequent acts we have had some experience of our
selves. These things premised, I say, let him who would gain Assurance,

I. Labor to bring himself to be content without Assurance till God see him
meet for it. By Contentedness I do not mean that he should sit down satisfied
without it, or remit his care, or neglect the means appointed for the getting
of it; for it is not possible that he who does truly prize and value Heavens joy
should be at rest till his hopes of getting it are above his fears of losing
it; But when I say he should be contented, I mean he should not grow impatient,
not murmur and repine against God, as if he did him wrong because he lets him
be in the dark, or as if he were unrighteous in hiding his face from him, and
seeming to shut out his prayers. There Is scarce a more dangerous distemper then
an hasty, over-eager, impatient desire of comfort, for it usually leads out of
the good old way into the bypath of error. As those who are impatient in a
Fever, will needs suppose that their disease is rather in their Beds then in
their Bodies, and therefore will often shift their beds; by which means though
they find some present refreshment, yet they do indeed increase the Calenture:
So does he who is impatient under his want of comfort, go from one Minister to
another, and at last says, Why should I wait any longer? My want of comfort is
not from me, but from the way and Religion in the which I have been brought up.
Many an English man has turned Papist, Quaker, Antinomian, Separatist, because
these show unto their Proselytes a more easy and speedy way to comfort, then
can be got on the Principles of the Reformed Religion, which affords no comfort
to those who are not Christians as well as Protestants. May we always hold fast
these Principles, lest God complain, as Jer. 6.13, 14. From the least to the
greatest every one is given to covetousness, and from the Prophet even unto
the People, every one deals falsely; they have healed also the hurt of the
daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace, where there is no peace.
Some one perhaps that has read in Popish Authors, That without not only
Attrition but also Contrition there is no remission, may think that I do wrong
them, whilst I number them with those who do slightly heal troubled
Consciences, especially seeing they do require such a degree and measure of
Contrition as is either intensively or appreciatively the greatest; and they
account it not so much as appreciatively the greatest, till the Will does more
esteem the detestation of sin, then the attainment of any good, or escaping of
any evil. But this notwithstanding, they have an Art by which they can easily
content their Disciples, and skin over their wounds; for this they deliver as a
Tenent to be at any hand maintained, That Christ by instituting the power of
the Keys did consult man's infirmity, appointing a way in the which he may have
Divine favor without Contrition (unto which it is hard to come) by mere
Attrition, if he do but receive the Priestly Absolution; that obtained, carnal
sorrow, becomes to all intents and purposes as effectual as the godly sorrow
working repentance not to be repented of. This is Receptissimum aliorum omnium
axioma (not dogma) quod Sacramentum suppleat ex opere operato defectum
contritionis, says Gregorius de Valentia, disput. 7. quest. 8. de Contrit.
punct. 3. Can any one desire an easier Religion? It is but, when a man feels
some sorrow arising from a slavish fear, betaking himself to a Priest, and from
him receiving Absolution, and then all old scores are cut. Let me also add,
That it becomes us under troubles more to desire grace then comfort; yea, not
to desire comfort upon any account so much as this, that the joy of the Lord
may be our strength; that being refreshed with the oil of gladness, we may the
more easily and swiftly run the ways of Gods Commandments. Spiritual comfort
is desired carnally, if not desired in order to service: Psalm. 51.12, 13.
Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit;
then will I teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be converted unto
thee. By his free Spirit, the Psalmist here means his Spirit to set him free
from the slavish fear, either of God or Man; which usually makes us weary of
our lives, and yet horribly afraid to die: But wherefore does he desire this
free Spirit? not that he might be free from Gods service, but that he might be
free to his service; that being not in bondage through fear, he might win
others to the faith, that he might be able to encourage others to walk before
God in holiness and righteousness all their days: he that uses not his
comforts to this end, does but turn the grace of God into wantonness

2. A good way to gain Assurance, is to be thankful for what we enjoy already.
When Nathaneel was induced to believe meetly because he was told of his being
under the tree, Christ was so pleased, that he promised him, he should see
greater things then that, Joh. 1.50. So when we are thankful for the first
dawnings of light, God is so well pleased with that thankfulness, that he
causes our light to grow clearer and clearer to the noon day, Phil. 4.6, 7. Be
careful for nothing: but in every thing by prayer and supplication with
thanksgiving, let your requests be made known unto God, and the peace of God
which passes all understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds through
Christ Jesus. To him that is thankful for what he has, shall be given, but
from him who is not thankful for what he has, shall be taken away even that
which he has. How can we more provoke God, then if we overlook and despise
all our mercies because we want some one thing which we have a mind to, though
no present meetness for it; yet so is God provoked by bad men, and by good men.
Though Haman be by the King advanced above all the Princes, yet all avails him
nothing so long as he saw Mordecai the Jew sitting at the Kings gate, Hest.
4.13. and even the father of the faithful utters words not much unlike, Genesis
15. God bids him not fear, for he was his shield, and exceeding great reward.
But what does he reply? v. 2, 3. What will thou give me seeing I go childless,
and the steward of my house is this Eliezer of Damascus; and behold to me thou
have given no seed, and lo one born in my house is my heir. What will thou give
me? As if God had nothing to reward his Servants obedience with, but Children?
as if he could not be better to them then many heirs?

Obj. If God should hide himself from me in temporals, I could, that hiding
notwithstanding, be thankful for spirituals; But what have I to be thankful
for, so long as I know not that God loves me with a special peculiar love?

A. Is it nothing that thou art out of Hell, that thou art kept from running
into all excess of riot, that thou art kept from laying violent hands on thy
self? nothing that thou art born in Emmanuels Land, that thou hear of the
covenant of grace sure and well ordered in all things, that thou have Ministers
and Christian friends to help thee to lay hold of this Covenant? nothing that
the Spirit has brought thee under convictions of sin, and inclined thy heart
to seek out after the Gospel cure? Surely, if thou can see nothing to be
thankful for but Assurance, if thou should have Assurance it self, thou
would scarce be thankful for that, but quarrel at it, because it is not
clear enough, or because others have more of it then thy self.

3. He that wants Assurance must believe till he feel that he believes, and put
forth acts of love till he find that his love is sincere and unfeigned. Direct
acts would be multiplied when we have not the comfort of reflex acts; this is a
rule given by all, and seems to be firmly grounded on that famous place, Isa.
50.10. He that walks in darkness and sees no light, let him trust in the
name of the Lord, and stay on his God. He that walks in darkness, and sees
no light, is in as comfortless a condition as a child of God can be in. What is
the way to bring him into the light? Even to trust in the Name of the Lord, and
to stay on God: That is, he must consider that Christ died for him, and that he
is able to save to the uttermost all that come to God through him: yea, and
that he has promised, if he come, not to cast him out, and by express
commandment has made it his duty to believe; and in the strength of these
considerations, the Spirit assisting, to cast himself on him, and lay hold of
him so long till he find he has him. Those who make the being assured that God
is ours in covenant, to be the only, and the first ground of reliance on God,
do by consequence make all Preaching in vain, and bring unto us a new Gospel.
For suppose I had to do with an Unbeliever, what should I say to him? that he
does not believe, till he is persuaded that God is his in covenant with him?
Would not this be in effect to tell him, that he must die in his unbelief? For
how should he come to know himself to be in Covenant? Shall I tell him, because
he is elect? That cannot be known to him; nor if it could be known to him,
would it be sufficient to infer his being in covenant? for the elect, till
renewed by grace, are the children of wrath as well as others. My business
therefore is to convince such a man, that if he die in his sins, he is undone
everlastingly, and that his own righteousness is so every way imperfect, that
it cannot answer the demands of the Law: I must also call upon him to meditate
on the free and full offers of life and salvation that are made in the Gospel,
and let him know that it is his duty to lay hold of the hope that is set before
him, and to follow such kind of meditations with his prayers till he feel his
heart resolved to adventure himself on this bottom. But can any one so do?
Without grace he cannot; By grace he can. And so did Job, Job 13.15. Though he
slay me, yet will I trust in him. I, but Job, thing destitute at present of the
sense of Gods favor, might remember his former loving kindnesses, and with
such remembrances support himself. It Is possible he might: but the soul that
never had any sense of Gods love, may come to this pitch of resolution, nay, to
this pitch of resolution it must come. For what else should it do? To continue
in a natural condition brings damnation inevitably, get out of it by his own
strength no man can. Tell him what promises God has made of pardon, he will
reply, that whatever is promised as to pardon, is suspended on a condition,
which condition he finds not. But then tell him, there are absolute promises
wherein God promises to bestow grace on the graceless, here his hope begins to
stir and revive. The Lord has promised to take away the heart of stone, and to
give an heart of flesh: In that promise he has not put my name, but neither
has he excluded or put me out; he may do it for me as well as for another,
therefore at his feet will I lie down, and no longer be unwilling he should
rule in my heart by his Law and Spirit, and whether he ever smile on me or no,
(which yet I have reason to hope he will). I will have no other Lord or Master
but himself, and in the use of all good means will I wait on him, and look up
to him, till he write his law on my heart, and put his fear into my inward
parts. And this leads me to a fourth direction.

4. Let him that wants Assurance wait upon God in the use of all good means,
duties, ordinances, till he show his reconciled countenance to him. I say all
means, duties, etc. not only because the neglect of one may provoke God to
reject our attendances on him in the other, but also because it is uncertain in
which God will manifest himself.

1. Sometimes in Prayer he drops the oil of gladness into the wounded spirit,
and indeed in this duty as much as in any. Upon the Prayers of the Church
Peter's bonds were loosed; and could the Church be brought to as instant servent
prayer for her doubting members that are fast held under the chains of their
troublesome thoughts, we might find them sooner delivered. But as public
prayers have this advantage, that by them God is most honored, so private
closet prayers have this advantage, that by and in them a man has fairer
opportunities to spread all his doubts before God in all their particular
circumstances. Look on David, you would think he were not the same man at the
beginning and end of some of his Psalms. Before Prayer, as full of fears as the
night is of darkness; after Prayer, as full of confidence and comfort as the
Sun is of light. If our doubts do not prevail so far as to make us leave off
praying, our Prayers will prevail so far as to make us to leave off doubting,
Of Hannah it is said, That after she had prayed her countenance was no more
sad, 1 Samuel 1.18. Had we more praying, we should neither have so many jovial
sinners, nor so many dejected saints.

2. Sometimes in the reading or hearing of the word of God, a beam of light is
let in that scatters all doubts and fears. The Spirit takes off the veil that
is upon the Word, and the veil that is on the heart, and then a man can
misinterpret the Scripture no longer, his title to the Promise is no longer
obscure. The Word, it is Gods Power to Salvation; it is the instrument he makes
use of for the begetting, strengthening, confirming of faith; it answers all the
objections that carnal reason can raise against either the fullness or freeness
of Divine Grace. Therefore when people have been the very next door to despair,
by looking into this record of Gods love, they have met with that which has
recovered their hope, and made them to say, Who is a God like unto thee,
pardoning iniquity, transgression and sin?

3. Sometimes God appears in holy religious conference. As Iron sharpneth
Iron, so does a man sharpen the face of his friend, Prove. 27.17. And therefore
Christians, when they meet together, should encourage and strengthen one
another in the service and worship of God, Exhort one another daily, while it
is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin,
Heb. 3. 13. Indeed, why is one comforted, but that he should comfort others
with the same consolations wherewith he has been comforted? When thou art
converted, strengthen thy brethren. And that no man may despise any serious
Christian, though of the meanest parts, let it be considered, that God makes
use of the discourse of the foolish, for the conversion and confirmation of
those that have been in great repute for learning. Thus the famous Junius was
brought to be serious, by hearing the hearty discourse of a Country-fellow
concerning Faith, and Repentance; and our own renowned Bradford comforted by
the discourse of an unlearned Weaver. Thus will God have it to be, that no
flesh may glory in his presence, and that no member of the body may say to
another, I have no need of thee.

4. In the receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper sometimes the Lord
does seal men up to the day of Redemption. I have heard some say, that they did
never receive of this Banquet, but they found some sensible reviving by it; but
they were such as made more conscience of preparing themselves then most now a
days do. Indeed the two main ends of this Ordinance seem to be, Growth of
Grace, and Evidence of Grace: Here the newborn babe takes in that which makes
him grow up to his just and full proportion; here also the soul in a swoon
takes in that Wine which makes it recover, and feel its own life and strength.
No man can open his mouth so wide, but there is that in this Ordinance which
will fill it; for in it the whole Covenant is sealed, Christ and all his
benefits made over to the worthy Communicant.

Object. None must come to this Ordinance but he who has Assurance, and
therefore I do ill to prescribe it as a means to beget Assurance.

Answ. This is a mistake; men may without sin come to the Lords Table, and yet
have no Assurance that they are in favor with God. All must examine
themselves, and if it be clear that they are dead in sins and trespasses, they
must not in that condition venture upon the sacred mysteries: but if a man do
upon examination find that in him which does usually accompany true grace,
though he be not without some fears and doubts, he may, he must receive; and
the Sacramental Wine is the more proper for him, because of those infirmities.

5. Singing of Psalms also has been much blessed by God to the quieting of
men's minds, and filling them with the sense of his love. The Scholars of
Pythagoras seem to have thought that singing had some natural tendency to
procure quiet rest, and freedom from ill affrighting dreams; hence they used
it every night. And it is by the ancient Fathers much commended, as very
powerful for the quieting of all passions, and easing of the mind of all its
perturbations. Many have I read of, that in singing of Psalms have been sweetly
affected with the highest consolations: so that it may well be wondered how this
duty came in the late times to be so much difused in the Families of persons
professing Religion; Reasons indeed have been brought against it by some, but
such as could scarcely lay hold of any but those who had a mind to be deceived.
But what Lie would not they believe, unto whom God had sent strong delusions,
as a punishment of their wantonness, and proud contempt of those Guides at
whose mouths they were to enquire the Law? But it is hoped the folly of such
men is so manifested, that it will proceed no further. Sure I am, singing of
Psalms is a duty, when rightly performed, that makes glad the heart of God and
man; by it we make melody to God; the Prayer of the upright is his delight, but
the Praise of the upright much more: the time is coming when Prayer shall be no
more, but Praises shall never cease; it is an heavenly work, and therefore no
wonder if it give those who do use it such a taste of Heavens glory, as makes
them forget all their sorrows. That Luther could quell all his fears by singing
the 46 Psalm, is almost in all men's mouths; but we have a more sure and early
example in holy Writ, 2 Chronicles. 5.13, 14. When they lift up their voice with the
trumpet, and cymbals, and instruments of music, and praised the Lord, saying,
For he is good, for his mercy endures for ever; that then the house was filled
with a cloud, even the house of the Lord: so that the Priests could not stand
to minister by reason of the cloud, for the glory of God had filled the house.

Direct. 5. Let him that wants Assurance cast out every sin, set upon an
universal course of Reformation; for God will not give his Cordials to one that
has a foul Stomach. Those that dally and tamper with sin he will have no
commerce with, Rev. 2.17. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the
hidden Manna; and I will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name
written. These are all metaphorical expressions, which being put together do
amount to as much as Assurance; but they are all promised (...), to him that
overcomes, to him that rides on conquering and to conquer, vanquishing
temptations, steadfast in the Faith. Let loose and wanton Professors talk as
they please of their high enjoyments, and boast as they list of their raptures
and ecstasies, we do know that they lie against the truth. If we say that we
have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth,
1 Job. 1.6. But, If we have his commandments and keep them, then do we love
Christ; if we love him, we shall be loved of the Father, and he will love us,
and manifest himself to us, Joh. 14.21.

More especially, Assurance goes along with such acts of Obedience as do
notably cross some carnal interest; as

1. Acts of Charity; a costly duty, but very comfortable. God makes known his
mercy to those who are merciful to others. Isa. 58.7, 8, 9, 10. If thou deal
thy bread to the hungry, and bring the poor that are cast out to thy house;
when thou see the naked, thou cover him, and hide not thy self from thine own
flesh: Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thy health shall
spring forth speedily: and thy righteousness shall go before thee, and the
glory of the Lord shall be thy rereward: Then shall thou call, and the Lord
shall answer; thou shall cry, and he shall say, Here I am. If thou draw out thy
soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul, then shall thy light rise
in obscurity, and thy darkness be as the noonday, and the Lord shall guide
thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought. The Hebrews were very
charitable Christians, chap. 6. verse. 10. we read of their labor of love; they
took as much pains in relieving the poor, as if they had been all Deacons; and
the Saints were the special object of their charity, and to them they were
charitable for the Lords sake. Now this labor of love was that on which the
Apostle did build his persuasion, that they would not fall under that heavy
doom he had denounced against Apostates, I am persuaded better things of you,
things that accompany salvation, things that cleave to salvation, things from
which salvation cannot be separated, for God is not unrighteous to forget your
labor of love. And this diligence and unweariedness in ministering to the
necessity of the Saints, is that which is commended by the Apostles as the way
to attain to the full assurance of hope, verse. 11. We desire that every one of
you do show the same diligence, to the full assurance of hope to the end. No
wonder God honors this Grace, which does so highly honor Him, 2 Cor. 9.12.
The ministration of this service not only supplieth the want of the Saints,
but is abundant also by many thanksgivings unto God, whilst by the experiment
of this ministration, they glorify God for your professed subjection unto the
Gospel of Christ, and for your liberal distribution unto them, and unto all
Saints. Those who make it their grand plot and design to grow rich, do pierce
themselves through with many temptations; and when they come to lie down on
their sick-beds, they have no more ease then if they did lie down on beds of
thorns: But those who have wisely considered the poor, the Lord makes their
beds for them in their sickness, needs must they lie down in peace, and sleep
sweetly. It is a more blessed thing to give then to receive; and therefore we
should rejoice not when we receive of the bounty of others, but when we have
opportunities, to express our bounty toward those who do serve God in a worse
condition then our selves.

2. The duty of Fraternal correption may possibly hazard a man's repute and
esteem in the world, and make him accounted a busy pragmatical fellow, but it
will endear us in the eyes and sight of God: God will give some eminent token
of his love to those who are not ashamed of him in the midst of a crooked,
adulterous generation; men of such courage are seldom known long to lie under
any anxious fears of their eternal state.

3. Acts of Mortification carry in them a great contrariety to carnal
pleasures; and the dearer it costs any one to part with sin, the more sweet and
comfortable will it be to call to mind the victory got over that lust. None
more cheerful then they who deny themselves the cheerfulness of jovial
company, who set a knife to their throats, and walk by the strictest rules of
temperance. There Is no assurance of the Crown albeit we do strive, if we do not
strive lawfully; and lawfully we do not strive, if we be not temperate in all
things. Even St. Paul could not keep under his fears of being a reprobate,
longer then he kept under his body, and brought it into subjection, 1 Cor. 9.27.

4. Peacemaking is a thankless office, bringing not infrequently on those who
do attempt it, the anger of both the dissenting parties: but nothing does more
clearly evidence unto us our Adoption, Mat. 5.9. Blessed are the peacemakers,
for they shall be called the sons of God. It is the observation of Maldonat,
That to be called the sons of God, implies somewhat more then to be the sons of
God, viz. that peacemakers shall be owned and published as the sons of God;
they shall have a testimony in the consciences of others, and in their own
consciences, that they are the children of God.

5. Loving of those that hate us, blessing those that curse us, praying for
those that persecute us, are actions very contrary to corrupt nature, unto
which nothing is more pleasing then private revenge; but they have on them so
much of the Image of him that makes his Sun to rise on the evil and on the
good, and sends his rain on the just and unjust, that they clearly evidence
to him that is conscientious in exerting them, his Adoption: He cannot long
question his own forgiveness from God, who finds in himself an heart ready to
forgive all who trespass against him; for how should not the God of all mercies
much more readily forgive, then he who has but a very dram of mercy? Let any
one who is of a trembling heart, but go into his closet, and there pour out his
soul in supplications for the pardon and salvation of those who persecute him,
he can scarce not thence draw a deal of divine sweetness and secret sense of
Gods love. Unto such a one, sooner then to any other, would I promise
settlement in a sure and glorious peace. But revengeful projects are so black
and hellish, as that they cannot consist with calmness of conscience. God
indeed does not a second time put any sins into the Book of his remembrance,
which he has once blotted out: but a malicious revengefull prosecution of our
fellow Christians, may write over in our own hearts and consciences, all those
sins that were by the Blood of Christ before blotted out; for there is not as
to all things the same reason of the Original of the Act of Indemnity kept in
the hands of God, and the Counterpane of it kept within our selves.

Direct. 6. Let not any that would attain Assurance, give way to any
unnecessary scruples or doubts about his condition; or think that every thing
which calls for trouble and shame, does presently make a man an hypocrite, or
out of covenant with God: It is therefore wisdom, as soon as any doubt arises,
presently to take our selves to task, and see whether that which we have
against our selves be such a matter as from whence we can rationally infer that
God and we are still at enmity. I shall not here take occasion to descend to
particular doubts, for they are numberless; and besides, to answer doubts in
writing, avails little, because a doubt as represented to a tempted soul,
scarce seems to be the same thing that it is when described on paper; yet there
are some general Rules that may be laid down, which if particularly applied,
will be of great use for the silencing of doubts.

1. I ought not to make my self an hypocrite for that which the holy Scriptures
do no where make a character of hypocrisy. If any consolation were tendered to
me, had it not a foundation in the Scriptures. I were bound to reject it, and
so am I to put away all trouble which comes not backed with some Scripture. By
this rule our first Reformers did extricate themselves and others, out of those
labyrinths of desperation into which Popery had led them; and the rule has
still a standing necessary use, and if observed, would set at liberty many who
do account themselves bound.

2. I must not make my self an hypocrite for that which would make the whole
generation of the faithful Hypocrites as well as my self. If I have a mind to
gratify my self in hard thoughts concerning my self, yet I ought not to have
hard thoughts of every one else too. If I cannot see my own name written in the
Lambs book of life, yet I must not blot out the names of all that make up the
body of Christ Jesus. We may therefore observe, if we have opportunity, the
confessions of those who are, if any other, sincere; and if we do find but the
same lustings to sin which they also complain and acknowledge to be in
themselves, we may not for such lustings conclude our selves to be out of
covenant with God: or if we do think there is not security enough in this
course, then may we read over the histories of those who have Gods testimony in
Scripture that they were his children; and if we find that our spot is but as
theirs was, we need not for it fear our condition.

3. I need not trouble my self about that which has been already objected
against me, and fully by me answered. If a controversy has been long handled,
the question truly stated, arguments on both sides clearly produced, which way
a man has gone he will go, and not suffer himself to be removed from his
opinion by every new book, in which are only the old arguments in a new dress,
without any new additional strength. Sophisters, if you give them an ear, will
be wrangling infinitely; so will the Devil, and our own carnal hearts: we must
therefore do by them as Moderators do by Opponents after their argument has
been answered; bid them either urge it further, or use some new argument, or
else be silent; else shall we both lose our precious time, and also wrangle
away our consolations. And let all those who might see the seal of the Spirit
on their hearts, did they not nourish needless doubts, well consider, that they
do by disquieting themselves with childish irrational fears, commit a very
great sin. For 1. They do rob the Spirit of all the honor due unto him for the
work that he has wrought in their hearts. And can it choose but grieve him,
when he has put forth power equivalent to that by which the world was created,
by which Christ was raised from the dead, to find it overlooked and not at all
acknowledged? 2. He sins against his soul in hindering the growth it might make
were it not hindered by continual fears that the root is still unsound. Possess
a builder with an apprehension that his foundation is not sure laid, and you
will never persuade him to carry on his fabric with any vigor; for he will
still be thinking that when the storms and tempests arise it will fall, and the
higher he has raised it, the more shameful will be its fall. 3. By thus
disavowing Gods work of grace, he does dishearten and discourage his fellow
Christians, who observing him (of whom they always had far better thoughts then
of themselves) to doubt of his sincerity, do begin to question their own. 4. By
nullifying in conceit the new creature on such weak grounds, he extremely
hardens the unconverted; who will hence be ready to conclude, that no religion
lies deeper then the fancy.

Object. But if out of a fear not to deny a true evidence, I should trust to a
false evidence, I were then eternally undone.

Answ. True. And therefore I am not now persuading any man to slight any doubt
bottomed either on Scripture or reason, but only such as have all their force
merely from a palpable misapprehension of God, or of his covenant. Let a man
fear where fear is; but let him not make that matter of fear, which is indeed
ground of confidence: let him not say, that God loves him not because he
chasteneth him, when as he scarcely could be thought to love him if he did not
chasten him; neither let him for every flaw or crack call himself reprobate
silver, nor yet make every blasphemous thought an unpardonable sin, which
perhaps is so far from being an unpardonable sin, that it is merely his misery,
and not at all his sin; for if the blasphemy arise not out of my heart, but be
injected by Satan, I not consenting to it, it is my trouble, but his sin.

Object. But I have been told, that there is undiscerned as well as discerned
hypocrisy; and how then can I cease doubting?

Answ. Undiscerned hypocrisy, is only in those who have no mind to discern;
he that honestly proves his own works, and heartily prays, Search and try
me, O Lord, if there be any way of wickedness in me, cannot be in a way of
wickedness in me, and not know it. God may for a season hide from us our
sincerity, but prevailing hypocrisy cannot, at least shall not be hidden from
us, if we search carefully to find it out.

Quest. 6. part. 2. How may he who has Assurance do to preserve and keep it?

Answ. This is a right useful and weighty question: for [Non minor est virtus,
quam quaerere parta tueri] no less care and prudence is required to keep up
Assurance, then to gain it. Little, as we are taught in Metaphysics, is the
difference betwixt Essence and Duration, Creation and Conservation. The Spirit,
who is the author of Assurance, is also the carrier of it on; and those Duties
and Ordinances which are the wombs in the which it is conceived, are also the
breasts that do suckle and nourish it. Advisable it has been thought by some,
to have some one promise unto which we may have recourse when troubles
threaten; and caeteris paribus, it is most advisable when storms return, to
fly to that promise which we did lay hold of and escape shipwreck by when they
did first arise. Much of what was said in answer to the first part of the
question, will also serve to answer this second part of it, yet I will speak
somewhat to it distinctly. He therefore that would hold fast his Assurance, let
him

I. Labor to imprint on his heart, a true and firm knowledge of the covenant of
grace. He that understands this, may (says Luther) give thanks to God, and
account himself a good Divine. He that understands it not, is neither good
Divine. nor Christian: For therefore do our consolations not fail, because this
covenant is sure, and well ordered in all things. Two things especially there
be in this Covenant, in which it concerns all, who would not be as the waves of
the Sea driven with every wind, to be well established.

1. Upon what terms we take God: And doubtless we take him to sanctify and
pardon and glorify us, not to make us rich and wealthy in the world. Nay, if
we understand our selves, we leave it to him, if he will but make us partakers
of the Divine Nature, to despoil us, when it may tend to his glory and our own
good, to the utmost nakedness. To list our selves among Christ's Disciples, is
to profess that we have it in a readiness to forsake Father and Mother,
Brethren and Sisters, and whatever else is dear unto us. A believing meditation
of this, will quench that fiery dart with which many a godly man has been
pierced, even to the utter loss of all his Assurance of Salvation: For what
more usual then for persons to conclude God has forsaken them, because he has
somewhat lessened the stream of Temporal Mercies. Let an Angel from Heaven tell
Gideon the Lord is with him, he will not believe, as long as his people are in the
hands of the Midianites; If the Lord be with us, why then is all this befallen
us? Judge. 6.13. Naomi returned home laden with spiritual grace, yet she says
to her neighbors, Call me not Naomi, but call me Mara, for the Lord has dealt
very bitterly with me: I went out full, but the Lord has brought me home again
empty, Ruth 1.20. Upon such an account also Job complains, That God had
hidden his face, and did hold him for his enemy, Job 13.24. Could any thus
argue, if they had not forgot that when they did take Christ, they did then
also take up his Cross?

2. Upon what terms God receives us into favor; viz. not on the terms of
perfect, unsinning, but sincere and hearty obedience; and with express promise
never to forsake us till we have forsaken him, which he reckons us not to have
done, till we let some inferior good have more of our heart then he has.
Through non-consideration of this, many one has cast away all his hope, merely
because of sins of forgetfulness, inconsideration, passion; he is over-taken
with anger, pettishness, inordinate fear; he has eaten some little matter more
then the necessities of nature required; he had some wandering thoughts in duty;
he omitted an opportunity of counselling a friend: What then? therefore God is
not in Covenant with him? Nay, but thence nothing can be inferred, save only
that he is not yet with God in Heaven; for whatever is of frailty omitted or
committed, has a pardon on course granted unto it; if any man thus sin, he
has an Advocate with the Father, who has procured for him that he may lay
actual claim to eternal life, and make faithful plea for mercy. He therefore
that would keep his Assurance, must, when sins are brought to remembrance, and
set in order before him by Satan, thus say, Were my sins presumptuous sins,
enormous conscience-wasting crimes? if so, then is all my actual claim to the
promise of Eternal Life suspended till I recover my self again by renewed
repentance; my right and title to Heaven I may retain, but my present fitness
for it is lost; if they were not presumptuous sins, then may I with wonted
boldness go to the Throne of Grace and call God Father.

II. He that would keep his Assurance must thankfully and admiringly
acknowledge the goodness of God in bestowing it on him. God does expect a
tribute of Praise for every Mercy; by not paying that tribute we forfeit the
mercy: but if after so great a mercy as Assurance we continue to be
unthankful, we may expect, that as we forfeit our Assurance, so God will also
take the forfeiture. Indeed what will a man be thankful for, who is not
thankful for the sense of Gods pardoning, adopting love? It Is not Heaven, but
it is near of kin to Heaven; it is not the Redemption, but it is the first
fruits of it, and we know that Gods people were commanded to bring their
Oblation of Thanksgiving when they received their first fruits, because the
first fruits were a pledge and pawn of the whole Harvest, Deuteronomy. 26. Blessed be
God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant
mercy has begotten us again unto a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the dead, to an inheritance incorruptible, etc. If God had only
assured us, that we should spend Eternity in some Limbus unacquainted with pain
and horror (seeing we do know that by our sins we have deserved to receive our
portion with hypocrites and unbelievers, where there is weeping, wailing and
gnashing of teeth) monstrous ingratitude were it not to admire so great love:
but if God have given us a well grounded hope that our names are written in
Heaven, that we have a title to that Paradise in comparison with which the
Garden of Eden was but a dunghill, this is such a mercy as is undervalued if it
be thought on without astonishment; if it do not cause us frequently with David
to sit down before the Lord, and say, Who are we, and what is our house, that
thou have brought us hitherto? And this was yet a small thing in thy sight, O
Lord God, but thou have also spoken of thy servants for a great while to come;
and is this the manner of men, O Lord God? O how great is thy goodness which
thou have laid up for those that fear thee? 2 Samuel 7. Psalm. 31.19. But if any
one who has the love of God shed abroad in his heart, do in a short time grow
so stupid as not to allow himself time sufficient to view the height, depth,
breadth, and length of that love, let him not wonder if he be brought back to
the valley of the shadow of death and darkness.

III. He that would keep his Assurance must keep himself from returning to sin,
especially from returning to that sin upon which Conscience in its former
accusations was wont to lay the greatest Emphasis. Psalm. 85.8. I will hear what
God the Lord will speak; for he will speak peace unto his people, and to his
saints: but let them not return to folly. If they do, instead of peace they
shall soon find trouble; for the sin which was so loathsome and uneasy as that
we had no rest till we had vomited it up, must needs be far more loathsome and
uneasy if we do return unto it after we have cast it up. If the Devil, after
he has departed for a season, return, he returns not alone, but brings
with him seven more spirits worse, more defiling, more tormenting then the
former.

Object. Can a man that is regenerate lose the Spirit of regeneration?

Answ. If he can, after grace received, sin with full consent, delight and
contentment, he may: but some say that God is by promise engaged never to let
him sin at such an high rate; others deny that there is any such promise: Which
way my judgment in this controversy inclined, I before showed; but this is
agreed on by all sober Divines, That a wilful relipse does notably weaken the
habit of Faith, and make our own spirits unable to testify of our Adoption,
and so grieve the Spirit of God as that he will not testify, and give the evil
spirit advantage to suggest that we are utter reprobates, and in no capacity of
being renewed by repentance.

IV. He that would keep his Assurance, must be careful to keep the vows that
he did make to God in the time of his trouble. It seems natural to those that
are in perplexity, to make unto God promises of such things as they suppose
will be acceptable to him. We find in Scripture this to have been the practice
of bad and good. But the Devil finding that at such times we have more
affection then judgment, puts us sometimes to vow things in their own nature
unlawful; such vows oblige not to performance, but only to repentance: No
other is the obligation of vows made of things indeed not unlawful in
themselves, but yet impossible to be done without neglecting the duties of our
places and relations. It is not unlawful to set apart one day in the week,
besides the first, to the direct immediate acts of Religion; but if my body
will not bear it, or if the necessities of my family will not consist with it,
or if I am under Authority, and Governors will not permit it, then the
separating of so much time for Religion becomes to me unlawful, nor can any vow
oblige me to it. But the vows we have made of things in our power, and pleasing
to the Almighty, must be performed, else they will be upon us, and break our
peace so as nothing more. When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it,
for he has no pleasure in fools. Pay that which thou have vowed. Better it is
that thou should not vow, then that thou should vow and not pay. Suffer not
thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, neither say thou before the Angel, it was
an error; wherefore should God be angry at thy voice, and destroy the work of
thy hands? Eccles. 5.4, 5, 6. Do not so much as deferr to pay, for God has no
pleasure in fools. It is certainly a (...), and the meaning can be no other,
than that he is greatly displeased with those who go about one while to flatter
him in making a vow, and afterward to mock him in refusing or delaying to
perform it. Say not before the Angel it was an error; Do not say it was
imprudently made, that it was an ignorance which thou art willing to expiate.
Wherefore should God be angry? Wherefore should he foam? A dreadful place of
Scripture, often to be thought on by those who alter vows make enquiry.
Deliberation is needful before the vow be made, and we sin if we vow rashly:
but it is one thing to sin in vowing, another thing to vow to sin; if we have
sinned in vowing, yet if the matter of the vow was not something sinful, we
must not alter; or if we will alter, we must not expect to dwell in the Lords
holy hill.

V. He that would continue his Assurance, must bring forth such fruit after
Assurance as he either did not, or could not, before Assurance. For the Rule
holds here, Whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have more
abundance: but whosoever has not, from him shall be taken away even that he
has, Mat. 13.12. God will not long let his candle shine on him who does no
more then what he might have done, had he remained in darkness. But if when God
has lift up upon us the light of his countenance, we then walk as children of
the light, our light shall increase; we shall not only be quiet, but also
rejoice, and make our boast of him; we shall grow from a probable, to a certain
and infallible hope of Heaven. God does never from those who are in covenant
with him withhold those influences that are simply and absolutely necessary for
the avoiding of sin, or performance of a duty; when it is a duty (affirmative
precepts do not oblige ad semper) but there are aids or influences, called by
some arbitrary, by others liberal, by which a man is enabled with less
difficulty to abstain from evil, and to lead an holy life; these aids are
usually vouchsafed to the assured Christian: If these notwithstanding he yield
to temptations, or omit duties, or perform them either slightly or
unchearfully, ay, or if he do not encourage others to wait on God, it may well
be expected that God should withdraw them, and give Sin and Satan some notable
advantage against him. Those very omissions and commissions which would not
provoke God to deny Assurance at first, may provoke him to recall it after it is
granted.

Quest. 6. part 3. How may Assurance when it is lost be regained?

Answ. This question supposes that Assurance may be lost; a supposition I am
so far from not granting, that I humbly conceive it may be lost, and a man not
sensible of it. That it may be lost in part, and a man take no great notice of
the loss, will be easily granted; and why not in whole? Is it not possible that
the great Duties of self-reflection and examination should be for some time
discontinued, or not impartially performed? If so, how easily may one judge
that liveliness and enlargedness which arises merely from temper of body, or
increase of gifts, or false zeal, still to arise ftom the testimony of the
Spirit and a good Conscience? Histories do abound with examples, of men who
meeting with persons of great pretended zeal and piety, have been by them led
into such practices as could not stand with an actual assurance of pardon: yet
till by some providence the vizor has been pulled off the face of such
hypocritical Guides, they have not missed their comforts. The consolation of
the Holy Ghost must needs be gone, only another consolation did grow up
instead of it, arising from comparing themselves with others of different
persuasions from them, whom they saw to be worse then themselves, or from the
testimony and applause given them from their companions whom they reputed always
the most holy; Measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves
among themselves, they are not wise or understand not, 2 Cor. 10.12. May all
whom Satan has got into this snare, by timely repentance recover themselves;
for it is of all snares the most dangerous, as being laid by the Devil
transforming himself into an Angel of Light, and his Ministers transformed into
Ministers of Righteousness.

Some there be who have lost their Assurance, and are sensible of that loss,
and they are of two sorts.

I. Such as have fallen into such sins as do till repented of make them unmeet
for pardon, and much more unmeet for Assurance.

2. Such whose persuasion of pardon might have still put forth it self into
act, had they not looked on their sins through a false glass, and so unduly
aggravated them. This latter sort are not to be favored in their hard thoughts
of themselves; they must have the falseness of those Rules, by which they
mis-judge themselves discovered, and be made to know that they greatly
dishonor God, whilst they measure his thoughts by their own thoughts, whilst
they look on him as extreme to mark what men do amiss, who is indeed gracious
and merciful, slow to anger, pardoning iniquity, transgression, sin. Yet care
would be taken, lest while we endeavor to cure men of this injudicious (and
therefore falsely so called) humility, we cast them not into a more dangerous
disease, spiritual sloth and security.

But it is the former sort of troubled souls to whom my Directions are
designed, (though something may be said that will not be unusefull to the
latter. Them I advise

I. To bring themselves to a due and just sense of their condition. I say, a
due and just sense; for there are in this case two extremes to be avoided,

I. A sleighting of it. They who err on this hand have either benumbed their
consciences; or else they have, through the cares of the world and multitude of
business, so diverted their thoughts, as that conscience has no time to speak.
One would have thought that David after committing Adultery should have been a
Magor missabib, a terror to himself and all round about him: but he seems
rather to be taken up with sinful contrivances how he might cover that sin,
nor do we find any complaint of broken bones, till Nathan the Prophet had
awakened him. To such I would say, Remember from whence ye are fallen. Ye are
fallen from the smiles to the frowns of a Father, of an Husband who can arm all
the creatures in Heaven and Earth against you, who can turn all sweet things
into bitterness. Is it nothing to you, that for ought you know your names are
blotted out of the Lambs book of Life? nothing that you lie open to eternal
wrath? What are your pillows made of, that you can give either sleep to your
eyes, or slumber to your eyelids, and not reckon that God will break in upon
you while there is none to deliver.

2. Some have too deep sense of this condition, looking on themselves whilst
in it as desperate, as having committed the unpardonable sin. There be two
places in the Epistle to the Hebrews that have some aspect this way, these have
horribly puzzled some of the ancients, and are usually set home to the full by
the Devil and a misgiving heart in this evil day. To remove this error, I will
not digress into an inquiry concerning the nature and symptoms of the
unpardonable sin, about which it is most certain some have discoursed very
wildly; it may suffice to say, that a presumptuous sinning after the grace of
Assurance received, though it cause a sore wound, yet not an incurable wound.
There is balm in Gilead, a Physician in Israel. Scriptures give promises after
such lapses, and furnish us with examples of some who have recovered out of
them; nay, it is thought by most, that such falls do not leave the person thus
fallen, dead, but only in a swound; if so, he may somewhat relieve himself
with remembering the days of the years of the right hand of the most High, and
by means of grace still left, act, being first acted, somewhat toward his own
recovery: his sin indeed is in some respects more heinous then any sin of an
unregenerate person, but yet if not quite deprived of the spirit of life, he
may do that which a man who is void of the spirit cannot do. This leads me to
the second Direction.

II. Let him who has lost his comforts, examine how and which way he lost
them. The cure usually is half wrought, when the cause of the trouble is found
out: and sometimes it is not difficult to find out the cause, viz. when
Assurance goes away simul and semel, when all of a sudden a man is carried out
of the Wine-cellar into the Dungeon, he can hardly be ignorant what it was that
provoked God thus to change his actings toward him; it can hardly be that it
should be any thing but some notorious sin lately committed by him. Such sins
are found without secret searching, Jer. 2.24. They are open before hand, and
go before hand to judgment, 1 Timothy 5.24. These must humbly be acknowledged to
God, and the Church too, if they be of that nature as that the Church by them
has been scandalized. Let wanton proud wits argue as they please, and cavil as
they list, God will own that power he has entrusted his Church with, and
retain the sins that she retains. But when Conscience has brought in some
such sin as the cause of all the unquietness and trouble feared or felt, it
must not rest satisfied in acknowledgment of that sin; a man must by and
through it go to the other sins of his life, and to Original sin, the fountain
of every sin. As David, when by Nathans message he was made to possess the sin
of Murder, from which he prays to be delivered, Psalm. 51.14. does also confess
the corruption of his nature. ver. 5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in
sin did my mother conceive me. Sometimes the black cloud has been long a
gathering, then it is the more difficult to find out what the sins are that did
contribute most matter toward it. And therefore more care must be used in
searching our hearts, and trying our ways, and Prayer must be made to God, that
he would show unto us, Wherefore he has hardened our hearts from his fear, and
caused us to err from his ways. This was Elihu's counsel to Job, Job 34.31, 32.
Surely it is meet to be said to God, I have born chastisement, I will not
offend any more: That which I see not, teach thou me; if I have done iniquity,
I will do no more. This searching must be continued till we find; And when the
Achan is found out, must we then sit still? Nay, then must we bewail it before
God; The evil way must be forsaken that caused God to forsake us; That good way
which when we left God did leave us, must we return unto. Remember from whence
thou art fallen, repent, and do thy first works, Revel. 2.5.

Obj. Can one in this case do his first works?

A. Not in their wonted perfection: but in some sort he can, or at least he can
go to him who renews strength to the weak, and comfort those who are in
trouble. To spend time in whining complaints, is more easy and more pleasing
to those who have bruised themselves; but to stir up strength and be doing, is
more safe and pleasing to God. I would not have deserted souls chidden for
crying out and roaring; How can they do other, whose wounds stink, and are
corrupt, whose sores run all the night long? But they must not spend all their
time in roaring, but get the broken bones set, and make use of them, so shall
they recover strength, and rejoice.

III. He that would regain his Assurance, must justify God until it return.
This is, if any other, in all Christianity an hard duty. Satan reckons that all
whom God touches, not only in their bone and flesh, but also in their spirit,
will not fail to curse him to his face. Job did not do so, but he came as near
it as one could do, and not do it; he cursed almost every thing besides God,
Job 3.1, etc. Yea, many an hard thought did rise in his heart against God
himself, and some hard words he uttered against him, as will appear to any that
will read his Book: the way to prevent all, whether hard thoughts or speeches,
is to hold our eyes on our sins, and well and duly to consider their demerit:
so shall we wonder that no worse thing has befallen us; that we are not under
horror and despair total and final, and remediless. Psalm. 51.3, 4. I acknowledge
my transgression, and my sin is ever before me. Against thee, thee only have I
sinned, and done this evil in thy sight. That thou might be justified when
thou speak, and be clear when thou judge. When we seriously and frequently
think of sin, and God against whom sin is committed, we do soon clear him; and
when we justify him, it is not long ere he justify us, in his Court of
Heaven, in the Court of our own Consciences, and in the Court of the Church
too, (many of whose members are apt to condemn those for hypocrites against
whom God writes bitter things.) While Job thought that God wronged him, God
ceased not to scare him with dreams, and terrify him with visions; to shoot
arrows into him, the poison whereof did drink up his spirits. When he
acknowledged, that God could do every thing, and that no thought could be with
holden from him, and began to abhor himself in dust and ashes; then God takes
his part against his uncharitable friends, turns his captivity, and gives him
twice as much as he had at first, Job 42.

IV. He that would regain his lost Assurance, must offer unto God what terms of
agreement he pleases; be glad to be received into favor upon the hardest
conditions. I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am no more
worthy to be called thy son; make me as one of thy hired servants, Luke 15.18,
19. as one of thy hired servants, who fare hard, and work hard, and seldom are
admitted into the presence of their Master; he was content to be any thing, so
he might again be admitted into his Fathers house. This is the genius of
repentance, whether initial, or renewed; it makes a man peremptory, never more
to draw in the iron yoke of sin, but willing to take any other yoke that Christ
shall think meet to lay on him; to put his mouth in the dust, yea, to lick the
dust, if there may be any hope for him. Therefore Absalom, when he would
counterfeit a strain of true repentance, thus expresses himself, 2 Samuel 14.32.
Let me see the Kings face, and if there be any iniquity in me, let him kill me.
He chose rather to be out of the world, then out of the Kings favor. Whether
David's favor were to be bought so dear or no, Gods favor is; for as his anger
is worse then death, so his loving kindness is better then life. He never duly
estimated the light of Gods countenance, who would not get one glimpse of it,
though on condition presently after to enter into the chambers of darkness. He
never truly prized communion with the Father and Son, who would not part with
houses full of silver and gold rather then not partake of it. I have born nine
Children (says that good woman in Mr. Bolton) with as great pain, I think, as
other women; I would with all my heart bear them all over again, and pass again
every day through the same intolerable pangs as long as I live, to be assured
of my part in Christ Jesus. A very Hypocrite in some tempest of terror might
say as much; but when this is become the frame of heart, to will the blood of
Christ absolutely, it is not long usually ere God sprinkles us with it. Here
many may see whence it is that they spend the most of their days in grievings
and groans, namely, because they will not rise up to the terms and conditions
of comfort. Would they confess their transgressions unto the Lord, he would
forgive the iniquity of their sin: But if they will keep silence, let them not
wonder if their bones wax old through roaring all the day long, if Gods hand
lie heavy on them day and night, till their moisture be turned into the drought
of summer. Would they ply their hearts with stirring thoughts, then they would
revive; but if they be so lazy as never to commune with their hearts, no wonder
that they remain benumbed. Would they be humble, God would give them more
grace; but if they suffer their proud thoughts to exalt themselves against the
knowledge of Christ, no wonder God sets himself against them. The terms of the
Covenant are made so low, that God cannot in honor stoop lower; if any one
cannot bring himself to close with them, let him not think that God will find
out new ways to satisfy his longing follies and lazy desires.

V. He that would regain his lost Assurance, must be sure to pray hard. Profane
wits make themselves merry with us, because commonly in all our Directions we
bring in Prayer for one. They may as well laugh at Feast-makers, who in all
their entertainments furnish their tables with Bread and Salt; or with
Physicians, who make Aloes an ingredient in almost every Pill. Some duties are
more peculiarly suited to some one kind of trouble, but Prayer sanctifies and
sweetens all, Jam. 5. Is any man afflicted, let him pray. (...). If any man
suffer evil, of what kind soever, he will find it useful to betake himself to
Prayer; especially in soul-distresses and desertions Prayer must needs be
advantageous, because it seems to be one main end God aims at in
withdrawing himself, to make his people more fervent and frequent in Prayer.
Hos. 5.15. I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their
offense, and seek my face; in their affliction they will seek me early. I will
return to my place, I will as it were shut my self up in Heaven as if I
regarded them not, till they seek my face, that is, my favor; in their
affliction they will seek me early, betimes, with all speed, with care and
vigor also, at such a rate as men are wont to do things in the morning. Hence
we shall observe, That the adopted children of God have when under desertion
intended their prayers. David did so, Psalm. 30.6, 7, 8. Psalm. 77.1, 2. So did
Heman, Psalm. 88.1, 2, 9. yea, of the natural Son it is said, That being in an
agony he prayed more earnestly, Luke 22.44. that agony made him more to express
his earnestness, then at other times: And when all other means have been used
without success, Prayer has presently effected the cure, so that man in
Gerson, that studied against Atheism, and could never get the better of it, at
last prayed that God would help him in it, and he was clean rid of all his
horrid temptations this way, and was as really persuaded of the truth of unseen
things as of the chair he sat in. And many no doubt now alive have found by
their own blessed experience, that when the most rational arguments have not
cured their distrustful thoughts, Prayer has done it speedily; they have
kneeled down with the spirit of heaviness, but did rise up clothed with the
garment of praise.

Object. I should have hopes that God had not cast me off, did he vouchsafe to
receive a prayer from me; but this is that which heightneth all my miseries,
that When I spread forth my hands, he hides his eyes from me; yea, when I make
many prayers, he does not hear.

Answ. This is a sad case indeed, but no other then what many of the dearest
servants of God have complained of: The Spouse so complains, Cant. 5.5. I
sought him, but I could not find him; I called him, but he gave me no answer.
So does the Church, Lam. 3.44. Thou have covered thy self with a cloud, that
our prayers should not pass through. But perhaps this was some faint Prayer.
Nay, it was a most vehement Prayer; When I cry and shout, he shuts out my
prayer, verse. 8. And before these, David, Psalm. 22.1, 2. My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? why are thou so far from helping me, and from the words
of my roaring? O my God, I cry in the day time, but thou hear not; and in
the night-season, and am not silent. And before him, Job chapter 30. v. 20. I cry
unto thee, and thou do not hear me: I stand up, and thou regardest me not.
We must to avoid the dint of this temptation, know, that it is our duty to pray
always, and not to faint; and what the fruit of that will be, our Savior has
told us in a whole Parable, Luke 18. The repulses God either gives or seems
to give unto our Prayers, should only intend our devotion, and make Faith to
gather up its strength: Therefore we shall observe in Scriptures, that it has
not been unusual for Christians to plead and expostulate with God, in case of
desertion and not answering prayer. Why art thou so far from helping me, and
from the words of my roaring? Psalm. 22.1. and Psalm. 80.4. O Lord God of Hosts,
how long wiit thou be angry against the prayer of thy people? Many places there
be of the same strain and import: which pleas and arguings, because they do
sometimes arise from that holy becoming boldness which is purchased for Saints
by the Blood of Christ, Ephesians. 3.12. Heb. 10.29. but do also sometimes arise
from a sinful sauciness made up of discontent and unbelief; therefore I shall,
to complete this last Direction, show when a deserted person is in a fit frame
thus to plead with God, and also what are the Topics from which Faith may
argue.

A man cannot believingly plead and expostulate with God for not answering his
Prayers, till he be meet to receive that mercy he prays for. Whilst iniquity
is regarded, God will easily answer our pleadings, and make us ashamed of our
expostulations. Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see not? Wherefore have we
afflicted our souls, and thou take no knowledge? Isai. 58.3. God easily
counterpleadeth, verse. 4. Behold ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite
with the fist of wickedness. Your fasts end in, and are seconded with
vexatious suits and brawls; Vid. Gatak, in locum.
you misuse your servants, and deal hardly with your debtors not able to pay
you. Ye shall not fast as ye do this day, to make your voice be heard on high.
As if he had said, Never look to have your fastings accepted, or your suits
heard on high, so long as ye continue these courses of vexation and oppression.

Object. If we must not plead till we be meet for mercy, then we must never
plead; for our hearts being once made meet for mercy, God bestows mercy, and so
no need to plead for it.

Answ. Meetness does not consist in indivisibili, but has its latitude and
degrees. God does not delay to answer when he has brought a man to full
fitness; but he may and does sometimes delay when he has brought him to some
fitness. That also may be a full fitness for one, that is not a full fitness
for another; and that a full fitness for the same man at one time, that is not
at another. It Is commonly said, and truly, that there are preparatory works to
Conversion, but these are not alike for degree in all: those that have led
orderly civil lives, are usually by a less humiliation fitted for faith, then
those whose sins have more scandalized Religion: so are those who are designed
for a private life, then they whom God calls to the work of the Ministry. That
very repentance that would have fitted a man for Assurance at first, will not
fit him to have it renewed, after he has by any notorious revolting lost it.
He also who is by God designed for exemplary strictness and eminent
mortification, does commonly come by his Assurance more hardly then he who was
not designed to be so choice a vessel. He therefore who lives without the sense
of Gods love, though he have waited for it more then they who wait for the
morning watch, let him think that God has some gracious end in this
dispensation, either to humble him afresh for former sins, or to cause him the
more highly to value Christ Jesus, or to make him a more able experienced
comforter of others: yet if he be not conscious to himself of indulging any
known sin, let him not cease to pray that God would restore unto him the joy of
his salvation, nor yet humbly to expostulate with God, and enquire wherefore He
hides his face from him; for these expostulations and pleadings are the ways in
which, and means by which God gives in promised mercies, and in and by which
our own faith is stirred up to lay hold of Christ, his Blood and Spirit. We
must not by our pleadings design to make any change in God (with whom there is
not the least variableness, or shadow of turning,) but to make a change in our
selves; our wrestling is not to overcome God, but to overcome our own pride and
infidelity: yet we are said (Scripture accommodating it self to our infirmity)
to awaken God, to prevail over God himself, Hos. 12.4. He prevailed over the
Angel, he wept, and made supplication. By the Angel, almost every one now
thinks we are to understand the Angel of the Covenant, God blessed for
evermore. Let us see what it is from which we may so argue with God, as to have
power with him, and prevail.

1. We may argue with him from all the names (suitable to our condition) by
which he has called himself in Scripture. Many comfortable names God
proclaims himself by, Exodus 34.6, 7. look what it is that best hits our
condition, by that we may plead with God. So we find Moses to have done, Numb.
14.17, 18, 19. And now I beseech thee, let the power of my Lord be great,
according as thou have spoken. The Lord is long suffering, and of great mercy,
forgiviag iniquity and transgression. Pardon, I pray thee, the iniquity of this
people, according to the greatness of thy mercies. Scarcely can any deserted
persons condition be clothed with such circumstances, as that he may not be
able to relieve himself, and argue with God by some one of those seven names by
which his good affection to repenting sinners is set out: they are seven skirts
by the which he would have us to lay hold of him, and not let him go till he
has blessed us. In Scripture also he makes himself known by the name of
Father, by that name the Church argues with him, Isa. 63.16. Doubtless thou
art our Father. This was the hinge on which the Prodigals Faith did turn, I
will go to my Father, and say, Father. Dulce nomen patris: Let every deserted
soul plead it with God. Thou art my Father; and can a Father shut his arms
against a son, formerly indeed disobedient, but now entreating mercy with
tears, resolving to redeem the loss of former, with improvement of the time to
come? He that shall thus with true remorse and hearty grief bespeak God, shall
not long be without the best robes, the ring, and the shoes, without the most
signal tokens of fatherly love.

Obj. If I durst call God Father, then I were well enough, but this is my
misery, that I have lost all that which sometimes made me to think he was my
father, and afforded me some boldness in my accesses to him.

A. If I should for once gratify thee in thy hard thoughts concerning thy
self, yet thou can not deny but that God is thy Father on a common account,
as a Creator. Plead that relation, for it will go a great way with God,
especially if we be also within the pale of his Church, Isa. 64.8, 9. But now,
O Lord, thou art our father, we are the clay, thou art the Potter, we are all
the work of thy hands. Be not wroth very sore, O Lord, neither remember
iniquity for ever: behold, see, we beseech thee, we are all thy people. An
argument also used Psalm. 138.8. Job 10.8, 9. In all the places there is an
allusion to Gods framing man's body at first, but perhaps something more is
aimed at, viz. that they had been by God not only formed and fashioned in the
womb, but also formed and fashioned into a Church, taken into Covenant, and so
made a peculiar people, doubtless there is something to be made of this, that
we are called by Gods Name, and that we are the sons of his handmaid, born in
his house; some weight this nail will bear; if we hang all our vessels on it,
then it must needs break.

2. The very extremity of our condition is a very effectual plea with God: he
uses it as an argument to himself, Isa. 57.17. I will not contend for ever,
neither will I be always wroth, for the spirit should fail before me, and the
souls which I have made. While no temptation has befallen us but what is
common, God counts not himself so much concerned to regard us; but when once we
are tempted with such malice as we shall not long be able to bear, God will
then soon either restrain, or refrain his anger: When therefore our spiritual
troubles are come to a true, and not only an imaginary extremity, let us plead
that with God: so seems Heman to do, Psalm. 88.14, 15. Lord why hidest thou thy
face from me? I am afflicted and ready to die; from my youth up, whilst I
suffer thy terrors, I am distracted. God may suffer soul-trouble to end in
distraction, and it has sometime so ended; but this is his strange work, and
it will not displease him that any in whom his arrows do stick should pray to
have them pulled out, lest they should drink up their spirits, yea, lest the
horror of them should deprive them of sense and reason.

3. Deserted Souls may remember God of his former gracious dealings with them.
The multitude of the Jews cried aloud to Pilate, desiring him to do as he had
ever done unto them, Mark 15.8. They thought it would be unworthy of a man in
authority to leave off to do acts of grace; yet men sometimes think they are
not engaged to do more, because they have already done so much. But God does do
good, that he may do good; his former loving kindnesses may be pleaded with him
as arguments to move him to renew his mercies. Can any one that is distressed
remember the time when God did wipe off the tears from his eyes, and bid him be
of good cheer because his sins were forgiven him? thence let his faith plead as
does the Church, Isa. 63.15. Where is thy zeal, and thy strength, the sounding
of thy bowels, and of thy mercies toward me? are they restrained? That tender
affection and ability to do me good, of which I had formerly so many evident
signs, and conspicuous proofs; how come I now to hear nothing of it? How comes
it about that those breasts (so some read, and not bowels) of consolation that
I was wont to suck at so freely till I was satisfied, are now quite put up,
though I need them more then ever I did? And to strengthen our faith yet more,
we may mind God that he has done greater things for us then that we ask; for
he has given us his Son to die for us when we were enemies; and will he not
now give us the fruits of his suffering? Did he not stick at letting his only
begotten pay the dear price for our Redemption, and will he think much to let
us only have our share in it?

4. We may in desertion plead our own readiness to remit unto others their
offenses against us. This plea Christ (supposing us to lift up pure hands, void
of wrath) has put into our mouths in that most complete form of Prayer, Luke
11.4. Forgive us our sins; for we also forgive every one that is indebted to
us. Can we who have a spirit in us lusting to envy, revenge, fury, bring our
hearts to forgive our offending brethren to seventy times seven, and wilt not
thou, O God, who challengest us to show any God like unto thee, that pardons
iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage, Mic.
7.18. blot out our sins as a mist, and our iniquities as a thick cloud.

5. We may also plead the compassion and prayers of others for us. Thus, Do all
the Lords Ministers bowels yern toward me? and shall Gods bowels be restrained
toward me? Do they declare themselves ready to loose all my sins, and shall
God retain them? Will the Stewards show pity, and will the Lord who gave them
their commission show none? It is lawful to plead our own Prayers, much more
the Prayers of others, Psalm. 80.4. O Lord God of Hosts, how long will thou be
angry against the prayers of thy people? If thine anger be kindled against me,
yet since all the Church prays for me without ceasing, will thou not accept
her? Did thou ever say to the whole house of Jacob, Seek ye my face in vain?
Papists speak much of a treasure of the Church made up of the satisfactions
purchased by the death of Christ, and of the Passions of the Saints, who in the
days of their flesh suffered more then their sins required; the sufferings and
satisfactions of these Saints may be applied to others, say they, and Church
Officers have power to dispense them, and grant indulgences. Such a treasure we
all reject with abhorrence, but yet according to the Creed, we acknowledge a
communion of Saints, consisting in the mutual help and assistance of one
another by prayer. Doubtless it may somewhat quiet and stay our troublesome
spirits, to call to remembrance, that when we dare scarce speak for our selves,
there are of our fellow Christians that are crying for us, some making
particular mention of us, (a favor often desired by St. Paul, Romans 15.30.
Ephesians. 6.18, 19. Col. 4 3. 2 These. 3.1, 2.) others mentioning us as members of
the same body with themselves, known to God, though unknown to themselves.

6. We may plead the ill use like to be made of our desertions by others,
whether they be good, or bad. This Plea, if we be sincere in it, is like to be
very effectual, because it arises from a love to Religion, a fear lest it
should suffer in our sufferings. God can so order it, and sometimes does, that
his servants soul-straights do benefit those without, and those within. When
the Spouse had caused her beloved to withdraw, He put in his hand by the hole
of the door, and her bowels were moved for him, Cant. 5.4. she starts and
follows after him, and enquires of all she met concerning him. Now what was the
effect of this? The Daughters of Jerusalem ask ver. 9. What is thy beloved more
then another beloved, that thou do so charge us? And chap. 6.1. enquire
whither he is gone? whither turned aside, that they might seek him with the
spouse? And indeed, in reason one would think this should be the language of
bystanders: If a lost Christ be so precious, what is an enjoyed Christ? If a
frowning Savior be so desirable, what is a smiling Savior? But oh how seldom
is it so? Do we not rather observe that hereby,

1. The good are much discouraged; apt they be to faint at those tribulations
which do befall others, though for their sakes, Ephesians. 3.13. How much more for
those tribulations that seem brought on their fellow Christians by Gods own
immediate hand? In this case there is room for that ingeminated plea of David,
Psalm. 69.6. Let not them that wait on thee, O Lord, be ashamed for my sake: let
not those that seek thee be confounded for my sake, O God of Israel.

2. The bad are much hardened and made to rejoice. Hence they say, in a sense
quite contrary to Solomon's sense, He that increases knowledge, increases
sorrow; and resolve to get no more Religion then what they can easily master,
and never to put Faith or any other grace on the trial: yea, hence they rise to
hellish and most accursed insultations, Where is now your God? your Religion.
From this Topic David does often argue in his Psalms, Psalm. 27.11. Lead me in
a plain path (wherein I may not scandalize my self) because of mine enemies.
38.16. I said, Hear me, lest otherwise they should rejoice over me, and
magnify themselves against me when my foot slippeth.

Double to these are the pleas proper to deserted souls, that may be picked out
of the Book of Psalms; but I forbear to gather them together, commending the
Book it self, as the best Directory to furnish those who are in trouble, with
fit praying-matter: only let them be sure that they be sincere, using David's
prayers with David's heart, i. e. humbly, believingly, charging their souls to
wait on God; so He that shall come, will come, and will not tarry: So shall he
who now stands as an Enemy, or as a Stranger, say, Is Ephraim my dear son? is
he a pleasant child? for since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him
still: Therefore my bowels are troubled for him I will have mercy on him; so
shall the wilderness and the solitary place be glad, and the desert rejoice and
blossom as the rose, blossom abundantly, and rejoice with joy and singing. The
ransomed of Lord shall return and come to Zion with songs, and everlasting joy,
upon their heads; they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing
shall flee away.

Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; the Father of
mercies, and the God of all comfort, who comfort us in all our tribulation.
Amen.

FINIS.
The TABLE.
COherence and parts of the Text, page 1, 2. Q. How is the Spirit said to be
grieved? p. 3. A. 1. Properly, if by Spirit we understand the renewed part of
man, p. 3, 4. 2. But if the Spirit of God, because that is done against him
which would grieve him, were he capable of grief, p. 4. 3. When we make the
Spirit so to carry it toward us, as persons do toward those that have grieved
them, p. 5. Q. 2. Why are we said rather to grieve the Spirit then Father and
Son? p. 6. A. Because sin is most opposite to his appropriate work, p. 6, 7 Q.
3. What sins do grieve the Spirit? Ibid. A. Generally, wilful deliberate sins.
Specially, 1. Lusts of Uncleanness, p. 8, 9, 10. 2. Sins of Anger, Malice, etc.
p. 11. 12, 13. 3. Sleighting of the Divinely Inspired Writings, and preferring
Humane Writings, p. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. 4. Robbing the Spirit of his glory, and
taking his praise unto our selves. p. 17, 18, 19, 20. 5. Fathering on him the
ugly brats of the ev^l spirit, p. 21, 22. 6. Ascribing to the Devil the works
of the Spirit, p. 22, 23. Inferences; 1. The Spirit is a Person, p. 23. 2. Has
a tender care of Believers, ibid. 3. Not to be blasphemed. p. 24. 4. They
wretched who take pleasure in sin, which grieves the Spirit, p. 24. Motives not
to grieve the Spirit. 1. He is a Divine Person, the only Divine Person against
whom a sin is irremissible, p. 25, 26, 27. 2. He has little deserved to be
grieved, p. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. 3. They who only are in a capacity to grieve
him, have least reason so to do, p. 32, 33. 4. Dreadful are the effects of
grieving the Spirit of God. 1. Hence ensue foul and dishonorable lusts, p 34.
2. Ordinances become unprofitable, p. 35. 3. The heart is filled with sad
distressing doubts, p 37. The Spirit is pleased if 1. We grieve when he is
grieved. p. 38. 2. Bring forth the fruits of the Spirit, p. 38, 39. 3. Pray to
him and for him, p. 39, 40. 4. Honor his gifts in others, especially those for
Ministry; no time to be expected in which no Ministry, p. 40 41. 42. What meant
by the Day of Redemption. 1. Not the day of Baptism, p. 43. 2. Some day after
this life; for till then, 1. Redemption from the power of sin is not perfect,
p. 43, 44. 2. Forgiveness of sin not perfect, p. 44. 3. Redemption of the body
scarce begun. p. 45. Godly should groan for this day, p. 45, 46. Wicked should
kiss the Redeemer, p. 47. Nature and ends of Sealing, p. 47, 48. By the Spirits
sealing is meant not his regenerating, but assuring work, p. 48, 49. Assurance
possible; proved by four Arguments, p. 50, to 56. Why Papists deny Assurance,
p. 57, 58, 59. Differences betwixt Assurance and Presumption, p. 60. Assurance
breeds not sloth, p. 61, 62, 63. Faith consists not in Assurance, p. 64. to 69.
Q. Whether all Believers sometime or other have Assurance? p. 69. A. In four
Propositions. I. Some have Assurance just before death, who had it not before.
p. 69. to 72. II. Some that had it before, want it then: 1. To quicken others
to preparation, p. 72. 2. To harden worldlings, p. 73. 3. To punish falling
from first love, p. 73, 74. 4. Through the nature of some diseases. 5. Through
the malice of Satan. III. It Is rarely seen that any understanding Christian
runs out his whole course without some Assurance, p. 75. IV. Yet is it not
impossible it should be so, ibid. This no ground for idleness; for 1. Men argue
not so in temporals. p. 76. 2. It Is a sin to want Assurance, p. 77. 3. None can
be a child of God, who does not desire to attain the full Assurance of hope. p.
77, 78, 79. Q. How is Assurance wrought? A. 1. In a very mysterious way, p. 79,
80, 81. 2. In the same way that bondage is wrought in unconverted sinners, i.
e. discursively, p. 82. 83, 84. Immediate testimony explained, and cautioned by
its assertors, p 85, 86. What to be thought of it, p. 87, 88. Discursive way
the most ordinary and safe, p. 89. to 92. Antinomians who deny the use of Marks
confuted, p. 93, 94. Stupidity of sinners reproved, p. 94 95, 96. All that fear
God persuaded to make use of this way of examination. Some Marks visible, if
not others, p. 96. If none visible, then Examination no duty, p. 97. Q. Why
does God suffer his children to want Assurance? p. 98. A. Assurance is
twofold, high, and moderate; high too strong for our weak vessels long to
hold, p. 99, 100. Good reason why God lets Believers for a season want even
moderate Assurance, 1. To keep them from relapses, p. 100, 101. 2. To keep them
humble, p. 102, 103. 3. To make them more earnest in Prayer, p. 104. 4. To try
and exercise their graces, p. 105. 5. To make them more value Assurance when
they have it, p 106. 6. To make them more able to comfort others, p. 107. 7. To
make them more long after Heaven, p. 108. 8. To encourage good and confound
wicked, p. 108, 109. 9. To manifest his own power and patience, p. 109, 110,
111. Therefore we ought not when God withdraws to charge him foolishly, p. 111,
112. Q. How do Believers meritoriously procure the want of Assurance? A. 1.
Through the smalness of their graces. Conversion more discernable at the first
Plantation of the Gospel then now. Some Objections answered, p. 113. to 116. 2.
Because they seek it not with diligence enough: the case of poor Christians
considered, p. 117, 118, 119. 3. Because of their ignorance and errors about
the Terms and Conditions of the Covenant of Grace; about knowing the time of
Conversion; about the way of working of Assurance, and the nature of Assurance,
p. 120. to 123. 4. Because they keep the Devils counsel, and bury their doubts
in their own bosoms, p. 123, 124, 125. 5. Because they join themselves to
unmeet company. Five sorts of people unmeet to be associated with by persons
troubled in spirit, p. 125, 126, 127. 6. Because they perversely cavil and
dispute against that which should comfort them, p. 127. to 130. 7. Because they
give way to groundless scruples in reference to the use of Gods Ordinances, and
their own callings, p. 130, 131, 132. 8. Because they do not heartily enough
oppose some unmortified lusts, p. 133, 134. Q. By what motives may we quicken
our selves to look after Assurance. A. 1. Only the Assured Christian can
desire or adventure to die in cool blood, p. 135, 136, 137 2. Only the
Assured Christian can despise the World, and cheerfully endure the loss of
Goods, p. 137. to 140. 3. Assurance strengthens against reproaches of wicked
men, p. 141, 142. 4. Assurance begets boldness in Prayer, p. 142, 143, 144. 5.
Assurance sweetens the reading the Word and receiving the Sacraments, p. 144,
145. 6. It inlarges in Praise and Thanksgiving, p. 146, 147. 7. It furthers
Repentance in both its parts and acts, p. 147, 148, 149. 8. It deadens to all
needless disputes and controversies, and fortifies against dangerous errors, p.
150, 151, 152. Two objections against the speedy seeking of Assurance answered,
p. 153, 154, 155. Q. What means are to be used for getting Assurance? three
things premised. 1. The Question must be intended of true Assurance, not of
Presumption, p. 156. 2. No need that any new Rules should be prescribed for the
getting of it, p. 157. 3. When all Directions are given, no Assurance can be
had without self-examination, p. 158. Directions. I. A man must bring himself
to be content without Assurance till God see meet for him. Overhasty and
overeager desire of Assurance dangerous and sinful, p. 158. II. If we would
have Assurance, we must be thankful for the mercies we enjoy before Assurance
comes, p. 162, 163, 164. III. He that would have Assurance, must believe till
he feel he believes, p. 164, to 167. IV. God must be waited on in the use of
all Duties and Ordinances. 1. Prayer, 2. Reading and hearing the Word, 3.
Religions conference, 4. Receiving the Sacrament, 5. Singing Psalms, 167, to
171. V. Every Sin must be cast out, and Universal obedience yielded, p. 173. Q.
What acts of Obedience most likely to yield Assurance? A. 1. Acts of Charity,
p. 174, 175, 176. 2. Acts of Fraternal Correption, p. 176. 3. Acts of
Mortification, p. 176. 4 Peace making, p. 177 5 Loving of Enemies, p. 177. VI.
Give no way to unnecessary Scruples, p. 178. Three Rules to prevent them. 1. I
must not call my self an Hypocrite for that which Scripture no where does make
a character of Hypocrisy, p. 179. 2. Nor for that which would make all others
Hypocrites as well as my self, p. 180. 3. Nor for that which I have formerly
answered, p. 180. A Fourfold sinfulness in disquieting our selves with
childish irrational fears, 181, 182. Obj. If I should trust to a false evidence
I were undone. Answ. p. 182. Obj. There Is undiscerned as well as discerned
Hypocrisy. Answ. p. 183. Q. How may he who has Assurance do to keep it?
Usefulness of the question, p. 183. Directions. I. Let him well understand, 1.
On what terms he takes God: 2. On what terms God takes him, p. 184. II. Let him
thankfully and admitingly acknowledge the goodness of God in bestowing
Assurance, p. 187, 188. III. Let him keep himself from returning to former
sins, p. 189, 190. IV. Let him keep his vows, p. 190, 191, 192. V. Let him
bring forth such fruit as before Assurance lie neither did, nor could bring
forth, p. 192. etc. Q. How may Assurance when it is lost be regained? A. 1. He
must bring himself to a due and just sense of his Condition, p. 195. avoiding
two extremes: 1. A slighting of it, 2. Having a too deep sense of this
condition, p. 196. 2. He must examine how and which way he lost his comforts,
p. 198. 3. He must justify God until it return, p. 200. 4 He must offer unto
God what terms of agreement He pleases, p. 201. 5. He must be sure to pray
earnestly, p. 204. Obj. But God does not vouchsafe to receive a Prayer for me,
p. 206. A. It is our duty to pray always, and not to faint. Q. What it is from
which we may argue with God, p. 210. A. 1. From all the names by which He has
called himself in Scripture (suitable to our condition) p. 210. 2. From the
very extremity of our condition, p. 212. 3. From his former gracious dealings,
p. 213. 4 From our own readiness to forgive others, p. 215. 5. From the
compassion and prayers of others for us, p. 215. 6. From the ill use like to be
made of our desertions by others, good or bad, p. 216. Discouraged or Hardened,
p. 217.
FINIS.

