A Breviat OF SOME PROPOSALS

Prepared to be Offered to the Great Wisdom of the NATION,

The KING'S most Excellent Majesty, And Both Houses of PARLIAMENT,

For the speedy Restoring the WOOLLEN MANVFACTVRE,

By a Method practiced in other Nations.

Already Perused and Approved by those known Promoters of England's Weal and
Safety, The most Illustrious PRINCE RUPERT,

And the Right Honorable, the EARL of SHAFTSBVRY,

And since Heard and Encouraged by diverse Members of the HOUSE of COMMONS, who
upon Perusal were pleased to Declare, That the same would be of great Advantage
to the NATION.

Desiring the Author to give his Attendance to the HOUSE when they are at
leisure; and in the mean time to Publish this Brief Account thereof, for
General Information.

By R. HAINES.

London, Printed for Langley Curtis on Ludgate Hill. 1679.

By the Expedients Proposed, it is offered,
1. THAT in short time all the Wool of England may be secured from being
Exported unwrought. 2. That all the Wool of England, and what is to spare in
Scotland and Ireland, may be Manufactur'd in England, as fast as it grows and
arises. 3. That the converting of such great Quantity of Wool will be of very
little Charge to the Nation, so that all the Cloth we have to spare shall find
quick Markets as fast as it is made. 4. That forty hundred thousand pounds worth
of Cloth may be made in England every year, more than now is, or can be by the
present course of Trade. 5. That the Wealth of the Nation Will Increase at
least forty hundred thousand pounds per Annum, and his Majesty's Revenue by the
Increase of Customs, very considerably. 6. That every particular Parish and
Parishioner in Dealings in the Country shall thrive thereby, considerably. 7.
That although we should make twice as much Cloth as what is beforementioned,
yet there shall be no danger of Glutting the Markets; But we may obtain and
secure the best Markets in the World to our selves notwithstanding any Attempts
of other Nations.
1. As to the first. To secure our Wool from going abroad, the best and most
certain Expedient is, to have it converted into Cloth at home, as fast as it
grows and arises, by setting to work all idle hands; by means of which, our
Wool will soon yield more at home than abroad, and this will more effectually
do that business than the severest Laws. 2. To have all the Wool of England,
and what as to spare in Ireland and Scotland, to be Manufactur'd in England,
depend's on the same Expedient, viz. Employing all People, who by Contributions
or Begging, are maintained by other men's Estates and Industry, for doing of
nothing, there being (as it is, reasonably computed) 200 thousand in the Nation
capable of one Employ or other; so that by this great number of People, with
the help of some Clothiers, it is not to be doubted but we may Manufacture a
hundred thousand Packs of Wool more than are now Converted in a year. 3. That
the Converting of such great Quantity of Wool, will be of very little Charge to
the Nation, so that all our Cloth shall find quick Markets as fast as made, is
Demonstrable: For,
By the Expedient proposed, all these People now maintained for doing little or
nothing, may instead of doing nothing, convert our Wool into Cloth, for their
Living, so that look how much more Cloth is made by these two hundred thousand
People so much there is clear Gain to the Nation. For had they not done this,
they had been, as now they are, kept and maintained for Begging, etc. So that
put case all Beggars, Vagrants, etc. were placed in, and maintained by the
Parishes as Parish-Poor, only for Sleeping, the thing in Effect to maintain
them thus, would not be more disadvantagious to the Nation, than it is.

Now since by the Expedients proposed, these two hundred thousand People may
earn some two pence per Day, some three pence, some four pence, some fix pence,
some eight pence, some ten pence, and some one shilling a day more than by
their present course of Life they do, and the Parishes by this means continue
but half their Contributions which they paid before, then may the Clothiers in
short time, having their Work done for half the Wages which before they gave,
afford their Cloth cheaper than ever they could; and since it is so, that other
Nations who are our Supplanters cannot make Cloth without a mixture of our Wool
(as our Clothiers affirm) nor good Cloth neither but on dear Terms, without
Fullers Earth, which no Nation has but our selves. It must needs follow, that
we having more hands than they, to improve, more Wool, and all the Fullers
Earth our own, may (when all idle hands are thus brought to Industry)
under-sell them all, and force a Market in all Places in the World, where Cloth
is vended, which is what was to be demonstrated.

4. The fourth Proposition, viz. That forty hundred thousand Pounds worth of
Cloth may by the Expedient proposed, with the Assistance of some Clothiers be
made in a year, more than now is, or can be made by our present Course of
Trade, is not difficult to conceive from what has been said, for if two
hundred thousand Persons be industriously employed more than now are, it may
rationally be concluded, that each Person one with another in a whole years
time with the help aforesaid, may manufacture at least twenty pounds worth of
Cloth, which is all that was to be demonstrated. Besides in little time they
will increase more and more both in Number and Ingenuity, for instead of
breeding every Year thirty or forty thousand Beggars, we shall by this
Expedient breed up the same or a greater number of Ingenious Cloth-makers, as
in the Proposals at large is more fully discovered, so that it is not to be
doubted but they may convert one hundred thousand Packs of Wool in a year more
than is now converted as aforesaid. 5. That the Wealth of the Nation will
hereby increase at least forty hundred thousand Pounds per Annum more than now
it does, and His Majesty's Revenue very considerably, more than before; is thus
to be demonstrated.
As by the Confirmation of the second and last Propositions, it appeared, that
after a little time of Practice, 100 thousand Packs of Wool may be Converted
more than now is: so this wool at twelve pence per pound, is twelve pound per
Pack; and when it yielded so, the Wool was counted by the Clothiers to be one
fourth part of the charge of the Cloth: By which it follows, that 100 thousand
Packs of Wool Converted, will be worth four times twelve hundred thousand
pounds, or four Millions eight hundred thousand pounds; which being Exported,
their Returns will be much more, and His Majesty's Customs increase
proportionably; since our Trade of Merchandise will then be almost double to
what it was, and the wealth of the City by such Increase of Trade thrive more
abundantly than ever it did.

6. That every particular Parish and Parishioner in Dealings in the Country
shall thrive thereby, is no less certain: For, Besides raising the price of
Wool, at least sixpence in every Shilling, and saving sixpence in every
Shilling, which before they laid out in Contributions and House-rent to the
Poor. They will have better Trade for all Commodities; ready Money for Corn,
Fat Cattle, Butter, Cheese, and every thing the Farmer has to spare; by reason
of this Circulation of Trade and Industry, seeing then there will be so many
thousands that pay for all they eat, drink and wear, who before had all for
Begging, etc. 7. That though we should make twice as much Cloth, as before
mentioned, yet there shall be no danger of glutting the Market; But that we may
obtain and secure the best Markets in the World to our selves, notwithstanding
any Attempts of other Nations. This seems reasonble to believe, if we consider,
1. That if all the Wool, not only of England, Scotland and Ireland, but France
and Spain also, could be Manufactur'd in England; yet there would be no more
Cloth in the World, than now there is, for what is not made in England, is made
elsewhere, since it is certain Wool is neither Burnt, rotted, nor any wise
wilfully destroyed in any Nation wherever it grows; but is either converted at
home or abroad. Therefore the more we convert in England, the less in other
Nations, and the more they, Deerease in their Manufactory, the more shall we
Increase in Wealth, Trade, Seamen and Navies of Ships, for the Strength and
Safety of our Nation. 2. That no other Nation has the like Expedients and
Advantages as we have, and therefore it is imposible they should out-doe us;
unless we be Wanting to our selves in point of Industry and good Method: And
therefore though it cannot be expected, that we should make Cloth for all the
World, yet if we can under fell all other Nations, our Work is done: for we may
force a 'Trade where we please. There is no Demonstration like Experience, and
for this we have a notable Example, given us by the Swedes, who having by
Under-selling their Iron, forced us not only to quit our foreign Markets,
where before we vended very much; but also to desist from making sufficient for
our own use. And then when they saw we had quit our Markets, and let fall our
Iron works, they raised their Iron to as high a Rate as before. A President
worthy the Consideration of the great Wisdom of the Nation. For as it is true
that Sweden abounds with Woods and Mines, more plentiful than other Nations; in
such manner that they may under-sell and force a Trade where they please for
that Commodity. So England having more Wool, more Fullers-Earth, more Poor
People and Beggars, to be Employed, than any (if not all) the Nations about us.
Therefore we may as certainly have Cloth made and fold on easier and more
profitable Terms than any Nation in the World; And consequently may force a
Market in any Nation where Cloth is to be vended: As the Swedes have done with
their Iron.

The Method by which all this may be effected; is no more Charge, than if in
every County, several Parishes should be obliged to join together to Build in
several places Working Almshouses for their chargeable Poor to live In: And
that the Clothiers observe such Method in their Trade, as to place themselves
near such Houses, and employ the said Poor, where they may have their Work done
cheaper than before.

But in case the Clothiers refuse such Method, whereby all the Wool, aforesaid
may be converted, then it seems unreasonable for their sakes to prohibit the
Exportation of Wool: Seeing that by their present course of Trade, little more
than half is Converted: however, if they shall so refuse, it will be no
difficult thing, for the respective Parishes concerned, to manage the
Expedients Proposed themselves, to all the Advantages beforementioned.

As for other great Advantages arising both to City and Country, together with
the happy Reformation thereby to be Accomplished, and all material Objections
answered; the same with the said Expedients, are more fully set forth and
Contained in the Proposals. As also a Model of Government to be used in this
Respect; for preventing all Abuses and Deceits which have proved most
destructive to such Public Undertakings.

POSTSCRIPT.
HAving since the drawing up the precedent Breviat met with some Objections
from a very worthy and intelligent Gentleman, but (as I conceive) not fully
informed of the true Scope, feazibleness and Utility of these Expedients, I
think my self obliged to give him and all others that may have the same
Scruples, this endeavor toward Satisfaction.

I. The first and great Objection is the Charge, to put us in such Method of
Industry, to which I answer, it is surely better once to pay for good Physic
than always to Languish, the Charge will not amount to a twentieth part of the
Profits, for every thousand pound expended on this Occasion, will purchase two
if not three thousand pounds per Annum to the Nation, and yet we shall keep our
Purchase Money still as it were in our own Sacks with our Corn, so that there
shall not be a Great the less in the Nation, as is demonstrated more at large
in the Proposals. 2. Hence I cannot but maintain, that what is Proposed is
undoubtedly practicable, for that it is no new Project, but with great Success
practiced at this day by our Neighbors, being satisfied by what I have seen,
that this very thing, viz. the Industry of the Poor accomplished by these very
Expedients, is that whereby the Wealth of the Netherlands is raised and
maintained. And why should we dishonor our Country so far as to imagine that
England yield not Men as wise to contrive, or as honest to manage such an
affair as any other Nation? 3. It has further been objected by the
beforementioned Honored Person, that it is uncertain what number of Poor there
is to be employed, and what Quantity of Wool to be converted. To which I humbly
Answer, that though it be true that in those Particulars I may err, yet in this
we cannot err, if we proportion our Houses to the Number of the Persons to be
employed, and to our Quantity of Wool, for then be the same more or less, the
Profits will be proportionable to what I have calculated. And put case we have
not Wool enough to employ them, this Expedient still remains unshaken, for we
may employ them in making of Linen to great Advantage, for as the first will
bring Treasure into the Nation, so the other will be a means to keep it from
going out.
Lastly, Lest the Poor should misapprehend and suspect by these Expedients they
shall be enslaved etc. I must declare that I would not for all the World be an
Instrument to any such base and cruel Purpose, and therefore in my Proposals at
large have demonstrated, that their Work shall not make them Lives any wise
Burdensome or Destructive to themselves, having nothing to do but to mind
their Business, Eat, Drink, and take their Rest without any thing to disturb
their Peace.

Thus much I thought fit to add here, and submit the whole to Consideration.

FINIS.

