PLUS VLTRA* OR Englands Reformation* Needing to be Reformed.

BEING An Examination of Doctor Heylins History of the Reformation of the
Church of ENGLAND.

WHEREIN, By laying together all that is there said by the Dr. about the
Reformation of the Church, and by many testimonies of Reverend JEWEL, Bishop of
Salisbury; and by several Observations made upon the Whole, it does evidently
appear, That the present state of the Church of ENGLAND is no way to be rested
in; but ought to proceed to a farther Degree of Perfection.

Written by way of Letter to Dr. Heylin, by H. N. O. I. Oxon.

Dan. 5. 27. Thou art weighed in the Balances* and art found wanting.

Luke 19 22. Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee.

Heb. 6. 1. Let us go on unto perfection.

LONDON, Printed for the Authors, and are to be sold in St. Dunstans
Churchyard in Fleetstreet, 1601.

To the Christian Reader.
Courteous Reader,
THou art not, we presume, ignorant that Dr. Heylin has lately writ a History*
of the Reformation of the Church of England. His Learned name is of such great
credit, that it does not only invite* but bespeak his Readers approbation and
acceptance. The love we bear to the Reformation of the Church of England, and
an earnest desire to be satisfied about it, led us forth to the view and
consideration of that History; wherein we labored to follow our Reason more
then our Fancy; and the truth of the Story, more then the cry of Fame; as not
being willing to have any man's person in admiration. All that the learned
Doctor has storied about the Reformation in many parts and parcels of his
Book, having interwoven it with variety of civil Occurrences both Foreign and
Domestic, thou will find here Methodically put together, and shall have a
full view of it at once; which by several skips and leaps thou will be put to
search for in the Doctors History.

We could heartily wish, the Doctor would have saved us this trouble, and put
together the parts of this goodly Building (as he is pleased to call it) that
we might at once have gone round about it, and viewed the Towers and strength
thereof. This thou shall find faithfully done to thy hand, wherein thy
patience is entreated to stay and consider the several particulars, lest by
overmuch haste, thou lose the fruit of these few lines.

We have here laid before thee the Evidence the Doctor brings for the
Reformation, with some Observations out of his own Book, Reverend Jewel, and
others of our own upon it, and the judgment is left to thy own breast. We can
assure thee, thou art heartily dealt withal in all that we allege; either out
of the Doctors Book or any other. His Printer has mis-numbred some Pages, and
thou may be at some loss (if thou compare some of these quotations with the
Doctors Book) through the neglect of Printing; but otherwise thou shall find
the Page, the words many times as they lie, or at least the substance of the
Doctors sense faithfully communicated to thee. We suppose, the Doctor cannot
desire a fairer way of Trial in the particular of the Churches Reformation,
then when himself in his Book, and the testimonies he brings, be upon the
matter constituted Judges of it, we hereby conceive, that any person, not
biased by interst, will conclude from the Doctors premises, that Englands
Reformation is sadly defective.

There was a time, when there was no Smith found in Israel, and the Israelites
went down to the Philistims to sharpen their Weapons. We contend not for
Victory, but for Truth; and if in this contest something may be laid hold on,
even in the Tents of an Adversary, for the advantage and advancement of it, we
shall not scruple to undergo the shame of our own weakness, and the discredit
of our own poverty, as being fain to borrow both the shop and tools of an
Adversary to vindicate it, and support it. Reader, we leave these few sheets
with thee, desiring thy prayers for the Churches through-Reformation, which is
their sole desing.

To the Worshipful Peter Heylin, Doctor in Divinity.
Reverend Sir,
YOu have lately presented to the World an History of the Reformation of the
Church of England. You tell us in your Epistle to the Reader, what study and
diligence you used in the performance of the work, p. 10,
Your historical abilitiesare sufficiently known, and it is presumed you have
said as much as can be spoken upon this Subject; for what can the man do that
comes after Docotr Heylin?

-- Si Pergama Dextra
Defend^ possent, etiam hac defensa fuissent.
If Troy could have been presery'd,
Thy Hand of any best had served.
It is not the purpose of these lines to vie abilities of learning and language
with you. Take to you the deserved praise of a learned Doctor, and police
Orator. But the work at present is, to scan over some passages in your History
of the Churches Reformation; and in such a season as this ( a Convocation now
sitting) to press onward toward perfection. And in the pursuit of this design,
please you to take along the judgment of that Reverend Bishop Jewel, Bishop of
Salisbury, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, one whom you often mention with
deserved honor in your last History. You style him, page 123. in the latter
part of your History, The right Learned Mr. John Jewel. Page 129. Reverend
Jewel, that learned Prelate. Page 147. The right Reverend Bishop Jewel, page
155.

His Book which he wrote in defense of the Apology of the Church of England,
against that foul-mouthed Caviller Harding is yet extant in most Churches in
this Kingdom, and next unto the Bible their best Ornament.

From this Book, and some Sermons of this reverend Bishop bound up with it, and
several passages in your own, something is tendered to your judicious
consideration: Whether the reformation of the Church of England be, or were at
any time so complete, and in such Primitive luster as you phrase it, in the
close of your History, that nothing is more to be done for the perfection and
beauty of it. Be assured, learned Sir, the World shall not be abused with false
quotations, with wrested interpretations, either out of your Book, or this
blessed Bishops; you shall have the page, the words quoted, without the least
prevarication.

And first of all, Sir, What a soul blot does your pen cast upon the
Reformation, when you tell the world That you cannot reckon the death of King
Edward the sixth for an infelicity to the Church of England. They are your own
words, in the fourth page of your Epistle to the Reader; That he was ill
principled in himself, and that his Reign was unfortunate, page 141. part. 1.
And the ground of your account is, Because it is not to be thought (had he
lived) but that the rest of the Bishoprics (before sufficiently impoverished)
must have followed Durham, and the poor Church been left as destitute of Lovers
and Ornaments, as when she came into the world in her natural nakedness. This
Vein runs throughout your whole Book. You tell us in the history of Edward,
page 33. that the Grandees of the Court began to entertain some thoughts of a
Reformation, on an hope to enrich themselves by the spoil of the Bishoprics,

You tell us page 48. That the first Parliament, in the first year of his
Reign, though it consisted of such Members as disagreed among themselves, yet
they agreed well enough in one common Principle, which was to serve the present
time, and preserve themselves, that they came resolved to further such a
Reformation, as should most visibly conduce to the advancement of their several
ends, and to prepare a way for exposing the Revenues of the Church unto spoil
and rapine.

You tell us page 95. That the alteration of Altars into Tables, and the
disfurnishing of the Altars, of the Hangings, Palls, Plate, and other rich
utensills was taken up by some great men about the Court, on hopes of profit.

You tell us in the fifth year of King Edward, page 99. Gardener was lifted out
of the wealthy Bishopric of Winchester, to give the Courtiers opportunity to
enrich themselves by the spoil thereof. And in page 101. That one John Poynet
succeeded him to serve other men's turns. And in the same page* That the Pirates
of the Court were intent upon all advantages to enrich themselves.

You tell us in the second year of Queen Elizabeth, page 121. That the Bishops
Sees were kept void, till the best flowers in the whole Garden of the Church
had been culled out of it. That the Queen and her Hungry Courtiers had
alienated many fair Manors from the rich Sees of Winchester, Elie, and indeed
what not?

Thus, Sir, you have muddied the first Springs of the Reformation, by casting
into it the abhorred filth of covetousness.

But, Sir, Did your pen and your heart agree together, when you said you could
not reckon it for an infelicity that Edward the sixth died so immaturely; or
which in plain English is, 'Twas good for the Church he was taken out of the
way?

The Preface to the Book of Homilies makes an honorable mention of him. And
when our precious Jewel had occasion to speak of him, page 359. Of his defense,
these are his words, That noble Prince of blessed memory King Edward the sixth.
Was it not an infelicity to the Church to lose her chiefest stay and pillar? To
have the hopes of a glorious Reformation nipt in the very Budd? To have a
fearful Deluge of blood and idolatry rush in upon us by the succession of
Queen Mary? in whose Reign more precious blood was spilt, then in all the times
of her Predecessors.

The persecution under her Reign, and the carriage of the Papists in it, you
relate out of Bishop Jewel, page 81. of your History.

You have given a large testimony of King Edwards Learning, before he was eight
years old, page 12.

Of his tenderness to consent to sign the Warrant for the execution of Joan of
Kent, page 89.

Of his great zeal for God, in resisting the tolerarion of Popery only to his
sister the Princess Mary, though pressed to it by the Archbishop of Canterbury
and the Bishop of London; resolving rather to venture lite and all things else
which were dear unto him, then to give way to any thing which he knew to be
against the truth* expressing his inward trouble by a stood of tears, page 103.

Of his Piety and fervent Charity in his last godly Prayer; wherein he calls
upon God, O my Lord God! Bless my people, save thy chosen people of England. O
Lord God! Defend this Realm from Papistry, and maintain thy true Religion, that
I and my people may praise thy holy Name, for Jesus Christ his sake: As you
have related it page, 140.

What better qualities and Principles could be desired in a Prince? And what
greater felicity in that kind could the Church enjoy, then so gracious and
Godly a King?

And do not you Mr. Doctor shake hands with the shameless rayler Harding
against our glorious Jewel. When you hear him called Rayler, be not displeased.
Look on that large Catalogue of hellish slanders, poured out on that blessed
man, summed up by himself immediately before his decease. This is offered to
you the rather, because when you have occasion to mention Harding (a base
Apostate, and grand enemy of the Gospel it is with terms of honor and
reverence, viz. Dr. John Harding, one of the Divines of Lovain, and the most
learned of the College, page 128, in the latter part of your History. But when
you speak of those glorious lights of the Reformation, Luther, Zuinglius,
Calvin; it is barely Calvin, or John Calvin, as all along your History is
evident. That Rabshakeh Harding, dipped his Pen in the same gall and speaks your
sense, page 31. of the Defense. Did not (says he) your Religion begin first of
covetousness.

And for your ^ear of the poor Chruch being left destitute of Lands and
Ornaments, your Right learned Prelate Jewel gives you a corrective in page 567.
of his defense, etc. Ye say (says he) to Harding: Your Bishops are gay and
gallant, attended and guarded with Princely routs behind and before. And
thereof ye make no small account, specially in respect of our estate, which you
call beggarly. In such disdain the Heathen sometime said, That Christ was the
beggarliest and poorest of all the Gods that were in Heaven. Howbeit, our
Bishoprics, saving that certain of your Fathers have shamefully spoiled them,
are now even as they were before; certainly the poorest Bishopric in England,
as it is reported, is better in revenues, then some three or four of your Popes
Italian Bishoprics in the Kingdom of Naples. Howbeit, the Gospel of Christ
stands not by riches, but by truth. In comparison of the one, we make small
reckoning of the other.

Had that glorious King lived to perfect the Reformation ( which you would have
accounted an infelicity to the Church) and taken away more of her Patrimony;
yet if you will believe the Right Learned Prelate Jewel, he might have revok't
in all those grants made by his Predecessors: See his Defense page 639. If our
Kings in that darkness and blindeness of the former times, gave them these
things of their own accord and liberality, for Religions sake, Now, says he,
when the ignorance and error is espied out, may the Kings their Successors take
them away again, seeing they have the same authority the Kings their Ancestors
had before. For the gift is void, except it be allowed by the will of the
Giver, and that cannot seem a perfect will, which is dimmed and hindered by
error.

The next thing, Mr. Doctor, to be spoken to, is the Reformation it self; whose
History you present to us. And in p. 34. p. 1. you write, That neither to lose
time, nor press too much at once upon the people, it was thought fit to smooth
the way to the Reformation, by setting out some preparatory injunctions; this
to be done, by sending out Commissioners, accompanied with certain godly
Preachers; who when they went from the people, left behind them Homilies to
instruct the people. The Preachers abovementioned, were more particularly
instructed to persuade the people from praying to Saints, for the dead; from
adoring of Images, from the use of Beads, Ashes, and Processions; from Mass,
Dirges, praying in unknown languages

All which was done to this intent, That the people in all places being
prepared, by little and little might with more ease, and less opposition, admit
the total alteration, which was intended in due time to be introduced. You
mention also certain injunctions appointed for the Bishops, that they should
personally preach once a quarter in their Diocese; that they should cause their
Chaplains to Preach; that they should Ordain none, but such as were learned in
the Scriptures. There was also a Form of Bidding-prayer prescribed, or bidding
of the Beads, as you say it was then commonly called in page 37. You lead us
next to the Parliament, page 47. which took beginning the 4. Note.
of November; in which you tell us of packing the Cards by Sir Ralph Sadler;
that this Parliament, without any sensible alteration of the Members, continued
till the death of the King; and you say, page 48. a great part of the Nobility,
and not a few of the chief Gentry were cordially affected to the Church of
Rome. Note.
In the same page you tell us, that several Acts were repealed, which touched
the Subject in life or liberty for matter of conscience; by which repeal, you
say, all men had a liberty of reading Scriptures, and being in a manner their
own Expositors, ( which you scruple whether it may be counted for a felicity.)

There was an Act, you say in the same page, and following page, against such
as spoke against the Sacrament of the Altar, and for the receipt thereof in
both kinds; with these Provisoes notwithstanding: -- If necessity did not
otherwise require; as in the case of sudden sickness, and other such like
extremities, that wine could not be provided for the use of the Sacrament, nor
the sick man depart this life in peace without it. And secondly, that the
permitting of this liberty to the people of England, Note.
should not be construed to the condemning of any other Church, in which the
contrary was observed.

The next great business you say, page 50. was, the receiving of a Statute made
in the 27. year of Henry 8. By which all Chanteries, Colleges, Free-Chappels,
and Hospitals were permitted to the King during his life; but dying before he
had taken many of them into his hands, the great ones of the Court not being
willing to lose so rich a booty, it was set on foot again, and carried in this
present Parliament. And you say page 51. these Chanteries consisted of Salaries
allowed to one or more Priests, to say daily Mass for the souls of their
deceased Founders and their friends.

But in the same page you say, That which made the greatest alteration, and
threatened most danger to the State Ecclesiastical, was the Act for Election of
Bishops, and what seals and styles should be used by Spiritual persons. In the
compounding of which Act you say (in the same page) there was more danger
couched, then at first appeared; for you say it was the intent of the
Contrivers, to weaken the authority of the Episcopal Order, by forcing them
from their strong Hold of Divine Institution, and making them no other then the
Kings Ministers, only his Ecclesiastical Sheriffs; and such use was made of
this Act, that the Bishops were not in a capacity of conferring Orders, but as
they were empowered by especial License; the tenor whereof you mention page
52. and in the same place you say, The true drift of the design of this Act,
was to make Deans and Chapters useless for the time to come, and thereby to
prepare them for dissolution.

The next Church-business you mention, is page 55. where you tell us, the first
heats of the Visitation beginning to cool, there were two Orders sent forth for
the taking down of Images.

Page 57. you tell us, Some godly Bishops and other learned and Religious men
were busily employed in the Castle of Windsor, appointed by the Kings Command
to consult about one uniform Order for the administering the holy Communion in
the English Tongue, under both kinds of Bread and Wind, according to Act of
Parliament before mentioned. You are in the dark who the persons were, but you
think they were the same which made the Liturgy in this Kings time; and you
say, being convened together, taking into consideration as well the right rule
of Scripture, as the usage of the Primitive Church ( How does this appear good
Dector) agreed on such a form and order as might comply with the intention of
the King and the Act of Parliament, without giving ( note these following words
good Sir) any just offense to the Romish party, for they so ordered it, that
the whole office of the Mass should proceed, as formerly in the Latin Tongue,
even to the very end of the Canon, and the receiving of the Sacrament by the
Priest himself; which being passed over, they began with an exhortation: Dearly
beloved in the Lord, ye coming to this holy Communion, which afterward
remained in the public Liturgy. Then followed the invitation: You that do
truly repent, etc. proceeding to the general confession -- distribution of the
Sacrament to the people upon their knees; which godly Form you say was
presented to the King, and published by Proclamation; which Proclamation you
have at large, page 58, 59.

The next care was you say, page 59. to send abroad printed copies to the
several Bishops: But now you come to handle the chief Key to the whole work of
Reformation the Liturgy (as you phrase it) page 65. and the same men which drew
up the Order for the holy Communion, were now again employed as you confess,
page 64. Calvin being rejected, though offering his assistance.

The Liturgy you say is finished, accepted by the King, Enacted by Lords and
Commons then assembled in Parliament, though you say the passing of the Act
gave great offense to the Romish Party; not that they could except against it,
Note.
in regard either of the matter or manner of it; but because it was
communicated to the people in the vulgar Tongue, page 66. Which exception you
take a great deal of pains to prove to be an error.

You tell us page 106. That the Reformation under King Edward proceeded more
vigorously then before, by reviewing the Liturgy, and composing of a book of
Articles. You say page 107. Calvin and his followers had taken some offense at
some parts thereof, and did excite the King and Council to a further
Reformation.

And you say he prevaild so far in the first two years, that in the Convocation
there were debates about such doubts as had arisen about some things contained
in the Common Prayer book; but you say, page 107. and 108. not one alteration
made in it. For though you say it was brought under a review, and being so
reviewed, was ratified by Act of Parliament; yet by the tenor of the Act you
mention, it does appear first, That there was nothing contained in the said
first book, but what was agreeable to the Word of God, and the Primitive
Church. Secondly, That such doubts as had been raised in the use and exercise
thereof, proceeded rather from the curiosity of the Minister and mistakers,
then any worthy cause: they are the very words of the Act as you quote them.

And therefore, Mr. Doctor, you might have spared your pains, p. 108. in
seeking the names of those good and godly men, by whom it was altered for (
bona fide) there was no alteration at all, if you will believe your own Book.

You tell us p. 121, 122. part 1. of the hand the Convocation had in canvasing
the Articles of Religion: but you question whether they had any such hand in
reviewing the Liturgy; and you speak of digesting of such alterations; as were
considered and resolved on, but show not what they were in the least, and
possibly you say it might recieve the like authority from the Convocation ( you
cannot say it did receive) as the book of Articles had. But whether so or not,
say you, it received as much authority and countenance as could be given unto
it by an Act of Parliament, by which it was imposed, you say, upon the subject
under penalties -- (A worthy foundation for divine service.)

And then page 121. p. 1. Mr. Doctor, you begin to triumph, as if you had got a
firm bottom for the Liturgy* the Liturgy (you say) thus settled and confirmed in
Parliament, was by the Kings command -- And p. 123. you say, we have seen a
reformation made in point of doctrine and settled in the forms of worship, the
superstitions and corruptions of the Church of Rome entirely abrogated ( good
news if it were true) and all things recteifed according to the Word of God,
(How prove you this, Sir) and the Primitive practice ( we can see nothing, but
an Act of Parliament.)

This is all account you give us in your History of the Reformation of the
Church, in the time of King Edward the sixth, saving that p. 125. you speak
something of Holy days, and Fasting days, which were to be abolished or
retained.

But possibly more may be behind: we shall not follow you in your History of
the Church in the reign of Queen Mary, when the Reformation by your own
confession went down the wind, and the professors and assertors of it
persecuted in all parts of the Nation.

We shall therefore pass on with you to the times of Queen Elizabeth, and see
what was more done to the repairing and carrying on this work.

And when we consider, what you say in the 103. page of your History of her
reign, that she retained such as had been of privy Council to Queen Mary her
sister, to be of her Council: of which according as you have set them down
there were thirteen, of which one was an Archbishop, and adding but seven to
them, it cannot in reason be imagined, that Church reformation should be so far
from growing to perfection, that it is more likely to decrease and wither.

And so it proved, for the Parliament that was summoned which passed an Act as
you say p. 110, 111. for recommending and imposing the Book of Common Prayer,
and administration of the Sacraments, took care to revise the book, and to make
alterations and corrections, ( now Mr. Doctor we have found some alterations in
the Liturgy, and what are they) why say you, p. 111. great care was taken for
expunging ( mark Mr. Doctor) all such passages in it, Note.
as might give any scandal or offense to the Popish party: in the Letany ( you
say) the Pope and his detestable enormity were expunged, as giving offense: and
in the delivery of the Sacrament, though by Calvin's means ( as you say) some
Reformation had been made in the second Liturgy in King Edwards time, Note.
now it is returned back into the first form: and besides ( you say) a whole
Rubric was expunged as not favoring (the figment) of Transubstantiation, Note.
and not only so, but there was made alteration in the Bread of the Sacrament
in Alters, and the standing of them, in gestures, vestments, music and what
not? by which compliances ( with Rome your plain dealing is commendable) the
book was made so passable ( you say, p. 111.) amongst the Papists, that they
repaired to our Parish Churches without scruple. Note.


And to give us a more full account of the State of Religion in these times:
you tell us, p. 172. part 2. Such a well tempered piety did at that time appear
in the Devotions of the Church of England, Note.
that generally the English Papists still resorted to them: moreover you tell
us, p. 131. that Queen Elizabeth doing all this in the form and fashion of our
devotions, did so far satisfy the Pope then being, that he showed himself
willing to confirm all by his Papal power, Note.
and that Parpalio was instructed to offer in the name of his Holiness, that
the English Liturgy should be confirmed.

And now you triumph again, p. 173. part 2. as if the matter were past all
doubt; telling us, Thus we have seen the public Liturgy confirmed in
Parliament, with diverse penalties on all those who either did reproach it, or
neglect to use it, or wilfully withdrew their attendance from it.

But pray you Sir, look back to what you say of this Parliament which confirmed
the Liturgy, Note.
p. 107. there wanted not ( say you) some rough and furious spirits in the
house of Commons, who eagerly opposed all propositions which seemed to tend
unto the prejudice of the Church of Rome, of which number, none so violent as
Story Doctor of the Laws, and a great instrument of Bonners butcheries; Note.
others there were ( say you) and doubtless many others also in the house of
Commons, who had as great a zeal as he to the Papal interest.

Thus, Mr. Doctor, we have travailed over your History, and have picked up and
laid together, the several pieces of this goodly building* as you call it, that
you and others may have the full prospect of it at once, and for the integrity
of this action in these quotations, we appeal to the great searcher of hearts.

And now, Sir, would you have the world satisfied in such a Reformation? Can
the conscience of a Protestant comfortably repose it self on such a foundation
as you have here laid? We gladly embrace the reformation of Doctrine contained
in the book of Articles, because we see (blessed be God) they have a clear and
full authority from the Holy Scriptures: but* Sir, you have dealt very
deceitfully with your readers in your History, in jumbling Doctrine,
Discipline, and Worship together: as if, because there was a Reformation in
Doctrine, and that grounded upon the Word of God, there must also be a
Reformation in the rest too (which was little or not at all) and that grounded
upon the Word also; this deceit runs through your book: you tell us ever and
anon of a Reformation according to the Word of God and the Primitive practice:
but in all your book there are but three instances of the conformity of the
Reformation to the rule of the Sacred Scriptures, and they are only in point of
Doctrine, and not in Discipline or Worship.

The first instance is p. 49 of your History of Edward the sixth, where having
mentioned an Act of Parliament, declaring, that it is according to Scripture,
that the Sacrament be administered to all Christian people under both the kinds
of Bread and Wine: you spend a great many lines borrowed out of Bishop Jewel,
to prove that this Declaration of Parliament and the words by which it was
enacted, do every way agree with Christ's institution: no Protestant, not John
Calvin your great eyesore, will deny you this.

The second instance is p. 66. where you mention the Popish exceptions against
the Act confirming the Common Prayer not to be upon any other account, but
because it was in the vulgar tongue, and then you run out into a large
discourse to prove that prayer ought to be made in a tongue understood of the
common people; the like you do p. 157. part 2. Calvin and Cartwright that
firebrand, as you call him, will conform Mr. Doctor to this Reformation.

The third instance is p. 67. where you take notice of an Act for advancing the
work of Reformation, which took away all Laws forbidding Ministers marriage, in
allowance whereof you spend many lines: in this Mr. Doctor the Calvinian and
Zuinglian faction concur with you.

These are all the Presidents of Scripture or Primitive practice you allege in
your whole book for the Reformation of the Church, and in matters of this
nature so evident and clear out of the word of God; amongst all the Zuinglian
Gospellers as you call them, you shall not have one dissenter, or Nonformist.

And because you mention a memorable challenge publishled by Bishop Jewel
against the Romish Clergy, who injuriously you say, page 129. part. 2.
upbraided the Church of England with the imputation of Novelty, and charged it
with teaching such opinion, as were not to be found before Luthers time; the
Calvinian and Zuinglian faction which you so blot with your learned pen will
willingly be his seconds in this challenge.

Nay, Sir, the Zuinglian Gospellers do renew this Challenge against the sacred
Hierarchy, (as you call it) in the same terms as you deliver the stout and
gallant challenge of that Learned Prelate Jewel, against the Romish Clergy.

The Zuinglian Gospellers challenge, If any learned man of our Adversaries be
able to bring one sufficient sentence out of the holy Scripture, or any one
example of any Bishop, Minister, or Martyr, either in the time of King Edward
the sixth, viz. Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, Hooper, Farrar, Philpot, Bradford,
Tailor, or any other, or in the times of Queen Elizabeth out of Reverend Jewel,
who do directly and ex professo plead for, and commend the present Liturgy in
the frame of it, or that Episcopacy is Jure divino, or for Adoration toward the
Altar, Bowing at the name of Jesus, signing with the sign of the Cross, wearing
of Caps, and Surplices, kneeling at the Sacrament, or for the exercise of
Church power by lay-Chancellors; if you, Reverend Sir, or any other be able to
produce any such authority or example, contending as you do professedly for
these things, the Zuinglian Gospellers will be then content to yield and
subscribe. These are the things M. Doctor, which administer trouble to the
Church of God at this day. Satisfy but our consciences, that these things,
ought to be continued in the Church, and we have done: We beseech you read this
passage of Reverend Jewel in a Sermon preached by him in St. Mary's in Oxford,
it is in the beginning of the Book, called his Defense of the Apology, page 6.
This only, says he, will I speak, and that in a word, They which brought in
Transubstantiation, Masses, calling upon Saints, sole life, Purtory, Images,
Vows, trifles, follies, bables into the Church of God, have delivered new
things, and which the Scriptures never heard of, whatsoever they Cry or Crake,
they bring not a jot out of the Word of God. And these, as I have said, are the
things wherewith the Church of God is disquieted at this day: upon these lies
the watch, and ward of the Church. These they honor instead of the Scriptures,
and force them on the people instead of the word of God, upon these men suppose
their salvation and the sum of Religion to be grounded. And that which is much
more grievous, notwithstanding at this present by the great goodness of God,
religion is restored (note Mr. Doctor) almost (not to the luster you Mr. Doctor
imagine) to her former dignity and light, yet (poor and pitiful fouls!) they
set great store by these things, they to them again, and teach them (do you
see, Mr. Doctor) as though without them the Church could not be in safety. O if
the Word of God might be heard among so many clamours, and in so great a Hurly
burly; if we would suffer God himself to sit as Judge in his own case, the
matter would be passed over with less tumult a great deal, and more easily
might we agree about the whole matter. Wherefore if all the worship of God, all
godliness, all religion be to be sought out of the word of God: if the
institutions of men have miserably perverted all things in all times; let us my
Brethren ( beware Doctor) unto whom the office of teaching is allotted.
Consider how dangerous a thing it is to speak more: and let all who will be,
and will have themselves accounted to be Christians, remember how dangerous a
thing it is to believe more.

You say, Mr. Doctor, page 130, 131. Reverend Jewel in his learned writings, is
a magazin of all sorts of learning, and that all our Controversors have, since
he wrote, furnished themselves with Arguments and authorities from him.

If you have been so well acquainted with his writings as you pretend to in
your history, you would not have presented the Churches reformation to be so
glorious and splendid as you have done, and would have pitched it on a better
bottom, then the authority of two acts of Parliaments, the members whereof you
have rendered in your history to be too much swayed in their votings and actings
by wordly Popish and politic respects.

We do highly reverence the memory of our first Reformers, but is it meet to
Idolize them? why should not the Parliaments of succeding times do the work of
the Lords house according to the light and temper of their generation, as well
as they did in theirs? and why should not the present Bishops, who (according
to the character of his most Excellent Majesty our Gracious Sovereign) are
known to be men of great sufficiency for Learning, prompt them and put them on
such a work? Is it not a dishonor to the Church of England, after so many
years standing to be fed with the dish and spoon, and suck-bottle, provided for
her infancy?

And must it be still with us in matters Ecclesiastical, as Spain would have it
to be in Civils, to be wards to the Church of Rome, that we may not espouse a
thorough-Reformation, for fear of the Popes curse, and the Spaniards rage?

For this (Mr. Doctor all along your history) was the compass our first Pilots
steered by, page 58. part. 1. and in page 103. part. 2. You say Queen Elizabeth
resolved to proceed to a Reformation as the times should serve: so also page
116.

Do you not tell us, page 12, 13. That though the Letters written by Prince
Edward to his father, may be used as good evidences of his great proficiency
with reference to the times in which he lived; Yet in our days, in which either
the wits of men are sooner ripe, or the method of teaching more exact and
facile, they would be found to contain nothing which is more then ordinary? And
speaking of Doctor Ridley one of the greatest of them, page 53. you say, he was
a man of great learning as the times then were.

And shall our ripe witted times, and more exact methods every way, bow down to
their dull forms and paterns? Our heavenly Master (the only Archbishop of our
souls) had entrusted them with two talents, and they (take it so) traded
faithfully, and gained other two talents: and shall not we, who have five
talents committed to us, labor to be faithful in a like proportion?

We have justly separated from the Church of Rome, and have departed from her,
because she has departed from the Word of God: what she had remaining
according to the Scriptures in doctrine or worship, the Protestant Churches
have retained, and embraced, not because it was reserved by her, but because
they saw it founded on the Word of God. And (Mr. Doctor) England has been
numbered among the Protestant Churches, and your title page tells of a history
of the Reformation of the Church of England: a Reformation of what, but of the
Idolatries, Errors, Heresies, Superstitions, and Corruptions (it should be so)
which the pride, avarice, ambition of many of the blind Ringleaders in the
Romish Clergy had brought into it? There are yet such things remaining in the
worship and appendents to it in the Church of England (for with the doctrine we
meddle not, the blood of the Martyrs shed in the defense of it alone by the
Word of God, has washed away the Romish filth cast into it) which are visibly
seen, and practiced in the Romish Churches. We have before named them, but that
you may know where our shoe wrings us, and what are our just scruples; We tell
you again, that the English Liturgy is tantum non the Romish Mass. Do not you
tell us, page 76. that King Edward tells his Popish Rebels, It is indeed says
he, somewhat altered, and page 66. That the Translation of the Mass (which used
to be served up in Latin) into English, was the cause why the Romish party
were offended with the Act confirming the Common Prayer book. Note.


We say also, The Ius divinum of Episcopacy, i. e. Prelacy, Bowing toward the
Altar, Bowing at the name of Jesus, signing with the sign of the Cross, holy
Vestments, Kneeling at the Sacrament, these are found most evidently in the
tents of Popery.

How come they then to be found in the Protestant Church of England? Has she
received them from Scripture? Where is any thing there that gives the least
shadow? Show us, good Dr. And therefore these are some dreggs of that disease,
and some relics of those abominations which England was overwhelmed with in
the times of Papacy; which through a strong Zeal to these in some, State Policy
in others, and a fear of giving offense to the Romish party at home and abroad
in others of our State and Church Physicians, have not to this day been purged
out, but suffered to remain.

But you will say, Objection.
it may be, Mr. Doctor, that the Apostles rule, Concio Synod. page 29.
Let all things be done decently and in order, will warrant all these things
(tending to decency and good order.)

This is a rule of Natures teaching, for the Apostle tells the Corinthians to
whom he spoke, Solution.
1 Cor. 11. 13, 14. Jugde in your selves, 1 Cor. 14 40. explained.
Is it comely that a woman pray unto God uncovered? does not nature it self
teach you, that if a man have long Hair, it is a shame unto him? And in chap.
14. of the same Epistle, where these words are, ver. 40. he taxes some for
over-priding themselves in their gifts, not aiming at the Edification of the
Church, ver. 5. and says he, ver. 23. If the whole Church be come together in
some place, and all speak with tongues, and there come in some that are
unlearned, or unbelievers, will not they say, that ye are mad? And in ver. 29,
30. That the Prophets should speak but one at a time, and the rest should hold
their peace, while any one speaks. And in ver. 34, 35. he gives order, That
women should not speak in the Church, and says, It is a shame (that is, it is
not decent, as the speaking of many at once, was not orderly) for women to
speak in the Church. And then he concludes with a general rule founded in
nature, Let all things be done decently and in order, ver. 40. What is here
(Mr. Doctor) to warrant any such things as are before mentioned, which neither
nature nor reason direct to, but are taken up by the will and pleasure of men,
and receive their legitimacy, not by any connaturalness to the worship of God,
but by forinsecall Canons and Constitutions? Let us put the case thus, Mr.
Doctor.

Suppose you, or some of the Prebends of Westminster should forsake your
Cloister, and go down into the Country, to some one of your Parsonages, and
coming among an ignorant and unlearned people, should officiate the Liturgy
after the Roman order, and so turn the Common Prayer into the Mass again; Or
suppose you should preach to them in Hebrew, Greek, or Latin, which they
understand not: or suppose, while you are preaching in the Abbey, another of
your fellow-Prebends, puffed up with his knowledge and gifts, should at the
same time take upon him to stand up and speak together with you; Or that women
should usurp authority to speak, or teach, thinking they can speak more to the
edification of the people, then you or any of your Brethren: in these cases
this rule of the Apostle is to be pressed and observed, Let all things be done
decently and in order; for to remedy such unnatural disorders and confusions,
the Apostle left it; and your Zuinglian Gospellers are as much as your self for
this decency in the church.

But you will reply, Object.
Mr. Doctor, These things, though they be indifferent, yet the Church having
judged them meet and expedient to be used in the worship of God, it becomes
every man to observe them, Dr. Pierce his Concio Synodica, page 37.
though they have not any express warrant in the Word; there is nothing in the
Word against them, and there is an express command to obey the laws and
constitutions of our Superiors, and therefore obedience is due, though not for
the things themselves, yet for the Authorities sake enjoining them.

In answer to this weighty objection, Sol.
we shall propose these Queries,

Pierce his Scala of Obedience mentioned page 33. of his Synodica Concio, a
Synodo ad Regem a Rege statim ad Deum: that we must proceed in the path of our
obedience from the Convocation to the King, from the King immediately to God:
we are very well pleased with this order (though the Doctor would have it
otherwise, page 39.) We know, God has tied every soul to be subject unto the
higher powers, Romans 13. 1. and God requires the higher powers to be subject
unto himself, Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19, 20.



We shall take a little liberty to debate upon this last Querie, waving at
present the two former. We shall speak first to the first branch.

First therefore, we say, that the things before mentioned, Liturgy, Vestments,
etc. have been an offense to the Reformed Churches abroad. You tell us, page
79. part. 1. That Bucer (who was sent for over to be Regius Professor in
Cambridge) was not well satisfied in some particular branches of the Liturgy:
you tell us, he had given an account to Calvin of the English Liturgy, desiring
a Letter from him to the Lord Protector, which you say, page 80. proved the
occasion of much trouble to the Church, and Orders of it.

In this Letter, you say, Calvin approving well enough of set forms of Prayer,
descends particularly to the English Liturgy, and makes it his advice ( it is
wholesome counsel Mr. Doctor, and for this alone, your rash pen flings so much
scorn on that learned and blessed man) that all these Ceremonies should be
abrogated, that he should go forwards to reform the Church without fear, ( but
not, as you say, without wit) without regard of peace at home, or
correspondency abroad, such considerations being to be had in Civil matters,
but not in matters of the Church, wherein ( as you quote his own words in
latin in your Margin) not any thing is to be exacted which is not warranted by
the Word ( does not Jewel say so?) and in the managing whereof there is not any
thing more distastefull in the eyes of God then worldly wisdom, either in
moderating, cutting off, or going backwards, but merely as we are directed by
his will revealed. You tell us in the same page, he touches on the Book of
Homilies, permits them very faintly for a season, ( you say) but by no means
allows of them for along continuance, or to be looked on as a rule of the
Churches, or constantiy to serve for the instruction of the people. Would you
have it so, Mr. Doctor? The Church and people of God are then little beholding
to you: The Churches rule is the Word of God, and the people of God have found
far better helps for their instruction by painful and able Preachers (and hope
it shall be so still) then the reading of a Homily by a simple non-preaching
Curate.

You add concerning Calvin, page 80. That he must needs trouble the Protector
about the Ceremonies, that he writes to him (you quote his own words in the
Margin) to this effect, you say, That the Papists would grow insolenter every
day then other, unless the differences were composed about the Ceremonies: But
how, say you? not by reducing the opponents to conformity ( which it seems you
would have) but by encouraging them rather in their opposition, and that he
solicited the Protector in behalf of Hooper, who was then fallen into some
trouble about the Ceremonies.

Do not you see, Mr. Doctor, that these Ceremonies have ever been the occasion
of trouble.

You tell us next of Peter Martyr, a great and eminent Divine (as you report
him) page 97. part. 1. yet page 92. you tell us, That Caps and Surplices were
utterly opposed by him, That he thinks it (you quote his own words in your
Margin) most expedient to the good of the Church that they and all others of
that kind should be taken away. And he gives (you say this reason for it) That
where such Ceremonies were so stiffly contended for, which were not warranted
and supported by the Word of God, there commonmonly men ( lay your hand upon
your heart, Doctor) were less solicitous of the substance of religion, then
they were of the circumstances of it; and you say, he tells of himself in one
of his Epistles, that he had never used the Surplice when he lived in Oxford,
though he were then a Canon of Christs-Church, and frequently present in the
Quire.

You tell us, page 107. part. 1. That Calvin desiring esteem here in England as
well as in other places, writes to King Edward (after the Refomation had gone
as far forward as ever it went) that many things were still amiss in England,
which needed Reformation.

Thus (Sir) by your own confessions, Liturgy and Ceremonies have been an
offense and trouble to the Reformed Churches abroad, Martin Bucer, Peter
Martyr, and Calvin the glorious lights of these Churches, men of renown in the
Church of God, have strugled and born witness against them. The last but not
the least of which three worthies (for he is the chiefest of the three) Mr.
John Calvin (then whom the Church of God since the time of the Apostles never
had a more choice and happy instrument both for learning, piety, wisdom,
moderation and diligence) you and most of the sacred Hierarchy, as you style
it, do still decry and vilify as Joseph's Brethren did him, because he brings
your evil report amongst the Churches, and cries down your Diana (Liturgy and
Ceremonies) as not warranted by the Word, and so not to be endured in the
Church of God.

Never shall you or any man by all your starcht Oratory, bring Mr. Calvin out
of credit in the Churches of God, they have tasted such a soul edifying and
strengthening sweetness in his learned and happy labors, that you may as soon
persuade the Church of God that the Sun is dark, and Honey bitter, as that Mr.
Calvin was not a heavenly spiritual holy man. But this is no new thing (Mr.
Doctor) to hit men (desirous to see the Church perfectly reformed) in the teeth
with Calvin and Zuinglius, as if they were a couple of pestilent fellows, of
whom all men that loved themselves or the Church had need to beware. How is
your History all along chequered with Calvin, Zuinglius, and the Calvinian and
Zuinglian faction? as your betters (Mr. Doctor) will honor and have honored
these blessed men (for see what a testimony Bishop Jewel gives of Luther and
Zuinglius in page 360. of his defense, etc. says he, Martin Luther, and
Hulderike Zuinglius are most excellent men, even sent of God to give light to
the whole world) so worse men then you (we are sorry to see you tread so much
in their steps) have labored to make this the reproach of our chief Reformers,
that they have been too much addicted unto Calvin. You may read a passage in
Bishop Jewels Preface to his defense or to the Reader, where in the tenth page
are these words. He tells the world, says Bishop Jewel (meaning Harding) Mr.
Jewel is the open enemy of the Church, Mr. Jewel is the enemy of God, Mr. Jewel
honors that Idol Calvin, more then Jesus Christ, so that you see (Doctor)
Bishop Jewel had a very high if not too high an esteem of Calvin, whose
assistance in our reformation Cranmer rejected, and whom you have so causelessly
asperst.

Not only the reformed Churches abroad, but also many holy and learned men (who
suffered Martyrdom in Queen Mary's time) have had a continual grudge against
the Ceremonies, professed their dislike of them, and suffered as Non-conformists
in the time of King Edward the sixth. And to make this evident, we will use no
other proof, but your own history.

And if you please to compare the number of those that were for the Ceremonies,
with those that were against them (though preferment and ease, Mr. Doctor, will
never want numbers) we shall find (considering the bias of preferment) no great
odds, between their numbers, as you have cast up the account for us.

You cannot tell us certainly, who were the compilers of the Liturgy, for page
57. You say, you think they were such as you there name, but p. 126. p. 2.
Having occasion to mention Queen Elizabeth's Coronation, and wondering that the
Bishop of Ely should refuse to Crown her, having his first preferments from her
Father; you say this Bishop assisted in the composing of the public Liturgy,
and appeared forward in the Reformation, but afterward he was one of those
which were sent to Rome to tender the submission of this Kingdom to the Pope
then living; upon this ground he refused to Crown Queen Elizabeth; this was one
whom you call Thomas Goodwick, p. 57. p. 1. Sure you will set him aside, as not
fit to be reckoned: and besides him you reckon thirteen more, who (you think)
compiled the Liturgy. And amongst these you very often glory in Cranmer and
Ridley, whom you call a learned, stout, and resolute Prelate, p. 78. p. 1. but
surely you have cast a fly into this ointment of their great names, which does
very much defile and debase their reputation: when you tell us, p. 103. p. 1.
That these two moved King Edward so importunately to license, or at least to
connive at the exercice of the Romifh Religion by the Princess Mary, that they
forced tears from him, whereupon, you say, with admiration they withdrew.

You bestow no encomiums on any other in all your history of Kings Edwards
time, but on these two, who were so stiff in point of Ceremonies: these are
your only sticklers for them.

On the other side you say, p. 90. p. 1. John Hooper the designed Bishop of
Gloucester (whom you commend for his constant Preaching, and learned writings,
and note his humility, that the King bestowed on him the Bishopric of
Gloucester without his seeking) applying himself to the Archbishop for his
consecration, desires to be forborne in some Ceremonies at his hands, and to be
dispensed with for the oath of Canonical obedience to his Metropolitan. Cranmer
and Ridley would, you say, by no means yield. And the King being moved by the
Earl of Warwick, wrote to the Archbishop (which Letter you mention, p. 91. p.
1.) in favor of Hooper: notwithstanding this gracious Letter, you say, the two
Bishops would not obey the King: but Hooper persisting in his obstinacy and
wilful humor (as you term it) was for his disobedience and contempt
committed prisoner.

Here you see a good man, and a designed Bishop, boggle at the Ceremonies, and
choosing a prison before conformity; he could not swallow these gnats, though
lapt up in so great honor and preferments.

And when Ridley and he came together to the stake in the times of Queen Mary,
did Hooper or Ridley then sigh out a recantation: Hooper for his indiscreet
obstinacy, or Ridley for his unchristian and unbrotherly rigor? look on what
you say (Mr. Doctor) on this occasion, you tell us page 51. in the history of
Queen Mary, that Hooper and Ridley being both prisoners ( you see, Mr. Doctor,
what dealing both Conformists and Non-conformists receive at the hands of Rome,
if we think to charm her with some fond compliances, we are mistaken) the
Controversy concerning the Episcopal habit which Hooper refused, revived in
Bishop Ridley's thoughts; and he writes to him in these words as you say, p.
51. My dear Brother, forasmuch as I understand by your books, that we thoroughly
agree and wholly consent together in those things which are the grounds and
substantial points of our Religion, against which the world so furiously rages
in these our days, however in times past, in certain by-matters and
Circumstances of Religion, Note.
your wisdom and my simplicity (I must confess) have a little jarred, each of
us following --

Do not you perceive (Sir) how his conscience pricked him for his overhasty
violence toward his tender Brother, does not he shame himself for his folly in
pressing so hard upon the conscience of his Brother in such by-matters (which
Jewel calls bables, follies, trifles) commending his wisdom (which you brand
with obstinacy and a wilful humor) for his generous fortitude in contending
against them, even to the loss of his precious liberty.

As stout and resolute a Prelate as he was, yet his courage comes down, he
dares not look death in the face, till he had washed away the stain and guilt of
that unchristian action by a humble and penitent confession of the folly of it.
The wind of persecution, and the apprehensions of death made a strange
alteration in his thoughts; the dust and cobwebs of his Prelatical dignity and
glory, were now blown over, and he sensibly perceives a good conscience
(holding fast the truth and standing steadfast in the liberty of the Gospel) to
be a more desirable portion then the Bishopric of London.

Verily (Mr. Doctor) it is a bad cause which does not answer for it self; when
death knocks at the door, the hot contests which you and others sweat in for
these by-matters of Ceremonies, are not like you see to contribute any thing to
your comfort and joy in the evil day.

You are yet warm in your Cloister, lined with manifold favors, your zeal for
the Church cannot want its recompense; but sir, it is good to remember your
latter end, you know not, but that your conscience may be then awakened, and
read over this history you have written, and pinch you for the Errata's of your
zeal and charity against your poor Brethren: we are confident, that much of
that you have laid into the foundation of the Reformation of the Church of
England (though you and others judge it gold, silver, precious stones) will be
found wood, hay and stubble, when he appears, who is like a refiners fire.

There is one very naughty passage in your book, page 38. part 1. utterly
unbecoming the mouth of a Christian, much less a Doctor of Divinity, where you
are not ashamed to say, That because in the twenty fourth Injunction in King
Edwards time, that upon Holy and Festival days, it shall be lawful for men to
labor in harvest, you extend this liberty, as well to the Lords day, as the
Annual Festivals, and then you quote an Act of Parliament, to authorize this
liberty, and say that by that Act, any man, either in harvest, or or at any
other times in the year (when necessity shall so require, who will not pretend
necessity) may labor, ride, fish, or work any kind of work at their pleasure
upon the Lords day. And you tell us what was done at Court on that day.

Sir, we are confident that the intention of that Act did not reach to allow so
gross a profanation of the Lords day; and you that are so versed in Acts of
Parliament, (for they are the only sphere wherein Liturgy and Ceremonies move)
cannot you find an Act of Parliament restraining this abuse? If you cannot
(which we know you may) it had been the duty of a Protestant Reformed Doctor of
Divinity, to have discovered the evil of such abuses, and to have labored with
all your might, that such an Act may pass.

Oh Sir, must Jesus Christ our Lord, have no pre-eminence above our Lady? and
must John Baptist be lifted up to an equality with him, whose shoe-latchet he
confessed he was not worthy to unloose?

What! have Peter, and Paul, and Philip, and Jacob done as much for us as Jesus
Christ? and where is the least hint that one hour is to be set apart to their
honor?

Must every paltry holy day be set in equality of reputation with the Lords
day, which Christ sanctified by his resurrection, (the accomplishment of a far
greater work then that of Creation) and his Apostles instituted by their
constant solemn Assemblies upon it?

You say in page 38. part 1. in the latter times, the Lords day began to be
advanced into the reputation of the Jewish Sabbath; If by latter times, you
mean the Apostles times, it is true, for then it began; and when ever it began,
why should not Christians be as zealous to advance the Lords day unto the
highest pitch of reputation, that ever the Jewish Sabbath was in (abateing the
Ceremonious rigor?) have not Christians greater obligations, greater
encouragements to glorify God, and lift up his name, which is Holy, Holy, Holy?

Oh Mr. Doctor, the time past may suffice you for this folly. You need not have
now told us, that men may do any thing at their pleasure, if they say they have
necessity, on the Lords day, and seek to establish this mischief by a Law. We
would be loath to be in your coat in the day of the Lord, for your debasing the
Lords day, for the best preferment the Church of England can give us. We say to
you, as Bishop Jewel said to Harding, Arripe severitatem Christianam, and
palinodiam cane.

Well Sir, to go on with our reckoning, you have seen one Nonconformist, and
Ridley's recantation for his Prelatical rigor, which amounts to another, and so
he is to be taken off the file, and you have two less then you had. We shall
pass on with more speed in the numbering up the rest. You tell us, page 93. part
1. of one Trins a Deacon, who refused to wear the vestments appointed to be
worn: Of one Mr. John Rogers Prebend of Saint Paul's, and Divinity Reader of
that Church, who could never be persuaded to wear them: The like aversness (as
you call it) you ascribe unto Mr. John Philpot, Archdeacon of Winchester, who
suffered in Queen Mary's time. So that here you have Hooper, Ridley (when in
his cold blood) Trins, Rogers, and Philpot, all disgusting these Ceremonies.
Many more there were, but these you have left upon record with your own pen.

To proceed to the times of Queen Elisabeth, you have heard Jewels testimony in
part, who was the glory of her Reign for learning, and you will see it more
fully by and by. You tell us, page 120. part 2. that one Whitehead who had been
Chaplain to Anne Bollen the Queens mother, was offered the Archbishopric of
Canterbury, but you say he refused it, because he was more inclined to the
Presbyterians, then the Episcopal form of Government.

And page 123. part 2. you say Coverdall waved the acceptance of the
Bishopric of Oxon, or any other then vacant, out of a disaffection to the
Habit of that Order.

And page 124. part 2. you say, Alexander Nowell Dean of Saint Paul's, Preaching
before Queen Elisabeth, spoke irreverently of the sign of the Cross, for which
she from her closet window immediately checked him, commanding him to retire
from that ungodly digression.

And page 165. part 2. you tell us that Father John Fox the Martyrologist,
being called on to subscribe, appeared before the Bishop with the New Testament
in Greek, To this, said he, I will subscribe, and if this will not serve, take
my Prebend of Salisbury, the only preferment I hold in the Church of England,
and much good may it do you.

You tell us of Sampson Dean of Christ-Church, who was deprived, you say, page
164. part 2. for refusing to wear the Habit belonging to his place. You tell us
also of one Hardiman page 115. part 2. a Prebend of Westminster deprived also,
for throwing down the Altar, and defacing the vestments. And in the same page
you say, both the Professors of divinity in the two Universites, and Whitington
Dean of Durham were Non-conformists.

These instances are your own, and so you have no reason to except against
them. We have not wronged you ( as far as we know) in a syllable, and now, Sir,
we leave it to you to judge, Whether the point of conformity to such
Ceremonies, (which have been a continual occasion of offense to the Reformed
Churches, both at home and abroad) be still to be pressed with accustomed rigor?

A second branch of the third Querie was, Whether such Ceremonies which link us
in a conformity with that Church, from which in many other things we have
justly separated, be to be continued and enjoined? We say, that the Church of
England having renounced Communion with the Church of Rome, in all material
points of Doctrine, ought in point of Prudence and Conscience, to reject
conformity with her in Worship and Discipline; for the same reason which moved
us to depart from her doctrinal corruptions, binds us to leave her to her self
in the superstitions of her worship and discipline. The reason, why we reject
Communion with the Church of Rome, is for that the Popes Supremacy,
Infallibility, Transubstantiation, Merit of good works, Invocation of Saints,
Purgatory, Latin Service, Worshipping of Images, half Communion, and such
like, which are the Pillars of the Romish Fabric, cannot be proved and made
good out of the Word of God. And is not this reason of like force against the
Ceremonies of that Church yet in use among us? Is there a scriptum est for one
of them, without which authority, the Devil the father of lies, pretends not to
be believed and adored.

Though Doctor Pierce in his Synod. concio, p. 44. be pleased to lay the
maintenance of the Ministry, Infant Baptism, the Sanctification of the Sabbath,
yea the Personalities of the Godhead, in an even level of authority, with the
Orders of the Church about Liturgy and Ceremonies, as if the one as well as the
other, must depend on his Traditionis fulcimentum, his shore of Tradition, and
would all otherwise fall to the ground: Yet we can by no means give way to this
Traditional unscriptural assertion; if he will please to produce but one Text
of Scripture, as fairly concluding for Service Book and Ceremonies, as have
been and can be produced in great numbers for those four things, we will never
put him to the trouble of a hard word more; and we shall be as ambitious to
advance the reputation of the Ceremonies, as well as of the Sabbath.

You may possibly say, these Ceremonies are small matters, far from the
foundation, and if men had not more of humor and will in them, then reason or
conscience, they might down with them well onough.

We might reply, that any action (especially conversant about the worship of
God) not undertaken in faith, is sin; and faith has no ground to stand upon,
but Divine Authority.

But we refer you to Bishop Jewel, in the 11. page of a Sermon of his preached
upon this Text, Joshua 6. Now Jericho was shut up, etc. which is bound up in
the same Book of his defense, in the end of it.

Joshua* (says that learned Bishop) suffered nothing to stand, he burnt all
together, he left nothing remaining, were it never so little -- In Religion, no
part is to be called little, a hair is but little, yet it has a shadow, in the
body a little disquiet is oftentimes cause of death: The Ciniphes are but
little, yet are they reckoned among the great plagues of God. -- Paul says, a
little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. I speak not this, because I think
nothing at all may be left to any special purpose. For even in Jericho, where
was made a general destruction, God himself commanded that all silver, and
gold, and vessels of brass and iron should be saved, and brought into the Lords
Treasury. Howbeit, the things that may be reserved, must not be dust or chaff,
or hay, or stubble, but gold, and silver, and iron, I mean, they may not be
things meet to furnish ( do you see Doctor) and maintain superstition. And if
you will know what he accounts superstition, he tells you in his Reply unto
Hardings Answer, page 310. in the ninth Article of the Canopie, Moses, says
he, was commanded to make the Tabernacle, neither durst Moses or his workmen
add or diminish, to do any thing more or less, otherwise then God had appointed
him. Solomon built the Temple, but he followed not therein any part of his own
fancy, but only that self-same plat and proportion that God had given to his
father, for so says David, I Chron. 28. Here mark (good Christian Reader,
says he) in these examples God has bridled our devotion, and has taught us
to worship him, not in such sort as may seem good in our eyes, but only as he
has commanded us. Yet Mr. Harding by his cunning, would make use of these
examples to prove, that we may honor God in such sort, as we of our selves can
best devise. This was (says this learned Bishop) evermore the very root of all
superstition.

Therefore Mr. Doctor, I wish you would learn of that ancient worthy Father
Chrysostom, as Jewel quotes him, page 280. in his Defense. Discamus Christum ex
ipsius voluntate honorare: Nam qui honoratur, eo maxim honor laetatur, quem
ipse vult, non quem nos optamus. And because you see Chrysostom cited, give us
leave to pass an observation upon one passage you let fall, in page 123* part
2. you are there admiring the beauty of the face of the Church of England, and
this is one part of her comeliness, that the Priests as you call them, executed
not any divine Office but in their Surplice, a vestment set apart for Religious
Services, you say in the Primitive times, as may be gathered, you say, from
Chrysostom for the Eastern Churches, and from Saint Hierom for the Western. But
Sir, what if this vestment come not from the Primitive times, but from the
usages of the Heathen. Then either Chrysostom and Hierom were mistaken in
saying so, or you have abused their names, in fathering an heathenish vanity on
them, and the Primitive times.

Pray you, hear the Right Learned Jewel, page 281. of his Defense. Neither,
says he to Harding, may ye justly and truly say ( take heed of lying, Doctor)
you have received none of your orders and usages from the Heathen. Nicolaus
Leonicenus says, Isidis sacerdotes in Aegypto utebantur lines vestibus, and
semper erant detonso capillo, quod etiam per manus traditum ad nostra usque
tempora pervenisse videtur, siquidem ii qui apud nos divino cultui and sacris
Altaribus praesident, barbam comamque nutrire prohibentur and in sacris utuntur
lineis amictibus: The Priests of the goddess Isis in Egypt, used to wear
linen Surplices ( rub your eyes, Doctor) and evermore had their head shaven,
which thing seems to have been derived from them, unto our time from hand to
hand; for they that among us minister Gods service, and serve the holy Altars,
are forbidden to suffer the hair of their head or beard to grow, and in their
divine Service they use linen garments.

And Sir, to draw to a conclusion in this argument, we say it is unlawful for
the Church of England to retain, either in Doctrine, Worship, or Discipline,
any Conformity to the Church of Rome.

And because we know this will hardly go down with you, by any reasons we can
lay before you: We shall commend it to you under the credit of your Right
Learned Prelate Jewel, please you to peruse page 325, 326. of his Defense.

The learned and godly men, at whose persons it pleases you so rudely to
scoff, ( says Jewel to Harding, Mr. Doctor, Harding used to scoff at Calvin
and Zuinglius, and to upbraid Jewel with them) that refuse either to go in your
apparel, or otherwise to show themselves ( note Sir) like unto you* have age
sufficient, and can answer for themselves. Notwithstanding thus much I may say
in their behalf: Neither do they commend any manner of apparel as holy, nor do
they condemn any apparel as unholy -- They say not therefore, that the apparel
is either holy or unholy, but they may truly say, the same apparel on your part
has been foully abused to filthy purposes. They may justly say, they would not
gladly in any appearance ( good Doctor, note this) show themselves like unto
them, that have so untruly and so long deceived the world. And herein they are
not without sundry Authorities, and examples of the godly Fathers. Saint
Augustine says, his mother left bringing of Wine and Cakes to the Church, but
only for that she was warned, it was a resemblance of the superstition of the
Heathens, and so she left it. Saint Gregory speaking of the three sprinklings
or dippings into the holy Font, says thus, In una fide nihil officit
consuetudo Ecclesiae diversa; Tamen quod Haereticiid fecerint, negant idem esse
a Catholicis faciendum: The faith being one ( but it is not so between us and
Rome) the diversity of customs hurts nothing; yet forasmuch as Heretics have
thus done, they say the Catholics may in no wise do the same.

Tertullian reasons vehemently, That a Christian man ought not to go with a
Laurel Garland upon his head, and that for none other reason, but only for that
the Heathen used so to go. Whereupon Beatus Rhenanus gives this note, Non
solum ab his remperandum fuit, quae manifestam praese ferrent impietatem, sed
etiam ab illis quae possent indifferentia vocari, hoc est, quae essent neque
bona, neque mala. Partim (pray mark Sir) ne quisquam infirmior ex Christianis
offenderetur, partim ne ethnici (did not Calvin say the Papists would grow more
insolent) in suis erroribus confirmarentur, dum rectius putant esse, quod etiam
Christianos observare vident: It was meet for them to refrain, not only from
such things as have a manifest show of wickedness, but also from such things as
might be called indifferent, that is to say, neither good nor ill: Partly, left
any of the weaker Christians should be offended: Partly also, lest the Heathens
(we say Papists) should be encouraged in their errors, thinking that thing, for
that the Christians themselves do it, to be the better. You may read more to
this purpose.

There is one particular which we know you will very much distaste, and that is
the Divine Right of Episcopacy; which we deny, and you with great confidence
assert, page 51. part 1. for there mentioning one Act of Parliament, you say,
The contrivers of that Act, did intend by degrees to weaken the authority of
the Episcopal order, by forcing them from their strong hold of Divine
institution.

We hope Sir, you will not assume so much upon you in the Divinity school, which
is given to Aristotle in the Logic, that your Dixit must suffice us.

We might produce the unanswered Treatise of Mr. William Prinne (a fast friend
to Monarchy, and as earnest an Antagonist to your Ius Divinum) in his
unbishoping of Timothy and Titus, to batter your strong hold: but that learned
and pious Gentleman, being a Lawyer, and also a sufferer under your Ius Divinum
is very low in your thoughts; and whatever comes to you in his name bath little
credit with you, as being looked upon to be either the fruit of his ignorance,
or desired revenge.

And therefore we shall oppose the judgment of a Bishop; an English Bishop, one
whom you in your History do very much extol for his great learning, from whom
you say all Controversors have furnished themselves (being a Magazin of all
sorts of learning, page 131. part 2.) with arguments: it is Reverend Jewel:
from this Magazin we will take some weapons and Artillery to assault and batter
your strong hold.

Sir, you are no stranger to the distinction of Episcopus praeses, and
Episcopus princeps, the former we allow, as being for order and decency in the
government of the Church: but Episcopus princeps (which is Prelacy and not
Episcopacy) this as you contend for, so we to this, oppose the judgment of
Bishop Jewel.

Harding (page 196. of the Defense) pleading against the sufficiency of the
Scriptures, and for the credit of Traditions; among these Traditions he
reckons the distinction of a Bishop and a Priest, and says, that they that
denied this distinction between a Bishop and a Priest were condemned of
heresy: in the Margin over against these words in the letter R. Jewel says it
is an untruth, that ever any were condemned for heresy for denying this
distinction of a Bishop and a Priest, for if it were so says he, both St. Paul
and St. Hierome, and other good men are condemned of heresy. Afterward page
202. of the Defense having taken notice and answered what Harding had said
against the sufficiency of the Scriptures and for Traditions: If Dr. Pierce be
pleased to read the right learned Prelate Jewel, he may learn from him (we hope
he will not take it in scorn) to learn less upon tradition and more upon the
Word of God.
he comes at last to the forementioned words, and says, But what means Mr.
Harding here to come in with the difference between Priests and Bishops?
Thinks he that Priests and Bishops hold only by Tradition? (he means not
the distinction but the office) Or is it so horrible an heresy as he makes
it, to say that by the ( do you see Doctor) Scriptures of God a Bishop and a
Priest are all one? Or knows he how far, and unto whom he reaches the name
of an heretic?

Verily Chrysostom says, Inter Episcopum and Presbyter um interest ferme
nihil, Between a Bishop and a Priest in a manner there is no difference. St.
Hierom says somewhat in rougher sort, Audio quendam in tantam erupisse
vecordiam, ut Diaconos Presbyteris (id est, Episcopis) anteforret: cum
Apostolus perspicue doceat eosdem esse Presbyteros quos Episcopos, Note.
I hear say, there is one become so peevish, that he sets Deacons before
Priests, that is to say, before Bishops, whereas the Apostle plainly teaches
us, that Priests and Bishops be all one.

St. Augustine says, Quid est Episcopus nisi primus* Presbyter, hoc est, summus
sacerdos, what is a Bishop, but the first Priest, that is to say, the highest
Priest.

So says St. Ambrose, Episcopi and Presbyteri una ordinatio, uterque enim
sacerdos est, sed Episcopus* primus est: There is but one confecration of
Priest and Bishop, for both of them are Priests, but the Bishop is the first.

All these and more holy Fathers, (says learned Jewel) together with St. Paul
the Apostle, for thus saying, by Mr. Hardings advice, must be holden for
Heretics.

Does not your strong hold shake, if not fall before the face of these
Authorities, Doctor?

However we will charge once more, see page 100, and 101. of the Defense. But
Mr. Harding says, the Primates had authority over other inferior Bishops. I
grant says Bishop Jewel, they had so. Howbeit, they had it by agreement and
custom, but neither by Christ ( observe Doctor) nor by Peter, nor by Paul, nor
by any right of Gods Word. St. Hierom says, Noverint Episcopi, se magis
consuetudine, quam dispositionis Dominicae veritate Presbyteris esse majores,
and in commune debere Ecclesiam regere: let Bishops understand ( would to God
they would) that they are above Priests, rather of Custom, then of any truth or
right of Christ's institution, and that they ought to rule the Church
altogether. He proceeds in other passages out of St. Hierom --

Augustine says, Secundum honorum vocabula, quae jam Ecclesiae usus obtinuit,
Episcopatus Presbyterio major est: the office of a Bishop is above the office
of a Priest, not by authothority of the Scriptures (this is Jewels Parenthesis)
but after the names of honor, which the custom of the Church has now
obtained.

Thus, Sir, you see Bishop Jewel with his own breath has blown down your
strong hold of Divine institution.

And therefore you have no other hold for your Episcopacy, but Ius Politicum;
and truly Mr. Doctor, if our most Gracious Sovereign, whom we are bound to
obey, and honor as our lawful and rightful King, and to love and reverence for
his Gracious and most acceptable indulgence expressed in his refreshing
Declaration, please to cast the beams of his countenance upon the Bishops, and
to make them (as you say) his Ministers only, his Ecclesiastical Sheriffs to
execute his will, page 51. part 1. such is our high esteem of his Majesty's
pleasure, that we shall strain to the very utmost (so that we may preserve the
incommunicable Jewel of a good conscience) to conform unto it.

The meanest groom receiving the impression of his Majesty's favor, shall
become venerable in our eyes.

And though you are pleased to say in some of your last lines, that our
interest is incompatible with the Rights of Monarchy (wherein we understand you
not, and entreat you to give the particulars of our so inconsistent interest)
yet though we will not vie with you in learning and oratory, we have and shall
ever (according to his Majesty's expectation in his Princely and pious
Declaration) in our several vocations with all our parts and strength, as much
endeavor to indear the hearts and affections of his people both to his Person
and Government, as you or any other whosoever.

And we hope and pray, that the Bishops and others met together in Convocation,
will be so tender of his Majesty's Honor and the peace of his Kingdoms, that
they will not suffer these by-matters of Liturgy and Ceremonies to be a
partition wall between a Gracious King and a willing people.

You are afraid (we suspect Mr. Doctor) that that covetous piratical hungry
humor, which you say was at work so busy in our first Reformers, is lurking
in us, and that we have an evil eye upon your great preferments and revenues
(our jealousy is not causeles, if you please to peruse a passage in your
fourth page of your Epistle to the Reader, and compare it with another passage
page 95. part 1.) But, Sir, we deal clearly with you; we envy not any man's
titles and dignities; we have food and raiment, and are contented with our
portion, and seek not great things. All that we beg at the hands of our
Superiors, is a liberty to worship God according to his Word, that we may have
nothing imposed upon us, but what we may be directed in our compliance with, by
the rule of the Scriptures; we desire that men may not command, where God is
silent, voniat verbum Domini, and you shall lead us with a twine thread, nay we
will gladly follow and bless God for any example: we desire not to be judged
stubborn or factious, if we bow not down to the single authority of a Canon; we
can do nothing against the truth.

(Sir) we hope this is a fair request, and we are sure ought to be granted.

As for the Bishops, we say of them, as Jewel said of the Pope, page 366. in
his Defense.

Let the Pope do the duty of a Bishop: let him exhort: let him preach: let him
dispense Gods mysteries: let him fulfill his office: let him do the part of an
Evangelist: and we will love him and reverence him, although not as Christ's
Vicar general, yet at least as a Bishop; otherwise we must say unto him, as St.
Gregory said sometime to Cyriacus the Bishop of Constantinople: Omnes magnos
esse and honorabiles cupio, quorum tamen honor honori omnipotentis dei non
detrahat: nam quisquis se contra deum honorari appetit, mihi honorabilis non
est, I wish that all men might be great and honorable, so that their honor be
not prejudicial to the honor of Almighty God; for whosoeve shall desire
himself to be honored against God, shall not be honorable unto me.

We conceive (Sir) there is work enough for the Bishops, (though they trouble
not their heads about the by-matters of Ceremonies ( as your stout Prelate
Ridley at last called them) either in contriving Canons to establish them, or
in seeing to the execution of those Canons) to preach frequently as his Majesty
expects, to-govern their Clergy, to preach to them, to exhort and quicken them
to their duty, to direct them in their studies, and guiding of their flocks, to
punish the negligent and scandalous, to turn out the insufficient and
incorrigible, to countenance them against the profane insulting rabble, to see
their maintenance duly paid to them, to hold Provincial Synods, to set up
Lectures in all the chief Market Towns of their Diocesses, to watch against and
punish such as preach treason, sedition, heresy, to take care that Church
censures be duly executed upon ignorant and scandalous sinners, to see that the
ordinances of Christ be kept up in due reverence, neither disused through
idleness, nor polluted by reminess and lukewarmness; to discountenance the
heathenish customs of May-poles, revellings, dancings, and all other profane
disorders, especially on the Lords day: Hic labor, hoc opus, this will find
them work enough, and this is to be a Bishop indeed. And if Episcopacy (after
it has lain so long fallow) bring forth such a fruitful crop, we shall be so
far from muttering and repining, that we shall cry, Grace, Grace unto it.

Mr. Doctor, we are not against external decency in Gods worship; Ministers
habits ought to be grave and comely becoming their function, and if any be
garish, or fantastical, or clownish and slovenly, let the Bishop punish him;
the behavior of Minister and people ought to be very reverent, both in coming
in, going out, and during their abode in the Congregation, and if any be rude
and irreverent, let him be admonisht, and censured; we say, the Churches ought
to be kept in a handsome decorum free from nastiness and sluttishness; that the
Pulpit, Reading place, great Bible, Communion Table, Seats, Pavements, Windows,
Walls, Roof, Cushions, Carpits, Churchyard, be all kept neat and comely, and
in good repair. And what would you have more? We know you miss the
Common Prayer Book, and some other Ornaments.

Truly, Mr. Doctor, we desire to deal plainly with you, the greatest part of
the people of this Nation are very ignorant, (Oh that you would leave your
Cloister, and make some experiment, by questioning and reasoning with them) and
we conceive plain and frequent preaching to be far more necessary for them, and
more required at all our hands, then the reading of prayers, or decking and
adorning of Churches.

Would you commend that Nurse, that should spend the greatest part of her time
in decking and tricking up a child, and in teaching it to speak and say after
her, and in the mean time suffer the child to pine away for want of milk? While
here is a great stir about Ceremonies, Ornaments, Liturgy, the people perish
for lack of knowledge: Sermons decay apace, it is come to once a day already,
and in some places to once a fortnight.

Sir, diligent and frequent preaching, is the great wheel should be kept going,
without which, Prayers, Sacraments, Sabbaths, will be but blind and blunt
devotions, and will quickly lose their savor and efficacy.

To bring you in love with Preaching, we shall offer to you Bishop Jewels
esteem of it, who is of so great esteem with you.

And first, we shall commend to you part of that Sermon preached at Saint
Mary's in Oxon, which is to be found before the Book called the Defense, it is
upon these words, 1 Pet. 4. 11. If any man speak, etc.

In the third page are these words.

If the Sun were taken away from the world, all things should be left dark,
disparkled and confounded; so if the voice of the Pastor be taken out of the
Church, Religion is left at sixes and sevens, it is left blind, troubled, all
things are mingled with error, superstition and idolatry; of so great weight it
is to be a Steward of the house of God. The Gospel, Religion, Godliness, the
health of the Church, depends of us alone. This is our office, this we take
upon us, and this we profess. And except we do this, we do nothing, we serve to
no use at all. It is not enough to know I know not what learning, the Devils
perhaps know more then any of us all, it belongs to a Pastor not so much to
have known many things, as to have taught much. Let it shame us, that the
basest kind of men, even Cobblers and Porters, do that which belongs unto
them, and we which ought to give light to all others, are idle and do nothing:
For God would not have us to be idle bellies, but he would have us to be
interpreters of his mind, Ministers of Jesus Christ, the light of the world,
salt, Angels, and the sons of God. --

Much more excellent matter to this purpose you may there read. And he
concludes his Sermon thus, Whatsoever we are able by nature, whatsoever by
counsel, whatsoever by wit or cunning, let us bestow it all to serve the Church
of God -- If we be the Brethren of Christ, let us hear Christ, let us feed his
Lambs, let us feed his sheep, let us go, let us preach, let us teach --

And Mr. Doctor, this great office of preaching is mightily hindered by
non-residence and pluralities, by reason, of which the Church is pestered with
a generation of silly Curates, who can scarce read the Common Prayer, or an
Homily as they should, who neglect preaching, which Bishop Jewel complains of
as a sure inlet to Popery, in his Sermon upon Joshua 6. from these words, Now
Jericho was shut up, etc. page 14. But when, says he, we see the great
blindness and ignorance in all places abroad: (how could you, Mr. Doctor, so
admire the face of the Church of England, page 123. part 2. when you see her so
blind, for this Sermon was either preached before Queen Elisabeth, or at Paul's
Cross in her Reign) what hope may we have to see Jericho (he means Rome)
suppressed or quite overthrown? It cannot be, but great inconveniences shall
follow in the Church of God, as confusion of Order, and dissolution of life, to
the indangering of the State, unless by godly care of the Magi strates, some
help be provided. This care must show it self in removing blind Watchmen, who
have no knowledge ( he does not say, that cannot read the Common Prayer) who
are but dumb dogs that cannot bark, who lie and sleep, and delight in sleeping.
These greedy dogs can never have enough, faith the Prophet Isaiah.
Non-residence and absence from their Cure, is a fault that would be amended in
the Shepherds of the Lords flock* Though they be never so able to instruct, and
therefore worthy to have the Rooms in the Church, yet if they have not a desire
to do good, if they feed not Christ's sheep, if they be strangers to the people
of their charge, if they be not at hand to give their flocks their bread in due
season, what let may here be ( the Common Prayer could not prevent it) but that
ignorance and blindness shall grow and increase in the people.

Another fault, says he, no less hurtful to the Church of God, is the
suffering of Pluralities, when one man takes the profit of two or more
Benefices, which is not worthy of one. These Non-residents and Plurality-men
teach not, they know not, nor care for the people of their charge; they have
brought this confusion ( do you see, Doctor, what a glorious Church we had in
the time of Queen Elisabeth?) and shame into the House of God, they are blind
guides, they are the darkness of the world. Against those which are such, God
shows his heavy displeasure, Ezekiel. 34. Ier. 2. Ier. 10.

These either be a Remnant ( do you see, Sir, we are not yet fully reformed) of
the wicked inhabitants of Jericho, (i.e. Rome) that resist the passage of Gods
people ( we are yet in the Wilderness, Doctor) toward the Land of promise --
These be they that seek the restoring of Jericho, (do you know no such in the
Convocation Sir?) and the over throw of Jerusalem; therefore the curse of God
will fall upon them, the blood of Gods people shall be required at their hands,
because they bring the abomination of desolation into the holy place, because
they suffer Christ's flock to perish for lack of knowledge -- God grant ( Amen)
all such, that they may see with their eyes, and understand with their hearts,
and know the gracious goodness of the Lord* that the people be not through
their negligence like Horse and Mule; but that they may discern between
darkness and light, and between Jericho and Jerusalem. --

Let us go on, Mr. Doctor, to his next Sermon to this, about Jericho, upon
Haggai cap. 1. V. 2, 3, 4. Thus speaks the Lord of Hosts, saying, This people
say, that the time is not yet come, that the Lords house should be builded, etc.

After much excellent matter, which you may there read, page the fifth, he
speaks thus, What greater disorder can be in the Church of God, then when
Antichrist shall come and sit in the place of God? I know many are offended to
hear the Pope pointed out for Antichrist, and think it an uncharitable point of
doctrine; therefore I refrain to use any such names, and only will report to
you of others, by what tokens Antichrist may be known when he comes. Gregory,
as it were in the Spirit of Prophecy, writing against John Bishop of
Constantinople, says, Rex superbiae prope est, and quod dicinefas est,
sacerdotum est praeparatus exercitus: The king of pride is at hand, and which
is unlawful to be said, an army of Priests is prepared; by these tokens, says
Gregory, you may know him, he shall be the Prince of pride, and he shall have
an army of Priests to wait upon him. In another place he says, Quisquis se
universalem sacerdotem vocat, vel vocari desiderat, in Elatione sua
Antichristum praecurrit: Whosoever calls himself the Universal Priest* or
desires so to be called in the pride of his heart, is the forerunner of
Antichrist -- When the woman of Samaria saw the Miracles that Christ had done,
and heard some men doubt whether he were the Messiah or no, Why, quoth she,
when Messiah shall come, shall he do more signs then this man has showed? So
may we say by the Bishop of Rome, when Antichrist shall come* shall he work
more signs, then they of that See have done? Shall he work more disorder in the
Church? Shall he do more to the dishonor of God, and against Christ?

We desire you would at your leisure read page 480, 481. of his Defense, and
page 365. where, and in many other places, you will find this Right Learned
Prelate not so shie, as in this Sermon, to pronounce the Pope Antichrist. And
we put this Reverend Bishop in the scales with Gr. Williams Bishop of Ossorie,
and leave it to you to judge who weighs heaviest in in this point: If one be
as you call him, Right learned, then the other must be Wrong.

Let us go on Sir, with this Sermon, page 8. Here says he, must I touch the
causes that withhold men from the building of Gods Temple*

The first seemed to be despair of the cause, for they saw it was a long travel
from Babylon to Jerusalem. --

Others charged them with sedition, and said, if these men may once recover
their City, they will pay no more tribute -- Look in your Chronicles, and you
shall find that the Jews have ever been traitors.

Even so when the man of God Luther, was raised up by God to reform the
Church, a friend of his said unto him: O Father Luther, you shall never be able
to prevail, the Pope and Princes and all the world are against you, the matter
is past recovery, go into your study, and say, Deus misereatur nostri. --

Even now that it has pleased God to restore his Gospel, they that are of the
contrary part (of which side are you Doctor) cry out, these men be rebels, they
would have no Magistrate, they would have all things in common, behold what
they have done in Helvetia, behold what they have done in Germany* look out
your Chronicles, you shall find that all the uproars and seditions which have
been these forty years, have been stirred up by some one of them.

But all this discouraged not the good Prince Zorobabel -- some confess many
things are out of frame, but they say it is no time to fall a building, we must
look for a general Council.

Some others say it is not yet time, the Bishops be they should redress the
Church, would to God they would; for they should be lux mundi, the light of the
world; they should be Shepherds and Watchmen, they should be builders of Gods
Church: but what if the light become darkness? What if the Shepherds become
Wolves? What if the Watch men lie asleep? What if the builders become
overthrowers? Jeremy says, the Pastors have overthrown the Vineyard, and is it
likely they will rear it up again? I pray God lighten their hearts with his
holy Spirit, and make them to be that they profess themselves to be, the light
of the world, and true laborers in Gods Vineyard, and faithful builders of his
house ( Amen).

In the mean season let us remember, that in the old Law, whenever the Bishop
grew out of order, God raised up sometimes Prophets* sometimes Princes to
reform the Church -- For the Prince is Keeper of the Law of God, and that of
both Tables, as well of the first that pertains to Religion, as of the second
that pertains to good order -- By that authority Moses rebuked Aaron the
Bishop: Ioas redressed the riot of the Priests: Solomon put down high Bishop
Abiathar, and set up Sadoc. --

After the coming of Christ, Constantine a godly Emperor, threatened the Bishops
if they would not be ruled, he would take upon him to see them punished, as
having indeed authority and power over Bishops. --

Other impediments there be that keep men from building of Gods house, but that
which God complains of by the Prophet, is, that every man fell to build his
own house, and left the house of God unbuilded. --

Oh that Aggeus the Prophet were now alive and saw the rearing up of Gods
Temple here in England! (he does not mean the repairing of Paul's Church, but
teaching and feeding Gods people) what, think you, he would say, You build your
own houses, and leave the house of God forsaken: nay he would say, you build
your own mansions, and pull down the house of God.

The Masters of the work* build Benefice upon Benefice, and Deanery upon Deanery,
Note.
as though Rome (note, Sir) were yet in England. The poor flock is given over
to a Wolf, the poor children cry out for bread, the bread of life, and there
is no man to break it to them.

The Noble man or Gentleman, the Patrons of Benefices, give presentations of
Benefices, either to be Farmers themselves, or else with exception of their own
tenths, or with some other condition that is worse then this. The poor Minister
must keep his house, buy him books, relieve the poor, and live, God knows
how, and so do you too.

O good my Lords and Brethren, I come not hither to be a patron for money
matters God sees my heart, before whom I speak it: but I see Gods Temple by
this means is forsaken --

There lack Ministers throughout the Realm, to teach the people (here is not a
word (Sir) of the Liturgy) and to build up the walls of Gods Church, one poor
hireling is driven to serve two or three Parishes -- If there be none to be
found, nor hope of any to be hereafter: be you well assured ( good Doctor
consider this) that Acts of Parliament and Proclamations are not enough to
content the conscience of the people, and to build up the Temple.

Oh that the Queens Majesty knew the great scarcity, and miserable need of
Ministers that is abroad! And I beseech you, good my Lords, and other
Honorable and Worshipful that are here, that have or may have access unto her,
to put her in remembrance, that her Grace will be mindful of the house of God,
and redress the greediness, both of corrupt Patrons, and of such who ingross
and gather into their hands many livings, being themselves the remnant ( do you
see Doctor) of the ignorant and persecuting Babylon; and yet leave to take
charge over the people; blind Sir John's, not only lack Latin, Note.
but lack honesty, and lack conscience, and lack Religion. It would be a great
furtherance to the Church of God ( Doctor commend the care of this to the Con
vocation) and a wonderful way to increase Schools and the Universities. Now I
come (says he) to the manner of the building. And what better way can be
devised to restore Christ's Church ( Doctor tell the Convocation so) then that
we see used by Christ himself; when in any matter he was opposed by the
Pharisees, he calls them back to the Scriptures; so Josias, so Ezechias, so
Iosaphat reformed the Temple of God when it was polluted, according to the
pattern of the Scri ptures. --

Wherefore the foundation of this building whereupon all the whole work must
rest, See Dugdales History of Paul's Cathedral. p. 5.
must be Christ and his holy World. --

Whatsoever we see that they have done which were our latter Fathers before us,
that have destroyed Christ's Church, let us remember to do the contrary ( note
Sir*) Their founda tion is ignorance, let our foundation be Christ and the
knowledge of Gods' Word -- They build Gods Word upon the Church: let us as Paul
does teach us, build the Church on Gods Word. --

Let us remember whatever they do or have done, to do the contrary.

Consider this last passage (Mr. Doctor) you have little reason to find such
fault with Sir* Stephen (as you call him, page 93. part 1.) or with other
Reformers since, who were desirous to be as contrary to Rome as the Word would
warrant them: if it were a peccancy of humor, a right learned Prelate would
not have advised to it.

This precious Jewel sparkles once more concluding his Sermon with a sharp
reproof, and moving exhortation.

We are in love (says he) with our own corruption, and as the people says, we
rejoice when we have done wickedly; we cannot abide to have our faults touched,
our pride is grown up as high as heaven, and our covetousness is sunk as deep
as hell: our poor weak brethren be offended, and think that these be the very
fruits of Christ's Gospel; yet we can in no wise suffer to be reproved, we say
to the Preacher, Peace, and talk not to us in the Name of the Lord, tell not us
of the Scriptures, tell not us of Christ, of Peter, and Paul; We bid him speak
us fair, and bless those things that be accursed by Gods own mouth: We say, he
is too busy, he medleth with that he knows not. Yes, yes man he knows it
well enough, he knows that pride is pride, that sin is sin, and thou and
thine own conscience knows it too, if thou would be known of it, and this
is extreme misery that we are so far plunged in sin, that we can neither abide
our own faults, nor yet the amending of them. Are these the fruits of Gods
Gospel? Are these the fruits of the innocent blood, that we see shed before our
eyes? Are these our tears for the sins we have committed? Are these the thanks
we render unto God for giving unto us so great blessings? But, what said I,
blessings? would God we were so blessed that we might consider our
blessedeness. Many already bewray the weakness of their stomachs, they brook
not the Gospel, yea they seem already weary of these Preachers, they call them
Pulpit-men of the Spirit, and I know not what; as though they themselves had
nothing to do with Gods Spirit. Ah merciful God -- and so this blessed Bishop
goes on most excellently and seasonably for our times.

In the following Sermon upon these words, Psalm. 69. 9. The zeal of thine
house, etc. he has these words.

All men ought to be patient and gentle in matters pertain ing to themselves;
but in Gods cause no man must yield or be patient, where all along he presses
for a learned and Preaching ministry, but not a word for the Common Prayer.

He directs his speech to Queen Elizabeth. Oh that your Grace did behold the
miserable disorder of Gods Church ( where is your glorious reformation, your
goodly building Mr. Doctor?) or that you might foresee the calamities that will
follow. It is a part of your Kingdom, and such a part as is the principal prop
and stay of the rest. I will say to your Majesty, as Cyrillus sometimes said to
the godly Emperor Theodosius and Valentinian, Ab ea quae erga deum est pietate,
reipublicae vestrae status pendet, the good estate and welfare of your
Commonwealth hangs upon true godliness: you are our Governor, you are the
nurse of Gods Church, we must open this grief before you. God knows if it may
be redressed, We say also help O King.
it has grown so long, and is run so far; but if it may be redressed, there is
no other besides your Highness that can redress it.

I hope I speak truly, Fully verified in our gracious King.
that which I speak without flattery, that God has endued your Grace with such
a measure of learning and knowledge as no other Christian Prince. He has given
you peace, happiness, the love and true hearts of your Subjects. Oh turn and
employ these to the glory of God, that God may confirm in your Grace the thing
which he has begun. --

Let us follow him to his next Sermon on these words, Mat. 9. 37, 38. The
harvest is great, but the laborers are few, etc. -- He says not the harvest
is great, and there are but few Scribes, but few Pharisees, but few Sadduces,
but few Priests, but few Levites. -- Their number was almost infinite. --

I say not, there be but few Cardinals, few Bishops, few Priests that should be
Preachers ( not Common Prayer Book men, Sir) few Archdeacons, few Chancellors;
few Deans, few Prebendaries, few Vicars, few Parish Priests, for the number of
these is almost infinite -- Cardinals have Pillars and Poleaxes carried before
them in token that they be Pillars and Stays of the Church, and Poleaxes to
beat down all evil doctrine. And what shall I speak of Bishops, their cloven
Miter signifies the perfect knowledge of the Old Te stament and the New: their
Crosier staff signifies their diligence in attending the flock of Christ.
Their purple Boots and Sandals, signify that they should be ever Booted and
ready to go abroad through thick and thin to teach the Gospel ( not a word of
the Liturgy, or ordering of Churches or Ceremonies.) --

O lift up your eyes, and consider how the hearts of your poor brethren lie
wast without instruction ( had they not the Common Prayer?) without knowledge,
without the food of life, without the comfort of Gods word, such a misery as
never was seen among the heathens -- ( where is your Primitive luster Mr.
Doctor?) --

In such a state as a flock is in, which has no Shepherd, as the ship which
has no Pilot to guide it, or the sucking-child which has no nurse to feed it;
even in such state are your souls, if you have not the Ministry of Gods Word.
--

Laborers they must be and not loiterers, for Christ compares the teaching of
his people to things that be of great labor, as to plowing, to planting --

Therefore if they be Pastors, let them feed the flock; if they be Doctors (
consider Sir) let them teach the people --

This is the way to build up the Church of Christ ( Commonprayer will not do
it) --

This is the only instrument wherewith we may cut down and have in the harvest
of God.

For all man's devices, acts, laws or commandments ( good Doctor let the
Convocation know so much) be the authority thereof never so great, yet are not
sufficient to content one man's conscience ( why then, Mr. Doctor, do you talk
of obstinacy and wilful humor?)

Aristotle the great wise Philosopher on a time being sick, when the Physician
came to him to minister him a potion, and showed him not what was in it, began
to chafe and take on with him, why said he, heal not me as thou wouldft heal an
Ox or a Horse, but show me what thou give me. Even so must the people be
healed of their errors. Fides, faith Ber^. suadenda est non imponenda, faith
may not be compulsed by force or rigor, but gently brought in by persuasion.
Saint Paul says, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God.

Let us follow him in his next Sermon, on Luke 11. 15. He casts out Devils
through Beelzebub, etc. --

The Religon of the Jews, was the true worship of the only God, yet Pliny
says, it was Contemptus omnium numinum, the despsing of all the gods. The Jews
suffered no images to be in their Churches, (because God had forbidden them)
yet Cornelius Tacitus said, they worship their God in the form of an Ass;
others said, they worship a God whom they call Sabbath, in the shape and
fashion of an Hogg; and therefore that they were forbidden to eat Swines-flesh;
others, that they worship Saturnus, because they were com manded to keep holy
Saturday.

The wicked and cruel Haman, to bring the people of God into hatred with the
King Ahashuerus, made his complaint of them in this wise, May it please your
Majesty, says he, to understand, you have a people here in your Realm, that
uses a new kind of Religion, and will not be ordered by your Graces Laws --

This is Gods holy will, that for our exercise, whatsoever we say or do, be it
never so well, it shall be ill taken.

Julian the Apostate, found fault with the simplicity and rudeness of Gods
Word.

Tertullian says, the Heathens in the time of the Primitive Church, were wont
to paint out in mockery, the God of the Christians, with an Asses head and a
Book in his hand, in token that the Christians professed learning, but indeed
were Asses, rude and ignorant. And do not our Adversaries the like this day,
against all those that profess the Gospel of Jesus Christ? O, say they, who are
they that favor this way? None but Shoemakers, Tailors, Weavers, Appren tices,
such as never were in the University, but be altogether ignorant and void of
Learning. Thus you have been born in hand, that you might be brought to
mistrust the Go spel. --

Saint Paul was counted a pestilent fellow, and a mover of sedition.

Tertullian says, that in his time the Christians were called hosts publici,
that is, enemies and destroyers of all common States. And these reports they
did not only scatter among the common people, but also dropped them into the
Magistrates and Princes ears, that they might have an ill opinion of Christian
Religion, and suppress ( Note Sir) the Ministers and Preachers of it. So unkind
commonly men have been, toward the Messengers of Gods Word.

In these latter times it has been laid to Preachers and Professors of Christ's
Gospel, that they have been Godless, seditious, rebels, despisers of good
orders -- Such things as would not be believed, spoken of a thief or murderer,
will soon be believed of him that professes the name and Gospel of Jesus
Christ. --

Despise not, good Brethren, despise not to hear Gods Word, ( not a word of the
Liturgy) as you tender your own souls, be diligent to come to Sermons. --

WE might, Sir, have been much more plentiful in our gatherings out of this
holy Bishop, there is not a waste line in all his Sermons. Some we have not
touched upon at all, but so much we thought good to present unto you, that you
may see both the complexion and constitution of the Church of England in the
time of Queen Elisabeth. You see by the judgment of the best Bishop (the
rarest Jewel the Church of England ever had, who was an eyewitness, lived, and
preach ed, and writ in the prime of his age, for he was not full fifty years
old when he dyed) a good part of her reign, the Church of England to be full of
blindness, disorder, profane con tempt of the Word of God, yea to have
something of Rome remaining in her, of necessity to be purged out.

And truly, Sir, when we have read over the Sermons of this Reverend Bishop,
and your History, we should rather judge you to be the Pupil of Doctor Harding
(whom you would be thought to oppose) then of Bishop Jewel, whom you do seem to
reverence. Bishop Jewel does not think he fouls either his tongue or his pen,
in naming the Gospel of Jesus Christ: But how often in your History, do you by
way of scorn, tell us of the Zuinglian Gospellers, as if this were some
reproach to them, and you had nothing to do with the Gospel; which in an hun
dred places your Doctor Harding upbraids Bishop Jewel with?

There are some parcells and odd passages in your History, which we shall only
mention, and refer you to learned Jewel to answer your self out of him; page
53. part 1. you say, The Zuinglian Churches were in an error, in that they deny
ed a Real presence, and held there was nothing else in the blessed Eucharist
but signs and figures; and that Ridley, whom you incline to, affirmed, That in
the Sacrament are truly and verily, the body and blood of Christ made forth
effectually by Grace and Spirit. Sir, Harding says the very same as you do.
See Jewels reply to Harding, page 235* in the Article of Real presence; and
there you shall see, how* Jewel takes him up; and you will understand to speak
more like a Protestant Doctor; and in page 262. of the Defense, says he to
Harding, You call our doctrine naked and cold, for that we say, the Sacrament
is a figure. You will there see how pitifully he baffles Harding. Mr. Doctor,
it was wont to be said, sursum corda, but now it is deorsum corpora, your
stickling for a Real presence effectually made forth by Grace and Spirit, does
very well sort with your low postures and cringings to the holy Altar, which
was a thing unknown to Bishop Jewel. You shall find these words in his answer
to Mr. Hardings Preface, page 5. You say we have overthrown Altars, verily Mr.
Harding, we have overthrown nothing, but that which Gods good will ( note Sir)
was should be overthrown. Christ says, Every plant that my heavenly Father
has not planted, shall be rooted up. An Altar we have, such as Christ and his
Apostles had, the Table of the Lord, and stood not at the end of the Quire, but
in the midst of the people, Note.
as many ways it may appear --

You say also, page 140. part 2. That the Zuinglian Gospel lers, or the
Genevian party ( why cannot you call them Prote stants?) did rejoice at a
lamentable accident which happened to Paul's Steeple; and there you fall into
the praises of that Idolatrous Fabric; and to quit it of the displeasure of
heaven, you have got a tale by the end, of an old Plumber, who confessed, that
woeful accident came by his negligence, in leaving carelessly a pan of coals in
the Steeple when he went to dinner.

We shall be as careless of examining the truth of this story, as your plumber
was of his coals; and shall only tell what Jewel says in his Treatise of the
Holy Scriptures, (bound up with the Defense) page 30* speaking of Kingdoms and
Coun tries, See Dugdales History of Paul's Cathedral* page 3.
which were in times past Heathenish, mentions England also, and says he, Here
in England, Paul's Church in `London was the Temple of Diana, Peter's Church in
Westminster was the Temple of Apollo --

In ten of your last lines, you threaten the world with a Presbyterian History,
for the carrying on of whose designs since the days of Calvin, (you may say
Luther as well) they have most miserably, you say, imbroyled all the States and
Kingdoms of these parts of Christendom, the Realms and Churches of great
Britain more then all the rest. Mr. Doctor, where was your conscience and
modesty when you writ thus? Where was your Loyalty and Obedience to your Dread
Sovereign, which you profess in your Epistle Dedicatory? Will not your bitter
spirit be conjured down, neither by Royal command, nor Sovereign example?

Sir, you know, or may know, that Bishop Jewel is fain to Apologize for the
Church of England, to wipe of that slander you have cast upon the
Presbyterians, page 10. of his Defense. They cry out upon us (faith he) at this
present every where, that we are all Heretics, and have forsaken the Faith,
and have with new persuasions and wicked learning utterly dissolved the concord
of the Church. And again, page 15. That we labor and seek to overthrow the
state of Monarchies and Kingdoms. Nay Sir, do not you shake hands with that
Varlet Harding, page 18. Before Luthers time says he, ( before Calvin's time
say you) all Christian people came together peaceably into one Church, in one
accord, but after, etc.

That which this Reverend Bishop returns to Harding, by way of answer to these
filthy slanders, will very well serve to take out that blot your unhappy and
uncharitable pen flings upon the Presbyterians. We will not justify the seats
and passions (oppression makes a wise man mad) of every individuum of that
persuasion, but having been all this time rather standers by then actors, and
seriously weighing their rule by which they desire all Church concernments may
be regu lated, and considering that you, as the mouth of the Hierarchy, have
pleaded nothing but two Acts of Parliament (the Members whereof, you more then
once tell us were led mostly by politic and Popish considerations in what
they did) for authorizing and confirming all the matters in difference, we are
bold to say; they are got upon the better ground, (though the wind be against
them) and their advantages for inward peace (though not for outward
preferments) are so much greater, as the Word of God is greater then an Act of
Parliament, and the authority of God, then the authority of men.

Oh, Mr. Doctor, when shall the voice and authority of Christ be heard and bear
sway in the Church of God? Non est Ecclesiae loqui ( says Beza) sed meritum
loquentem audire* ( Good Mr. Doctor, consider these words of Beza in his
Epistle Dedicatory before his Annotations on the New Testament) Hic vero mihi
in mentem venit vox* illa hominum (ut sibi quidem videntur acutissimorum) qui
non transformandam sed reformandam Ecclesiam arbitrantur. Reformationem vocant,
eorum rituum (qui florente, ut loguuntur, Ecclesia obtinuerunt; sublatis
nonnullis, quae temporum injuriae velut rubiginem quandam ills obduxerunt)
restitutionem: Quae nisi a nobis admittatur, Ecclesiam transformari, and
penitus suo decore ( Note Sir) privari contendunt. Bella certe and speciosa
oration, sed a satanae spiritu profecta, qui tum demum se prodit, quum adrem
ventum est. Note.
Tum enim nihil adeo turpe est -- Quod si qui objiciat no omnia ab Apostolis
vel a Luca fuisse perscripta. Quaeso cur ita censent? An quia pauca continent?
Imo vero utinam ea paucitate contenti fuissent, qui se Apostolis jactant
successisse. Neque enim voluit abrogari Dominus Mosaicos ritus, Note.
ut alii substituerentur, etsi Iudaiz^re non licuit, multo minus Gentilizare
oportuit; quod si veteribus Episcopis in mentem venisset, Christiana religio
neque tam cito neque tam turpiter, Note.
primum ( Note Sir) in Ceremonias vanas, and Ludicras Liturgias, deinde etiam
in manifestissimam superstitionem, ac tandem in Atheismum degenerasset --

Mr. Doctor, we are sorry, that having travailed over your History, we must
say of you, as Reverend Jewel said of Harding in his Preface to the Reader of
his Defense, When Scriptures fail, then discourse of wit must come in place (
of your Acts of Parliaments) and when wit and discourse will not serve, then
good plain round railing must serve the turn* Then he discourses and flingeth
now at his Lutherans; now at his Hugenotes; now at Brown; now at the Puritans*
now at Bale; now at Illyricus (Now at the Calvinists* now at the Zuinglian
Gospellers*)

Thus he, says Jewel, jumpeth and courseth this way and that way, as a man
roving without a mark, or a Ship fleeting without a Rudder. Thus he shows us
a mountain of words without substance, and a house full of smoke without fire
and imagines that his little Elder-pipe, by discourse of (...) will resemble
the sound of a double Canon. When (...) we may say of him, as the poor man said
that shore (...) Here is a great cry, and little wool.

Bring us but the authority of Scripture (that wisdom that is from above) to
justify our obedience in these points in difference, you shall find us gentle
and easy to be entreated* But if you resolve to turn us off (as you say Weston
did Mr. John Philpot, and the five other Divines, page 30. part 2) It is not,
says he, the Queens pleasure, that we should spend any longer time in these
debates, and ye are well enough already, for you, says he, have the Word, and
we have the sword, if you resolve to assault us with this Argument, the Lord
put on you the bowels of mercy, and on us the Armor of patience.

FINIS.

