A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Timotheus and Judas, Concerning a Pamphlet called, The
Growth of DEISM in England.

A DIALOGUE Between Timotheus and Judas, Concerning a PAMPHLET, CALLED, The
Growth of Deism in England.

LONDON: Printed for S. Manship at the Ship in Cornhil, near the
Royal Exchange, MDCXCVI.

TO THE READER.
ABout the middle of June last, a Gentleman put into my Hands a Pamphlet,
called, The Growth of Deism in England; but withal told me, that he had
borrowed it, upon promise to restore it with speed, and therefore could allow
me just time to peruse it; and so I did, and that was all. My Curiosity leading
me to a further and more ferious perusal of it, I sent with what speed I could
to London, for one of those Pamphlets, but could not get one till July the
18th. As Soon as I had received it, and read it once or twice, I believed that
the Author's Travels in his Youth had spoiled him, and so much corrupted his
Christianity, as not to leave him the Morals of an Honest Infidel. What his
Modesty, his Truth and Charity are, his Pamphlet tells us plainly enough, What
his Religion is, I wish he himself could tell. If we should allow him to be a
poor deformed By-blow of Socinus, we do him great Honor. But who can guess
what, or who he is? He has more Disguises on than Father Greybeard had on the
Scaffold in 48. Jan. 30. Whether that Man be still living or no, who can tell?
But however that be, the Author of the Growth of Deism has undertaken the like
Jobb of Journey-work again, excepting only, that his Master has enlarged his
Commission to the Execution of the whole Body of Christianity, with its Prince,
or (as he calls him Page 17.) its Patron. I had sent this abroad a little
sooner to beg the Honor of its being admitted into his Numerous Acquaintance,
but I feared, being upon his Travels in making his Summer-Visits, it might not
find him: But the Season of the Year approaching now, that will call him to his
Winter Quarters in London, I thought it good Manners to send this forth a
little beforehand, to wait him there, and Congratulate his Return.

A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Timotheus and Judas Concerning a Pamphlet, called the
Growth of Deism in England.
Judas. SIR, next paying my Respects to you after your Return Home, the chief
of my business is, to have your Judgment of a Pamphlet lately written, called,
The Growth of Deism in England.


Tim. I just saw, and heard of it Sir, in my Journey, and that was all.


Judas. Bless me Sir! It has been abroad several months, and written with that
smartness of Style, and quickness of Wit, that I am amazed to hear you say, you
did not hear of it before.


Tim. If you could have added Evidence of Truth, and Strength of Argument, it
had been never the worse. But you know Sir, that I live a Retired Life, and
that I have neither Time, nor Money (like that Author) to Contract a Numerous
Acquaintance, to spend the Winter in Town, and the Summer in Country Visits.
There may be a thousand Books Printed, and I never hear of One of them. And it
was mere chance only, that ever I heard of this.


Judas. But pray Sir, what is your Judgment of it, for I presume you have read
it since your Return.


Tim. Once or twice I have Sir; enough in Conscience to see through the Authors
both Honesty, and Argument. But because I do not much trust to my own Judgment
in any thing, I will (if you please Sir) wave mine a while, and give you an
honest Gentleman's Opinion of it, who was with me lately, and who had scanned
it narrowly.


Judas. With all my Heart Sir.


Tim. Asking then his Judgment Sir, of it, he told me, that it was ominous to
stumble in the Threshold. When I read Sir (said he) the Title of that Pamphlet
of the Growth of Deism, I expected to have heard of Arguments to invalidate all
Revelation. I expected to have heard of Sampson's Locks and Balaam's Ass in the
Old Testament, and of as many Absurdities in Matters of Faith, and Falsehoods in
Matters of Fact in the New. I believed he would have proved its inconsistency
with the Chronology, and History of those Times in which it was written, of its
prescribing Mysteries to be believed, which were contradictory to common
Understanding, and of matters of Practice, which were so to common Morals; I
expected to have heard that the Apostles were no proper Judges of the Matters
of Fact they delivered, that they were corrupted either through Interest, or
Design, or rendered Incompetent through Ignorance, or Profligate Lives, and by
consequence, that their Testimony could not be supposed to pass in any Court of
Judicature in the World, and that for the same Reasons we might reject the
Validity of it too. This I say, I looked for (at least) from this Man when I
read the Title to his Pamphlet (for I expected Pertinence, and not Design) but
instead thereof, out comes a Mouse at last, and tells me, that there are a
parcel of Men amongst the Clergy of England, that do not live so good Lives as
they should do; as if (said he) there were any Body of Men in the World that
did; and that our Savior had not expressly foretold, that to the End thereof,
there would be Tares mixed with the Wheat.

Sir said I, methinks there cannot be a weaker and more Ridiculous Argument
brought against the truth of any Doctrine, than the ill Lives of some of its
Professors. For if there be any Force in it, there is (with Christianity) an
End of all Religion in the World (for none are without some Men of bad Lives)
and all Mankind (if this Argument be good) must with one dead weight sink into
downright Atheism.

To which my Friend replied, and who knows Sir, says he, what hidden Reserve
this Man had when he made use of it? But Sir (said I) it may be, if this
Author's Life were narrowly inspected into, that it might be found no very good
Argument for the Truth of that Religion (whatever it be) that he himself
professes. To which my Friend returned: We ought Sir, to have better grounds to
believe it is, than he has given us in this Pamphlet; for Diabolical Slanders
and Malice (said he) are but poor Arguments of a Good Life. But when all is
done (said my Friend) if the bad Lives of some of the Clergy of England are an
Argument against the Truth of Revelation, the Lives of those that are good,
must by a Parity of Reason be an Argument for it, and except, said he, that
this Man is lost to all Shame, and Modesty, he cannot deny, but that there are
abundance of the Clergy of England, that live answerably to their Faith.

Upon this I interposed a little, and said, you seem, Sir, to me to be much
mistaken. For this Gentleman does not say, that these Arguments have made him a
Deist, but some of his Acquaintance.

To which he replied, The Monky, Sir, you know, pulled the Nut out of the Fire
with the Cats Foot, but both the Action and Design was wholly the Monky's, and
not the Cat's; and this Gentleman makes so many ugly Grimaces through his whole
Pamphlet, against all Christian Churches, as well as that of England, that it
is an easy Matter to see who was Master of this Movement. It Is true (said he)
he does sometimes seem to boggle a little at the Deists Arguments brought
against the Truth, and in Scandal of the Christian Religion, but he does it
after such a yawning rate, that you would believe he were more than half
a-sleep when he did it.

But however it be as to that matter, yet all they bring against the Church of
England, he swallows whole, and does not only allow, but improve them. So that
whatver Disguises he would appear under in other Respects, yet all that is said
against the Church of England is plainly his own, and ought to be so esteemed.
And therefore (said he) let him put on as many Skins as he will, we see his
Ears still, as the Man knew well enough who it was that stunk, though the Woman
said 'twas her Dog.

But pray Sir, said I, how can this be? When, Page the 8th. we are told that he
belongs to the Church of England, and that it was well for him he was of the
Bishop's Church, for without a dutiful Allegiance to the Bishops he could not
hold the Place he now enjoys.

I am glad Sir, said my Friend, to hear, that some Men may hold Places under
the Church of England, that are not of the De Facto-ship. And this is the only
Instance (I think) (though I believe much against his Will and Knowledge) that
he has confuted the Objections he made by the Deists against the Church of
England. For by this Instance he has let the World see, that a Man may hold a
Place, and yet pay very small Duty to the Bishops. Not that I doubt, said he,
but that he is old enough to hold a Place under any Church whatever, and be
their Shiboleth the Jure Divino, or De Facto, or any other Title, he is wise
enough to hold fast what he has; only it may be, he had rather their Shiboleth
were the Title of the People, that so the King might hold his Place under him.
And as for his belonging to the Church of England, he may, Sir, said he, for
all as I know, if you will allow Judas to belong to Jesus and the twelve, or
Ascarides to belong to the Body of a Man. After he had said this, Sir (said I)
we will have done if you please with the Title, and I will beg the Favor of
you to give me your Judgment of the Body of the Discourse.


Judas. It is what I have been long a waiting for.


Tim. I tell you then Sir (said he) that if you will believe all this Author
says, you may believe enough; if only what he proves, you can believe nothing.
For if you will not take his Word for his Stories, there is an End of them, and
I dare boldly say, that take ten Pages together through his whole Book, and
there is hardly one Word of Truth in them, or if there be, it may honestly be
said of him, what he colourably says of the Deists, Page the 14th. that he
stretches his Conclusion beyond his Premises. The main of his Building is
raised on the Shiboleths (as he calls them) of the Church of England: The
Doctrine of Nonresistance, and the De Facto Title: there is a little Color of
Truth in the First, in the last there is none at all. So that if you do but
rightly state the former, and barely deny the latter, his whole Structure falls
about his Ears, and he is buried in its Ruins. The rest of his Book is (most of
it) Personal Calumniations, just said, and never proved, and for the greatest
Part as false, as the Foundations of his Building are rotten.

In short, Sir, said he, it is a Discourse written with that little Truth, and
less Argument, with that incomparable Malice against all settled Churches,
particularly that of England, against Christianity it self in all its holy
Mysteries, more especially that of the Divinity of our Blessed Savior; that I
cannot think those Papers can deserve any better Fate, than to expire in a like
Place, where the Author's famous Ancestor Arius did; and Sir, said he, I
honestly confess to you, that those I had of them, have sometimes since given
up the Ghost.

Thus Sir, you have heard (in part) the Thoughts of my Friend upon this
Pamphlet!; pray now, before we go any further, what are your Thoughts of him?


Judas. Why truly Sir, to deal plainly with you, I think him a Priest-ridden
Ass, one that has more Ears than Brains, that hears and receives whatsoever the
Priests please to put into his Head, and has no Judgment to distinguish of
things. But as for my Friend, the Author of this Pamphlet, (so I call him, for
so he is) I think him (next the Honorable S. R. H. the best Distinguisher in
the World. He had that Acumen Ingenii from his Infancy, that he was used to
slit Motes in the Sun, when he was but four Years old, and now he is above
threescore, he can, he says, slit a Hair without Spectacles.

In short, Sir, I believe, that you cannot but see, that he has distinguished
so nicely between Religion and Priestcraft, that he has made all Ambitious
Priests to stink, even from Aaron down to this Day. And has turned the Edge of
the Church of England's Caution to young Travelers, Page 5th. so sharply
against their own Throats, that he has distinguished them forever out of their
Gains that way, by making it plainly appear, that there are as many holy Cheats
amongst the Clergy of the Church of England, as amongst those of Rome.

And now Sir, since you have had my Judgment so freely of your Friend, pray let
me have yours so of mine, and of his Discourse.


Tim. I will, Sir, as far as concerns the Church of England, but no farther,
let others answer for themselves. And I will do it only on this Supposition
too, that when I charge this Author with what is said against the Church of
England, you do not reply, that it was said by this or the other Deist, and not
by him. For besides, that this would breed an endless Confusion in our
Discourse, if the Charge that is made against the Church of England be
answered, it matters not under whose Name it be done. But I cannot think of a
juster Way than doing it under this Authors, for the Cause and Quarrel is
wholly his, though like a Coward he hides his own Head; and thrusts other Men
forward to fight it for him. Do not think therefore, Sir, that in the Judgment
I shall give of, and Answer I shall make to this Pamphlet, that like a
Gladiator, I will go to fencing with half a dozen Men at once, when it is
obvious, that all the Thrusts they make against the Church of England, are
directed by this Author's Hand. Or be the Arguments whose they will, the Malice
('it is plain) is purely his.


Judas. I do not know, Sir, how my Friend may like this Dealing, but if you
will not be led, I cannot drive you, you must take your own Way.


Tim. Then Sir, to what you said last I reply, that notwithstanding what this
Author has said, blessed be God, the Throats of the Clergy of the Church of
England are pretty well yet, but how they would be if this Author had his full
Swinge at them, I cannot tell. But pray Sir, by your leave a little. Did the
Difference between the Church of England and the Dissenters in Bishop Laud's
Time, show the young Traveller upon his Return that they were both Cheats? Pray
what then Sir, must a young Traveller think now, upon his Return of the Deists,
when he shall read their bitter and malicious Invectives also against the
Church of England? Will he not think, that they now, as well as the Dissenters
formerly, are contending with the said Church about Power, and that there is
Knaves-Craft as well as Priestcraft, and that Deism is as very a Cheat, as
(they say) the Christianity of the Church of England is?

In short Sir, our young Traveller seeing all Christian Churches exploded by
these Men, and in the mean time observing so much Malice and Bitterness in
their Writings against all Persuasions but those of their own Sect, pray Sir,
what must this young Gentleman do, if this Man's Argument be good but turn
Atheist and leave them all?

Once more Sir, what if our young Traveller, upon his Return, should find an
Army of Factious Republicans in Rebellion against the King and Parliament, and
the King and Parliament in Maintenance of their just Rights and Laws in Arms
against them: Must the young Traveller presently conclude that this is only a
Contest for Power, and that the King and Parliament are as very Cheats as those
Rebels? And that their Controversy at bottom only is, How they shall make the
best Market of the People? Will he conclude that Government is nothing but a
Piece of Kings-Craft, and that Government and Governors are Cheats both alike?
Will he conclude, that, as by reason of the zealous Contest between Archbishop
Laud on the one Part, and the Presbyterian Kirk on the other, he will be of no
Religion, so by reason of these Controversies between the King and the People,
he will live under no Government? Will he therefore betake himself (as if this
Man's Argument be good he must) to Hobbs his Natural State of Independency, and
like a Bear or a Wolf, retire to Caves and Dens, and bid Defiance to all
Mankind? Or will he not rather, as he ought (and as he will, if he have made
any Improvements in his Travels) Arm himself in defense of the King and Laws of
the Land, against those Factious and Ambitious Rebels, whose only design is to
be uppermost themselves?

But to let this pass Sir, that which troubles me most is, to hear this Author
so positively affirm the Church of England to be but one Great Bulk of
Imposture, and that all her Priests to a Man (except Mr. Johnson) are so many
Knaves and Cheats; At this Rate Sir, he must believe the Church of England to
be the Church of Hell, as well as the Church of Rome, and for all as I can see
by this Charge, must have a great many more Devils in her than she has.


Judas. Why truly Sir, my Friend does verily believe the Church of England so
to be, and so he will call her, as soon as he can do it with the same security
he now does the Church of Rome. Nay Sir, I tell you further, that he believes
all settled Churches in Christendom so to be: For he tells you plainly Page 27.
That it is the trick of all settled Churches to take away the Use of Men's Reason,
to render them Slaves and Vassals to their Dictates and Commands; and what are
these pray that do so, but Churches of Hell? But particularly as to the Church
of England, he has proved it to a Demonstration, that she is so Arrant a Cheat,
that she has no other Ends, than to make her self Rich and Great.


Tim. If this be proved Sir, I am his Convert. But pray Sir, does this Author
mean, that the Church of England Cheats us of the Use of our Reason, because
she does not teach us to believe, that one of his Friends, Page 25. or rather
indeed himself, can write as good a Moral as our Savior?


Judas. We will let that pass at present Sir, if you please, and examine this
Author (as near as our discourse will permit, page by page, and if I do not
demonstrate to you, that he has made it clearly appear, that all settled
Christian Churches are but so many Cheats, but more particularly the Church of
England, I also with the rest of the Fools will give up my Reason to them.


Timotheus. If you do Sir, I am your Proselyte, and will take this opportunity
to recover the Use of mine.


Judas. We will begin with the Church of England Sir: I told you that the main
end of that Church was to make Themselves Rich and Great, nay that they do (as
my Friend says) even Rival the Sovereign Power. For the proof of this see Pages
6, 7. The Bishop's House (says my Friend) like that of the King's, must be
called his Palace, he must keep up his Claim to the Miter and Crosier, to Vie
with the Crown and Scepter. The Title of the King's Courts is Anno Regni
nostri, of the Bishops, Anno Consecrationis nostrae. In short, is the King
Enthroned? The Bishop is Enthronised; Has the King a Divine Right? So has the
Bishop, etc. And now, what think you Sir? Is not this Argument a plain
Demonstration of the Ambition and Pride of the Bishops? Is it not worth its
weight in Gold, as scarce as Money is now?


Tim. It may be Sir, for all as I know, and yet not be worth much neither.


Judas. Why do you think it is of no weight Sir?


Tim. Undoubtedly of very great, and strength too; The whole Convocation must
needs sink under the Burden of it. Another such Barrel clapped under the Church
of England would blow her up infallibly. But now I think of it Sir, this
Argument puts me in mind of two other sorts of Men, who, (if this Man's
Reasoning be good) seem as dangerous to the State as the Bishops and Clergy;
And you might do well, the next time he comes up to the sitting of Parliament,
to advise him to take them a little into his Consideraton.


Judas. Pray who are those Sir?


Tim. Why the Nobility and Lawyers, especially the Lord Chancellor and the
Twelve Judges.


Judas. But pray Sir, how do you think my Friend may make this out, for if it
can be done, I can promise for him; for next a Priest, he hates these Men at
his Heart.


Tim. Then first of all Sir, as to the Nobility he may Argue, That has the King
his Crown? so have the Nobles their Coronets: Has the King his great Palaces?
so have They: Has the King his Robes? so have They: Has the King a Coach and
Six, and a numerous Attendants of Lackyes and Foot-boys? so have they. Nay,
they have as many Ears and Eyes as the King has, and called by the same Name
too; and what is most dangerous of all, they have as many Fingers and Toes and
Nails as the King, and who knows, how soon these bold Men, may climb up into
his Throne, and scratch out his Majesty's Eyes.


Judas. Upon my word Sir, I think this is well thought on; my Friend will
improve this I Will warrant you, for he loves the Commonwealth too well, not to
hate the Nobility. But pray Sir, how shall he make it out as to the Chancellor
and Twelve Judges?


Tim. Easily enough Sir thus. Has the King his Scepter? my Lord Chancellor has
his Mace: Has the King his Purple? the Judges have their Scarlet. Has the King
his Throne? they have their Benches. Nay, Does the King wear a Doublet and
Breeches? so do these Men too; And what is worst of all, as if they intended to
starve his Majesty, these Conquering Judges have Thrust him out of his own
great Refectory or Hall, where all his Ancestors did constantly Eat and Drink,
and have there erected a Committee of Twelve, to determine of all his Majesty's
good Subjects Lives and Estates. And this Committee of Twelve, being as nimble
in wresting a Statute, as any of the Committee of Six is a Text, to their own
Advantage, get great Estates Themselves, whilst many Honest Men Live and Dye
Beggars. Nay, what is more than all this, These Conquering Twelve will not
admit his Majesty to sit in their Courts, so that his Person is as little seen,
and known there, as his Name is heard of in the Bishops: But like Moses to
Aaron, these Men make themselves Gods to the King, and say, Hitherto shall thy
Prerogative come, and no further. And what is more than this still, when these
Conquering Twelve have a mind to show their Power abroad, they take a Jaunt
once or twice a year through the Kingdom, and hang up so many of his Majesty's
Subjects, that it is to be feared, that in a little time, his Majesty will be
King but of a very small moiety of his People. And for this doughty Service of
theirs, I may honestly say (without the help of a Whetstone as in Dr. S's Case)
they have sixteen hundred pounds a year a Man, whilst Honest Mr. Johnson
Starves upon Charity.


Judas. Pray Sir, what would you advise my Friend to do in this Case?


Tim. Why your Friend may Sir (if he pleases) the next time he comes up to the
Session of Parliament, but advise his Majesty, with the Committee of Six, Page
31. to Dissolve this Committee of Twelve, and he will then be King both of the
Clergy (as he says) and Laity too. And fix the Obedience of all his Subjects on
himself exclusively: For on these two hang all their Law and their Prophets.
But were they but once Dissolved, his Majesty need but Ask and Have. Whereas
it is plain now, that these two Conquering Committees of the Clergy, and
Lawyers, cast an Awe upon the Sovereign Power, and suffers it not to provide
for the Common Good of the Subject, but will appropriate the Salus Publica, and
Influence the Government to serve their own Particular, their own Private Ends,
as this Author has most admirably worded it, page 31.


Judas. Really Sir, you have hit the Nail on the Head; and don't you fear, but
as soon as the Times will bear it, my Friend will be at the Lawyers too, as well
as the Clergy. He has given you a smart Touch of his Inclinations that way
already, page 23. where he calls the Attorney General, and Judges so many Court
Bloodsuckers, and by Consequence, as very or worse Tyrants over the Lives and
Estates of the People, than the Bishops are over their Consciences.


Tim. But now I have thought better of it Sir, I think my self bound to give
you Notice, that there may be a little Danger to your Friend from my Advice;
for the Judges are of the Fundamental Constitution of this Government.


Jud. As if my Friend did not know that the Bishops were so too. Alas Sir, I
have heard some wise Men say, that there is but One great Fundamental either in
Church or State.


Tim. Pray what is that Sir?


Judas. Every Action of your Life tells you Sir, it is Self-Interest. And can
you think Sir, so accomplished a Person as my Friend is, will be frighted only
with a Hard word, fit only for the Amusement of the Ignorant Vulgar? If he has
taken that Courage Sir, to Examine what he believes, and will not submit to
your Fundamentals in Religion, do you think he will boggle at those of the
State? Under the Rose Sir, it would make a Cat laugh to hear you talk of
Fundamentals.


Tim. Nay Sir, if your Friend shall think it is for his Interest, let him do
it, I shall not hinder him.


Judas. But pray Sir, let us look back a little. Do you not think that my
Friend has by the last Argument plainly demonstrated, that the Bishops of
England Rival (as he says) the Sovereign Power?


Tim. Truly Sir, I cannot as yet bring my self to believe, that living in a
pretty good House, with a little Honor and Power by the Bounty of his Prince,
can make a Man a King. Nor do I think that Kings would have been so weak as to
have bestowed These Honors on the Bishops, if they had believed, that at the
same they they had made so many Rivals of their Power. Methinks this Author
should have shown some Money they had Stamped, have produced some Bills they had
Past. He should have named the Ambassadors they had Sent and Received, the Wars
they had prolaimed, and the like.


Judas. The Wars they have proclaimed Sir, pray who are they at Peace with? By
the Abjuration of the Covenant and other Acts, he tells you Page the 9th, That
they proclaimed War against the Presbyterians, and beat them out of their
Livelihoods, and after that drove them five Miles distance from all
Market Towns: And that King Charles the II. was not able to support these his
Loving Subjects against the Power of the Bishops. And Page the 8th he tells
you, That by a new Church Device or Law, they have deprived the rest of the
Dissenters of the Privileges of their Country to which they were Born; and
Pages the 18th and 19th, That they have proclaimed War against the Honest
Deists too, because they will not believe Things which are in their own Natures
Absurdities, and impossible to be believed, such as the Doctrine of the Trinity
and other unintelligible Mysteries, which serve only for Amusement, and not for
Instruction. And lastly Sir, he shows you plainly, That they proclaim War
against King William, by allowing him only a De Facto Title as the Principle of
their Obedience, Page the 13th, And that this is now the Shiboleth of their
Party, as Non-resistance was formerly, and that none must be promoted to Church
Dignities, but such who come in upon this Title only. So that it is plain as is
said Page the 12th, That the Church of England is a Party, and are at War with
all but those of their own Persuasion, and have their Watchwords to know one
another, as well as their Church Devices, to destroy all others but themselves.


Tim. This is a heavy Charge indeed Sir, but a Grace of God it may not be true.
I will give an Answer to the Particulars of it by and by. But this you call
Sir, Proclaiming of War; and Rivalling of Sovereignty, do you not?


Judas. Can you doubt it Sir, is there not waging of War against Men's
Livelihoods, as well as Lives?


Tim. And against Men's Reputations as well as Lives and Estates; and would not
they (think you) that do it upon the one, do it upon the other, if it were in
their Power?


Judas. I allow it.


Tim. Then is your Friend this Author, not only a Rivaller of Sovereignty, but
the most barbarous Tyrant living.


Judas. How is that proved Sir?


Tim. By his murdering the Reputation of the Innocent without distinction of
Age or Sex, not sparing our Savior himself, from his Cross down to this day.


Judas. Pray Sir, how does this appear?


Tim. Only from his own words Page the 7th, where after he had sufficiently
scandalized the Modern Clergy, He tells us, That it is not Impossible but that
the Ancient Clergy might be possessed with the same spirit of Pride, that has
prevailed over the Modern; and who does not know what this Man means by that
word, Impossible? Nay he can hardly forbear an open Justification of the Romans
Crucifixion of our Savior himself, and punishing him (as he words it) as a
Slave. For although he covers it with this supposition, If he laid the
Foundation of the Power of the Clergy. Yet he must be blind indeed that cannot
see what this Man means here by his If's and And's. When the times will permit,
he will leave them out, and speak plainly. Jesu God! how is it, that we live to
see thy Face impudently spit in again by Miscreant Infidels, and all this
openly, in the Face of the Sun, and a Christian Government.


Judas. You mistake Sir, it is a Deist says this, and not my Friend.


Tim. I warned you of this Sir, at the beginning of the discourse; you think
your Friend is like Legion in the Gospel, but he is just the contrary. For he
himself is the Master Demon, and has power over all those Evil Spirits which
have taken up their abode in him, and has Power over them to command them to
speak what he pleases, even to the blaspheming of our blessed Lord himself.

But if this Man Sir, would have had us hearken to his condemnation of
contentious Humors, and Hostile Inclinations in others, he ought first to have
showed to us, the Peaceableness of his own. If he would have exposed the
Quarrelsome and unchristian tempers of Churchmen, he ought first to have
recommended himself by a Spirit of Meekness and Charity. Then he might with
better confidence (at least) have reproved those of the Church of England, as
he does, Page the 8th. from the breach of the second table, and might sometime
or other (it may be) have had his wish, that his Soul might be amongst the
Philosophers.

But in stead of this, he has sounded a defiance throughout this Pamphlet, not
only against the Church of England, but all other Christian Churches whatever,
and thrown as much filth upon them, as old rotten Lungs could discharge.
Whereby he has proved himself a spurious breed of Celsus, Porphyry, Julian,
etc. for he has their Spite, and Malice, he only wants their Wit and Learning.
But if this be the Religion of the Deists, Gather not my Soul O God with these
Sinners.


Judas. Pray Sir, let Harangning alone, and come to the Particulars you
promised. Does not my Friend make it plainly appear, that the Bishops and
Clergy did use the Presbyterians and Dissenters barbarously, by the Church
devices of Abjuration of the Covenant and the Test, etc.


Tim. Good Sir! what makes your Friend so sweet all on a sudden on the
Presbyterians? how comes he to appear to them like an Angel of Light in this
Page, and yet in the two immediately foregoing, to be kicking with his Cloven
Foot at them, to spurn them to death? for there he levels them with the
Bishops, and tells us that they both under a pretense of Religion were grasping
at Power, and that the Claims of the Presbytery are nothing inferior to those
of the Bishops.

So that as kind as he is to them here, yet he has given them such a Cast of
his Office, as plainly to discover to them, that were they guilty of the same
fault the Church of England is at present, that is, were they uppermost again,
he would not fail to remember them how they Imposed the Covenant as a Condition
of their Communion, as he now tells the Church of England they did the
Abjuration of it. That he would tell them then, as he does the Church of
England now, Page the 8th. That no Man could enjoy a place of Profit or Trust
under them, though never so dutiful a Subject or honest a Man, unless he had a
Conscience by their Law established, by which they deprived Men of the
Privileges of their Country to which they were born, etc. These and a great
many other matters upon occasion, I suppose this good Author could rub his old
Temples, and call to Remembrance against the Presbyterians, were they once
again uppermost, which I hate to rake in, for I have Dunghill enough before me
already.


Judas. But what is all this to the business Sir? does the Presbyterians dealing
barbarously with the Bishops and Clergy, justify their dealing so with them,
and other Dissenters? What can they say for those Church Devices of their
making, the Acts of Abjuration of the Covenant and the Test, etc.


Tim. If your Friend could make this Good, he might well say they rivall'd the
Sovereign Power. It may be he thinks he can. And (indeed) he is pretty near it;
he is within one Proposition of it; for if he can but prove that the King and
both Houses are all Clergymen, he has done his business; but till he has done
that, he has done nothing at all.

Now although I do look upon this Author to be a mere swelled Hypocondriac,
whose Spleen does not only Rival, but tyrannically domineer over the
Sovereignty of his Brain, yet I do not believe him so weak neither, but that he
knew very well what he did, and understood well enough what he said in this
Matter. He knew well enough that these were not Acts of Convocation, but of the
Parliament; but because he durst not wreak his Malice where he would, he did it
where he durst. But when all is done Sir, I believe this Author would have a
pretty hard task to prove, that our Government, as well as all other
Governments in the world, may not make Laws for the Encouragement of the
Established Religion, because he does not concur in opinion with them. And I
fear if this Man and his Friends the Deists, were once uppermost, it would be
the first work they would set about themselves. For how hard soever he bear
upon the Abjuration of the Covenant, yet he cannot but threaten the Clergy,
Page the 16th. with the Abjuration of King James; and I doubt not, but the next
thing they would hear of from them, would be, the Abjuration of Jesus Christ,
and all his unintelligible Mysteries.


Judas. And pray Sir, why may we not renounce all unintelligible Mysteries? We
must either renounce them, or our Reason, that is, our Nature.


Tim. Must we then Sir, renounce every thing that we cannot fully comprehend!
if we must, then there is an end of Deism, as well as Christianity, for there
are Mysteries in the Creation of the World, as well as the Redemption of it. If
there be not, I desire this Author the next time he comes up to the Session of
Parliament to publish a Comment on the 38th. Chap. of Job, and therein to let
us know, that though Job was so ignorant as not to be able to answer God, yet
He can; or if he cannot, (which I much doubt) let him give us a Reason, why God
may not redeem the world, with the same Incomprehensible Wisdom that he made it.

I do verily believe that God is a Spirit, and that Infinity and Eternity are
his Incommunicable Attributes, and yet I do honestly confess, that I am far
from being able to frame in my Mind a distinct, positive or adequate Idea
either of a Spirit or Eternity. If this Author can, he will do well to oblige
the world with his Notion; if he cannot, and Christianity must be turned out of
Doors by reason of its Mysteries, Deism must take it by the Hand and go with
it, and this Author must turn Atheist, and be Gentleman Usher to lead them both
forth. For why should not those mysterious puzzlings in Nature stagger his
Faith of God's Creation of the World, as well as that of the Trinity does in
God's Redemption of it? they are both alike the works of his Incomprehensible
Wisdom.

It is enough for me (methinks) that God lets us see so much of the Creation,
as to convince us, that he made us when we were Nothing; and it is enough in
the work of the Redemption, to let us know, that he Redeemed us, when we were
Lost; and from Both, to give Mankind a full Demonstration of his Infinite Power
and Wisdom, of his unspeakable Goodness and Love to them, and by consequence
the eternal Obligations they lie under to Love him again, and obey him: And
therefore, though I am not able sully and distinctly to comprehend the mystery
of the Holy Trinity, yet it is enough for me that I see many great ends and
purposes of my belief of it, in order to my eternal Salvation. And though I
declare it to be past my Reach and Understanding (and it may be if God had made
further discoveries of it, it would have been so much the more beyond my
Capacity and Comprehension) yet I think my self bound in Duty to sit down
satisfied with those God has already made, and with profound Veneration and
Thanksgiving to adore the unspeakable Love of God in the great work of our
Redemption, though I am not able to comprehend his Mysterious Wisdom therein.
And so far is this belief of the Trinity from being like (what this Author says
Page 20) the belief of one of Euclid's Elements, that I defy him to instance in
any one Mystery of the Christian Religion, which is not capable of Useful and
Practical Deductions, or to use his own Words, of Application to Moral Duties,
and thereby to make us better Men.

I know that St. John says 1 John 5.7. that there are three that bear Record in
Heaven; and these three are One. And I have that absolute deference to the
Spirit of God, to believe it. But (I fear) if St. John were now Living, and
this Author should hear him say those words, that he would make himself very
merry with him, and Ask Father John, Whether he meant three Modes, or
Properties, or Internal Relations, or External Denominations, or else no more
than a Holy three, or three somewhats, or (what is truly his meaning) three
Nothings. Or were our Savior now on Earth, and he should hear him say that He
and his Father were One, I doubt as he says Page 20. that he would either run
mad through despair of finding out the Truth, or which I rather believe, would
turn Pharisee, and endeavor to stone him to death, for making himself equal
with God.


Judas. You do not Sir, seem to me fully to take in my Friend's Argument; for
he tells you Page the 20th. That though you all agree in the belief of the
Trinity, yet you widely differ in what we must believe concerning it. Whereby
it is plain, that your differences are so great about it, that you know not
what you believe your selves; and how then shall other Men know?


Tim. It seems much to me Sir, that when there are some differences amongst
us, they should signify Every thing, but when there are more and greater
amongst the Deists, they should signify Nothing. Thus the Author of the Letter
to the Deists (a great Friend of, though (he says) no Acquaintance with the
Author of the Growth of Deism)" What says he Page 147. shall I set my self to
seek out a System of Christianity amongst their endless Disputes? Let them
first agree upon it amongst themselves; when that is done, it will be time
enough for me to consider what they say.

One would think this Author had great Reason to put his Memory into the
Gazette, with a Stolen or Strayed such a Day, from such a one, One of his
Internal Senses, etc. For it was but Page the 13th. of that Letter that he
tells us of the several sorts of Gods the Deists frame to themselves; and Page
the 14th. he says they are so many, that to expose their Notions were an
endless Task. For he doubts, he says, whether any two of them agree entirely in
one System, and by consequence he tells us (the same Page) the mischievous
Influences that all such like opinions must needs have upon the whole state of
Mankind in the world.

So that it seems all the mischiefs arising from Divisions in the world, do not
arise from Christianty only, and the Church of England, but the Deists come in
for a small share with them. And although this Author require, Page the 148. an
Universal Agreement amongst Christians in order to his belief of Christianity,
yet notwithstanding all these divisions amongst the Deists, he says, he does
still believe there is a God. And if so Sir, pray why may not the Christians
believe there is a Trinity, though some of them may differ in what we must
believe concerning it? I remember Tully says somewhere, That nothing can be a
more weak and ridiculous Charge, than such a One, which by Changing the Name
only, a Man may turn upon His Adversary. Thus changing the word Christianity
into Deism, I may say to the Author of that Letter, shall I set my self to seek
out a system of Deism amongst their endless Disputes? Let them first agree upon
it amongst themselves; when that is done, it will be time enough for me to
consider what they say.

And truly it will not be good Manners for us to go before Them, considering
what a strong Palpitation of Heart the Clergy's desire of Precedence caused in
your Friend the Author of the Growth of Deism, Page the 19. I confess, because
we are naturally most jealous of that we most love, I do not much blame your
Friend for being angry with the Clergy, if they do Rival his Mistress. But
however Sir, if one saucy Fellow of them had once in his Life (it may be) stepped
before Him, yet he ought not (methinks) (like an Italian) to carry his Revenge
down to the whole Body, to which he stands related, for his sake only.


Judas. But pray Sir, was not that pertinently alleged to prove the Pride and
Insolence of the Clergy; and could he give a better Instance of it, than that
A. one of his Majesty's Chaplains, did in the Pulpit at Whitehall abuse the
Author's Honorable Friend S. R. H. for writing a Treatise, wherein with great
Learning and Acurate Judgment, he distinguished between Religion and
Priestcraft? For to tell you the truth Sir, once more, I think the Honorable
Sir R. H. and my Friend to be the best Distinguishers in the World. So that
it is great Pity, but that Sir H. R. (at least) having, like an Old Roman,
fought so stoutly in the Defense of the Liberty of his Country, and his Gods,
and wholly vanquished the Priests of this Nation, it is Great Pity I say, but
that he like them, should have his Honorable Cognomen; and as they had their
styles of Scipio Africanus, Pompeius Magnus, etc. So he also should have of
H-us Discriminator.


Tim. With all my Heart Sir, I am no more a Rivaller of Titles, than I am of
Sovereignty. But to return to our business.

I remember Sir, that Pages the 18th and 19th this Charge you mention, of Love
of precedence in the Clergy, with a great deal more, is said, and laid against
them by this Author. Particularly, that they do not allow of Sir Matthew Hales
his Notions, nor will they suffer us to take any thing for Religion, that is
distinguished from their particular Interest. And Page the 19th, That a Man's
Churchmanship will not appear by any Mark so well, as by the Hatred he bears to
all Dissenters, and in Conjunction with a deep aversion to all the Ancient
Rights, and Just Liberties of his Native Country.


Judas. And what Answer Sir, can you make to this Charge?


Tim. No more than this Sir, that it is so grossly and scandalously false, that
this Author gives us thereby undoubted Reason to believe, that the Accomplished
Traveller he mentions Page the 6th, was none Other than Himself, who having got
an ugly Habit when he was Young, could never leave it since. For he might with
the same Truth and Charity, have charged the inhumane and bloody Barbarities
committed by his Forefathers in Dr. Cave's Seculum Arianum upon the Church of
England, or have brought in the other Arm of Arsenius, and have Sworn that he
was murdered again by the present Archbishop of Canterbury, as have laid those
things (as he has done) to the Charge of that Church.

However Sir, this I must needs say in his Honor, that I think no Man living
ever kept closer to his Text than this Author: I think he ought to have
Precedence in that Respect, of all the Clergy of England. For, for uncharitable
Censures, idle and loose Consequences, unchristian Leasings, joined with
incomparable Spite and Malice, he ought not only to have Preference of the
Church of England, but of all Mankind Living. I never heard of his Peer. Shimei
was an Ass to him; He could only Rail and Curse; but he had never Traveled,
and so was unacquainted with the great Accomplishment of impudent Lying; He was
ignorant of that Noble Maxim, Fortiter calumniare, aliquid adhaerebit.


Judas. But pray what can you say to A's abusing the Honorable Sir R. H. for
his Excellent Treatise?


Tim. Who this A. is, or wherein he has abused this Honorable Person I cannot
tell, but I presume, he is of Age, and can Answer for himself. And as for the
Honorable Sir R. H. his Book (whoever he be also, for I am no Cunning Man at
Ciphers) I have not seen it, and so can give no Account of it. But I am apt to
think, that the Niceness of these Men's distinguishing Faculties lies more in
their Pockets, than it does in their Heads; and that the Bishops deadly Sin of
Priestcraft lies chiefly in this, That they have a little Money in their Purses,
and a little Land belonging to their Bishoprics. But truly Sir, I cannot but
say to you first of all; That if these Bishops could use their Money to no
better purposes than some of these Honorable Distinguishers have done, it were
great Pity they should ever have any.

Secondly, I say Sir, that if this Author would have had us believe, that his
Friends are such nice Distinguishers in other folks Matters, he ought in order
thereunto, to have given us good Proof of their Distinguishing with a little
more Honor, than some of them are said to have done, in their own.

And lastly Sir, pray give me leave to tell you, that sometimes through an
inveterate Wont or Habit a Man may wholly lose his Distinguishing Faculty.
Thus, there was an Honorable Knight in, or near the last Age, so wonted to
Errantry, that at last he could not Distinguish between a Windmill and a
Giant; and there may be Another (for all as I know) in this, that may have been
so long accustomed to the Stage, that he may think the Priesthood, Religion,
and all things else to be Counterfeit, and may not be able to Distinguish
between the New Testament, and a Play.

Therefore Sir, let these Men put what Value and Estimate they please upon
their Distinguishing Faculty, yet I do not intend they shall measure my Opinion
of it by theirs.


Judas. Stay, Pray Sir. You are Riding on the wrong side of the Post, and must
turn back again. I am afraid you do not care to hear what I mentioned before,
of the Church of Englands prevarication in the Matter of Non-Resistance, which
was formerly, as my Friend tells you Page the 12th. the Shiboleth of their
Church, as the De Facto Title is now, none being promoted to Dignities but such
as come in upon that Title, whereby they proclaim War against King William
himself, by allowing him only a De Facto Title as the Principle of their
Obedience.


Tim. We will come to the De Facto Title by and by; in the mean time we will
talk a word or two to the Doctrine of Non-Resistance, or Passive Obedience.

Although this Doctrine of Non-Resistance was never the Shiboleth of the Church
of England, yet it always was, and is still believed by all the true and
understanding Members thereof, although not in that extravagant Latitude that
some Men would have stretched it unto.

However, as a very Judicious Gentleman observes in his True Notion of Passive
Obedience stated (who was far from subscribing to the late bewildred Notion of
some Men of Non Resistance) It is no wonder, says he, whilst the bloody and
distracting Consequences of the unjustifiable Proceedings against Charles the
Firstlay fresh in Men's Memories, and when there was a Ground of Suspicion, that
the same Tragedy was again designed in Charles the Second's Time, if the
Imaginations even of the most understanding were warmed in Opposition to such
Principles and Practices, and by a well designed Zeal were carried on to
enlarge the Notion of Non-Resistance, beyond the Limits their cooler Reasonings
would Allow.

However therefore Sir, there might be some few Men in the Late Reigns, of warm
Zeal and hot Constitutions, who observing those Evils above menzioned, did
extend this Doctrine to an unruly Latitude, yet were there many more, of cooler
Thoughts and Complexions, who never allowed it, or believed it in that
Latitude. And although they have sometimes, when they thought there was great
Occasion, Preached the Doctrine of Non-Resistance themselves, yet they did
never stretch it beyond its due Bounds and Measures. But only taught, That we
were bound either Actively to submit to the Laws of the Land; or if we could
not in Conscience do it, then Passively to submit to the Penalties, rather than
Resist. For they were fully of Opinion, That Humane Laws are, and ought to be
the Measures of our Obedience to our Governors; though Christ's Laws must be
the Measures whether this Obedience ought to be Active or Passive.

And this is the Notion of Passive Obedience, which upon the best Judgment I
can make, is contained in the Sermon of Obedience in our Homilies: If our
Author can make more or less from thence, let him do it, and thereby prove what
he says it is, Page the 12th, A Sacred Record of the Injustice of some of those
who concurred in the late Revolution. Thus Sir, you see, though some Hot, and
most of them (some few excepted) unthinking Men, mistook themselves in this
Point, yet were there a great many Others of more Cool and Sober Thoughts that
stood their Ground, and still maintained the Right. And whether the Judgment of
the Church of England be to be taken from the first, or last of these, let any
Reasonable Man judge.

And now I have dealt pretty well Sir, I trust, with this Author's great Giant,
the Doctrine of Non-Resistance, I hope we shall do well enough with his Man of
Straw that follows.


Judas. Do you call the De Facto Title then, a Man of Straw?


Tim. The Halt and the Maimed are little better; and one would think by this
Man's Writing, that he did verily believe the Clergy of England did extend
their Doctrine of Non Resistance to Him as well as the King: For no Man surely
would have brought only the Blind and the Lame into the Field, if he had
thought he should have met with any Opposition.


Judas. Good Sir, methinks this Charge of the De Facto Title seems to be sound
and whole, and of great strength. Can you deny Sir, but that this is now, what
Non-Resistance was formerly, the Shiboleth of the Church of England? And that
none are promoted to Dignities but such who come in upon this Title; as is said
Pages the 12th and 13th?


Tim. I will tell you a Story Sir. I have heard it reported of the Witches of
Lapland, that they knew very well when the Father of Liars tells them a Loud
One, by a Noisome Stench (such as they are not able to endure) which follows
immediately upon it. If the same should happen to his Sons in England, How
offensive must some Men's Neighborhood be? There would be no living within some
Furlongs of them.

If this Author had not contracted a great deal of Confidence (to say no worse)
in his Travels, how is it possible he should tell the World, that the De Facto
Title is the Shiboleth of the Church of England? He may as well tell us, that
the Jure Divino is so of an old Republican. For the Unanimous Association of
the Clergy, in defense of his Majesty as Lawful and Rightful King of England
plainly shows the contrary.


Judas. But pray Sir, how comes it to pass then, that there are none preferred
to Church Dignities, as my Friend says, but such as come in upon the De Facto
Title?


Tim. This were a Question worth asking, if there were the least shadow of
Truth in it: But he that has the Confidence to tell us this groundless, this
ridiculous Story, will tell us in the next place of the Cabbage and Caldron.


Judas. Why Sir, was not the King made to pay Fifteen Hundred Pounds a Year to
Dr. S. for a De facto-ship only? Page 13.


Tim. This Man will force us to speak out in spite of our Teeth, and to tell
him plainly to his, That if ever Impudent Lying come to be Rewarded (in
proportion) as (he says) Title-Making is, he cannot fail to have Sixteen
Thousand Pounds a Year at least: And then it is to be hoped, he will keep Mr.
Johnson from Starving.

But here, before I go any further, I cannot but Remark, that when this Author
is laying about him in his mad Fits, he makes no Conscience where his Blows
light; so that if he can but down with a Churchman or two, he does not care,
if the King fall with them.

For who that had any Regard to the Honor of his Majesty, would reflect so
basely on his Wisdom and Government? Who, I say, that had any Honor for the
King, could represent him to the World as a Prince of that Weakness and
Simplicity, to give the greatest Price, for that which is worth Nothing at all.
Nay, for that which is worse than Nothing; worse than the worst of Titles, when
he had much better, as he says, of his own before; and by which he opens a
Door, not only to let in King James, but to Turn himself out at also, at the
same time. And what is worst of all, to suffer Dr. S. to force him to do all
this.


Judas. Why has not Dr. S. done it Sir?


Tim. Bless me! What a D. of P's have we gotten, that the King at the Head of
an Hundred Thousand Men should be afraid of him. He must be more than Jesuit
Sir, that can bring this Story under the Doctrine of Probability. Rablais would
have Blushed to have put it into his History of Grangousier, and Nothing can
Match the Impudence of him that told it, but the Folly of him that believes it.


Judas. But Sir, Can you deny that Dr. S. set up a De Facto-ship?


Tim. If we do allow he has, is therefore the De Facto-ship the Shiboleth of
the Church of England? This Man Reasonings keeps equal Pace with his Stories,
and his Logic and Ethics are just of a Measure: So impossible is it for any
Man to Apostatize from Christianity, except he first turn Renegade to all
Honesty and Truth.


Judas. But pray Sir, are there any of the Clergy preferred, but such as come
in upon the De Facto Title? Does not my Friend tell you plainly there are not?


Tim. Truly Sir, if your Friend makes no more Conscience of what he does, than
what he says, his Neighbors that live near him had need to keep their Mounds
in good Repair. If there be any likelihood of Truth in this Charge Sir, why
does not this Man produce the Subscriptions required of the Clergy to this
Title, in order to their Preferment? What will he answer to their Unanimous
Associations mentioned before, in which they own King William to be Lawful and
Rightful King of England, etc. Will he tell us that none of these Associators
were preferred? Bless me! how many vacant Dignities be there then at this time
in the Church of England? Enough sure to tempt an Infidel to turn Christian, or
an old Republican to turn Churchman, and be of the De Facto ship.

But now we are talking of Title-making, pray Sir, what Title would this Man be
pleased with? The Jure Divino Title he Laughs at; the De Facto he Rails at;
that of Conquest, he says, is Cut off by Parliament; the Matrimonial Title is
dead. Pray what Title is it Sir, that this Man would have?


Judas. He tells you Sir, Page the 28th, That one of his Friends saw with his
own Eyes our Great and Gracious King accept the Crown of England as the Gift of
the People.


Tim. One of his Friends saw; that is, himself saw: Very well Sir, and so the
King's Title to his Crown must stand upon the Sandy Foundation of the Will of
Himself, and some few Republican Demagogues. Pray Sir, who leaves a Loophole
for King James his Right now? And not only for His, but for any other Man, or
Body of Men, as well as King William, when these Men shall think fit to find a
Crack in his Covenants? When it shall be wholly in their Power which shall be
Uppermost, the Head or the Rump?

Pray Sir, who Rivals the Sovereignty now? The Jure Divino Bishops, that say
God makes the King; or this Man, that says, He makes Him? Who Rivals the
Sovereignty now Sir? Those Churchmen that Tay (if you will believe all) that
his Majesty holds his Kingdoms by his Sword; or this Man that says, He holds
them from his Grant? But now I think on it, this passage of our Author
satisfies, me very well why he called the Church of Rome the Church of Hell,
Page 22. It being now manifest, that the Pope has been a damnable Usurper for
some Hundreds of Years, that Prophecy of Jer. 1.10. being never meant of Him,
but Personally of our good Author, who is the Holy Father, of whom it is said,
I have set thee this day over the Nations, and over the Kingdoms, to root out,
and to pull down, to destroy and throw down, to build and to plant.


Judas. But by your leave Sir, my Friend shows plainly, Page the 11th, the
great Reason the Church of England have to maintain this De Facto Title, for
thereby they kill two or three Birds with a Stone.


Tim. Do they so Sir? then they sat a little nearer together than your Friend
has laid his Stories: But I have shown you just now, that the Church of England
may carry her Ammunition home again; for he himself has killed them already.


Judas. Well Sir, let them be De Facto Men, or what they will, it is plain they
are Enemies to the Government.


Tim. Pray Sir, how does this appear?


Judas. From their being great Friends to the Jacobites who are so; and yet
these Jacobites find such Favor with the Bishops, that if the Livings they
lose are in the Bishops Gift, he shall present any Friend which the
dispossessed Jacobite shall recommend: Now what can be more by them desired,
than to enjoy the Profits of their Livings, and put in what Curate they please;
as is said Page the 9th.


Tim. This is another Taste of our Author's Traveling Accomplishments. But oh
these Bishops! these pestilent Bishops! How heavy do they lie upon many a good
Man's Stomach? How Sick do they make this good Author? What Convulsions, what
Vomitings do they cause in Him? Even to the casting up of his Christianity, and
all Truth and Honesty with it. What great Pity is it that the King and
Government will not destroy this Pestilent Race of Men; who have been a Part
Constitutive of it little more than a Thousand Years, that this good Author may
recover his Health again.

But pray Sir: If there be any Bishops guilty of this Man's Charge, why did he
not Name them? Why did he not tell us who they be, and where they live? Why did
he not produce the Bonds of Resignation they have taken from the Curates, and
the Articles they agreed on? He has kindness enough for them to have done it if
he could. But alas Sir. if he had descended to Particulars, he knew well enough
that those Bishops would quickly have vindicated themselves, and exposed both
the Falseness and Malice of his Charge. He knew that Knaves-Craft lay safest
under Generals, and that the unthinking Multitude would swallow this Pill
whole, as he gave it them; and since abusing of the Clergy was the Text he was
to Preach on, he was resolved not to wander from it. And whether this was done
by false and malicious Invectives, groundless and scandalous Stories, weak and
absurd Consequences, it was all one so it was done: This was the Author's great
Aim, and this was keeping to his Text. Rem Rem, quocunque modo Rem.

Thus Sir, you see this heavy Charge improved by the highest Aggravations, is
the issue only of this Author's bewildred Brain, and that there is no hurt
done, but what his unchristian Calumniations have done to himself.


Judas. But pray Sir, let me urge a Supposition to you made Page 15. Suppose
the King should bestow a Bishopric upon a De Facto Doctor, and this Doctor
should there find his old Acquaintance Dr. H. and being a Stranger in his
Diocese, should be willing to instruct himself in the Characters of Men from
the good Doctor, would it not fall out so, that the Clergy of the Diocese must
be used well or ill, as the most open and notorious Enemy the Government has,
shall design?


Tim. And pray Sir, let me have my Suppose too, if you please. Suppose this
Bishop does not meet Dr. H. there, what then? Why then there is an end of this
Gentleman's Jest. Or suppose he does meet him there, and does not ask him; why
then there is an end of the Gentleman's Argument. But suppose he does both meet
him, and ask him; must all follow what this Man says? No surely, this great
Prelate did never yet see with other Men's Eyes, or hear with other Men's Ears;
and if this Author will have us believe him, he ought to give us better Reasons
than he has yet, why he must begin now. If this Man knew of any Grievances in
that Diocese from Dr. H's Information, he will do well to Name them; if he does
not Name them, it is plain he cannot; for he has Charity enough to do it if he
could.

I only mention this Sir, to let you see, that allow this Author all the If's
and And's he can desire, yet has he not either Logic or Honesty enough to draw
from them one true Conclusion. And that it would move a Passion in Job, to hear
this Grub-street Author undervalue this great Bishop (of so profound Learning)
as a Common-Placer only, Page the 14th. whom all the Learned World admires;
between whom and this Crawling Scribler, there cannot be the Thousandth part of
Comparison for Worth and Learning, that there is for Poetry, between an
Honorable Discriminator and a Ballad-maker.

In short Sir, that which rubs this Man's Back, and makes him Kick so hard
against this great Bishop, is, That he is an unfoilable Champion for the
Divinity and Satisfaction of our Blessed Savior; and these are Sins of
Priestcraft that he will never forgive him.


Judas. But pray Sir, can you deny but that the Ambition and Pride of the
Clergy has been often the Ruin of this Government? What was it, (as is said
Page the 22th.) but the Insolence of the Priesthood that brought about Father
Laud's, and Father Peter's Revolutions? And Page 26. What an unhappy Effect had
the Spirit of Father Laud upon King Charles the First?


Tim. In answer to this Sir, I cannot but observe first of all, The Malice of
some Men to be bolder than that of the Devil himself. For they tell us they
believe, and yet they tremble at Nothing. This Author is an eminent Instance
thereof, who has not feared to keep his Spite Boiling against this good Bishop
for Fifty Years together, and by an Inhumane Barbarity (like a Wolf or a mad
Dog) is taring him out of his Grave, where he had slept in Peace for so long
time, after he had fell a Sacrifice to the Rage of such Merciless Wretches as
he is. What great Reason does this Man give us to believe, that he himself did
in his Youth, mingle his Hands in the Blood of this Sacrifice, whose Ashes he
is now throwing in the Air as the sport of his Old Age? And how does this
Wantonness in Cruelty at these years, give us just cause also to think, that
the same Hands and Heart are ready to make the like Oblation in the Blood of
the Priests of the same Church now? For the older Satan grows (they say) still
the more Devil.

Thus when Men have once lost their Christianity, their Bowels, like those of
Judas and Arius, quickly gush out, and all Pity, Compassion, and Common Charity
with them. But maugre all this Man's Spite, the Piety and Devotion of
Archbishop Laud will be Conspicuous to all Ages, of which his Diary will be an
Everlasting Monument: And if he had any Failings, it was because he was a Man.

This Author thinks he has made a notable Jest upon him, by calling him Father
Laud, and joining him in Company with Father Peter's, by which he would
insinuate that he was a turbulent Papist: But all the World knows, that this
good Bishop was no more a Papist, than this Man is a Christian. And if by being
joined with ill Company makes this Prelate any thing the worse, how bad must
this Man be, who for all as I can see, amongst his Numerous Acquaintance. keeps
no other. For if we may guess from his own Confession, Page the 5th. his
Acquaintance are but of two sorts, and the first he makes Scandalous for their
Lives, and the other for their Understandings: The first he calls downright
Atheists, Page the 5th. And Page the 14th. he makes the others little better
than Fools (as he might well enough) from their Ridiculous Reasonings. And he
himself is so outragiously mad against all settled Churches in Christendom, and
upon such weak grounds, that he seems to me to be venomously bitten by both of
them.

To conclude this Point Sir: It was not Bishop Laud's Counsel to King Charles
the First, but such Men's Counsels as this is, to the People, that brought that
good Prince to the Block.

Thus Sir, you may see from my Discourse with you on this Pamphlet, how little
Wit, joined with a good Stock of Spite and Malice, is required, to abuse the
best of Men, and best of Causes. Nay, to banter our Blessed Savior himself,
the Christian Religion, and all the Holy Mysteries thereof, with the whole Body
of Christians from our Savior's Time, down to this day, as well as the Clergy
of the Church of England. But however such scurrilous Writings may make some
Impression upon Men of sickly Brains, and crazed Religion; yet upon Men of
stronger Understandings, and sounder Piety, it has no Influence at all: The
issue of the whole is, They laugh at the Jest, and despise the Buffoon.


Judas. But pray Sir, let me ask you one Question more, if you please, before
we have done?


Tim. I am quite tired, but if it be but one Question, it will not break
squares much.


Judas. How can you Sir, believe this Author such an Enemy to the Church of
England as you have represented him, when Page 32. he tells you, That he is far
from begrudging the Bishops and Clergy that small Maintenance which is by Law
Established: And that he hopes, they have no other Aim in discharging their
Offices, but to save our Souls, by imprinting in our Hearts the Reason, the
Advantages and Excellency of the Law of Christ, etc.


Tim. Amongst many other matters Sir, proposed to my Friend, whose judgment I
gave you in part, at the beginning of this Discourse, this was one; and I will
give you his Answer to me upon it; which was as follows: This Author (said
he) in his Travels, had doubtless visited the old Satyr, who could blow Hot and
Cold in a Breath. For how does this Poor Maintenance of the Bishops, as he
calls it here, agree with their Royal Styles, Dignities, and Greatness, which
he instances in, Page the 6th and 7th. as undeniable Arguments of their Pride
and Ambition? Does not this Man then (said he) envy the Bishops their Estates?
But who can believe him after so many malicious Invectives against them, and
their Power? Who can believe (said he) this Author can have any grounds to Hope
for what he says at last, that has read what he said before? So that this
Gentleman seems to me (said my Friend) to have the Honesty of the good old Fox,
who after he had singled out several of the Flock, and devoured them, wiped his
Mouth after Dinner, and fell to his Prayers, wishing the remainder of the Geese
all increase of happiness, and that they were double the number upon the
Common. Thus said my Friend, I wonder this good Gentleman in his great Fit of
Charity and Devotion, had not wished the Estates of the Bishops double also,
that he might have the pulling of their Feathers, and the larger share in the
division of their Lands.

But I tell you Sir (continued he with vehemence) that there are Thousands, and
Thousands of us, Gentlemen of the Church of England, who are not to be baffled
out of our Religion by an Irreligious Jest or two. We are not Beau's of
Sixteen, that we should forego our Faith in our Blessed Savior, to hearken to
the Buffoonry of an old Infidel; Nor shall any Man living persuade us, that
Estates are proper only for Men that wait at Taverns, and Plays, and worse
Places, while those that wait at the Altar of God must Starve; or that
Thousands of Learned, and Honest, and Religious Men must want, that Fools and
Knaves and Atheists may abound. We cannot disbelieve the Mysteries of
Christianity to hearken to this Man's Reason, till he has shown a little more
of it, than he has done in this Pamphlet; or let it be as good as it will, he
will have much ado to persuade us, that his blasphemous Friend, Page 25. can
write as good a Moral as our Savior; and the next time he comes up to
Parliament (it may be) will tell us, he can live as good a one too. But if his
Friend (said he) be so very good at Writing Morals, I think this Author would
do well to desire him to Write One against malicious Lying, and to read it well
over himself when it is done. For this puts too Keen an Edge upon an
ill-natured Infidel, as well as Divine, and is the ugliest sign in the World,
of a Mean Birth and Narrow Education.

In fine Sir, said he, this Man would feign insinuate by one of his Friends (as
he would have us believe) Page 27. That all Religion is wholly lost in the
World. I pray God, said my Friend, this be not more this Man's Wish, than his
Belief; But if it be lost, I must say (said he) that of all Men living, neither
he, nor his Friends, do seem to me to be the Persons that are ever like to find
it. But if these Men's Counsels (added he) and Devices should stand, there
would quickly be an end of all Religion in the World indeed.

Pray Sir, said I, what is your reason for this Opinion?

Because (said he) he that has but half an Eye may see, that the end of these
Men is to bring us all to Deism, and to beat out all Revealed Religion. But if
once Sir (said he) we come to have no Divine standing, Revealed Measure, or
Rule of Life and Faith, he must be quite blind that does not see, that a very
little time will bring the greatest part of Mankind, either to downright
Atheism, or Idolatry, which is as bad; and that every Man will make his own
God, and every Man his own Worship.

Upon this I replied, Surely Sir, you mistake when you say that these Men
intend to pull down all Revealed Religion. For the Author of the Growth of
Deism says, Page the first, That there is no reason why one should suspect the
Gospels of Forgery; and Page 25. He makes one of his Deists to be convinced by
a late Book of the Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. that he was more
indebted to Revelation than he thought of. And the Author of the Letter to the
Deists confesses Page 138. That the generality of Mankind stand in need of some
further Assistance than that general Capacity they are naturally endowed with;
and that considering the many Frailties of Humane Nature, some extraordinary
Helps may be useful, Page 141. And he does not deny in the same Page, but that
God may convey these Helps by Men extraordinarily Commissioned by him. Now this
Sir, says he, Page 138. is pretended (at least) among Christians, to have been
done by the Revelation of Jesus Christ; And if the History of the Gospel be
true, (he says) its Divine Authority cannot be questioned. And he believes,
Page 142. that Christianity has the sairest Pretensions to this of any Religion
now in the World.

To which my Friend answered. The Author of the Letter to the Deist Sir, (said
he) is the best Interpreter in the World of the Author of the Growth of Deism.
He is, I doubt not, as well acquainted with his Mind as his own, though (if you
will believe him) not with his Person. They were both convinced, as he says
Page 148. of the reality of Revealed Religion by the same Book, and are both
Converts, (questionless) of the same Make and Size.

The Author of the Growth of Deism tells us, Page 25. that one of his Deists
(but the Author of the Letter, Page 148. tells us with more Honesty, or less
Caution, that it was himself) was convinced by a late Book, called, The
Reasonableness of Christianity, etc. that he was more indebted to Revelation
than he thought of; but yet he tells us in the same Page, that he could have
written as good a Moral at the Scripture himself, (and had not his Modesty
stood a little in his way, I presume would have said a much Better) and by
Consequence, that he could have done as well without it. Nay, I think verily it
had never been mentioned, but to insinuate some malicious Suggestions against
the Church of England.

The Author of the Letter, receives the Gospel no further than (if it be true)
as an Improvement of Deism, Page 144. and so far he is ready, for all as I can
see Page the 8th. to receive what is written by Apollonius or Mahomet. That
Jesus Christ was Commissioned by God to reveal his Will, is (he says Page 138.)
only pretended by Christians; and the utmost he will allow to Christianity, is
Page 142. That it has the fairest Pretensions to Revelation of any Religion now
in the World. So that our Savior has only fair Pretensions to a Divine
Authority, at best; and if this Man lived at Constantinople as he does in
England, who knows, whether he might not find out another Fair Pretender there?
For Page 136. he tells us, That something more easy, and more evident is still
wanting; and therefore Page 137. he solicits Mr. Lock to give us a more perfect
System of the Laws of Natural Religion.

It would Sir (said my Friend) make an Ass speak again to forbid the madness of
these Prophets. I know not which the Author of this Letter deserves most, our
Laughter, our Pity, or our Scorn. This Prodigal has left his Father's House,
and spent his Substance, and would be eating Husks abroad with Swine, rather
than the fatted Calf with his Father. It had been enough for Mr. Lock, to have
preferred him (as he does) to Grotius, (for I known no Man of that mind but
himself;) but to esteem of his Abilities beyond those of our blessed Savior,
and all his Apostles put together, betrays a Judgment more bewildred, than the
Fancies of Bedlamites are in Dreams. But the Author of that Letter knew very
well, that this Request would undervalue both the Perfection and Authority of
the Scriptures; and he had his Cue set him (I doubt not) as well as his
Forerunner, the Author of the Growth of Deism.

It was not fit for that Author, who was sent out first by the Party, to try
the ways, to Ride at all Adventures, and therefore he glased a little in the
Acknowledgment of the Truth of Christianity. The Author of the Letter that
comes after him, now the Road is beaten, Rides somewhat brisker up against
Revelation, with his If's and And's, as If the History of the Gospel be true.
And if the Pretenses of Christianity be well grounded, etc. And if this comes
off as well as the former, I doubt not, but in a little time, we shall have a
Third spur up full speed in the face of the Christian Religion, and tell us
plainty, That it is a mere Forgery, and a piece of Priest craft, and that the
Romans did but Right, when they punished Jesus Christ the Patron of it, with
the Punishment of a Slave.

For let them pretend what they will of their belief of Christianity, this is
their design; and the Morals of Plutarch, or Tully, or Seneca, or Mahomet, are
altogether of as good Authority with them as the Scriptures. For if once you
come to talk with them of the mysterious Efficacy of the Sacraments, of the
great Ends of our Savior's Manifestation, in his Birth, Life, Death,
Resurrection, and Ascension, which are the great Characteristicks of the
Christian Religion, they take their leave of the Scriptures there, and you had
as good tell them a Tale out of the Legend of the Sleepers, and they will
believe it as soon. These, they cry out upon as unintelligable Mysteries; not
that they are so, but are obvious to the Capacity of any Honest and Ordinary
Christian; but they do not fall within their Scheme, and what they will not
believe, they will not understand.

Sir, said I, what you have said puts me in mind of what the Author of the
Growth of Deism says, Page 28. That he cannot frame to himself an Idea, How
the Body and Blood of Christ are verily and indeed received in the Sacrament,
when we say there is no other Body there but that of the Bread. The Men of the
Church of England tell me (indeed) says he, that they mean it in a spiritual
sense; but he had tried, he said, and found it impossible to form an Idea of a
Body, verily and indeed in a spiritual sense.

It Is true, replied my Friend, he does so, and with Ignorance enough of the
Doctrine of the Church of England, and the great Ends of our Savior's
Sufferings. For by these words, That the Body and Blood of Christ are verily
and indeed taken by the Faithful, is meant no more, than that all those
Blessings and Benefits which were purchased for us by the Body and Blood of
Christ, are communicated to all Faithful Receivers, in and by those Elements of
Bread and Wine, which are the Real, but Mystical Body of Christ.

Now however this Man, for want of a right Faith of the great Ends of our
Savior's Death, cannot (said he) form to himself an Idea thereof; yet, as
there is no Christian of common capacity but may frame to himself a very
congruous and familiar Notion of what the Church of England means in this
Point, so is there of Faithful Receiver, but from the Real Presence of the
Invisibe Power of Christ's Spirit quickening and enlivening his Soul by his
spiritual Graces and Workings, in and by the faithful Reception of those
Elements, but can give an Experimental Testimony to the truth of it.

Upon what my Friend had said, I told him I was verily satisfied now, that
these men did intend to reduce all Religion to Deism; but pray Sir, how do you
make it appear, that without a standing Revealed Rule, Mankind will quickly
sink into Atheism, or Idolatry? To which he replied.

Easily enough, and in a few words. The best way Sir, says he to judge what
would be, if such things should happen, is by reflecting on what has been, when
they did happen. Now Sir, said he, if ever there were any True Deism in the
world, it was in Adam's time; yet if we will believe Maimonides, he tells us in
the beginning of his first Book of Idolatry, that Idolatry began in the days of
Enos, which was but two hundred and thirty five years after the Creation,
scarce in those days the Infancy of a man. After the General deluge (a Judgment
on all Mankind for this their scandalous Apostasy) to the days of Abraham are
not reckoned quite three hundred years, in which time (the Infancy also of this
second World) Idolatry had not only prevailed amongst the Ignorant sort of
people, but amongst the wisest and learned of Men. For Historians make
Zoroaster contemporary with Abraham, who first started the Worship of two
Beginnings. And if Zoroaster lived in Abraham's Time we may reckon him but a
third Generation from Adam, Abraham being born threescore years before the
Death of Noah, Noah above five hundred before the death of Methusalem, and
Methusalem two hundred and forty before the Death of Adam.

Now if a Man of those great Parts, Wisdom and Learning which Zoroaster is said
to be of (and who could doubtless write as good a Moral as our Author) was so
ridiculously imposed upon by the Devil, as to believe and worship two
Beginnings, what gross Idolatry must the more Ignorant of Mankind lie under
(think you) in those Days?

Thus Sir, said my Friend, I have in a few words shown you the speedy Apostasy
of those Original Deists from Almighty God in the very Infancy of Times, after
the Creation, and after the Flood; and yet those Primitive Deists had several
great advantages, which the Deists of these later Ages cannot pretend to. As
first of all Sir, said he,

They had the advantage of Tradition, and thereby an easy means of a right
Information and themselves in the knowledge of God, and his Worship, from Adam,
the Patriarchs, and their own Fathers.

2ly. They had the advantage of Angelical Messengers, and Messages, which God
vouchsafed them in those days (before he had given them a standing revealed
Rule) for the better discovery of himself, and his Will to them. And lastly,

They had this advantage also, that besides those Heavenly Annunciators of his
Will, God did constantly in all Ages raise up a Noah, a Lot, an Abraham, or
some such Preachers of Righteousness, furnishing them with Gifts and Abilities
to teach, and instruct Mankind in the true Knowledge and Worship of the Deity,
Who, with the other two above mentioned Means and Advantages, might be to Man,
instead of a written, standing, and revealed Rule and Law.

Now Sir, said he, if notwithstanding all these advantages, both before and
after the Flood, these Original Deists, in the very Infancy of the Times of
both, did sink into so gross Idolatry, as to provoke the Jealousy of God so
highly, as to move him once to destroy the whole World, except one Family, and
afterward to renounce (as it were) and cast off all Mankind, except one small
Nation: How is it possible to imagine, but that the Deists of these last Ages
(who can pretend to none of these advantages) must in a very little time (if
once the Light of the Gospel be extinguished) sink into utter Darkness, and
turn as gross Idolaters as any the Spaniard sound at Peru, or Mexico? And this
Sir, said he, will more plainly appear if we consider further, That some of
these Deists confess, that many of their Brethren are little better than so
already. For the Author of the Letter to the Deists tells us (bewailing the
Brotherhood) Page 12. That many of them have such base Idea's of the Deity, as
may have a worse Influence upon them than none at all; and that while they did
own the Name of God, they did take away the Thing, and substitute a worse
instead of it. He tells us Pages 12, and 13. of the several Gods these Men
frame to themselves, of the Inconsistency of their Notions, that it would be an
endless Task to expose them; that two of them did not entirely agree in one
System, and that all their Schemes equally lead to Irreligion, etc.

He tells us of the Materialists, the Antiprovidentialists, the Fatalists; and
we may add, their almost infinite Divisions, and sub-divisions, all which lead
Naturally to downright Atheism, or worse. For it were better, as Plutarch says
of himself, to believe that God never was, than to have base and unworthy
thoughts of him. But what wickedness may not the Fatalists be guilty of, and
charge it upon God when they have done? The Antiprovidentialists will quickly
have as little regard to God, as they believe he has to them, and the
Materialists will as speedily fetch their Gods out of their ultramundane
Retirements, and set them before them in Gold, or Silver, or Brass, or Wood;
and when this is done, it is not this Gentleman's superfine Philosophy in
proving the Impossibility of thinking matter can help it.

Or what if we should allow (said my Friend further) that all Deists should
agree in a right and true Idea of a God (which will never be) will they
therefore all agree in a like, and a right manner of Worship? What if they
shall be to seek for a System of Natural Duties, (as this Author of the Letter
acknowledges he himself is, Page 135.) And by consequence run of course into
such degrees of Superstition, which may (as this Author also says, Page 50.) be
of as evil tendency, if not worse, than absolute Irreligion.

So that I say Sir, if Mankind have not a fixed Rule and Law, backed by a
Divine Authority to stand to, they will never stand to any thing, but will
quickly run into a Thousand Confusions of Superstition and Idolatry, both in
respect of God and his Worship. For there is no reason, why any one Man should
be guided and directed by the System of another, if he have no Divine
Commission from God. For the best of Men may be corrupted by Lust, or Interest,
and the wisest may be blinded by Ignorance.

But the Precepts of Nature, as they must be drawn from long Observation of
Nature its self, from deep Skill in Philosophy, and great Strength and Trains
of Reasonings, whereby a Man may be enabled from his general Observations of
Nature, to deduce particular Rules, easy as to their Practice, and familiar as
to their Use, for all the Exigencies and Necessities of Humane Life: As they
must be drawn from distinct, and right Idea's of the Natures of God and Men,
that from thence we may receive exact Schemes of the many and even infinite
Obligations Man lies under to his Maker, and of the variety (and almost
infinite too) of Duties and good Offices one Man owes to another; and all this,
in plain and easy Propositions fitted to the Capacities of the meanest that
will but seriously attend to them; so must it all be done by an unbiassed
Judgment, by an inflexible Honesty, a most profound and universal Knowledge
both of God and Man, with the infinite Relations they bear to all things else
in Nature. And where shall we find (Sir said he) such a Man, with all these
Qualifications? Or if we could, how should all Mankind know he has them, except
he be sent from God Divinely inspired, and his Commission sealed by Miracles,
or some other Stamp of the Divinity? Now from what I have said Sir (said my
Friend) I conclude, That if the Deists before and after the blood
notwithstanding those several advantageous Means they had of informing
themselves aright of the Nature of God, and his Worship, did, for want of a
standing, revealed Rule, most scandalously Apostatize from the Worship of the
true God, into the grossest Idolatry of the Creature: From this, I say, I
conclude, That the Deists of our days, (who cannot pretend to the Advantages of
the former, who do already labor under unworthy and scandalous Notions and
Idea's of the Being and Nature of God, who confess themselves ignorant of the
Duties arising from Natural Religion, and have no Man's Judgment they can rely
on, or stand to for their better Information therein:) These Deists I say, must
of necessity in a very little time (if once the Scriptures be cast off as a
Rule of Faith and Manners, and all Footsteps and Remembrances of Christianity
worn out) change the Truth of God into a Lie, and in all probability Apostatize
into so ridiculous and multifarious an Idolatry, as to become the Scorn and
Laughter of the very Indians. And then, said he, the Author of the Growth of
Deism (if he lives to come up to Parliament in those times) may write us (what
I fear his Fingers itch to be at) an Account of the Growth of Atheism in
England. For who can give a better Account of it, than he that has been one
great Cause of it?

Thus Sir, I have given you my Friends last Judgment of your Friend, the Author
of the Growth of Deism, and his Pamphlet.


Judas. You may well call it his last Judgment Sir, for there is Condemnation
enough in Conscience in it.


Tim. You seem to Jest and be Merry Sir, but I tell you seriously, that except
your Friend mend both his Faith and Manners, I fear he must expect a much
greater.


Judas. You seem to me Sir, to be wholly of the Judgment of your Friend.


Tim. I confess plainly to you Sir, I am; and I think the Author of the Growth
of Deism would have proved himself an honester Man, if he had laid by all his
Disguises, and told the World, that the Judgment of those he calls his Friends,
was his own too; For either he thought their Arguments valid or no? If not, why
did he not answer them? If he did, why did he not own them?


Judas. I see Sir, there is little hopes of your Conviction, and therefore I
take my leave of you.


Tim. Fare you well Sir; May the Dayspring which from on high has visited us,
so enlighten your Mind, that you may understand the Truth aright as it is in
Jesus.


FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by S. Manship at the Ship in Cornhil, near the
Royal Exchange.
A Collection of Miscellanies, consisting of Poems, Essays, Discourses and
Letters; in large 8o.

Theory and Regulation of Love; a Moral Essay in two Parts: To which is added,
Letters Philosophical and Moral, between the Author and Dr. More. The 2 d.
Edition in 8o.

Practical Discourses upon the Beatitudes of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
To which are added, Reflections upon a late Essay concerning Humane
Understanding. Vol. I. the third Edition, in 8o.

Practical Discourses upon several Divine Subjects. Vol. II.

Practical Discourses upon several Divine Subjects. Vol. III.

Letters Philosophical, Moral, and Divine, to the Reverend Mr. John Norris,
with his Answers in 8o.

Treatises upon several Subjects: Formerly Printed singly, now collected into
one Volume, in 8o. large.

An Account of Reason and Faith, in relation to the Mysteries of Christianity,
in 8o. large.

These eight writ by the Reverend Mr. John Norris, Rector of Bemerton near
Sarum.

A Treatise of Sacramental Covenanting with Christ. Showing the Ungodly their
Contempt of Christ, in their Contempt of the Sacramental Covenanting: With a
Preface chiefly designed for the satisfaction of Dissenters; and to exhort all
Men to Peace and Unity; in 8o.

An Explication of the Creed, the 10 Commandments and the Lord's Prayer, with
the Addition of some Forms of Prayer; price 1 s. 6 d.

A Dialogue betwixt two Protestants (in answer to a Popish Catechism, called, a
short Catechism against the Sectaries) plainly showing, that the Members of the
Church of England are no Sectaries, but true Catholics, in 8o. price 2 s.

Poetic Miscellanies, in 8o. price 1 s. 6 d.

The Christian Monitor, the Nineteenth Edition, price 3 d. having already sold
95 Thousand; and those that are charitably disposed may have them for 20 s. the
hundred, and so proportionably for a smaller quantity.

These five written by the Reverend Mr. Jo. Rawlet.

An Essay concerning Humane Understanding, in four Books, the third Edition,
with large Additions, by Jo. Lock Gent. Folio.

Malebranch's Search after Truth, complete in 2 Vol. 8o. to the 2 d. is added
the Author's Defense against the Accusations of M. de la Ville. Also the Life
of F. Malebranch. Done out of French by Mr. Sault.

Christian Conferences, demonstrating the Truth of the Christian Religion and
Morality. By F. Malebranch.

Practical Discourses on the Parables of our blessed Savior. By F. Brag
Vicar of Hitchin in Hertfordshire.

A New Voyage into Italy, with necessary Instructions for those who undertake
the same, by Max. Misson, in 2 Vol. Done out of French, and illustrated with
Sculp.

The Roman History, from the building of the City to the perfect Settlement of
the Empire by Augustus Caesar. By Sa. Echard. the 2 d. Edition with Amendments.

A full, large and general Phrase Book. By W. Robertson A. M. price 5 s. bound.

Reflections on the good Temper and fair Dealing of the Animadverter upon D.
Sherlock's Vindication of the Holy Trinity, 4o. price 6 d.

Essays of Michael Seigneur de Montaigne, in 3 Books. Done into English by C.
Cotton Esquire; in three Vol.

A Sermon concerning the Excellency and Usefulness of the Common Prayer. By W.
Beveridge, D.D. the Eleventh Edition, price 3 d. Those that are Charitably
disposed may have them for 20 s. the hundred.

-- His Sermon before the Queen, price 6 d.

A new Voyage to the Levant, containing remarkable Curiosities in Germany,
France, Italy, Malta and Turkey, by the Sieur de Mont. The second Edition,
price 5 s.

Moral Essays, in several Treatises on many important Duties, in 4 Vol. Done
out of French by a Person of Quality, in 8o large, price 10 s.

The Complete Surgeon, or the whole Art of Surgery explained in a most familiar
method: To which is added a Chyrurgical Dispensatory; showing the manner how to
prepare all such Medicines as are most necessary for a Surgeon. Done out of
French, price 2 s. 6 d.

The Light of the World, a most true Relation of a Pilgrimess, M. Antonia
Bouvignon, Traveling toward Eternity. Done out of French, in 8o. price 6 s.

The Complete Horseman, discovering the surest Marks of the Beauty, Goodness,
Faults and Imperfections of Horses; the Signs and Causes of their Diseases, the
true Method both of their Preservation and Cure, with Reflections on the regular
and preposterous Use of Bleeding and Purging; also the Art of Shooing, with the
several kinds of Shoes, adapted to the various defects of Bad Feet, and the
Preservation of good. Together with the best Method of Breeding Colts, Backing
'em, and making their Mouths, etc. To which is added, a most excellent
Supplement of Riding; Collected from the best Authors, with a Catalogue of all
the Physical Simples, in English, French, and Latin. Done out of French, and
adorned with Figures.


