Decus and Tutamen: OR, OUR NEW MONEY As now Coined, In Full Weight and
Fineness; Proved to be for The Honor, Safety, and Advantage of England.
WRITTEN By way of ANSWER to Sir Richard Temple and Dr Barbon. To which is
Added, An ESSAY to preserve our New Money from being Hoarded, Melted down,
Transported or Counterfeited.

LONDON Printed, and are to be sold by most Booksellers, 1696.

TO HIS Honored Friend G. Clive Of the Middle Temple, Esquire
SIR,
AS the many Civilities received from You, most justly Challenge an
Acknowledgment, so Your exquisite Perfections in Learning and Ingenuity, render
this Dedication duly applied; by the former whereof, to own Your Candor and
Generosity, by the latter to bespeak (by the Touchstone of Your perusal and
approbation) a sufficient Security from the Snarlings and Insults of those
Carping Zoylus's, who are such Self-Admirers, to approve of nothing of which
themselves are not Authors; and are more disingeniously Witty in Criticizing,
and discanting on others performances, than in rectifying and amending what
they pretend so defective. And here, SIR, I am not ignorant, that while I am
barely owning your Favors instead of a Compensation, I am running farther on
the Score, which I doubt not however, but your Goodness will readily pardon,
since it is not practicable for one to pay, where another is not willing to
receive.

There is one things, SIR, I have omitted in the following Discourse (as not
being practiced till it was finished,) i. e. To observe how great a Mischief we
are falling into, by giving considerable Sums of Money for the prompt payment
of Bank and other Notes, of which the Rates grow so high, as it is to be feared
will in a short time ruin our Paper Credit, which used to be very considerable
in the way of Trade, and which must needs be abated if not totally ruined
thereby, unless the Government by some means or other put a speeedy stop
thereto; for Men are grown to that pass, that few will pay their just Debts
(though of Money lent, and they have considerable Sums by them,) unless you will
take a Note, which they have made by this ill Practice, at least 10 per Cent.
less than Money: So that though we had our Complement of Running Cash, we shall
find, that if this practice be permitted, we shall never have Notes in better
Credit, nor ready Money paid in much more plenty than now it is, as I could
easily prove by sundry instances, were it not matter more proper for another
place, than this Epistle: Which before I. conclude, I shall only further
observe, That I look upon the great Mistake of such as are for having the
nominal value of our Coin raised, the Alloy therein more, or the same Coined
lighter, to be owing chiefly to this misguided Supposition; That we in this
Island live independantly without having any thing to do with Foreign
Countries, which did we do the making any thing current by Stamp, that has
little or no value in it self, would I coefess, be sufficient to make it serve
to most Ends and Purposes of Inland Trade and Bargains: But if we consider our
selves, with respect to Foreign Dealings and Traffic, we shall find we are so
much the more at a loss, by how much the Extrinsick value of our Coin exceeds
the Real or Intrinsic.

But lest I should by prolixity misuse the liberty of this Dedication, and
retain your Thoughts too long from the Entertainment of Subjects more Noble,
and solidly Refined, I subscribe my self with all Sincerity,

Your most Humble, and obliged Servant, E. H.

Decus and Tutamen, etc.
SUCH is the Folly, as well as the Ambition and Envy of the present Age, that
nothing can be propounded as advantageous to the Public, that meets not with
Opposition, to the great hindrance not only of the Riches and Prosperity of the
Nation, but also to the unspeakable Scandal and Discouragement of its true
Policy.

And upon such irregular Principles, no doubt but Sir Richard and the Doctor
undertook, to write against Mr. Lock's Book concerning Coin; A Book which for
its excellent Prescriptions of curious Remarks and Political Maxims on that
Subject, cannot be sufficiently valued, but by those of equal judicious
Accomplishments, and clear Notions with himself.

But before I proceed, that the aforesaid Remarkers may not think, this
Discourse undertaken out of any prejudice conceived against them, I do
sincerely profess, I know neither of the two; but that this is published out of
pure Zeal for Truth, without any prejudice against any Party whatever.

First then in general, I cannot but admire that Sir Richard Temple should be
the Author of such mistaken Notions concerning Coin and Trade, as he has
published in his said Remarks, in which I see not any thing of weight or reason
in all his seven Objections; nor does he make out any thing he Assigns, to be
an Erroneous Assertion of Mr. Lock, unless we must believe merely because he
says it, whose Authority must be looked upon unquestionable, because of his
Quality.

But though these Gentlemen have taken the Pains to impose their Sentiments on
the World, yet I hope they will have no better reception than they had in the
Honorable House of Commons; for how much soever the leaving open the price of
Guineas, and advancing the value of Coin, might have been to Sir Richard, and
to Dr. Barbon as to his expected Bank, (by which means the Sum subscribed would
have been more) yet sure I am, we should thereby have* had miserable
Convulsions in Trade, if not a total Ruin, before the next Session of
Parliament. And here I remember what the Doctor says in answer to this, in his
Epistle: That he could have got more by melting down the New Coin of the
present Standard, than he could propose to do by a New Coinage of advancing the
Crown Piece to Six Shillings and 3 pence. But this he should talk to Children,
or such Projectors as himself; for I would fain know, Whether is safer and more
for advantage, to gain 15 pence in a Crown Legally, or to gain but 1 penny,
(for Bullion is but at 5 s. 1 d. per Ounce,) in a Crown, and incur thereby the
Penalty of the Law against such melting down.

But I Will leave the Doctor a while, and return to Sir Richard, who in his first
Remark says; First, That an Ounce of Silver is equal to an Ounce of Silver of
the same Weight and Fineness, but that an Ounce of Silver will buy an Ounce of
Silver, of like fineness (he says) is absurd, since there is no occasion for
any Barter.

This Remark consists of Two Parts: The first he grants, the second he denies;
and I think the first, which is that he grants, is more absurd, or at least
has more inpropriety in it than the latter; for two Ounces of Silver of the
same Fineness, he needs not question are of the same weight; for an Ounce Troy
is always equal to an Ounce Troy; so that he had better have left [of the same
Weight] out.

Then as to his Second Part, I dare Appeal to all the world, Whether it is
absurd to Barter Silver for Silver; I am sure, its a thing done every day, and
no doubt but Sir R. has done it himself, unless he always paid for his Plate
with Farthings and Halfpence, which few Goldsmiths would take, unless the
quantity bought were inconsiderable; so that its just as absurd to say, that
an Ounce of Silver will buy an Ounce of Silver of the same Fineness, as it is
to say, an Ounce of Sterling Plate is sold for a Sterling Crown Piece; and
that is no Absurdity at all, for the Plate bought is an Ounce of Silver, and the
Crown that paid for it is near 1 of sterling Silver of the same Fineness, which
Barter is very proper and practicable; and therefore his Reason [since there is
no occasion for any Barter] is vain and frivolous, since nothing is more true,
than that Silver Coin and Old Plate are daily Bartered for New Plate.

His Second Remark, is, That the intrinsic Value of Silver is the true
Instrument or Measure of Commerce, (he says) is partly true and partly false;
for the Money of every Country is the Measure of Commerce there.

To this I Answer, That though the Money of a Country is the Instrument of
Commerce, yet the intrinsic value of Silver is nevertheless the true Measure
thereof, by being the measure of that Money; for by how much the more there is
of Silver in any Money, by so much the more it is valuable; and by how much the
more is is valuable, by so much the more of any Commodity it will purchase: And
in all Buying, Selling, and Bartering, though the Persons concerned were guided
as to the Worth of the thing, Bought, Sold, or Bartered, by the Coin of the
place where such Bargains are transacted. Yet all or the greatest part of the
Coin in all Countries, being either Silver or Gold, whose value is computed by
that Silver. To say, That because Coin is the Instrument of Commerce, that
Silver is not so, (as the Doctor does positively, and Sir R. in part affirm) is
to say, That the Coin of all Trading Nations is no Silver, which is false, and
the Remark very weak.

But the Doctor says, page 24. That if Men made their Bargains only for the
Quantity of Silver, to what purpose is there any Copper Money Coined, which
reckoning one Country with another, is part of the Money in Europe.

To which I Answer, That Copper Money is in all places, except Sweedland,
designed only for convenience in paying small Sums, which cannot so well be
paid in Silver, because the quantity thereof being very small, would be (and is
as we see in our Silver pence, pence, two pences, etc.) in danger of being
lost. And as to there being of the Coin in Europe made only of Copper, I dare
affirm, and appeal to all the Merchants and Travelers in England, that not one
hundredth part of the Coin in all the Traffiquing Nations in the world, except
Sweedland, is any thing but Gold or Silver; And I am farther confirmed in this
Opinion, not only because I have some knowledge of the several Coins, but from
this computation of it in our own Nations Coin.

The most ingenious Calculator Sir William Petty has told us* That 50000 l. in
Farthings and Half pence, is a sufficient quantity of Copper Money for England:
But I am of opinion, that we have not so many now, because we want. And the
Running Cash of Gold and Silver is computed modestly at 6,000,000 il. which
divided by 50000 l. quotes* 120: so that at that rate, instead of, there is but
a one hundred and twentieth part of the Running Cash of England made of any
thing but Gold and Silver. And we have great reason to believe, That Copper
Money in other Countries, being but for the same use we make of it in England,
(viz. for Change, and paying small Sums, as is said above,) is near the same
proportion to their Gold and Silver Cash.

And therefore as to what the Doctor says, page 15. 'That there are more
Bargains made with Copper Money than either with Gold or Silver, and would make
good this Assertion by an instance of half penny Loaves being bought and sold,
(which by the way is a ridiculous one.) I say, it is egregiously false, to
instance in some useful things for the Body and Mind, (as the Doctor has it,
page 2.) In a Wholesale Trade, where the Commodities bought and sold are not
cut or divided into lesser parts than they were brought in. Daily Experience
tells us, there is no such thing as paying in Copper Money, for it is a small
Wholesale Parcel that is not worth 6 d. and all or most Parcels above (not to
say some below) that price, are paid for in Silver; and though the Copper Money
has the King's stamp on it, which the Doctor lays such stress on, page 13. 'yet
so prudent and wise were our Lawmakers, that no one can be forced to take this
Money for Rent or Debt, because it has not a Universal Value, nor was intended
to be received or paid in large Sums in the way of Trade, by reason of its
being far less portable than Silver; 3 farthings weighing 14 grains more, and
taking up as much room as half a Crown in Silver, and consequently omitting the
Grains 100 l. in Copper, as much as 4000 l. in Silver; and at this rate, how
troublesome would it be for a Man to be obliged to receive Copper Money for
Packs of Sheeps Wool, or Sacks of Cotton, Bales of Silk, Hogsheads of Sugar,
Wine, Brandy, etc. nay, if this money were paid for the greatest part of
Bargains, as the Doctor says it is, it would cost less money to carry most
sorts of Goods to a Fair or Mart, than the Money those Commodities were sold
for home again; but to come nearer the Doctors half penny Loaves, how few are
there that pay for either Victuals, Apparel or Lodging in this sort of Money?
For does any Man pay for a Years Board, or so much as a Joint of Meat at the
Market in farthings? Does any man pay for a Hatt, Coat, etc. or so much as
Gloves or Thread Stockings, in Farthings? Does any one pay their House-rent, or
so much as for a half Peck Loaf in Copper Money? Nay, to come to the Doctors
own instance, of the vast number of Half penny and penny loaves that are
bought, I dare Engage thereof are paid for in Silver Coin; for the Baker I Will
warrant, never buys a Bushel of Wheat, and pays for it in Farthings or Copper
Money, nor the Victualler (in whose House most of the Bakers Half Penny Loaves
are spent,) pays for a dozen or two (than which he has seldom less) in Copper
Money, no nor even the Person who buys these of the Victualler for his own
Eating, comes to his House only to eat; for it is a hundred to one, but this
Guest and his Friend, (for few drink alone) if he calls for a Role or two, but
he has some Cheese or Butter, and two Tankards of Ale, which makes 6 d. in all
which Trade, there is no Copper Money used; and I think all these Cases may and
do happen every day. And as for Books, there is scarce a bound one in any Volume
bought under 6 d. And where one pounds worth is bought with Copper Money, 1000
l's. worth are bought with Gold and Silver. All which is sufficient to show,
that it is with Silver Money and not Copper (as the Doctor says,) that our
Inland Trade is managed, and consequently that Silver is the Measure thereof.

And after the same manner is the Traffic of other Nations, their Money being
for the most part made of Silver, contrary to what the Doctor says, page 14.
viz.

That the Merchants both in their Bills of Exchange, and in their Accounts do
as often reckon by the Copper Money as the Silver Money.

This I utterly deny, and will prove it a Mistake in the Doctor, by showing
what Money other Nations keep their Accounts in. And in what Money they
exchange with London.

That all Trading Nations that have Commerce with England, do keep their
Accounts in, and buy and sell with and for Silver Money, for the most part will
appear as follows:

1. In the Netherlands, viz. at Amsterdam, Rottordam, and Antwerp, Accounts are
kept in pounds, shill. and pence, Flemish, or in Guilders and Stiver; there is
likewise current the Holland Dollar, Duccatoon, and other pieces, all of
Silver, some 9, some 10, and some 11 ounces fine.

2. In France Accounts are kept in Livres or Franks, Souze and Deniers, and
there are Curant the Crown of 3 Livres, and other pieces, all made of silver,
some 10 ounces, some 10 ounces 18 pw. fine.

3. In Spain Accounts are kept in some places, viz. Valentia, Saragota and
Barselona, in pounds, shill. and pence; and there are current the Ducats of 10,
11 and 12 Ryalls, which is silver Coin of 11 ounces, 3 pw. fine; and at Cadix,
are Current the piece of 8 Sevill and Mexico, the first 11 4 pw. the latter, 11
ounces fine. As also the Pattacoon, etc.

4. In Portugal, their chief Money used in Traffic are Milrees, Crusado's,
and Testoons: And they in some parts keep their Accounts in these, and some in
Rees, which is Copper. But the Exchange is made with London upon the Mill-Ree,
which is Par with 6 s. 4 d. Sterling; All these Denominations of money, except
the Rees are Silver, some 10 ounces 7 pw. and some of 11 ounces fine.

5. In Germany the Coins of silver are too tedious to mention here; the most
usual of which in Trassique, are the Rix Dollar above 11 ounces fine, Creutzers
of 10 ounces, 10 pw. fine of Silver; and at Hamburgh, Accounts are kept in
pounds, shill. and pence, in which they likewise exchange with London 32 shill.
being Par there, with one one pound Sterling.

6. In Italy, as at Leghorn and Genoa, Accounts are kept in pounds, shill. and
pence De Ovo, the Testoons of Mantua and Milan of 11 ounces, 5 pw. fine, also
Ducats, Tarry, and many other silver Coins, too tedious to relate here; but we
exchange with Venice and places thereabout, upon the Ducat de Banco, which is
Par with 52 pence Sterling, and with Legorn upon the Crown de Ovo, which is Par
with 67 d. Sterling.

7. The Money of Ireland in which Accounts are kept, are Pounds, Harps and
Obbs, the Harp is 9 6 pw. fine, the Obb is half the Harp, and 20 Harps is their
pound; and Exchange at London with Dublin by the 100 pound Irish, which is Par
with 75 English.

8. The Money of Scotland, is Pounds, Marks, Nobles, and small Pieces, the
former of 11. 2 pw. (or Sterling) fine. And in short, all other Trading
Countries, except Sweedland, have their Commerce carried on chiefly by silver
Coin, as the Rupee and Rupee of East India, all sine, the piece of Eight,
Mexico and Peru in the West Indies, fine as abovesaid; The 8 s. Danzick,
Guilders, etc. in Poland, 10. 12 pw. fine; The Deghen, etc. of Russia, 11. 13
pw. fine; The Danish Dollar 10. 12 pw. fine. And in Sweeden, besides their
Copper Dollars, they have the Sweeds Dollar of the same fineness, with the Rix
Dollar of Germany, and half its value; though I confess, a great part of their
Trade is carried on with the Copper Money; but the like is not done (as appears
by the foregoing Account) in any other Nation, and no doubt but the Sweeds
would glad enough be rid of it for Silver, were it not the Product and
Manufacture of their own, and that they are very poor: for as the Learned and
Ingenuous Malynes says on the same Subject, Necessitas non habet Legem.

And thus I think, I have sufficiently proved from matter of Fact, That more
Bargains are made with Silver than Copper Money, since there is abundantly more
of the former than of the latter, and consequently that Silver is the measure
of Commerce: And I have likewise proved, That Merchants do not either in their
Accounts or Bills of Exchange, reckon any thing near so much in Copper Money as
in Silver. For whereas the Doctor says, page 13. As in Portugal, the Merchant
often draws his Bills of Exchange, to be paid in Rials of 400 Rees; and says
he, And so in Spain, he draws his Bill to be paid in Rials of 372 Malvadies. He
is in this very much out, as well as in his Copper Money bargains; for our
Exchange to Lisbon is in Milrees of 6 s. 4 d. Sterling per Millree, and to 7 s.
etc. in Circa and to Cadiz. The Par is 54. d. sterling for one piece of Eight;
and the course (now) 60 d. and upward; to which two places are the principal
Exchange of that Country with London made; and what they do among themselves,
is nothing to us.

And therefore it does not appear, that the Doctor has any more Experience in
these matters than Mr. Lock (nor indeed so much*) notwithstanding his great
Profession, in condemning* Mr. Locks definition of the Par of Exchange, page
19. which with the Doctors Notion, I^ll incert as follows, and leave it to
those that have long known the Practick part, whether of the two is the most
true and genuine.

Mr. Lock's Definition of the Par. The Par of Exchange (page 18. of his
Considerations) is a certain number of Pieces of the Coin of one Country,
containing in them an equal quantity of Silver to that in another number of
pieces of the Coin of another Country.

The Doctor's Definition. The Par of Money is made by computing the valuation
that the several Governments set on their Coins, which is not from the equal
quantity of silver in each piece of Money.

Now I take the Doctors Notion of the Par of Exchange, to be very false, and
what was never thought of being the Par by any but himself; for to say that the
value of Money (for I take the Par to be value,) is made by computing the
valuation that the several Governments set on their Coin, is not only false and
nonsensical Contradiction; but also (if he means, that one Nation must take
another Money for what they please to call it,) pernicious to Trade, and
destructive to the very foundation of all Exchange, and a thing never
practiced. For instance, Suppose in the Year 89, I had paid 100 l. at London,
that my Factor or Correspondent might receive the value at Dublin, where the
Person on whom the Bill was drawn, pays my Factor 800 Copper Half Crowns, which
were equal to my 800 silver ones which I paid here, according to the Doctors
Par of the valuation the Government had put on them, (though in truth, they were
not above 800 Half Pence, or 33 s. 4. d. of that Money the value was paid in
England.) Now suppose the Government had changed after my Correspondent had
received these Copper Pieces, and before he had put them off again; and that
this new Government had put a stop to the Currency of the Copper Money, and
made Half a Crown current for Half a Penny (as was reasonable enough) I should
here have lost 98 l. 6 s. 8 d. by the Bargain; and such loss is every Merchant
liable to, that regards not whether the Money his Correspondent is to receive
Beyond Sea, be something near the Par of the Money paid by himself here, by
having so many more pieces allowed in Exchange, by how much those pieces are
deficient in weight and fineness of those paid first: For otherwise I would
fain know, to what end all the Mints of Europe keep so precise Accounts of the
fineness of their Coins, for they might know without that, what value (by
denomination) other Governments put upon their Coin. Or to what end was there
such care taken by Edw. III. and other Kings of England, to fix Tables of the
Par of Exchange in public places, setting forth the true weight and fineness
of Foreign Coins, to prevent our English Merchants being imposed on in their
Exchanges?

And the truth is, the matter is not so difficult as the Doctor would make it,
by his singular way of expressing it: For the very word implies the meaning,
Par pro pari, i. e. value for value, not as the Government puts upon it (with
respect to Foreign Exchange,) but as it is in weight and fineness.

For as Silver is the measure of all kind of Commodities, so is it of Exchange
too; for as in Commutation or Barter of Goods, the several sorts must first be
valued by the standing measure of Silver before it can be known how much of one
must be given for another kind: So is it in Exchanges, where the true value of
each Coin being compared with Silver, it is easily known how many pieces of one
Coin must be given for so many of another.

And Lastly, I offer this as a Proof, that the quantity of Silver in Exchange,
is considered, and not the nominal value the Government gives to Money; because
for these two years past, since our Money has been so very much clipped and
debased, and our Guinea's so high, Exchanges have run very low against us; the
Dutch (and other places proportionable) allowing us but 26 s. and 27 s. Flem.
for a pound Sterling; whereas within these 4 or 5 years, they allowed 35 s. per
pound Sterling; and since our Coin has been amending, and Guinea's lowered, the
Dutch allow 29 and 30 s. for 20 s. Sterling.

Sir Richard's Third Remark, is, Bullion is a Commodity, and has no certain
universal stated price or value.

And says the Doctor in the first of his contrary Propositions: That there is
no intrinsic value in Silver, or any fixed or certain Estimate that common
Consent has placed on it, but that it is a Commodity, and rises and falls as
other Commodities do.

I must confess I have this advantage in answering this: That no body is of the
Doctors mind, and therefore a little may serve to say against him in this case,
for it is a hard matter to introduce a new Opinion at best; but more especially
when that Opinion is contrary to all men's Reason.

That there is a natural or intrinsic Goodness in Silver above all other
Metals (except Gold) such as solidness, and not porous, cleanness and not apt
to rust, fineness and beautiful to the Eye, I think no body can gainsay.

And that upon and for the sake of these natural Perfections and Qualities,
Silver has obtained an Universal Esteem and Value above all other Metals
(except Gold) in all the most civilized Nations and earliest of times, is as
undoubted a Truth.

For as to its universal value, it is much the same at the East and West
Indies, in Turkey and Eastland, in Russia, Poland, and all over the Commercial
World, as it is here in England.

And as to the early esteem it had in the world, we find it the common Measure
of Commerce in Sacred History, about 488 years after the Flood which was in
Abraham's time; and no doubt but it was so long before: And though Silver is a
Commodity because it is bought and sold, yet I deny that it rises and falls so
as other Commodities do, nor is there any Commodity that keeps such a certainty
as to price, as Silver does; it being in no part of the World worth less than 5
s. an ounce, and in few places worth much more; and the reason of this will
appear, by comparing it with other Commodities, most of which are the Product
of more Countries than one or two, and the same sort of Commodities are made
better and worse, which with many other Circumstances, as Fashion, Plenty,
Scarcity, etc. much alters the price of Commodities that are for Wear, (as the
most staple ones are.)

But Silver coming chiefly from the Mines of Peru and Mexico in America, and
not subject to any of the abovesaid Causes of rising and falling, the price
thereof is much at one; so that the intrinsic value of Silver, may properly
enough be said to be 5 s. per ounce, because it will fetch so much in any part
of Europe, if not of the World, and consequently the fittest measure of
Commerce; and this is no more than Sir Richard grants at the latter end of his
third Remark. Though the Doctor is much more positive in denying the whole, to
make good the credit of his Copper Money Extrinsick value, etc.

Sir Richard's Fourth Remark. That advancing the denomination, or lessening the
weight and fineness of Coin, will be no loss to the Landedmen in their Rents,
etc. And that such a change can have no such effect.

And says the Doctor in the Tenth of his contrary Propositions. That if the
Money be raised, the Landlord will not lose any part of his Rent, or the
Creditor any part of his Debt.

The truth of these Assertions depend on this:

That raising the value of Coin by denomination, will not inhance the price of
any Commodity.

I shall therefore first prove, That the raising the denomination of the Coin,
and making the 5 s. piece to pass for any Sum more, will analogically (at
least) advance the price of all things.

2. Show how the Landlords and other Persons, having Annuities or Stypends,
will become losers by such advance of Coin and Commodities.

We have sufficient matter of Fact, to prove, That the raising the denomination
of Coin, does also advance every Commodity proportionable; for that which was
worth but 20 pence, in Edward the first's time, is now worth 5 s. and that all
Commodities did rise near from July, 94. (when Guinea's began to rise) to the
time they were at 30 s. is also matter of Fact; and that since Guinea's have
been settled at 22 s. all Commodities have fallen is also true, Wool and Woolen
Cloth (the chief of our Commodities,) is a Proof thereof, and is that I choose
for instance; the first being fallen 8 s. per Tod, the second 4 or 5 s. per
Yard. Which advance of Commodities according to the advance of Coin, made the
wise and good Q. Eliz. in the Declaration, Anno 1559. concerning the amending
the Coin, debased by H. VIII. express these words: [Also by continuance of this
sort of base Moneys, although Almighty God has given now of late Years,
plentiful increase by the Earth, yet the Prices of all things growing or coming
from the Earth, has daily risen, as Grain, Fruit, Cattle, Victuals, Wool,
Leather, and suchlike, and no remedy could be devised to amend the same, but
to cause that the same base Moneys should be current for no more than they were
in just value.] And the reason of the Rise or Fall of Commodities as Money
does, is plain, because Money is that which measures every thing; and therefore
if Money rise, Commodities must rise; if it falls, they must fall. And the
chief reason of this, is our being so deeply engaged in Commerce with
Foreigners, who will never take our Money for what we are pleased to call it,
but what it is really worth with them, and will be taken from them for, in
other places. Thus, if an Ironmonger buyeth of a Dutchman Chimney-backs, to
the value of 825 pounds Flemish, he might have paid for them before the advance
or debasing of our Coin (the Exchange being at least 33 s. Flem. per pound
Sterling.) with 500 l. Sterling; but our pound being advanced to 24 s. the
Dutchman lowers his Exchange proportionable (as they always do; Witness the
extreme low Exchange just before the Regulation of our Coin, and the advance of
it since,) which is to 27 s. 6 d Flem. for 1 l. Sterling; at which Rate 600 l.
will but pay the pounds Flem. 825. So that here is evidently lost to the
Englishman, who must fetch it up by selling his Goods dearer than formerly. Or
if he Barters for Goods of our own Product or Manufacture, as suppose Iron in
the Bar, the seller of this Iron will advance it proportionable to what the
Chimney Backs are advanced, which. And thus it is plain, the raising our Coin
advances Foreign Exchange; that raises Foreign Commodities, and Foreign
Commodities rising, does many ways advance the Product of our own Country; for
if Chimney Backs, Sword Blades, etc. coming from Holland, should by raising our
Coin grow dear, our English would generally content themselves with English
Blades, and Grates, and Chimneys of our own make, which would much advance the
price. And though I have only instanced in one or two Commodities from Holland,
yet the same consequence would happen by the raising our Coin to all other
Goods or Merchandise, not only of that Country, but all others with whom we
have any Commerce. And thus I have proved, That raising our Coin would
necessarily advance the price of all things, and shall therefore proceed to
show:

2. That by this advance of Coin and Commodities, all such as have made
Contracts before this advance, must necessarily be losers, till such time as
they can advance the Terms of their Contracts proportionable to the advance of
things. Thus,

1. All Landlords whose Estates are let out by Lease.

2. All Persons having certain yearly Stipends or Sallaries.

3. All Creditors whose Debts were contracted before the advance of our Coin,
and not paid till afterward; must all unavoidably be at a loss by the advance
of Coin.

1. As to Landlords, whose Estates are let out by Lease for 7, 11, 21, 31 or
40 years, (the usual terms Leases are granted for,) will be so much the greater
losers, by how much the longer the Leases they have granted are: because here
is an advance of Coin that has advanced the price of things, and still the
Landlord has but the same Rent. For instance, if I have 500 l. per Ann. let out
by Lease for 40 years, to be paid in current English Money; after this, the
Coin of the Nation is advanced, and other things proportionable, yet I received
but 500 l. per Ann. of this New Money; so that if I expended yearly before the
advance of Coin 300 l. and laid up 200 l. now the Coin is advanced, that which
cost me 300 l. will cost me 360 l. so that I can lay by me but 140 l. per Ann.
The interest of which at 6 l. per Cent, is but 8 l. 8 s. Whereas it is plain,
the interest of my 200 l. which I laid up before the advance of Coin, is 12 l.
So that here is evidently a loss of 3 l. 10 s. in 12 l. which is above loss to
the Moneyed Man.

But it may be said, That this Landlord or Moneyed Man, must be supposed to
have Money by him when this change of Coin happens, which will be more, as if
he had 1500 l. of the Old Money, it would be 1800 l. of the New, which is 300
l. gain to him.

To this it may be answered, That this Gain will be more than lost in a short
time after, when much Money by the dearness of things is drawn out of the
Landed or Monyed Man's, into the Trades-man's hands. And the Money of the
Nation being thus increased, does naturally increase the number of Userers and
Purchasers, and the number of Userers and Purchasers increases the value of
Land, and lowers the Rate of Interest. So, if with this Money he would
purchase, Land is advanced; or if he would lend it on Usury, Interest is
lowered; so that he must necessarily Iose by this means notwithstanding.

2. As the Landlord, whose Estate is let out by Lease, must lose until his
Leases are expired, and he can advance his Rents proportionable to the price of
all other things: So likewise it will go with such as have Employments, whose
Sallaries are certain, and cannot be suddennly (if ever) advanced in proportion
to Victuals, Clothes, etc. on which they live, so that they must also be great
losers by this advance of things, which is occasioned by the rise of our Coin.

3. All Creditors whose Debts were contracted before the rise of Coin, and not
paid till afterward, must lose, because the Debt was contracted before the rise
of things, and according to the value of Money then; but now Money is raised
and Commodities likewise, this (when paid the Creditor in the New Money) will
not purchase so much by as if it had been paid him before this Revolution of
Coin; besides, had the Debt been in the Creditors hands before the alteration
of Coin, it would of it self increased, which he also loses.

But on the other hand,

1. All Day-Labourers. And,

2. All Landed-men having Tenants at Will, need not lose by this Alteration of
Coin, because they may advance the Prices of their work, and Income
proportionable, to the advance of Money and Commodities, which loss must
therefore fall,

1. On such as have occasion to employ these Laborers, as Builders, etc.

2. On these Tenants at Will, who must advance the Rent of the Houses or Lands
they hold; so that I think nothing can be made more apparent, than that
advancing the current value of Money, will be a loss not only to Landed-men,
but to most others.

What is material in Sir Richard's Fifth Remark, is already Answered: I shall
therefore say no more to it, but consider*

Sir Richard's Sixth Remark. To keep up an old Standard under an old
Denomination below the value of Bullion, is the greatest Folly imaginable, and
for which we have paid dear; for it first carried away all our Gold and Broad
Money, and lastly all our Milled Money, etc.

And the Doctor says in the Eighth of his contrary Propositions, That it is the
Practice of all the Governments in Europe, to raise their Money as the price of
Silver rises.

To Sir R. I answer, That nothing can be greater Folly than to alter the
Standard of our Coin, as the price of any Commodity is altered; for Money being
the Measure of Commerce (as both Sir R. and the Doctor say it is,) to alter
Money, is to alter the Measure of all things; and that I am sure, unless there
is absolute necessity, is both Folly and Injustice, and is as though the Buyer of
Timber or Deal Boards, should have his two Foot Rule made longer in proportion
to what the seller advances the price of his Wood.

It Is great Folly to advance the value of our Coin in proportion to Bullion, or
any other Commodity, because it will never answer the end for which it is
raised. I have sufficiently proved, That raising the Coin will inhance the
price of all Commodities; and therefore to advance the value of Money, to bring
it to the same price with Bullion, instead of that, it would advance the value
of Bullion, that being a Commodity as well as other things, and is indeed
beginning at the wrong end, as if we should bring the Cart to the Horses; Not
that I can see that Bullion before the Regulation of our Coin was advanced
(properly speaking) to 6 s. 3 d. per ounce, as some fancy; although it was
frequently sold for that price, yet if we consider that that 6 s. 3 d. of Clipped
Money, was bona fide, worth but 5 s. of our true Milled Coin; it then follows,
That Bullion was not advanced so much as other Commodities, but was all along
at the old price of 5 s. per ounce, if you would pay for it with Money of full
weight and fineness. And to confirm this truth, I have discoursed with several
Eminent Goldsmiths, who have great dealing in Plate, and they tell me, That
what I have here asserted is true; and I am sure, it is reasonable. For (as the
ingenious Mr. Lock observes) it is impossible there should ever be 15 d.
difference between an ounce of Sterling Silver coined and an ounce uncoined,
though there may be 2 d. 3 d. or 4 d. per ounce difference, because Bullion may
be exported and coined Silver may not. And because a Crown Piece wants 2 d. of
being 1. of Silver.

And as the ill Policy of coining our Money lighter, or making it go for or
(...) more than it is worth in other Nations, would appear; so would it be
great injustice, because it would injure several sorts of people. The King for
Example, must lose of what he takes over to bear his Expenses in Holland, and
so must the Officers and every private Soldier, which would fall especially
very heavy on the latter: who out of their 3 s. a week Allowance, must but have
a Crowns worth (at most) of the Dutch Victuals, Drink, etc. and so would it
likewise be a manifest Injury to all persons concerned in Foreign Affairs, as I
have sufficiently proved before; so that instead of being the greatest Folly
imaginable to keep our Coin to the old Standard for Weight and Fineness, I
think if rightly considered, it will appear to be the most prudent and
advantageous thing the Government can do, to keep it where it is; and that more
especially, considering we are so deeply engaged in Foreign Concerns: And as to
out Domestic Affairs, many (I have showed) will be losers by this advance of
Coin, but none can be gainers; the truth is, our Inland Trader's (purely living
upon that) will lose the least, though they will gain nothing; for what they will
gain by the advance of their Stock and Cash just upon the Revolution thereof,
they will in short time lose, by paying dearer for Manufacturing their Goods,
and all Necessaries.

But on the contrary, though we can gain nothing but loss by advance of Coin, yet
we shall be great Gainers by continuing the present Standard, because
Foreigners will take out Money (upon occasion) at the same price we take it at,
and it will keep all Commodities both Foreign and Inland, at a reasonable
price. Besides, the Honor and Esteem the Nation would justly gain thereby in
the eyes of Foreigners* for, as the ingenious Sir William Betty says of raising
the Denomination of Coin, That it is like compounding to pay a Debt, and is an
infallible sign of a Bankrupt, and poor Nation; so on the other hand, the
keeping the Coin to its Primitive Weight and Purity, is an Indication of its
Wealth and Riches.

As to the continuing our Coin on the present foot, being the cause of carrying
away all our Broad and Milled Money.

I answer, That of the three parts, viz. what is Exported, Hoarded, and Melted
down, I really believe the part carried away to be the least, and the part
Hoarded the greatest. And this will appear by considering, in whose Hands the
greatest part of this Cash lies: It cannot be denied, but that the Nobility,
Gentry, and Inland Traders together, are Richer, and have more Money than
either the Merchants actually Trading beyond the Sea, on the Manufacturers of
Plate, called Goldsmiths; and therefore it is most certain, the greatest part of
our Milled and Broad Money, is hoarded, for the Nobility and Gentry have no
other use to make of the surplus of their Expenses, unless to purchase with, or
put out to Interest, or into the Bankers Hands; and so long as the major part
of the Cash current is Clipped, they will dispose of that these ways, and keep the
Milled and Broad Money in their own Hands; so that I may safely affirm, that in
some measure to my own knowledge, besides what Reason suggests, That there is
not a Gentleman in England, that lives not up to the height of his Estate, but
who has considerable Sums of Milled, and Broad Money by him; and though the
Bankers and Goldsmiths are reputed to have melted down much, yet they are not
all so ill principl'd, to act against the Laws, Constitution and Interest of
the Nation; for I know a Banker who upon this Revolution of Coin, had by him to
answer Payments in Old Milled Money, to the value of 10000 l.

And it is but reasonable to conclude, That the Bankers have much more Money in
their Hands than the Merchants; for they have generally the possession of the
Merchants Money. And if a Merchant has a great Sum to receive, he orders his
Goldsmith to do it, who has therefore the privilege of picking and culling out
the Milled or Broad, to hoard or melt down, and satisfies the Merchant with
ordinary Clipped Money; so that it is plain almost to a Demonstration, that the
greatest part of our Milled and Broad Money is hoarded, the next to that is
melted down, and the least part of all is exported.

And as to what the Doctor says, That it is the practice of all the Governments
in Europe, to raise their Money as the price of Silver rises: And at the latter
end of his Book, pretends to give several Examples of it, and what was the
consequence thereof. I do not see that thing he says makes for him, but rather
against the Raising of our Coin, whose Circumstances do by no means run
parallel with theirs. For page 61, 62, and 63. he tells us, The Romans and
French did use to raise their Coin; but what is that to us; they were lead by
their Ambition to be engaged in long and chargeable Wars; the former, with most
part of the World; the latter, with most of Europe. And therefore, let the
consequence be never so fatal to their Foreign Commerce* (of which the Romans
had little, and the French of late have as little or less,) yet they must have
Money to supply their present Exigencies, which they could not possibly acquire
any other way, but by multiplying their Species of Coin. But for us to follow
their Example, since we can easily raise our Money without that beggarly way of
Compounding; and since we have so vast a Foreign Trade, which is the Riches and
Glory of our Nation, and which must be much abated, if not ruined by such
advance of Coin, as I have sufficiently proved above: I say, these and many
other miserable consequences unavoidably attending, for us to follow their
Example, would be the worst piece of Policy imaginable: For indeed, the
consequence of this advance of Coin was no more than (as the Doctor confesses,
page 62 and 63,) they themselves grew weary of; for (says he) it created a
disturbance. And page 82. they called in such Money as had been greatly raised,
and reduced the value of it to its usual Bounds; which I think they would never
have done, had they not found this raising of their Coin very prejudicial to
them; for People are not willing to let go what they find by Experience will be
their interest to retain. And page 84. the Doctor confesses, that the Nation
was never at Peace in their Commerce and Traffic, till the value of the Money
was reduced within their Bounds. So that the Doctors Example of raising Coin,
is neither a Reason why we should do the like, nor any Encouragement, but quite
contrary; from the ill Effects, he tells us, The raising their Coin had as I
have showed above; and yet notwithstanding these miserable Effects, the Doctor
wishes heartily, page 71. That we had a Power to raise our Coin 40 or 50 per
Cent. Which Power no doubt but we have, so that he needs not wish forit; but
blessed be God, they that have this Power, have more Reason and Ingenuity, than
to make use of it in a case that would be of so miserable and destructive
consequence.

The truth is, could the Doctor prove, That Bullion were 6 s. or upward per
ounce in Foreign parts, with whom we have great Commerce, and that this price
were so constant and ordinary, that there were no hopes of its Fall, then it
would be time to advance the price of Bullion likewise in England, otherwise we
should have none Imported, but what we have would be Exported; and if we should
by that means, be forced to advance the price of Bullion from ^ s. 1 d. per
ounce (which it is at now,) to Six Shillings, we must necessarily advance the
price of coined Silver as well as Bullion, otherwise the price of Bullion being
so much above that of Coined Silver, we could neither make up the Difference by
Imposition, as I have hinted afterward; nor could we possibly prevent the
Melting Down and Transporting it, the Encouragement being so great; but since
that high price of Silver cannot for a constancy happen in Foreign parts, since
the discovery of those rich Mines in the West Indies, and since the price of
Bullion is now much the same with us as in other Trading Countries; and since
the value of Bullion and Coined Silver is at this time much the same here,
there not being a penny per ounce difference, I see not the least Reason why we
should advance the value of our Money.

As to what the Doctor says, page 80. That Trade makes people Rich, and Gold
and Silver are the Badges of Riches; and therefore, as the People grow Rich,
Gold and Silver must rise. I Answer, That his Premises do by no means require
such Consequences; for by this he would suppose, that we have only a certain
quantity of Gold and Silver here in Europe, which can no ways increase but by
the advance of the Specie, not considering that many Years some Millions of
pounds are brought over into Europe from the West Indies, which greatly
increases our Stock, keeps the price pretty certain, and prevents us having any
occasion for the Doctors multiplying our Cash by inhancing its nominal value.

Sir Richard under his last Remark* has chiefly this, worth Answering, viz.

That the Fall of Guinea's was not only unnecessary, but highly prejudicial to
the Nation.

This is easily proved a mistake, by proving that the lowering of them conduced
extremely much to our advantage, especially in our Foreign Trade. For if in the
greatness of our Foreign Trade consists the Riches and Glory of the Nation, as
all hands do agree it chiefly does, and if the highness of Guinea's so
perplexed our Merchants that they could not possibly carry on their Foreign
Commerce without great Difficulty and Loss, and if all this put the Merchants
upon petitioning the Parliament for bringing Guinea's lower, which was done at
their Request; then I think it is plain, that the lowering them was not
disadvantagious to us, but absolutely, necessary for the carrying on of Foreign
Commerce, and maintaining the Riches and Grandeur of this Nation: For the high
price of Guinea's first advanced the course of Exchange against us, and all
Foreign Commodities; and secondly, the price of Inland Goods, which nothing can
be more plain, than that lowering of them has brought down; and I could give
instances almost in all Commodities that have fallen since Guinea's were
brought Low: So that the Gain thereby extends to all that have occasion either
for Apparel or Victuals, whereas the loss by lowering them chiefly fell on such
as had great Sums in their hands, and who probably got as much or more by the
Rise of Guineas as they lost by their Fall.

And thus I have done with my Arguments against Raising our Coin, of which though
I might have said much more, if my Business other ways would have permitted;
yet I think the foregoing Lines are sufficient to prove, That the Raising our
Coin will infallibly bring great loss to the whole Body of this Nation, by
raising Foreign Goods, and the course of Exchange, and likewise all Inland
Commodities: Whereas the Loss to us by continuing the Coin at the present
Standard, is merely accidental, and can only prove so by our Coins being either
melted down, counterfeited or hoarded; all which, it would be no less subject
to, were it Coined lighter, or the value raised, as they would have it, should
the price of Bullion rise proportionably to what we advance our Coin, which
it is more than probable it would. And therefore, since our Coin (though it were
advanced) would still be liable to the aforesaid Mischiefs; the way to prevent
and salve them, will not be to Coin our Money lighter or baser, or raise its
value, but it will be to endeavor by all means possible to prevent these
Mischiefs, in order whereunto I have made the following Essay.

Since many have taken upon them to prescribe Rules for the prevention of these
great Prejudices to the Nation, of Hoarding, Melting down, etc. I shall take
the liberty to throw in my Mite, for the preservation of the Public Treasure.
For the truth is, though the currency of such Money as is of full weight and
fineness, would conduce much to the facilitating all Receipts and Payments, and
tend extremely to the Honor and Advantage of the Nation in several respects.
Yet if we cannot find means to prevent the great mischiefs of Hoarding, Melting
down, Exporting, etc. it is to be feared, we shall have a greater diminution of
our Coin by these irregular and ill Practices, than we can possibly make up by
our Mint: And therefore I humbly propose,

First, To prevent hoarding our Coin.
This is certainly the least blameable of any of the ill Practices, because the
Money remains in Specie in the Nation, which on emergent occasions would
probably be brought to light, as we see great Sums are of Broad Money at this
time; it is therefore the excessive Hoarding that is mischievous to the Nation,
when Men have such a love to Money, either for its Beauty, or intrinsic Worth,
that rather than part with it, they will let their just Debts remain unpaid
after due, in hopes, or upon the expectation that a Sum will shortly come into
their hands that is less valuable, though in the mean time perhaps the Labourer,
and other Artificers, who have but just from hand to mouth want Bread for
themselves and Families.

This is the case of such Nations as have two sorts of Coin current, a better
and a worse of the same denomination, and this has long been our own case. We
have had the Crown, Crown, Shilling and Six Pence, New and Old, Unclipt and
Clipped; and the consequence of that has been, that our Milled and Broad Money
has been Hoarded, and the Clipped only current.

Therefore, if ever we would prevent the excessive Hoarding of our Coin, we
must have it coined all of full Weight, by calling all our Money in that admits
but of suspicion of being Clipped, and when that is new Coined, and all our Coin
is Milled, or Broad unclipt, we shall find not a penny Hoarded that will any
ways be a detriment to the Nation: And for any Gentleman, etc. to hoard so much
Money as is over and above what will defray all their Expenses and pay their
Debts, can never hurt us.

But then, this calling in our Old Coin will best be done gradually, as the
Wisdom of the Parliament has begun, to their exceeding great Commendation. And
in my poor opinion, if the Government in the space of six Months (by which time
we shall have a Million and a half of New Money, besides the great quantity of
Old Milled Coin and Guinea's,) should call in all our present clipped Money, it
would I presume, effectually prevent excessive Hoarding, and we should have
much more plenty of Money current, and ease in telling it, than we have now;
which we can never expect, so long as any of these Clipped Sixpences, etc. are
permitted to go, for the Reasons aforesaid.

2. To prevent the Melting down our New Coin.
I humbly propose, That the price of Bullion may be settled by Act of
Parliament at 5 s. per ounce, to all people that have dealings in it within
this Kingdom, except the Merchant that imports it, who may have 5 s. 3 d. or 5
s. 4 d. per ounce, as an encouragement for bringing it into the Nation.

That all Bullion imported be bought of the Merchant by the Lords of the
Treasury or their Agents, for the King, of whom alone, all such as have
occasion shall buy their Bullion at 5 s. per ounce:

That to make good this 3 d. or 4 d. per ounce, and Charges, etc. to the King,
a Duty be laid on some Commodity imported, as Wine or the like, to be paid by
the Retailers or Importer, as the Parliament shall think proper.

That an enact Account be kept of what Bullion is imported, and to whom it is
disposed, that so an estimate may be made what the King is out of Purse, and a
Duty laid accordingly: And if this Account is audited once a Month by the Kings
Auditors, it will prevent his Majesty being defrauded.

That the Officers concerned in receiving and disposing of this Bullion, shall
be sworn to deal justly and fairly, and likewise give good Security for the
same.

That all persons selling Bullion to the King as imported, shall make Oath,
that it was first Landed in England, since a certain time that may be mentioned
in the Act; and that such Silver was never bought or sold before in this
Kingdom, which will prevent the selling of any Bullion to the King (to gain 3
d. or 4 d. per ounce) that was formerly bought of him.

That all Bullion thus bought of the King, shall (after it is manufactured) be
carried to Goldsmiths-Hall, and vouched by the Mark (as it is now) to be
Sterling Silver, to prevent putting a greater quantity of Alloy therein by the
Owner.

That the Gain of Workers or Sellers of silver Utensils, shall be charged to
the Buyer in the Fashion; and if any Goldsmith shall take or require above 5 s.
per Ounce for Plate of 11. 2 pw. fine, and 18 pw. of Alloy, he shall forfeit
the same ^ to the King, and to the Informer, or such other Penalties as the
Wisdom of Parliament shall think fit.

That no Bullion be Exported before the Exporter make Oath, That not any of the
Current Money of England is contained in it, as is by Law provided to that
purpose.

And if any one shall discover any Persons offending in any of these Cases,
their Estate shall be confiscated, to the King, and to the Informer.

These and such like Rules and Methods, though here laid down rough and
imperfect, may I doubt not, if polished and improved by a prudent Government,
wholly cure us of that mischievous practice of melting down our Coin. And though
many Objections may by prejudiced or self-interested People, be brought against
them, yet if they prove only Motives to induce this sort of men, or any others,
to rectify what I have said amiss, or complete what I have Essayed, I have my
desire. But I am fully persuaded, That if ever our Coin be reduced to a state
in which it may continue, to be for the interest of the English Nation, it must
be effected, first, by having it coined according to the present Standard, and
secondly, by taking such measures as will certainly secure it to us in that
State, by making it men's interest neither to Hoard, Export, or Melt down.

3. To prevent Exporting or carrying our Coin out of England.
The occasion of carrying away our Coin, is taken to be,

1. To pay the Balance of our Trade.

2. To supply our Army in Flanders.

3. To buy Foreign Commodities, where we have no Exchange.

4. To maintain Gentlemen in their Travels abroad, till they can receive Money
in Exchange.

The first and third of these are reckoned the most material, the other two
more inconsiderable; the second being only while the War lasts, and may
wholly, or for the most part, be avoided by our agreeing with the Dutch, to
take so much of our English Commodities, as shall be equivalent to the Expense
of our Army in Flanders, and the English Merchant to be paid out of the
Exchequer for such Commodities; and the fourth, which is very inconsiderable,
may be salved by the same method the first and third are.

As to the first, The paying the Balance of our Trade. The Reader is to know,
That if England Export not as many Goods as it imports from all places in the
World, (reckoning the prime cost of the Foreign Goods imported, and Charges,
and the selling price of those Exported, with Charges) it must be in debt; and
in this case, the Balance of Trade is said to run against us.

That this Balance of Trade, if it continue to run against us, runs us still
farther into debt; and if the course of Trade does not alter, that we pay this
debt or Balance with Commodities, we must pay it with Gold or Silver; for we
cannot pay it with Bills of Exchange, because that implies a Debt both ways; as
if I owe a Dutch Merchant 100 l. and another Dutch Man owes me 100 l. I can
draw a Bill on the Dutch Man that owes me 100 l. to pay it to the Dutch
Merchant, to whom I am indebted. But if I have no 100 l. owing me in Holland,
nor any other place to which they Exchange, then I must pay this 100 l. in
Specie, because I cannot draw a Bill.

This is the common notion of the Balance of Trade, and of carrying our Money
over to pay it; but I must confess, that unless the several Countries we trade
with, kept an account of the Trade in the Gross Bulk thereof, by all the
Merchants comparing Accounts of their Imports and Exports, I cannot see how
this Balance should upon any certain grounds be known. So that though we may pay
dear for the Balance of Trade running against us, by its being and cause of
Exchange running against us, which is caused by our having occasion to pay more
Sums in Foreign Parts, than they have to pay here, yet the Sums carried over to
Balance Trade withal, are very inconsiderable if any at all.

The chief occasion then of carrying away our Coin, is to buy Foreign
Commodities with (not to pay Debts,) in places where we have no Exchange, as
chiefly in the East Indies: And this is done, either because the Goods we carry
thither are more bulky in proportion to their price; so that the value of the
Ships Cargoe outward, will not lade her home in Goods, whose value lie in a
little room, unless Silver be taken to make it up; for in such long Voyages,
the Merchant is very unwilling to come home without a full Cargo; or else it is
done because the Merchant can go out (supposing the Goods of like value Bulk
for Bulk,) without a full Cargo, and make up what is wanting by taking Bullion
or Coin privately, which saves a great deal both in Custom outward, and in
Freight.

But however, let the design of taking away our Coin be what it will, it is
agreed on all hands, that much of it is taken from us, and especially to carry
to the East Indies, which is one great reason why I believe that Trade does us
more damage than it does us good. And though I am a great Admirer of every thing
the Ingenious and Accomplished Merchant Sir Josiah Child says, in his Discourse
concerning Trade, yet I must except this of the great advantage that occurs to
the English Nation, by the East India Trade; and my chief reason for not fully
conforming to his opinion in this matter, is, First, Because the Trade to the
East Indies robs us of our Coin, without which it is impossible the Nation
should subsist, as we have too great proof of at this time, when no man can get
10 per Cent. of Bankers, though his necessities are never so pressing: And
Secondly, Because the Commodities we import from India, are fully manufactured,
as Silks, Muslins, and Callico's, whereby our own Artificers have no Advantage,
as they have by the Turkey, Hamburgh, and most other Trades. But this being
partly a Digression from my Subject, I shall return to show, That this
Exportation of our Coin will be prevented, by the aforesaid reducing the value
of Bullion below that of our Coin. For,

As when our Coin is Richer than Bullion, i. e. a 5 shill. piece is worth as
much Bullion as 5 s. 4 d. or upward, and then our Coin is more likely to be
carried away than Bullion; so on the other hand, when Bullion is reduced as
aforesaid to 5 s per ounce, it will be Richer than our Coin (as I have showed
before,) and consequently be more advantageous to carry away than Coin. But
because, after the price of Silver is thus settled as aforesaid, it may
sometimes happen, that Bullion may not be easily got to carry away, and that
rather than go without, the Traders to the East Indies will carry away our
Coin. Therefore, Secondly, I humbly propose, That before any Ship be permitted
to Sail that is bound to the East Indies, the Governor and Committy-men of the
East India Company (if the Ship is on their Account) shall make Affidavit, as
shall also the Master of such Ship, with his Mates and Pursur. That none of the
current Coin of England, or Bullion made thereof in all or in part, is laden or
designed to be laden on Board such Ship, or otherwise to be conveyed to the
said Indies, by any means directly or indirectly, to their or any of their
knowledge or privity, other than permitted by Act of Parliament. And if the
Ship is an Interloper, suchlike Oath may be taken by the Owners, Supercargo,
Captain, etc. Thirdly, And if any one shall discover any Sum so to be carried
away of English Coin, one Moiety shall be the Kings, the other the Informers.
Fourthly, And if it can be proved, That any of the Company or Owners were privy
to the taking away such Sums of English Coin, then the whole Ships Cargo shall
be forfeited; and if the Captain be proved privy to it* (unless he makes such
Discovery,) he shall be utterly incapable of Commanding as Captain, any English
Vessel whatsoever, and his whole Estate confiscated.

But there is a Fifth occasion of carrying away our Coin, and which, next to
the East India Trade, robs us of the most; and that is, what is taken from us
by the Sweeds, Danes, and Portuguese, who when they bring us of their
Commodities, do not take enough of ours to Balance the Trade with them, but
take very considerable Sums of our Coin, to our great Detriment, and which I
think deserves to be prevented, either by altering the Act of Navigation, that
we have none of their Commodities, but what our Merchants fetch from them, or
by laying severe Penalties on all such as buy their Pitch, Hemp, Tarr, etc.
unless they pay with Goods of our own Manufacture.

These or suchlike Penalties and Encouragements will certainly prove
effectual, to prevent our Coin from being Exported, or carried out of England;
the preservation of which is of the greatest consequence to us, and deserves
certainly some speedy methods to be taken in order thereto; for otherwise all
our Coining at the Mint is in vain.

4. To prevent Counterfeiting our New Coin.
I had not thought to say any thing on this Head, because I judged it needless,
by reason of the Difficulty of Counterfeiting our Milled Coin. But being since
informed, that several considerable Sums thereof have been Counterfeited, I
think it proper to say something that may (if carefully put in practice) be a
means to prevent it.

And indeed Nature it self does much favor the Detections of this villainous
practice: Since it is not possible for those Counterfeiters of our Coin to make
their pieces weigh as ponderous as the true ones, because Silver is heavier
than any other Metal of less value, except Lead, with which Silver will not
incorporate or mix. For the weight of the several Metals Quantities being
alike, are less according as they are here placed, from the heaviest downward,
viz.

Gold, Lead, Silver, Copper, Brass, Iron, Common Pewter, Fine Pewter, etc.


The weight of Sterling. Silver to the like quantity of Copper is as 1 is to.87
Brass is as 1 is to.81 Iron is as 1 is to.77 Com. Pewt. is as 1 is to.71 Fine
Pewt. is as 1 is to.69


At which rate the quantity of a Crown piece of Copper will weigh but 16 Pw. 19
grs. Brass will weigh but 15 Pw. 15 grs. Iron will weigh but 14 Pw. 21 grs.
com. Pw. will weigh but 13 Pw. 17 grs. fine Pw. will weigh but 13 Pw. 8 grs.


Now, that which I would infer from these Analogies of Silver to other Metals,
is to show, how we may compute when a piece of Money is too light by
Counterfeiting, and when too light by wear. As in this Table of Proportions, a
false Crown Piece made of Copper, and only washed over, (if it does not much
exceed a true Crown in Bulk) it will want 2 pw. 13 grs. the difference between
16 pw. 19 grs. and 19 pw. 8 grs. which it is impossible it should be worn
lighter in 700 Years. And to prove this, I have weighed some of K. Charles the
2d's Crown Pieces, and find of those coined 27 Years ago, to be worn about two
Grains; now if I strike off the two Years last past, wherein this Coin could
not wear much, because Hoarded; then the Proportion will be, That a Crown Piece
will wear 29 grains in 25 years. By which it may be easily gathered, what any
other Piece will wear in any other number of years, which cannot be worth
taking notice of in any piece under 50 or 100 years; in which last time a Crown
Piece will want but a penny of full weight, if the lightness proceed only from
the wear.

To instance in other Pieces, Suppose I would know what a Shilling should wear
that has been coined 120 years: By this Proportion it will appear, it will but
wear 1 26/29 Grains, which is not quite two Grains. For

grains. years. grs. grs. years. 464 25 2 92 120 1 26/29 Grs.

So that it can never countervail the trouble of Rogues and Villains, to
counterfeit any Pieces of Coin, but it will be easily discovered by weight,
making a sufficient Allowance both for wear and difference in weight of the
same pieces, occasioned by the negligence of the Weigher at the Mint. A Crown
Piece, if they should take but 6 d. in Silver out, and put the like quantity of
Copper therein, this would make 7 Grains difference in the weight, between that
Crown Piece and a true one, which a true Crown would not wear in less than 87
years. And if this extraordinary Alloy were Brass, or any other Metals, the
want of weight would be much greater.

And, if every Banker and Cashier were obliged to keep in their Public Shops
or Offices, a good pair of Scales and Weights for Silver, to be for the common
use of those with whom they deal, it would be very easy to discover this
Cheat, either in single Pieces or in great Sums together, allowing however a
small matter for wear. And for the Assistance of those concerned, I have here
inserted a Table what any Sum of our New Coin should weigh precisely, from 6 d.
to 100 l. and may serve for much greater Sums; which Table is calculated at the
rate of the 5 s. piece weighing 19 pw. 8151, 612, 903, 225 grains, or 19 pw. 8
grains* and something more than a grain.

lb. pw. gr. 6 d. 00 00 01 22 1 s. 00 00 03 20 2 6 d. 00 00 09 16 5 s. 00 00 19
08 10 s. 00 01 18 17 1 l. 00 03 17 10 2 00 07 14 20 3 00 11 12 06 4 01 03 09 16
5 01 07 07 02 6 01 11 04 12 7 02 03 01 22 8 02 06 19 08 9 02 10 16 18 10 03 02
14 04 20 06 05 08 09 30 09 08 02 13 40 12 10 16 18 50 16 01 10 23 60 19 04 05
03 70 22 06 19 08 80 25 09 13 12 90 29 00 07 17 100 32 03 01 22

So that if a Person have any of these Sums to receive, it is but telling it
over, and afterward put it in a Bag, and weigh it; as if be 70 l. it must weigh
22 l. 6. 19 pw. 8 gr. To which add the weight of a Canvas 100 l. Bag, which is
commonly 1. and so to 1. 1 pw. and you have the true weight of 70 l. of our
Milled Money and Bag; but if any of it were counterfeit, it would want weight.
And if to this be added severe Penalties on all such as offer any Counterfeit
Money in payment, especially on the Goldsmiths and Bankers, who are supposed to
know Money well, and are less liable to be deceived than others: I hope it
would be effectual to hinder the Currency of Counterfeit Money.

For indeed, it is too miserable and unhappy a truth, That notwithstanding the
Parliament have taken such measures in the last Sessions, as would have been
abundantly sufficient to cure us of the great difficulties we labored under,
by reason of the ill state of our Coin; yet we have a sort of Men among us, I
mean Bankers, who (because these good Laws have run counter to their Selfish
ends) have endeavored to make all those prudent Methods taken for the
Regulation and Restoring our Money, of no effect, by combining together to
ruin the Bank of Eugland, by getting what Bank Notes they could into their
hands; which upon the stop of the Currency of our Clipped Money, they power'd on
the Bank so fast, as it was impossible they should Answer. And though they were
disappointed in their design of quite ruining the Bank thus, yet they have made
the short Payments of the Bank a sufficient Reason for making their little or
none; though at the same time* they have very considerable Sums in Guinea's,
which they either Transport to Holland or Scotland, to gain 1 s. or 18 d. a
piece, or else Hoard them up, in hopes to break through the late Act of
Parliament, for keeping the value of Guinea's at 22 s. or under. Besides, the
non-payment of of their own Notes is most apparently very advantageous unto
them; and which for that reason they will never be brought to pay, till they
are forced to it by Law, or the Bank paying in full, or the plenty of Silver
Money or Guinea's, which they will therefore endeavor to stifle and retard as
much as in them lies; since by that, they have a color for not paying their
Notes; and by not paying their Notes, they have the more Cash out at Interest,
or invested in Jewels, etc. or perhaps in monopolizing of Goods to their
exceeding great advantage. All which Rogueries some ill disposed people are
forward to say, The Parliament might have prevented: First, By giving longer
time for bringing the Clipped Money into the Exchequer: And Secondly, By not
lowering the price of Guinea's; not considering at the same time, That we had
little or no Silver Coin current from about last Midsummer till after
Christmas last, the Guinea's all that time being a sufficient Running Cash,
which they would have been, till we had a sufficient quantity of our New Silver
Coin, had we not had some monsters of Men among us. And as for the lowering of
Guinea's 3 s. too low, which say they, is the occasion of their being carried
to Holland, Scotland, and Ireland, because they go there for 23 s. 24 s. and 25
s. each. I say in Answer, that it was but reasonable to conclude, that as the
high price of Guinea's in England, was the occasion of their Rise in these
three places; so the lowering of our own Coin should have caused these Nations
to do the like, which it has done in part: And no doubt, but so long as we can
have Gold as now, at near 4 l. per. if the Parliament should think fit to
permit the Coining of more Guinea's, we might afford to let the Dutch or others
take them from us at 23 s. till they are weary; for we shall gain considerably
by them at this Rate, as we do also in the way of Trade; which the Dutch are
not so blind (whatever the Irish are) but they will soon perceive, and value
our Guinea's no higher, if so high as we do.

But, if every body were on my mind, unless these Bankers could make it appear
by their Books, and their own Oaths, that they cannot make their Payments, I
would quickly make them tired with the Trade of Cheating; for if a Man has
receiv d a Sum of Money of another, for which he has given his Note to repay at
demand, I think 't is but reasonable, that if this Demand is made, and the
Money is not paid, the Lender should have the Improvement of that Money from
the time such Demand is made* and I doubt not but a Court of Equity would give
it, and which if duly prosecuted, would soon make these Sparks weary of their
Trade of Cheating, in hindering what they can the Current Money (...) to the
destruction of Commerce, and ruin of this Rich and Flourishing Island. So that
upon the whole, I humbly conceive, That the readiest way to have plenty of good
Money current, is either totally to put down the Bankers Trade, or to abridge
them of that Power which they knavishly make use of, to the great detriment of
the Nation; but on the other hand* if Rounds were set to the practice of
Bankers, and (...) made more effectually, to prevent Melting down, Exporting
and Counterfeiting our Coin, we should in a short time, notwithstanding the
War, and malice of our Enemies, be one of the happiest Nations the Sun sees.

FINIS.

