The Saints Justified AND THEIR ACCUSERS FOUND OUT: OR An Answer to the great
Dragons Message, Put forth in five Positions by one of his Messengers.

WHO For this purpose made use of Edward Laurance Priest at Bast-church, a
place so called, in the County of Salop, who at a Dispute at Milford-Hall in
the said County, not far from the said Steeple-house, stood up to prove the 5.
Positions, and there contended for his Masters kingdom, that none could not but
live in sin while they were upon the earth, (no not the Saints) whom he there
accused to live in sin; And other falsities he stood up to prove, producing
scriptures to that end, but left all unproved to anies understanding there who
had the least true discerning to discern with.

Also a few Queries put forth to be answered by the aforesaid Priest (if he
will) or any else of his Brethren.

By a Witness against the Dragons Message (of man's always living in sin here)
and for the Truth, called Richard Hickock,

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the sign of the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate, 1660.

To the Reader.
ABout the latter end of the eighth month in this year accounted 1659. as I
was passing through Denbigh-shire into Shrop-shire, I heard of a great boasting
that was amongst the Priests followers, how that ene Edward Laurance had
overthrown the Quakers, at a dispute which was at Milford-hall in Shrop-shire,
in which County I heard the like boasting and in some other parts, and
perceiving that a false testimony had (...) spread abroad concerning the said
dispute by the Priests friends, that truth might not lie under false reports;
could not omit but give a true testimony of it as in eye and ear witness, and
from (...) to last how it was carried on that day; The aforesaid Edward wrote
five Positions, which he give to one which is called a Quaker, and promised to
prove them at some of their meetings, upon which the day was appointed; and
being so, that a pretty distance of time was between the delivering of his
Paper, and the time he was to prove what he had wrote in it, the noise of it
spread abroad and (...) a great multitude were gathered together on the day
appointed to hear both parties, the Priest being come, who though he knew we
were no upholder of Steeple Houses, yet he pressed on us to go, telling us that
it was a more fit and convenient place for that work, which was contrary to his
promise, which was to do at our meeting, to which promise we kept him, that we
might not be guilty by submitting to his will of him breaking of his promise,
which he seeing that we would not go from the place appointed, our meeting
being without, he pleaded that he had but a week body, and wa^ subject to be
troubled with the toothache, and saying that was not a place for him, upon
which we proferred him to stand within the house and to speak through the
window, and we to stand without, but he not being willing to engage, denied
that, saying, the wind would be sharper in the windows then elsewhere, and
such like excuses, so went his way from us to the Steeple house and a great
rude company with him, and many stayed with us waiting to see the event of the
day, and after a while we sent unto him, that he would either come here or else
he was a liar and did not fulfill his promise, and with much ado he came with
two or three other Priests with him and a ru^^ multitude, and then he went to
the window, though he had denied them before, and there began to prove his
Positions as he had them wrote down in his book, and ever when any of us who
are called Quakers did answer against what he had said, the rude multitude
cried out hold thy tongue, hold thy tongue, we will not hear thee, we will not
hear thee; and he called to them again, whose hearts were fully given up to
receive what ever he said, but nothing that the people called Quakers said; are
you satisfied in what I have said, people are you satisfied, people, to whom
they answered, we are, we are, we are; And to make short and come to speak
something to the matter, thus it continued all the while, and nothing would be
received nor heard but what the Priest spoke, except it was with a few
honest-hearted ones, who desire truly to know the truth; And when three of the
Positions were run over though not one of them proved, he with a scorn cast out
on them whom the Lord loves, saying, That by that time the Quakers hearts were
as rotten as Habakuks bones, we shall be shut of them, and so went to prayers,
and with such a preparation as the did he pray, which when he had done he would
not stay for no man's words, though two Positions was not at all disputed on,
and his wicked multitude thrusting one another fell a fighting, but with
patience were we through the love of God carried on that day to bear the
reproach of our enemies, and to rest satisfied in the truth, though the wicked
would not hear its testimony nor receive it; And this had not been given forth,
but finding lies pass so lively for truth so long after their birth.

By a witness to Truth and against lies R. H.

The Saints justified, and the Accusers found out.
First the Priest said as follows.
Pr. I undertook to prove that the dearest Saints of God living upon earth have
sin, and that I do thus, By proving that the Apostle Paul cried out of a body
of sin, and that David was a man after Gods own heart, and yet a sinner, and
John said if we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, etc. as Romans 7.24.
and 1 John 1.8. Eccles. 7.20. and 2 Samuel 11.

Answ. The end for which this Position was laid down and these Scriptures
brought forth for, was to prove, That no man cannot, but while that he lives
here, he must live in sin; This being truly weighed, and these Scriptures
honestly read over, a rational man may see they prove no such thing.

When the Devil tempted Christ, he for his own ends made use of the Scriptures,
and it is no marvel if his Ministers do the like to labor in the Scriptures,
like him, to bring if they can about their wicked designs; and though such
labor in the Scriptures, by turning over leaf after leaf, and quoting line
after line, to prove that none can live here, but whilst they live here they
must live in sin, yet such Labor not in the Word and Doctrine, nor speaks the
Scriptures as they were spoke forth by the true Prophets and Apostles, but
uses them to answer their ends, (to wit) to accuse the Saints with, and to
prove them to live in sin, yea the dearest of them, so the Devil has true
service by them, that great Dragon and old Serpent which deceives the World
and accuses the Saints, Rev, 12.9, 10. Surely you Priests have brows as of
brass, and the sinews of your necks are as Iron, and it may as truly be said
of you, as Jeremiah said to your forefathers, Were ye ashamed when ye had done
abomination, (nay) ye were not at all ashamed, neither could ye blush, Jer.
6.13, 14, 15. yea ye are more unexcusable then these, seeing you profess your
selves to be Ministers of Christ, and greater abomination could scarce be
committed, then to accuse the Saints, and affirm that none while they live here
cannot but they must live in sin, for hereby the power of God and the end for
which Christ was sent is denied, yea, and more power attributed to the Devil,
over man while he is here then unto God, surely the Devil is much beholding to
such Ministers as these who are doing his work, And I know no reason why any
should be judged as transgressors who tell you that you are of your father the
Devil and are doing his work.

These are the accusers of the Saints, and fellow-heirs of the Kingdom of Satan
in this time of the glorious breaking forth of the Gospel of our God and his
Son Christ, makes it a great part of their work to accuse the Saints of the
most high God, and to insinuate it into others, That none can but live in sin
here, which Doctrine pleases the fleshly part in man, which according or
agreeing with it, sound Doctrine by such will not be received, and the
Scripture is fulfilled which said, The time should come that found Doctrine
would not be received, and Timothy speaks expressly by the Spirit, That in the
latter times some should depart from the Faith, (take notice of that) giving
heed to seducing spirits and Doctrines of Devils, and it is a Doctrine of the
Devil to accuse the Saints, as Revel. 12. and to teach people that none can but
live in sin here, and that though they live in sin, yet they may serve God too,
when Christ said No man can serve two Masters, And the Apostle said Be not
deceived Brethren, whosoever abides in Christ sins not, 1 John 3. to 7. and
they who give heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of Devils are erred from
the Faith, and you who say that none cannot, but while they live here they must
live in sin, and quote Scripture to prove the Assertion, I never found that
Scripture yet that said so, and I have been a searcher of them thirty years,
and if the Scriptures be not your ground, and yet quoted by you for a ground,
then your doctrine is without a bottom, and must needs be such as proceeds out
of the bottomless pit, which is so smoaky and black that the Air is darkened
by it. Now that the wicked do live in sin, that we do acknowledge, and if the
Saints cannot but live in sin too, where is the difference between them both,
in what does it consist what does it stand in words and outside professions?
No) for Christ said, Except your Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter the Kingdom of Heaven,
Mat. 5.20. and they who live in sin do live after the flesh, for sin is a fruit
of the flesh, and as they who live after the flesh do mind the things of the
flesh, so they who live after the Spirit do mind the things of the Spirit, and
the Apostle said Walk in the Spirit, and you shall not fulfill the lusts of the
flesh, Gal. 5.16.

And again, whereas it is affirmed that there never was any man that was
without sin here, or that can be, this is an affirmation that the Scripture
will not justify, for in the Scriptures are the names of diverse recorded as
cannot justly be charged with any sin, as Abel, Enoch, John Baptist, and
several others, and Christ the Son of God, who came to destroy the works of the
devil, for to this end was he made manifest, 1 John 2.8. And he said be ye
perfect, as your Heavenly Father is perfect; and man was not created to live in
sin here, but to live in the Spirit, where the fruits of the flesh is not
fulfilled, as Gal. 5.16. And they who live in sin follows not Christ for their
Leader, but him who leads into sin, who is the prince of the Air who rules in
the Children of disobedience, and therefore must the wrath of God be powered
upon the Children of disobedience, who follow not the Lamb Christ, and such
though they have the name of Christians, yet with the Light Christ they are
found to be false Christians, and to be of the many Antichrists, who bares not
the Image of Christ, and these are the accusars of the Saints, whom the Lord
has Sanctified, and whom he has sanctified he has perfected, by the one
offering, and who are they that dare lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect,
but such as Edward Laurance, in whose mouth the devil that accuser of the
Saints, is a lying spirit, whose mouth i^ full of blasphemy, and casts his
floods out of his mouth to drown the truth if he can, and as fast as he casts
his floods forth, so ready are his servants to drive them forward, that their
Masters design might go on.

Now for these Scriptures, which is quoted by Edward Laurance and made use on
by others, for this end before mentioned, I say that they who knew the
Scriptures, as they knew them that gave them forth, do not produce them to this
end; and whereas it is said that Paul cried out of a body of sin, and John
said, if we say we have no sin, etc. It Is true they said so, and though Paul
once witnessed such a condition, yet this proves not that Paul always lived in
sin here, but that he was now in the time of putting it off, and of witnessing
the fulfilling of Christ's words, who said Come unto me, all ye that are weary
and heavy laden, and I will give you rest, which if he had not come unto
Christ, the ^ight which met him on the way, by him to be guided, he might have
been like you, always complaining of sin whilst he lived, but he was
faithful to him who condemned sin, so come to see it overcome, and being set
free from sin brought forth fruit unto God, Romans 6.22. Paul witnessed both
these times, and before he could truly tell others, how fruit was brought forth
unto Holiness, or witnessed it himself, he was first in the time of crying out
because of sin, but thousands now complain of sin being in them, that are not
yet come to the condition (it to witness) which Paul was in when he cried out;
John who also was a witness of the same things, he speaking unto others, said
if we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, etc. But he did not say, if we
say we shall be redeemed from sin here, so that we shall not live in sin here,
we deceive our selves, etc. No he did not say we cannot but live in sin here,
etc. If we say otherwise, we deceive our selves, etc. If you Priests could
find a Scripture that says so, you would not hide it, but none of these say
so, and John who was a witness of the same things with Paul said, if you abide
in the Light as he is in the Light, then have you fellowship one with another,
and the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. For he was
one who knew the true time of confession of sin, and the time of deliverance
from it, so was a fit Minister to declare unto others of such conditions.

And whereas the Scriptures say, there is not a just man upon the Earth that
does good and sins not, and there is none that does good no not one, etc.
This also is true in its place and time, for the best of man's performances,
which is not the true Spirits work, is but as filthy clothing, which though
they who live after the flesh call the work good, and them that do it holy, yet
with the Lord they are not numbered so, nor with his Saints; and the Apostle
said we know we are of God, and all the World lies in wickedness, but he did
not say that all that are in this place, called the World, lies in wickedness,
and John saw just men who lived not in sin* who were cleansed from sin by the
Blood of Jesus, and Paul saw just men, who brought forth fruit unto holiness,
and David said mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of
that man is peace; and there were many just men the Scripture makes mention of,
some of which are before mentioned, which did good and cannot be charged with
sin, and in the same Chapter wherein, its said, there is not a just man upon
the Earth, does the same man that spoke those words declare of a pure estate,
seeing I find more bitter then death, the woman whose heart is snares and
nets, and her hands as bands, who so pleases God shall escape from her, and
where he exhorts from abounding in wickedness and an overmuch righteousness,
yet he says, he that fears God shall come forth of them all; Now take
notice, that as there is an overmuch wickedness, so there is an overmuch
righteousness, now that righteousness which stands not in the Power of God, is
a righteousness which is over much, which as the fear of God is witnessed, it
is come out off, and in an overmuch righteousness some were in the Prophets
days, with which the Lord was wearied, as Isa. 1.11.13, 14. and so on, and the
Scribes and Pharisees who had the Law in their Synogogues every Sabbath day,
and thought in the Scriptures to have Eternal life, they were in a
righteousness which was heapt above the righteousness of Christ, and they were
counted just and holy men in their time, by such who were in the same worship,
and their worship they counted holy, yet by the Spirit of the Lord it was
counted an abomination, and the prayers of the wicked is abomination, and by
this generation the true Prophets and Apostles were persecuted to death (as
deceivers) and themselves went under the Names of holy, just and righteous men,
so accounted of their brethren who consented with them, but amongst such just
men as these there is none that does good and sins not; and whereas the
Preacher said, there is not a just man that does good and sins not, he did
not speak this of such who was in the Power of God, who stood in his Council,
and abode in his will; but to Idiots and Novices, who be out of the Power of
God, the Spirits sayings be a mystery.

And you who say David was a man after Gods own heart, and yet he was a sinner,
how is your wisdom become foolishness and night come upon you for a vision,
well may it be said of you, as Isaiah said of those Teachers in his time, that
they were all blind, Isa. 56.10. Surely if you had known the Scriptures, you
had been more wise then to asserted such a thing as this, for where the
Scripture makes mention of David's sinning, it gives no such testimony that
David was a man after Gods own heart, as he was a sinner, but there is proof
enough to show that he was a man after Gods own heart, as he walked uprightly
before the Lord; it is time for you to throw aside your Retorick, Logic and
Heathenish Phylosophie, it does you no good, nor gives you no Light in the
knowledge of the things of God, nor it is not like: for the treasure of wisdom is
not there to be found, (that is in Christ) as Paul witnessed, Col. 2, 3, 4.8, 9,
10, 11.

The second Position.
Pr. That the Holy Scriptures is the Word of God, proose in Exodus 20.1. Ephe.
6.17. Col. 3.16. etc.

Ans. Now if these Scriptures proves the Scriptures to be the word of God; the
first here quoted declares of the ten Commandments, but speaks not one word
that the Scripture is the Word of God, and at that time the most of the
Scriptures were not written: The second here quoted, says the Helmet of
Salvation, the Sword of the Spirit is the Word of God, but does not say the
Scriptures is the word of God, and they who know any thing of God or have but
one grain of true discerning, knows that the Scriptures is not the Sword of
the Spirit, and the last here quoted shows that the Apostle exhorted the
Collossians to let the Word of Christ dwell in them rightly: he did not say let
the Scriptures, and call that the Word of God, dwell in you, that is your dark
consequence, Imaginations and conceivings from the Scripture in calling them
so, and its in vain for you to cast such dark foggs and mist before the
children of Light, for they will not walk in them having the Light, we walk in
the Light and exhorts others unto the same.

Now concerning the Word, that's Christ's Name, Rev. 19.13.15. whence had you
your Authority to rob Christ of his Name, and give it to the Scriptures, but
what will ye not do, when you will give his Name to the devils words, as thou
Edward Laurance did when thou went about to prove his words the Word of God;
and for the Scriptures we own them in their places, and exhort People to read
them, and to give that honor to them which is due (to wit) to come unto it
which they point at, which is the anointing, the Light, the Grace of God, which
is Christ the Word nigh, to whom all come to Learn that are saved and that
believe in the Light, and this the Scripture directs to, as Joh. 5.39, 4^. and
2 Pet. 1.19. and 1 John 2.20.27. Titus 2.11, 12. etc. And herein is true honor
given to the Scriptures: but you dishonor them and him ye point unto, who
lurry them up and down like a pedlers pack, from Market to market, where you
put them to sale, to as great extortion as you can, though you have no example
in them for so doing, but this is not all, for you to make your ware -- pass
off which you have mixed with the Scriptures, brings in the Scriptures to prove
your ware good though it be as black and smoakie as hell, and then say you the
word of God confirms it, when there is no such thing; and let any question you
what is the word you speak of, the Scriptures say you, when the word Scripture
(being interpreted) does not signify as much as to say the Word of God, but as
much as to say a writting, and thus you wrest the word Scripture, calling it by
another name then it signifies being interpreted, and read the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles, and you shall find them declare that the Word was in
the beginning, was made flesh, and that all things was made by it, this is not
the Scriptures, they say the Word endures for ever, this is not the Scriptures,
and that the word is as a fire and hammer, and this is not the Scriptures, and
the Word is quick and powerful sharper then any two edged Sword, and is a
discerner of thoughts and intents of the heart, and this is not the Scriptures,
this is the Corner Stone which you false builders reject, and will not build
with, who build thereon do deny your teachings, and smoakie foggy doctrines,
which has grimed the hearts of some with dirt and mire, that sticks so fast it
will not easily be got off.

Yet further for the satisfaction of such who truly desire to be satisfied
concerning the Word of God, the Word of the Lord endures for ever, it came unto
Abraham saying, Genesis 15.1^^. And the word of the Lord came unto Jonah the Son
of Amittai, saying, arise go to Nineveh etc. Jonah, 1.1.2. and in the eighth
Month in the second year of Dius, came the Word of the Lord unto Zechariah the
son of Barachiah, the son of Iddo the Prophet, saying, etc. as Zechariah. 1.1.
And many more Scriptures there be which declares of the Word of the Lord coming
to such and such a Prophet, saying etc. So take notice that the Word of the
Lord spoke to the Holy men of Old, who gave out the Scriptures, and that was
the Word that spoke the words, which were received and written after the Word
had spoke them, so the Scripture is fulfilled which Peter spoke, who said, Holy
men of God spoke as they were moved of the Holy Ghost, 2 Peter, 1.19, 20, 21.
And where have you been learning Oh you blind guides who put no difference
between the Word and the words, which shows to others what the word speak to
or by such and such a man, and what says the Words which were written from the
Word, even that the word is nigh, as Deuteronomy. 30.41. etc. And Christ said my
sheep know my voice; so it is plain you are none of Christ's sheep, much less
his shepherds who yet knows not the living Word, it by which the Lord spoke to
the Holy Prophets and Apostles, and if the blind lead the blind they shall
both fall into the ditch; so you Priests you must to school again to learn
what the Word is, and if you will do honestly, turn the People from your
immaginations and conceivings which you have fed them with to the light of
Christ in them to be taught, and if you will not be so honest, yet once more
after so often exhortation of the Lords People, to your flock and people do I
declare and testify unto them, that to the Light of Christ in them they must
hearken and be obedient, else no entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven, and there
the Word of God is to be heard and known, and true Wisdom to be found: And his
third Position is as follows.

Pr. That I my self am a true Minister of Jesus Christ, Proof, First by my
call. Secondly by my Qualifications; my call I prove by the laying on of hands
of the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.14. Titus, 1.5 my Qualifications, by being fitted
and qualified for that work.

Ans. For this man's qualifications, they surely are very bad, who accuses the
Saints, and has denied the end for which Christ was sent, and does the work of
the devil as before is proved; and who called thee or any of your Priests to
this work, but the prince of the air which ruling in your hearts, and leads
you to do wickedly, and for these Scriptures, they make nothing for any of you,
but against you; and for the laying on of hands (there were women that had
that) as is plain from the Scriptures, as Acts, 8.12.17. Will you grant they
were made Ministers by it, if not there is more reason for it then for yours,
for by it they received the Holy Ghost, but I know none of you that have
received the Holy Ghost by the hands that have been laid on you, and Edward
Lawrance thou know, that at the Dispute thou were proved a false Presbyter,
and them that laid their hands on thee, as when thou wast asked whether the
Presbyters that laid their hands on thee took Tithes or no, to which thou
answeredst they did, but could not prove the like of that Presbyter in the
Apostles days; and to any who justly consider the matter, it will plainly
appear, That's no just ground to own you for Ministers of Christ, because you
have had the hands of a company of proud and covetous men laid on you, nor to
own their action in so doing, no more then Pharaohs Inchanters work was to be
owned or compared with what Moses the servant of the Lord did; and I appeal to
Truth and Scripture in this matter, and leave any rational man to search the
Scriptures in this point, and see what things was done by the laying on of
hands then, and then consider what yours does, and it will plainly appear yours
is but a mock to it, not worthy in the least to be numbered with it.

And they who were really and truly Ministers of Christ were called of God,
fitted and qualified by his spirit, and they followed Christ for their example,
and their fruit made it manifest they were his Ministers; These had not so
learned Christ, to tell people they could not but live in sin here, and to take
their Corn, Hay, Flax, Hemp, Wool, Lambs, Foals, Calves, yea Cows and Oxen from
the people. Christ told of Deceivers and many false prophets that should rise
and deceive many, as Mat. 24.11. and in the seventh chapter he bids beware of
them, saying, by their fruits ye shall know them, as verse, 4, 15. And Edward
Lawrance, what fruit brought thou forth when thou took Richard Wards yoke of
Oxen from him for Tithes, does this prove thee a Minister of Christ or a wolf?
If all the scriptures were searched through, the like example could not be
found from any one Minister of Christ, but thou have many brethren, and your
making use of the Saints words in your Pulpits and Assemblies cannot hide you,
nay any who have scriptures to read, and will read them honestly over, may see
you are another sort of Ministers then the Ministers of Christ were, and if
another sort that makes use of the Name of Christ in your preaching and
praying, Then it must needs be the Minister^ of Antichrist, and such is the
qualifications of the Ministers of Antichrist, to take the goods of people, of
them by force who owe you nothing, and to bring them before Rulers and
Governors if they deny, and cast them into prison besides, it is time to leave
telling of your qualifications till ye be better, and till you be turned out of
Simon Magus his way and road, who would have bought the holy Ghost with money;
you may leave off telling of your caltoo. And I pray you priests who led him to
offer money to purchase that power that was among the Apostles but his great
master the Devil, and surely the Lord does not lead his Ministers to follow
Simon the Sorcerer the Devils servant; so cease from your call and
qualifications, they both being bad, and return to the Light of Christ which
you have so much despised, and learn at that, and be not proud, to stoop so low
that you be not always Idiots and Novices.

Now concerning his fourth and fifth Position, I know nothing at all that he
said to either of them, except what is said at the latter end of what is said
to the Reader, yet that they may not go without an answer, his two last
Positions is as follows.

Pr. That the people called Quakers are no true Church of Jesus Christ. That
the Quaking amongst them is a Delusion of the Devil.

Answ. Though these two Positions remain without any proof at all to uphold
them, yet being I have found that they remain in the minds of some as if they
were true; Take this answer, to the first of these, I answer, That for the
people called Quakers, they are a People evil spoken of, in every Parish and
Country I have been in since I first either heard of them or knew them, this I
speak as from what I know, and that not only of one, two or three sorts of
Religions, but of all that I met with have I heard this evil spoke of, and I
find in Scripture that the way that the true Church was of was evil spoken of
every where, and I find that the Corinthians which was a true Church received
Paul with fear and Trembling, 2 Cor 7.15. and he spoke to the Philippians which
was of the true Church to work out their salvation with fear and Trembling, and
I know them to be a People that walks much in the fear of God, and who walks
there have a place in God where the true Church is, as 1 Thessalonians. 1.1. and 2
Thessalonians 1. and where this man can find proofs to prove such as these no
true Church I know not, without he fly to lies and false reports for his refuge
and proofs; but woe must come upon them that make lies their refuge, for with
Truth he can never do it.

And to the last Position I Answer, That the Quaking that is witnessed amongst
these despised People, is no delusion of the Devil, but the mighty power of
God, which casts down delusions and overturns them, and I question not but the
same power was despised in the Prophets and Apostles days, by the same
generation who then were strangers to the power that wrought in the true
Prophets and Apostles, so they were persecuted as Deceivers, and put to death
under the name of Schismatics, Heretics, and Deceivers, and Paul bid work out
your Salvation with fear and trembling, as before is said, and the true Church
witnessed Trembling, as before is proved, And the Lord said to them that were
got above the fear of God, whose hearts were hardened, etc. Fear ye not me
says the Lord, will ye not Tremble at my presence? Jeremiah 5.22. Isaak
Trembled, Genesis 27.33. Habakuks belly Trembled, etc. Hab. 3.16. But concerning
this did Edward Lawrance make a jest, which showed he was a stranger to the
work of the power of God in him, and so where it is witnessed he calls it a
Delusion of the Devil, This is one of them who puts good for evil, and calls
evil good, but when your reward comes upon you it shall come as an armed man
that you cannot escape it: so Repent betime least there be no place left.

R. H.

A FEVV QUERIES As follows,
I. YOU who say men cannot but live in sin here, do not you exhort people from
sin? (and if so) then how does that agree to exhort them from sin, and also
tell them they cannot but live in it here, is not this confusion and Babylonish
work?

II. Is there not a time to confess and a time to forsake sin and come out of
it, and is not man to come out of sin here (what preach you Priests of this,
say you I or nay) if I, then whether are the Saints they that come out, or they
that stay in sin, If those be they that come out, then what are they in that
which they are come out of? what Logic have you to make these agree.

III. And you who say the Scripture is the Word of God, does not the Scriptures
give this testimony, that the word of the Lord endures for ever, as 1 Pet.
1.23.25. And does not the word Scripture singnifie as much as to say a writing,
and do you not know that words written or printed with ink on paper cannot
endure for ever? how then by Scripture can you prove those words which are
written or printed with ink on paper, to be this word the Scriptures testifies
of?

IV. And is there not plain Scriptures, which says, the Word was in the
beginning, and was made flesh, and by it the Heavens were made, as John 1.1, 2,
3.10.14. Psalm. 33.6. Heb. 11.3. But where does the Scriptures give this
testimony of themselves? Are you such fools and Idiots, to put no difference
between the Word and words (the declarer and the declared) what see you no
difference between it, and what it said, you must to school to the Light to be
taught, before you can be true witnesses of the Word?

V. In Ephesians. 6.17. a scripture which is used by you Priests to prove the
scriptures the Word of God (it is said) that the Sword of the Spirit is the
Word of God, has the Devil this Sword [the Sword of the Spirit] or did he ever
use it to overcome any with, or is the Scriptures this Sword? if the Scriptures
neither be this Sword, nor he never had it nor used it, you know he had the
Scriptures and made use of them to tempt Christ, that if it had been possible
he might overcome him, Matthew 4.6.

VI. And if it be so that he had the Scriptures but not the Sword of the
Spirit, then you Priests in what are you above him who have the Scriptures to
make use of as Weapons to overcome your Enemies with, but wants the Sword of
the Spirit (which if you say nay) then prove the Scriptures it, seeing you put
them for it, which if you cannot, your fruit will not prove you have it for
you, let your fruit be laid before you and trial be made.

VII. Again you Priests, seeing you tell people you are Ministers of Christ,
whether have not they Christ for their Example who are his Ministers (if they
have) how prove you your Example from Christ of taking peoples Lambs, Piggs,
Geese, Calves, Foals, Corn, Hay, Wool, Hemp, Flax, and other goods from them
for preaching, yea, and if they will not give it you, to take it by force,
surely the Sword of the Spirit destroys and cuts down this fruit; and did not
Christ say, By the false Prophets and Deceivers and Antichrist preachers which
was to come, that by their fruits men should know them, Mat. 7.15, 16, 17. Now
it lies on you to prove this the fruit of Christ, or else you must no more own
your selves to be his Ministers, but Ministers of Antichrist, tell the people
so and you will tell them truth.

VIII. And seeing you prate so much of your call to the Ministry, tell who sent
and Commissionated you to Preach, whether were you called immediate of God or
of Man? if of man, whence then had they power to make you Ministers, and after
what manner did they make or ordain you to be Ministers, if by the laying on of
their hands, have you received the Holy Ghost by it (if not) nor they had not
their Authority from God to do so, but would imitate to do as like as they
could, to what they had read that others did? then whether I say are you
Presbiters followers of the Pope or of Pharaohs Inchanters, or whether are you
not like them both, they both being out of the Power of God, yea, and to Simon
Magus the Sorcerer, who would have bought the Holy Ghost with Money, which with
Money cannot be bought.

R. H.

THE END.

