THE (...) OF (...).

Examining The several Opinions of diverse Authors, especially that of Sir (...)
in his (...).

With A general Relation of the manner of Generation, as well in (...) as
(...): With some Figures delineating the first Originals of some Creatures,
evidently demonstrating the rest.

To which is joined a Discourse of the ^.

Or without any real applycation of Medicines to the part affected, but
especially by that Powder, known chiefly by the name of Sir (...) Powder.

By (...) lately of Trinity College in Oxford, Doctor of Physic.

LONDON, Printed by R. N. for (...) and are to be sold at the Bell in S. (...)
1651.

To the Honorable, Mr. ROBERT BOIL, Son to the Right Honorable the late Earl
of CORK, my much Honored Friend.
Noble Sir,
WHere Virtue shall be found in conjunction with Noblity in such black, the
last and worst times, it no less invites and amazes the eyes and hearts of
beholders,

holders, then some new Star or blazing Comet: but with this difference; the
one is cause of their fear, the other gives life to their hopes and joy. You
have, Sir, so inricht your tender years with such choice principles of the best
sorts, and even to admiration managed them to the greatest advantage; that you
stand both a pattern and wonder to our Nobility and Gentry: who in these past
times many of them have so spent their precious Minutes, that they are scarce
able to account for one, or spend an hour but in vice: that cannot brook
Virtue, because it is not born with them; that hate all things that must be
obtained by industry. Who most degenerately intrusting their wits as well as
fortunes with their inferiors, have made them Master of both; a sad forerunner
(I will not say Author) of these sadder times.

But you have made a better and far nobler choice, you have not thought your
blood and descent debased, because married to the Arts. You stick not to trace
Nature in her most intricate paths, to torture her to a confession; though with
your own sweat and treasure obtained. Being ravished, Sir, with these
considerations of your worth and candor, I shall not fear to throw these Papers
into the bosom of your protection; from whom as I cannot miss a judicious
censure, so I shall hope for a candid reception. They are Discourses which have
busied the Heads and Pens of many judicious and learned, amongst whom our noble
Author has not deserved the lowest esteem. I shall not presume to these
phansies with their maturer births. Yet perhaps something may here be found,
that may encourage others to a farther search. I shall not despair of your own,
which may give a better account and a plenary satisfaction, if it may be, in
these so labyrinthean works of Nature, which is all I have labored for, and
shall still be, (as likewise for the preservation of your health) the prayer of

Sherborne, May 15. 1651 Your Honors most humble Servant, NATH. HIGHMORE.

An Explanation of the following Figures in both Tables.
THe first Figure, of the first Table, shows the Kidny Bean opened; in which is
a little crooked leaf ^olded up, which being displayed, shows it self, as in
the second; and when, being set, it arises above ground, it is such a Plant as
the third shows; with the very same leaves and no other.

The second Figure shows a Colewort seed: the first shows both leaves, with the
stalk folded up, as they lie in the husk of the seed: the second shows it come
up out of the ground.

The third Figure has the small germen of an Ash; lying with his two leaves in
the kernel of an Ash, both in the husk enclosing them. The second shows him
sprung up above the Earth, at his first coming abroad.

The fourth delineates the young germen of the Pease in the midst of the grain,
and its breaking forth.

The fifth shows the young Plant in the midst of the Bean: with the manner of
his putting forth, with the same leaves displayed in the third, which are wrapped
up in the first and second.

The fixth Figure displayes the young Maple wrapped up in his husk; and how he
lies, as in the first: The second shows him a little unfolded, when it is taken
out of the husk. The third shows him gotten from his shell, and the surface of
the Earth.

The seventh Figure shows what progress the Chick has made in his formation,
in the third day after incubation.

The eighth shows the Chick perfectly formed in his shell not long before his
exclusion* with the Yolk almost whole; describing the manner of his lying in
the shell.

The second Table shows the growth of the Chick in the first days Incubation.
THe first Figure demonstrates the Eggs taken from their shells in a dish, with
the Chalazae, and Cicatricula: which in A that was never sat on, is but small.
In B that has endured the heat of the Hen one whole day, something dilated. In
some new laid Eggs, I have seen it no more altered the third day.

The second Figure delineates the second days observations and change in the
Egg; the large dilation of the Cicatricula, with all its Circles.

The third Figure shows the growth of the Chick, and alteration in the Egg, the
fourth day.

The fourth and fifth Figures, show the fifth days addition to the former
growths.

The fifth shows him taken from the Yolk, and White, with a delineatior of all
his parts, as they appear lying round together in the Egg.

An INDEX of the Chapters contained in this History of Generation.
THe opinion of Philosophers touching Generation. Chap. 1.

The Conceit of Sir Kenelm Digby, ^ching the generation of Creatures, ^ap, 2.

A short censure of the former con^pt, Chap. 3.

The true way of Generation set down general, with the examination of some
^gning Arguments of several Authors, ^p. 4.

A more particular narration of the way of Generation, Chap. 5.

How Plants are generated, Chap. 6.

How Animals are generated, especial ly Insects, Chap. 7.

How those Creatures are generated that are bred from Eggs. Chap. 8.

The generation of Animals brough forth alive, Chap. 9.

How difference of Sexes and Simil^tude with the generators is caused, Chap ter
10.

Several Arguments against this opin^on proposed, and answered, Chap. 11.





THE HISTORY OF GENERATION.
The Opinion of Philosophers concerning Generation.

Chapter the First.
THe ancient Philosophers have taught us that all subsisting Bodies consist of
two parts, Matter and Form: the first they would have us believe to be composed
of four jarring Bodies, which they call Elements, endued with as many proper
qualities, which they called Prime: as if from the various mixture of these did
arise all other qualities.

Some later Philosophers, seeing themselves begirt within so straight and
narrow bounds; and ^inding some effects much out-stripping the power of such a
slender mixture, have told us of occult Qualities; which arise from some other
Bodies not yet known or discerned in the composure.

Our Chemists assure us for certain, that in the dissolution of all mixed
Bodies, they ^inde other Elements besides those four, we received from the
Ancients. And perhaps could their separations and putrefactions be as accurate
to distinguish, as Nature is in the mixing, we might ^inde many more, from
whence these strange effects in several Bodies should arise. For indeed how can
we imagine that the complicated and reiterated mixture of heat, and cold,
moisture and drought, should ever produce those ridling effects of Mercury, the
Loadstone, and many others. But this discourse I shall leave to those that have
largely handled it.

The second part which they call Form, ab informando, they scarce tell us
whence it comes; only magisterially they teach us, (and we must believe them)
that it arises from the power of the matter.

But how this, if rightly considered, does agree with their own principles,
seems somewhat difficult to unriddle, viz. How a Substance (as they grant all
Forms to be) can subsist in an accident, which has no being of it self, is no
less a Riddle, then repugnant to their own grounds.

This some of our later Philosophers have very well discovered; and showed us,
that those Forms which they thought and taught to be but potentially in the
matter, are there actually subsisting; though till they have acquired fitting
Organs, they manifest not themselves. And that the effects which are done
before their manifestation, (as the forming and fashioning of the parts wherein
they are to operate) can rise from nothing else but from the Soul it self. This
likewise I shall leave to the Readers enquiry, and shall follow that other way
of introducing Forms, and Generation of Creatures, (as well Animals, as
Vegetables,) which gives Fortune and Chance the preheminency in that work. A
conceit lately vented by the noble Author of the two Treatises, the one of
Bodies, and the other of Man's Soul: Where he describes the motions that are in
Plants, (which are Nutrition and Generation;) to be, by one part transmitting
unto the next to it, the juice which it received from that immediately before.
So that there is one constant course from the root, (that sucketh this juice
from the Earth) unto the top of the highest sprig. And the passage of this
moisture from one to another, is in a manner but like the rising of Water in a
Still: which by heat is made to creep up by the sides of the Glass, and so by the
external cold is fashioned into that Body which at last it is. Let us hear him
describing the manner of it himself.

The Conceit of Sir Kenelm Digby concerning the Generation of Creatures.

Chapter the Second.
LEt us frame (says he) a Chap. 23. Sect. 7.
conception; that not far under the superficies of the Earth; there were
gathered together diverse parts of little mixed Bodies; which in the whole sum
were yet but little; and that this little Mass had some excess of fire in it,
such as we see in wet Hay, or in must of Wine, or in wort of Beer: And that
withal the drought of it were in so high a degree as this heat should find no
means, (being too much compressed) to play his game: and that, lying there in
the bosom of the Earth, it should after some little time, receive its expected
and desired drink, through the benevolence of the Heaven; by which it being
moistened, and thereby made more pliable, tender, and easy to be wrought upon,
the little parts of ^ire should break loose; and they finding this moisture a
sit subject to work upon, should drive it into all the parts of the little
Mass, and digesting it there, should make the Mass swell.

This increase (says he) of bulk, and swelling of the little Mass, will of its
own nature be toward all sides, by reason of the heat, whose motion is on
every side, from the center to the circumference. But it will be most
efficacious upwards toward the Air; because the resistance is least that way,
both by reason of the little thickness of earth over it, as also by reason that
the upper part of the earth lies very loose, and is exceeding porous, through
the continual operation of the Sun, and falling of rain upon it. It cannot
choose therefore but mount to the Air, and the same cause that makes it do so,
presses at the same time the lower parts of the Mass downw^rds. But what
ascends to the Air must be of the hotter, and more moist parts of the
fermenting Mass, and what goes downwards, must be of his harder and drier
parts; proportionate to the contrary motions of Fire and of Earth, which
predominate in these two kinds of parts. Now this that is pushed upwards,
coming above ground, being exposed to Sun and wind, contracteth thereby a hard
and tough skin on its outside but within is more tender. In this sort it
defends it self from outward injuries of weather, whiles it mounteth; and by
thrusting other parts down into the Earth, it holds it self steadfast, that
although the wind may shake it, yet it cannot overthrow it. The greater this
Plant grows, the more juice is daily accrewed unto it, and the heat is
increased, and consequently, the greater abundance of humors is continually
sent up; which when it begins to clog at the top, new humor pressing
upwards, forces a breach in the skin, and so a new piece like the main stem,
is thrust out and begins on the sides, which we call a branch. Thus is our
Plant amplified, till Nature not being able still to breed such strong issues,
falls to works of less labor, and pusheth forth the most elaborate part of
the Plants juice, into more tender substances: but especially at the ends of
the branches; where abundant humor, but at the first not well concocted,
grows into the shape of a Button; and more and better concocted humor
succeeding, it grows softer and softer, (the Sun drawing the subtilest parts
outward) excepting what the coldness of the Air, and the roughness of the
Wind, do harden into an outward skin. So then the next parts to the skin are
tender; but the very middle of this Button must be hard and dry, by reason that
the Sun from without, and the natural heat within, drawing and driving out the
moisture, and extending it from the Center, must needs leave the more earthy
parts much shrunk up, and hardened by their evaporating out from them. This
Button thus dilated and brought to this pass, we call the fruit of the Plant;
whose harder part encloseth oftentimes another, not so hard as dry. This
drought makes these inner parts, to be like a kind of dust, or at least such
as may easily be dried into dust, when they are bruised out of the husk that
encloseth them. And in every parcel of this dust, the nature of the whole
resideth, as it were contracted into a small quantity: for the juice which was
first in the Button, and had passed from the root through the manifold
varieties of the diverse parts of the Plant, and had suffered much concoction,
partly from the Sun, and partly from the inward heat, imprisoned in that harder
part of the fruit, is by these passages, strainings, and concoctions, become at
length to be like a tincture extracted out of the whole Plant, and is at last
dried up into a kind of magistery. This we call the Seed, which is of a fit
nature, by being buried in the Earth, and dissolved with humor, to renew and
reciprocate the operation described.

But a sensitive Creature (says he) being compared to a Plant, as a Plant is
to a mixed Body; you cannot but conceive, that he must be compounded, as it
were of many Plants, in like sort as a Plant is of many mixed Bodies: But so,
that all the Plants, which concur to make one Animal, are of one kind of
nature, and cognation. And besides, the matter, of which such diversity is to
be made, must of necessity be more humid, and figurable, then that of an
ordinary Plant: and the Artisicer, which works and mouldeth it, must be more
active. Wherefore we must suppose, that the Mass, of which an Animal is to be
made, must be actually liquid; and the Fire that works upon it, must be so
powerful, that of its own nature, it may be able to convert this liquid matter,
into such breaths and steams, as we see do arise from Water, when the Sun or
Fire works upon it. But lest this moisture being wrought on by such an active
heat, should vanish quite away; we must suppose it to have such unctuous parts,
that may hold them together; so that the heat imprisoned in this viscous liquid
matter, rises in bubbles: and by reason of its solid unctuousness cannot break
forth, but stretch themselves longer and longer; and every one would be as it
were a little Brook, whereof the chanel would be the enclosing viscous
substance, and the inward smoke that extends it, might be compared to the
Water of it.

This liquid smoak-like substance, the Fire works on in these Channels, he makes
to be threefold; First, Watery streams, which first fly out, settle in the
remotest parts, and is fittest for figuration. Secondly Oily, which give to the
other continuance, and solidity. Thirdly Fiery, which is made of the grosser,
more fixed parts incorporated with Fire, having sufficient moisture to keep it
flowing, and is like a Cauldron of fire; and these last vapors are for the
continuance of heat. These three Brooks in a sens^ive Creature, arise from
three Sources or Fountains, the Heart, the Brain, and the Liver, and are
conveyed in three several Channels; the Arteries, Nerves, and Veins, and give
unto the Animal, heat, sense, and nourishment.

A Short Censure of the former Conceit.

Chapter the Third.
HOw much this Conceit subverts the antique principles of Philosophy, I shall
not here undertake to demonstrate: How far it shoulders out Truth it self, and
so blots out those indeleble Characters, fixed by the finger of the Creator on
every species; those inscriptions on all his works, the distinct constitutions,
parts, operations, and figures (which are as so many Bushes, or Signs hung
out, to discover what are the inhabitants within) will easily show us. For if
heat rarifying a substance, making it thrust it self into a larger space were
the sole author of all generation; and were the cause why Plants grow up in
stalk and leaves, and downwards in root: we must either admit those differing
Characters to be vain accidental chances, or else look out some other agent,
from whose fruitful womb, this variety might spring forth. If we but muster
over the numerous Regiments or several species of Plants, and consider how this
grows up with a square stalk, that with a round; some start up hexangular,
others triangular; some bear a fruit of one form, some of another: and in them
fashion seeds, of as differing figures as themselves* How the leaves also and
flowers show as much of variety, as skill in the Workman; every Plant being by
them as soon discerned, as seen. Let us call over likewise the differing
numbers of Animals, Insects, and others; and examine all the starting holes,
that Fire can breathe forth a stream by; all the casual compressures of cold,
or external accidents; and compare them together, we shall see whether such a
fruitful stock of variety in colors, shape form, virtue, and many other
differing signatures, can be the issue of such accidental, and equivocal
parents.

If this formation of Creatures arise from heat extending, and enlarging a
small moistened lump; without any other consideration, why are not these Atoms
extended circularly; and so all Bodies should be cast into the same Mould with
the Heavens; and should, as they seem to us, be all sphericall. But he tells us
of some light parts, that, besides the power of the Fire enforcing, naturally
climb upwards: and of others, which by their natural weight, are persuaded to
sink into the Farth, to hold the mounting parts steadfast, that they may not be
overthrown by Winds. But were there nothing else to give a figure to Plants,
but ascending and descending, of light and heavy parts; whence should that
variety arise in the fashion of those ascending and descending parts: the
weight of the parts should carry them directly downwards, as the lightness does
upwards; and so all roots should descend in one continued round, but long,
lump: what then makes some spherical, others stretching out infinite numbers of
hairy threads; some directly downwards, others parallel to the superficies. The
Author tells us the figures of them, as of the ascending parts, are caused by
some external accidents: As when the more hot and moist parts are ascended, and
broken from the prison of the Earth, the cold air compresseth and hardneth the
external parts, and so enricheth this sprouting upstart, with a hard tough
skin; both armor and clothes to protect the interior softer parts. The
hardness of the Earth, likewise compresseth the descending parts, into such
forms as we find them of. But may not the truth of this be vehemently
suspected; when, if we examine the coat, we shall find it more penetrable then
the Body: and more subject to external injuries, then that enclosed? as in all
Trees and Plants, the Bark and Rind is of a more flexible, tender, and soft
composure then the invested Trunk: and the hard solid shell of Walnuts,
Almonds, stones of Plumbs, etc. are environed with a very tender substance.
Besides this, there is yet a greater doubt, how this external cold air should
in the same place, at the same instant of time, fashion these mounting Atoms
into a round stem, with a long, sharp leaf: and close by that, compress others
into a square, hexangular, or triangular shape; with leaves round, jagged,
indented, scollopt, or the like? as may be seen in several Plants, inhabitants
of the same piece of ground, under the same Heavens, inviron*d with the same
Air, and heavenly influences. These distinct figures cannot spring from the
cold circumstant Air; for this applying it self alike to all, and every side of
these ascending parts, should equally compresse every part; and so all Plants
should sprout up cylindrical, as the Trunks of Trees do.

The Fruit also and Seed, which he calls a Button, or greater quantity of those
hot and moist parts collected, and dust or parts dried into the form of dust,
by the external heat of the Sun, and innate heat of the Plant; are in a more
orderly method framed and reposed. For not only in qualities, but in figure,
they much vary one from another. One producing a seed enclosed only in a husk;
another a seed of differing figure enclosed in a fruit, and hard shell. Is cold
Air the fruitful Mothe^ of this variety too? Nay, if we bu more seriously
examine this dust, w^ shall find it orderly set, with nave strings, affixt to
some part of their in closing Matrix; by which nourishmen is conveyed for
their growth, an^ subsistence. And if we shall further anatomize these dusts,
we shall find^ laid up in them Plants; the very sam^ Identical Plants, which
first grow up after the seeds are committed to the ground. In which indeed
resides the nature of the whole And this youn^ seminal Plant, we may truly call
the extracted tincture, or Magistery of the whole Plant; as shall more largely
appear hereafter.

Neither does his 25 Chapter (where he endeavors to show how this wonderful
effect, as he calls it, is performed how a Plant or Animal comes by tha^ figure
it has) afford us any greate^ satisfaction. For if we examine his first
principle, viz. That the several figure^ of Bodies, proceed from a defect in
one of the three dimensions; caused by the concurrence of accidental causes; we
shall find it extremely straightning the most delightful variety of the
Creation, and the infinite power of the Creator. For upon these grounds it must
be supposed, that the most perfect figure is to be cubical, and all Bodies
should have been cast into that mould, but that some external causes stepping
in, hinder almost all from obtaining that perfection: the Creator not being
able to withstand their prevalency; or by patching up that defect, could not
give perfection to all that, which his own mouth assures us was good. The
examples also which he produces, teach us there is but little truth in this
position; for how can we conceive the watery drops of rain falling, should
suffer violence (as to be pared round) by the softer Air, which is not able so
much as to hinder it from falling? The fashioning of Salts (as he relates) does
as little satisfy. As for Alume, it is not of such unctuous parts as he
reports; for how then could it so indiscernably be dissolved in Water, and so
much resist Fire, which is not proper to unctuous Bodies? Besides, being
dissolved and falling again, what should hinder the parts from meeting all in a
lump, and conforming themselves to the fashion of the bottom of the Vessel, in
which they are contained; as we see all unctuous Bodies do? As for Salt, if
that should acquire his figure on the superficies of the Water as he informs
us, it should be only long and broad, without thickness: whence then come
those exact cubical forms in Salts, which are suffered to coagulate of
themselves. Where you shall find the most exact Mathematician out-gone by this
natural Art. Neither is this caused by the falling of parts one upon another,
(as he speaks before of Alume) ere the former are thoroughly hardened: for then
why should it not arise still in height, by the continual addition of
descending parts, as long as there are any Attoms to fall, by which means it
should not become cubical, but a long square. But we find the contrary, while
it most exactly casts it self into cubes; the angles sometimes looking upwards,
sometimes transversly; which were impossible, if those squares were made, by
long and broad Bodies falling one upon another. And vitriol, though calcined to
perfect redness, if dissolved and fixed again, not only recovers his bright
shining greenness, but is squared out into various angles, looking every way,
as if it had been fashioned by the hand of the Artificer.

The figure of Saltpeeter is almost neglected by him; only he tells us, that by
reason of its dryness, it is more difficultly figured, and therefore is not
equally increased. But if we examine it well, we shall find it more unctuous,
then the other two, and is more readily cast into that figure, then the other.
For it does not only shoot forth presently almost in water, after it is
removed from the heat; but we shall find it oftentimes upon new Walls shot
forth to a great length, without the help of Water to fashion it in. So that
there seems to be some more particular agent to be found out, that immediately
imprinteth these determinable figures; which should rather work by a conceived
design of producing such a figure, in such a Body. How else could such effects
continually be wrought, (accidental causes working not still alike) and
therefore it were impossible to expect ^arce a similitude in the works.

The formation of Animals affords us little less perplexity. How heat sending
forth, or how those vapors emitted should settle themselves in such and such
method* and form; such variety of parts without some other di^ector cannot
appear. That there are in all Animals three sorts of channels, is an
unquestionable truth; but that there are distinct Bodies conveyed by them,
though taught us by our Masters, is not granted, nor by him received for a
truth. For in the next Chapter we shall find him applauding the circulation of
the blood; and describing its motion through, and from the Arteries to the
Veins, and from them to the Arteries again. Both of these channels then must be
filled with the same liquor; only perhaps in the Veins it may be something
cooler, and thicker; as our Bath waters are less hot in the gutters, then in
the spring. That which is conveyed in the other chanel, the Nerves, we can
scarce afford it the distinction of another Body; it being only the pure, and
most subtle selected parts of the blood, which was conveyed in the other two
channels. Neither, if it were granted that three distinct Bodies, were
continually traversing those three several channels into the Bodies of all
Animals; does he show us, how they put themselves into such various shapes and
figures, (when they have escaped this conquering expelling heat) as we find
them wonderfully expressed in every creature.

All things arising in fumes and steams, as moist Bodies wrought on by heat
will do, when they are freed from that which rarefied them, return to their own
nature and forms again. As Water rarefied, (when those minute particles of heat
that divides it into such small Atoms, and mixed themselves with it, are
either lost or overcome by the watery Atoms,) returns again to water. Or if
those particles remain still active, they do but further divide it; and so it
becomes more like Fire, by having a greater number of fiery Atoms mixed with
it, yet is not made another thing, either in substance or figure. But in the
generation of Creatures, it is far otherwise; where the product or effect is
much differing from what the matter or the agent were. Now how this difference
does arise, and how this change is wrought, we must enquire a little further,
then what heat and moisture will lead us unto.

The true way of Generation set down in general, with the examination of some
repugning Arguments, of several Authors.

Chapter the Fourth.
HAving thus far wandered in the search of a truth, examining those opinions
which have endeavored its discovery; and finding them much failing in their
labors: I shall the more boldly attempt the same enterprise: hoping if I fail
in so great a business, to pass along in the crowd, though not undiscerned,
yet favorably censured.

The production of all Creatures, after the first Omnipotent Fiat was executed;
is by Philosophers called Generation. Which is performed by parts selected from
the generators, retaining in them the substance, forms, properties, and
operations of the parts of the generators, from whence they were extracted: and
this Quintessence or Magistery is called the seed. By which the Individuals of
every Species are multiplied; and that which the Almighty for its
transgression, made to have an end; by the fertility of this Sperm, is
continued to immortality.

From this all Creatures take their beginning; some laying up the like matter,
for further procreation of the same Species.

In others, some diffused Atoms of this extract, shrinking themselves into
some retired parts of the Matter; become as it were lost, in a wilderness of
other confused seeds; and there sleep, till by a discerning corruption they are
set at liberty, to execute their own functions. Hence it is, that so many
swarms of living Creatures are from the corruption of others brought forth:
From our own flesh, from other Animals, from Wood, nay, from every thing
putrified, these imprisoned, seminal principles are mustered forth, and
oftentimes having obtained their freedom, by a kind of revenge feed on their
prison; and devour that which preserved them from being scattered.

Neither are these without their subordinate forms; for from the walls of their
bodies frequently, broken by corruption, issue forth other Creatures, differing
in specie from themselves; as whosoever will but examine the production of
Insects, shall easily find.

This seed consists of two parts, Material Atoms, animated and directed by a
spiritual form, proper to that species whose the seed is; and given to such
matter at the creation, to distinguish it from other matters, and to make it
such a Creature as it is. Both which are separated, the Material Atoms from
the body; the form, from the form of the generator. Which in Vegetables. and
sensitive Creatures, where the forms are composed of material substances, our
Philosophers are easily persuaded to believe. But how the immortal soul of man,
should be communicated to these corruptible material Atoms of the seed of Man,
without prejudice to its most pure nature, seems a Riddle to our Philosophers,
and impiety to our Divines. I shall not undertake those large disputes pro and
con about this argument, but do believe the Soul of Man may be traduced, though
not generated; may spread and multiply it self into many, without fear of
corruption. It being a substance incorruptible, immortal, like the Creator, the
breath of his own mouth, which still retains so much of that nature, from
whence it was breathed; that without the least diminution, it is able to
communicate, and dilate it self into many Millions, and yet still remain the
same entire substance that at first it was.

For the material part of this seed, there is a large dispute, whether it be a
toto vel a part decisum. I shall not stand to tell you the names of those that
are Patrons of the one, and of the other: nor rehearse their Arguments. If you
examine them, you shall find theirs most rational, that affirm the decision
from the whole body; what we find more particularly discours't of by our
forementioned Author, in his 24 Chapter, we shall take up and a little review.
Where he has truly and fully evicted the wandering phancies of some, that would
have this compound of several parts, to be collected from every particle, so
as passing by, or through every little Atome of the Parents body, in its
passage; should be impregnated, and imbued with the nature of it, and so retire
to the reserve where it is kept for generation. And afterward these particles
being fermented by convenient heat, do take their posture and situation;
according to the posture and dispositions of those Atoms they visited in their
passage, and from whom they received those imbibed natures. But this
circulating our Author tells us, is impossible. I will not wrong him so much as
to rank his more solid reasons with mine own. Could we find these channels and
conveighances in the Body, by which this matter should pass; yet I might doubt
of the unquestionable verity of this doctrine. For what should hinder this
matter circulating about the Body, from receiving qualities, and so likewise
the nature of every part it passes by; and so every particle of this matter,
should be impregnated with the natures of the whole; and every small Atome
should become a living Creature, or else the Subsequent should blot out the
Antecedent Character, and the impression should be only from the last part. We
may likewise as truly, as safely conclude with our Author, that it is
impossible for every little part to remit some parts impregnated with the
nature of that whole part from whence it fell. This by some is thought to be
done by that Quasi epilepsia in coitu, that kind of convulsion or concussion
of the parts, by which is shook off from them somewhat retaining the nature,
and property of every part, and these being joined, make up the Seed. This
seems to be very much befriended by our Authors relation of the Cats kitned
without tails: and the Woman's daughters with six fingers upon a hand. My self
also have seen a kind of Poultry without rumps: which breeding with their own
kind, still brought forth Chicken wanting that part: If with others, sometimes
they had rumps, sometimes but part of a rump. And not long since I saw a
Mungril Bitch, that had her tail cut close to her body almost, whose Whelps
were half without tails, and half with tails: the next year following, she
brought them forth all with long tails, as she had before the cutting off.
Which though it seems to favor (as I said) this opinion, it does no way
confirm it; as may appear by the more frequent perfect generations of mutilated
creatures; which beget children or issue with two legs or arms, though they had
but one; Spaigniels, whose tails are always cut, bring forth Whelps whose tails
need as much cutting, as their Dams or Sires did. We must therefore look out
some other way, how this may be done, without the parts themselves.

Some others have supposed this decision to be made from the blood, when it is
tantum non assimilatus; after it has undergone all its concoctions, and
received all its names christened by the Arabians, of Humoris in nominati,
Roris, Glutinis, and Cambii: and is fastened to the part, but not perfectly
assimilated; and this being selected, and reposited in convenient vessels,
receiving some kind of impression from the part from whence it was divided; it
retains still an imperfect signature, and delineation of them; and makes up
that which we call the sperm. But I shall here want Anatomy to instruct me,
how this Cambium, this thinner, or not yet consirmed, or hardened substance of
every part, should desert its hold; and being shaken off, should be conveyed
into the seminal Vessels. All which, returns to the first opinion confuted by
our Author. Who has likewise fairly cleared the other part of the doubt,
whether this matter be divided, or taken only from similar parts alone, and so
the matter of bone, should accordingly to the convenience of place and use,
become round, blady, circular, or long, and the flesh likewise, only by the
help of fermenting heat.

After our noble Author has so strenuously confuted these phansies, we shall
find him laying down his own opinion, and seeking some other means and course
of Generation: He tells us, that the superfluous part of the nourishment, when
it is drained from the rest, and reserved in a convenient place, by little and
little through digestion gains vigor, and spirits, and becomes a homogeneal
body, like to other simple compounds; which by other degrees of heat and
moisture, is changed into another substance, and that again by other
temperaments into another. And thus by the c^urse of nature, and by pa^ing
successively many degrees of temper, and by receiving a total change in every
one of them; at length an Animal is made of such juice as afterward serves to
nourish him.

But if we more seriously examine this assertion, we shall find it to leave
the truth very much behind it. For first, if we but look on the Body to be
nourished; we shall find it to be composed of many several parts, of differing
natures, which would sufficiently instruct us in the disagreeing and
heterogeneal particles of that which nouri^heth this heterogeneal Body. But if
we more curiously anatomize this juice or blood, it will abundantly show us, it
is no homogeneal Body; neither therefore can that superfluous part selected and
drained from it, claim that privilege.

Should we grant this, it cannot appear how heat working upon this homogeneal
body, should make in it a total change in the nature of it; or create it an
other substance quite different from the first, making it less homogeneal. And
in every digestion or operation of heat upon it, it should become still less
homogeneal, until that substance be produced which we see composed of so many
heterogeneall parts. If we examine the works of heat, we shall find it
penetrating, dividing, and mixing of small particles of it self, with the
Atoms of the bodies it works upon; and in progress of time, divides the body
into such small indivisible parts, that it becomes like it self, in respect of
rarity. As Fire working on, and mixing it self with Water, divides it into
small indiscernable Atoms, which now attains unto the same rarity, and
lightness with the Fire; and being accompanied and intermixed with those fiery
Atoms, flies alo^t, till at last disliking one another society, being far
removed from the Agent rarifying them, they part companies. And then those
unseen Atoms of Water, collect themselves again to their former temper, and
bulk, no whit changed or altered either in qualities or substance, which were
impossible, were this change total, or could this action of heat create
heterogeneall parts, in this homogeneal substance. If we further consider the
power of heat, (or any other qualities) we shall surely find, that in no
action there can any substantial thing be given, which is not originally in the
agent, or giver. Fire could not give heat, nor Water, moisture, unless it were
inherent in those Bodies. Neither can heat or Fire working on an homogeneal
body, give it any other heterogeneal parts then fiery ones; nor moisture, any
other, then moist ones, which indeed accidentally may give hardness to bones,
and softness to flesh; but how comes this bony substance in this place blady,
in that round, in another long? this Muscle round, that triangular? this Plant
of one form and nature, that of another? We must seek out some other agent to
fashion these parts, and to compose this difficulty; and confidently conclude,
this way to be lame, and imperfect; of which our Author seems to be conscious,
and that makes him so staggering, and at last falling upon an opinion, which he
before in part rejected, viz. That the blood in its circulation visiting every
part, is impregnated with the nature of them, and the purest part of this blood
being extracted like a quintessence out of the whole Mass, is reserved in
convenient receptacles till there be use of it; which is the seed, of which a
new Animal is to be made. This imbuition of specifique qualities from every
part, will appear as impossible as the former. For first, there are many parts
from which the blood does not again return, as from all those parts, which have
attracted their specific nourishment from out of the vessels; from them there
is no return made. Besides the blood, in its circulation, is carried in vessels
of the same nature, from the one end of the body to the other; and out of those
vessels there is not the least motion in the blood. How these qualities should
be communicated from every particle, through the think skins of the vessels,
seems somewhat strange. Besides all this, should we grant this circulation
through every particle, how comes it to pass that receiving so many differing
qualities, the one does not confound the other, and that which is last impressed
does not blot out all the rest? These or the like difficulties being kenn'd by
our Author, makes him fly to another refuge; and to tell us, that the heart of
every perfect Animal, contains in it, the specific virtues of all the
several parts of its own body; by reason of the bloods continual resorting to
it, in a circle from all parts of its body, and its being nourished by that
juice; so that the Heart is the abridgement of the whole, and imbueth the blood
with those specific qualities, from whence is extracted the seed. But neither
can this clear all the former difficulties. For how shall we suppose, so many
distinct qualities to be impressed in so narrow a compass, as in the heart,
without confusion; or how so short a stay in the heart, could implant such a
numerous Regiment of qualities in the blood; or why not differing faculties in
the same particle of blood; all sliding (without distinction) through the
ventricles of the heart? we shall be forced therefore to seek out some other
way, which indeed our Author has chalkt out unto us, though himself has not
trod in it.

A more particular Narration of the way of Generation.

Chapter the Fifth.
OUr noble Author has laid this ground for us, which I hope will easily lead
us to the truth, viz. That it is necessary the parts should be made in
generation, of a matter like to that which makes them in nutrition. Now what
that is from whence every part receives his nourishment, we must search for
in the blood: Which is a tincture extracted from those things we eat, concocted
and separated in the Stomach, Liver, and Heart; and afterward by its
circulating in the Arteries and Veins, is pellicanized (as the Chemists term
it) and becomes most pure, and defaecated from all its excrements, and is made
a fit nourishment for every part. The things we eat are not simple, but
compounded of as great a variety as the parts to be nourished can express.
What variety of Plants goes to the making up of one piece of flesh we eat? What
multitudes of differing Atoms are conjoined in one piece of bread, or draught
of drink, or Wine? The extract then sure must be furnished with as great a swarm
of differing parts; only here they are more refined, more subtiliz'd, and
separated one from another. But how does this variety of parts in the blood,
make it the fitter for nourishment? by comprehending in it small indivisible
particles, cognate or similar Atoms, which are of the same substance, essence,
and nature with the parts, to which they are to be adjoined, and assimilated:
and want nothing but separation, and afterward union and conjunction with, to
be part of those particles, for whose nutriment they were provided; which
operation is called assimilation. For then these similar, or cognate parts, are
become like to those, to which they are joined. How nu`rition is made.
And this is the matter and manner of our nutrition, which if slightly
considered, may perhaps go amongst the number of falsities. But if we examine
from the Creation, the product of Creatures from the confused first created
Chaos; or since that time, the continual hourly decay, or expiration of every
part of us, (in so much that Physicians allow us clearly a new Body every seven
years,) we shall soon discover the truth of this position. How the great
Architect fetched from the bowels of this Lump, precreated particles, to supply
him with fit matter for such bodies; and appropriated forms for such matter,
will instruct us that there are such particles, which being brought together
constitute such bodies. The continual expiration of particles from all bodies
will more clearly illustrate it. The hourly decay is by expiration of material,
the last dissolution is both of material and formal Atoms. Now as all agree
that material parts throughout multitudes of (nay all) mutations, remain
incorrupted; so also according to, not only the judgment, but several
experiments of knowing men, diligent inquirers into the various works of
Nature, and mutations of natural compounds* natural forms themselves also do
not perish at their parting from their matters; but only are dissolved and
dissipated, lying after that in their scattered Atoms, confused and mixed with
some others; constituting perhaps a quite differing bo^y; so that the entity of
the form, continues after corruption; though not in the formality of such a
form. If it be so then that the matter of every particle in every body, and the
Atoms of their forms likewise, still remain, though scattered into millions of
several bodies; what should hinder, (when these Atoms are again rallied,) an
easy union with particles of the same condition, and nature? and why should
not then the blood, which is made up of many and distinct bodies, be furnished
with the several Atoms comprehended in those bodies: and those Atoms being
agreeable to our parts, be as easily united to them?

The way of nutrition being cleared; let us see now, how from the same matter
generation is performed. This blood, that all parts might be irrigated with its
benign moisture, is forced by several channels, to run through every re* gion
and part of the body; by which means every part out of that stream, selects
those Atoms which they find to be cognate to themselves. Amongst which the
Testicles (destined to that office from their first creation, as the Stomach
and Liver were to digest) abstract some spiritual Atoms belonging to every
part; which had they not here been anticipated, should have been attracted to
those parts, to which properly they did belong for nourishment. As the parts
belonging to every particle of the Eye, the Ear, the Heart, the Liver, Stomach,
Guts, the Hand, every particular bone, and muscle, etc. which should in
nutrition, have been added (to repair the continual deperdition) to every one
of these parts, are compendiously, and exactly extracted from the blood,
passing through the body of the Testicles; and being in this Athanor cohobated
and reposited in a tenacious matter (lest being spiritual, and very fine, they
should lose their vigor) at last, pass from the body of the Testicles, by
certain vessels, in which through infinite Meanders, it undergoes another
digestion and pellicanizing, (as in another place I have shown.) And from
thence, being now delivered from all its ex^rements, and furnished with Atoms,
fit for the making of every part and particle of an other Individual; is
treasured up in certain Granaries, till the seed time comes. And this is the
nature, substance, and manner of collecting the Seed. This shall be further
illustrated by the several ways of Generation in several Creatures, and first
in Plants.

How Plants are generated.

Chapter the Sixth.
THese seminal Atoms are in the same manner separated by all Vegetables, which
are watered in every Region by a certain juice, or blood which they attract and
suck from their Mother Earth: which is nothing else What the Earth is.
but a confused Mass of multitudes of forms, and substances, fit for the
nourishment and reparation of all things In which a Plant being ^ixt, presently
sends forth his Purveighers on every side, his roots, which supply the want of
hands and mouth, to bring in its provision; who are finely palated too, and
able to make choice of that tincture, which most delights their palats, best
fits their own diet, and is most proper to repair their decaying selves in
every part. This juice or blood they concoct, and strain through their finer
parts; and separate them from other earthly excrementitious particles, (or such
as belong to another species) till it becomes fit only for the repairing of
that Plant, for, and by which they were selected, and sucked out of the Earth.
From this quintescence, this juice, are selected parts of the same substance,
nature, qualities, and form with the Plant, and agreeing with every particle of
it, whose blood it is, and from it, is the species propagated. But not after
the same method, in all, for in some, propagation is made by this juice
residing in part of the Plant, pulled from the Trunk, and fixed in the ground:
In others, by part of the root transferred: In others, by seed.

The first is done by that juice which is retained in the part taken from the
Plant, which reserving parts sit for the nourishment of How a Sprig put into
the ground grows.
every particle in the Plant, from whence it was taken, has now some parts
which are vessels, for that Sprig which is to be propagated. For those Atoms
which in the juice were to augment and repair the root of the Tree, being rapt
from the Tree, are of no use, not having a root to adjoyn themselves unto.
Being therefore not attracted by any part of the Sprig, as not cognate and sit
nourishment for them, by often circulation about this beginning Plant, are at
last united, (other parts being drawn from them) and by their freedom from
those parts, and union, become more vigorous, and will not be idle; but since
they cannot be employed, drawn by, and adjoined to other parts; they will set
themselves to work, and falling to their proper place, the lowest region of the
Sprig, collect themselves in the same method they should have done in the root,
to which they should have been adjoined. And there finding the bark softened by
the external moisture of the Earth, and fitted to give way to them; being thus
settled, they thrust forth themselves into the Earth; from whence they extract
cognate juice, with all sorts of Atoms fit for the augmentation and
nourishment of themselves, and the whole Plant. And thus grows up a Plant of
the sine kind with the old stock.

The 2d is performed by these seminal Atoms residing in the top of the root;
which part being separated, acts in the same manner as it did in the whole Plant.

The last sort is by Atoms, selected from this juice, when the Plant is grown
to his full bigness, and wants no more for his further growth at that time, and
laid up together in convenient (...): which is a more perfect operation of
Nature then the two former are.

In the former ways, these Atoms lie confused in the juice; and are not
separated, but by the parts to which they are to be adjoined. ^ut in this,
these A^omes are methodically reposed, and laid up in such leaves, as they
appear to be a very Plant, enclosed within a skin, with such leaves as they
discover themselves with, at their first breaking the (...). The Atoms
belonging to the root, the stalk, the leaf, are all laid together, and set in
their right (...), and make up a perfect Plant, the very same which first comes
up out of the Earth. If the Seed be great, they are easily discovered. In the
seed of the Ash, the skins being removed, in the middle of the kernel ye shall
find two white tender leaves lying one upon another, with a stalk reaching to
the point of the seed, (not that which is fastened to the tree, but the other)
to which is loosely adjoined as it were, a navel string from the stem,
conveighing nourishment to this young Plant, while it is upon the Tree: as in
the third Figure of the first Table is delineated. In the Maple, both greater
and lesser, though the seeds be winged as the Ash, yet these seminal Atoms or
this young Tree, is enclosed in the round knob; within whose tough and harder
skins, is found a stalk and two leaves rolled round together, which are the
very same that first comes up: as in the sixth Figure is discovered. In Beans
and Pease, betwixt the kernel, you shall find those very leaves which first
break the ground, with a stalk, whose end passes through one of the thicker
skins, and is contained only within the outermost thin skin: as in the several
faces of the fourth and fifth Figures is described. Which if it be any way
moistened by an adventitious moisture; presently gives way to the swelling stalk
and leaves, which when they are distended beyond the capacity of the outmost
skin, break forth and show themselves. In other smaller seeds, the leaves are
enclosed and rapt round, the stalk lying betwixt them; as in the Cabbage and
Radish seeds; figure the second. But when they break through the ground, they
erect themselves upright, sometimes carrying the hard skin up upon their tops.
The greater seeds have, besides these small plants, a substance which we call
the kernel; unto which their stalk is fastened, near about the middle of them*
by two short stalks; from which substance they receive nourishment, while they
are enclosed within their skins, and matter afterward for the distention of
the stalk and leaves, after they have enlarged their territories, both upwards
and downwards, in root and leaves: as in Beans, Pease, Wheat, Barley, Acorns,
whose parts turn into a milky substance, fit nourishment for these tender
Plants. That these seminal Atoms do conform and dispose themselves likewise,
according to the same method they did, or should have done in the Plant, whose
they were, or for which they were prepared for nourishment, will easily appear
by that artificial generation of Plants, which not only casually has fallen
out, but by many has studiously been effected. When from the powder or liquor
of Plants, (as is related by Libarius, and others, I need not name the Authors
being so common an experiment) they shall again be recalled to live, and start
up stalk and leaf; which but now was dust, or liquor. I shall only relate one
experiment casually, though twice made by a learned grave Physician, nearly
related to me: which will explain the manner of this operation to the full.

Having in the evening exposed a decoction for a clister (made of Violet
leaves, Strawbery leaves, Mallows, and the like) to the cold of the night. The
next morning he found it covered with a slender crust of Ice, which gave him
leave through it to behold in the Water, the leaves in their perfect shapes, of
all those Plants, of which the decoction was made, both in fashion and color;
which remained in that posture till the Ice was broken; which was no sooner
done, but all those fictitious Plants presently vanished, nothing remaining but
the clear liquor of the decoction.

Now how this could be performed, unless it were by the union of these seminal
Atoms dispersed in the liquor; (drawn from the other parts, by the gentle heat
of the Fire acting with the Water) disposing and settling themselves in their
right and natural places, will appear impossible. How could a slender heat in
so short a time give a form* or square out such a matter into that figure which
but now it lost? or why when the matter is thus fashioned, should it not retain
that figure and bulk when the enclosure is broken? We must therefore conclude,
that these seminal Atoms of the Plants, which were separated from the other
parts by decoction, and by the sudden closure of the Ice intercepted from
flight; were actuated by some remaining particles of heat, and put in mind of
their office and nature; insomuch that every Atome began to seek out his proper
situation and neighbor, to settle themselves in such method as they held one
toward another, before they were parted from the Herbs, and so make up perfect
Plants both in figure and color. But the Ice being broken, and the liquor
moved, these appearing Plants, being made of such fine spiritual parts without
cement; were soon shattered into their first indivisible particles; which being
again dissolved, and the order broken, could not be by the sense discerned.

The reason why these seminal Atoms could not then constitute a perfect solid
Plant, was, because there was wanting some other more sixth parts of the same
nature, and condition, with these more spiritual, to conserve them in that
posture, and to cement them together; to fix and harden them into a
consistence. These are of the same nature, particles belonging to every part,
Atoms of Leaves, Stalks, Flowers, Fruit, and Root as the others; but are
grosser, more terrestrious, which cannot act themselves; but give solidity,
strength, and hardness to the other when they are joined together; and are so
exactly united with them, when the Plant is entire; that they cannot, but by
dissolution of the whole, be distinguished These in this decoction, were left
behind in the expressed Stalks, Roots, and Leaves, and therefore the Plants
were not permanent.

The consideration of these two parts in the constitution of a Plant, will give
us a light of the cause of the diversity of the Sexes in Animals; whose way of
generation follows next.

How Animals are generated.

Chapter the Seventh.
THe generation of Animals is as various almost as their several Species;
whereof some derive their Pedigree from the corruption of Dirt, Mud, and other
Animals; some arise from the funerals of Plants, and start up a moving
sensitive piece, which but now grew a vegetable. Others again of a more noble
Progeny, owe their beginnings to some seminal parts derived from the Genitors;
but reposed in certain vessels excluded from the Females, and left without the
sphere and guidance of their forms; such are all births breaking forth from the
enclosing walls of Eggs. The more excelent Animals after their formation, are
contained (^ll they acquire some degrees of perfection) within the precincts of
one of the generators. All which, or the most of them, I shall prosecute in the
following Discourse.

The first rank of Animals arising from corruption of other creatures (as Eeles
from Mud; Flies and Worms, from Beasts; the Scarabeus from Oxen; Lice from the
silth of most Creatures.) These I say, grow up upon the mutual juncture of such
Atoms, which before lay ^ered in the bowels of some other compound; and wanted
nothing but union, to fashion them into such a frame and structure: which, as
soon as possible they can obtain their freedom, put themselves in rank and
order, and become another living thing, differing from that Species whence it
had its birth. This is seen in the Misselto, which grows upon other trees, very
evidently; the juice which nourishes and constitutes this Plant, is drawn from
the Earth, with the juice belonging to the other tree it grows from, and is
perfectly mixed with* not to be discerned from it* till after long circulating
about the several parts of the tree, it is refused by all as unfit for them. At
last uniting in small lumps* they discover their differing natures, by parting
from the parts of the tree, and when they are in such a proportion united;
thrust out those stalks, and leaves* and fruit, which we call Misselto. These
particles of the Misselto may be discerned united in small lumps, a good way
from the eruption out of the tree; where ye may find many small green drops,
as it were, hardened, enclosed in whiter wood of the other tree. So these
seminal Atoms, taken in with the ordinary nourishment of those creatures, are
carried up and down through their parts; but received of none, to be perfectly
united with any; but being dispersed in small parcels, they cannot easily unite
themselves, till a greater portion of them be met together; which generally is at
the Spring, when the Suns heat begins to contribute vigor to them; and
dissolves the excrementitious humors of the Body they are enclosed in; so that
they much easier obtain their freedom, and so uniting themselves in their
proper method, and order, become such creatures as those Atoms can fitly
constitute. These Animals too, sometimes alter their external forms, and become
another thing then what at first they seemed to be; as from a Worm, the next
advancing Sun salutes a Butterfly; such is the growth of all Insects, which
appear first to be Worms; the Tadpoles grow to be Frogs; the spitting or eggs
of Flies, to be Worms, and then Flies again; which is caused by the addition of
new parts, which they themselves procure from their nourishment; by which these
parts become larger, solider, and so discernable, which before could not be
seen. As the germen or young plant in the seed, when it has obtained a new
stock of moisture and nourishment, puts out leaves of a differing form from
those which first come up; as the Maple, Borage, Cucumber, and almost all
plants differ in their second leaves, from their first, which manifestly appear
enclosed in the seed. The other are so small and wrapped up, that until there be
new parts adjoined from their nourishment, they are not discerned.

These imperfect Animals spring not up alike indifferently, from all Bodies;
some Animals being made of one kind of Matter, some of another; some Plants
retaining the seminal Atoms of one Insect, some of another; so that from one
Plant or Animal arises one kind, from another, another. I shall not stay to
look out their several originals.

The way how those Creatures are generated which owe their beginnings to ^ggs.

Chapter the Eighth.
THe other two more perfect generations, are made by the conjunction of these
seminal Atoms, extracted from both generators: who both of them contribute
such Atoms, as being laid together in their proper places, would constitute
an Individium of that Species* One of which incloses and lays up these united
sperms, with a proportioned quantity of nourishment, for the growth and
perfection of the Fa^tus, in an Egg. From which all Fowls* most kinds of
Fishes, Snakes, Spiders, Frogs, and some other Creatures are br^ught forth.
This Egg is com^os'd in the Matrix of the Females, and is the ^roduct of these
seminal Atoms selected from the nutrimentall juice of both; the Femal adding
those parts fitted for the growth and nourishment of the Foetus, from her own
blood. The yolk, the grosser aliment, is composed in the Vitellary, or Eggbag,
selected from large vessels immediately arising from the Aorta. The other part,
the White is made in the Matrix, by a certain milky viscous exudation, flowing
from the rough wrinkled membranes of the Womb; whose property it is to convert
that blood, which by several great vessels is brought to it, into that milky
spermlike substance.

Besides these seminal parts there is (I say) a contribution of nourishment
conveyed with them in the same Egg, for the nourishment and growth of the
Foetus, while it is enclosed in those walls. And this is, as I said, of two
sorts, agreeable to their double use, fitted for their nourishment while the
Atoms are uniting, but tenderly cemented, and growing together: and this is
the White, which is more agreeable to the nature of Sperm; and answers to the
Mothers blood, which gives growth and nourishment while the Foetus lives in the
Mothers womb.

The other, the Yolk, of a more solid and confirmed substance, is for its
nourishment when it has achieved some perfection and growth; the parts then
expecting a more solid nutriment. This supplies the use of Milk in other
Creatur^s, who sor a time after their exclusion are nourished altogether by it.

Both of these, White and Yolk, are enclosed in Membranes; some of which being
hardened into a shell, are excluded from the Femal daily as they grow to
perfection. And that because such small bodies as these Ovipara are, cannot
contain so numerous a progeny together, as their fruitful wombs do yearly
disclose.

In which none of these parts, either White, or Yolk, these seminal Atoms are
reposited, is doubtfully related. Some affirming them to reside in the Center
of the Yolk. But this will easily be rejected, when ye shall see the whole
Animal framed, and the Yolk yet entire, whole, enclosed within its own
membrane: only some small threadlike veins full of blood ye may s^e thrust
into it, conveighing some of it* as nourishment, to the Foetus.

Others think the White to be that, of which the Chick is framed and fa^hioned;
but not rightly neither; for that likewise is to be seen whole, when the body
is formed.

^abritius who has taken a great deal of pains in dissections, a strict
enquirer into Natures secrets, especially concerning the manner of Generation,
supposes these parts to reside in the Chalazae* that part which by our Women is
called the treddle But this likewise is false, for then every Egg should
produce two Chickens there being one ^reddle at each end of the Egg; which
serve for no other end, but for ligaments to contain the Yolk in an
Equilibrium; that it might not by every moving of the Egg be shakt, broke, and
confused with the White. What therefore I have often observed I shall here
discover, and in it the true manner of their formation.

Fabritius makes mention of a little white Circle, or Cicatricula on the thin
Membrane of the Yolk; which he supposes to be a skar, left by the breaking off
from the foot-stalk, by which it was fastened to the Hen, before the White grew
about it. But if ye further observe it, ye shall find it another thing.
Parisanus would have it to be the seed of the Cock. I think it to be the
seminal Atoms derived from both, here reposited; as the following Observations
will discover.

In the Hen, while all her Eggs are but Yolks, or small little grains contain^d
in the Egg-bag, or Vitellary; ^e may perceive this white Circle or Cicatricula,
which afterward, as the Yolk increases to bigness, does appear more
evidently.

When the Egg is perfect, if you break the shell at the bigger end, you shall
find this Circle in all prolificial Eggs; the fashion of it you may see in the
first Figure of the second Table, the innermost Figure, A.

This Cicatricula after the first days incubation, you shall see dilated and
grown wider, as in the first figure at B. with a little white spot in it,
easily to be distinguished from the rest.

The second day being past, in the third day ye shall find it spread yet
larger. I have seen it enlarg*d to the breadth of a Sixpence, distinguished
with several Circles within it, exactly round, representing the Eye. The
outmost round was of a much paler yellow color then the rest of the Yolk, and
of a thinner consistence, as if it had bin by the heat of the Hen dissolved and
melted. Within this was a lesser Circl^ of a most resplendent cleerness;
through which did pass some small white threads into the outmost pale circle.
This inner clear Circle was of a substance like to the white of the Egg, but
cl^arer, and very fluid. Within this clear round, was another of a pale yellow,
like to the first; which enclosed another translucid Circle within it, in which
was a clear small Body, but something obscurer then the enclosure, containing
in it a little whiter spot, easily to be distinguished from it: which seemed to
be center to all the enclosing circles. This you may see in the second figure
of the second Table. The inner white Circle and spot in the after discoveries,
will be found to be the Carina and heart of the Chick. The two clear Circles to
be that liquor, or humor, in which the tender Atoms of the Chick, while they
are collecting and conjoyning, do swim in; that by external motions they might
not be disordered and hindered from union. The middle yellow was some of the
same matter, not yet dissolved into that clearness. The outmost yellow Circle
was some dissolving by the heat of the Hen* and preparing for the making of
blood, from which it now differs only in color; which the next day or the day
following will appear in those small threads, conveyed to the white spot
within: which the fourth day ye shall find filled with this blood, and moving.

Toward the latter end of the third day, you shall find this Cicatricula to
be all clear in the middle Circles, the yellow being obliterated; and now
remains only the white Circle and spot in the middle, somewhat enlarged,
circumscribed by a larger resplendent Circle; environed with the outermost
yellow round; in which, by the help of Glasses may be discovered the small
vessels coming from this dissolved yellow matter, from every side to the middle
of the white Circle; which by a Microscope appears now to be the Carina or back
and neck of the Chick, and the heart in the midst of it: this is delineated in
the seventh Figure of the first Table.

On the fourth day, this Cicatricula was spread the full compass of the big
end of the Egg; the outmost Circle whereof, was filled with veins variously
spread abroad, and Arteries, as might be supposed, (though by their coats not
to be distinguished,) because their Anastomases were evident; which being
collected into four trunks from the opposite points, passed through the
refulgent clear Circle to the middle or center. Without the extreme limb of
this pale yellow Circle, were no vessels to be seen.

Within the white Circle in the middle, which was much dilated too, appeared a
red sparkling line encompassing the white spot, now red too, and moving: whose
motions plainly show, it was the heart; as afterward I saw by the help of a
Microscope, exactly showing me the heart perfectly fashioned, with both his
ears, and this red line joined to it, running quite round in the inside of the
white Circle. By the help of this Glass, I saw the motions of the heart and
ears for a long time; one anticipating the other, and continuing after the
others decay. When the hearts motion was almost spent, the ears contracted
themselves in due order, and after five or six pulsations of the ears, the
heart would move once, and then rest again, till after such a number of pulses
were performed by the ears.

The heart when it had emptied it self, by its continual pulsation, of all the
blood, and was become perfectly clear, and transparent as before the blood came
to it; moved a long time after, observing the same order, following the
pulsation of the ears, as when it was watered from that bloody Fountain.

This Glass showed me the head too, consisting of three bubbles as it were;
whereof one confessed it self to be the eye, by the manifest discovery of the
Pupilla in the middle. From hence the Spina was carried round almost to the
head again, which is that transparent white Circle without the red line. From
whence appeared some small obscure clouds, fastened in the proper places of the
wings and thighs: which in the fifth days observation, appeared to be so
indeed, without the help of Glasses. Besides, from this Carina, were drawn some
small streamings, which were the rudiments of the succeeding ribs This fourth
days observation may be seen delineated in the third Figure of the second
Table.

The fifth days this transparent clear body, together with the Foetus swimming
in it, sunk lower to the side of the Egg, then in the day before; and what was
then clear and transparent, begins now to thicken and grow obscure. The head is
beyond its proportion grown* outstripping all the rest; as if Nature made haste
in finishing that part* of which she should have most and sudden use. The eye
grown almost to its perfect bigness, and discernable in all its parts, the
greater divisions of the brain, and Cerebellum easily to be seen. The Carina or
Spine discovers it self encompassing the red line or V^na Cava, which was now
scarce discernable by reason of that clothing it had by this days addition,
procured: the heart too, obscurely covered, al^ost hid from view, excepting a
little in the forepart, which seemed open, or at least not so much hardened as
the other, but continued tender and clear still. The wings and legs easy to be
observed, without Glasses, being much whiter then the rest. The bulk of the
body hardened into a visible form and obscurer then before, yet not so darkened,
but that the pulsation of the heart being red with blood might be discovered
through it: which after it had layen still for three hours at least, I
afterward laid it in the Sun, whose vigorous heat renewed its life and motion
again. This thin body being opened, from the great vein might be seen some
rudiments of the Liver, some small puttings forth of vessels, which had some
blood between them hardened. This fifth days observation you may see in the
fourth and fifth Figures of the second Table

The sixth days observation shows every part more distinctly, and what before
even by the help of G^sses seemed but darkly adumbrated* now begin to confess
themselves by their visible shapes and actions. The three bubles of the head
are much enlarged, the eyes perfected, the wings and legs grow out: the heart
appears fleshy and corpulent, the rudiments of the Lungs, Liver, and Guts,
appear more clearly.

The seventh day shows all more perfectly yet, and it now appears in the shape
and figure of a Chick, perfectly accomplished with all its parts; wanting
nothing but confirmation and hardening, which every day now increases, to the
diminishing of the wh^te; which about the tenth day is done: there remaining
little more then that thin clear liquor the Chick did swim in: the yolk entire,
and appearing bigger then before; being rari^ed, and as it were dissolved, by
the heat of the Hen: and brought into a fit condition to be by the continuing
heat reduced into blood, obtaining from that gentle Furnace color, and
fluxibility. After which time there is little observable till the fourteenth.

About the fourteenth and fifteenth days, the beginnings of the feathers
appear, the skin being covered with little black spots, which are the roots of
the feathers. The skull begins to cover the brains. The umbilical veins plainly
discover themselves: of which the first that was * spread through the white of
the Egg, passes through the upper part of the Liver, perforating the Vena Cava,
near the basis of the heart. The other coming from the yolk insinuates it self
into the Vena Porta, in the lower part of the Liver. Which shows what
disserence Nature has made betwixt these two liquors: the one, the white,
concocted and fitted for present use, is carried immediately to the Vena Cava
and to the heart, to be distributed into every part for their increase and
nourishment; out of which every part might select cognate and appropriated
Atoms, separated from all excrements, for their augmentation and nutrition

As soon as this is done and spent, because the Foetus is not yet strong enough
to seek his own nourishment abroad; neither is the Hen able to provide for it:
Nature has ordained another reserve of provision, which though it be not so
fine, yet having another Cook to dress it, the Liver being now perfected, it
will by undergoing another dressing or concoction there, be made fit for the
nourishment of the now hardened and con^irmed parts of the Chick. And therefore
Nature sends what is melted and dissolved by the external and internal heat,
from the yolk to the Liver, by the Vena Porta, to be there dressed and cookt
again. From whence some excrements are separated, as by the fullness of the
Gall, and the green excrements in the guts may appear.

To these two venal Umbilical vessels are added two Arteries, arising from the
Lumbary Arteries, Which accompanying the veins throughout the white and yolk,
make a perfect circulation here, as well as betwixt the Mother and the Foetus
in Viviparis: by which means the new concocted blood mixed with this, is without
trouble or danger brought to the Foetus.

And therefore it is (I suppose) that the heart so soon before any other part
performs his office; that by his continual motion, driving that dissolved clear
liquor, (which is found in and about his vessels* and melted by the external
heat) and forcing it into the white, may melt and dis^olve that too, and make
it fluid, apt to be carried along with it, returning in other vessels back to
the heart, where it receives new vigor, and an addition of heat. By this means
the liquor being increased, the vessels are not large enough to contain it; and
therefore the heart thrusting it forth with the same continued violence, hourly
drives it further into the white first, and afterward into the yolk; where it
still melts more* and the dissolved circle is still enlarged; as by the daily
observations will appear.

After this time you shall find the white clear liquor, in which the Chick did
swim, consumed too; and the Foetus lying ^n the yolk, and entire yet, as on a
pillow. Whose outward membrane being either united to, or else the same (which
is most probable) that closes the Chicks belly, and indeed clothes the whole
Chick; holds now both yolk, umbilical vessels, and guts altogether. And as the
yolk daily lessens by the growth and increase of the Chick; this membrane is
contracted, and the guts with the yolk by degrees are drawn up into the belly,
and closed up by this skin; where a portion of it may be seen after the Chick
comes abroad, if by dissection it be enquired after, and serves to nourish it,
even after it is disclosed. So that in these creatures there is no footstep or
sign left of the Umbilical Vessels, or Navel string, as in others; but both
vessels and nourishment are enclosed within the belly of the Chick: A figure of
the Chick thus formed, some few days before his exclusion, you may see in the
eighth figure of the first Table.

And now the Chick is perfectly fitted to come abroad, and seek his own
provision; and indeed it is almost time, having spent his patrimony* he must
now seek other food: Being straightned likewise within the prison of the shell,
and wanting now the air to breathe in; for the allaying that heat which now the
moisture being spent) begins to en^lame* and has so dried the shell that it
becomes friable, by his continued struggling and turning round, with his sharp
beak from under his wing, he breaks through those walls, which now imprison
him, and were before his Castle, exactly dividing the shell in the middle.

From these observations of the daily progress of the C^icks increase, we may
see the manner of their generation which must be in this sort The seminal
Atoms constituting the Foetus, collected from the blood by the testicles, and
joined together in the womb or vitellary; contract to them from the femal blood
that round body which serves afterward for their nourishment, (as I have
related) the yolk, which from several small threadlike vessels, ^eceives
nourishment from the blood, until they come to their accomplished bigness. On
which (as I have shown) these seminal Atoms being fixed, by the former
observations you clearly see, how they daily grow up into a living thing of the
same species. And this seems to be as the Germen or little plant reposited in
every seed; which grows up to a bigness not to be contained within the skins of
the seeds, but breaks through that and the earth that covers them; and then
shows themselves in a visible form and bulk, which before could not, but by the
curious observer, be discovered.

This Cicatricula in the small grains in the Vitellary, seems to be, nay are
the same seminal Atoms, disposed in their due method and places which they
observe one toward another; as when they appear in a more visible bigness
afterward. For before they are sat on by the Hen, there appears in this
Cicatricula some distinction of parts; there is a little white spot, in the
middle of a white circle to be seen; which particles never vanish, but grow
larger still, till they discover themselves what they are. The middle spot is
found to be the heart, the white circle becomes the Carina or Spine; at the end
whereof, three or four days incubation shows the head; and so the rest of the
parts as Nature has need of them, grow up to their offices in their visible
figures. So that these seminal Atoms as soon as they are conjoined in a
convenient place, by the due ordering and regulating of the specific soul, put
themselves in order, fall to their proper places, and make up a Chick before
the Egg be pe^fected. As the germen in the seed of a Plant (as I have shown is
perfectly fashioned in the seed, though it discovers not all its parts, till by
addition of new particles, they grow to a big^er bulk, and become more visible.

The first work that is performed by the Hens heat in incubation, is a
dissolving and melting as it were of the ^iner and more spirituous parts, which
are most sensible of the first and least heat; by which means the seminal
particles are cleared and separated from other parts; and those finer parts
appointed for his first nourishment, are clari^ied, melted, and made fluid, and
^pt to be moved and dispersed by the white spot or heart.

And this is the true way of gene^ation of these Creatures; whose edu^tions, as
well as those of Plants, our ^uthor brings as instances for his equi^ocal
generations. Which as they fail ^is expectation of clearing those accidental
causes, he so much depends on: ^o they clearly show, that as in the ^ed of a
Plant, there are actually such ^arts reposited, as do make up a Plant perfectly
formed. So in an Egg before incubation, where both seeds are con^yned, the
parts of a Chick are orderly disposed, by the conjunction and regular disposure
of these Atoms; which while they were parts of the blood, served for the
nourishment and increase of that body from whence they were taken, but now
serve to make up another Individuum of the same species.

I Have been something the longer i^ explaining the former ways of generation,
because as their discovery i^ easier; so they more plainly illustrate the way
and method of Generation. Which, how fitly it may be applied to those that
produce living births, in this ensuing discourse shall be examined.

These, as the former, are the issue o^ a double Sex; and only differ in this,
that they are enclosed in the female, till they are perfect. I shall not here
stand in the examination of that doubt, whether or no the femal contributes any
spermatical particles, toward the formation of the Foetus, in Coition. When we
shall observe what parts Nature has bestowed on the females; I mean testicles,
(for so they are, and not glanduls for I know not what use;) to which are
derived Arteries and veins, of the same original with those distributed to the
Masculine stones: and when in these testicles ye shall find spermlike matter,
and vessels from them to the womb. When also in coition ye shall observe the
same delight and concussion as in Males; why should we suppose Nature, beyond
her custom, should abound in superfluities and useless parts.

The principles therefore of these living births, arise as the other, from some
selected Atoms by the testicles of both, thrown into the Matrix of the Female.
Where being united and mixed by the fermenting heat of the womb: the several
Atoms fall to their respective places: the soul plaving the skilful Workman,
(not laying brick where should be mortar) reposing every Atome in his proper
place, that very same which it should have held in the body, from whence it was
separated.

While this is doing the tenacious part of the sperm, in which these Atoms
were laid up* is now hardened into membranes enclosing several substances; the
one enclosing the pure seminal Atoms which are in fashioning themselves, in a
clear transparent liquor as in the ^gg; the other enclosing both that* and the
other parts of the seed from which these Atoms are enlarged and nourished.

This outward Membrane, sticking to, and about those asperities, or papillar
extuberancies, which are caused by the orifices of Arteries, and Veins opening
into the cavity of the womb, gives way to the gently distilling blood, to
descend to these Atoms; to furnish them with store of cognate parts, to be
selected by, and added to them for their future growth.

But that these yet tender parts, may not be overwhelmed with too great a flux
of blood, and be stifled with too much nourishment, before they are able to
dispose of it: (a frequent cause of abortion) Nature suffers it to wander
through a Labyrinth of an infinite number of* vessels, dispersed through this
outmost membrane; from whence by one chanel it is conveyed to this new
Animal. But not to remain all of it, within the limits of this little frame;
but being conveyed to the heart of the Infant, by its continual motion some
is thrown into every part, according to the capacity of their vessels. And
because all parts of this too, are not fit for the repair of these young Atoms,
but do require a greater choice; therefore at every motion of the heart, some
of this blood is thrown out of this Infant, by appropriated Arteries, back to
the Mother again. So that by this continual circulation of the blood, through
this new Animal; fresh and cognate moisture is supplied to irrigate, and
augment every part of it. From whence, as at the first, cognate Atoms are
selected and adjoined to every particle, until the Foetus come to perfection;
and then breaking through those membranes, it is brought forth a living
creature.

It will be requisite I should here satisfy a doubt, which may perhaps perplex
some in the receiving this opinion of generation, viz. why there should be a
distinction of Sexes? and why there should be a collection of these seminal
Atoms by both Sexes? and that without the admixture of both these, there could
be no generation?

The reason why there are distinct Sexes, is, because one of them must supply
the part, and office, that the Earth does to Vegetables; which is, to contain,
preserve, and supply it with fitting nourishment; which is done by the Female.
But why cannot all be done by this one? what need is there of another seed?

The use of these differing seeds, is evidenced in the former discourse of
Plants: where I showed you, that these seminal Atoms were of two sorts,
spiritual, and more material; whose duty was to fix and cement the spiritual
Atoms together, that they might mutually cohere the one to the other; the
Masculine, are to actuate, enliven, and to act for all the rest: and this
diversity of Atoms, makes a difference in seeds, and a distinction in Sexes.
The Masculine seed having undergone concoctions and separations by a greater,
and purer heat, becomes more spiritualized and subtle; and is like to those
spiritual Atoms of the appearing and rising Plants out of the spirits of a
former Plant corrupted, as I before declared. Which contains in it all parts
fitting to constitute such a body, as that was from whence it was taken: and
being thrown into a convenient pl^ce, where it may have room and agreeable
heat, would by the disposing of every Atome into his pro^er place, constitute a
perfect body. But not being furnished with those more material particles, it
would soon vanish (as the appearing supposititious Plants did) these spiricual
Atoms not being cemented and conjoined together.

The feminine seed being extracted after the same manner, from the same
vessels, by the female testicles, containing the same particles, but cruder and
less digested, from a cruder matter, by less perfect Organs, is left more
terrene, furnished with more material parts; which being united in the womb,
with the spiritual particles of the masculine seed; every one being rightly,
according to his proper place, disposed and ordered with the other; fixes and
conjoynes those spiritual Atoms that they still afterward remain in that
posture they are placed in.

I shall forbea^ the prosecution of this any further, having sufficiently
cleared the ways of generation of perfect bodies. I shall proceed to show the
causes of similitude in the Foetus to the generators, and of mutilated and
imperfect births.

How different Sexes, and similitu^e of the ^oetus with the generators is
caused.

Chapter the Tenth.
THe conjunction of these seminal material Atoms of both Sexes, causes this
similitude of parts, and marks, with the parents that begot them. For according
to the exuber^ncy, or power of the Atoms of either Sex, so is the Foetus
fashioned and distinguished. If the Atoms constituting the Masculine parts
prevail, then is a Male generated: but if the Atoms of the Females seed
prevail either in quantity, or energy, over the Masculine; then is the product
a Female: and those Atoms which were ordained for, and belong to the Masculine
parts, being but few in number, and less in power, are obscured, being
scattered amongst the rest, or else being of no use, and having no parts to
join with them, to unite and cement them together, are quite lost.

This is the cause too, why the Foetus or Infant has parts, some resembling
the Father, some the Mother, having sometimes the Mothers Lip, the Fathers Eye.
etc. according to the prevalency of the respective Atoms.

Besides, by how much the more the Masculine Atoms abound in a Female Infant;
by so much the more the Foetus is stronger, healthier, and more Manlike, a
Virago. If the Female Atoms abound much in a Male Infant, then is that issue
more weak and effeminate. If either parent has any extraordinary Mark, or part
more then usual; as the Woman with six fingers; whom our Author relates to have
born all her Females, with the like number of fingers: It is caused by these
seminal Atoms extracted from the blood, carrying along with them Atoms
belonging to every part, communicated to the seed, and so to the Infant;
especially if the Atoms, in which these supernumerary parts or marks reside,
prevail over the rest. As the example of that Woman illustrates, who brought
forth all her Males with the usual number of fingers; all her Females with six
upon an hand, like her self. The Sex showed the prevalency of her seed, which
having the mastery of the Masculine, all the several Atoms contained in her
seed* showed themselves in the same posture, as in her own body. In the Males,
those particles of her seed being weaker, served only to cement the masculine
Atoms, and no more.

The cause of defect of some parts, or an ill disposition of them in places
they ought not to be in; may be from the avocation and disturbance of the
imagination of the parent, at that time when these Atoms are in disposing and
ordering by the soul of the Infant, in their proper places. This I say, is done
by the imagination of the Mother disturbed, representing to the Infants soul,
then dispos^ng and ordering these Atoms, either some other pattern by which it
con^orms its work* or else wholly call^ng it away from that operation, su^ers
these Atoms confusedly to unite and dispose themselves as well, as being
disordered, they may; and so make up a monstrous kind of ^irth. ^r (...) the
soul being d^sturbed, and the Atoms disordered; they join not to one another
in their proper places, but the Atoms of the leg join with those of the side,
or the arm, or the head. Sometimes supernumerary particles are found in the
seed, which being many and prevalent, do unite themselves, and join to some
others, and there put forth; so that there are seen sometimes two perfect
bodies, conjoined in one part or other; or four arms, etc. as several Histories
relate of several monstrous births. That seen amongst us of late years, being
none of the contemptiblest of that kind. I mean the young man that had a head,
arms* and legs of another body growing out of his side.

But here arises a great difficulty, how this disturbance of the seminal
Atoms, should be occasioned by the disturbance of the Mothers fancy? How the
imagination works upon parts of the same body, Authors tell us, is by the
mediation of humors and spirits: but how it should operate upon these seminal
Atoms, at this time, before there is any influx either of humors or spirits
from the body to them? I cannot yet find satisfaction from any.

I should think it done by the mediation of the soul, traduced with the seeds.
Which being of the same essence, and part (as I may say) of the Parents soul;
it retains still the same affections and passions that it had before its
traduction. Hence the soul of the Mother being disturbed, this soul of the
Infant, by that consent and harmony which is betwixt them, must be disordered
too: which causes that disorderly concourse of the seminal Atoms, and those
monstrous births springing from it: as I before declared.

Some Arguments against this opinion proposed, and answered.

Chapter the Eleventh.
OUr Author brings in an opinion of Doctor Harvies to father his accidental
formation upon, so much contrary to me, that I cannot baulk the relation and
examination of it, viz. That the seed of the Male, does not remain in the womb
of the Female in any sensible bulk: but (as it seems) evaporateth, and
incorporateth it self either into the body of the womb, or rather into some
more interior part, as into the seminary vessels, which by mediation of the
Females seed, suck up the Males seed, and turn it into a vapor, operating in
such sort as our Author before relates, in the generation of Animals. And after
a certain time, some six weeks, or two months, (as the Doctor observed in Does
and Hinds) these seeds distill again into the womb and by little and little do
clarify in the midst, and a little red speck appears in the midst of the
bright clearness.

The right observation of this experiment (under favor) in my judgment was not
truly made; for this inspection into the wombs of creatures cannot be, but by
dissection; which must certainly hinder that second work, namely the returning
back of the seed into the womb: And if so, how shall it come to our knowledge,
that the seed, which at the time of accoupling, was received into the womb, and
afterward when the observation was made was evaporated, and attracted by the
Females testicles, shall afterward distill into the womb again; unless the
same Female were preserved to make those distinct observations, at several
times. I should rather believe the Does, or Hinds in whose wombs the Doctor
found no sperm after the accoupling, were barren, and so never received the
Masculine seed into their wombs or at least never retained it; or else had not
then coupled with the Male. And that after the two months, he met with some
others that had conceived, in which he found that resplendent clearness and red
spot. All which will not amount to a considerable argument, to support this
change of substances by accidental causes.

Not unlike to this is that opinion of Fabricius, asserting that the seed of
the Cock is not cast into the womb of the Hen; but into the beginning of the
Matrix, and there by an irradiating influx foecundates the Hen, and makes
fruitful all the eggs that shall for a long time after be produced, without any
admixture of the seeds at all. This opinion of his is grounded upon the
impossibility (as he supposes) of the entrance of the Males seed into the
Females womb; the inner orifice being so closely shut, that from without it is
impossible to receive any thing. Besides in dissection, he could never find
any part appointed for the ejaculating the sperm into the womb. The Penis or
Prick being wanting in the Cock; so the seed cannot be thrown further then the
entrance into the womb.

Whether or no there be a present union of the material parts of the seeds,
after every coition, which impregnates the Females; former observations have
not fully discovered. Those which are casually made by dissection of Females,
at, or near the usual time of coupling may ea^ly deceive us. For if nothing be
found in their wombs then; we may as safely and conclusively argue, that either
that Female never coupled with the Male, or never retained his seed as to say
it is impossible for the seed to enter, because I never found it there The
experiment ought to be made on some creatures, under the continual view of our
observation; and presently after copulation, if we see nothing reflowing again;
then to search where that seed lies, will undoubtedly discover the truth to us.

That observation of Doct. Harvies, related to us by Sir Kenelm Digby, (though
I confess his curious eye, seldom takes any thing upon trust, or slightly
passes by what is observable) seems to presuppose a conception; and on that
supposition to ground his opinion, that the Males seed is not retained in the
womb, but evaporated; because in his dissections of those creatures he supposed
had conceived, (because done at the usual time of coupling) he never found it:
till after, some two months, meeting with others whose pregnant wombes
discovered some rudiments of a growing Foetus; he concludes, those creatures,
he two months before dissected, would have shown then, the fertility of their
wombs in the same manner We may as truly argue (I say) they had not conceived*
at the time of his dissection; neither (had they escaped his knife) would they,
without a new coupling, have had that red spot, in the midst of that clear body.

But when we shall consider the great quantity of sperm, emitted by the Male
in every coition; and see that quantity retained by the Female, if by that
copulation she conceives; and find no other part capacious enough to keep it,
but the womb: when we shall find the material parts of the Male, copied out to
the life in the Foecus; even his marks, which never came under his sight or
knowledge peradventure, to be branded on the young one: we must needs
acknowledge something more then an irradiation, or foecundating quality,
impressed on the womb by the Masculine seed; and more then fancy in the Females
to produce such effects. A Hen trod by a Pheasant, though in a dark room, that
so she could never see his proportions or color, brings forth Chickens,
resembling both her self and the Pheasant. A Bitch lined with several kinds of
Dogs, though in the dark, where her fancy could not operate to the
assimulating of her births, brings forth her whelps fashioned and colored,
like to all those she coupled with. The Horse leaves some material impressions
of himself, on the Mule, which he begets on the Ass.

That strict closure of the wombs orifice in the time of dissection* cannot
exclude the seeds entrance. For we know in the time of coupling in all
Creatures, those parts, all of them are much differing from themselves, at
other times, dilated, and swollen up by a more then ordinary heat, increased by
an extraordinary afflux of blood to those parts, at that time. Which heat not
only increases the desire, but dilateth the cavities and pores: that those
parts will now be open, which before were shut. The Hen, and Does in coition
elevate the Velabrum, which at other times closely shuts that passage. So it
will be no marvel, if the straight orifice of the womb in coition shall open,
to admit that guest she so much desires; and moves it self directly, to receive
what is thrown into it by the Male.

As for his second ground, that the Cock wants that part which should ejaculate
the sperm into the Matrix: dissection will show us that, though it be not so
conspicuous as in other creatures; yet at the termination of each ejaculatory
ves^el, close by the Orifices of the Uret^rs, may be seen small extuberancies*
which if comprest will be distended to a greater length, emitting seed from
their terminations. In coition we cannot but believe them much extended, as in
all other creatures; which afterward are flaccide and contracted. So that if
we may believe dissection (the surest guide) we shall see Natures bounty to
this creature; whose ^alacity exceeding others, Nature has bestowd two parts,
whereby he may satisfy his desire. And indeed it was ^ecessary so to be, for
having no common receptacle, to receive the sperm from both testicles; as the
Prostata in other creatures: one Penis could emit but from one stone; therefore
are there two, that in co^ion either by turns, or together, he may emit these
seminal parts, from both testicles. The defect of this part then will be no
argument to prove Fabricius his irradiation only.

I must here take away one stumbling block more, which our Author has l^id in
my way, in confutation of that opinion, favoring the actual existence of all
things, in all bodies. Which because it may something reflect on this my
opinion of the way of Generation; I shall a little review it.

He to confute this wa^ of Generation and nutrition, furnishes us with an
example to illustrate his Argument; which bears the weight and vigor of his
Argument, and may seem very much to infeeble my foregoing Discourse. Suppose
(says he) a Man, a Horse a Cow, a Sheep, and 500 more several Species of
living Creatures, should make a meal of Let ice: to avoid all perplex^ty in the
Argument, let us allow, that every one did eat a pound; and and let us conceive
another pound of this herb to be burned: as much to be putrisied under a
Cabbage root, and the like, under five hundred Plants more of diverse Species.
Then cast how much of every pound of Lettice is turned into the substances that
are made of them, or that are increased by them: as how much ashes has been
made by one pound, how much water from another by distillation; how much a Man
has been increased by a third, how much a Horse by a fourth, etc. And when you
have summed up all these several quantities, you will find them much to exceed
the quantity of one pound; which it would not do, if every pound of Lettice
were made up of several different similar parts actually in it* that are
extracted by different substances of the nature of those parts: and no
substance could be increased by it, unless parts of its nature were originally
in the Lettice.

In answer to this, we shall return this confession, that if it were certain
that all of so many distinct Species, that have altogether different parts one
from another, did or could from the same quantitv of one Plant or thing,
receive a valuable bulk of nutriment; his Argument would remain exceeding valid
and considerable. But when it cannot be made appear, that every one takes
something of the quantity, and is nourished by it. Nay, when the contrary
appears, that all are not nourished by the same food: Some choosing one sort of
meats, some another; one feeding on, and living by that, which kills another;
this growing fat by that, which starves another. It will appear that there is a
choice and election of Atoms in that which nourishes, appropriated to the
Species for which they are provided: and as well a selection of those Atoms
again, to constitute a new Individuum of that Species. In distinct Regions we
find several sorts of Plants and Animals, which are the proper offspring of
those countries; which are nourished b^ things peculi^r to that country. If
they be transferred* they either degenerate, or die, wanting their proper
aliment; but seldom or never propagate their kind. Non omnis (...) omni^
tellus.


Besides, if it can appear, that many Species are fed with the same thing: it
will be found likewise that they are those Species, that have many or most
parts resembling one another. And then no doubt in the same aliment, they may
every one find particl^s fitly applicable to those corresponding parts: and no
less able to consti^ute their members, then another.

It may yet be objected; If the seminall Atoms do so dispose themselves in
their due and natural orders, as to make up a body resembling the Species; or
at least to lay the first foundations, and rude draught, as it were, of a Body.
Why are they not thus disposed, and settled in the seminal vessels of both
Sexes, as soon as the sperm is made? There wants neither heat nor life to
actuate them.

To this I shall answer; first, that perhaps if these seminal Atoms had
convenient room in those vessels, they might be conjoined in an orderly method.
And therefore Nature has so ordered these vessels, that the parts, both
separating and containing these Atoms, should not be one continued cavity, as
the Matrix is, which receives them in coition; but should be a glandulous and
porous body; in which the particles or Atoms of the seed lie scattered, and
parted one from another by the substance of the glandule. For first, these
Atoms are separated by the testicles, a glandulous body; next, they are
conveyed to the Prostata, a glandule too; in which they are reserved until
the time of use. In the Ejaculatory vessels, their passage betwixt the
testicles and Prostata; though they circulate through diverse Meanders, and
Cavities; yet there they cannot rank themselves in order, because they are in
continual motion, (the subsequent particles still driving on the former) which
hinders their conjunction: rest being the Mother of Union. Those seminal
vessels, which in dis^ections are found joined to the Prostata, having many
Cavities, and full of thin liquor, do not contain these seminal particles, but
the Prostata, (as I said) and from thence in coition are they emitted. The
liquor that is found in these seminal cavities, supplies perhaps (besides that
other in coition) the office of the thin transparent liquor in the Egg, in
which the Chick swims, and by which the finer parts are nourished at first,
that is first concocted into the blood.

Besides, these Atoms in their ordering must (I said) be regulated by the
soul, traduced with them; which is not fastened to the seed, while it remains in
the seminal vessels, more then to the blood, or other humors in their channels,
on whose loss or preservation the soul does no way depend.

Neither in all emissions of sperm, is the soul conveyed with these seminal
Atoms, that in any place it may constitute a body. In all involuntary
emissions, the soul is not communicated to the seed. But then only, when the
generators soul by a voluntary act, intent on propagation and multiplying her
self into another Individuum* diffuseth her self into the now parting sperm,
then only is it prolifical. Which coming into a convenient receptacle, where
these Atoms may repose; being moved only by that soul which accompanied them,
and from which they received their orders and commands, are soon settled into
their proper places, and become a perfect Individuum of that Species.

Thus have I discovered the ways of Generation; which being cleared too of all
those doubts* that could be raised against it; will ^ly pronounce, that fancy
of our Authors, to be but the issue of an acute wit, not the birth of his
maturer judgment. If in this Discourse I have erred, I shall not marvel at my
humane frailty but hope to find as favorable a Censure.

FINIS.
A DISCOVRSE OF THE Cure of Wounds BY SYMPATHY.

OR, Without any real application of Medicines to the part affected; but
especially by that Powder known by the name of Sir GILB^RT TALBOTS POWDER.

By NATH* HIGHMORE Dr. of Physic.

THE Sympathetical Cure OF WOVNDS.
THese universal and general Laws of Nature being laid down and rightly
understood, the Cure of Wounds w thout Topical Application of Medicines, to the
part affected, will soon appear an unquestionable Truth, and not a Magical
delusion, as has bin supposed: and by some, whose laborious Pens have
endeavored a conv^ction, most unjustly bin styled diabolical.

1. First, it is absolutely true, and an unquestionable law of Nature, (if,
prejudice laid aside, right reason takes her place,) that all actions and
motions are performed by Atoms, or small bodies, moving after a different
manner, proportionable to their several ^igures; and not by I know not what
qualities, (which have only a notional subsistence,) acting without the bodies
to which they belong, and leaping from one subject to another, without changing
their forms.

2. There is a constant Effluvium or expiration of such Atoms from all bodies:
caused by a compression of other Circumjacent bodies; driving the parts closer
together; or else by the mtion of other Atoms crowding into the porous parts
of that body; disturbing the repose and quiet of the former inhabitants, and
thrust them out, to wander about in the air, till they meet with some other
body of the same nature, or return to the same body from whence they were
driven, where they may obtain their desired rest a while, which is but very
short.

5. This expiration, some by the help of Glasses, have seen in the form of a
mist to flow from a Loadstone, and other bodies whose aporcheas are more
plentiful: In bodies that are actually hot, this Fffluvium is sensibly apparent
to the smell, especially to Creatures of an acuter sense; whose expirations
hanging in the air, or upon the ground; are as sure a guide to the persecuting
Dog, as if they were continually in his eye. Sanctorius teaches us too, that
they are no less sensibly discovered by weight, who affirm, a Man in one
nights space to be lighter by three pounds weight, then he was at the beginning
of the night, caused only by this insensible expiration.

3. These Atoms are not of one Figure, nor of one magnitude or grossness:
some being so subtle and slender, that they admit of no opposition, but
continue their course through all mediums: and whatever may seem to oppose them
in their way, such are not discovered by us, but by their effects; they
^enetrating, and acting what their Figure can do, before we are sensible of
them: such are the contagious Atoms of bodies infected with the Plague, or
other pestilential diseases; which are ^ot only communicated to others, by
their harboring in the visitants clothes; but being dis^erst in the air, are
conveyed to remote places and persons, on whom they exercise their tyranny,
not discovered till they break out into open violence. Others again are
grosser, and cannot so easily pass by, or through others of the same or
greater grossness: and are therefore driven by the strongest, and enforced
from their intended voyage; and sometimes beaten into the pores of other
bodies. And such Atoms are apprehended by our senses, as heat, cold, smells,
color, etc. and move more slowly then the former. Some are so gross that they
move solid and fixed bodies out of their places, as the wind* and many others
that are driven to and fro by the wind, as it moves, they change their place.
These Atoms we are sensible of, and shall without much difficulty, be
persuaded to confess their being and activity. The magnetic effluviums, and
influences of the Planets, the subtle expirations of all bodies, especially
those which are not raised by the attenuating of much heat are to be ranked in
the first Classis, and have been heretofore Christened by the name of Occult
qualities. The others have been styled prime qualities, vapors, exhalations, or
the like.

4. It is another general Law of Nature, that all bodies desire rest; and would
continue in their own proper places, if they were not disturbed by an intruder:
Rest being the Mother of union, which is the desire of all natural bodies.

5. There are some places more sit for the receiving and holding of some
bodies, or Atoms, then others; in which they may better and longer rest. And
that in respect of the fashion and form of the pores receiving them; being
proportionable, and more agreeable to the figures of the Atoms. As some Atoms
are Angular, some Cylindrical, branched, smooth sharp, rough. There are in
bodies pores agreeable to these figures; so that some Atoms shall be received
into po^es proportionate to them, others excluded; as the fire, sharp and
penetrating Salt, creep into the pores of a Stone; which the Atoms of Water,
cold, and light, cannot: the infectious Atoms of that pestilential disease
amongst beasts, called the Murren, insinuate themselves into Cows and Swine,
not into Horses, or Men, as the infection of the Pox or Measils in Men, is not
communicated to Beasts, etc. This agreement betwixt the pores and the Atoms,
makes that, we call Cognation.

6. No Atoms rest any where, but in those cognate or proportionate pores. They
may be driven into other bodies, or may accompany other Atoms, into pores that
do not exactly correspond with their figures but cannot rest there; being still
thrust out by those that do better sill up that place, and correspond with the
capacity and proportion of those pores; and hence arises a natural inclination
and tendency toward those bodies where such pores are. For being once
dislodged, and thrust out of those cognate places, they are still shouldered
out, and pressed to give way for those Atoms, whose figures cla^m a right to
those pores they are now wandering in: being thus thrust out, and pressed on every
side by other dislodged Atoms, they are enforced to move that way where they
find least crowding, and where the violence least urges; and that is on the
side where these pores are, and perhaps from whence they were first disquieted.
For other Atoms not finding entrance into the pores of such bodies, rebounding
back, cause other behind them to rush into their place, to give way for them
rebounding; who likewise not being entertained, return too, thrusting others
into their room: till at last it comes to the turn of those cognate Atoms: who
being violently thrust on by those behind them, are also now by these that
were before them, returning; are pressed upon these proportionate pores, who in
respect of their cognate figures, sinding admitance by their entrance, make way
for others of the same proportion to follow them. So that there is a constant
necessitated motion of such Atoms this way, forced by the impulsion of other
Atoms. Which motion is natural too, in respect of the cognation betwixt the
place and the Atoms, though in respect to other Atoms, and the force impressed
by them, it be violent and forced. And this is that motion which they say is
caused by Sympathy. Such are all magneticall motions; amongst which likewise
may be ranked these Atoms curing at a distance.

7. No distance hinders the motion of these Atoms toward their natural
places. For no pores agreeing with their figure, but their own, that are
p^oportioned to them, they will still be thrust out by those Atoms which are
fitted for those pores in which they are: so that being enforced by the
pressure of others to move from one place to another they will still keep on
moving that way whither they are th^ust, till they come to a place
proportionable to them where they may be freed from this violence So that as
the large sphere of magnetical motions may not seem wonderful, so neither
rightly can this sympathetical motion of these curative Atoms be accounted
magical, if they cure the part they seem not to touch.

8. The nearer these Atoms approach to their desired home, the resistance is
still less on that side, and the pressure greater on the contrary, and
therefore their motion is swifrer, in a shorter distance, and also slower at a
greater.

9. There may be, and oftentimes is a Conjunction of Atoms, which in their
Pilgrimage, fly on the back one of another, and may and do operate together:
as the Wind does carry with it many infectious Atoms, and sometimes rare and
comfortable smells.

These things premised and laid as foundations of truth, which can (if
examined with an unbiassed judgment) appear no other; they will
demonstratively illustrate this way and cure of wounds without any topicall
application. It remains therefore that we explain the manner of this
operation; what the Medicine is, and why it works more effectually at a
distance, then if applied to the part.

First, the Medicine is made of a Zaphyrian Salt, calcined by a celestial fire,
operating in Leo and Cancer, into a Lunar complexion. The heat must be such,
that it draws out all adventitious moisture, leaving it intensly dry, and in
this condition it must be kept. If at any time it meets with any moisture, it
loses its energy, and must to the ethereal furnace again, it must be such a
proportioned heat, and not a greater; for by excess of heat, all the volatile
parts and sinest Atoms, which only work this cure, will be evaporated: and
only the grosser saline parts remain, which neither can be raised to accompany
the Atoms of the blood: neither if they could, would they cure; but by their
sharper angles, grate the orifices of the capillary veins, and so procure an
efflux of blood, and not a consolidation of the wound.

The substance of this medicament being joined with other unctuous bodies, is
applied to the wounds themselves, in most cicatrizing and drying emplasters.
Which when the sharp angles are blunted by the unctuousnesse of the adjoined
medicaments, does dry up, and unite the wounded parts most effectually, as in
the emplaster called Diapalma, etc. Much more effectual then must the siner
active (...) ^articles be, when they are separated from those more earth^,
(...) parts; and conveyed into the remotest pores of the wounded part, by the
help of the bloody Atoms returning home: upon whose score they find a far
greater and more welcome entertainment, then if they came alone, or joined with
any other Forrainers.

The manner of applying the medicine is in this fashion. The blood, or bloody
m^tter taken from the wound on a cloth, ^ust be lightly covered over with this
powder, kept very dry; and afterward wrapped up close from the air, and so kept
in a temperate heat; neither must it find any muta^ion to either excess; the
wound in the mean time must be kept clean, and clothed up with dry clean
clothes. If it has been an old sore or ulcer, that Nature has found a
convenient passage to vent the burden of her excrements that way, and there be
a tumor, (as necessarily there will be) the first dressing does most violently
drein this Fountain, and you shall find the wound to run most strangly:
afterward when the matter is lessened, and is reduced to such a proportion as
nature and the medicine may conveniently buckle with it, then it turns it into
laudably concocted matter, which every day lessens, and the wound closes. But
if the wound be fresh, the applied medicine presently stops the blood, and
hinders an afflux of humors to the part. So that there is nothing to be done,
but the uniting the severed parts, which this medicine does in a wonderful
short time.

The way which these balsamical Atoms of the Medicine, applied to the blood,
take to come to the wounded part, is next to be showed. All action being
performed Applicando activa passivis, either by a real or virtual (which indeed
must be real too) contact, it must needs make this cure suspected; because the
medicine being applied only to the blood, there appears to be no kind of
contact, and therefore it should follow, that there is no operation or action
upon the wound; especially when the wound is at so great a distance from the
medicine.

But if we shall review the former Laws of Nature, the contact will soon appear
to be as real, as that made by the Sun darting his beams into any of these
inferior bodies, though thousands of miles remote from it. The medicine
therefore being a body constituted of several particles* it will necessarily
follow, that there is an effluvium, or constant expiration of Atoms from it,
by the second law of Nature. And by the ninth rule these may be conjoined with
the Atoms of blood extravenated, and accompany them in their flight. Nay, they
must join with them, for the Medicine being a Salt, when it comes to imbibe the
moisture of the blood, is (as all Salts will be) dissolved, and perfectly mixed
together with it; which being kept in a constant continued heat, are
continually breathing forth insensibly Atoms from both. Being thus united and
exposed, the particles of blood being most, and most active, they carry their
companion along with them. Who by the sixth and seventh rules, must of
necessity be driven to the wounded part, though remote from it a very great
distance.

When these companions the Atoms of the extravenated blood, and the Medicine
are come to the wounded part, the Atoms of the blood are received, finding an
easy entrance at those cognate parts, those proportionate pores; with which
covertly slips in the other of the Medicine; who meeting there with more
moisture, presently delivers up its saline parts to be conjoined with those
new moist parts; which by the addition of these newly resolved salt particles,
become more fluid and loose, fitter to be driven out, which is suddenly done.
For besides this loosening the superfluous matter in the wound, the Medicine
has such parts as contracts the solider parts nearer together, and so shuts
the orifices of the veins, that the efflux of blood and humors thence, is
presently stayed; and the ^ores being lessened* ^his superfluous moisture which
hindered the union of the parts, is pressed out, so that the wound is more easily
soadred up. Which work is quickly performed by Nature her self, when there
shall be nothing to hinder the apposition of such fitly prepared particles, as
she has provided in every part for their nourishment and augmentation. This
double work of the Medicine, the loosening and diluting the fluid parts, that
distend the pores of the wound, (which causes that pain, which is an
inseparable companion of separation of continuity) as likewise the constriction
of the pores, and joining the more solid parts nearer together; is demonstrable
in all Salts, when they are laid on bodies retaining any quantity of moisture
in them. For Salt laid on mea^, causes first a great quantity of bloody water
to flow from it; aster which you shall find the flesh harder, and shrunk
closer together: and at last, if it continues long, the moisture is clean
dreined out of it. So in the making of some Syrups, if upon Limons or Apples
sliced thin, you strew Sugar (which is a kind of Salt) it will drein out all
their moisture, and leave them dry and hard. This being done by ordinary Salts,
we must expect a far greater and speedier operation from this, whose parts
claim a greater activity in binding up and closing, then any Salt, as every
tongue will soon confess that touches it, either before or after its
preparation. It will be no wonder then, to see so large an efflux of Matter
from an Ulcer, till all be consumed, after the sirst dressing of the cloth; or
to see so sudden a stop given to the blood flowing from the wound.

The cloth in which the blood and Medicine are kept, must be wrapped up close,
and kept warm in a temperate heat, not declining to either excess. First,
because the cold does prohibit the expiration and breathing forth of these
Atoms, so that the wounded part is for that time destitute of those balsamical
Atoms, which should drein forth the superfluous humidity, and restrain the
afflux of blood, and other humors to the part. So that the blood flowing to
this weakened part, distends its pores, and vessels again beyond its natural and
accustomed limits, and rends asunder what was almost united before. And this is
that which causes that pain, occasioned by exposing the clothes to the cold
air. Besides, this hindering the efflux of these aporrheas from the cruentated
cloth by cold, there may be some extraneous Atoms; (as those of cold or icy
parts, whose activity in penetrating of bodies, I conceive to be little less
then those of fire,) which being conveyed along with these Atoms from the
cloth, more slenderly now transmitted; may disaffect the wound, according to
the figure and nature of the Atoms: as may appear by that story of Sir Kenelm
Digbies usage of Master Howels cruentated Garter, heating it over coals in a
dish of Vinegar; which put the lame Gentleman into extreme pain and torture;
but upon the removal of those, and the fresh dressing of the Garter, he
presently received ease, and in a very short time a perfect Cure The other
extreme, viz. of heat, does as much exasperate the wounded part, as may appear
by this story, as well as by another, from a very credible Reporter, who in the
cure of some Scrophulous Ulcer by this powder, had almost perfected the Cure;
the Father still keeping the Cloth (...) his pocket; but being to lodge abroad
one night, left the Cloth with this Gentleman; who dressing the Cloth, as
before, in the ^orning put it up in his own pocket, and kept himself by a
great fire all that day; and at night, laid it in his bed, under his she^
only, and so kept it extream^ hot. The Child which had before continued in
very good case since the first dressing, all that afternoon and the night
following was extremely tortured, and slept not at all. In the morning when he
came to dress the Child again, he found the wound had bled much, and was
very sor^: but dressing the Cloth again, put it up in his own pocket; and so
returned to his good fire; the Child continuing in extremity of pain, they
sent their servant to acquaint him with it; who presently apprehending, tha^
the change of the keeping of the Cloth might be the cause of i^, gave the
Cloth to the Boy to put it in his pocket: who followin^ his employments, came
not to the fire at all, and in a quarter of an hour after, he found the Child
playing, and in very good ease. The reason of this was not only because there
were ^any fiery particles joined with these A^oms, which inflamed the wound;
but because the extreme heat working on the matter and Medicine in the Cloth,
in an unusual manner, raised a far greater number of these saline parts then
usually; which when by the sanguineous Atoms they were introduced, did by
their sharp angular parts shave and corrode the small orifices of the veins:
and gave way to that efflux of blood, and by their sharpness lay continually
pricking and dividing the tender parts, which was occasioned by some of grosser
and more fixed parts.

This Cure, by this Atomicall energy wrought at a distance, is more sudden,
then any the most excellent Balsame could perform, or then the substance of the
Medicine it self, applied to the part could do. For first, as I said, the
Medicine being a calcined Salt; the sharp part of it would erode the orifices
of the small vessels, which in all wounds are divided; and would prove rather
corrosive then curative. But being thus transmitted with the united Atoms of
blood, they steal in undiscerned, and by the virtue of that cognation betwixt
the* Atoms of the blood and the pores they are to enter, they are more freely
entertained, and admitted to pass and insinuate themselves farther, then if
they came alone; whose disproportioned Atoms would scarce find an entrance
there, without the other. Being thus freely admitted into every pore, and being
but the finer volatile particles, whose angles though keen* yet have not that
hardness to fret off the tender mouths and termination of veins: First, they
dilate the superfluous humid parts, and make them fit to be expelled: then by
their more then ordinary restrictive power shrink together the pores, and
squeezes out that humidity, and glue together those disunited parts. And thus
in a very short time is the cure performed.

The easing of the Toothach by this Medicine too, is performed by its Atoms,
repelling those humors which were flowing to, and distending the thin, and most
accuratly sensible membrane, including the Marrow of the Teeth. Which is done
by closing and shutting the pores, that the already imbibed humors must be
expressed, and others that are flowing, are prohibited from entering.

Thus have I cleared what to Philosophers seemed one of Natures
Cabbinet-Secrets, but to others, that condemn all they understand not for
Magical, it has seemed, and been accused to have been done by some
diabolical compact. There have not been wanting some, that have labored to
undeceive men's understanding, and to clear the process of this cure: but upon
principles, I confess, of as much difficulty, and that require as great a
portion of faith to believe them, as the thing it self. Their misfortune has
occasioned me to look something more narlowly into the true principles of
Nature* which though I shall not beg to be granted me gratis, yet I shall
appeal to every man's reason (by which Rule I would have them examined) whether
they do not truly agree with the usual ways of Nature, by which she
constantly works: if upon any ones just trial they shall appear to be
erroneous, it shall not grieve me to become his convert, recanting my mistakes.

FINIS.

