Speculum Sherlockianum: OR, A LOOKING-GLASS In which the ADMIRERS of Mr.
Sherlock may behold the Man, as to his Accuracy, Judgment, Orthodoxy.

By an Obedient Son of the Church of ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst at the Three Crowns and Bible at the
lower end of Cheap Side, near Mercers-Chappell, M.DC.LXXIV.

SIR,
YOu are pleased in your Letter March 24th, to counsel me to buy the Book
called, A Discourse concerning the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, not questioning
but by reading of it, I shall be brought to abate of the esteem I have sometime
expressed of those Divines who are therein refuted. Your counsel to buy the
Book came somewhat too late, I had bought it sundry weeks before, tempted so to
do by its promising title and flattering my self into a persuasion, that what
was written by Mr. W. S. and Licensed by Dr. S. P. must needs contain in it
somewhat extraordinary. In this persuasion I was somewhat confirmed, because I
found the Author in the Preface averring that he had composed his Book not
without imploring the guidance and direction of God. But having perused only
his first Chapter, consisting of 13 pages; I found in them so much weakness,
contradiction, and calumny, that I wished I had the Money I gave for the Book
in my Pocket again.

Page 3. He says, The Gospel of Christ is as severe a dispensation as the Law
which dooms all men to eternal misery, who live not very innocent and virtuous
lives, but the Person of Christ is all Grace, a mere refuge for the wicked and
ungodly.

If these words express his own mind, then have those who ordained him, reason
to wish they had laid their hands upon a thorn bush, rather than imposed them
on his head. If they are intended to represent the opinion of others whom he
takes upon him to refute, or rather to deride, then must I needs for the
present, look upon them as a calumny, being very confident that no one of them
has either Preached or Printed such things from which such desperate absurd
opinions can be inferred.

Page 4. Some men wherever they meet with the word Christ in Scripture, always
understand by it the Person of Christ.

I have heard of some, that wherever they heard their Minister read the word
Jesus in the New Testament, thought they were to understand by it, the Redeemer
of Mankind, and therefore have devoutly bowed their Knees at the Name Jesus,
when it signified Joshua, or him that was called Justus; but of any men who
thought that the word Christ was always in the New Testament to be understood
of the Person of Christ, did I never till I read this Author here, and I
believe he himself does not think there are any such; if he do, why then does
he say page 11. that it is acknowledged by all, that Christ sometimes signifyes
the Church of Christ. Let us frame a Syllogism, If it be acknowledged by all
that the word Christ does sometimes signify the Church, then are there none
who wherever they meet with the word Christ in Scripture, do always understand
it of the Person of Christ. But it is acknowledged by all, etc. Ergo, If you
can answer this Syllogism, so as not to make your friend either to contradict
himself, or calumniate others, then shall I confess my self to be what you
imagine, somewhat Melancholy, and to need a diversion.

Ibid. Christ is originally the name of an Office which the Jews call the
Messiah, or one anointed by God.

That a concrete or connotative term should be originally the name of an
Office, seems to me very strange and uncouth. All terms that are denominative,
signify two things; that which is denominated, and the form from which it is
denominated; so must the word Christ needs signify, and I despair of being
referred to any place of Scripture where it signifies an Office, and not also
the Person invested with the Office. But to say that the Jews call an Office
the Messiah (a word of a Greek termination) or one anointed by God, is to
father such a piece of prodigious Nonsense upon the Jews, as I dare say they
would be loath to have laid at their doors. And yet this confident Gentleman
takes upon him to give a reason of so gross Nonsense in these words, For under
the Law, their Prophets, Priests, and Kings, were invested in their several
Offices by the Ceremony of anointing them with Oil. I will not be so severe as
to bring this reason into the form of an argumentation, lest it should create
some horror in you: Make the words an entire or absolute Proposition, and you
will not much fancy it; for indeed under the Law the Highpriests in regular
times were invested in their Office, with the Ceremony of anointing with Oil;
but so were not the inferior Priests at any time save only the first. As for
the Prophets under the Law, I cannot find that any one of them was invested in
his Prophetical Office by the Ceremony of anointing with Oil: which
notwithstanding, they might and perhaps were called, the Lords anointed, and so
at this day may we call all Ministers and Christians, yet not because they are
anointed with Oil ceremonially applied to them when first they are put into
the number of Ministers or Christians.

He adds, That the legal unctions were typical of that divine unction the Holy
Jesus received at his baptism when the Spirit of God descended on him like a
Dove, and I think that those unctions were typical, but doubt many of the Jews
never understood their typicalness, and do not see why they should be thought
only to have typified the anointing of Christ at his baptism. He was anointed
with the Holy Ghost, and with power at his conception or incarnation. But be
this as it will, I am unsatisfied with what follows page the 5th. That Gods
anointing Christ with the Holy Ghost, and with power, should be his
consecration to the Mediatory Office. Dr. Jackson, and Dr. Hammond sing quite
another Song, and tell us Christ was consecrated to his Priestly Office (a part
sure of his Mediatory Office) by his sufferings and death, and surely Christ's
dying, was not his being anointed with the Holy Ghost. There follows something
page the 5th. which amazed me, for he says all those Offices of Prophet,
Priest, and King, are not properly distinct Offices in Christ, but the several
parts and administrations of his Mediatory Kingdom.

Do not wonder if this put me into a little amazement for resolving it into
three Propositions, I found every one of them strange. It Is strange presumption
for a young Divine to say, that these Offices are not distinct Offices in
Christ, and never in the least to suggest wherein the impropriety of so calling
them does lie. To find fault with forms of speech generally used, and which may
be retained without any inconvenience, and never to tell us where the
faultiness of those forms of speech lies, does not become one who is minded to
keep up a reputation of modesty. The second Proposition is yet more strange,
these Offices are not distinct Offices, but the several parts of Christ's
Mediatory Kingdom, as if they might not be distinct Offices, and yet parts. The
third Proposition is yet strangest of all, That these Offices are the several
administrations of Christ's Mediatory Kingdom. Is an Office an administration?
Is the Office of a King but one part and administration of a Mediatory Kingdom?
You are wiser than I, wherefore put me out of my wondering humor, and tell me
what kind of totum a Mediatory Kingdom is to the Offices of Prophet, Priest,
and King. And yet should you so do, I should not be cured of the admiring
humor this Author has put me into; for he tells me, ibid. That Christ's
preaching of the Gospel was his exercise of his regal Power and Authority in
publishing his Laws, and the conditions of eternal life. I can easily
understand, that to make and enact the Laws and conditions of eternal life, is
an exercise of regal Power and Authority. So is it also to constitute and make
Officers to promulge and publish Laws. But if bare publishing of Laws be the
exercise of a regal Power and Authority, there will be more Kings in every
Commonwealth, than were ever yet called by that name.

He adds ibid. That our Savior tells Pilate he was born to be a King, quoting
Joh. 18. v. 37. And yet our Savior neither there, nor anywhere else uses any
words of such an import, either unto Pilate, or any one else. Christ was not
born to be a King, but was born a King. I had took no notice of this, but that
I smelt a Socinian rat in it.

Page 6. That to which we commonly appropriate the name of Regal Power, is that
Authority which he is invested with to govern his Church, to send his Spirit to
forgive sins, to dispense his grace and supernatural assistances, to answer
Prayers, to raise the dead, and judge the world, and bestow immortal life on
all his sincere Disciples; all this is the reward of his death, and sufferings,
and is therefore called his Intercession, because like the intercession of the
High Priest, under the Law it is founded on his expiation and sacrifice.

This is a strain of new Divinity, so new that perhaps the world never saw it
in Print, till it was so unhappy as to be pestered with Socinus. All the things
here spoken of do agree to Christ as God-man, yet so that the Divine Nature is
chiefly to be eyed and to be looked upon as the principle or fountain, the
humane Nature affording only an inferior instrumental concurrence. But why
should it be said that all these are the reward of Christ's death and
sufferings? Had he not the Authority for all from his incarnation? Did he not
raise from the dead, and forgive sins, and dispense his grace and supernatural
assistances before he dyed? what one place of Scripture is there that says,
the power of forgiving sins, or raising from the dead was a reward of Christ's
death and sufferings? And where did this Gentleman learn that all these things
are called the intercession of Christ, and therefore called his intercession
because founded on his expiation and sacrifice? Every thing that is a fruit of
Christ's intercession is not presently in Scripture called or to be called his
intercession. And he writes very loosely and wildly, page 7. when having quoted
Heb. 9.12. He adds, so that intercession signifies the administration of
Christ's Mediatory Kingdom, the power of a Regal Priest to expiate and forgive
sins. For neither does the intercession of Christ so signify, nor if it did so
signify, could such a signification be collected from that place of Scripture
where the word intercession is not used, nor any other word equivalent
thereunto.

Page 8. Though Christ is originally the name of an Office, yet it is in
Scripture used to signify the Person who is invested with this Office.

This is a rare and odd notion, for as the word Christ never signifies the
Office abstracted from the person, so it never signifies the Person, but as
invested with the Office. And he that can distinguish this second acceptance
of the word from the first, and make sense of both, I think must be more
subtle than Doctor Subtilis himself. What follows that, the Lord before his
designation to the Office was publicly owned, was only called Jesus. Either I
do not understand, or else it is very false, for when was our Lords designation
to his Office publicly owned? A man would think by what is added that this
Author thought it was not publicly owned, till he was raised from the dead.
For these are his words, In the Gospels which contain the History of his life
and death, he is called Jesus always, because all this time it was disputed
whether he was the Christ or no. But I am sure that the Gospels contain the
History of his resurrection, as well as of his life and death, and that he is
not always in the Gospel called Jesus, but he is called Jesus Christ in the
very first Verse of St. Matthew's Gospel, and that he was called Christ as well
as Jesus before his resurrection, not only by his Disciples, but by such who
had not courage or faith enough to become his Disciples. Had it been otherwise,
the Jews would not have thought it necessary to make a Law against those who
said he was the Christ. The reason why the Evangelists use the name Jesus more
frequently than the name Christ, could not be because in the lifetime of
Christ it was disputed whether Jesus were the Christ, for the Gospels were all
written after the resurrection of Christ, and one of them was written after all
Paul's Epistles were written, at which time there were many Churches founded on
this persuasion and belief, that Jesus was the Christ.

Page 9. He acquaints us, That Christ sometimes signifies the Gospel and
Religion of Christ.

I think in the Sacred Scripture it does sometimes so signify, but wish he had
not brought Col. 2.8. as an instance of that signification. The Socinians would
be glad to have it convincingly proved that the word Christ is there used for
Christ's Doctrine and Religion, or Gospel, for so they would have it to
signify, and thence they infer that the words in the 9th Verse are not a
sufficient argument to prove Christ's Divinity. It Is, say they, not the humane
Nature of Christ, but the Gospel of Christ, in which the fullness of the Godhead
dwells bodily, and they prove it by so expounding the 8th Verse, as Mr. Sh.
expounds it.

I grant also that the word Christ, does as he notes page 11. sometimes
signify the Church of Christ which is his body, the fullness of him that
fills all in all: But I deny that we must thus understand those Phrases of
being in Christ, ingrafted into Christ, united to Christ; I deny that these
Phrases signify no more than to be one who belongs to the Society whereof
Christ is the head. The whole Church is in Christ, and shall we say that the
Church, being in Christ, is the Churches being in it self: A particular Church
may be said to be in God the Father, as well as in God the Son; so is the
Church of the Thessalonians said to be, 1 Thessalonians. 1.1. Would it be handsome thus
to Paraphrase the Apostles words, unto the Church of the Thessalonians which is
in God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ; that is, which is in the Church.
It may be, this Gentleman means that for a particular believer to be in Christ,
is no more than to be in the Church, and that in order of Nature, a man is
first united to the Church, then to Christ; and if this be his meaning, then he
must hold that the first believer, whoever he was, was not in Christ; until he
had a certain number of fellow-believers, enough to make a Church, and then all
together were united unto Christ; and had his first fellow-believers fallen off
from Christ, then had he again been not united unto Christ, and must have
waited till there had been other members making a Church, and by joining
himself unto them, then, and not till then had he been again united to Christ.
If this be that which he aims at, he will not sure expect we should forthwith
receive his Doctrine; and he shall do well not to make the receiving of this an
Article of Church Communion, lest he should find it unpossible upon these terms
ever to gather a Church; doubtless every one that is sanctified does first
submit himself to Christ, and by submitting unto Christ, he is in Christ, and
Christ in him; but such is his submission unto Christ, that it inclines him to
submit himself to the Ministers of Christ, and to walk in all ordinances with
those that have submitted to the Laws and Government of Christ, as well as
himself. Indeed the Church of Christ can receive no Member till there be
presumption that Christ has first received that Member, and that Member
received Christ: And a man's union to Christ, does in order of Nature precede
his union to the Church, and would continue, though a man should suppose (which
perhaps is impossible) that there should be no Church for him to be united to.
And if this Gentleman thinks it unintelligible, How a Believer should be in
Christ, and Christ in a Believer, he may be pleased to know, that it is
unintelligible to none but himself.

Page 22. He has told us there (in the Gospel) whatever he intends to do for
us, and has charged us to expect no more from him.

If the meaning be that, Christ has in his Gospel told us on what terms we
must expect Justification, Adoption, Glorification, and charged us not to
expect these on lower or easier terms than are expressed in the Gospel, I must
needs say, your Author is not mistaken; but if that be his only meaning, he is
not the happiest man in the world in expressing himself; for his words sound as
if he were of the mind of the wildest Fanatics, who are of Opinion, That
Christ in his Gospel has told us all the remarkable particularities of his
Providence toward the Church, even till time shall be no more. Christ has
told us in the Gospel whatever he intends to do for us. What can this import
less, than that Christ has told us in the Gospel, that at such a time Kingly
and Episcopal Government should be restored here in England?

Page 26. He raised up some great examples, and Preachers of Righteousness,
such as Enoch, and Noah and Abraham; and gave such plain and undeniable proofs
of his acceptance of these men, as might reasonably encourage others to imitate
their examples. He translated Enoch immediately to Heaven, and preserved Noah
and his Family in the Ark, when he destroyed the rest of the World by a deluge
of Waters, he sent Lot out of the ruins of Sodom, and made Abraham the Father
of a great Nation; which was a convincing Argument how dear these good men were
to God, and what others might expect from him, who would worship and fear him
as they did.

Something in these words is questionable, something false. 1. It is
questionable, whether God immediately translated Enoch to Heaven; and therefore
it would have become this young Divine, not barely to affirm, but strongly to
prove Enoch's Translation to Heaven; and when he has proved that, it will be
another work to prove that he was immediately translated to Heaven. 2. It is
false, that the Favors of God to Enoch, Noah, Lot, Abraham, are convincing
Arguments what others may expect from him, who will worship and fear him as
they did. Hundreds and thousands have worshipped and feared God as they did,
who never expected from him such extraordinary Favors and Rarities of Grace as
those Elders had vouchsafed to them, nor indeed had they any ground to build
such an Expection on.

Page 27. When God chose the Posterity of Abraham to be his peculiar People, he
did not design to exclude the rest of the World from his Care and Providence,
and all possible Means of Salvation, as the Apostle argues in Romans 3.29. Is be
the God of the Jews only? is he not also of the Gentiles? yes, of the Gentiles
also: which Argument if it have any force in it, must prove Gods respect to the
Gentiles before the Preaching of the Gospel, as well as since, because it is
founded on that natural Relation God owns to all Mankind, as their merciful
Creator, and Governor; which gives the Gentiles as well as the Jews, an
interest in his Care and Providence.

True it is, that Gods choosing the seed of Abraham, did not exclude all the
rest of the World from his Care and Providence, nor make salvation impossible
to the rest of Mankind. But when God chose Israel, he did for many years reject
the rest of the World from his special care and Providence, and from all
ordinary ways and means of Salvation. If God saved any but the Jews, it was by
bringing them among the Jews, or the Jews among them; or by acquainting them in
some extraordinary way with the substance of that Doctrine concerning the
promised seed that was ordinarily preached among the Jews.

Page 29 He (God) committed his Laws and Oracles to them (the People of Israel)
from whence the rest of the world, when they pleased, might fetch the best
Rules of Life, and the most certain notices of the Divine Will.

This is very strange, and next to impossible; the rest of the world could not
fetch the Laws from the People of Israel, unless they knew that there were such
a People as the people of Israel, and that they had the Oracles of God among
them, and which was the way to travel to this people. And did the one half of
the world know this? But let us suppose that all the world knew of the
Israelites, and of their Laws, and how they might come to the Israelites;
suppose we also that the Jews would be so kind as to let remote Nations have a
sight and Copy of their Laws, these Laws could be no Notices of the Divine
Will, till translated into a known tongue. Were there always among the Jews
men that could translate the Law into all Languages?

Page 33. Whereas God was formerly known by the Light of Nature, and the works
of Creation and Providence, and those partial and occasional Revelations of his
Will, which he made to the World; now the only true Medium of knowing God, is
the knowledge of Christ, who came into the World to declare God to us.

If this be not downright Fanaticism, I know not what is. Heretofore the Light
of Nature, and the Works of Creation and Providence were true Mediums for the
knowing of God, now they are not only dark and insufficient (as they ever were
since the Fall) but also false Mediums of knowing God. Christ is the only true
Medium, all others must be thrown away, or not made use of, unless we design to
be deceived by them. Would Mr. Tho. Brooks have written thus?

Page 42. The Light of Nature, and the works of Creation and Providence, etc.
assures us, that God is so good that he desires and designs the happiness of
all his Creatures according to the capacity of their Natures, etc. very patient
and long-suffering toward the worst of men.

Does not only the Revelation made by Christ, but also the Light of Nature
assure us, that God desires and designs the happiness of all his Creatures
according to the capacity of their Natures? How then comes it to pass, that all
his creatures are not happy? does God fail of his desire? does he miscarry in
his design? or do the creatures lose the capacity of their Natures? As for
patience and long-sufferance God exercised none toward the fallen Angels, nor
do we find that Adam and Eve after their Fall had any expectation that God
would exercise it toward them. Indeed the Histories of God's Providence
manifest that he has very long endured some very bad men (which was a great
stone of offense to some of the greatest Philosophers) with others not so bad,
as far as we could judge, he made short work in righteousness; so that sinners
have little reason to promise themselves that God will spare them, when they
wilfully sin against him.

Page 44. It is not possible to understand what Goodness is, without pardoning
Grace.

A very bold and rude Assertion. God is good to all his Creatures, and yet some
of them need no pardoning Grace, because they never sinned; others of his
creatures cannot sin, because they have no notions of God, nor of a Law, and so
they are incapable of pardoning Grace. Perhaps this Author would be understood
of sinful creatures, they may be assured that God is very good, and good he
cannot be without pardoning Grace. If so, let God look to it; Maximus he may be
accounted, but Optimus he may not look to be called, if he do not find out some
way to pardon sin, and make some discovery to all sinners, that he is ready to
pardon them, till he has done this, they cannot understand that he is good.

Page 45. That God is so Just and Righteous, that he cannot pardon sin without
satisfaction to his Justice, is such a Notion of Justice that is perfectly new,
which neither Scripture, nor Nature aquaints us with.

That God cannot forgive sin without satisfaction, I did never yet believe, nor
shall as I suppose ever be brought to believe. Yet I should account I had made
shipwreck of all Modesty, if I should be so hardy as to affirm this Notion,
That Gods Justice cannot be diverted from sinners without the interposing of a
Propitiation, is perfectly new. Many well acquainted with Nature and Scripture,
did in former Ages believe, as also in this present Age many do still believe,
it implies a contradiction, that the rational creature made under a Law with a
a sanction, and having broken that Law, should not either be punished in his
own person, or in some one that undertook for him. Yea, there be some of
greater Learning than I can hope to attain to, who say, that pardon of sin
without satisfaction is simply impossible, though it had never been said to
Adam, In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death: Quia implicit
ut Deus habeat supremum and absolutum Dominium in hominem, and homo non
obligetur ad actualem obedientiam, aut ea deficiente ad vicariam ejus
compensationem per poenam.

And I must needs say, that the learned are confirmed in these Opinions, by the
weak Oppositions that some men make against them, and that one can scarce
imagine a weaker Opposition to be made, than what is made by this Predicant,
page 48.

If Justice be so natural to God, that nothing could satisfy him but the Death
of his Son, the Redemption of the World by Christ may discover his Justice or
his Goodness, but not his Wisdom; for Wisdom consists in the choice of the best
and fittest Means to attain an End, when there are more ways of doing it.

If there be any wit in this Argument, surely there is not much wisdom nor
judgment in it; for wisdom may very well consist in finding out fit means that
are not very obvious for attaining an End, though there be no other means for
the attaining of that End. Let Mr. Sherlock find out the Quadrature of a
Circle, and we will count him a wise man, and never put him to the trouble of
demonstrating that there were other ways of finding out that Knack, only his
way was the fittest and best: Yea, let him but find out a satisfactory medium
to prove that the Faculties are really distinct, or are not really distinct in
the Soul, and we will cry him up for a wise man, and never enquire whether
there were not other mediums to prove those Conclusions by. But the truth is,
this pert Preacher understands not the Question betwixt himself and Dr. J. O.
as will appear from what he lays down page 50. The Desert of sin is such, that
it is impossible to make any satisfaction to the Justice of God, but only by
the death of Christ, otherwise Christ had died in vain. This one would think
should go down without much chewing, and so indeed it would, but that Mr. S.
could not or would not understand the meaning of it, for thus he explains it,
That is, that God could not forgive it (sin) without full satisfaction, which
nothing but the Death of Christ could make. I appeal to all men of common sense
and reason, whether these two Propositions be the same.

It is impossible to make satisfaction to the Justice of God but by the Death
of Christ; God cannot forgive sin without full satisfaction.

Page 52. Vindictive Justice and pardoning Mercy are but secondary Attributes
of the Divine Nature.

This seems to me a spick and span new Proposition, and I hope it never before
this time dropped from any man's pen. Very absurd I am sure it is.

Page 58. By this it appears how rigorously just God is, that he will never
pardon the least sin, when he can serve his own Glory by the misery and
confusion of sinners.

By this; by what? if he can frame any Propositions or Premises of Dr. Owen,
from which so absurd a conclusion can be drawn, then shall I wish that such a
creature as Dr. Owen had never been born; let him when he next puts out, try
his skill in Logic.

I am almost weary of raking in a Dunghill, and therefore you must excuse me,
if I take no notice of any thing else till I come to page 107. where thus our
Author phrasifyeth, If we would get the Blessing, we must go to God, as Jacob
did, in the Robes of our Elder Brother, though I confess this resemblance does
not please me very well; for though Jacob was a good man, yet this looks like a
cunning trick, to rob his elder Brother of the Blessing, and to cheat his blind
Father; and men must not think that God is thus to be imposed on.

Who they be that have made use of this resemblance, he discovers not; yet it
is like enough some Nonconforming Divines may be intended; nor can I deny that
some of them have made use of it, sundry of the ancient Fathers had so done
before they were born. This Author says, it pleases him not very well; if it
do not, let all the Nonconforming Ministers have a care that they mention it
no more, for Mr. Sh. is one that if he be not very well pleased, will lay about
him, and make the whole Nation witnesses of his displeasure. But, as I said
before, the Fathers made use of this resemblance before the Non-conformists
meddled with it, and is it come to that pass, that a poor Predicant must be
jeered for speaking as the Fathers did? Time was I am certain, when a Minister
that was called in question for a Puritanical Sermon, came off well enough when
he made it appear, that the most offensive passages were but St. Chrysostom
translated. This notwithstanding, I am not huge fond of the Resemblance, and
shall be content it be laid aside, if Mr. Sherlock can but prevail to have
another Resemblance laid aside, which I think I have as little reason to be
well pleased with: A certain conforming Minister was wont always to have this in
his form of Prayer before Sermon, Grant that with the good Thief on the Cross
we may steal Heaven when we die. By a little enquiry he may find out the man,
and if he can prevail with him to omit it, I will use my interest with any
Nonconformist I am acquainted with, no more to use the Resemblance of Jacobs
putting on the Garments of his elder Brother, and in them getting the Blessing.
Yet I assure him, I heard it very largely insisted on, in a Sermon made by one
of the present Prebends of Canterbury.

Page 119. Mr. Sh. falls upon those who say that Faith justifies as it brings
us to Christ, and makes us one with him by whom we are justified; Faith
apprehends the the Righteousness of Christ, and the Righteousness of Christ
justifies. Well what has he against this Distinction? he says, It plainly
owes it self to their preconceived Opinions, without which no man could ever
have stumbled on it. That when the Scripture says, that Faith justifies, the
meaning should be, that it justifies and saves instrumentally and relatively,
(words which the Scriptures are unacquainted with) i. e. not as it is Faith,
but as it apprehends the Righteousness of Christ, which in plain words
signifies, that Faith does not justify, though the Scripture so often says
it does.

If this Gentleman think Mr. Baxter has not sufficiently beaten those who thus
misrepresent Faith's concurrence to Justification, good leave he has from me
to take his Cudgel and to bang them: But let him not lay about him without fear
or wit, as here he seems to do. They will but laugh at him, if he tell them,
That the Scripture often says, that Faith justifies; for they have been told,
That Scripture no where says Faith justifies, though it often speak of being
justified by Faith. Has this Divine so much forgot his Grammar, as to know no
distinction betwixt justifies and being justified? And can he imagine that the
world will believe his Adversaries to be so simple, as to say, that the meaning
of Faith's justifying is, that it justifies and saves too? But I were best
beware how I meddle with this great Author, who speaks of himself as if he had
read all that ever did write, and had heard all that ever did speak.

Page 121. He blames Mr. Watson, for saying, All that Faith does is to bring
home Christ's merits to the soul, adding, If you can but find out an improper
and absurd form of speech in use among the Vulgar, or if you can but invent
one, as this Gentleman does, for I never met with this before, it is a
sufficient reason to expound Scripture as improperly as unlearned men talk or
think.

If his for have any reason in it, and certainly he intended it should have
some, then it is thus to be formed, That which Mr. Watson uses, and I never
met with before, that Mr. Watson invented: This phrase Mr. Watson uses, and I
never met with it before, therefore he invented it. Just at the same rate he
must be conceived to argue, page 128. That which I never read of before, is a
very new conceit: I never read before of Faith's sucking Justification out of
the spiritual Stomach; therefore it is a very new conceit. This is just
according to the old Observation, that Young men are confident.

Sir, I am not now Apologizing for Mr. Watson, he is of Age, and can speak for
himself, if he count it needful; nor have I Mr. Watsons Books by me; if I had,
perhaps I might find that he is abused, for I do assure you, Mr Sh. does not
much stick at abusing and wronging those whom he deals with: so that when an
ordinary Reader would suppose he beats his Adversaries, a Scholar may soon find
he only thresheth a man of Clouts of his own making

Page 132. He takes Dr. O. as I suppose to task for saying, That though
Holiness be neither the cause, matter, nor condition of Justification; yet it
is the way appointed by God for us to walk in, for the obtaining Salvation. Now
what has he against this? he confesses it is, home to the purpose, but yet
there are two little faults in it, that it contradicts it self, and overthrows
their darling opinion; which I can very well pardon, if he can. Really he is a
good natured man that can so very well pardon a contradiction, he had
contradicted himself, as I noted before, and needing pardon from others, will
give pardon to others; but I pray you what contradiction is there in the Dr's
words? why this is a contradiction, that Holiness should be affirmed to be the
necessary way to eternal life; and yet neither the cause, matter, nor
condition: this looks I confess like a contradiction, but now the Dr. did not
say, That Holiness was neither the cause, matter, nor condition of eternal life
or salvation, but neither the cause, matter, nor condition of Justification;
let us set Dr. Owen's two Propositions together: Holiness is neither the cause,
matter, nor condition of our Justification. Holiness it the way appointed by
God for us to walk in, for the obtaining of Salvation. What contradiction is
there in these two Propositions? just as much as there is betwixt two
Propositions that consist not of the same predicate; that is, none at all. Mr.
Sh. may do well to study his Logic again, and find out there what a
contradiction is, before he charge any ^ther Dr. of Divinity with a
Contradiction.

Page 137. Mr. Sh. falls into a fit of Admiration, at the Wisdom and honesty of
our Church of England, who in her public Catechism (he takes no notice of her
Articles or her Homilies) has been careful to prevent cheats and delusions of
fancy, feeds her Children with wholesome and substantial food, has taught them
a Religion without art or subtlety, has instructed them in the Nature of their
Baptismal vow, and those Obligations it lays on them to a virtuous life: has
taught them the Apostles Creed, which contains those great and essential
Articles of Religion, which are the necessary principles of Action, (i. e. has
taught them to say them, but has not explained the one half of them) has
given them a plain and easy explication of the Ten Commandments, which are the
rules of good life, has taught them to pray to God, (by propounding to be
learned the Lord's prayer with out the Doxology) and what the true design of
our Saviors Institutions is, without filling their heads with Notions and
Artificial Theories of Religion, which serve only to make them giddy with a
vain conceit of knowledge, to talk ill and to live worse.

I have already noted by the by, that the Gentleman takes no notice of the
Churches either Articles or Homilies, had he touched them he would have found
himself to have a wolf by the Ears. For though perhaps he laughs at the
Articles and Homilies in his sleeve, yet he has more either of wisdom or
honesty, than openly to gibe at them, to which he has subscribed; and yet if
he had recited their words, the world would soon have seen that the weapons
formed against Dr. O. Mr. W. might have been used as successfully against the
contrivers of our Articles and Homilies, and the Authors of other writings
allowed by Royal Authority. In King Edward's days, Bishop Poinet's Catechism
was appointed to be taught in Schools, Mr. Nowel's Catechism was authorized in
Queen Elizabeth's days, and I think still continues to be the authorized
Catechism; in those Catechisms I find faith called the hand, and the mouth, and
yet this man of Drollery thinks, that if faith were not a very humble grace,
she would never take such language. But I will not hope to repress the
petulance of his wit, by the Authority of these Catechisms, he will say they
are designed for School-boyes, and not for Divines, the Homilies should be read
by him on Holy Days, unless he have then a Sermon, and he has acknowledged
them to contain a good and wholesome Doctrine, let us try whether they do not
lie as open to this Gentleman's Witticisms, as the Sermons or Discourses of J.
O. and T. W. The Sermons in the first Tome of Homilies that treat of
Justification, are entitled of Salvation. Thus begins the first; Because all
men be sinners, etc. therefore can no man by his own acts, works, deeds, (seem
they never so good) be justified and made righteous before God; but every man
is constrained of necessity to seek for another righteousness or justification
to be received at God's own hands, i. e. the forgiveness of sins. And this
justification or righteousness, which we so receive of God's mercies, and
Christ's merits, embraced by faith, is taken, accepted, allowed of God for our
perfect and full justification.

I was about to transcribe much of the Homilies, but seeing they are in many
men's hands, and should be in all Churches, that will be needless, therefore I
shall only excerpe some Propositions out of them, and quote the pages according
to the Edition by John Bill, 1623.

All the world being wrapped in sin, God sent his only Son our Savior Jesus
Christ into this world to fulfill the Law for us, etc. p. 13.

God provided a Ransom for us, the most precious blood of his own most dear,
and best beloved Son Jesus Christ, who besides this Ransom, fulfilled the Law
for us perfectly, page 14.

St. Paul declares nothing upon the behalf of man concerning his
Justification, but only a true and lively Faith, which nevertheless is the gift
of God, and not man's only work without God, and yet that faith does not shut
out Repentance, Hope, Love, Dread, and the fear of God, to be joined with faith
in every man that is Justified; but it shuts them out from the Office or
Justifying. So that although they be all present together in him that is
justified, yet they justify not altogether. Nor the faith also does not shut
out the Justice of our good works necessary to be done afterward of duty
toward God, but it excludes them, so that we may not do them to this intent
to be made good by doing of them, page 14, 15.

Christ is now the Righteousness of all them that truly do believe in him; he
for them paid their Ransom by his Death: He for them fulfilled the Law in his
life, ibid.

Justification is not the office of Man, but of God; or Man cannot make himself
righteous by his own works, neither in part, nor in the whole, for that were
the greatest arrogance and presumption of man, that Antichrist could set up
against God, to affirm that a man may by his own works take away and purge his
own Sins, and so justify himself, p. 17.

The true understanding of this Doctrine, we be justified freely by faith
without works; is not, that this our own act, to believe in Christ, or this our
faith in Christ which is within us, does justify, and deserve our
Justification unto us (for that were to count our selves to be justified by
some act or virtue that is within our selves) but, etc. Ibid.

Faith in Christ (as it were) says unto us thus, it is not I that take away
your sins, but it is Christ only, and to him only I send you for that purpose,
forsaking therein all your good virtues, words, thoughts, and works, and only
putting your trust in Christ, p. 18.

Because faith does directly send us to Christ for remission of our sins, and
that by faith given us of God, we embrace the promise of God's mercy, and of
the remission of our sins (which thing none other of our virtues or works
properly does) therefore Scripture uses to say, that faith without works does
justify, ibid.

All the Fathers, Martyrs, and other Holy men (whom St. Paul spoke of Heb. 11.)
had their faith surely fixed in God when all the world was against them. They
did not only know God to be the Lord, Maker and Governor of all men in the
world, but also they had a special confidence and trust, that he was, and would
be their God, their comforter, aider, helper, maintainer, and defender. This is
the Christian faith which these Holy men had, and we also ought to have. And
although they were not named Christian-men, yet it was a Christian-faith that
they had, for they looked for all benefits of God the Father, through the
merits of his Son Jesus Christ, as we now do. This difference is between them
and us, that they looked when Christ should come, and we be in the time when he
is come. Therefore says St. Aug. the time is altered and changed, but not the
faith; for we have both one faith in one Christ. The same Holy Ghost also which
we have, had they. God gave them then Grace to be his Children, as he does us
now, etc. In effect they and we be all one, we have the same faith they had in
God, and they the same we have, page 25.

Faith gives life to the Soul, and they be as much dead to God that lack
faith, as they be to the world, whose bodies lack souls; without faith all that
is done of us, is but dead before God, although the work seem never so gay and
glorious before man. Even as the picture graven or painted, is but a dead
representation of the thing it self, and is without life, or any manner of
moving; so be the works of all unfaithful persons before God. They do appear to
be lively works, and indeed they be but dead, not availing to the everlasting
life. They be but shadows and shows of lively and good things, and not good and
lively things indeed. For true faith does give life to the works, and out of
such faith come good works, that be very good works indeed, and without faith,
no work is good before God, as says St. Aug. page 30. And there, and in page
31, 32. much is quoted to the same purpose out of St. Augustine, St. Ambrose,
St. Chrysostom. Among other things, this is quoted with approbation from
Chrysostom, I can show a man that by faith without works, lived and came to
Heaven; but without faith never man had life. The Thief that was hanged, when
Christ suffered, did believe only, and the most mereiful God justified him. And
because no man shall say again that he lacked time to do good works, else he
would have done them: Truth it is, and I will not contend therein, but this I
will surely affirm, that faith only saved him. If he had lived, and not
regarded faith, and the works thereof, he should have lost his salvation again.
But this is the effect that I say, that faith by it self saved him, but works
by themselves never justified any man.

These are some of many things which I could have quoted out of the Homilies,
which Mr. Sh. is bound to read to his people, and which were published by Queen
Elizabeth, to expel erroneous and poisonous Doctrine, and were reprinted by
King James, not only for a help of Non-Preaching, but withal, as a pattern for
Preaching Ministers. How ill Mr. Sh. has fitted his cloth to this pattern, he
that is not very blind may see; somebody perhaps may be at so much trouble, as
to gather up his drolling Parenthesis, and adapt them to the expressions in the
Homilies, composed perhaps, as to the first Tome of them by Arch. Cranmer, and
as to the last of them by a Prelate not inferior to him for learning and piety.
I have no mind to make the Papists and other Sectaries so much sport. But
certainly had I a Cure of Souls, I would every Holy Day when there was no
Sermon in my Church, either read or cause to be read one of them to my People,
and should not dare to expose the Doctrines contained in them, as Mr. Sh.
manifestly does: I might look before I leapt, well consider whether it were
meet to tie up my self not to contradict some passages in the Homilies; but
when I had so tied my self, I would either strictly observe my Obligation, or
openly declare my sorrow for bringing my self under it.

But because he has so much applauded the Milk for Babes, or the Liturgical
Catechism, let us take some notice of that which for my part I so much approve,
that I would not for all the Money in my Pocket a new Catechism were now to be
made. In that Catechism we shall find something of Art and Subtlety as this
Gentleman would call it. The Child in that Catechism, is first asked, What is
his Name? that Question may be answered without Art or Subtlety; but then in
the next place, being asked, who gave him that Name? he is directed to make
answer, My Godfathers, and my Godmothers in my Baptism, when I was made a
Member of Christ, a Child of God, etc. If the Child was at Baptism made a
Member of Christ, he was also then united to Christ, and put into Christ; for
nothing can be a member of that unto which it is not united.

Now suppose any Child should be so pert or malepert, as to ask the Rector what
the word Christ signifies, when it is said that he was made a Member of
Christ; the Rector will gravely answer, Christ has four significations; It
signifies the Office of Christ, the Person of Christ, the Doctrine of Christ,
the Church of Christ. The Child was not I suppose made a Member of Christ's
Office, nor of Christ's Doctrine; he must be made a Member therefore, either of
the Person of Christ, or of the Church of Christ. It is like Mr. Sh. will
answer the Child that he was made a Member of the Church of Christ. But what
this Church of Christ is, the Child no where finds explained in the Church
Catechism. The Holy Catholic Church is mentioned as one of the things to be
believed in the Creed, and I think the word also occurs in the first question
concerning the Sacraments, (which part of the Catechism is no older than the
Hampton Court Conference) but what the word Church signifies is no where
opened in that Catechism; will Mr. Sh. now say that the Child is to profess
himself a Member of he knows not what? I suppose he will not, but rather will
tell him what the Church is, and then he must use some Art or Subtlety to make
him understand how he is Member of that Church; and I think he must be very
subtle that can make a Child understand how he can be a Member of the Church of
Christ, before he have first made him understand how he was made a Member of
Christ himself. And I doubt the Child's head must be filled with notions before
he can be made understand how he is one of those elect people of God, whom the
Spirit sanctifies.

You will hope that in the next place I will take Mr. Sh. to task for his
Exposition of John 15. v. 1. etc. beginning p. 145. but it is so Singular, so
uncouth, so forced, that it cannot deserve consideration. Our Savior says, I
am the true Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman; some Copies add, and ye are
the Branches. The meaning, says this grand Interpreter is, That Church which
is founded on the belief of my Gospel is the true Vine, (...). But lest it
should seem strange, that Christ using the first person singular, should mean
the Church, he presently adds, I, signifies Christ, together with his Church.
Did ever man write at this rate? in one humor he says, I am, means the
Church is; within two lines he is in another humor, and then the meaning is, I
am, i. e. I and the Church are. Take him in which humor you will, neither is
very good. Church founded on the belief of the Gospel, there was none when
Christ used these words; the Jewish Church, State, and Ordinances then stood,
and were to stand till Christ dyed. Christ himself speaks indeed once of his
Church, but he speaks of it, not as existing, but as that which was to exist,
not as built, but as to be built: The first time we read of any Gospel Church
as existing, is in the Acts. So then if Mr. Sh's. fancy hold, at this rate our
Blessed Savior must be supposed to speak, I, and the Gospel Church which shall
shortly be planted, and the planting whereof I must commit to you, are the true
Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman, and you your selves are the branches of
this Vine; that is, of me, and of that Church which is made up of you, or must
be added to you. There Is certainly more of Art and Subtlety than usually has
been observed in any speech of our Savior that he used so near his death. But
this Gentleman has four Reasons to confirm his interpretation, but which of
his interpretations I cannot yet tell; only I suppose he means the last. I,
that is, I and my Church, but let him be thought also if you please, to mean
thus, I, that is, the Church founded on the belief of my Gospel.

His first reason is, because the Jewish Church is frequently in the Old
Testament compared to a Vine; now a Vine being the Metaphor whereby the Church
uses to be described, we cannot reasonably understand it otherwise here.

He should have produced some place of the Old Testament, wherein God speaking
in the first Person, called himself and the Jewish Church the Vine: This he
does not, and yet thinks his exposition cannot reasonably be refused; but I
suppose he will meet with but few that will account themselves every a whit the
more unreasonable, for refusing this exposition confirmed by no better an
argument.

Secondly, God (says he) is called the Husbandman who takes care to dress this
Vine, which cannot be understood of Christ, but of the Church. But by his
leave, God is not here said to be Husbandman taking care of the Vine, but only
the Husbandman pruning, or purging the fruitful branches, and taking away the
fruitless branches. Now the branches are Christ's Disciples.

Thirdly, Christ, says he, speaks of such branches in him as bear no fruit.
This is boldly said, and cannot be proved if any one will deny it, the words
may be read, not every branch in me that bears not fruit, but every branch
that bears not fruit in me; so the Old English Translation read: so the
Syriack seems to have read, so Abbot against Bishop thinks it should be read.
But let us not put the Gentleman too hard to it, let us grant that reading
which alone can serve his turn; what follows? why this, there can be no
branches in the Person of Christ, not bearing fruit, Ergo, by being in him can
signify no more than being Members of his visible Church. How long shall we be
wearied with such trifles? there may be branches in Christ who do not bear
fruit, and all branches are such, who be not in Christ by faith unfeigned, and
love undissembled.

In the fourth place he thinks to strike all dead, and to prevent all
objections from the Chapter it self, whence it is evident that when Christ
speaks in the first Person, I and mine, he cannot mean this of his own Person,
but of his Church, Doctrine, and Religion, according as the circumstances of
the place require. Thus ver. 5. I am the true Vine, ye are the branches; he
that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit, for
without me ye can de nothing. He would willingly learn what sense can be made
of this, if we understand it of the Person of Christ. If he would willingly
learn this, verily he may have many Masters that will teach him. St. John's
Gospel is commented upon by many, both Ancient and Modern Writers, all expound
the words clearly enough without the help of his new crotchet; but if this
Grave Rector cannot understand, how we should be in Christ, by faith and love,
and Christ in us by his Spirit and Grace, without penetration of dimensions,
nor how our union to Christ should be the ground of fruitfulness; I suppose his
head may be somewht dulled, or made heavy, and if so, there be Physicians enough
at London that can help him. And for his encouragement you may tell him, that
when Mr. W. D. was troubled with an humor of making singular expositions of
Scripture, Dr. Sim of Huntingdon gave him some Physic, and the Physic having
wrought, the Gentleman was as Orthodox, and expounded Scripture as soberly as
ever he did in all his life.

But why do I advise this Gentleman to take Physic, his head is already
mavelous clear, for he says p. 197. That nothing is more easy to be
understood than our Union and Communion with Christ. He is an happy man indeed
if he can understand our Union and Communion with Christ, as easily as any
other thing whatever. I suppose our Union with Christ, is that which the
Apostle calls a great mystery, and am apt to think that great mysteries are
not as easy to be understood as any other things whatever. Certain I am, that
our Union with Christ is an Union, and if it be so, it cannot be very easy to
be understood; let Mr. Sh. review his Metaphysics, and he shall find it as
hard to attain to a clear and unexceptionable notion of Union, as of any term,
commonly called Transcendental. Shall I give another taste what an admirable
man Mr. Sh. seems to himself? King James his Translators, we always took to be
Learned men, never did I hear modest man differ from them, nisi praefata venia;
but this man of Criticismes can find them rendering a place quite contrary to
its sense. What place is it? verily Col. 2.3. Our English Translation runs
thus, In whom, or wherein, are hid all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge.
He says this is contrary to the sense of the place, for it should be, In whom
are all hidden treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge. Many had before him
suggested that the words are rather to be rendered this way; but he is I hope
the first Beneficed English Protestant that said our English Translation is
contrary to the sense of the place. It is one thing not to hit the sense of a
place, another thing to give a translation contrary to the sense of a place. I
would faign know what contrariety here is in our Translation to the sense of
the place; for I doubt Mr. Sh. does not well understrnd what contrariety is.
His Proposition, and the Proposition of our Translators may be both true, so
cannot two contrary Propositions. Besides, if a man should be so rigid as to
demand of him an argument why our Translation is not to be followed, I doubt he
would be at a loss. Sure I am, the English Translation is not singular. But
here I must acquaint Mr. Sherlock's hearers with a mystery: He will read Col.
2. as he is appointed by the Calendar, and will at the 3 v. read in whom are
hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, but they must remember that he
reads quite contrary to the sense of the place. And they may do well to get
from him a Catalogue of all other places of Scripture that must be understood
in a sense contrary to what the words he reads imports. Else he and they must
necessarily be of contrary minds. And perhaps if they would not differ from
him, they must get them not only a new Translation, but a new Bible.

But I am gone too far, and must come back to page 166. where he shows himself
a Latitudinarian, for these are his words; When nothing is made the condition
of our communion which is expressly forbid by the Laws of our Supreme Lord, we
acknowledge his Authority in our subjection to our spiritual Guides, and we
disown his Authority in disowning and affronting theirs. This should have been
proved, and not dictated; for I am apt to think that if any thing be made an
Article of Communion which is forbidden by a clear and immediate consequence, I
am under no obligation to maintain any communion. So am I also if the omission
of any duty which Christ has enjoined be made an Article of my communion. I
will never have Communion with that Church which will allow me no communion
with her, unless I promise not to baptize my Son till he come to years of
discretion, yet I do not believe that Christ has any where expressly enjoined
Infant Baptism. Mr. Sh. it seems has more liberty, I envy it not unto him, but
rather wonder, how he came by it.

Page 201. He blames some men for having found out a person for Christ,
distinct from his Godhead and Manhood. But I should think they had rather been
to blame, if they had found out a person not distinct from the Godhead and
Manhood. Godhead and Manhood betoken the two Natures of Christ, and if the
Natures and Person be not distinct, we must amend our Creeds, and expunge
diverse persons out of the black Role of Heretics: Let Mr. Sh. try whether he
can find out a person for Christ, not distinct from his Godhead and Manhood.

I might now fall upon that noble and much agitated controversy concerning the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, of which Mr. Sh. says a great deal, but
he manageth it only against one Dr. whose words and meaning he also seems to me
horribly to pervert and wrest, and that person is about, as I hear, to
vindicate himself; so that I cannot count my self at all concerned to meddle in
that affair, as to the merits of the cause.

But there is one thing that this Author suggests about the controversy, which
I cannot but take notice of, page 239, etc. he says, It is very observable
that our Savior in none of his Sermons and Parables, as they are recorded,
makes any mention of the imputation of his Righteousness, but exacts from men a
Righteousness of their own, never warns them to beware of trusting to their own
Righteousness, or of expecting Salvation from their own works; but instead of
this, severely enjoins them the practice of an universal Righteousness, as the
only thing that pleases God.

I easily grant (and hope none will deny) that our blessed Lord does enjoin the
practice of an universal Righteousness: And an universal Righteousness (I do
not say a perfect Righteousness) is necessary to our first Justification. That
Adult person who has not an heart purposed and resolved to give to God and Men
(as far as he is able) their due, is for that present unjustifiable,
unpardonable; the continuance of an upright heart, and the expressing of it as
opportunity serves, is necessary to the not losing of Justification, and to
eternal life. But if Mr. Sh. can show me any one place in which our Savior
instead of warning his hearers to beware of trusting to their own
Righteousnesses, or of expecting Salvation by their own works, severely enjoins
them the practice of an Universal Righteousness, as the only thing that pleases
God; I will not only burn all my Systems, but also confess that I have read the
four Gospels very negligently and carelessely. Does this Gentleman in good
earnest think, that nothing pleases God but our own universal Righteousness?
yea, does he not think and believe that our own personal Righteousness all our
life long is so sinfully imperfect, that God would not be so far well pleased
with it, as to reward it with eternal life, were there not something else in
the which he is well pleased?

Ob. Does Christ any where in all his Sermons make mention of the Imputation of
his Righteousness?

An. In so many terms he does not, but when he blesses those who hunger and
thirst after righteousness, Dr. Hamond thinks that hungring may refer to
inherent righteousness, and signify an eager desire of Grace, of Sanctity of
Soul; and that thirsting is apportioned to imputed righteousness, which he
described to be Christ's righteousness accepted as ours; or in plainer terms,
the pardon of our sins, and acceptance of our persons in Christ? It may be the
learned Dr. is a little too Critical in this descant on our Saviors Metaphors,
but he took it for granted that our Savior taught his Disciples of a twofold
righteousness, else he had extremely forgot himself in making such a
Paraphrase. Imputation of Christ's righteousness, in the sense in which some of
our Bishops, and Episcopal Divines pleaded for it, is not founded either on the
Gospels or Epistles: but take it in the sense in which those old
Non-conformists, Mr. Anthony Wotton, and Mr. W. Bradshaw, explained it, and I
will undertake against Mr. Sh. and all others, to prove it out of the Sermons
and Parables of our Savior.

Page 240. by way of Parenthesis he lets us know, That he is apt in the first
place to admire our Saviors Sermons, who was the first Author of our Religion,
before the Writings of the Apostles themselves, though inspired men.

If he be but apt, and apt in the first place, I need not much concern my self
to enquire what brought him to this Aptness; I think Christ is the only Author
of our Religion, and therefore leave it to him to consider, why he called him
the first Author of it; but our Savior did no more write the four Gospels,
than he did the Epistles. The same Spirit that inspired Matthew, Mark, Luke,
John, to write the Gospels, inspired Paul, Peter, James, John, Jude, to write
the Epistles: Wherefore, though I know that Christ our Lord is to be admired
above his Servants, yet do not I know why I should read the Gospels with more
Admiration or Reverence than the Epistles. I know no point of Doctrine or
Practice contained in the Gospels, which is not also contained in the Sermons
or Epistles of the Apostles: some very weighty and momentous truths which I do
not find our Savior to have taught his Disciples in his Sermons, at least not
very clearly, I find clearly laid down by the Apostles in their Sermons related
in the Acts, or in their Epistles.

Page 242. We cannot imagine that our Savior would neglect to acquaint his
Disciples with the necessary terms and conditions of Salvation, for his Sermons
were to be the Rule of theirs.

Doubtless, our Savior would not neglect any thing, for then he had not been
Faithful; and there is no question but he acquainted his Disciples with the
necessary terms and conditions of Salvation, those they were not before
acquainted with, and those that were necessary for that time in which he
conversed with them: But that nothing now is necessary to be believed by us,
which cannot be proved out of the Gospels, I am not he that will affirm, nor
yet will I say the contrary. Mr. Sh. reads to the people that which is commonly
called the Creed of Athanasius, and that professes to contain the Catholic
Faith, which if a man do not believe the whole, and undefiled, without doubt he
shall perish everlastingly; let him consider, whether he can prove all the
Articles of that Creed out of the Gospels, not calling in the Epistles.

Page 243, 244. It is worth observing, that in all the New Testament there is
no such Expression as the Righteousness of Christ, or the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, which is very strange, did the whole Mystery of the Gospel
consist in the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, that neither Christ nor his
Apostles should once tell us so in express terms.

It would be very strange indeed, if there should be any men who say, The whole
Mystery of the Gospel lies in the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness; and if
there be none such, it is almost as strange, that Mr. Sh. should encounter his
own shadow; but the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness may be a very important
and necessary Doctrine, notwithstanding the express words of Imputing Christ's
Righteousness occur not either in Gospels or Epistles. This Gentleman I hope
owneth the Satisfaction of Christ, and thinks our Hope is built upon it, now if
the Socinians should object, (and so simple be they, that sometimes they do so
object) If our hope be so built on the Satisfaction of Christ, it is strange
that neither Christ nor his Disciples should tell us so in express terms; he
would not be long a considering what answer to return them, and what answer he
would return to them, may suffice to remove his own admiration: In the mean
time, let him consult his Concordance, and see whether there be no such
expression as the Righteousness of Christ. There is an Expression very near a
kin to it, Romans 5.17, 18. the Righteousness of one, is the Righteousness of
Christ, mentioned v. 17.

Page 247. No man could believe in Christ till he came, i. e. could not believe
any thing upon his Authority.

By coming, I suppose he means coming in the flesh, or being made man; and let
Christians Ears judge, whether such a Proposition as this, No man could believe
any thing on the Authority of Christ till he was incarnate, be not an
ill-sounding Proposition, whether it should have been put in Print without some
Explication, and some proof. So dull am I, that I can no more see an
impossibility in believing a thing on the Authority of Christ before he came,
than in believing on his Authority now he is gone as to his bodily presence.

Page 248. That general obscure Promise, In thy seed shall all the Nations of
the Earth be blessed, is all that ever was revealed to Abraham concerning
Christ.

What dare not a confident man say? How knows he that this is all that ever was
revealed to Abraham concerning Christ? He had the benefit of all the
Revelations concerning Christ that had been made to others, as is probable;
also he was met by Melchisedeck King of Salem Priest of the most High God, one
of the most eminent Types of Christ; God made a covenant with him, sealed it
with Circumcision, the initiating Sacrament of the Old Testament; heis called
the Father of the Faithful; and yet behold a Divine that dare confidently
aver he never had any knowledge of Christ, but by that general obscure
Promise, In thy seed shall all the Nations be blessed.

Page 249. That Christ was to die for the sins of the World, was more than the
Apostles of Christ themselves understood till after his Resurrection, though
Christ had expressly told them of it.

The Apostles it seems, though they had been sent to preach, and had been told
by Christ in express words, that he must die for the sins of the World, yet
till after the Resurrection understood it not. That they did not believe this,
or were unwilling to believe this, or had forgot it when they should have
called it to remembrance to fortify their hearts, would not seem so strange;
but that they were so dull as no^ to understand what was expressly told them,
seems very strange. I pray you therefore get Mr. Sh. to prove these two things
to you. 1. That Christ expressly told his Disciples, that he was to die for
the sins of the World. 2. That they understood not this till after the
Resurrection.

Page 252. Mr. Sh. tells us of a strange Entity, "A natural Faith, founded on
natural Demonstrations "or Moral Arguments; and by this he would have us think
that Abel offered a more acceptable Sacrifice, and Enoch also walked with God.

Never till this very day, did I ever read or hear of a Faith built on natural
Demonstrations, or moral Arguments. Whatever assent is built on natural
demonstrations is Science, whatever is built on moral Arguments, may be but
Opinion: Faith I have been taught must be founded on Testimony, and divine
Faith must be founded on divine Testimony; that is, on his Testimony who can
neither deceive nor be deceived. Mr. Sh. defines or describes it to be such a
firm and steadfast persuasion of the truth of those things which are not evident
to sense, as makes us confidently expect them. It is not evident to sense, that
the next Month there shall be a great Eclipse of the Moon, yet I have a firm
and steadfast persuasion of it, and do confidently expect it; is this Faith, or
does it make me a Believer? I humbly conceive it does not, and should count my
self much engaged to any one who would prove to me, that any one of those
Worthies mentioned in Heb. 11. did obta^ Salvation upon any Faith but a Faith
that was built on some Divine Promise or Revelation concerning Christ to come.

Page 260. Mr. Sh. tells us, He will examine those Texts of Scripture which are
abused by these men to set up the Personal Righteousness of Christ as the only
formal cause of our Justification.

Who he means by these men I cannot tell. Do or did those men whom he
scoffingly calls the great Acquaintances of Christ, ever bring the Scriptures
after by him quoted, to prove Christ's Rigteousness to be the only formal cause
of our Justification; if they do not, or did not, then may we conceive that Mr.
Sh. was some night scared with a Dream, and writes this part of his Book to be
revenged of that Proposition which affrighted him; if they do or did, I wish
they had or would cleanse their Sermons or Discourses from such Ambiguous terms
as can minister only to vain jangling. I profess, I do never in this
controversy hear these terms of material and formal cause, without some
regret; I must sometimes use them, but it is full sore against my will; and
commonly I take as much care to qualify them, as the Physician does to correct
poison. Bishop Prideaux asks, Quis unquam e nostris nos per justitiam Christi
imputatam formaliter justificari asseruit. Yet Bishop Davenant says, Haec
communis est nostrorum omnium sententia, Christi Obedientiam and Justitiam
nobis imputatam esse formalem causam Justificationis. De Just. Habit. p. 312. I
suppose the great repute and authority of this learned Prelate has trepanned
some of our Preachers to say as he said: Why does Mr. Sh. stand pelting at poor
Conventicles? Why does he not take up his Latin Pen and confute Davenant? or
if he be more ready and fluent in English, there is Bishop Downham (the great
Commentator on Ramus, and therefore the more like to undestand Logical terms)
who makes not the Righteousness imputed, but the imputation of it the formal
cause of Justification? let him try a fall with him, and if he do fairly lay
him on his back, the day is his own. But still the generality of
Non-conformists are in statu quo, out of danger, having never either said or
dreamed that Christ's Righteousness is the formal-cause of our justification. In
putting Mr. Sh. upon dealing with the two great Bishops, you must not think
that I put him to use a weapon at which he has no skill; for he is a great
School-man, well acquainted not only with their sayings, but with their very
thoughts; for p. 303. he tells Dr. Owen, He gives such an explication of the
term Qua, as the subtilest Schoolman of them all never yet thought of. Belike
he has some secret and familiar converses with the separate Souls of the
subtilest Schoolmen, and correspondence by Letters with those who are still
alive; and they acquaint him what have been and are their thoughts about the
particle Qua; and they unanimously tell him that it never came into their minds
to explicate this Proposition, An Ambassador eats and drinks as an
Ambassador; thus, He who is an Ambassador eats and drinks. If indeed he
has any such way to know what have been the thoughts of the Schoolmen
concerning Qua, I Will not contradict him, nor do I envy him his
correspondencies. We begin every day less and less to stand in need of the
Schoolmen, but I am sure if the Schoolmen that are most subtle have acquainted
him, that they never thought of any such explication of Qua as is before
mentioned, they have played the Hypocrites most egregiously; for diverse and
sundry of them explaining the vulgar distinction of Qua, Specificativum and
Reduplicativum, do give us just such a sense of the specificative As, as is
here by Mr. Sh. rejected and derided. Thus they say, Plato as he is white is a
Philosopher, is true specificatively; as is this also, Christ as Man is to be
worshipped with the Worship called Latria: But yet both these Propositions are
false, Qua being taken Reduplicatively. It is like Mr. Sh. will say, That the
Schoolmen who do expound Qua to such a sense, speak very loosely and
improperly; and so say I too, but I am apt to suppose that they did speak as
they thought; and though I should either reject this distinction, or give a
better explication of the members of it, yet if I find any one expressing his
mind, as many have done before him, I will not throw him my Glove, ot send him
a challenge, or post him up for an Ignoramus.

Page 326. Now as the Death of Christ upon the Cross, and his Ascension into
Heaven, and presenting his Blood to God in that true Holy Place, did answer to
the first sprinkling of the Blood under the Law, which confirmed the Mosaical
Covenant, as the Apostle discourses Heb. 4. so his continual intercession for
us in the virtue of his Blood once shed, and once offered to God, answers to
those frequent Expiations by Sacrifice under the Law, especially to that grand
Sacrifice on the great Day of Expiation, when the High Priest entered into the
Holy of Holies with the Blood of Beasts.

So exact a man as Mr. Sh. should not have expressed these things so much at
random. He should have told us how and when Christ presented his blood to God
in the true Holy place, and told us what he means by the first sprinkling of
blood under the Law, and how Christ's continual Intercessions for us answer to
the frequent Expiations by Sacrifice under the Law, especially to the general
Sacrifice on the great day of Expiation; and if he can give us a true and plain
Explication of the whole Ninth to the Hebrews, and not entangle himself, nor
pull down some of the things he had built up, I will say he is a most
wonderful man, excelling all the Systematists I know of.

Page 389. A sincere Obedience to the Gospel makes a real Union between Christ
and us. (I should think that a Purpose of sincere Obedience makes the Union,
and actual sincere Obedience is an Evidence or Effect of our Union; but let
that pass.) He adds, There is no more need of any Revelation of any private
Testimony of the Spirit, to assure us that we are united, or that we obey
sincerely, than there is to assure us of any thing which is evident to our
outward or inward senses.

This will not down without some chewing. I never heard of any man that desired
a testimony of the Spirit for any thing which was evident to his outward sense:
if it were evident that meat was on his Table, Mr. Sh. I deem never prayed that
the Spirit would testifye that there was Meat on the Table; but his Heart is
deceitful, the course of his Obedience is often interrupted by Acts of sin,
and every Act of Obedience is imperfect; if this notwithstanding the sincerity
of his Obedience be so evident to him, as what is most evident, he has such
peace and joy in Believing as few men have, no men that I converse with; and
this Conclusion, I William Sherlock am really united to Christ, is to him a
Conclusion de fide. For thus I frame his Syllogism, Every one that sincerely
obeyes is really united to Christ; I William Sherlock sincerely obey, Ergo, I
am really united to Christ. The minor is as evident to him, as that his
Surplice is white; but so I trow is not the major, which is a Scripture
Proposition, an Article de fide, therefore his Conclusion must be de Fide, as
following the less evident Premisse.

Page 399. He takes on him to correct the Notions of some men concerning the
Love of Christ, and says, that with them, The Love of Christ is a Love to the
Person of a Believer, without considering any other Qualifications, than that
he is such an individual Person: The meaning whereof he makes to be this, That
the Excellency of Christ's Love consists in this, that he loves for no Reason.

Who the men be that have so expressed themselves, I no more know, than I know
what the Pope of Rome is doing while I write. All that ever were in any
reputation for Learning and Sobriety, say, That Christ in pardoning a Believer,
and hearing his Prayers, has respect unto Qualifications; he pardons him
because he is meet for Pardon, because he is a Penitent, because he hates sin,
confesses, forsakes sin, can forgive those who have sinned against him; in a
word, because he is one, who by virtue of Gods gracious Covenant has a right
to Pardon. But why did Christ give Repentance to one, and not to another?
because he belonged to the Fathers Election: but why did the Father elect this
man, and not another? only because it pleased him. Methinks Mr. Sh. might
allow God to be merciful because he will be merciful, and to show some Acts
of Love to one Person which he does not show to others; because it seems good
in his eyes, and not impute folly to him for doing with his own what he
lists. It was an act of love in Christ to lay down his life for men; what was
the reason of this love? what moved him to lay down his life for them, and not
for the Angels? It was an act of love in Christ to send the Gospel to us
Britains, sooner by many years than to other Nations; what reason can any one
give of this love? If the Histories of God's Providence be not all false, he
has let the light of his Gospel shine among some that lived a very lewd and
profligate life, by which means they have some of them been brought to the
knowledge of the Truth into other places, that were better governed; light came
not, or at least came not till some of those who used their Talent of Nature
better than most, were gone to their graves.

Page 414, 415. Mr. Sh. falls on the bones of Mr. W. B. (or perhaps only of
some ignorant Transcriber, or careless Printer) for some expressions relating
to our love to the Person of Christ. The words quarrelled (though not the only
words liable to exception) are these. It is a more excellent thing to love the
Person of Christ, than the benefits of Christ; a more excellent thing to have
my heart drawn out in love to the Person of Christ, than to have my heart drawn
out in love to him for his benefits. What (says Mr. Sh.) can be the meaning of
all this, but that the excellency and perfection of our love to Christ consists
in our loving him for no reason; the proper object and reason of love is
Goodness, to love that which is good for nothing, is the folly and degeneracy
of love; and it is as foolish and impossible a task to love a Person, who has
been good to us, not because he has been good, but for no reason. Now this is
the case here, etc.

He that will spend much time to set things right betwixt Mr. W. Bridges his
Ghost, and Mr. W. Sh. does not set any very great price upon his time. I for my
part am not wont in my communings with my own heart, to vex my self with
Metaphysical niceties; If I can but find, that I love God, so as that I dare
not, cannot disobey him, I am quiet. But Mr. Sh. I perceive is profoundly
Metaphysical, intimately acquainted with the writings and thoughts of
Schoolmen, especially those who were most subtle among them. I shall give him
the pleasure and recreation of propounding some difficulties relating to his
discourse of love.

1. Whether God did not from all Eternity love himself?

2. Whether in that love he did consider himself as doing good, or bestowing
benefits on himself, or others?

3. If he did not so consider himself, whether he loved himself for no reason?

4. Whether there be any goodness in what is merely possible, but shall never
be?

5. If there be any goodness in what is merely possible, whether the ground of
God's love to it be good, it does to himself, or others?

6. What is the Ground, Object, Reason of God's love to the Creature?

7. Whether the Creature be bound to love the Creator more than the Creature?

8. Whether the benefits we receive from God, be not created beings?

9. Whether if the benefits we receive from God, be the sole or chief ground of
our loving God, we do not either love the Creature more than the Creator, or
not love the Creator at all?

These are knots which Mr. Sh. can easily untye; for what is there that can be
difficult to him who has all his Philosophy at his fingers end?

In the mean time I must conclude these advertisements, which you had never
seen, if so be those on the first Chapter put into the form of a Letter at your
importunity, had not been far beyond the time allowed by you or me, detained in
the Country. Upon the whole I think, Mr. Sh. should not have thrown so many
stones at other men's writings, till he had took care to make his own less
faulty. He might if he had pleased have chosen other Subjects and Persons on
whom to exercise his Juvenile Pen. I verily believe his book will not occasion
any one man to live a better life, or to look on Fanatics with the worse eye.

You will say all this while I have said very little in defense of those whom
Mr. Sh. impugnes.

I confess I have said but a little, and yet I have said more than I intended,
and more than was needful; for what if every passage in some men's popular
discourses will not bear a severe trial by the Rules of Art? is this any
disparagement to the cause of Non-conformists? Cannot I find passages in the
Homilies of the Fathers, that would make good sport, if any one would be at the
pains to lay them together, and play upon them? Or have any of our late so much
famed Writers against the Papists, took so much care to put out their Books, as
never to stand in need of a very candid Reader? He that Preaches often, and
Printeth much, may do no more than what he thinks himself in Conscience bound
to do; but it is a thousand to one, he will in many things lay himself open.

Ay, but the men whom Mr. Sh. pincheth, do professedly avow such principles as
naturally tend to make men bad, or hinder and retard their progress in true
holiness.

Ans. If his design were only to expose opinions that naturally tend to make
men bad, or, etc. it was very laudable; and if his Conscience do clearly
witness that he had no other design, he has the less to answer, though he has
failed in the managing of his design. But,

1. Before he charge any opinion, he ought fairly to state, and heartily to
represent that opinion. This I seldom find him to do, and if I had said I
never found him so to have done, I should not lie, though perhaps I might be
mistaken.

2. He ought never to charge any man with those consequences of an opinion
which he knows to be disowned and disavowed by him; for though he who writes
against an opinion, is to burden it with all the consequences which do
naturally flow from it; yet is not he who maintains the opinion, to be
represented forthwith, as one who avows all those consequences. Indeed it were
to no purpose to dispute against any man by urging the consequences flowing
from his opinion; if he did own those consequences, in vain it would be, I mean
as to the man himself who owns the consequences, though perhaps not in vain, as
to every one of those whom he had proselyted to his opinion.

3. He sins against God and his Neighbor every time he draws a bad sense out
of words that are capable of a good sense. How often he has polluted his
Conscience this way, may easily be discerned; I shall give one instance for
all, page 379, 380. he lays it to the charge, of some men, that they do so
magnify the seize of Hypocrites, who shall never go to Heaven; that it
is impossible for any sanctified man to do more than an Hypocrite may do. If
there be any men who so do, they are to be withstood, as adversaries to all
Christian Consolation in this world. But who are the men that so do? why, Mr.
Shepherd does so; and will the Conscience of this Minister of the Gospel
suffer him to charge that upon men which is found only for ought appears in Mr.
Shepeheard. If Mr. Shepeheard through a zeal without knowledge, have indeed
made those things common to Hypocrites, which are proper only to Sound
Believers, and sincere Christians, he must bear his own burden; and less
understanding. Readers are to be cautioned that they prejudice not themselves
by his writings; but what is this to others who contributed nothing to the
making or Printing his Book, and perhaps never saw his Book? So page 37, etc.
He tells us of an acquaintance with the Person of Christ, which if we will
believe some men, is the only fountain of saving knowledge, this acquaintance
he afterward makes to be such an acquaintance as is not to be got or attained
to by the Gospel; yea, which is contrary to that acquaintance we can get from
the Gospel. Are there some men who make such an acquaintance with Christ's
Person, the sole fountain of saving knowledge? I never saw any such, never read
of any such, and hope there are none such in the world; Mr. Sh. thinks there
be: and how does he prove it? Why, J. O. D. D. in a Book Entitled, of Com.
with Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, has some expressions which if they be set on
the Rack, and construed to a sense that it is manifest he never intended, may
seem to hold forth such an acquaintance with the Person of Christ; and this is
sufficient to this Rector of St. George Buttolph-Lane, to charge on a party of
men so vile a principle; this is sufficient to warrant him to call Mr.
Shepeheard (who it is like never heard of Dr. Owen, and to be sure was dead
before his Book of Communion came forth) by way of Scorn, a great acquaintance
of Christ.

Well, but let us imagine yet Mr, Sher. had charged Mr. Shepherds sayings only
on Mr. Shepherd, and try whether he has done him no wrong in what he charge
upon him. I say he has manifestly, laying to him such faults as it does not
appear he was ever guilty of. Mr. T. S. stands charged as one that so magnifies
the seize of Hypocrites, that it is impossible for any sanctified man to
do more than he may do. To make this good, he is brought in answering the pleas
which several Hypocrites make for themselves: and Mr. Sher. supposes the same
man to make all these pleas for himself, which is not fair or just. Let Us hear
the Pleas, and the Answers to them.

Plea. I have left my sins I once lived in, and am now no Drunkard, no Swearer,
no Liar. Mark, it is not supposed that he has left all the sins he once lived
in.

Answ. Be washed from all the mire (the pollution of the world) and yet be a
Swine in God's account.

This I say is a truth, a man may be washed from the pollution of the world,
and yet be a Swine in God's account; that is, his outward conversation may be
so altered, as that he shall cease to act and practice those things which the
Apostle calls the Pollutions of the world, and yet his heart be still unclean,
and so remain a Swine in Gods account, for God esteems him a Swine who is not
cured of his swinish disposition, though he be so restrained as that he does
not wallow in the mire. Ay, but Mr. T. S. proves this from 2 Pet. 2.20. which
is point blank contrary to what he Affirms. That is, it is point blank
contrary, if we will take Mr. Sh's word, but we will look for a proof before we
yield any point blank contrariety.

Plea. I Pray, and that often.

Ans. So thou may, and yet never be saved, Isa. 1.11. To what purpose is the
multitude of your Sacrifices?

That Mr. S. H. may Master this Objection, he supposes the man who so pleads
to live, a blameless, innocent, honest, smooth life; and then replyeth, that
Sacrifices when offered by such, are sure to great purpose, and that the want
of such a life, made those Sacrifices abominable to God. But it may be
questioned whether Mr. T. S. supposed the man who prayed often, to be of a
blameless, innocent, honest, smooth life; yet if he had made that supposition,
his answer may be good and pertinent; for if a man's life be blameless, etc. if
it be not so with relation to God and Men, and in every thing, his Prayers may
avail nothing.

Plea. But I fast sometimes.

Ans. So did the Scribes and Pharisees twice a week.

Reply. It was to devour Widows houses, which was not the fast of an honest
innocent man. It is then granted, that a very gross Hypocrite may fast
sometimes, which is enough to justify Mr. T. Sh. But where did Mr. Sh. learn
that the Scribes and Pharisees did fast twice a week to devour widows houses;
or that on those fasting days they made longer Prayers than other men? Yea,
how does he prove that the Pharisees devoured widows houses? In Mark and Luke
this is charged only on the Scribes. And though it be charged on the Pharisees,
Matthew. 23.14. yet there is some question made by learned men whether that Verse
be not thrust into Matthew. Mr. Sh. shall do well to correct Grotius and
Brugensis, to assert the Authentity of those Greek Copies which our Translators
follow; and then he may with more confidence say the Pharisees made long
Prayers to devour widows houses, yet if he will say so before he has taken
such pains, I will not reprove him; for I am no advocate of Pharisees.

Plea. I hear the Word of God, and like the best Preachers. Ans. So did the
stony Ground, who heard the Word with joy, and for a season believed.

Mr. Sh's reply to this, is wonderfully delivered in these words, This had been
well, and a good sign of grace if it had continued. That is, the disposition
which was in the hearers compared to the stony ground, was a good sign of Grace
whilst it continued, but by not continuing it became no sign of Grace: Before
the scorching Sun came, the stony ground was good ground, as well as sowed with
good seed. What is the result of this? why, -- Vltima semper
Expectanda dies homini est, sanctusque vocari
Ante obitum nemo, supremaque funera debet.


Suppose a man doubting of his condition, should come to Mr. Sh. and tell him,
that he rejoices in the Word, and believes; he will answer, this is a good
sign of grace if it continue; but how shall I know whether it will continue?
that will appear when tribulation or persecution comes, because of the Word of
the Kingdom, till then hope the best. How well this will satisfy a man that is
concerned for his Soul, we may easily guess; none of the Non-conformists whom
he so much scorns, would have sent away a doubting Christian with so
unsatisfactory an answer, they can easily out of God's Word, lay down
Characters by which the joy and faith of an Hypocrite may be discerned, before
the Hypocrite quite falls from either.

Plea. I read the Scripture often.

Ans. So did the Pharisees, who were so perfect in the Bible, that Christ
needed but to say, It has been said of old times, for they knew the Text
without intimation.

If these be Mr. T. S's words (which having not the book by me, I cannot
examine) he much mistook himself; for as it may be questioned whether Christ
ever said, it has been said of old times; so it is certain that that form of
speech which he used, however to be rendered, was spoken not to the Scribes and
Pharisees, but to his own Disciples, whom we must account generally good. But
the Divinity is good, he who reads the Scripture often may be an Hypocrite?
what is it that Mr. Sh. objects or adverteth. First, he scoffingly says, Men
of prodigious Memories certainly, better than any Concordance. Does he indeed
think that they must be men of prodigious Memories that can tell the Text
without intimation; if so, the Jewish Nation abounded with many prodigies, for
that there were many in it, who if they had been at hand were better than any
Concordance for the Hebrew Text, I suppose he does not doubt. His answer is
still behind, Though Knaves may read the Scriptures, and be never the better
for it; yet good men may read it to good purpose, and therefore I hope reading
the Scripture is no argument that a man is a Hypocrite, because the Pharisees
were. This hope is such as he need not be ashamed of, but he shall do well to
take shame to himself, for endeavoring to put a man famed for Piety, into a
Fools Coat, to see whether he can make people laugh at him. O! that he would
before it be too late, commune with his own heart, and search the Scriptures to
see whether this Drollery becomes a Preacher.

Plea. I am grieved and sorrowful, and repent of my sins.

Ans. So did Judas. What says Mr. Sh. to the case of Judas? why, that he
hanged himself, and that indeed was no repentance unto life. Indeed the
repentance of Judas was no repentance unto life; nor did Mr. T. S. say it was,
but brought it as an instance of a repentance not unto life. And I wish all
pretending to be the Sons of the Church, would well consider what the Homily
says of Judas his repentance: 2d. part of the Sermon of Repentance. It might
perhaps move some of them to alter their apprehensions about the Nature of
Repentance, and not take up with such a Repentance as is so far short of what
Judas did. In the mean time I am glad to find Mr. Sh. acknowledging that Judas
hanged himself, because the immortal Hugh Groot goes quite another way, as also
do Heinsius, De Dieu, Dr. Lightfoot; it seems this Rector is not always out of
conceit with that Translation he reads to the People. I wish by minding him,
that late Critics deny Judas to have hanged himself, I have not laid a stone
of offense in his way.

Plea. But I love good men and their company.

An. So did the foolish Virgins. What jest has Mr. Sh. to break upon this?
(for he is not in the mood of giving serious replies) why this, The foolish
Virgins slept, and suffered their Lamps to go out, which I hope all that love
good men do not. If he hope there are any good men who do not sleep, he hopes
there be some wiser than any of the five wise Virgins; as for not letting their
Lamps go quite out, Mr. Th. S. will allow him not only to hope it of some good
men, but also to affirm it of every good man.

Plea. God has given me much knowledge.

Ans. That thou may have, and never be saved. Mr. Sh. denies not this; but
adds, If a blameless honest man have the keeping of this knowledge, it is never
the worse for him; which if you mark it well, is an huge Commendation of good
knowledge, that a man is not the worse for it.

(...).

Ans. So did the Jews, whom yet Christ condemns. Here Mr. T. S. stumbled, and
Mr. Sh. must needs call to all England to take notice of it; But the answer
though unhappily expressed, is sufficient to show that a man may strictly keep
a day of Divine Institution, and yet be of the number of those whom Christ
condemns. But has not Mr. Sh. committed a greater mistake in saying, that to
keep the Lords Day strictly is one good thing, which does well in the company
of more? such a Speech would formerly have been esteemed Puritanical, and it
may be this, notwithstanding he could like well enough of a Book of Sports. 2.
In implying that with other things, it will justify a man; for as I think, it
is God, and not the Observation of the Lords Day that justifies.

I am ashamed to observe how in the remainder of p. 382, and page 383.
throughout Mr. Sh. shows his teeth, and knows not where to bite; just like a
man that wishes his adversary had errors to be confuted, and were sorry he
could find none.

That a man may think he has a good heart to God, and yet deceive himself,
which is all that Mr. Shepeheard says, he cannot deny, but wishes he had
said, that a man who thinks he has a good heart toward God, must needs be
mistaken; and then he would say, the whole Doctrine concerning marks and
evidences were at an end.

It may perhaps be worthy a little observation, what Mr. Sh. says; to a
distinguishing mark betwixt a regenerate and an unregenerate man. An
unregenerate man, says T. S. let him go never so far, do never so much, yet he
lives in some one sin or other. This I say is a good Rule for a man to judge
himself by: He that allows himself in no known sin either of Omission or
Commission, is a regenerate man: Every unregenerate man allows himself in some
known sin of omission or commission. A Regenerate person hates every known sin,
and sincerely endeavors to avoid all known sin, so does no unregenerate man,
so can no unregenerate man do: no man not born of God, loves God above all;
there is something he loves above God, and what the effect of not loving God
above all must needs be, who knows not? Mr. Sh. it should seem does not, for he
says, this is very strange, That let an unregenerate man go never so far, and
do never so much, yet he lives in some one sin or other. If it seem strange,
very strange, I cannot help it; but a little Christian Philosophy will take
away the admiring Humor.

Lastly, It is manifest that Mr. Sh. thrusts out his sting against those who
have written nothing (taken notice of by him) that can be supposed to hurt or
hinder Godliness. He mentions Thomas Vincent, p. 144. censureth the prettiness
and fantastical Wit of an Exhortation made by him: What is the Exhortation? why
the Exhortation is directed to his Hearers, To choose Christ for their Husband,
because he is Rich, Beautiful and Kind, and has all the Properties of an
excellent Husband. This he says, would sound better in a Popish Nunnery, than
among such pretenders to Reformation. One man's Exhortation does not please him,
but he cannot content himself to declare his displeasure against one man; we
presently hear of pretenders to Reformation, not so generous suitors for Christ
as the Papists. To the reproach of my stupidity, I cannot see what prettiness
or fantasticalness is in this Wit, if wit it must be called. I ever took it for
granted, that in sound Conversion a man is taken into a conjugal Relation with
Christ, and that if any man so related to Christ should fall into an Act of
Idolatry, he should commit spiritual Adultery, and would provoke God to
jealousy. This young Divine is so illuminated that he can correct Magnificat,
and spy a beam in Expressions so usual among the greatest Clerks, and so
agreeable to Scripture; let us see what Discovery he has made. The Church is
Christ's Spouse, and every Christian is a member of that Society which Christ
owns for his Spouse: He is a great Enemy to Polygamy, and has but one Spouse,
as he has but one Body, but one Church. If Mr. Vincent should grant all this
to be true, his Exhortation is not at all spoiled; Maids are still to be
persuaded to choose Christ to be their Husband, only it seems they must first
choose to be members of the Church, and then they shall be parts of the Spouse
of Christ. But I should think, that as his Majesty by being King of England,
Scotland, Ireland, is King to every Person in these three Kingdoms; so Christ
by being Husband to his Church, has the Relation of an Husband to every member
of the Church. It is the Church of Christ that is called the Spouse in the
Canticles, and the Wife of the Lamb in the Revelations; but why is she so
called, but because she is a collection of such men and women as are married or
espoused to him. The Church which is married to Christ is also married to his
Father, is so his Wife that she is also his Mother, and yet Christ is as great
an Enemy to Incest as Polygamy. Let us leave it to Julian to scoff at these
Titles and Relations; and for our own parts, let us admire at the
condescensions of Divine love, and conceive of things spiritual spiritually, so
shall we be accounted worthy to be called to the Marriage of the Lamb, and be
brought by him into his Fathers House, which he has prepared for all that fear
him.

I have now done, and desire you to keep these Papers to your self; or if you
will needs show them to Mr. Sh. to conceal my Name; for I love not to enter
into the Lists with any man, and he has already Adversaries enough. And if you
will, you may please to acquaint him with the misadventures of some men of wit,
but of no great judgment in Divinity. Vergerius was a witty man, else he had
not been made Legate to Clement the seventh, and Paul the third; he setting
himself to write against the Apostates of Germany, became by reading their
Books, their Convert, and so quite lost the Hope he had of a Cardinalship:
Pighius adventuring to read Calvin about Justification, with a design to refute
him, became a Calvinist in point of Justification, and that did not help him to
Preferment. A worthy and Right Reverend Person, now one of his Majesty's
Bishops, preaching when he was young, for a Friend of yours and mine, very
elegantly discoursed against the Imputation of the active Righteousness, in
that sense which looks a little too like Antinomianism, our Friend told him, he
had delivered but his sense, yet blamed him for that being so young, he would
so peremptorily declare himself in a point wherein it was possible he might
live to be of another mind. He replied, That it could not be, he should alter
his Mind in that matter; but setting himself afterward to preach at large
about Justification, he most professedly pleaded for the Imputation of the
Active Righteousness, and of that mind he is still. Commend to his Reading,
three Non-conformists, Mr. Fox, De Christo gratis justificante; Mr. Anthony
Wotton, De Reconciliatione, etc. Mr. William Bradshaw, De Justificatione. Bid
him also consider, whether if the Parliament should meet, they might not find
leisure enough to censure his Discourse, as they did Mr. Mountagues, who in
vain pleaded for himself, That he he had writ against the Puritans, and was
left alone to suffer, though others had instigated him to write. The Commons of
England will scarce endure to find the Doctrine of the Church of England struck
at, though it be through the sides of Dr. Owen and Dr. Ja^. Nor can I think,
that the Reverend (...) of our Church read this Book of Mr. Sh's. without a
Frown in their Foreheads; common Fame is more than ordinarily false, if some of
them have not manifested their dislike of it. These things you may if you
please suggest to your Author. Let Brotherly Love continue betwixt you and

Your, etc.

FINIS.

