THE CAUSE OF GOD AND HIS PEOPLE IN NEW ENGLAND, as it was STATED and DISCUSSED
IN A Sermon Preached before the Honorable GENERAL COURT of the MASSACHVSETS
COLONY, on the 27 day of May 1663. Being the Day OF ELECTION at BOSTON.

By JOHN HIGGINSON Pastor of the Church of Christ at SALEM.

Mat. 22.21. And Jesus said unto them, render unto Caesar the things that are
Cesars: and unto GOD the things that are Gods.

1 Pet. 2.17. Honor all men, love the Brotherhood, fear God, Honor the King.

1 Chronicles. 12.32. And of the children of Issachar, which were men that had
understanding in the times, to know what Israel ought to do.

CAMBRIDG, Printed by Samuel Green 1663.

Christian Reader,
THe Curse of God and his people (which is the subject of this following Pious
and Elabourate discourse) never (...) more ^^lp from Heaven, nor more servant
prayers from earth, to be put up to the God of heaven, for then a^^aming of it,
t^^^ (...) this time. For some there are (and not a sin) that are so engaged to
their own interests, that le^ the cause of God and his people, sink or swim,
they care not, so their own ^nds be compassed, and their own design and
projects may find sure foo^^ng: and these are your self-loving worldly
politici^ns, that are of this world, as Christ speaks and savor nothing but
the things of the world, and seek (...), and not (...), that seek their own and
not the things of Jesus Christ. Others there are so dissolute and profane, and
are risen up to such as height of impiety, that they do no more regard this
Cause, than the air^ under then ^^et, they are so around in drink and other
sensual deli^hts his, and are so heightened in their Oaths and blasphe^^^ and
other abominations, tha^ God and his peoples c^^se are not in their thoughts:
(...) if at any time this c^^se come into them (...) as, it is only to cast the
foulest pers^^^^ they can upon it, and to be spatter (...) with the ba^^st
obliquies and (...) speeches that the Devil and their own cursed hearts can
invent, and to persecute it wi^^ tongue and (...) and heart and hand to the
highest degree of persecution, even unto blood and sl^ughter: though when they
have done all that ever they (...), they shall not be able to (...) the cause
nor the faithful servants of Christ that ^^^ck (...); but as the Primitive
believers said of persecuting Nero, Nero may kill us, but he cannot hurt us; so
may we say now. Others there are that seem to own this cause and adventure much
this way, and may not only be willing to lose their liberty and estates, and
the favor of great friends, but go further also, yet afterward turn away and
draw back, and these are hypocrites, which are either taken with the eyelids
of the aluring harlot the world, in the profits, pleasures and honors of it,
or else are afraid of her frowns and discouragements, after all their former
sufferings: they have ventured so far, but dare go no further, and so lise all
they have wrought, and suffer in vain, these are not true to the ca^se of God
and his people, and by their putting away a good conscience, and wan^ of
self-denial, make shipwreck of the faith and cause we speak of. Only there is a
very few sincere ones that hold their own, and in the worst times deal
p^^^ently, and discern both time and judgment, and are valiant for this c^^se.
All which duty weighed and seriously considered, no wonder that this holy man
of God being guided by his Spirit, made choice of this subject to preach upon,
in that great Assembly at the Court of Election, now in these days wherein so
many turn their backs of God, and set themselves so desparately against H^^,
and his peoples cause. I was to star^ us all up to besiege and beleag^^ the
^^r^e of Grace now in th^se last and pe^il^us days and times, to awake and
stand to maintain this cause, and to show forth his Almighty power in crushing
all the designs, and out-plotting all the plots of Satan and his instruments
that undermine this cause, and the Lord help us all to attend what God by his
Spirit speaks to us, and now if ever, to pray and give God no rest, ^ll this
cause be maintained against the faces and forces of all its enemies. The Sermon
when preached was acceptable to all, and found general approbation among all
the wise-hearted and godly, so far as we have heard.

Reader thou have i^ to peruse, read it, understand thy time according to it,
let the cause of God and his people lie nearer to thine heart then ever, and
let thy so^l awake more to be a Prince with God to prevail, that this cause
may be main a^ed and upheld against all the powers of darkness, and all the
conspiracies of men on earth, and devils in hell, that it may be victorious,
and ride in triumph till Christ come, who will own is before the whole world,
and them that have stood for it, though it have cost them dear from those that
have been the d^spisers of it. We have no more to say, but to desire from our
hearts that the blessing of heaven may go along with the labor of his Servant
in this work, and that be and we, and whosoever read it, may find this fruit
that we may tread in this wise Kings steps, who prayed so fervently, that God
would maintain his cause and his peoples always, as the matter shall require;
Prayer of Faith opens all doors, prevails for all blessings, has such power
with God that it never comes away empty, but as that renowned Emperor said,
that he never sent any su^er ^^d w^^ from his presence, so we may be sure that
the Lord will do to them that sue to him, giving them all that they seek to him
for (especially in maintaining his own and his peoples cause, which he cannot
s^e forsaken) and will not send his suitors and suppliants sad away from him,
they are bidden to come with boldness to ^he Throne of Grace. One word more
and we have done, Jesus Christ that great Favorite by whom both our persons
and prayers are accepted, and this cause comes to be maintained for the much
Incense that he offers up with the prayers of all Saints, prevails ever for
us, and this cause when it and we the honor of both are laid most in the dust.
To this Lord Jesus, with the blessed Father and Eternal Spirit, be Glory and
Power everlasting. Amen.

Thine in Him who is ^o^ Love and Life, John Wilson, Senior. Samuel Whit^ng.


THE CAUSE OF GOD AND HIS PEOPLE IN NEW ENGLAND, Stated and Discussed.
1 King. 8.57, 58, 59. The Lord our GOD be with us, as He was with our Fathers,
let him not leave us nor forsake us; That be may incline our hearts unto him,
to walk in all his ways, and to keep his Commandments, his Statutes and his
Judgments which he Commanded our Fathers. And let these my words wherewith I
have made supplication before the Lord, be nigh unto the Lord our God day and
night, that He maintain the cause of his Servant, and the cause of his people
Israel at all times, as the matter shall require.


IN the beginning of this Chapter, we read of a General Assembly of the
Representative body of the people of Israel: thus in verse 1. Then Solomon
assembled the Elders of Israel, and all the heads of the Tribes, the chief of
the Fathers of the children of Israel: and verse 2, 3. And all the men of
Israel assembled themselves, and all the Elders of Israel came.

The special end of this great Assembly is showed in verse 6. they brought in
the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord into his place, in the house of the Lord.
Upon this occasion Solomon makes a large Prayer for the welfare and prosperity
of the people of Israel which begins at the 22 and continues to the 54. verse,
wherein he mentions all the common Cases which might in changes of time befall
the people of Israel, and he commends their condition to the Lord for special
mercy and help in such cases as are expressed in the 37. verse; If ne^^ be
famine, or pestilence, or wars or captivity, if there be these or such like
cases, and thy people Israel do repent and confess thy Name, and pra^^; then
hear thou in heaven and forgive, and do for them, and hearken to them in all
that they call upon ^hee for. This is the Su^me of his prayer.

At the Conclusion of which he pronounces a solemn blessing upon the
Congregation verse 55; He stood and blessed all the Congregation of Is^^^. This
blessing of Solomon consists in three things.

1 A thankful acknowledgment of present and former mercy, that hitherto the
Lord had given them rest. verse 56; Blessed be the Lord that (...) given ^^st
(...) people Israel

2. A renewed Prayer for a threefold blessing to be farther granted, bo^^at the
present and for future times.

1 And that he prays for the gracious presence of God, even such a gracious
presence of God with them as their fathers had enjoyed. verse 57; the Lord our
God be with us (...) with our Father; and because his heart was much in this,
therefore he repeats it again, let him not leave us nor forsake us.

2. He pays so Divine assistance verse 58. That he may incline our hearts unto
him to walk in his ways, and to keep his Commandments, which he Commanded our
Fathers.

3. His third request is for Divine protection verse 59. Let these my Prayers
be high to the Lord our God, that his (...) the cause of his People Israel,
which is amplyfied by the end of it; that all the People of the (...) may know
that the Lord is God and that there is none el^^^ verse 60.

3. And th^n the last particular wherein he blesses the People is, by
Exhorting them to upright waking with God. Let your heart therefore be perfect
with the Lord our God, ^o walk in his Statutes and to keep his Commandments as
at this a^y, verse 61.

The Text (as you see falls within the compass of Solomon's blessing upon the
representatative body of the People of Israel.

From the whole you may please to take notice of this Observation in the
general, which I shall but briefly touch upon.

Doct. The Lords gracious presence with his people inclining their hearts to
keep his Commandments, and maintaining their cause; is a Sufficient means to
Establish the welfare of such a people, even at their own hearts can wish.

For thus did Solomon bless the heads of the Tribes of Israel, and he had the
hearts of the whole Congregation going along with him, that if the Lord would
but grant his presence with them, his assistance of them, and his protection
over them, they had enough, they could have no more, they could be no better in
this world.

And if we our selves now might have our wish, if the Lord should say to us as
Ahas^^rus to Esther, what is thy Petition? or as he said sometime to Solomon,
ask what I shall give thee; what could any of us, or all of us desire more then
this? that the Lord our God would be with us, as he has been with our Fathers,
that he would incline our hearts to keep his Commandments which be Commanded
our Fathers, and that he would maintain his own and his Peoples cause amongst
us: what can be desired and enjoyed by us more then this?

For, does not Immanuel, God with us, comprehend our whole good? and the
keeping of Gods Commandments contain our whole duty^ and is not the Lords
maintaining the cause of his People enough to keep off whatever might interrupt
or hinder us in the performing this duty, and enjoying that good wherein the
utmost happyness of a People on this side Heaven does consist? Let these
requests (therefore) dwell upon the hearts of all the Lords People, let us bear
them continually upon our hearts before the Lord, that as hitherto, so still,
he may grant unto all his Servants, both Magistrates, Ministers, and People,
his Gracious presence, divine assistance, and divine protection in the times
that are come upon us. This is the Sum of all that we need or can receive, or
can desire whilst we are here tossed in the troublesome sea of this World,
passing to the Haven of eternal rest.

But I shall not further insist upon this. It is another Doctrine which I
mainly intend from the latter part of the 59 verse. That he maintain the cause
of his People at all times as the matter shall require. There are two things
need a little opening here.

1. What is meant by the cause of his People Israel. 2. What is meant by the
Lords maintaining the cause of his People at all times as the matter shall
require.
1. By [because of his People ^r^^] I understand the same which in other
Scriptures is called the cause of G^^, P^^l 74.^2. Arise O God and plead thy
own Cause. So that there is a cause of God in the World, (mark I beseech you)
there is a cause which is God own cause: A^^se O Lord and plead h^^ own ^use.
And if you please but to cast^y ur^ey upon two or three passages of that Psalm,
we need go no further to understand clearly, what is the cause of God (...) 20.
have respect unto the Covenant, the cause of God is the cause of his Covenant
it is also the cause of his Temple the dwelling place of his name, verse 7. and
further, it is the cause of his Church, verse 2. Remember thy Congregation
which thou have purchased of old, thine inheritance which thou have redeemed,
this mount Sion wherein thou have dwel^, i. e. his Church, and so in the 8
verse you read of the Synagogues of God in the Land.

Now the very same was the cause of his People Israel, for the special end of
the great assembly mentioned in this Chapter, it was to bring in the Ark of the
Covenant into the house of the Lord: by virtue of which Covenant the Lord was
their God and they were his people; and, the cause of God was theirs, and their
cause was his; the cause of God and his People Israel was one and the same, and
that was the cause of Religion according to the word of God. Therefore in the
Text here Solomon prays that the hearts of his People might be inclined to
walk in Gods ways and to keep his Commandments.

Again, it is observable, the word rendered cause here in the text is
translated [right] in the Margin of the 45. and 49. verses, that he maintain
the right of his People, there is a right unto house and land and the like, but
there is a jus divinum, a special divine right which the People of Israel had
unto the one true Religion, and a liberty annexed unto that right that none
could lawfully hinder them from enjoying all that belonged to the service of
God.

So that (in one word) the cause of his people Israel was right from God, and
liberty from God, to keep Gods Commandments in matters of Religion. This was
the cause of God and Israel then, and I hope it will appear anon, that the very
same is the cause of God and his people now.

2. What is meant by [the Lords maintaining this cause at all times as the
matter shall require] He had made the same request twice before verse 45. and
49. that he maintain his Peoples cause; here he mentions it again the third
time, that he maintain the cause of his People Israel, with an addition of this
further expression, at all times as the matter shall require.

He had before in his large Prayer comprehended all the common cases which
might fall out; but because there might be other cases which he could not
foresee, or they might be otherwise circumstanced, when the cause of Israel
might be so endangered, as there would not be any help in the ey of reason in
the sight of Man, therefore he commends the cause of his People Israel to the
Lord himself, and leaves it with him, and beseeches him, that he by his
prerogative would maintain the cause of his people, even as the matter should
require.

And those words in the Text [at all times] are in the Margin rendered [ the
thing of a day in his day] i. e. not only in the day of prosperity when things
go smoothly on; but in the days of adversity, in the Hirracano's of
tempestuous times, when it is a day of trouble and rebuke, and Blasphemy, as is
was in Hezekiahs time, Isai. 37.3. in a day of perplexity and treading down,
Isai 22.5. in such a day as this, the cause of God and Israel is Committed to
the Lord himself that he would maintain it.

And there is an Emphasis to be observed in that word [He] that He maintain it,
when there is none else that will, or can, or knows how: implying the need
(the extreme need) that the people of Israel might sometimes have for the Lord
himself to maintain their cause above all that themselves, or any else should
be able to do.

So that the point of Doctrine which I would commend unto the consideration of
this present Assembly from hence, is this.

Doct. The times may be such, and the case may be such, as the maintaining of
the cause of Religion, may need and require more then ordinary help from the
Lord himself.

The times may be so perilous, and the case so circumstanced, and the cause of
Religion so endangered, as it may be above the wisdom of Man to direct, or the
hand of Man to help: then there is work for Jehovah himself, for him to
maintain his own and his Peoples cause, you see the point: a little for the
Proof.

It is many times the cry of the Church of God in the World, give us help from
trouble O Lord, for vain is the help of Man, Psalm. 108. last. and our help is
in the Name of the Lord, who made the Heavens and the Earth, Psalm 124. last.
there is creating wisdom and power and goodness with him, that is God over
all, Blessed for evermore, there and from thence alone is the help of his
People when its no where else to be seen upon Earth. I shall add no more but
that in Isai. 63.5. I looked and there was none to help, and I wondered that
there was none to uphold, therefore mine own arm brought Salvation ^^ne, and my
fury it upheld me. Our Savior Christ is here brought in speaking of himself,
not as Chri^ ^nall, but as Christ Mystical, Christ and ^is Church as be^ers,
engaged together in the same cause, and the cause of Christ and his Church is
represented here as in a dispairing sinking case, I looked and there was none
to help, I wondered that there was (...) to uphold: what then? why, therefore
mine own arm brought Salvation ^o me: the Church when sinking, yet saved by
Christ, the cause of God and his People when ready to be overturned,
overwhelmed; yet then ^reserved, secured maintained, by the outstretched a^m of
a blessed ^aviour: implying, the case may be such, and the matter may so
require, that no less then the Infinite Wisdom, and good pleasure of of
Omnipotency it self can do the deed. This may suffice for the Proof.

There is a three f^ld Reason may convince us of the Truth of the Doctrine.

1. From the weakness of Man. 2. From the Malice of the Devil. 3. From the
Providence of God.
Reas. 1. The first reason is taken from the weakness of Men, from the
inability of Gods own People, who are affected unto this cause, and engaged in
it, but are not able to maintain it.

The best of the Saints have flesh as well as Spirit, they have something of
the Old Man, as well as of the New; they know but in part, and are Sanctified
but in part: and hence many weaknesses in managing the cause of God.

There is a mixture of Hypocrites amongst the sincere Servants of God, who
pretend unto this cause as well as they; and hence many times not only
weakness but wickedness is inter-woven into the fairest pretenses to the cause
of God.

There are various apprehensions, affections, and passions, amongst good men.
Moses the Servant, and Aaron the Saint of the Lord, are sometimes unadvised:
and when they are most upright, when they lead the People according to the
^kilfulness of their hands, and Integrity of their Heart, yet then traduced,
reproached, opposed, et tantum n^n, overpoured by a murmuring People, and there
were Men of renown and famous in the Congregation, that would not submit unto
Gods order.

Sometimes (alas) there is a sharp contention between Paul and Barnabas: and
Godly Peter does not ever walk with a right foot: and blessed Paul when most
faithful and true, is under evil surmises, as a deceiver. There is names and
parties of men, dividing Christ amongst them: some departing from the Faith,
others led aside from the simplicity of the Gospel, on the right hand, and on
the left, and many (in the last days very many) that have the form but deny
the power of Godlyness.

Hence the cause of Religion much obscured and ready to be spoiled in the hands
of those that profess to be the lovers of it. That is the first Reason.

Reas. 2. Taken from the Malice of the Devil, and his Instrumentie Satan from
the beginning has had an old grudg against the seed of the Woman, and he never
wanted instruments, who either by force or fraud or both, have done what
mischief they could against the Church and cause of God.

Thus in the story of Exodus, Pharaoh at first works, wisely to undermine,
afterward he works proudly to overtake and destroy the Israel of God. Thus
also in Psalm. 83.1, 2, 3. Keep not Silence O God, for ^thine Enemies make a
tumult, they have consulted together, they have said, come let us cut them off
that the name of Israel be had no more in remembrance; and then there is
mention made of Gebal, Ammon, and Amalek and many others.

And in the time of Ezra, and Nehemiah, no sooner had Zerubbabel and Joshua and
the rest of the poor People of Israel begun to reform and set themselves about
the work of the Lord, but Satan stood up to resist them, as it is in Zech.
3.1. and he had instruments at hand presently Sanballat and Tobia, with their
accomplices, Nehem. 4.11. and our adversaries said they shall neither see, nor
know, till we be in the midst amongst them, and Slay them and cause their work
to cease, thus also in Ezr. 4.9. you read of Rehum the Chancellor, and Shi^shi
the Scribe, with the rest of their companions, pleading much the damage and
dishonor of the King as in verse 13. and when they had got a commission they
went up in have unto Jerusalem to cause the work to cease, and in the verse 23.
they made them cease by force and power, though it was but for a time as it
appears afterward.

And if you look into Rev. 12.12. you shall find there in relation to the last
times, it is said, We to the inhabitants of the Earth, and of the Sea, for the
Devil is come down amongst you, and his rage is great, because he has but a
short time, the shorter the time the fiercer the rage of Satan against all
that keep the Commandments of God, and the Faith of Jesus; and where ever he
can prevail, down goes the divine Authority of the Scriptures, and up goes the
Commandments of Men in the Worship of God: and all that will not do, must
suffer, and all that bear witness to truth and Holiness, must be in sackcloth
until the time of the End.

Now from hence (again) the cause of Religion is much endangered by the haters
of it. That is the Second Reason.

Reas. 3. The last Reason is taken from afflicting Providence, He (the great
God) changes the times and the seasons, Dan. 2.21. the History of the Church
in all ages has informed us of this, that after a time of peace, comes a time
of trouble, after a time of l^berty (to be as good as men would be and as they
should be) there comes a time of restraint: and sometimes even in the valley of
vision there is a day of perplexity and treading down, and that from the Lord
God of Hosts, as it is in Isai. 22.5.

And though it has been questioned whether Dioclesians persecution or Julians
Toleration were more pernicious to the Church of God, yet without question
neither of these was without the Providence of God.

When the People of God know not how to use their peace and liberty, when they
have contracted the guilt of the Sins of such times, it is but righteous with
the Lord to bring them into bondage, that they may know the service of the Lord
with such a kind of Knowledge as Adam had after his fall, to know good by the
want and evil by the feeling of it, by terrible things in righteousness will thou answer us O God, who yet art the God of our Salvation and the confidence
of such as are in the ends of the Earth, Psalm. 65.5.

But from hence also the cause of Religion comes to be in the same condition as
the ship in which the disciples went when Christ was asleep, there came down
such a storm upon the L^^^, and they were so covered with the waves, and in
such Jeopardy, they were feign to cry out unto him, Master save us or we perish.

Gather up the Reasons briefly.

If the lovers of the cause of Religion be so unable to preserve it, if the
haters of it be so sedulous to destroy it, and if the Lord himself seem to
withdraw from it; then it is no wonder if the times be such, and the case be
such, as the maintaining of the cause of Religion does need and require more
then ordinary help from the Lord himself.

By this time you see the truth of the Doctrine. Now let us consider the good
of it in Application to our selves, and that but in a couple of Uses.

The one for the Information of our Judgments.

The other for direction in point of Practice.

Use 1. We may hence inform our selves, not only what the Cause of God and his
people is in other parts; but what it is here with us. I say, to inform us
what is the cause of God and his people in New England. This is the first use.

A mistake in this may be of dangerous consequence; the true stating of this
cause, and the right understanding of it, may be of no little help unto us in
the times that are come upon us.

For it is more then our lives, and as much as our souls are worth, to own the
cause of God, and to be faithful to it in our generation: to confess or deny
this cause, is in Scripture interpretation to confess or deny Christ himself,
and you know what he has said in Mat. 10.32. Whosoever shall confess me before
men, him will I confess before my Father which is in Heaven, but whosoever
shall deny me before Men, him will I deny before my Father which is in Heaven:
and in the eighth of Mark and verse 38. Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of
my words in this adulterous and sinful Generation, ^f him also shall the Son of
Man be ashamed when he comes in the glory of his Father with all his Holy
Angels.

Give me leave then I beseech you, Honored and Beloved, to present a few
things unto you about this Caus^. I confess I should be utterly inexcusable in
adventuring to show my weakness in such a place at such a time as this, were I
not able to call the Most H^^h to Witness that nothing but Conscience of my
duty put me and kept me upon this Subject: when I received the Summons of the
Honourabl^ G^^ to preach it this time, it was desired that some suitable word
might be spoken: now whether the stating of the cause of God and his People
amongst u^ be not seasonable, I leave to the consideration of ^his ^wful and
(...) A^s^h. And I hope ^n the Lord I shall say nothing about it, but what
might be more abundantly made out by Scripture light, and what the generallity
of all the People of God (not engaged unto parties) will readily subscribe unto.

First then, in the general the cause of God and his people amongst us is the
Cause of Religion, I say the cause of Religion (...) the profession and
practice of the one true Religion to be in all thing, according to Gods Word.
This was the cause of God and Israel then, the same is the cause of God and his
people now. To keep and seek for all the Commandments of God. To walk in his
ways and to keep his Commandments which he Commanded our Fathers, as it is in
the text: that every thing in Doctrine Worship and Discipline be conformed unto
and regulated by the rule of the word. This is the Cause of God and his People
in New England in the General.

But that it may be more clearly understood, let me propound it more
particularly both in the Negative, what this cause is not, and in the
Affirmative what it is.

And first Negatively.

It is 1. Not the getting of this Worlds good. 2. Not Separation from other
Churches. 3. Not a toleration of all Religions.


1. Not the getting of this Worlds good. The cause we are speaking of, it never
was, it is not now, the getting and increasing of this worlds good. Our Savior
Christ has commanded, seek first the Kingdom of God and the righteousness
thereof, and all other things shall be added Mat. 6 33. Accordingly when the
Lord stirred up the spirits of so many of his people to come over into this
wilderness, it was not for worldly wealth, or a better livelihood here for the
outward man: the generallity of the people that came over professed the
contrary: nor had we any rational grounds to expect such a thing in such a
wilderness as this.

And though God has blessed his poor people here with an addition of many
earthly comforts, and there are that have increased here from small beginnings
to great estates, that the Lord may call this whole generation to witness and
say, O generation see the word of the Lord, have I been a wilderness unto you?
Jer. 2.32. O generation see! look upon your town, and fields, look upon your
habitations and shops and ships, and behold your numerous posterity, and great
increase in the blessings of the Land and Sea, have I been a wilderness unto
you? we must needs answer, No Lord, thou have been a gracious God, and
exceeding good unto thy Servants, ever since we came into this wilderness, even
in these earthly blessing, we live in a more plentiful and comfortable manner
then ever we did ^x^^ct. But these are but additions, they are but additionall
mercies, it was another thing and a better thing that we followed the Lord into
the wilderness for.

My Fathers and Brethren this is never to be forgotten, that New England is
originally plantation of Religion, not a plantation of Trade.

Let Merchants and such as are increasing Cent per Cent remember this, Let
others that have come over since at several times understand this, that worldly
gain was not the end and design of the people of New England, but Religion.
And if any man amongst us make Religion as twelve, and the world as thirteen,
let such an one know he has neither the spirit of a true New England man, nor
yet of a sincere Christian.

2. Not Separation from other Churches, either in our own or other countries; I
say, not separation from any thing good in other Churches, whether truth of
Church estate, or any Doctrine professed, or any Ordinance administered, so far
as it was, or is agreeable to the word of God.

We deny not the being of Churches, where many things are wanting to their
well-being. We distinguish between the corruptions and disorders of Churches,
and the Churches themselves. We profess communion with, not separation from the
Churches of Christ in lawful things. They are the European Churches, in which
that numerous company of 144000. are said to stand with the ^amb upon mount
Sion, Rev. 14.1. and these are said to ^^^p the Commandments of God and the
faith of Jesus verse 12. It is the doctrine and worship of the Reformed
Churches coming out of Popery which are said to be as a Sea of glass man led
with (...), R^^ 15.2. if g^^^, then they are not clear as Cristall, as those in
the Primitive times Chap. 4 6 and yet not as the blood of a dead man, as those
under Popery Ch^^. 16.3. it (...) a Sea of gl^ss mingled with ^^r, (the fire of
persecution without, and of contention within) and yet they that stand upon
this Sea have gotten the victory over the Beast, and have the Harpes of God in
their hands and are accepted of the Lord.

The end of our coming hither was a reformation only of what was amiss or
defective in the churches we came from: from which we made no separation, but a
local secession only into this wilderness, with true desires and endeavors
after a more full Reformation according to Gods word.

1. Not a toleration of all Religions, or of the Heresies and Idolatries of the
age we live in. I say, not a toleration of these so far as we have liberty
and power for to help it. How inconsistent would such a toleration be, with the
love of the one true Religion revealed in the word of God? would not such a
state be guilty of having other Gods, where such a toleration is? is it not the
end of Civil Authority, that men may live a quiet and peaceable life, in
godliness as well as honesty? but not in the ways of ungodliness, no more then
in the ways of dishonesty: in a word, the Gospel of Jesus Christ has a right
paramount, all rights in the world, it has a Divine and Supreme right to be
received in every Nation, and the knee of Magistracy is to bow at the name of
Jesus. This right carries liberty along with it, for all such as profess the
Gospel, to walk according to the Faith and Order of the Gospel. That which is
contrary to the Gospel has no right, and therefore should have no liberty. But
the Laws which have been made by the Civil Government here, with respect unto
Religion, whereby you have declared your professed subjection to the Gospel,
and your non-toleration of that which is contrary thereunto; this will be a
name and a glory to New England so long as the Sun and Moon endure.

And so much for the Negative, what the cause of God and his People amongst us
is not, viz, not this Worlds good, not separation, not a toleration.

2. Now in the second place for the Affirmative, if my weakness was able to
show you what the Cause of God and his People in New England is, according to
its divine Original and Native beauty, it would dazzle the eyes of Angels
daunt the hearts of devils, ravish and chain fast the Affections of all the
Saints. I crave Leave to propound it thus, Affirmatively;

It is 1. Reformation of Religion according to Gods Word. 2. A Progress in that
Reformation. 3. The Union of Reformers.


1. The Cause of God and ours it was and is Reformation of Religion according
to Gods word.

There was Religion in the Churches from whence we came, but New-Englands
design in this vast undertaking, it was Reformation i. e. the avoiding of some
special corruptions, and the Vigorous profession and practice of every thing,
in Doctrine, worship and discipline, according to Scripture pattern: as in
Heb. 8.5. when Moses was about to make the Tabernacle, he was admonished of
God, saying, see that thou make it in all things according to the pattern
showed thee in the mount. And our Savior said unto his disciples, Mat. 28.20.
teach them to observe all whatsoever I have Commanded.

This was and is our Cause, that Christ alone might be acknowledged by us, as
the only head, Lord, and Lawgiver, in his Church, that his written word might
be acknowledged as the only Rule, that only and all his Institutions might be
observed and enjoyed by us, and that with purity and liberty, with peace and
power. This was the end of our coming hither, this is our Cause, hence I humbly
conceive that the consent of the Synod here to the confession of Faith by the
Assembly of Westminster, and the platform of Discipline published in the year
49 these for the substance of them, have carried with them a declaration of the
Faith and order of these Churches, and are so looked upon by the reformed
Churches abroad, unto which may be added many other books of our divines of the
same import: and the practice of these Churches so far as we have attained.

2. A progress in Reformation. I conceive our cause is, not barely, a
Reformation, but a progress in reformation; it was the charge of our Savior to
the Church of Philadelphia, hold fast what thou have, Rev. 3.11. it is also the
duty of the People of God to go on unto Perfection, Heb. 6.1.

A conceit of having already attained a perfect reformation should be far
from us: a true endeavor after a full reformation in the sense of our many
defects, is the duty and Spirit of sincere Christians that advance the Word of
God, as the only perfect rule, not that we have already attained or are
already perfect, (as the Apostle speaks of himself, Phi^. 3.12.) but we are to
press forward still unto this mark, that we may in all be conformable to the
perfect rule of the word of God.

Hence what we have attained in Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, according to
Gods Word, we must hold fast and then go forward unto any of the things of
Christ, we are defective in, we must go forward still, but not backward, I say
not backward, at for Instance.

Our Fathers fled into this Wilderness from the face of a Lording Episcopacie,
and humane injunctions in the Worship of God: now if any of us their Children
should yield unto, or be isntrumental to set up in this Country, any of the
ways of men's inventions, such as Prelacie, imposed Leiturgies, humane
Ceremonies in the Worship of God, or to admit ignorant and Scandalous Persons
to the Lords Table, this would be a backslideing indeed: it would be a
backsliding to the things which we and our Fathers have departed from, and have
openly testified against, to be not of God, as in the Platform of Discipline,
and many other ways. Instance again, if after such a public witness as has
been given amongst us against a toleration of all Religions, there should be a
graduall yiedling to a toleration of any false Religion, (either by Law, or
against Law, for want of the Execution of Laws,) this also would be a heinous
backsliding which the Lords jealousy will not bear. And for our Civil
Government to put forth any act of consent unto either of the former, would be
a thing to be trembled at, and Prayed against, that the Lord would keep them
from.

But on the other side: it is our duty to press forward still to the mark; and
to make a progress in reforming what ever is amiss or defective amongst us, as
in those the late Synod has pointed unto, about the subjects of Baptism, and
consociation of Churches.

That Baptism be administered to the Children of Church Members who have right
thereunto. And that the Communion of Churches be better improved amongst us.
These are things we have been defective in, and therefore should be reformed in
a practical way.

And that we be very careful there be no superstition amongst us, nothing
supra statutum, in discipline no more then in worship that nothing be Imposed
as necessary unto Church Membership, which God has not made necessary in his
word; that there be no arbitrary way of Judging according to the private
satisfaction or dis-satisfaction of men's Spirit^; and that no breach be made
upon that order which God has set in his Church between the Rulers and the
Ruled. That whilst we witness, against superstition in some things, we do not
fall into superstition in other things, but that the rule of Gods word be
observed in all.

The People of God sincerely endeavoring Reformation, (yet through
inadvertencie, are subject to err, either in defect or excess; and while they
would avoid one extreme, to fall into another: the way of God in his word is a
narrow way, there are extremes on either side, the Lord requires it of us,
that we neither turn to the right hand, nor to the left, that we neither add
unto, nor take from, what he has Commanded concerning the order of his house,
Prove. 4.26, 27. Deuteronomy. 12.32. Heb. 8.5. Mat. 28.20. Hence it is our duty to use
all circumspection that there be no additions to, nor detractions from, the
Lords institutions, but that all may be according to Scripture pattern; that so
far as is possible in this our state of imperfection, we may be complete in
all the will of God, Col. 4.12.

3. Unto Reformantium: the Union of Reformers. I say, the Union of Reformers
belongs unto this cause, for there is not any one duty more pressed by our
Savior Christ and his Apostles, then this of a holy and close Union amongst
those that profess his name. Our blessed Savior solemnly prayed for this, in
the seventeenth of John that his Disciples might be one. The Apostle Exhorts
unto this in Ephesians. 4.3. endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond
of peace; and he urges his Exhortation by an Argument taken from a sevenfold
Unity, wherein all sincere Christians agree, verse 4, 5. there is one body, and
one Spirit, and one Hope, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father
of us all. Therefore endeavor to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace. And he beseeches the Corinthians to mind Union, 1 Cor. 1.11. I beseech
you Brethren by the name of the Lord Jesus, that there be no divisions amongst
you, but that you be perfectly Joined together in the same Judgment, and the
same mind, and that you speak the same thing. To the same purpose he has a
most passionate Exhortation to the Philippians in Chap 2 1, 2. if there be any
Consolation in Christ, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels, and
mercies, fulfill you my joy, that you be like minded, having the same love,
being of one accord, of one min^: and sometimes, when he saw little hopes of it
upon Earth, he looks up to the Lord in heaven, and beseeches him to grant this
mercy to his Churches and People, as in Romans 15.5. N^w the God of patience, and
Consolation, grant you to be like minded one to another according to Christ
Jesus, that with one mind, and one mouth, ye may Glorify God even the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

All which may leave a strong conviction upon us, that this belongs to the
Cause of God, and his People, that there be a spirit of Union and Communion,
amongst us in the things of Christ, and though it be the privilege of some
times, when the Lord shall fulfill those prophecies in an eminent way, that his
People shall serve him with one consent; and that the Lord shall be one, and
his name shall be one: yet this is the duty of the People of God at all times,
(especially at this time and in this place) to endeavor Union, that (so far as
is possible) we may be of one judgment, of one heart, and one way, in all the
Churches of the Saints.

Hence there should be no affecting of dividing names and parties amongst us,
but all should be for this, that the Lord may be one, and his name but one.

Hence also it is desirable that one Catechism, one confession of Faith, and
one Covenant were agreed upon and used in the several Churches as a means of
consent.

And hence again (so far as the Lord gives liberty) there should be a frequent
use of Councils amongst us, to enquire after the mind of God and his word,
according to the pattern in Acts. 15. and other Scriptures. Its true that in
times of Popery, there was great abuse of Councils: yet it is as true, that in
diverse of the first Centuries there was great advantage to the truth by means
of Councils, and in somewhat above the last hundred years, the work of
Reformation was much promoted by the Godly Councils and conference of
Reformers. It is a known passage of Melancton.

V^ximus in Synodis et jam mortemur in illis. They were constantly searching
the Scripture, that they might reform all according to that, and before them,
the Churches of the Waldenses for many hundreds of years, walking in the
simplicity of the Gospel, they had then frequent Councils, and their general
^ouncils every year, nor is there any one point more frequently insisted on, in
the writings of our Divines of the Congregationall way then this of the right
use of Councils.

Not that the judgment of a Synod binds any further the (...) has Conformity
with the Scriptures, but Counsels are a mean, which the Lord has appointed,
and promised to bless for clearing up of the truth and uniting his People
therein.

It is true, the best of Men may err; and there being diverse measures of light
and grace, there cannot but be different apprehensions in some things, and
therefore where there is not so full an agreement as was to be desired, it is
our duty to forbear one another in love, so far as we have attained, walking
by the same rule, minding the same thing, leaving other things to God and time,
Phil. 3.15.16. that is now, when all Gods means have been used, and yet some
lesser things remain controversall amongst pious and sober men, who agree in
the maine, there is the place for Christian forbearance, not in order to
separation, but in order to union, for so the Apostle joins them together,
Ephe. 4.2, 3. in lowlyness and meeknes forbearing one another in love, and
endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. In one
word; union is to be endeavored because the truth is but one, and forbearance
is to be used because of the weakness of men, which yet is as far from a
toleration of a false Religion, as the East is from the West.

Thus I have showed you (as my weakness was able) what the cause of God and his
people amongst us is Affirmatively, it is Reformation, a progress in
reformation, and the Union of Reformers.

Now I shall add but this one thing more, That this cause has a Divine right,
and a Divine liberty adjoined unto it, according to the law of liberty, the
Royal Law of God, as it is called, James 2.8, 12. i. e. Right from God, and
liberty from God for his people, to do their duty to God and Christ, in matters
of Religion according to Gods word. Nor is there any power upon earth that can
lawfully hinder this.

And this is the chief interest of New England: i. e. it is the matter of
greatest importance in it self, and of greatest concernment unto us. The one
true Religion according to Scripture, being the only means to the highest end,
the glory of God and the salvation of souls: and therefore what ever may be
said of our interest in other respects, yet we may be sure of this, that here
lies our predominat interest and cause, and the great end for which we came
into this wilderness, and continue in it. And so much for the Use of
Information.

Use 2. It is for Direction, if the times be such, and the case be such, as the
maintaining of the Cause of Religion, does need and require more then ordinary
help from the Lord himself, then it serves, to teach all that are sincerely
affected unto this cause, what course we should take for the maintaining of it:
and that is this, to commend this cause unto Jehovah himself, beseeching him
that he would maintain his own and his people Cause both now at this time even
as the matter does require; and hereafter at all times as the matter may
require.

Me thinks I look upon this present Assembly as in its proportion resembling
that great assembly of the People of Israel mentioned in the text.

Here are the heads of our Tribes, the Honored Magistrates, and Deputies of
this Colonie, the Reverend Elders of the Churches, and a multitude of other
Godly People; and I am persuaded you are affected to this Cause, as that
Assembly was, your desire is to see Religion flourish, and the Cause of God and
his People be maintained amongst us.

I need not tell you what the times are, (shaking times, and trying times)
wherein the cause of Religion is endangered on every side. I desire only to
discharge the duty of a poor Servant of the Lord and yours, by putting you in
remembrance of that which the Text here points us unto, namely, to commit this
Cause to the Infinite Wisdom and good pleasure of the Lord our God, whose name
is upon us, and who dwells in the midst of us, to interest him, and engage him,
in the maintaining of it.

This was Holy counsel given to Job in the midst of his plunges and
distresses, Job 5 8, 9. I would seek unto God, and unto God would I commit my
Cause, which does great things, and unsearchable, and mervellous things without
number, who disappointeth the devices of the crafty, to set up on high those
that are low, that such as mourn may be exalted unto safety. Say (Brethren I
beseech you) is not this that you would have, that the Cause of Religion, and
those that love it, may be in safety? then here is the way, for all the
servants of God, to commit this cause unto him which does great things and
unsearchable, and marveilous things without number, unto him who has
maintained, who does maintain, and will maintain his Own and his Peoples Cause
according to the Counsel of his own will, for the Praise of his Glorious Grace.

Quest. Now if it be demanded. But now should we commit this Cause unto him,
that he may be engaged in the maintaining of it, above all that we can ask or
think?

Answ. I Answer briefly in this one direction, (which will be useful to the
Honored worthies of the General Court, and yet will also reach the meanest in
the Congregation) that you commit the safety of this cause to the Lord
himself, in the same way as you do commit unto him the Salvation of your own
souls, I say, that we do all commit this cause unto the Lord even in the same
way as we do every one commit unto him the Salvation of our Souls. You may see
the bottom of this direction in 1 Pet. 4.19. where the Apostle advises
Christians in evil times, to commit the keeping of their Souls unto God in
w^l^ing as unto a Faithful Creator.

I doubt not but there are abundance here that are acquainted with this, when
in the midst of Spiritual distresses you commit your Souls to the mercy of
God in Christ in the promise, you do also remember the way of well-doing, the
way of Gods Commandments, (the narrow way to life which our Savior has told
us of) and in that way you do commit your Soul into the hand of Jesus Christ,
Sanctifying him as your only and alsufficient Savior.

As David in Psalm. 31.3, 5, 6. into thy hands I commit my Spirit, thou have
redeemed me O Lord God of truth, for thou art my rock and my fortress, for thy
name sake lead me and guide me in thy way, for I hate lying Vanities, but I
trust in the Lord. Now in the very same way we should all commit the safety of
the Cause of Religion to the Lord himself.

That is 1. In the way of Well-doing, 2. In the way of Humble Prayer. 3.
Sanctify the Lord himself as the maintainer of this Cause. I entreat that I
may borrow but a little of your time and patience, to explain these three
Particulars and then I have done.


1. In the way of well doing. Commit this Cause to the Lord in the way of well
doing, thus the Apostle informs us, that this is the will of God, that we keep
in the way of well doing 1 Pet. 2.15. and upon this ground, he Exhorts in the
same place, verse 13, 14. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the
Lords sake. Civil Government in Genere is an Ordinance of God, ( the higher
powers are Ordained of God, R^m 13.1.) but in Spe^^^, it is an Ordinance of
man, though every form of Civil Government is to be subservient unto Religion,
as its ultimate end; yet ( hic aut iste singularis modus as divines use to
speak) this o^ that particular form of Civil Government is an Ordinance of
man, it is (...), a humane Creature. Now mark I beseech you what the Apostle
says, Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether
to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors sent by him.

This is our case, his Majesty the King whom the Lord has set upon the throne
is the Supreme Civil Governor under God, and over us; and the Government
settled here by the Charter of this Colonie is a subordinate Government, we are
to remember our duty to both, and that for the Lords sake, for so is the will
of God, that with well doing you put to silence the ignorance of foolish men,
as the Apostle there speaks verse 15.

This way of well doing, is a narrow way, (as every way of duty is) there are
by-pathes, and down-falls on either side, it is not good intentions, nor
p^aefrau^es, that will excuse from going out of the way of well-doing, but here
lies the exercise of Godly wisdom to keep in the narrow way of well-doing
showed in the word of God, to fear God, and Honor the King, to give unto God
the things that are Gods, and unto Caesar the things that are Cesars.

The Counsel of our Savior is to be remembered, be wise as serpents, and
Innocent as Doves, the Serpents ey in the Doves head, becomes a Christian well,
it is for the honor of Religion when the Servants of God carry it so as Paul
did, so as to give no occasion; so as to cut off occasion from them that seek
occasion, that we may be able to say as he did, neither against the Temple, nor
against the Law, nor against Caesar have I offended any thing, Act. 25.8. and so
as Daniel did in whom there was an excellent Spirit Dan. 6.3 and the
excellency of his Spirit did appear in this, that he behaved himself so as
those that sought to find occasion against him, could find none, for as much as
he was faithful, neither was there any Error or fault in him, then said these
men, we shall not find any occasion against this Daniel, except we find it
against him concerning the law of his God.

My Fathers and Brethren, this is for our Admonition, and this will be for the
Honor of Religion, when such as have the managing of Public affairs, are
understanding in the times to know what Israel ought to do^, 2 Chronicles. 12.32.
not what they can do, or what they will do, but what they ought to do, not what
their liberty is, but what their duty is, and what their liberty is according
to their duty. To serve the times in matters of Religion we must not: we must
obey God rather then men, if it come to a stress, but in managing public
affairs in such times as Daniel lived in the matter did so require for him to
be so careful, as that no error nor fault might be found in him. This is for
our imitation.

The Holy Ghost informs us, it is the Wisdom of the prudent to understand his
way, Prove. 14.8. And a wise man's heart discerns of time and Judgment: and in
Ephesians. 5.17. Be not unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is.

In two evils of sin, there is no Election, neither is to be chosen, but in two
evils of affliction the less has the respect of a good, and may be chosen to
prevent a greater evil.

In the question what is best, we are not only to consider what is best in it
self, but what is best with reference to all the circumstances of a case.

In matters divine where we have a clear Command, with Moses we must not yield
an hoof, but in matters humane, Summum jus may be Summa injuria, standing upon
extreme right, may prove extreme wrong, Salu^ populi suprema Lex, the safety of
the Commonwealth, is the supreme Law.

And here, suffer me I beseech you to exhort you unto that which is the duty of
us all, and that is, to be peaceable and faithful in Israel, according to that
speech of one in a troublesome time, when there were some that said they had no
part in David, 2 Samuel 20.19. I am one that am peaceable and faithful in
Israel, it was the speech of a woman, but it may well become the wisest men and
the most godly, to be peaceable and faithful in Israel.

First peaceable from Schism in the Church, and sedition in the Commonwealth,
or whatsoever tends unto faction, studying to be quiet, and every one to do
their own work, and then faithful to the cause of Religion according to our
duty to God: faithful to the King according to the oath of Alleg^^nce, and
faithful to the Government here according to the Oath of fidelity.

And be you all exhorted in the words of the Holy Apostle Romans 14.^9. ^^w after
the things which make for peace, and beware of such things as may endanger it
amongst your selves, let none say that these or those are disaffected to the
Cause of God and his People, because they see not (...) some things as others
do, do not impropriate the cause of Religion to some in opposition to others,
who profess the same cause, none should speak of themselves as if they were the
Godly party and eminently Saints and faithful with despising others, nothing is
more offensive amongst Christians, then to confine Religion to some singular
Opinion, as if Religion did mainly Center there, there were differences at
Corinth, but how does the Apostle write unto them all, 1 Cor. 1.2. 2 Cor. 1.2.
to the Saints at Corinth, and to all that call upon the Name of the Lord Jesus,
their Lord and ours; mark that expression their Lord and ours, theirs and ours,
wherein the Apostle checks the conceitedness in some that would impale and
enclose the common Cause of Christ unto themselves and some peculiar Opinion of
theirs, let us beware of this.

And the Apostle saw it needful to admonish the best Christians, let nothing
be done through strife or vain glory, or in a way of provoking one another,
avoiding jealousi^s and uncharitable censures, being watchful that Satan get
no advantage, this also is for our Admonition, and I hope that the votes of
this day will make it appear you have a due respect unto your ancient
Magistrates that have born the burden and heat of the day, and that you have no
undue prejudice against any that have been and may be still instruments of
public good. When once in Capua they were thinking of leaving out some of
their Senators, they considered where they should have better and what might
follow, (they considered what might follow) and this Reconciled their minds.

Finally Brethren be you all of one mind in this to be faithful and peaceable
in Israel, that as it has been, so it may still be an honor to all the people
of this Colonie, that they are peaceable men; and whatever the rumors and
surmises have been, yet I hope it will appear, such as are not yet fr^-Men will
be so far from disturbance that they will not offer to vote in the Elections
of this day. And I doubt not but the General Court will take the case into
Serious Consideration afterward, but for the present all should be careful
that there may be a peaceable transaction of the public affair, and a
peaceable Subjection to the Government here, and that all the People as one Man
do manifest their due sense of the many, Blessings they have enjoyed under the
present Government for so many years, that there may be conjoined Prayers and
endeavors for the continuance of it, according to the Patent, which under God
and the King is to be acknowledged as the foundation of the civil Government
here.

It is now 35 year since I well Remember, in the year 28 that one of the first
Ministers that came over into this Wilderness, giving some account of his
grounds in a great Assembly of many Thousands at Leicester in Old-England, he
mentioned this as one, the mercy of the Patent, and the largeness of the
Patent, from the royal Authority of England, for the people here to choose
their own Magistrates, and to admit unto freedom such as they should think
meet, and that Religion was the Principal end of this Plantation in his
Majesty's Royal intention and the adventurers free possession. This whole
generation has seen how good the Lord has been unto us in this Wilderness for
so many years under the Government settled here by the Patent.

And therefore at in the matter of Religion we are to keep to the Word of God,
so in the matter of the Civil Government keep to the Patent.

And thus to be peaceable and faithful in Israel, is the way of well doing,
wherein we are to commit the maintaining of the Cause of Religion to the Lord
our God.

I shall now dispatch the other two directions very briefly.

2. In the way of humble Prayer, commit this Cause unto God by humble fervent
and frequent Prayer as we are directed in the text: let these my Prayers be
nigh to the Lord our God, that he maintain the Cause of his People Israel.

When the matter requires more then ordinary help from the Lord himself, and
yet the Lord seems to withdraw and to be asleep, then the Servants of God must
awaken him by their Importunate Prayers, as the disciples in the storm did
awaken our Savior, saying; Lord save us or we Perish.

When the People of God are faithful to own his Cause, and careful, neither
to fall short of their duty nor to go beyond it, but keep in the narrow way of
well-doing and yet meet with such storms of Providence as they are at their
Wits end what remains then but Prayers and tears? O our God we know not what
to do, but our eyes are unto thee, Arise O Lord and plead thy own Cause. Awake
awake O arm of the Lord as in ancient times.

3. Last of all, Sanctify the Lord himself as the alsufficient maintainer of
this Cause as David said, th^^ O Lord art the maintainer of my L^^, Psalm. 16.5.

When the Cause of Religion seems ready to be spoiled by the professors of it,
and ready to be mined by the opposers of it, yet there is one in heaven that is
able and faithful, and watchful, and skilful, for the preservation of it, and
therefore in quietness, and confidence, in returning and resting shall we be
saved, as the Prophet speaks, Isai. 30.15. we should not only submit unto, but
acquiesce and rest in the Infinite Wisdom and good pleasure of God, that he may
do it in his own way, rejoicing in this, that the Lord Reigns over all.

Give unto the Lord the Glory due unto his name, that he will not forsake his
People, (he may afflict his People, and there may be need of it and Cause for
it, but he will not forsake his People) for his great names sake, 1 Samuel 12.22.

And be comforted in this, that the safety of the Church Militant lies upon the
hand, and belongs to the care of Jesus Christ; the ship of the Church may be
endangered, it cannot be drowned so long as the Lord lives, he has a thousand
ways (that we know not of) for him to maintain his own and his Peoples Cause.

Now unto him be Glory in the Church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages, world
without end. Amen.

FINIS.

