HISTORIA Quinq-Articularis Exarticulata; OR, ANIMADVERSIONS ON Doctor Heylin's
QUINQUARTICULAR HISTORY.

IN WHICH, 1. The Aspersions cast on Foreign Reformers, are wiped off. 2. The
Doctor's manifold Contradictions, are manifested. 3. The Doctrine of the
Arminians in the five points, is proved, to be contrary to the Doctrine of the
Reformed Church of England.


By HENRY HICKMAN, B. D. The Second Edition Corrected, and Enlarged.

Si moriens mordeat, mordeatur mortuus.
(...).
Cato Censor. London, Printed for Robert Boulter at the Turks-head in Cornhil
over against the Royal Exchange. 1674.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
READER,
I Am told the following Papers are mine. And really I think they be; for I
well remember, that sundry years ago, I did, hastily, either write or dictate
to others to be written, a Confutation of Dr. Heylin's Historia
Q^inquarticularis, that so I might remove a stone of offense which, some told
me, I principally had occasioned to be laid in the way of young students. Had I
thought ^o unstudied a scrible meet to be exposed to public ^iew I could then
have sent it abroad, when, either I ^^uld have procured a License to imprint
it, or should ^ot have been esteemed an offender though I had imprinted it
without a License. Some Friends have now adventured to put it forth, without my
privity, I doubt a little unseasonably, but I am confident with a good
intention: Therefore I must not be angry with them.

For my self, I must desire thee, once for all, to take notice, 1. That I only
relate some men's opinions Historically, and defend them from unjust
aggravations; but am not concerned to maintain them to be true or accurately
expressed. 2. That I acknowledge there be some depths, in the Controversies
relating to Predestination and Grace, which I am not able to fathom. Nor are
these the only points in Divinity, in which I believe some things, against
which I have objections that I cannot answer any otherwise than by saying, that
every Divine Revelation must needs be true though seemingly contrary to
something which my imperfect and corrupt reason apprehends to be true. It is
commonly laid to the charge of the Socinians, that they make reason the Judge in
Controversies of Faith, and so I verily think it is in some sense: but that it
should be Judex normalis, the Norma or Rule according to which we are to judge,
so as we are to believe nothing but what we could have demonstrated to be true
or possible by mere reason, is an opinion so wicked, that I hope it is but
falsely fathered on the Socinians. I believe the Hypostatical Union, a Trinity
of persons in the Unity of Essence: if a reason of this my Faith be asked, I
will quote the Scriptures, which clearly assert those two Articles: having so
done, I have resolved Faith into its first Principle, and I will continue
steadfast and immovable in my Faith though I cannot comprehend, either how
three Persons subsist in one numerical nature, or how two natures can be united
so as* make but one person, In like manner, I will believe the Doctrine of
Original Sin, as it is explained in our Articles of Religion, because I find
that explication of it agreeable to Scripture, though I cannot so clearly make
it out to my own or another man's reason, how Original sin is propagated. I will
also believe, that God has mercy on whom he will and hardneth whom he will,
bestows his determining Grace on whom he will and denies it to whom he will,
because this is a Scripture Doctrine, though the reconciling of Gods eternal
Decrees and the efficacy of Grace with the liberty of man's will* surpass my
knowledge. And I am the more confident, that I am not mistaken in thinking this
to be a Scripture Doctrine, because, as I have shown in the following Papers,
it has been so adjudged by the Ancient Fathers of the Church. Nor is it a
small confirmation to me, that the greatest opposers of Calvinism (as they are
resolved to call it) have, after the highest straining of their wits and
diligence, been able to say nothing against it, but what the Pelagians and
Semipelagians had before objected against S. Austin and his Disciples. I know
there be many who think quite otherwise: These will say, Q^id tandem Arminio
cum Pelagio, aut quid Calvino cum Augustino? Arminius learned not his opinions
from Pelagius, nor did Calvin owe his notions to S. Austin. Such men I
earnestly desire impartially to consider what I have hereafter produced, and if
they can answer my allegations, I will thank them for undeceiving me. But this
I will tell them, that he who hopes to make me his proselyte, must be, 1. No
Railer nor Reviler. I have read that some in old times, through I know not what
foolish and wicked superstition, thought Garden-Basil (that I suppose answers
to Plinie's Ocimum,) would grow the sooner and better, if it were sown cum
convitiis and maledictis, with reproaches and evil speaking: So, many of late
seem to have been of opinion, that the Doctrine which they plant will prosper
the better, if they water it with torrents of contumely against those that
differ from them. Perhaps the more rank their style is, the more it may please
some Readers: but he was wise who said, As dead flies cause the Ointment of the
Apothecary to send forth a stinking savor: so does a little folly, him that is
in reputation for wisdom and honor, Eccl. 10.1. A very little of any thing that
is but a kin to scurrility will make an ingenuous person disgust and nauseat
the most learned book. Dr. Crakanthorp has very s^lidly confuted Spala^^^sis,
but the uncivil language be every where uses against the Archbishop* has
sometimes turned my stomach and made me leave off reading. Dr. Abbot has most
judici^usly defended the Reformed Catholic against W^^^^^m Bishop, but when I
find him calling Wright, foulmouthed dog, when, etc. I cannot but wonder where
a man, that had all his days been bred up among Scholars, learned such
language. As for Bishop Mountague, he boasts that never any had handled the
Papists as he had done; and I verily believe him. His Gag is a piece for which
he may well be denominated a Matchless Scoffer. Fool, Goose, Cockscomb, Ass,
Horse, B^ind Buzard, Poor Woodcock, Catholic Cockscomb, etc. these are flowers
that grow in Mr. Mountagues Garden, are they not very lovely and sweet? will
not Popery fall to the ground after one of its Patrons has been so bespattered
with so many unseemly names? or, will not the Papists rather be confirmed in
Popery, when they shall observe a dignified Minister in the Protestant Church,
to use such unsavory language without check or control from his Superiors? 2.
I expect if any one answer me, that he faithfully relate Historical matters.
For let him not imagine, that I will think the worse of any party, because I
(...) slandered. Rather, I shall judge men good, because their Adversaries
durst not speak evil of them, till they had first represented them to be what
every man may know they were not. Lately there was Printed an History of
Presbyterians* Dedicated to both Houses of Parliament, and commended in the
Dedicatory, as being for the most part. Nothing but a faithful collection of
matters of fact, transacted by the Ancestors of a Sect to this day more than
enough warm in the bowels of these Kingdoms. Let me crave leave only to take
notice how this History begins. Page 1, 2, At such time as it pleased God to
raise up Martin Luther a Divine of Saxony, to write against the Errors and
Corruptions of the Church of Rome, Vlderick Zuinglius a Canon of the Church of
Zurick, endeavored the like Reformation among the Switzers; but holding no
intelligence with one another, they traveled diverse ways in pursuance of it:
which first produced some Animosities between themselves, not to be reconciled
by a personal conference, which by the Lantgrave of Hassia was procured between
them; but afterward occasioned far more obstinate ruptures between the
followers of the parties in their several stations. The Zuinglian Reformation
was begun in defacing Images, decrying the established Fasts and appointed
Festivals, abolishing set Forms of Worship, denying the old Catholic Doctrine
of a Real Presence, and consequently all External Reverence in the
participation of the blessed Sacrament: which Luther seriously labored to
preserve in the same estate in which he found them at the present. They
differed also in the Doctrine of Predestination, which Luther taught according
to the current of the Ancient Fathers, who lived and flourished before the
writings of St. Augustine: so that the Romanists had not any thing to except
against in that particular, when it was canvased by the Schoolmen in the
Council of Trent. And a little after, The Lutherans have solemnly vowed rather
to fall off roundly to the Church of Rome, than yield to those Predestinarian,
and Sacramentary Pestilences, as they commonly called them.



The Historian says, It pleased God to raise up Martin Luther. No such good
words are used concerning the Reformation endeavored by Ulderick Zuinglius:
Yet Zuinglius, though born four years after Luther, opposed the Errors and
Corruptions of the Church of Rome before Luther, and was doubtless of more
Modesty Humility and Learning than Luther. And if the differences betwixt him
and Luther, at the Conference procured betwixt them and others by the Lantgrave
of Hassia, could not be reconciled, Luther must bear the blame: who was so
uncivil as to call Bucer Knave, and so wedded to his notion of
Consubstantiation, that he declared he would not recede an hairs breadth from
it; and yet had at the Conference, so little to say for it, that he lost the
Lantgrave and his Preacher Francis Lambert, who before had embraced his
Doctrine in the point of the Sacrament. Yet dare not I say with the Dr. that
Animosities betwixt Luther and Zuinglius were produced, not to be reconciled by
a personal Conference which by the Lantgrave of Hassia was procured betwixt
them. For first I am not sure that any personal Conference was ever procured
betwixt Luther and Zuinglius at Marpurg. Indeed Oecolampadius and Luther had
personal Conference in private; so also had Melancthon and Zuinglius: no
Conference had Luther and Zuinglius, that I read of, unless for three days in
public: In which three days, though Luther alone spoke for his party, (
Melancthon, Brentius, Osiander, Agricola being (...),) yet not only Zuinglius
but Oecolampadius answered him and disputed against him. And this it is like
the Dr. calls personal Con^erence; whether properly or no, is a question. But
that I blame him for, is this, that he says, that the Animosities were not to
be ended by that Conference. It had been too much to say, they were not ended.
Fourteen Articles were after that Conference subscribed by all the Divines of
both parties. The fourteenth recites, how far they agreed about the Lords
Su^per. They agreed, it was to be received, according to the institution, in
both Elements: and that there was no need of the Mass, to obtain grace for
living or dead: and that the Sacrament of the Altar, was a Sacrament of the
true Body and Blood of jesus Christ: and that Christians, all and every one,
had most need of spiritual manducation. In like manner, that the use of the
Sacram^nt as the word, was appointed that weak Consciences might be moved by
the spirit to true Faith and Love. This was all they differed in, whether the
true Body and Blood of Christ were corporally in the Bread and Wine? About this
they could not agree in opinion, but yet they agreed to exercise mutual
charity, and to pray for one another, and to leave off writing against one
another. So that the Animosities were ended. And some think, that had not the
raging of that Pestilential disease called Anglicus Sudor put an end to the
Conference, the very difference in opinion as to the Sacrament had been made an
end of. But let us go on with the Doctor.

The Zuinglian Reformation, was begun in defacing Images, decrying the
established Fasts and appointed Festivals, abolishing set Forms of Worship,
denying the old Catholic Doctrine of a Real Presence, and consequently all
External Reverence in the participation of the blessed Sacrament.

When the Historian says, that the Zuinglian Reformation began in defacing
Images, the Reader will be apt to think, that defacing Images was the first
fruit of Zuinglius his Reformation: But if he should so think, he would be
mistaken. Zuinglius his Reformation began in Preaching of the Word at Zurick:
whither he came Anno 1519, leaving another place in which he had a larger
stipend than he could there expect, ( N. B. Both the Helvetian and German
Reformer agreed in this, that neither cared for Gold or sought great Livings.)
He laid the foundation also of Reformation in encouraging the study of the
learned Languages, the neglect whereof brought in Popery. It was not till
Zuinglius had been five or six years Preacher at Zurick, that Idols and Images
were burnt in the Market place, and being then burnt by public Authority, what
was there in the fact that deserved not praise? Is it not commendable in
Christian Magistrates, after they have heard it proved by their Divines* that
Images are not to be suffered in Churches or other places of public resort,
and when none either could or would say any thing for the retaining of them, to
take them away, that so they may be no farther temptations to Idolatry? As much
as this was appointed to be done in our English Reformation: why it is not done
in the Lutheran Churches we shall by and by hear.

It is added by the Historian, that the Zuinglian Reformation did begin in
decrying the established Fasts and appointed Festivals. If the meaning of this
be, that Zuinglius decryed the multitude of Fasts and Festivals, appointed to
be observed by the Church of Rome, or that he condemned the necessity and
meritoriousness, which the Papists ascribed to the observation of Fasts and
Feasts, it is true, and tends to the commendation of Zuinglius: but that he
decryed every established Fast, or appointed Festival, is a most notorious
slander.

So is it also, that his Reformation began in the abolishing of set Forms of
Worship: unless the meaning be, that he procured the abolition of some forms of
worship, set by the Papists as Papists. And if an Historian, after he has told
us, that a man abolished set forms of Worship may be allowed to interpret
himself of Popish Idolatrous forms of Worship, then may we think, he has no
mind to be understood, and, without any blame at all, neglect him.

It follows: the Zuinglian Reformation began in the denying of the old
Catholic Doctrine of a Real Presence.

This charge must be intended of Zuinglius his denying the Real Presen^e of
Christ in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper* and if it be so intended, it is as
false as what is most false. Zuinglius had been at Zurick five years, and
reformed many things before he let any one know his mind about the Sacrament,
and perhaps before he knew his own mind as to the manner of Christ's presence in
or with the Sacramental Elements. When he after long study discovered his mind
about this matter, he never denied a Real Presence, unless by Real Presence be
understood a Corporal Presence. He expounded Hoc est Corpus meum, by a Trope:
so did our Reformers in England. He thought the Bread was the ^ody of Christ
Representatively. And, as our King may be and is said to be really present,
where there is any one who by his own Authority is appointed to represent him;
so the Body of Christ may be said to be really present where there is an
Element, appointed by himself to represent his Body. And if Dr. Heylin did
opine that the Body which our Lord Jesus united to his Divine Nature and with
which he ascended into Heaven, is any other way present in the Eucharist, he
both erred and dissented from that Church in which he was bred up.

For a conclusion, the Historian tells us, that the Zuinglian Reformation began
in denying all Exte^nal Reverence in the participation of the Blessed Sacrament.

Words more strange than any that we had before. For what is meant by the
Blessed Sacrament? Sure the Dr. was so much a Christian, as to acknowledge at
least two Blessed Sacraments. If so, which of these two would he have us to
understand by the Blessed Sacrament? Baptism, or the Lords Supper? I know not
why the later, should rather be called the Blessed Sacrament than the former;
nor why more External Reverence is necessary in the participation of this than
of that, supposing the Recipient to be adult. If a converted Jew should come to
be Baptized, why is he not as well bound to kneel when he is sprinkled with
water, as when he takes the Bread and Wine? As for Zuinglius, he never denied
External Reverence in the Participation of the Blessed Sacrament of the Lords
Supper. The mode and form in the which he first administered it, is recited in
Melchior Adam, and in the Historia Sacramentaria de Coena Domini, and in it all
needful Reverence was used. But, perhaps, not to make the Communicants receive
the Sacred Elements on their knees, is to deny all External Reverence in the
participation of the Eucharist. If so, Christ and all his Churches for some
Centuries must also be affirmed to have denied all External Reverence.

By this it appears what false witness the Dr. has born against Zuinglius.
Does he bear a truer witness concerning Luther? Of him these words are used,
which Luther seriously labored to preserve in the same estate in which he
found them at the present. Words that either are senseless, or very untrue: If
they have any sense, it must be this, that Luther seriously endeavored to
preserve the things before mentioned, in the same estate in which he found them
in the Papacy. This sense the words do scarce afford: But if we suppose that
this sense was intended, I then say, Nothing more false could have been
written, Luther did not seriously endeavor to preserve any one thing
beforementioned in the condition in which he found it.

1. For Images; He was indeed angry that they were taken down, not because he
desired or endeavored to have them kept up, but because he would have had the
honor of pulling them down, and could not endure that Carolastadius should
adventure to make any alteration in his absence. Yet Carolastadius created
Luther Doctor, and made not the alteration on his own head, but with the
consent and advice of Melancthon and others. 2. As to Fasts and Festivals set
and constant; Luther had as little fondness for them as Zuinglius could have.
Might he have ruled the roast, no Holy days had been kept but the Lords day. To
be sure, he endeavored not, after he thought of Reformation, to keep either
Fasts or Festivals in the same state in which he found them: He looked not on
them as parts of Worship. 3. He defended a not only Real, but also a Corporal
Presence of Christ in the Eucharist; but not, the Ancient Catholic Doctrine of
Real Presence, nor yet, the new Roman Catholic Doctrine of Real Presence.
Finding in an eminent Schoolman, that were it not for the Authority of the
Church, he should more incline to Consubstantiation than Transubstantiation,
Luther bethought himself, that he had abandoned the Authority of that Church
which kept Cameracensis in awe, and so boldly maintained Consubstantiation
(though not to his dying day as some think.) Happy had it been for his
Followers, if so absurd an opinion had never been published by him; for they
counting themselves concerned to maintain, whatsoever he in his fierce
oppositions to Zuinglius delivered, are fallen into the most monstrous tenent
of Ubiquity: which whoever believes, with all the necessary consequences,
cannot believe one quarter of the Apostles Creed.
But what is the External Reverence in the use of the Lords Supper, affirmed by
Lutherans and denied by Zuinglianists? Adoration is by the Lutherans condemned
as well as by the Zuinglianists. So is Asservation, and Circumgestation. Luther
himself somewhere, if Wendelin abuse him not, advised Christians to Receive in
one Kind or Element where they could not Receive in both: but the Lutherans
stiffly contend for the necessity of Receiving sub utraque Specie. The
differences not already taken notice of, are, 1. The Lutherans think more
favorably of Stone Altars, than do the Zuinglianists. 2. The Lutherans, at
least many of them, better approve of lighting Candles in the Administration,
than do the Zuinglianists* We in England, in many places, set Candles and
Candlesticks on the Tables, but do not light the Candles. 3. The Lutherans use
for one Element, a placenta orbicularis, of which it may be questioned, whether
it can properly be called bread? So do not the Zuinglianists. 4. The Lutherans
use no breaking of the Bread: So do the Zuinglianists. 5. The Lutherans give
not that which they use for Bread into the hands of the Communicants, but put
it into their mouths: So do not the Zuinglianists.

In no needful point of the External Reverence do they differ.

But perhaps in the point of Predestination, Luther and Zuinglius were at
deadly strife and variance. So indeed the Historian suggests; for these are his
words, Predestination Luther taught according to the current of the Ancient
Fathers, which lived and flourished before the writings of St. Austin. But by
his favor, Luther taught Predestination as St. Austin and the Fathers that
followed him taught it. Had he taught it as the Fathers before him taught it,
he had in words at least complied with the wretched Pelagians. Other
Predestination did Zuinglius never teach. So that Zuinglius and Luther differed
not about Predestination; and the late Ubiquitarian Lutherans, make a
difference where they found none.

Obj. But Have not the Lutherans solemnly vowed rather to fall off roundly to
the Church of Rome, than yield to the Predestinarian and Sacramentary
Pestilences? Dr. Heylin ibid.

Answ. That some Lutherans have used words of such an import, I remember is
affirmed by Sir Edwin Sands: But to say, The Lutherans have solemnly vowed to
turn Papists rather than embrace Zuinglius his opinion about Predestination and
the Sacrament, is an untruth of such a bulk, as most men but Dr. Heylin would
have strained at. When did the Lutherans solemnly vow this? what Record is
there of any place where such a vow was made? or, what gr^und had the Lutherans
to enter into such a solemn vow? Till these questions can be well answered
which will never be, we might, if we did not reverence the Doctor's degree,
well be allowed to say Mentitur Petrus: But to give any man such language is so
troublesome, that I heartily pray, I may never have to do with any who will
give me any such temptation.

3. I do also expect, that he who will answer me, should have so much Logic
and Metaphysics, as to be able to understand the terms of the Questions and
the state of the Questions agitated in the Book, and rightly to form Arguments
pro and con. For let not any one imagine, that I will be at the trouble to teach
him that in Print, which he should have learned of his Tutor. Once indeed I did
stoop so low, as to inform Mr. Tho. Pierce, that Real and Positive were not the
same, and that The absence of a form from the subject, in which it ought to
have been though it were never in it actually, may be called a privation, and
that Death is a privation, notwithstanding Christ came to destroy it, and that
The generation of one thing is the corruption of another thing, not formally
but only by concomitance, and that Our English word Sin, is not a concrete, but
an abstract term, and that One accident may be the subject of inhesion to
another accident, though not the ultimate subject: But that employment did so
little please me, and I had so little thanks for it, that I am almost resolved
never to take it upon me more. Yet this I must needs say, for the excuse of my
first confident Antagonist, that he is not the only man that adventured to
fight, before he either kn^w how to form his weapon or to make use of it. Dr.
Heylin, whom the Bishops were wont always to send out upon the forlorn hope, had
written many Books of Controversy, before he knew the nature of a conditional
Syllogism: as appears from the mavelous check he gives Mr. Baxter for saying
after a conditional major, But the Antecedent is true. Ergo, so is the
Consequent. Such a form of arguing it seems, the Doctor had never read nor
heard of: yet I believe every Freshman has heard of it, and knows the reason
of it. Another, that went for a learned man, brings an Argument that he thought
unanswerable; viz. Babylon as Babylon is not a visible Church of Christ, But
Babylon is Babylon as it is Babylon. Therefore Babylon is not a visible Church
of Christ. Not knowing it seems, that, in such kind of Syllogisms, the
Reduplicative particle ought always to be put to the major term of the
Syllogism. But of all men, commend me to the Author of the Appeal to Caesar.
Some it seems offended at his Gag, had accused him for saying There ever was
and will be a Church, unto whom complaints may be made. This accusation his
great stomach could not digest. But observe, good Reader, how he strains to
get rid of it. Does he, in his Appeal, go about to prove, that the Church is
always so visible, as that complaints may be made to her? N^: But Appeal page
134 he says, that in the nineteenth Article of our Church Church and Visible
are convertible term. A position so absurd, that no one ^ho knows what
convertible terms do mean, can ^hoose but see it is absurdity. But page 139 he
grows more bold and confident (yet not so bold as to prove the proposition for
which he was challenged,) and in these words he swaggers, I will yet add more
Popery to the former, and so leave you my Friends and Informers to chew the cud
on it, as they did after Lectures.

The Church of Rome has ever been visible.

The Church of Rome is, and ever was, a true Church since it was a Church.

Therefore the true Church has been Visible.

If any after Lectures do not chew the cud, i. e. meditate, they are unclean
beasts; but woe be to those who must chew the cud on such food as this. The
enunciation here concluded is, The true Church has been Visible, which I never
heard any Christian deny. But let us see how this man of learning proves it.
The Premises are, The Church of Rome has ever been Visible, This Proposition
is most false and contrary to all History; The Church of Rome is, and ever was,
a true Church since it was a Church, This premise is not apt to infer the
conclusion: It should have been thus formed, The Church of Rome is the true
Church; but then it had been Popish with a vengeance. Little need have the
Puritans to pray, a Montacutii Logica liberes nos Deus.

Indeed I have observed, that many of those who are no friends to the absolute
decree, have hut little friendship for Syllogisms; they count themselves put
into the Pillory or Stocks as often as they are constrained to argue in form.
If they may not be allowed to rhetoricate, to amplify and exaggerate, to say
horresco referens, to cry out ever and anon, (...); then are they like Wasps
without a sting, or like Soldiers disarmed. Jacobus Andreas was earnestly
desired by Beza that the Conference betwixt them might be managed
syllogistically; but Andreas was so far from yielding, that he swore in these
or the like words, Per vitam meam nunquam sic vidi in scholis nostris
disputari. Vid. Bez. in praef. ad acta Coll. I hope he wronged the Lutheran
Schools, or else I must needs say, they had strange Schools, in which a man
could never hear a Syllogistical Disputation. In our Schools no Disputations
are allowed but what are Syllogistical, and the main work of the Moderator is,
to keep the Disputants to form. And this was that which Tertullian so much
commended, ad lineas and in gradum disputare: that which St. Hierom so often
called for, in his Disputations against the Luciferians; Rhetoricaris, and a
disputationum spinctis, ad c^mpos liberae declamationis excurris: verum define
quaeso a communibus locis, and in gradum rursus ac lineas regredere; postea si
placu^rit latius disseremus.

And yet the Author of Gods love to mankind makes this one of his reasons why
he suspected the Doctrine of absolute Reprobation not to be true, because the
maintainers of it are so loath to have it examined. But the Author, before he
died, knew, that the absolute decree did not fear trial, but was as generally
entertained, and as firmly held, after it had endured the most severe trials,
as before. Bu^ if men will say, We cannot endure to haave a Doctrine examined,
because we do not like that it should be misrepresented and then bespattered,
by those who had rather lose a good Conscience, than a profane Jest, if we
must be accouted Cowards, because we tell Rabshakeh, that we understand Latin,
and pray him not to talk to us in English in the ears of the People, and answer
him not a word when he has done reviling, we are content to be thought such
Cowards. But let those who so call us think what they would do, if the Doctrine
of the Trinity should be impugned; They would answer him who soberly went about
to show, that the Scriptures we produce do not prove a Trinity, or that should
go about by reason to show, that an increated infinite essence can no m^re be
one and yet agree to three persons, than the humane nature can: But if any one
should write such Books as Servetus did, in which above an hundred times over
the Trinity i^ called ^^iceps Cerberus, diabolicum phantasma, Geryonis
monstrum, illusio Satanae; and the eternal generation is thus derided, Debent
dicere quod pater habeat uxorem quandam spiritualem, vel quod solus ipse
masculo-fae^^neus aut Hermaphroditus simul sit pater and matter, etc. and, Si
logos filius erat nat^s ex patre sine matre, dic mihi quomodo peperit cum, per
ventrem, an per latus? they would think it sufficient to say, The Lord rebuke
thee.

To conclude, If any one who is a Scholar and will write like a Scholar, will
be at the pains to show me, that Arminianism in the five points is not contrary
to the Doctrine of St. Austin (the hammer of Pelagianism,) nor yet contrary to
the Doctrine of our Church, I shall either speedily reply or acknowledge my
self his Prisoner. Put if any one shall publish a Book against me, stuffed only
with impotent railings or malicious calumnies, I shall punish him, as I have
done two or three already, by not buying, not reading his Book.

It will perhaps be said, that the Papists, against whom we should unite our
forces, will be too too much gratified by one Protestant 's writing against
another.

Answ. I doubt not, but the Factors for the Papacy, do with much delight tell
their Disciples, how those that are not in Communion with them are divided
among themselves: But they should do well to make up their own breaches before
they upbraid us wit^ ours. He, that being scandalized at the diversity of
opinions among the Reformed, shall betake himself to the Romanists, will leap
out of the drying pan into the fire. The Papists only agree in that, in which
they dare not publish how much they differ: and they then let a Popes decision
put an end to their disputes, when they can neither say, that the Pope was
misinformed, or that he was not in Cathed^a, or know not how by some
distinction to evade the determination; that is, they then let the Popes
reconcile them, when they have no mind to be any longer at variance. They will
not deny, but that there is as much difference between their Dominicans and
Franciscans* their Jansenists and Molinists, as there is betwixt Calvinists and
Arminians: and yet they say, that their Church is one, and not ours. How is
this to be unridled? One A. D. about the beginning of King James his Reign, put
forth a Pamphlet which he called a Treatise of Faith; near the later end of
which he lets us understand, that the Roman Church is always one and uniform
in Faith, never varying or holding any dogmatical point contrary to that which
in former times it did hold. The learned men thereof, though sometimes
differing in opinion, in matters not defined by the Church, yet, in matters of
Faith, all conspire in one. And no marvel, because they have a most convenient
means to keep unity in profession of Faith; since they do acknowledge one chief
Pastor appointed over them (viz. the Successor of St. Peter,) to whose
definitive censure, in matters concerning Religion, they wholly submit
themselves. The Gentleman's meaning if I can fathom it is, that the Romanists
are resolved to think their Church is at unity within it self. For though the
members thereof have 10000 differences among themselves, yet those differences
are not in matters of Faith, because they are resolved* as soon as the Church
shall decide them, never to differ more. Well, one would think that Protestants
also might be at unity; because they profess they will yield to Scripture
determination whatever it be. Nay, that the Gentleman will not grant; because,
as he had told us a little before, diverse men expound the Scriptures diversely.
As if the decisions of their Church were not expounded diversely by diverse, and
were not as apt to be diversely expounded as the Scriptures. And, as if they
were as much at an end after they had found out the meaning of a decision made
by the Pope, as we are when we have found out the meaning of the Scripture.
Convince a Protestant, that any one place of Scripture must needs be so
understood as to assert Consubstantiation, he becomes a Syno^siast forthwith:
But when you have convinced a Papist, that a decision of the Pope must needs be
so interpreted as to cross his opinion, yet he will not lay down his opinion;
but will say, perhaps, that the Pope did decide not as Pope but only as a
Learned man, or that it may be questioned whether he be a Pope, or whether he
be infallible out of a Council, or whether he was rightly informed of matter of
fact? Suppose a Jansenist should thus argue, The Pope did not intend to condemn
the Doctrine of Augustine: therefore, He did not intend to condemn the Doctrine
of Jansenius. A Molinist would be loath to deny the Antecedent; and yet if he
deny the Consequent, then has the Jansenist field-room enough, and is as far
from being proselyted as if nothing had been determined against Jansenism. In
the mean time it were heartily to be wished, that Protestant Ministers would
v^ry sparingly in their Preaching touch upon those p^ints wherein they differ
am^ng themselves. The day is yet to come that ever I preached Sermon about
Election or Reprobation, and I look upon it as a great affliction that I have
been by the daring provocations of others put upon it to write about them. I
could easily have born it that Dr. Heylin should trample upon my self; but
could not so well endure it, that for my sake the honor of some of our best
Reformed Writers should be laid in the dust. If Zuinglius, Calvin, Beza may
still be read without prejudice and quoted in the Pulpit with due respect, If I
can but persuade young Scholars that those who composed our Articles did
understand them, and would not enjoin men to recant such tenants as were
agreeable to them; then have I obtained what I principally aimed at. And so,
good Reader, I commend thee to the love of God, and to the hatred of Popery and
Superstition and every opinion that has a natural tendency thereunto.

THE CONTENTS.
AN Introduction, giving an account of the undertaking, Page 1, 2. Of the
Blasphemy of Florinus; and whether Eusebius charge Blastus with it, p. 3.
Irenaeus his Arguments against Florinus, p. 4. The Arguments of other Fathers
against his Blasphemy, p. 5. Of the Libertines, and Calvin, p. 6, 7, 8. Of Mr.
Archers Book, and its burning. p. 9, 10. Of Manes, Bardesanes, Colarbas,
Priscilianus, p. 11, 12, 13. Luther no Manichee. p. 14, 15. Calvin no
Bardesanist, nor Priscilianist, p. 16. Of Socinus denying Gods Prescience; and
the Jesuits. Scientia media, p. 19, to 23. Of Pelagius his Heresy, etc. p. 23,
24, 25. Of the S^mipelagians, p. 26, 27. The Arminians follow the Pelagians and
Semipepelagians; Calvin, Austin, p. 27, to 35. Of Godescalk, p. 35, to 38. Of
the Council of Trent, p. 38, to 43. Of the Condemnation of Jansenius, p. 43, to
46. The Opinion of the Piedmont Churches concerning Predestination and Grace.
p. 46, 47. Of the Augustan Confession, by whom made. p. 49. not relished by the
Papists, ib. drawn up in have, p. 50. subscribed by Calvin and Zanchy, ibid.
Melancthon not against Calvin in the point of Predestination, p. 51, to 55.
Luther retracted not his Book De servo arbitrio, p. 55. An Article of the
Confession explained, p. 55, 56, 57. Of the Liber Concordiae, p. 57, 58, 59. Of
the Conference betwixt Beza and Andraeas. p. 59, 60, 61. Calvin not proved, to
make God the Author of Sin, p. 62, to 66. Of his Horribile Decretum, p. 66, 67.
Reprobation, as stated by him, not of such reproach among Papists, nor of such
offense among the Lutherans as the Doctor pretends, 68, to 71. Justified as to
Castalio, 71, 72. No Supralapsarian, at least not the first, p. 72, 73. Of the
different opinions concerning the object of Predestination, p. 73.
Supralapsarians abused by the Doctor, p. 74, 75. Sublapsarian Opinion stated
out of the Synod of Dort, p. 76, to 79. Answers to Mr Hoards objections against
it, p. 79. to 91. Of the Remonstrants and Arminians, p. 9^, to 104. The
Doctor's Parallel betwixt the Synod of Dort and the Council of Trent disproved,
p. 104, to 112. Of the Deputies of Utrecht and Maccovius, p. 112, 113. (...)
Remonstrants not used cruelly, p. 114. (...) made the Author of Sin by those
who charge others to make him such, p. 116, to 120. The City of Sedan abused,
p. 120. Episcopius his humor described, p. 121. The Remonstrants cannot join
with any Christian Church, p. 122. The Charge against the Remonstrants made
good, p. 123, to 127. Whether their Opinions tend to Popery, p. 127, to 138.
Wickliff defended, p. 139, to 146. Tindal, Barnes, Frith justified and
commended, p. 146, 147. Dr. Heylin's mistakes about our Reformation and
Reformers in England rectified, p. 148, to 157. The English Article about
Predestination laid down, and its sense, p. 157, to 160. The Historians
Observations therefrom considered and confuted, p. 160, to 165. Of the Liturgy,
p. 165. K. Edw. Catechism, ib. Of the Judgment of our Martyrs, Mr. Rogers, p.
166, 167. Cranmer, Ridley, p. 167, to 170. Philpot, p. 170. Bradford, p. 170,
to 175. Of Peter Martyr and Bucer, p. 175, to 178. Of the Geneva Bible, p. 178,
179. Hooper and Latimer no Friends to Arminianism, p. 179, to 182. Calvin's
Reprobation misrepresented by Dr. H. p. 182. as also his Doctrine concerning
Perseverance, p. 184. Of the sixteenth Article of our Church, p. 185. to 191.
Calvinists no new Gospellers, p. 192, 193. Of Campneys, Veron, Crowley, p. 193,
194. Of Queen Elizabeth's Articles, p. 196, 197. Of Mr. Nowels Catechism, p.
197, to 200. Of Queen Elizabeth's Homilies, p. 20*0 201. Of Mr. Harsnet, and
Bishop King, p. 202, 203. Of Mr. Fox; His Martyrology vindicated, p. 205, 206.
Mr. Perkins cleared, p. 206, to 209. Of Whitaker, Baro, Barret, p. 209, etc. Of
the Lambeth Articles, p. 211, etc. Of the Questions and Answers put betwixt the
Old and New Testament in former Bibles, p. 214. Of the Hampton Court
Conference, p. 217. Of the Irish Articles, p. 219. A Catalogue of Bishops
preferred by King James, p. 221. Of Overal, Vorstius, our Divines at the Synod
of Dort, Sympson, Tompsom, K. James his directions, Bridges, Mountague, p. 221,
to the end. A Postscript concerning Barret, p. 232, etc.
HISTORIA Quinq-Articularis Exarticulata; OR, ANIMADVERSIONS ON Doctor Heylin's
QUINQUARTICULAR HISTORY.
IT is an happiness rather to be wished, than hoped for, that the Church of God
should stand in need of no. Polemical Divines: for whilst Satan is Satan, and
Men Men, and whilst the Righteous Judge of all Mankind sees meet to punish
those who receive not the truth in the love of it, by giving them up to strong
delusions, there will be Heretics wresting the Scriptures, and opposing the
Faith once delivered to the Saints. Against these, as many as had any regard of
men's precious and immortal souls, have in all Ages thought themselves obliged
to contend earnestly, and that with two sorts of weapons: The first
Apodictical, proving the truth, and refelling the errors opposite to it, by
evidence of Scriptures, and strength of Reason; the second Historical,
confirming Truth by the Testimonies and Authority of men renowned for Learning
and Piety. The former are the weapons mighty through God to the throwing down
of strong holds, but the later have also been used with good success; and
indeed he must be a perfect stranger to all modesty and humility, who does
hastily embrace any assertion opposed by all, or the greatest part of the
Fathers, Martyrs and Reformers of the Church. With these later Weapons I intend
(he assisting who works in us both to will and to do,) to encounter the
Reverend Doctor Peter Heylin, thought, it seems by the many importunate Letters
sent to him, as able as any to strengthen the weak hands of Arminius, and his
followers. I do in the entrance promise, to have in my eye that golden saying.
Historici primum munus est, ne quid falsi dic^^ audeat, deinde, ne quid very
non audeat; ne qua suspicio gratiae sit in scribendo, ne qua simultatis: Which
that the Doctor observed not, will be evident before I have done to all* but
those who cannot or will not see. Our Subject must be the unhappy
Quinquarticular Controversy, about which the Doctor had written something, in
that part of his Certamen Epistolare, which was directed against Mr. Hickman.
That Certamen, whether it pleased others or no, it seems pleased the Doctor
himself so well, that he has thought meet to repeat a good part of it in his
Historia Quinquarticularis, and that without begging pardon for his Ta^tology.
But this being a fault against my purse rather than against the Truth, I can
easily forgive: and shall make some Animadversions on his History, and insert
such Digression^, as I shall judge meet to decide the Controversy, Whet^er the
Remonstrant or Contra-Remonstrant opinions be most agreeable to the sense of
the Ancient and Modern Reformed Protestant Churches, more especially this of
England? If I evince not that the Contra-Remonstrant are, I refuse not the
hardest Censure.

The Doctor in his first Chapter makes some declamatory attempts against such,
As have either made God the Author of sin, or denied the liberty of man's will,
or attributed too much to the natural freedom of man's will, in the works of
piety; Whether with that fidelity and candor that becomes an Historian, must
now be examined.

Dr. H. Lib. 1. page 2.
The Blasphemy which makes God to be the Author of sin, was first broached, in
terms express, by Florinus, Blastus, and some other of the City of Rome about
the year 180, encountered presently by that Godly Bishop and Martyr St.
Irenaeus, who published a Discourse against them, bearing this Inscription,
(...), that God was not the Author of sin. For this he refers us to Eusebius,
Hist. Eccles. Lib. 5. Cap. 14, and 19, and to no other Author.

Answ. Periculosum est in limine offendere; It Is ominous to stumble at the very
Threshold: So has the Doctor done. For though I can easily grant that Florinus
did in terminis assert God to be the Author of sin; partly because of the Title
of the Epistle written to him, which is, (...), partly because I find him by
Irenaeus, in a fragment of an Epistle to him recorded in Eusebius, lib. 5. cap.
19, charged to maintain such Dogmata, as (...), Heretics out of the Church
durst never hold: yet is there not the least proof from Eusebius (what ever
there may be from others,) that Blastus ever maintained any such blasphemy.
From the Title of the Epistle written to him, which is (...), we may guess that
his opinions were such as had a tendency to Schism, rather than to any thing
which is properly Heresie-Tertullian toward the end of his Book de Heresibus,
writes thus of him, Blastus latenter Iudaismum vult introducere: Pascha enim
dicit, non aliter custodiendum esse, nisi secundum legem Moysis, 14. mensis.
Quis autem nesciat quoniam Evangelica gratia evacuatur, si ad iegem Christum
redigit? Feuardentius in his Preface to some fragments of Irenaeus, says, It
may be easily collected from several Ancients (whom he there names,) that
Blastus gave the beginning to the Schism of the Quartodecimani. This is all,
peculiar to Blastus, that I can find, though it is scarce to be doubted, but
that he held some of the absurd opinions of Valentinus, whose Scholar he was. I
only add, If Florinus an hearer of Polycarpe, and a Presbyter of Rome, fell
into the highest and most horrid of Blasphemies, no one has reason to be
secure, but every one that stands, had need take heed left he fall into the
same fury, or by running from it, fall into some dotage as contrary to
Scripture. For so I find that a Sect of men called by Austin Coluthiani, (by
Isidore corruptly Cottiliani, and more corruptly by Platina Quolitiani,) from
Coluthus, a Presbyter of the Church of Alexandria, did; not doubting to assert
that God did not Create any sort of evil: whereas he could not be God, if he
did not work all evils that are in Cities or Countries, so far as they are
fruits and just rewards of men's sins. This error says Epiphanius (...), etc
lasted not long, but soon vanished; yet because it is so expressly mentioned by
Philaster, Danaeus conceives it spread it self both into East and West: Certain
I am, the Arminian, if closely followed, must either fall into this pit, or
else depart from some of his beloved opinions.

Dr. H.
Ibid. What Arguments the good Father used to cry down this blasphemy, I cannot
gather from any Author; but such they were, so operative, and effectual, in
stopping the current of the mischief, that either Florinus, and the rest, had
no followers at all, or such as never attained to the height of their Masters
impudence.

Ans. What the good Fathers Arguments were, is not so impossible to be
collected out of Eusebius, as the Doctor here suggests; For though it be but a
very fragment of the Epistle to or against Florinus, which is come to our
hands, yet our of that fragment we may gather something, that Irenaeus thought
meet to make use of; namely, that Florinus his Dogma was (...), not agreeable
to the sentiment of the Church of God that then was; that it did, (...), lead,
as many as did embrace it, into the greatest impiety: It Is also farther added
there by Irenaeus, that he had very perfect remembrance of Polycarpe, who
conversed with S. John, and that he could witness, as in the presence of God,
that had that blessed and Apostolical Presbyter (so he calls Polycarpe, not
Bishop) heard any such thing as was by Florinus asserted, he would have stopped
his ear; and cried aloud, according to his custom, (...), etc. Good God! unto
what times have thou kept me that I should hear such things? yea, that he would
forthwith have fled out of that place, in which, either standing or sitting, he
had heard any such impiety: Which considerations undoubtedly do not want their
weight, at least they are as material as any brought by Dr. Heylin himself.
Upon this occasion it may not be amiss to mention the Arguments by which, if
not Irenaeus, yet other of the Ancient Fathers have opposed this (not
undeservedly called) Doctrine of Devils, that God is the Author of sin.

1. They laid some stress upon this, that sin is not positive, but privative.
This Argument is largely prosecuted by Dionysius, commonly (though falsely)
called the Areopagite: He proves that Moral evil cannot be from God, because
it is (...): Much more of this nature may be seen in Mr. Hickmans Justification
of the Fathers and Schoolmen. And therefore if any (which God forbid) should be
minded to lick up the vomit of Florinus, Mr. T.P. by maintaining the positivity
of sin, has encouraged them so to do: But the best is, his Impartial enquiry
into the Nature of sin, is so managed, that one may say to him, as once Gualter
Haddon did to Hieronymus Osorius, Video librum tuum constare ex ignorantia, and
impudentia, quarum una cum fiat, ut nihil intelligas, altera tamen efficitur,
ut omnia audeas. There Is one continued fallacy runs through all his Pages,
the confounding of the materiale or substratum, and the formale of sin; he that
can distinguish these (as who cannot that has but dipped into a Systeme of
M^taphysicks?) has answered all his reasons, all his Authorities.

2. Basil and others, argue from the Nature of God, unto which Holiness and
Righteousness are essential; and therefore sin so contrary to it, cannot be
caused by it.

3. The Fathers much urge the reason drawn from the last Judgment, in which God
is to punish all the impenitent, for their ungodliness: Is God unrighteous who
takes vengeance? God forbid, for then how shall! God Judge the World? Romans 3.5,
6. God could have no mind to punish that which he himself caused, nor could he
justly punish man for doing that which he had made him to do; (...), as Nyssen
excellently.

But it is time that I should pass to that Age, in which the Heresy of
Florinus, buried (as the Doctor thinks) for so many Centuries, was revived: Of
that, thus he begins,

Dr. H. Page 2.
It never revived in more than thirteen hundred years after the death of
Irenaeus, when it was again started by the Libertines, a late brood of
Sectaries,

Answer. If the Doctor here speak of those, that did by just and necessary
consequence make God the Author of sin, there were many betwixt Irenaeus and
the two Tailors of Flandria, that did so; but if he would have us think, that
the Libertines did (...), in express terms, entitle God to the sins of all men,
he must pardon us, if we be not too ha^ty in so thinking. For Bellarmine, who
possibly read over the History of the Libertines with as much care as the
Doctor, tells us expressly, that the Libertines do in words deny, that they
make God the Author or cause of sin, de Statu peccati, lib. 2. c. 2. The truth
is, their Tenent rather was, that there is no sin, than that God is the cause
of sin. They would not deny but that God wrought all the Adulteries and Rapines
that were; but then they affirmed that Adulteries and Rapines being wrought by
God, were no sins. But under whose wings were these miscreants hatched, and
when did they first infect the Christian Church?

Dr. H. Page 3.
The time of their breaking out affirmed to be about the year 1529. Founders of
the Sect Coppinus, and Quintinus, Flemmings both: and this, Prateolus affirms
for certain, to be the Progeny of Calvin, and other leading Men of the
Protestant Churches; Bellarmine more remissly, Omnino probabile est.

Answer. About, is a word that will stretch, and has saved many a lie, yet was
it no more than was needful; For so uncertain is our Historian about the time
of these wretched miscreants rising, that having in these words placed it at
the year 1529, a very few Lines after, he places it at An. 1527, but his
Friend Prateolus places it lower yet, at the year 1525: at which time Mr.
Calvin was not much above sixteen years old; being born, if he who writes his
Life deceive me not, the sixth of June, Anno 1509: and therefore it would be a
most strange oversight in Prateolus, if he should affirm, that the Libertines
were the Progeny of Calvin. But the truth is, Prateolus is guilty of no such
oversight, though the Doctor is pleased to charge it upon him: There is no
necessity in the World, that e Schola nostrae tempestatis Evangelicorum, (which
are Prateolus his words,) should take in Calvin. Bellarmine does indeed, in the
place quoted by the Doctor, say, Omnino probabile est, ut Anabaptistae ex
Lutheranis, sic Libertinos ex Calvinianis promanasse: But he adds a reason,
which methinks no one of his admirers should be able to read without blushing.
For in the books of Calvin and his Master Zuinglius and his Disciple Beza, as
also of Martin Bucer and Peter Martyr, are found most apert sentences out of
which it is collected that God is the Author of all the wickednesses which are
perpetrated by men. Let us form this reason into an Euthymem that the
goodliness of it may appear. There are in Zuinglius, Calvin, Beza, Bucer,
Martyr, most apert sentences from which it is gathered that God is the Author
of sin: Therefore it is altogether probable that the Libertines did arise from
the Calvinians. The Antecedent he indeed uses all his wit and malice, for many
Chapters, to prove; howbeit with most pitiful success, as diverse have shown,
diverse are still ready to show. But why did he not use some covering for the
Consequent, the nakedness whereof is so visible? Could he think that we without
more ado would believe the Libertines were the brood of the Calvinians, if the
Calvinians have sentences in their writings from whence it may be inferred that
God is the Author of sin. Perhaps the Libertines were risen in the world before
these men's writings were extant. Perhaps they never saw these men's writings,
though they were extant, when they did arise. Perhaps there were other men, no
Calvinians, whose writings the Libertines were acquainted with, and sucked
their loose opinions from. Why do I use the word perhaps? Most certain it is,
that no writing of any Calvinian either did or could bring Libertinism into the
world. But it is as certain that if the first Libertines were bookish men (as I
think they were not,) there were extant many Popish Divines and Professors
Books, in which were sentences more likely to draw men into Libertinism than
any extant in Calvin, or any of his Disciples, or Colleagues. Nay, if need were
I could show, even in Bellarmine himself, such sentences as have a greater show
of making God the Author of sin, than any used by Calvin. But if the Cardinal
had a mind to lay those ugly brats of Libertinism and Anabaptism at the
Protestants doors, Why did he trouble himself to father them on two differing
sorts of Protestants? Why does he say, that Anabaptists are the progeny of the
Lutherans, and Libertines the brood of the Calvinians? Does he not confess that
Luther and Melancthon did at first teach the very same things, ministering to
Libertinism, that the Calvinians teach? If so, Why might not the Libertines
learn their lessons from them? Were not the first Anabaptists Libertines as
well as Anabaptists? If they were not, they are much abused by Historians; And
if they were, sure either Anabaptism is falsely fathered on the Lutherans, or
else Libertinism also must call them fathers. But why should we seek any other
fathers of Anabaptism than the Papists? Nothing made the Anabaptists so
infamous as their pretended euthusiasms or revelations, and their despising of
dignities, and rebelling against Magistrates: And who laid the foundation of
enthusiasm, I showed a young Scholar above twenty years ago, when he began to
be levened with that fanaticism, and he will thank me for it, I doubt not, all
the days of his life. What Schools first taught rebellion against Princes,
Bishop Morton and twenty more have shown. As for Rebaptizing of persons
Baptized in infancy (whence Anabaptists have their name,) it is the most
innocent error of all the Anabaptists hold; and yet even this owes its rise
and progress, to Popish principles and practices: as the Papists shall be made
to know if they desire it. Nor has it been my hap, as yet, to hear of any
opinion so wild and absurd of our late Sectaries, that I could not derive from
some famous Schoolman. Well, the Doctor himself is not unwilling to acquit
Calvin from being the Parent of these Libertines, and acknowledges, that
Calvin was not wanting to purge himself from such an odious imputation: And I
hope he has sufficiently purged himself, if a Learned and full Confutation of
their opinion be a sufficient Purgation. The truth is, Coppin and Quintin, as
also Bertrand and Perseval, were all Papists. As for Antonius Pocquius (whom
Dr. Heylin according to his mistaking faculty calls, page 3. Franciscus
Porquius) he was undoubtedly a Romanist, and a Romanist in Orders, a Franciscan
Friar. It cannot be denied (nor is it,) that Pocquius was for some time at
Geneva, and being to leave that place, he would fain have obtained Letters
Testimonial and Commendatory from Calvin, as he had from Martin Bucer; but Mr.
Calvin, though he then knew not the spirit of the man perfectly, did so
shrewdly suspect him to be a Fanatic, that he would never be prevailed with to
testify any good thing on his behalf: Yea when this Deceiver discovered
himself, he could not forbear him, but chastised him and Quintin, sharply and
by name, in his discourse against the Libertines: And when the Queen of Navarre
(who though not tainted with the Libertines Errors, was bewitched with the
pretended Holiness of these two chief Sticklers) took her self to be wounded
through their sides, this man of God wrote to her with admirable moderation,
(so it was meet, considering her dignity, and the good that she had done to the
Church of God,) but withal, he reprehended her imprudence for admitting such
men, and by this Letter he so far prevailed, that this abominable Sect which
began to flock apace into France, afterward kept it self in Holland, and the
Countries adjacent: the Epistle is to be seen among Calvin's Epistles, page 53.
To conclude, I do thoroughly join with the Doctor, in detesting all those, who
either directly, or by any just consequence known to them, make the Holy God
the Author or cause, of all or any sinfulness. Nor do I know any Calvinian,
that will not without the least hesitation join with us both in this
detestation. If there be any that will not, let him be cursed with the severest
Anathema's: If he should publish any thing of this nature, let his Book be a
Victime to Vulcan; as Master Archers was by the appointment of the two Houses,
and at the desire of the late Assembly of Divines. A story of which transaction
it will not be amiss here to insert, from Doctor Arrowsmiths Chain of
Principles; In the year 1645. there was published in London an English Book,
wherein God was expressly made the Author of his peoples sins, though not
without some limitations. The Assembly of Divines, then sitting at Westminster,
took offense at this, made complaint of it to both Houses of Parliament: they
both censured the said book to be burnt, by the hand of the Common Hangman: and
the Assembly of Divines agreed upon a Declaration, nemine contradicente, by way
of detestation of that abominable and blasphemous opinion; which was also
published under that Title July 17. 1945, and in which we meet with these
expressions among others, that The most vile and blasphemous assertion, whereby
God is avowed to be the Author of sin, has hitherto, by the general consent of
Christian Teachers and Writers, both Ancient and Modern, and those as well
Papists as Protestants, been not disclaimed only, but even detested and
abhorred: Our common adversaries, the Papists have hitherto, only calumniously
charged the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, with so odious a crime, (in the
mean time confessing that we do in words deny it, as well as they themselves;)
Now should this Book be tolerated, they might insult over us, and publish to
the world, that in the Church of England it was openly and impudently
maintained, that God is the Author of sin, than which there is not any one
point, whereby they labor in their Sermons and popular Orations, to cast a
greater Odium, (though most injuriously) upon the Reformed Churches: We are not
for the reverence or estimation of any man's person, to entertain any such
opinions, as do, in the very words of them, asperse the honor and holiness of
God, and are by all the Churches of Christ rejected.

Proceed we to what the Doctor says about those, who entertaining the same
dreadful madness with Florinus, did recommend it to the world under a disguise;
Of these, thus he begins; Page 3.

Dr. H.
Of this sort Manes was the first, by birth of Persia, and Founder of the
damnable Sect of the Manichees, Anno 273, or thereabouts. This wretch did first
excogitate two Gods, the one good, and the other evil, both of like Eternity;
ascribing all pious actions to the one, all sins and vices to the other: Which
ground so laid, he utterly deprived the will of man of that natural liberty, of
which it is by God invested; and therefore that in man there was no ability of
resisting sin, or not submitting unto any of those wicked actions, which his
lusts and passion offered to him. Contendebant item peccatum non esse a libero
arbitrio, sed a Daemone and eapropter non posse per liberum arbitrium impediri,
as my Author has it.

Answ. Who is this Author? Prateolus a Pontifician, who neither took great
pains in examining what the Ancients delivered concerning Heretics, nor was
fearful of affixing to men what they never held. It had been more comely for a
man of great reading, as Doctor Heylin either is, or seems to be, to have
referred us to Epiphanius, or Cyril of Jerusalem, or Austin, from whom we
should have taken the opinions of Manes with less suspicion; but seeing he has
consulted his ease more than his credit, and chosen rather to take things upon
trust from Prateolus, than to peruse those from whom Prateolus must take what
he brings, if it be truth that he brings, I shall let him enjoy his humor, and
not put my self to the trouble of an enquiry, whether these furious men did
affirm that sin was not from freewill? Though there be some passages that
render it probable, that they thought, that man when he sinned did propria
voluntate peccare; Though withal they seem to have been of this mind, that the
voluntas male agendi was not a thing we brought on our selves by the fall, but
something natural to us. However, without offense, I hope the Doctor may be
minded that Manes was not the first of that wicked sort of men: for he, first
called not as Augus. Urbicus, but as Socrates Cubricus, got into his hands the
Books of one Terebynthus, who had changed his name into Buddas, and published
them to the World, as if composed by himself; it being not likely that the
World should be taken with any Books that did bear the name of Buddas: who
though pretending to be born of a Virgin, and to be able to work great feats,
died not long before miserably, being thrown from an high place, and having his
neck broke. Nor was this Terebynthus or Buddas (...): he had got into his
custody the four Books entitled Evangelium* Liber Capitum, Mysteriorum,
Thesaurorum; but the Books were composed by his Master, one Scythianus, a
Saracen Merchant, who to gratify his wife lived in Egypt, yet Scythianus
himself did not excogitate these two Gods, or first principles, one good the
other evil, but sucked in that absurdity from such Writings or Fragments as he
had met with of Empedocles and Pythagoras, as Socrates tells us, lib. 1. c. 21:
whom in this whole matter I the more confidently follow, because he faithfully
alleges every thing out of the disputation of Archelaus a Mesopotamian
Bishop, who disputed with Manes face to face. Wherefore seeing this is the
undoubted and capital error of the Manichees, to assert two first Principles,
the one good the other bad, I leave it to the serious consideration of our
Historian, Whether the opinion of Mr. Pierce and the English Tilenus,
concerning the positivity of sin, do not border somewhat too near that absurd
blasphemy; and Whether it would not sound better in the ears of Christians and
Philosophers to say, that the obliquity of the sinful act is but a privation,
and to be attributed to the defectible nature of the will; but the Act, which
is the substratum of this obliquity, is positive, and to be ascribed to him who
is the first and supreme Agent and Cause; and Whether the admonition that
Austin once gave to the Manichees, de duabus anim. contra Manich. cap. 6. in
fine, may not ^itly be given to the two forementioned Authors, ut eos sequi
mallent, qui omne quicquid esset, quoniam esset, in quantumque esset, ex uno
deo esse praedicarent.

Dr. H. Page 4, 5.
-- Others not daring to ascribe all their sins and wickedness unto God
himself, imputed the whole blame thereof to the Stars and Destinies; the
powerful influence of the one, and the irresistible Decrees of the other,
necessitating men to those wicked actions, which they so frequently commit.
Thus we are told of Bardesanes, quod fato conversationes hominum ascriberet.

Ans. We are told of Bardesanes, but where? or by whom? In the Margin I find,
Aug. de Haeres. cap. 25. quoted. But one would almost think that the Doctor was
born under some such Planet, as did either incline or necessitate him to
mistake. Nothing is by S. Austin said of Bardesanes, cap. 25. Indeed in cap.
35. the words before mentioned are found; but the Historian (if he had not
written in haste) needed not have been ignorant that the Learned judge this
passage to be the additament of some later Pen, and they also affirm, that it
is wanting in most ancient Copies of S. Austin. Spondanus out of Baronius
sticks not to affirm, that nothing was ever more strenuously opposed by
Bardesanes than the Doctrine of Fatality; which he proves from the testimony of
many, yea all, and from Bardesanes his own Dialogue of Fate, written to
Antoninus the Emperor, and recorded by Eusebius, lib. 6. de Praep. Evangelica.

Dr. H. Ibid. Page 5.
And thus it is affirmed of Priscilianus, Fatalibus astris homines alligatos,
That men were thralled to the Stars; which last S. Austin does report of one
Colarbus, save that he gave this power and influence only to the Planets.

Ans. Of any such fatalist as Colarbus did I never read. In all Authors that
mention him, (which I have met with) he is called Colarbas or Colarbasus, or
bassus. Where he was born or where he taught, by all enquiry I have not yet
found, but he is commonly joined with Marcus; whose Heresy was raised out of
the Greek Alphabet, subjecting all Men and their Members to the Letters
thereof, so as (...) and (...) should rule the Head, (...) and (...) the Neck:
perhaps his School-fellow Colarbasus thought it less irrational to subject us
to the Planets. The History of Priscilianus is most exactly described by
Sulpicius Severus, in whom I have read it with care and delight, and find that
his Heresy did spread it self most stupendiously, so as not only multitudes of
Laics, but also sundry Bishops were carried away with it: among the rest
Hyginus or Iginus, or Adyginus, the Bishop of Corduba and Successor to Hosius,
though he was the very first man that set himself against it. The Heresy it
self was a mixture of Gnosticism and Manichaism. Idacius and Ithacius called in
the assistance of the secular powers to suppress it, for which they are
severely censured by Sulpitius. However the Emperor did take cognizance of the
cause, put Priscilianus, Felicissimus, Armenius, Latronianus and also Euchrocia
(a noted woman) to death, banished Instantius and Tyberianus into our Isle of
Sylly: But in all the accusations brought against Priscillianus, I do not find
him, in that Author, charged with Fatality; yet seeing he was wont to pray
naked, and to keep night Meetings with base women, let him upon Austins
authority pass for a Fatalist: and though he was after his death Celebrated for
a Martyr, and had in such honor by his followers, as that they were wont to
swear by him, yet I hope that his name is abhorred by all professing
Reformation, and that nothing of Fatality has been taught by any whom
Protestants honor: The Doctor thinks otherwise, and I must see on what grounds.

Dr. H. Page 5.
Amongst the Philosophical Heterodoxies of the Roman Schools, that of the
Manichees first revived by Martin Luther, who in mere opposition to Erasmus,
who had then newly written a Book de libero arbitrio, published a Discourse de
servo arbitrio, in which discourse he not only says, that the freedom ascribed
unto the will is an empty nothing, titulus and nomen fine re, but holds
expressly, that Man is drawn no other way than velut inanimale quiddam, no
other way than as a senseless stock or stone.

Answ. 1. What Christian besides Doctor Heylin would have taken upon him thus
to judge before the Day of Judgment? Had it not been censure high and hard
enough, to say of so eminent a Reformer, that he did write his Book partly out
of opposition to Erasmus, but it must be also affirmed, that he did it out of
mere opposition to Erasmus?

2. What Scholar besides Doctor Heylin would have quoted Luther, de servo
arbitrio, and never refer so much as in his Margin to any page, where we may
find the things that are quoted out of him, and examine their coherence with
passages antecedent and consequent?

3. As to the thing it self, Servum arbitrium, is no false Divinity, Voluntas
humana non est libera, antequam liberetur; In the first conversion a man is
passive, as passive as a stone is in receiving the impression or signature that
is made on it; The liberty of the will discovers it self in its actings, not in
its passions or receivings. I hope the Doctor holds that the Image of God in
which the first man was Created, was distinct from the faculties of the soul.
If he do not, then must he hold, that when man lost the Image of God, he also
lost the faculties of his soul, which is contrary to reason and experience. If
he do hold it distinct, I would feign know, whether the Will were not passive
in receiving that Image? whether it did in the least cooperate toward the
production of it? If it did not, as certainly it did not; Why may not this
Image be again restored, the Will not cooperating to the first restitution, and
yet its liberty not be diminished? Is it any absurdity to say that a man is
dead, i. e. void of spiritual life, before he is quickened? Or that a man is
senseless till he have his spiritual senses given him? Yet do not I think that
Luther was ever in such a height or heat of passion, as to say, that Gods
working on the soul is in all things like to our working on a stone.
Similitudes do not run on all four, as the Proverb is. When I draw a stone, no
internal change is wrought on the stone, I destroy not those qualities that
unfit it for motion, nor do I put into it any qualities that may fit it for
motion; but when God does out of stones raise up Children unto Abraham, he
makes them cease to be stones, he takes away the heart of stone, and gives an
heart of flesh, he makes them a willing people, puts into them a new Nature,
and a new motive faculty, and so they run unto and follow after Christ, as
readily and cheerfully as the child follows the Parent from whom he expects
good things. Well but Luther is beholding to the Doctor, for though he have
given him this shrewd knock, yet at last he gives him a stroke, as Bellarmine
had done before, intimating his recantation of his rigorous opinion, Page 6.
Luther afterward conformed his judgment in this point, unto that of
Melancthon, as appears by the Augustan Confession, in drawing up whereof, he is
acknowledged to have had a principal hand. Let us hear him ^ant against Calvin.

Dr. H. Page 6.
Calvin will revive the errors of Bardesanes and Priscillian, in charging all
men's wicked actions on the Star^ and Destiny, not positively and in terminis, I
must needs say that, but so that he comes up close to them, to tantamount,
ascribing that to the inevitable Decrees of Almighty God, which Bardesanes
attributed to the power of Fate, Priscillian to the influence of Stars; For if
God before all Eternity (as they plainly say,) did purpose and decree the fall
of Adam, (Ut sua defectione periret Adam, Calv. Inst. lib. 3. cap. 23. sect.
7.) there was in Adam a necessity of committing sin, because the Lord had so
decreed it. If without consideration of the sin of man, he has by his
determinate sentence ordained so many millions of men to everlasting damnation,
and that too necessario and inevitabiliter, as they please to phrase it, he
must needs preordain them to sin also; there being (as themselves confess) no
way unto the end but by the means.

Ans. This is an heavy charge, and had need be well and clearly proved, or else
the Doctor will be thought to have little of that, which is the bond of
perfection, Charity: Let us examine his proof. The conclusion he is to infer is
this, that Calvin does ascribe all men's wicked actions to the inevitable
Decrees of Almighty God. What are his premises? He is no Syllogistical man, and
therefore I will not tie him to the strict rules of argumentation; but examine
what he says as I find it. If God before all eternity (as they plainly say)
did purpose and decree the fall of Adam, there was in Adam a necessity of
sinning, because the Lord had so decreed it.

1. Who are these they? Before there was no mention of any one save Calvin* Is
he now multiplied into these two, John, Calvin, as once Luther was into Martin,
and Luther?

2. How do these John, Calvin say plainly, that God did before all eternity
decree? Had it been said, that he decreed before all time, or from all
eternity, this had been a plain speech; but how any decree should be made
before all eternity, which has no beginning, that is not plain: A man had need
have Dr. Heylins wit to understand it.

To the thing; God did purpose and decree the fall of our Father Adam from all
eternity: What is the fault in this proposition? Is this it, that the Decree is
said to be made from all eternity? Why surely there are no temporary decrees.
Is it that the decree of God passed upon the fall of Adam? Certainly the
decrees of the Almighty do reach every thing that has happened, or that shall
happen, be it good or evil: the very delivering of Christ into the hands of
them that Crucified him is said to be, by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God, Act. 2.23. Well, but hence it will follow, that there was
in Adam a necessity of committing sin. Verily a necessity in Adam is a phrase
somewhat odd and uncouth. If the meaning of it should prove to be no more than
this, that it was necessary Adam should fall or commit sin, I must grant this
would follow, but see no imaginable absurdity in it. Imagine God had never
decreed to permit the fall of Adam, Suppose him only to have foreseen it; hence
will follow, that it was necessary Adam should fall: But this is necessitas
infallibilitatis, or consequentis, not necessitas coactionis, or consequentiae.
Let the Doctor prove that any other necessity follows upon the decree; let him
prove that we Calvinists do fabricate any decree, necessitating and compelling
Adam to fall, whether he would or no, and I will yield him the whole cause. But
he has farther to say; If without consideration of the sin of man, he (God)
has by his determinate sentence ordained so many millions of men to
everlasting damnation, and that too necessario and inevitabiliter, as they
please to phrase it, he must needs preordain them to sin; there being no way to
the end, but by the means.

Who these they are I know not, nor have any direction to find them out, but a
blind one in the Margin, v. Synod. Rem. which I am not Scholar expert enough to
make use of; If the Synodalia Remonstrantium be intended, why is not the page
in which those words occur quoted? Can the Historian imagine his Readers do so
abound in leisure, as to read over a Book of so great bulk as the Synodalia, to
find out one phrase? Such an imagination is not worthy of him. To damn is a
judiciary act, If any should affirm that this is without respect to, or
consideration of man's sin, I Will be no patron of his. Dr. Twisse (who is wont to
speak as high as any that ever espoused the Contra-remonstrants quarrel,)
though he hold, that God has made no Law according to which he proceeds, in
giving grace unto some and denying it unto others, yet openly and willingly and
frequently professes, in his Latin and English works, that God has made a
Law acording to which he proceeds, in distribution of rewards and punishments,
and according to this Law he decreed from everlasting to proceed, in
pronouncing the sentence of salvation and damnation on mankind.

Answ. to Hor. part first page 38. Reprobation does signify either a purpose
of denying grace, or a purpose of inflicting damnation; and each may be
considered, either as touching the act of Gods Decree, or as touching the
things decreed: As touching the things decreed, we say, 1. That God decreed, of
his mere good pleasure, to deny unto some the grace of Faith and Repentance,
for the curing of that natural impenitence and infidelity which is found in
all, without any motive cause hereunto found in one more than in another. 2. As
touching the inflicting of damnation, we say that God decreed to inflict
damnation on some, not out of his mere pleasure, but merely for their final
perseverance in sin without repentance.


I shall conclude all that relates to this matter of Manicheism and Bardesanism
with two sayings of the Right Reverend Father in God John Davenant Bishop of
Salisbury, in his answer to Gods Love to Mankind; The one Page 73. If any shall
go about to set man's will at liberty, and to tie up short the decreeing and
determining Will of God, as if this had not the determining stroke amongst all
possible evil actions or events, which shall infallibly be and which shall
infallibly not be, he may avoid the suspicion of Stoicism or Manicheism, but he
will hardly avoid the suspicion of Atheism; for the greater number of men's
actions being wicked and evil, if these come into act, without Gods determinate
counsel and decree, humane affairs are more overruled by man's will than by
Gods. The other, Page 97. If any Writers among the Protestants have made the
Creation of the non Elect, a means by God himself subordinated unto their
damnation, and the damnation of such an end aimed at and intended by God, and
consequently the means of men's damnation ( viz. sin^ul corruption and voluntary
rebellion) procured or wrought by God as the Author of it, they deserve rather
to be branded than patronized by any judicious Divine: yet it becomes Orthodox
Divines to be careful, as well in maintaining the free and spiritual mercy of
God, in giving Faith, Repentance, and perseverance to the Elect, as in
maintaining the Justice of God in the punishment and damnation of the
non-Elect. The defenders of conditionate Predestination, may suppose they clear
themselves well in the later, but we are sure they stick in the Semi-pelagian
Briars as concerning the former. For if God upon the foresight of men's faith
and perseverance be induced to predestinate them, Gods Predestination is no
cause at all of Faith, or perseverance, or any saving grace; this prevision not
causing things, but supposing them already produced by other causes.

Hence I might pass to the Doctors Historiola, concerning the Pelagians, but I
think it not amiss to digress a little, and note something concerning another
Heresy, of which he takes no notice. There have been a vile Sect of men, who
^obbed God of his Praescience, as to all future contingencies. That Cicero
should be of this mind (as he was if we may believe S. Austin) is not so
strange; it is more to be wondered at, that the poor blind Heathens should think
aright of God and his attributes in any thing, than that in some things they
should judge amiss of them. But that any, upon whom the light of the Gospel did
shine, should be so absurdly impious is marveilous. Yet that Socinus was of
this mind is not denied by any: His words are plain, praelec. cap. 11. Cum
igitur nulla ratio, nullus Sacrarum literarum locus sit, ex quo aperte colligi
possit, Deum omnia quae fiunt scivisse antequam fierent, concludendum est,
minime a nobis asserendam esse istam Dei praescientiam; praesertim, cum and
rations non paucae, and Sacra Testimonia non desint, unde eam plane negandam
esse appareat. Of the same mind is his Scholar Smalcius Dis. 12. de causa
peccati, in These. 3. as also Crellius lib. de Deo and Attr. cap. 24. page 201,
204, 212. This is an error against which we have as many Arguments, as there
are Prophecies in the Old or New Testament, and had we no Prophecies* yet from
reason it were easy to prove, that God were not God, if he did not foreknow
all futurities. Confiteri esse Deum and negare praescium ^uturorum, apertissima
insania est, says S. Augustine; it is a manifest madness to acknowledge a God,
and to deny his Prescience; so manifest a madness, that the Remonstrants, who
are wont to follow Socinus in many of h^s errors, do forsake him in this.
Episcopius himself, though he profess, that were it not for the irrefragable
Authority of Divine predictions, he should incline to the opinion of them who
deny prescience; adding, that if Praescience of humane actions be not
attributed to God, we may the more easily rid our selves of sundry difficulties
that occur concerning the Divine Providence: yet upon the account of Divine
predictions, he is content to let God have his knowledge of things future; but
it is but tantisper dum res clarius liqueat. Vid. Beverovicium de termino
vitae, page 81. So as with Episcopius it is but a probationer attribute, and
should be dismissed, if an answer could be found out for that Argument drawn
from Divine Predictions or Prophecies: In the mean time he has most plainly
determined, in the fourth Book of his Institutions, cap. 18, that it is not
necessary to the attaining of eternal Salvation, that a man should either know
or believe, that the foreknowledge of future contingents does agree to God. I
think that Arminianism does take away the foundation of Gods Praescience, there
being nothing but the Will and Decree of God appointing and ordaining, that a
thing, in its own nature contingent, shall be, which can make it certainly
knowable or future; yet this Divine Decree the Arminians will at no hand
acknowledge. I grant diverse have taken pains to find out another bottom and
foundation of Praescience besides the Divine Will or Decree, but to very little
purpose. Never could I in Jesuit, Lutheran, or Arminian, meet with any thing in
this point, that would satisfy a mind inquisitive after truth. Some tell me of
the Idaeas in the Divine intellect, and say that by these God may know future
contingents. Idaeas upon the reasons and authorities alleged by the Schoolmen,
I am willing to admit; but it is to me unimaginable, that an Idaea should
represent the futurity of that, which in its own nature is merely possible, and
so indifferent either to be or not be: Who ever found in his mind an (...),
representing whether his House were to be built? More I might say, were I not
prevented by the Learned Ho^^nebeck, Socin. confut. l. 2. p. 343, 344. Others
tell me of a real presence of things unto God from all eternity: Which real
presence if one should deny, I see not how it could be proved; If it should be
granted, I know not how on that Divine Praescience could be founded: For the
proof of both these I refer to Hornbeck, l. 2. p. 344, 345. But I am most of
all unsatisfied with the Jesuits Scientia media: Well may I call it the Jesuits
Scientia media; for Molina boasts that he was the first inventer of it, and
doubtless unto him it does owe its Original, or else to Fonseca: The greatest
antiquity it can pretend to, is less than an hundred years; for Fonseca tells
us, that in the year 1566 he propounded this, as the best way of reconciling
free will and grace, but thought not meet to publish it till 1596, in which
interval, namely about the year 1588, Molina published his Discourse de
concordia liberi Arbitrii and Gratiae, in which he flies to this Scientia
media, professing, that it had not been to his knowledge delivered by any
before. If it had not been found These Papers were written about 1663.
out till 1660, I should not reject it upon that account; Let Us hear what it
is, That by which God, before any act of his own will, did know which way the
will of the Creature would turn it self, on supposition that he afford such
helps and concurses; and by which he would have known the contrary, had the
will made use of its liberty to turn the other way. Against such a
conditionate, middle or mixed knowledge ('it is called by all three names,) our
Reformed Divines, English and Transmarine, have brought such Arguments as never
were answered, never can be answered. The truth is, this kind of knowledge is
so unhappy an invention, that it brings in those very things, for the avoiding
whereof it was first devised: It was excogitated, that the liberty of the will
might not be taken away, and that God might not be made the Author of sin; yet
a Scholar of Voetius, has undertaken to show, and does prove, that this
conditionate knowledge takes away all freedom from God and Men, necessarily
brings in the Stoical fatality, and makes God the Author of sin; see Voet.
Disp. Selec. Vol. 1. page 331, 332, etc. I desire any man to try how he can
answer Doctor Twisse his Argument, tending to prove that it is impossible to
assign any other cause, of a things passing out of the rank of possible into
the rank of future, than the Will of Gods Decree. There is a late nibler at
this Learned Doctor, who had so much wit in his wrath as not to attempt the
answering of his Arguments, but yet (which is his way of disputing) rails
against this proposition, that Prescience of a thing future, must needs
presuppose a Predestination, or a predetermination of it, as if it contained a
senseless error. (...), p. 128. The senselesness lies in this, because they
who make use of this sentence seem to think, that God could decree to do
something before he knew what he would decree to do; If God did predetermine
before he foreknew, he predetermined at a venture he knew not what: God knew
all things, which yet he cannot be conceived to have done, if any thing can be
conceived before his knowledge, page 129. There Is in these Lines an Argument
couched, but not of the Gentleman's own making; it had been before used by
Suarez, and it is answered, satisfactorily answered, by that Scholar of
Voetius, whom I before commended, Selec. Disp. page 394. We grant it would be
blasphemously irrational, to say, that God decrees he knows not what, but we
deny that it will follow that he decrees he knows not what, if he know not a
thing as future before he has by his decree made it future. We deny not the
received order betwixt the acts and objects of the understanding and will, but
we say that the Scientia which in signo rationis precedes the decree, is the
Scientia simplicis intelligentiae, not the Scientia visionis.

This unhappy Disputant thought that because all Gods praescience is science,
therefore all his science is prescience; But he is now to take notice that
there is a twofold knowledge, 1. Natural, by which God knows himself, and all
things possible, in his own essence, as a necessary cause of them: This
knowledge in order of nature does precede any act of Gods will; It had agreed
to him, though he had never made any decree at all concerning things ad extra:
But this knowledge is at no hand to be called foreknowledge. 2. There is a
knowledge which is called Libera, and this must necessarily suppose the act of
the will, as the very name does imply; Unto this does praescience belong. We
say that God could not from all eternity have a certain foreknowledge that a
thing contingent should come to pass in time, if he had not decreed the thing
to come to pass in time; but though God has decreed all actions that are
future, yet according to Austins distinction, decrevit ut bona eveniant ipso
faciente, mala ipso permittente. This laid down, I shall consider one argument,
by which Mr. P. goes about to prove that prescience precedes the decrees of
election and reprobation, and so dismiss him, as a Writer fitter, for my pity
than con^utation. Thus it is laid down (...). page 129. If Gods praescience
preceded not his decrees of Election and reprobation, there was not a moment in
which he was free to elect or reprobate; for the Freedom to choose must needs
precede the Act of choice, and to deny God his freedom in his Elections, is as
impious as irrational. This is a ratiocination as loose as ever I read, and yet
it has been my unhappiness to be constrained, of late, to read over the
Pamphlets of men that made no pretense to Logic. Mr. P. might assure himself
any Calvinist would deny his consequence. If praescience precede not Gods
decrees of Election and reprobation, then was there not a moment in Eternity,
in which he was free to Elect or reprobate; How has he proved this
consequence? Why, with this reason, Because freedom to choose, must needs
precede the act of choice. Were this reason put into an Enthymem (the most
proper argumentation to prove the consequence of a conditional proposition by)
it would be ashamed of it self; though perhaps Mr. P. might not be ashamed of
it: Freedom to choose must needs precede the Act of Choice, Ergo, Unless
praescience precede Gods decrees of Election and reprobation, there was not a
moment in Eternity, in which he was free to Elect or reprobate. Baculus stat in
angulo, Ergo, cras pluet may from henceforth be forgotten, and this Enthymem of
Mr. P. be made use of, as the example of an absurd unconcluding argumentation.
The best Apology I am able to frame for it is, that Mr. T. P. thought that Gods
praescience did signify Gods feeedom to Elect, or reprobate.


Proceed we to the Heresy of Pelagius. Of that thus Doctor Heylin, Page 7.
Pelagius, a Britain born, either mis^uided by the lavishness of their (i. e.
the Fathers who lived before Austin) expressions, or otherwise willing to get a
name unto himself by some new invention, ascribed so much unto the freedom of
the will in acts of piety, ut gratiam Dei necessariam non putarer, as
Vincentius Strynensis tell^th us of him: This man associated with Caelestinus
and Julianus, two of his Companions, began to spread abroad their errors about
the year 405. amongst the which those that especially concern this purpose, are
these two that follow, 1. Non esse liberum arbitrium, si Dei indiget auxilio,
quoniam in propria voluntate habet unusquisque, facere aliquid vel non facere.
2. Victoriam nostram non ex Dei adjutorio esse, sed ex libero arbitrio. Add
unto these that Orationes quas facit Ecclesia pro infidelibus and aliis
peccatoribus ut convertantur, sive pro fidelibus ut perseverent, frustra fieri.


Page 8. These Pelagian Heresies did not hold out long; being solemnly
condemned in the two African Councels of Carthage and Milevis, confuted by S.
Augustine with great care and diligence, and finally retracted by Pelagius
himself in the Synod of Palestine.

Page 9. After this time we meet with no such enemies to the grace of God, no
such advancers of man's free will and the power of nature, as might entitle any
man to the crime of Pelagianism.

Answ. It must be acknowledged, that great care was used by the Church of God,
to pluck up the tares that were sowed by Pelagius, and by (his Scholars shall I
say or Masters) Caelestius and Iulianus. The Learned and Holy Fathers employed
their Pens against them, Councels made use of their authority against them, nor
was the Secular power wanting to make very severe Edicts against them. But why
does the Doctor say that the Pelagian Heresies were retracted by Pelagius
himself in the Synod of Palestine? Retractation is when a man out of conviction
of judgment revokes his error: That Pelagius did in that Council of Palestine
do so, appears not. That Council it is well known, is by Hierom called a
miserable Synod, not as erring in Doctrine, but as erring in the person;
supposing Pelagius to condemn his opinions heartily, which he condemned but
feignedly, Hier. Epis. 79. He essayed also to put the same trick on the Church
of Rome, but was not able* Aug. de peccat. merit. and remiss. l. 11. c. 8. and
9. And I doubt there have been too many in these two last Centuries, that have
too far imitated Pelagius, and seemed to have no enmity against grace (a word
they frequently use;) whereas upon examination it will be found that they were
the enemies of it, and advancers of nature. To this end I must be more careful
in setting down the History of Pelagius, than the Doctor has been. I must also
touch upon the story of the Semipelagians, which he does not so much as
mention: And if after this it does not appear, that the Jesuits and Arminians
deserve to be ranked with them; then let the Contra-Remonstrants be accounted
as egregious Calumniators, as the Remonstrants are found to be, in laying the
blasphemy of Florinus to the charge of the Calvinists.

Pelagius is by the Learned Vossius more than once affirmed to be by birth a
Scotchman. Being such a Pestilent enemy to the grace of God (unto which we owe
all that we have, and all that we are) it might be excusable, if we should let
this error go undetected: but because truth is to be preferred to the honor
of our Nation, we will rectify that mistake, and acknowledge that he was our
own Countryman: called (as is conceived) Pelagius, because born near the
Seaside. Some Cantabrigians would have him a Student in their University, and
so ungrateful to it, as to cause the overthrow and ruin of it, because it
afforded Orthodox Divines that opposed his Doctrines. But upon the best search,
it cannot be found that Pelagius in person did ever vent his poison in this
Nation. They are in the right, who assign the Monastry of Banchor for the place
of his education. As to his natural and acquired parts, it is not unknown how
slightly Orosius speaks of them in his Apologet: as if he had been a man Cui
neque natales dederunt ut honestioribus studiis erudiretur, neque naturaliter
proveniebat ut saperet. But though Orosius be, not undeservedly, by Mr.
Mountague called Nobilissimus rerum Christianarum Historicus, yet is he not in
this ingenuous; it being impossible that he should not have seen that Epistle
of Pelagius, which shows him sufficiently a Scholar: Had he not been so, the
Fathers, and the Church of God, would never have so troubled themselves about
him. His conversation is by some commended; by others, who had as much reason
to be acquainted with it, as much decryed: Vir egregie Christianus, vir
Sanctus, and non parvo profectu Christianus, are Elogiums bestowed on him by
Austin, a man who seems to be raised up on purpose to confute him, lib. 3. de
pec. merit. and remis. cap. 1. and 3; It appears also by Chrysostom, in his
fourth Epis. ad Olympiad. that he was reckoned among the men that did live very
temperately and fare hardly, insomuch that the Father being at that time in
exile, Death approaching, did grieve exceedingly, when he heard of his erring
from the Faith: But yet I find Pelusiota (a Scholar of this very Chrysostom,
so Holy, that he was called by a peculiar name (...),) fastening a quite
contrary Character on him, as if he were much under the power of a sensual
appetite, and this in an Epistle directed to Pelagius himself, Lib. 1. Epist,
314. page mihi 84.

(...). How are these things to be reconciled? Perhaps thus, Pelagius before he
swerved from the Faith, did lead a strict life, and had a glorious form of
Godliness; but when he fell into his horrid opinions derogatory to the grace of
God, then was he a slave to his lusts: and just it was with God, to let him see
how impossible it was to lead so much as a sober life without that grace, which
he would not acknowledge necessary, no not to the highest acts of piety. Indeed
Iansenius has made this general observation, that all the Pelagians were
somewhat loose in their lives: Which observation, as he takes abundance of good
pains to prove, so can it not* I conceive, be too much considered in this
Controversy; because the Pelagians do urge nothing more vehemently than this,
that the extolling of the Grace of God, and lessening of the liberty of man's
will, is the readiest way to destroy all piety; as shall be seen more
hereafter. Mean while, we must take notice of a more modest and refined sort of
Pelagians, commonly called Semipelagians, and from the place where they did
most abound, Massilienses. Our England might accidentally occasion the rise of
these men. Agricola an Emissarie of Pelagius had infected our Church with
Pelagianism; which it was no difficult thing to do, considering the dreadful
ignorance, and lasiness of the British Bishops in those days: Hereupon it was
thought necessary to call in Foreign assistance: Germanus Bishop of Auxerre,
and Lupus Bishop of Troyes are sent for out of France; who not consulting with
flesh and blood came over, and by Preaching and that signal Dispute at S.
Albanes, did so prevail, that the people who heard them were generally either
established or converted: But this Root of bitterness not many years after
began to sprout again; which occasioned another voyage of Germanus into
Britain, his companion being now not Lupus but Severus: Success answered his
second endeavors as his first; he so far prevailed, that the Pelagians durst
scarce show their heads; yea a Synod was called, in the which their damnable
opinions were condemned. All this may more fully be seen in Sir Henry Spelman,
who follows venerable Bede and Mat. Westmon. But whilst these good men are
thus busied in ^ Neighbor Church, some Tares are Sowed in their own, yea and
take deep Root, and spread very far. These Reliquiae Pelagii created S. Austin
as much trouble as the down right Pelagians. I know these Semipelagians did
always profess to abhor Pelagius, and those Tenants of his which the Church of
God had condemned. Vincentius Lirinensis, one of them, gives Pelagius the
Epithet of prophanus, and his Scholar Caelestius of prodigiosus. But he that
will take the pains to examine their opinions, shall find that they did, though
not in every point, err Pelagius his error.

Prosper in his 41 Chapter against Cassian, whom he calls by the name of
Collator, lets fall these words, Paria sunt ^^nius seminis germina, and quod
latebat in radicibus manifestatur in fructibus. Non ergo cum istis nova acie
dimicandum est, nec qua^i contra ignotos hosts specialia sunt ineunda
certamina; tunc istorum machinae fractae sunt, tunc in superbiae sociis and
principibus corruerunt, quando beatae memoriae Innocentius nefandi erroris
capita Apostolico mucrone percussit.

The question is, whether Arminius and his followers do hold the opinions that
the Pelagians, and Semipelagians did; Calvin and his followers the same that
Austin, Prosper, Fulgentius did? Affirmatur. My a^firmation I Will make good, by
comparing the writings of each party; but shall first make use of one Argument,
which alone will be sufficient to persuade my Reader that I am not mistaken: It
is this, That the Pelagians and Semipelagians did all along object the same
things against, and lay the same imputations upon, the Augustinian Doctrines,
that now the Arminians do upon the Calvinistical. What are the imputations and
aspersions, which at this day are cast upon the Calvinists? Are they not these,
1. That they take away free will, and bring in a stoical fatality. 2. That they
make God the Author of sin, and of all the punishments that do befall the
Creature. 3. That they open a gap to despair and slothfulness. 4. That they
take away all use of precepts, promises, threatenings, yea and prayer it self.
5. That they make God an impostor; seeing he commands men to repent and
believe, yet does not seriously will their Faith and Repentance, nor their
Salvation, unto which only Faith and Repentance can entitle them. 6. That their
opinions are against the whole current and stream of antiquity.


All these are urged by the Author, or rather the Authors, of that Tract
called, Gods Love to Mankind, and indeed they do utramque paginam facere in all
Arminian Writers. If all these horrid things were also laid to the charge of
the blessed Augustine, it will at least be highly probable, that Austin and
Calvin were of the same mind, about the Decrees of God and those other
Controversies depending thereupon. Whether they were laid to his charge, we
must now make some easy enquiry. As to the first, the taking away of
free will, and introducing stoical fatality; six hundred times was it objected
to the Father, especially by Faustus in his two Books, de gra^ia and libero
arbitrio. Sub pietatis front gentilitatis fatum, and inter gratiae Vocabulum
absconditum erit fatale decretum, Fa^st. lib. 1. cap. 4. Pros. in his Epistle
to Rufi. Scripta ejus (Augustini) quibus error Pelagianorum impugnatur
infamant, dicentes eum liberum arbitrium penitus submovere, and sub gratiae
nomine necessitatem praedicare fatalem.

2. Nor were they wanting to charge the Learned Bishop, with making God the
Author of sin, and of that damnation, which is a necessary consequent of men's
dying in their sin. Let any man but read over the Vincentian Objections, which
the Learned Vossius thinks were made by Vincentius Lirinensis, he shall find
that they harp upon no string more than this, that Austins notion of the Divine
Decree ascribed the sin and damnation of men to God himself* the fourth to the
fifteenth of those Objections, is nothing else but this one charge, prosecuted
in different phrases and expressions.

3. Nor were they ashamed to say that his principles did lead Sinners to
desperation, and taught Saints to be slothful. So much we learn from the
Epistles of Prosper and Hilary to S. Austin, in which the Semipelagians are
brought in saying, that the Decree as conceived by S. Austin did, and lapsis
curam resurgendi adimere, and sanctis occasionem teporis afferre, e^ quod ex
utraque part superfluus labor sit, si neque rejectus ulla industria possit
intrare, neque electus ulla negligentia possit excidere: quocunque enim modo se
egerint, non posse aliud erga eos quam Deus definivit accidere, and sub incerta
spe cursum non posse esse constantem: cum si aliud habeat praedestinantis
electio, cassa sit annitentis intentio.

4. They wanted not a forehead to affirm, that Austins Doctrine took away all
use of preaching, exhorting, reproving, praying, Hill. ad Aug. Excludi putant
omnem praedicationis vigorem, fi nihil quod per eam excitetur remansisse
dicatur: Ibid. Si sic praedestinati sunt ad utramque partem, ut de aliis ad
alios nullus posset accedere, quo pertinet tanta extrinsecus correptionis
instantia? To the same purpose Prosper. But let us hear our Country man
Faustus lib. 1. de great. and lib. arb. cap. 4. Qui unum ex origin perditum,
alterum in praedestinatione affirmat electum, vide quo improba persuasione
declinet; Quid enim aliud dicit nisi quod adjutorio orationis neuter indigeat;
Nam jam praeordinatis ad vitam necessaria non erit, deputatis ad mortem
prodesse non poterit; in isto supervacua, in illo infirma judicabitur.
Beneficia supplicationis qui in acquisitione praedestinationis est, non
requirit: qui vero in perditionis part, non recipit. Quod si curam impendendam
aestimat orationi, indubitanter intelligat ea quae imminent posse mutari.

5. They charged it upon Austin, that contra^y to the plain words of the
Apostle, he must needs hold that God would not have all men to be saved. Quod
non omnes velit Deus salvos fieri, sed certum numerum praedestinatorum, are the
words of the Frenchmen or Massilians, (i. e. Semipelagians,) Cap. 8. Gall. Quod
Deus nolit omnes salvare, etiamsi omnes salvari velint, is the second
Vincentian Objection.

They said also that the blessed Fathers opinion was destitute of all
Antiquity, and contrary to the opinion of all that had written before him. So
Prosper in the very beginning of that Epistle which he did write to Austin,
Contrarium putant Patrum opinioni, and Ecclesiastico sensui, quicquid de
vocatione electorum secundum Dei propositum disputasti: and a little after,
Obstinationem suam vetustate defendunt, and ea quae, de Epistola Apost. Pauli
Romany scribentis, ad manifestationem Divinae gratiae praevenientis electorum
merita proferuntur, a nullo unquam Ecclesiasticorum ita esse intellecta ut nunc
sentiuntur, affirmant.

It can scarce be doubted, but that we, who have the very same things objected
against us that were objected against S. Austin, are of the same mind that
Austin was; but because I am resolved to give not only full measure, but also
running over, I shall make a parallel betwixt the Pelagian and Semipelagian
Heresy, and the opinions of Arminius and his Remonstrant crew.

Pelagius (in this not followed by the Semipelagians) did deny original sin.
That in this he and Arminians do not differ needs not much proof; One of our
own, highly honored by the men of his own party, in a Book called Unum
Necessar. does in most express terms deny original sin, and take a great deal
of unhappy pains to answer or rather elude, all the arguments drawn either from
Scripture or experience for the proof of it. But perhaps Arminius, and his more
ancient Disciples were modester? I must confess, this Writer has exceeded and
gone beyond Arminius, and all the Dutch Remonstrants; but yet Corvinus has
told us, Cont. Til. page 388. That, with Arminius, original sin has not the
nature of sin or fault, properly so called. I would feign have passed this as a
Criticism, and charitably have supposed, that he had only meant that original
sin was not a sin or fault, in such a sense as actual sin is, but that I find
Arminius himself, Answer to the ninth Question, page 174, affirming, that it is
wrongfully said, that original sin makes a man guilty of death. Had he said
that none are actually damned for original sin, it had been more tolerable, but
to say that it does not make guilty, or obnoxious unto death, is to make it no
sin at all; and yet thus do the Remonstrants also speak in Apol. Cap. 7.
Peccatum originis nec habent pro peccato proprie sic dicto, quod posteros Adami
odio Dei dignos faciat: nec pro malo, quod per modum proprie dictae paenae, ab
Adamo in posteros dimanet, etc. The Pelagians also were wont much to insist on
this, that Nothing could be both a sin and a punishment of sin; because sin is
voluntary, punishment involuntary, etc. Austin to convince them, used to
produce that place, which indeed carries great evidence in it, Romans 1. Against
this, Iulianus would say, those speeches were Hyperbolical; but yet the Father
so pressed him, that sometimes he could not but acknowledge that something
might be, and peccatum, and paena peccati; whence that, lib. 5. cont. Iulia.
cap. 9. Meministine quamdiu disputaveris contrae lucidissimam quae per
Apostolum deprompta est veritatem, affirmans nullo modo esse posse aliquid,
quod and peccatum sit and paena peccati? Quid est ergo nunc quod oblitus
loquacitatis tuae, etc? Does not Arminius Pelagianize in this? See but the one
and thirtieth Article objected to him; It will thence appear, that he took
exception against the public Catechism, because in it is said, that Original
sin is a punishment; for if God did punish Adams sin with this, then he must
punish this with another, and that other with another, and so there will be a
processus in infinitum. My business is not now to answer the Objections of
Arminius, but only to discover his opinion; yet least any one should think this
subtlety unanswerable, I refer him to the lately published Lectures of Doctor
Samuel Ward, de p^ccat^ Originali, ( page 8.) where it is taken notice of and
answered satisfactorily.

Our next parallel shall be in the Doctrine, relating to Gods Decree, and the
absoluteness or conditionality thereof. The opinion of Pelagius was, that the
well using of free will and natural powers is the cause of predestination: How
much or how little the Massilians differed from him, in assigning the cause of
Predestination, is shown largely by Vossius, Hist. Pel. lib. 6. page 533, 534,
etc. and by Iansenius de Haeres. Pelag. lib. 8. cap. 21. to whom I refer my
Reader; And shall now only take notice of Saint Prosp^rs Epistle to Saint
Austin, in which I find the Semipelagians thus represented, They hold that God,
before the Foundations of the World were laid, did foresee who would believe,
and who would persevere in that Faith, (to this perseverance in says they
acknowledged the help of gra^e was needful:) and predestined those to his
Kingdom, of whom he foresaw that they would be worthy his vocation, and go out
of this World making a good end. If their judgment was asked about infants
dying in their infancy, they would reply, that they were predestined to life
or death according to the good or bad life which God foresaw they would have
lead, if they had come to maturity of years.

Do the Arminians, who are so angry when called Pelagians, differ from them in
this? I confess Arminius does not make a man to be predestined from foreseen
Works, but from foreseen Faith; nor does he make Faith the cause, but a
condition, or decent antecedent, using a less suspected term, but intending the
very same thing; for as our incomparable Davenant has well observed,
Conditions are of two sorts, Dissert. de prae. and reprob. p. 118.
common and distinguishing; these later, he defines to be such acts or
qualities, which being foreseen, or preconsidered in the subject, contrary
Divine Acts are exercised about that subject. Arminius when he makes Faith a
condition of Divine Election, infidelity a condition of reprobation, takes the
word condition in the later sense, and so plainly makes it the same with a
meritorious or motive cause; for he every where maintains that, posita side
ponitur electio, negata fide negatur electio; that Faith is a means ordained
and appointed by God for the obtaining of Election: therefore as that Learned
Professor well concludes, page 119, 120. Sunt merae verborum praestigiae cum
aiunt, praevisam fidem and infidelitatem esse conditioones, non modo quae
praecedunt praedestinationem and reprobationem communiter and promiscue
consideratam, sed etiam ex quibus oritur distinctio electorum, and tamen negant
habere aliquam causalitatem.

Consequently, as the Pelagians and Semipelagians did hold that the number of
Elect and reprobate was not definite, but indefinite and indeterminate; so also
do the Anticalvinists or Arminians: Illud pariter non accipiunt eligendorum
rejiciendorumque esse defini^um numerum, says Hilary Epist. ad August. of the
Massilians. Grevincov. These. exhib. p. 137, says the same, Electio incompleta
potest interrumpi, ac interdum interrumpitur: suntq^e incomplete electi, vere
quidem electi; sed possunt fieri reprobi, ac perire: numerusque electorum
potest angeri ac minui.

3. Our third parallel shall be in the Doctrine of grace, the efficaciousness
of grace. Hilary, in the so often quoted Epistle to Austin, thus describes the
Massi^ians, They affirm the will to be so free, that it can of its own accord
admit or refuse Cure or Medicine: and Faustus plainly tells us, that Though it
be of the grace of God that men are called, yet the following the call is
referred to their own will. Are our Arminians any whit more careful to give
grace the things that belong to grace? do they not make converting grace to be
nothing else but a gentle suasion? do they not every where rant against those
who hold, that God does by an Omnipotent and unresistable motion, beget Faith
and other Divine Graces in us? I shall among many places that do occur, for the
confirmation of this, make choice only of two: Hague conference page 282. A
man may hinder his own regeneration, even then when God will regenerate him,
and does will to regenerate him; And Arnold. against Boyerm. page 263. says
expressly, that all the operation which God uses to the Conversion of men being
already performed, yet this Conversion still remains in man's power, so that
he can convert or not convert, believe or not believe.

I had thought to have proceeded to the point of perseverance, but that I
considered the necessary dependence of that on the other two, concerning
Election and Grace. By what has already been laid down, it is manifest, that
if the Pelagians and Semipelagians were in the right, then are not the
Arminians mistaken; but if Austin, Prosper, Hilary, and those others whom the
Church of God has been wont to grace with the Title of Orthodox, were not in
an error, then Mr. Calvin and those that follow him are in the right.

Obj. Here I may expect it will be said, that the Doctrine most quarrelled at
in the Calvinists, is the Doctrine of absolute reprobation, and in favor of
that, nothing has yet been produced out of Orthodox antiquity.

Ans. To that I shall answer, 1. By concession that if by reprobation absolute,
be meant a purpose to damn any man without consideration of, or respect unto
sin, either actual or original; such an absolute reprobation is indeed unknown
to all antiquity: but as yet I could never meet with that Calvinist that
asserted such an absolute reprobation. 2. But if by reprobation absolute be
meant, Gods purpose to deny Grace to some according to the pleasure of his
will; I then stick not to affirm, that such reprobation absolute is not unknown
to antiquity. Indeed the Ancients do rarely speak of reprobation; our Church in
her Articles mentions it not at all; both they and she leave us to gather the
nature of reprobation, which is but Non-Election or Praeterition, from what we
find laid down concerning Election. Now seeing the Fathers, those of them that
had to with the Pelagians and Semipelagians, did constantly affirm, that Gods
own good will, not any foresight of the good use of free will, was it which
moved God to give converting grace unto some; they must also hold that God did
out of his own good pleasure, and not from any foresight of an ill use of
free will, purpose to deny this efficacious converting grace unto others.
Indeed it is scarce rational to assert, that God should purpose not to cure any
one, because he is sick; not to enlighten any one, because he was by him looked
on as dark and blind. But concerning the Judgment of Antiquity in this matter,
no more shall be said at present; the Reader that desires further satisfaction,
is referred to the Learned Davenant, in the close of his most accurate
Dissertation, concerning Election and Reprobation. As for Vossius his judgment
concerning reprobation, it is considered in a Manuscript by Doctor Twisse,
which Manuscript may possibly in a short time be published. From it, the World
will soon see, how unjustly the absolute Decree is charged with Novelty.


Object. 2. It may be further objected, that about the year 415 there were a
Sect of men called Praedestinati, who were accounted and condemned for
Heretics, whose opinions about the Divine Decrees seem to be the very same
that are now maintained by the followers of Calvin.

Answ. This Objection were scarce worth the taking notice of, if one R. B.
Gentleman, in his English Manual, called a Muster roll of evil Angels, had not
placed the Praedestinati among the Capital Heretics; but since it has pleased
him so to do, upon the credit and authority of Sigebert Monk of Gemblaux, it
will be needful to let the English Reader know, that this Predestinarian
Heresy is a mere figment, and that there never were any such Heretics as the
Praedestinati. So much this Mr. R. B. might have learned from Doctor Twisse,
Answer to Gods Love to Mankind, Part 1. page 58, 59. and more fully from
Iansenius, Tom. 1. page 219, 220, etc. Had there been any such Heresy Anno
415, or 414, undoubtedly S. Austin and S. Prosper would have taken notice of
it, and have endeavored to distinguish their own opinion from it, which yet no
man says they do: On the contrary, it is manifest that the Dogmata which are
by Sigebertus, Hincmarus, and Gennadius fathered upon the Praedestinarians, are
the very Tenants, with which the Semipelagians did asperse Saint Austin and his
followers.

From S. Austin Doctor Heylin takes a leap to the Council of Trent, but I shall
not so do; The transactions concerning Godescalk the Monk must stay us a while,
because they are somewhat differently related by learned Men. Godescalk is by
Vossius, from Hincmar, described to be one of a fierce mind, Epist. ad Nicol.
Papum.
impatient of rest, a lover of Novelty; with Rabanus Maurus also, he goes for
no better than a Sciolist: But these characters are the less to be regarded,
because drawn by the hands of two professed Enemies, and because Walafridus
Strabo* a Disciple of this Rabanus Maurus, and as Flacc. Illi. says, his
Notary, gives us a very high and large commendation of Gods. both as to Life
and Learning; which commendation is to be seen in Bishop Ushers Historia Gods.
page 38, 39. This Gods. was one that had much read the Fathers, especially S.
Austin, with whom he did perfectly agree as to the Doctrine of Praedestination,
as may be seen in his Confessions, first published by the incomparable Usher;
but some not regarding so much what his opinion truly was, as what were the
consequences which they thought did flow from it, charge him with blasphemy, as
the Massilians of old did S. Austin. Rabanus Maurus by the command of Lewis
King of Germany, called a Synod of Bishops and Abbots at Moguntia, in which
Godescalk is condemned; but condemned for that which he seems not to be guilty
of, as if he had held and maintained that good men were inevitably pre-ordained
to a life of happiness, wicked men inevitably pre-ordained to a life of endless
misery, and that it profits not the wicked if they be converted, nor hurts
the Godly if they sin. In this Synod Trithemius tells us, that he recalled and
revoked his error; but if he had so done, then would not both Rabanus and
Hincmarus charge him, which yet full often they do, with obstinacy. However at
this Synod, Godescalk was banished Germany, and made to promise not to return,
and sent to his own Bishop, i. e. the Archbishop of Rhemes; for unto his
Jurisdiction did the Monastery of Orbez (out of which Godescalk came) belong:
The Epistle of Rabanus to Hincmarus signifying this, is to be seen in Historia
Gods. page 46. One would think at this Synod Godescalk met with hard measure,
but harder was measured out to him in the Synod held in the Palace of
Carisacum: for being heard a second time, it is decreed that he should be
divested of his Sacerdotal Office, if ever he were truly a Priest, (which those
Fathers seem not willing to acknowledge, because forsooth he was ordained by
Rigbold, Suffragan of Rhemes, the Bishop of Sueston not consulted:) yea, that
he should be whipped notwithstanding his Age, and confined for ever to his
Cell. But what was all this while become of the Augustinian spirit? Was all the
World so soon become Pelagian? In no wise. Remigius as much appeared for the
justification of Godescalk, as did either Rabanus or Hincmarus for his
condemnation. The Church of Lions stoutly censureth and confuteth the decrees
of this Carisiacan Synod; and whereas one Johannes Scotus Erigena, a good
Philosopher but no great Divine, had written a Book against the cause of
Godescalk, consisting of nineteen Chapters, one Florus a Deacon of the Church
of Lions answered him. In the year 855 a Council was held at Valens, wherein
Canons were made diametrically opposite to the determinations of the Carisiacan
meeting, and to the propositions of Scotus Erigena. Learned Baronius mistaking
the Phrase Scotorum pultes, thinks that this Valentinian Synod was called
against some wandering Scotchmen, of which Godescalk was chief, and that the
opinion of Godescalk was there again condemned: whereas we there find Scotus
his capitula condemned, as containing Diaboli commentum, rather than argumentum
aliquod fidei. Of the four capitula of Hincmarus indeeed, the Synod speaks
somewhat more mildly and favorably, but yet so as to ascribe to them
inutilitatem, vel etiam noxi^tatem, and errorem contrarium veritati. When these
Valentian Fathers come to speak of grace and free will, these are their words:
Item de gratia per quam salvantur credentes, and sine qua rationalis creatura
nunquam beat vixit, and de libero arbitrio per peccatum in primo homine
infirmato, sed per gratiam Domini Jesus in fidelibus ejus redintegrato and
sanato, id ipsum constantissime and fide plena fatemur, quod Sanctissimi Patres
auctoritatem sacrarum literarum secuti nobis tenendum reliquerunt, quod
Africana, quod Arausica Synodus professa est. In this Synod were present the
Bishops of three Provinces, in number fourteen, though as the Preface plainly
intimates, Ebbo Bishop of Gratianopolis had the chief hand in compiling the
Canons. Nor had the great Volumn which Hincmar made against these Canons any
great effect; for in the year 859 a Council being called at Lingon, the Canons
of the Valentine Synod are again confirmed and ordered to be promulged for the
instruction of the Lords People, those words only wherein express mention was
made of Hincmars four capitula being, to avoid offense, left out.

But it is objected in Gods Love to Mankind, that in this very Valentine Synod
it is affirmed, that the wicked do therefore perish, not because they could
not, but because they would not be good, and by their own fault original or
actual also remained in the mass of perdition: Yea, the Fathers of that
Council denounce Anathema's to those that held, that men are so predestined
to evil, as that they cannot be otherwise: That any should be predestined to
evil by the power of God so as he cannot be otherwise, we do not only not
believe, but also if there be any that will believe so great an evil, we with
all detestation denounce them accursed, as the Arau^ican Council also does. And
at the Council of Arles assembled against the Pelagians, these Anathemaes were
denounced, Cursed be the man that shall say that the Man that perished might
not have been saved; and again, Cursed be the man that shall say that a Vessel
of dishonor may not rise to be a Vessel of honor.

For Answer, It were easy to reject those Anathemaes of the Council of Arles
as spurious, and forged by Faustus that Arch-Semi-pelagian: but we need not
trouble our selves so to do, for there is nothing in any or all these passages
that may not stand with absolute reprobation; for absolute negative
reprobation, preterition, or non-election, may well consist with a possibility
of avoiding sin and damnation, as all both Super and Sublapsarians grant, in
the Non-elect Angels and in the Protoplast, in whom they are wont to say, that
all and every person, received the posse stare and a posse salvari. A man that
of impenitent becomes penitent, may be said to rise from being a Vessel of
dishonor, to be a Vessel of honor: But never did any of non-elect become
elect; never did any who was under a non-predestination unto effectual and
infallible means of eternal life, procure to be under a predestination unto
effectual and infall^ble means of eternal life.

Dr. H. Page 12.
In such condition, says the Doctor, stood affairs in reference to the
Doctrines of Predestination, Grace, Free Will, at the first sitting down of the
Council of Trent, in which those points became the subject of many sad and
serious debates amongst the Prelates and Divines th^n and there Assembled.

Which being so necessary to the understanding of the questions which we have
before us. I shall not think my time ill spent in laying down the sum and
abstract of the same, as I ^ind it digested to my hand, by Padre Paulo.

Ans. 1. I shall show that it need not much trouble a Christian mind what was
determined at Trent.

2. I shall show that nothing was determined at Trent, but what is consistent
enough with the Calvinian Doctrine, as touching Predestination, Free Will,
Perseverance.

1. I say it is not greatly material what was determined at that meeting of
Trent: for notwithstanding it is by Papists honored with the name of a
General, and Ecumenical Council, yet all Protestants see that it was a
Conventicle of a few men, wedded to the Popes wicked interest, and resolved to
make such determinations, not as were agreeable to the truth, but as were
consistent with the pomp and glory of the Roman See. To evince this, I had
thought to present my Reader with a short History of this Council, gathered out
of Padre Paul the Servite, and Sleidan, but the Reverend and Learned Doctor
John Cosins has happyly saved me this labor, and done the work to my hand;
His Collection I shall transcribe:

The calling of a Council had been shifted off by Leo the X, Adrian the VI,
Clement the VII; but Paul the III, famous for nothing more than dissimulation,
condescended so far, that a Synod should be summoned at Mantua in Italy, and
sent his Bull of Indiction May 27, Anno 1531: but his design not taking for
that place, he sent out another Bull for a Council to be held May the first
1538, at Vicenza, a City under the Dominion of the Venetians: this Indiction
meeting also with opposition, he sends forth a third Bull, which commanded all
Bishops and Abbots with other privileged persons, provided they had taken an
Oath to be obedient to the Pope's See of Rome, to repair to Trent, on the
Confines of Italy, there to attend the Legates for the celebration of a
Council, to be begun November the first, Anno 1542. Against this Council,
protestations were made by the Princes and all the Reformed Churches in
Germany, as also by the Kingdoms of England and Denmark, and many other places
besides, which brought it to nothing. Wherefore he se^ forth another Bull, and
sent his Legates to Trent, to begin a Council there, March 15, Anno 1545. The
Legates being come to Trent, found no Prelate there but the Bishop of the
place: Within a few days came three Italian Bishops, who, being dependants upon
the Court of Rome, and Men very ready to promote the Popes service, had order
from him to be there with the first; for his desire was that the Council should
begin with as few as might be, and that to regulate the rest that came after.
In order whereunto he sent his Brief, and gave his Legates a Faculty, ^o
preside in the Council under his Name and Authority; with special directions,
not to suffer any thing to be proposed or offered there to public debate,
which had not first been privately approved by themselves, or any thing to be
put to the question and defined, which had not been formerly sent to Rome, and
assented to by him; and with power, if need were to do him service in it,
either to break up the Council for altogether, or to suspend and prorogue it
from time to time, or to remove and translate it from one place to another, at
their pleasure; which was a device whereby all attempts and motions that might
be made against the enormities of the Roman Court, should be sure to be
defeated. For above all other things this was the principal matter, which was
given them in charge, that they should not in any case suffer the Authority and
Power of the Pope to be questioned. There was a proviso in the first words of
the Bull, that they should do nothing without the consent of the Council, but
afterward that clause was thought needful to be altered, and the Legates had an
absolute power given them, independent of any but the Pope himself, whose
service they only attended.

Two Months passed after their coming to Trent before they got twenty Prelates
into their company, and because they were somewhat ashamed to begin their
Ecumenical Council (as they are not ashamed to call it) with so small a
number, they persuaded the Pope to put it off for eight months longer; though
much a do they had to persuade the Prelates to stay all that while with them.
But by the Months of December and January following (having in the mean while
contented the poorer sort of Bishops with a pension of forty Ducats a piece,
procured for them out of the Popes coffers,) they grew to somewhat a greater
number. For, besides the Legates and the Cardinal Bishop of Trent, there were
present four Archbishops; eight and twenty Bishops, three Abbots, and four
Generals. And these three and forty persons made the general Council: Among
whom two of the Archbishops were only Titular, being the Popes Pensioners at
Rome, and now sent to Trent to increase the number, and to depend upon the
Legates; but in those Churches whereof they bare the names, had they nothing to
do, nor were they any lawful and true Bishops at all. The one of these was
Olaus Magnus the Goth, who went for the Archbishop of Upsale in Swedland, and
the other blind Sir Robert the Scot, who appeared for the Primat of Armagh in
Ireland, and of whom it was then commonly said, that as pore-blind as he was,
yet had he the commendation to ride Post the best in the World. And with these
men they began their Ecumenical Chapter at Trent.

Thus far the Learned Doctor, whose design was only to take notice of an
Anathema, passed in the fourth Session of this Conventicle, by which all were
cursed that did not receive the new Canon of Scripture, in such manner and form
as was there first appointed; but that design lead him afterward to observe,
that in this Trent Assembly, there were private Congregations, which were
appointed to be kept twice a week at one of the Legates Houses, for the
proposing, debating, and framing of all their Decrees, before they were brought
to be voted and defined abroad in any public Session; for by this means the
Legates would be sure, either to have every thing prepared to their own mind,
and be able to number the Voices before hand, which way they would be given, or
else not to suffer the matter to be brought to any open definition in their
Council at all. Finally, the foresaid Learned Doctor having given us the Decree
concerning the new Canon, says that it was passed but by a few; for of the
Greek Church they had not one, unless it were some such as blind Sir Robert of
Scotland was: of the English as few, (for the Bishop of Worcester, Richard
Pates was not yet come among them, and when afterward he came thither, he was
there but in a private and personal capacity, having no employment given him by
the Church of England;) of the Helvetian, German, and Northern Churches none;
of the French Church scarce two; of the Spanish not many; all the rest were
Italians, among whom diverse were the Popes Pensioners, and sent thither to
outballance other men's voices, some of them Titular, and some Unlearned.

He that pleases may read the story of the remaining 21 Sessions in Padre
Paul; and having so done, let him, if he be impartial, judge whether it be
probable, that such a company of men should be blessed by God, to find out
truth, and settle the peace of the Church? But let us suppose there had been at
Trent a Meeting of the most Holy, Reverend, and Learned Divines that the Church
of Christ then afforded; Did they determine any thing either for, or against,
the Calvinians in these five points? In no wise; debates indeed there were
about the mysterious point of Praedestination, in which those Popish Divines
which went the way that Pelagius did of old and Arminius of late, prevailed,
whilst use was made only of corrupt carnal humane reason; but when the
testimonies of Scripture came to be examined, they were manifestly overcome, as
Doctor Heylin himself tells us out of the incomparable Servits Hist. page 15.
The same Doctor confesses that the Decrees about this and the points connexed
with it were so contrived, that every one might understand them in his own
sense, so as to give no distaste to the Dominican Friars and their adherents,
page 26. Indeed the ancienter Popes of Rome, (notwithstanding the great
pretense they made to infallibility,) were wiser than to take upon them, to
determine the differences betwixt the Dominicans and Franciscans, which are
almost the same with the differences betwixt the Contra-Remonstrant and
Remonstrant. Micraelius in his Hetorodoxia Calviniana disputatione quinta,
shall be my witness for this; who after that he had told the World how much
this question had vexed the Pontifician Schools, How God was not the cause of
sin, seeing he was the cause of those actions, as to their substance, unto
which moral pravity is conjoined? thus expresses himself, Parag. 6. Haec cum
ita disceptabantur, factum est tandem Lovanii in Belgio, ut circa 86 annum
superioris saeculi, gravissim^ de Praedestinatione, inter Dominicanos and
Iesuitas lites extiterint, quas quidem Nuncius Apostolicus ad tempus composuit;
sed postquam Iesuita Lud. Molina librum de concordia liberi arbitrii and
donorum gratiae evulgarat, res ad ipsum pontificem delata est: qui tamen
arbitrum se veritus est interponere, and suam cuique permisit sententiam. At
which I do the less wonder, because I find that the Pope had used the same
artifice in a controversy depending betwixt the Franciscans and Dominicans,
about the Virgin Mary's being, or not being, conceived free from Original sin:
alleging the Spirit (of whose perpetual assistance Popes are wont so proudly
to boast) nondum mysterii tanti penetralia Ecclesiae suae patefecisse. A brief,
but accurate story of this transaction, is to be seen in the learned Apology of
Dr. Andrew Rivet, for the most Holy Virgin, l. 1. c. 6, 7, 8. Yea, something
may be observed in the Council of Trent, which makes not a little for the
Calvinists, viz. that not Calarinus (as the Doctor p. 15.) but Catharinus
invented a middle way, That God, of his goodness, had elected some few, whom he
will save absolutely; to whom he has prepared most potent, effectual, and
infallible means; and that of these, thus singularly privileged, all the
places of Scripture, which do ascribe all to God and which show infallibility,
are to be understood; and that the number of these is certain with God. Yea,
Balthazar Meisner in his Anthropologia Sacra, de gratia Dei and
Praedestinatione disp. 11, yields, in the examples of Paul and Abram, a grace
extraordinary, efficacious infallibly and always, which so calls a man that, as
it were, by a necessary will and willing necessity, he is converted unto Faith
and the Church, of which no cause can be assigned, but the will of God, the
simple and absolute will of God, which cannot be hindered, is always most
efficacious. From these two men's acknowledgements and confessions I infer, that
seeing some are absolutely elected and converted by an insuperable grace,
therefore absolute election and grace insuperable are not contrary to Divine
Wisdom or Goodness or Justice, do not destroy the Liberty of man's Will, and
therefore are but weakly impugned when they are impugned by arguments drawn
from these Topics. But if that will do the Doctor any courtesy, or if he
think it any credit to his cause, I will grant him, that tha^ part of the
Papacy which is most Papal, does favor his Arminianism: and not many years ago
a Pope, as wicked as ever sat in the Chair, when he was come to his dotage,
was prevailed with to make use of his infallibility, and to condemn the
Doctrine of Iansenius. A copy of his Anathemaes and condemnations I have
thought meet to insert, as I find them in Maresius, the Professor of Groaning,
his Apology for the Iansenists.

Innocent, Bishop, Servant of the Servants of God, to all faithful people in
Christ, Health, and Apostolical benediction.

Whereas upon occasion of publishing a Book Entitled, Augustinus Cornelii
Jansenii Episcopi Iprensis, amongst other opinions of his, there did arise (
especially in France) a controversy upon five of them, many of the Bishops of
France did solicit us, to consider those propositions presented to us, and to
give our certain and definite sentences touching every one of them.

The Tenor of the said propositions is as follows.
The first, Some precepts of God are impossible to just men, willing and
endeavoring according to the present power which they have; Grace also is
wanting to them, whereby they might be possible.

The second, In the state of lapsed nature, there is no resistance made to
interior grace.

The third, To merit and demerit in the state of lapsed nature, there is not
required in man liberty from necessity, but liberty from co-action is
sufficient.

The fourth, The Semipelagians did admit the necessity of interior preventing
grace to every Act, even to the beginning of Faith; and in this they were
Heretics, because they would have that grace to be such as the will of man
might resist or obey.

The fifth, It is Semipelagianism to say; that Christ died or shed his blood,
for all men without exception.

We, to whom among the manifold cares which daily molest our mind, it lies
chiefly upon our heart, that the Church of God committed unto us from above
(the errors of wicked opinions being purged) may safely pass the warfare, and
as it were a Ship in a calm Sea, the Waves and storms of all tempests being
allayed, may safely sail and arrive unto the wished for Haven of salvation.

For the weightiness of these five Propositions tendered to us, as aforesaid, we
have caused every of them to be diligently examined by diverse Doctors in
Divinity, before certain Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church, and have maturely
considered their suffrages, delivered both by voice and writing, and have heard
the same Doctors, in several Congregations held before us, largely discoursing
upon them, and every of them. Whereas from the beginning of this discussion, we
enjoined, both publicly and privately, the prayers of many faithful Christians
to be made, for the obtaining of the Divine assistance; afterward the same
being more fervently renewed, and the assistance of the Holy Spirit by us
carefully implored; at last by the Divine Majesty of God assisting, we
proceeded to this underwritten declaration and determination.

The first, of the aforesaid Propositions (Some precepts of God are impossible
to just men, willing and endeavoring according to the present power they have,
they wanting grace by which they might be possible,) we declare to be
temerarious, impious, blasphemous, condemned under Anathema, and Heretical, and
we declare it to be such.

The second (That in the state of lapsed nature there is no resistance made to
interior grace,) we declare to be Heretical, and as such we condemn it.

The third, (That to merit and demerit in the state of lapsed nature there is
not required in man liberty from necessity, but liberty from co-action is
sufficient,) we declare to be Heretical, and we condemn it as such.

The fourth, (That the Semipelagians did admit the necessity of interior
preventing grace to every Act, even to the beginning of Faith; and in this they
were Heretics, because they would have that grace to be such as the will of
man might resist or obey,) we declare false and Heretical, and as such we
condemn it.

The fifth, (That it is Semipelagianism to say, that Christ died, or shed his
blood, for all men without exception,) we declare false, temerarious,
scandalous, and ( being understood in that sense, that Christ should have died
only for the salvation of the Predestined) impious, blasphemous,
contumelious, derogatory to Divine goodness and Heretical, and as such we
condemn it.

We therefore command all faithful people in Christ of either Sex, that they do
not presume to think, teach or preach otherwise, of the said propositions, than
is contained in this our present Declaration and Determination, under the
censures and penalties against Heretics and their Favorers expressed in Law.
We likewise command all Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ordinaries
of Places, Inquisitors of Heretical pravities, that they repress and restrain
all the Contradictors and Rebels whatsoever, by the censures and penalties
aforesaid and all other opportune remedies, by Law, fact, and usage, the help
also of secular power being called in hereunto, if need be. We do not intend
nevertheless by this Declaration and Definition made upon the five Propositions
aforesaid, any way to approve other opinions which are contained in the
aforesaid Book of Cornelius Jansenius. Given at Rome at St. Mary Major, in the
year of the Incarnation of our Lord 1653. Kal. Jun. the ninth year of our
Pontificat.

Hi. Datarius. G. Gualterius. P. Ciampinus.


In the year of the Nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ 1653, the sixth
indiction, the ninth year of the Pontificat of our most Holy Father in Christ,
and our Lord Innocent, by the Divine Providence Pope X. the ninth day of the
Month of June, the aforesaid constitution was affixed and published, in Eccles.
Lateranens. ac Basilicae principis Apostolorum de urbe, necnon Cancellariae
Apostolicae valvis, ac in acie campi Florae, per me Hieronymum Marcellum
Sanctissimi D. N. Papae cursorem.

Pro D. Mag. Corsurum.
P. Paulus Desiderius Cursor.

A good part of this condemnation of Iansenius is mentioned by Arnoldus
Poelenbergius, in an Epistle to Christianus Hartsoeckerus, Epistolae
Ecclesiasticae, page 845: in which he pretends (good man) to be grieved that
the Pontificians, who do too often deviate from Scripture when they attribute
too much to Tradition, should sometimes be more wise in Divine things than our
Reformed Divines, who yet acknowledge Scripture alone to be the norma and
regula of our faith. And that the poor Iansenists might have no starting hole,
by slipping into which to avoid the force of this condemnation, the Jesuit did
put a new Article into his Creed the 12 th. of December 1661, Datur in Ecclesia
Romana controversiarum fidei index infallibilis extra Concilium Generale, tam
in quaestionibus juris quam facti. Unde post Innocentii X. Alex. VII.
constitutiones, fide Divina credi potest, librum cui titulus est, Augustinus
Jansenii, esse Haereticum, and quinque propositiones ex eo decerptas, esse
Jansenii, and in sensu Jansenii damnatas.

Whether the Doctor has so many and so firm Friends among the Protestants,
must now be tried. But we shall not presently fall upon the Augustan
Confession: It would be injurious to the Evangelical Churches in the Valleys of
Piedmont, if we should take no notice of their Confessions; Churches, of which
Doctor Heylin was pleased, in a former Edition of his Geography, to say, That
they did never bow the knee to Baal: of which the Friar Rayneirius Saccon,
writing against them Anno 1254, confesses, That they continued from the times
of the Apostles. In Mr. Moreland's History of these Churches, I find page 39,
40, A brief Confession of Faith, made with general consent, by the Ministers
and Heads of Families of the Churches of the Valleys of Piedmont, assembled in
Angrogne Sept. 12. Anno 1532, but said to contain that Doctrine which was
delivered to them by Tradition from their Forefathers. In that Confession
these are three Articles: 1. All those that have been and shall be saved, have
been elected of God before the foundation of the world. 2. It is impossible
that those that are appointed to salvation, should not be saved. 3. Whosoever
upholdeth Free Will, denies absolutely Predestination, and the Grace of God.


I find also page 61, etc. another Confession of the said Churches, which was
published but in the year 1655, consisting of thirty three Articles; whereof
the eleventh is this:

God saves from Corruption and Condemnation, those whom he has chosen from
the foundation of the World, not for any Disposition, Faith, or Holiness that
he saw in them, but of his mere Mercy in Jesus Christ his Son, passing by all
the rest, according to the irreprehensible reason of his Free Will and Justice.
The twenty sixth is as follows:

The Church cannot err, nor be annihilated, but must endure for ever; and all
the Elect are upheld and preserved by the power of God in such sort, that they
all persevere in Faith unto the end, and remain united in the holy Church as so
many living members thereof.

In the close of this they protest, That they do agree in sound Doctrine with
all the Reformed Churches of France, Great Britain, the Low Countries Germany,
Switzerland, Bohemia, Poland, Hungary, and others, (as it is represented by
them in their Confessions;) as also we receive the Consession of Augsburg:
Therefore certainly they did not apprehend that their opinions about
Predestination, Grace, Perseverance, had any thing in them contrary to either
the Articles of the Church of England, or to the Augustan Confession; both
which, it seems, are by Doctor Heylin thought to be Anti-Calvinistical, but
without any reason, as shall (God willing) be made to appear.

Dr. H. Page 30, 31.
Here the Doctor tells us, That we need not take much pains in looking after
the judgment of the Lutheran Churches, which come so near to that of the
Church of Rome, as to be reckoned for the same. That he may not seem to be
mistaken in making them the same, he does page 32, 33, extract out of the
Augustan Confession the Doctrine of the Lutheran Churches in the five points,
only adding one clause to the first Article, out of the writings of Melancthon
and other learned men of that persuasion. Well, what is this addition? God
beholding all Mankind in their wretched condition, was pleased to make a
general conditional Decree of Predestination, under the condition of Faith and
Perseverance; and a special absolute Decree of Electing those to Life whom he
foresaw would Believe and Persevere under the Means and Aids of Grace, Faith
and Perseverance; and a special absolute Decree of Condemning them whom he
foresaw to abide Impenitent in their Sins.

Ans. Would not any Man in the World think that we should have had the places
quoted out of Melancthon, or some other Lutheran Divine, in which these things
are affirmed? But no such quotation is made, or so much as attempted; only in
the Margin we are referred to Appello Evangelium, cap 4. as if all that Mr.
Playfer faith concerning the Lutherans were as true as Gospel, and must be
believed without any examination. Mr. Playfer has four considerable Arguments
against this, which with him is the fourth Opinion, Why are none of them
answered? For my part I see not what there is in these passages, which the most
strait, narrow-throated Calvinist may not swallow; for it is not here said,
that there is no other Decree of Election but that mentioned: and the Calvinist
will readily acknowledge, that God has decreed to save Mankind under the
condition of Faith and Perseverance; but he will also maintain, that there is
another Decree by which God has determined to bestow Faith, and Perseverance
in Faith, on a certain number, viz. all his Elect. Bate us but the impropriety
of the phrases used in this addition, which is so great, that the Decrees of
Election and Reprobation seem confounded with Justification and Condemnation,
and we shall all of us subscribe to it.

But to speak more distinctly about the Augustan Confession, The composition of
it we owe to the joint endeavors of Luther, Melancthon, and Pomeranus, (
Iustus Jonas being absent when these three set about the work;) but Melancthon
did most in the business, a man whose both Learning and Piety were admirable,
but being of too timorous a spirit, he so drew up the Confession, which is also
called an Apology, as that he seemed to some not to keep distance enough from
the Papists, which made his Friends blame him, nor had it any good effect upon
his Adversaries: Pope Pius V. in an Epistle to Sigismund King of Poland thus
writing, Augustana Confusio (so he calls it, and not Confessio,) etsi similis
est caeteris Haeresium pravitatibus, tamen ob eam causam periculosior est, quod
levius quam caeterae a Catholicae Fidei professione declinans, speciem quandam
Religionis retinere videatur; eo perniciosior aliis, quo venenum ejus occultius
latet, nec eminet for as: so true is the common saying, Media via, neque amicos
parit, neque inimicos tollit. Grotius indeed tells us in his Votum pro pace,
that the Anathema's of the Trent Council were not directed against the Augustan
Confession, but against the sayings of some private Persons; and that Charles
the Emperor did intercede at Rome, that the Augustan Confession might not be
put among prohibited Books: But in this, as in most things that did pass
between him and Rivet, he does but delude his Reader. No man that reads over
the Trent Canons can choose but see, that some of them are directed against the
Augustan Confession. As for the Emperor, that ever he made any such
Intercession, it appears not; If he did, he had sure altered his mind, when he
commanded that a Confutation of the Augustan Confession should be written: At
least this is certain, that the Emperor's Intercession availed not; for it is
sufficiently known, that the Confession is put among the prohibited Books. I
have by me an Index of prohibited Books, Printed at Antwerp 15^0, but approved
by Pope Pius IV. Anno 1554, in which I find prohibited, page 16, Apologia
Confessionis Augustanae; Augustanae Confessionis Ecclesiarum causae quare and
amplexae sint, and retinendam ducant, suam doctrinam: and page 21, Confessio
Fidei Augustanae. Nor is it any wonder that the Augustan Confession is
prohibited, seeing the Epistles of Isaac Causabon (who endeavored to oblige the
Roman Catholics as far as he could, without forsaking the communion of the
Reformed Churches) are forbidden also. Doctor Rivet, in his Annotations on
Grotius's Cassander, only tells us, that he had heard it so related; but
Hornebeck had met with the Papal Bull it self, and exemplifieth it to the full,
in his Disputation upon the Bull of Pope Innocent V. page 177, 178. It is most
certain, that this Confession was never intended (whatever use be made of it
now) to be a perpetual rule, or symbol for all Protestant Churches; for it was
made in great haste. Scripsi (says Melancthon in an Epistle to Flachius)
Augustanam Confessionem tunc, cum haberem reprehensores multos, adjutorem
neminem. Melchior Adam in his life tells us, he would often say, That if he
were to make, or draw up that Confession again, he would use more accurateness
than before he could possibly use. Melancthon himself in an Epistle to Ioachim.
Camerarius, says, Ego mutabam* and resingeham pleraque quotidie: Plura etiam
mutatu^us, si nostri (...) permisissent. And in an Epistle to Luther, In
Apologia quotidie multa mutamus. But take the Confession as now it is, there is
nothing in it which a Calvinist may not well digest. I before noted that the
Piedmont Churches, after they had most plainly declared themselves for absolute
election and perseverance, do openly profess, that they embr^ced and adhered
unto this Augustan Confession. Calvin himself, in an Epistle to Schallingius,
Anno 1557 writes thus, N^c vero Augustanam Confessionem repudio; cui pri^em
v^lens ac l^bens subscripsi, sicut eam Author ipse interpretatus est. Zanchy
also subscribed it with this condition, Mado Orthodoxe intelligatur: which
plainly shows, that he thought it capable of an Orthodox interpretation. If any
of the Calvinistical persuasion have scrupled subscription, it has been only
on the account of the Sacramentarian Controversy, which has no connection with
the five Points that we are now enquiring into. Our Quinquarticular Historian
confesses, that in the Augustan Confession nothing is said about
Predestination; but we are told that Melancthon, in his writings, has declared
himself not to side with Mr. Calvin, but rather with Arminius in that Point. So
Grotius had boasted of Melancthon; but Lubbertus, in his Answer to the Pietas
Grotii, makes bold to tell him, that he was mistaken, Erras si Melancthonem
stare a remonstrantibus existimas. To prove this he alleges Melancthon on the
9 th to the Romans, Cur nos vocavit ad Evangelium, and non vocavit Alexandrum
Macedonem, Augustum, Socratem, etc. qui non minus civiliter vivebant quam nos?
Hic necesse est causam rejicere in voluntatem Dei, and Jacob electus est Esau
reprobatus priusquam quicquam boni vel mali f^cissent; ergo opera non erant
causa sed voluntas vocantis. Non addam hic quomodo cavillentur ista nonnulli:
Tantum hoc meminerit lector si opera secutura in vita crant causa electionis,
non licuit Apostola dicere, non ex operibus. Hence Lubbertus in^ers, that
Melancthon was of Luther's and Calvin's mind in the Doctrine of Predestination.
Therefore the Papists in their writings stick not to charge upon Melancthon, as
well as others, that Blasphemy of making God the Author of Sin. But seeing
Learned Men do so differ about Melancthon's judgment in this matter, I could
not be satisfied till I had made some further enquiry. To the Epistles of
Calvin I betook my self, and read over all those that passed betwixt Melancthon
and him; in which I found, 1. that the authority of Melancthon had been
objected to Calvin, disputing about the secret will and providence of God, on
which account Calvin was much troubled: This I gather from Calvin's Letter to
Melancthon, dated at Geneva the 4 th of the Calends of Dec. Anno 1552, Quidam
nebulones, quum nobis de gratuita Dei electione, and misera humani arbitrii
servitute, litem moverent, and public tumultuarentur, nihil ad nos gravandos
habuerunt magis plausibile nominis tui praetextu, quum experti essent, quam
nobis promptum esset, quaecunque ingerebant commenta refellere, hoc scil.
artificio nos obruere tentabant, nisi velimus palam abs te disc^dere; and ea
quidem servata fuit a nobis moderatio, ut minim^ extorserint quod astute
captabant: professi ergo sumus* ego and collegae omnes mei, eundem qu^ tendis
in doctrina scopum nobis esse propositum. 2. Melancthon did very studiously
decline the ^ull declaration of his judgment concerning Praedestination and
Freewill, and almost through all his writings so delivers himself, as to give
men occasion to think, that he acknowledges no other Decree, but only that
general Decree, viz. to save all Believers. So much may be gathered from the
before mentioned Epistle: Me non leviter pungit, quae in nostra docendi
ratione, nimis palam conspicitur repugnantia. Equidem non ignoro, si quid detur
hominum authoritati, long aequius esset, ut tibi subscribam, quam ut tu in
sententiam meam descendas: verum id non agitur, neque a piis Christi ministris
id optandum est; hoc scilicet quaeri utrinque decet, ut consentiamus in puram
Dei veritatem. Me autem ut ingenue fatear, religio impedit, ne tibi in hac
doctrinae part accedam, quod nimis philosophice de libero arbitrio disputare
videris, and in electione tractanda nihil aliud habere propositum, nisi ut te
ad communem hominum sensum accommodes: neque hallucinationi attribui hoc
potest, quod homo ac^tus and pr^d^ns and in Scriptura probe exercitatus,
electionem Dei cum promissionibus con^undis, quae sunt universae; nihil enim
magis notum est quam verbi praedication^m omnibus promiscue esse comm^nem, sed
fidei Spiritum solis electis singulari privilegio donari, etc. 3. Mr. Calvin
ever thought his Friend Melancthon rather to conceal his consent with him, than
to dissent from him: So much we may collect from another of Calvin's Epistles,
bearing date at Geneva 6. Call. of Dec. 1554. Scribebam nuper de illo doctrinae
capite, in quo magis sersum tuum dissimulas, quam a nobis dissentis. Q^id enim
aliud de homine acerrimi judicii, coelestisque doctrinae peritissimo arbitrer?
q^um neminem mediocriter in sacris versatum lat^at, quod ipse quasi ignotum
tegis; and tamen ^unditus perit gratuitae Dei misericordiae cognitio nisi hoc
tenemus, mero Dei beneplacito a reprobis discerni fideles, quos in salutem
eli^ere v^luit; nisi and hoc deinde constat, fidem ab arcana Dei ^lectione
manare, quia Spiritu suo illuminat, quos elig^re antequam nascerentur ei visum
est, and adoptionis gratia in familiam suam inserit. Hanc doctrinam a summo
Theologo convelli, quam absurdum sit, pro tua prudentia expende; manifestum
certe dissidium in scriptis nostris notari, pessimi exempli esse vides. 4. All
that Mr. Calvin desired was but this, that Melancthon would declare his
judgment about these matters, not questioning but it would be agreeable to his
own. Calv. ad Mel. 3. Non. Martii 1555, Nique tamen importunius urgeo, sed
quoad pace tua licet, etiam atque etiam te rogatum velim, ut tecum de q^ibus
scripsi, tacitus saltem expendas; sic enim operam te daturum confido, ut de
gratuita piorum electione sincerior quam autehac docendi forma inter nos mutuo
conveniat. 5. I found an Epistle of Melancthon's, in which he declares to Mr.
Calvin, that he had received his Book De libero arbitrio against Pighius,
thanking him for the great commendations bestowed upon himself in the Preface
to the Book. In the close of that Epistle he speaks something of the question
of Predestination, still holding to his old way of discoursing concerning it,
which he conceived to be most plain and fittest for the people; but withal
affirming, that what he held, had nothing in it of contrariety to, or
inconsistency with, what Mr. Calvin held. His own words are these, Quod ad
quaestionem de praedestinatione, habebam Tubingae amicum, doctum hominem,
Franciscum Stadianum, qui dicere solebat, se utrumque probare, evenire omnia ut
divina providentia decrevit, and tamen esse contingentia, sese haec conciliare
non posse. Ego cum hypothesin hanc tencam, Deum non esse causam peccati, nec
velle peccatum, postea contingentiam in hac nostra infirmitate judicii admitto,
ut sciant rudes, Davidem sua voluntate ultro ruere, and eundem sentio, cum
haberet Spiritum Sanctum, potuisse eum retinere, and in ea lucta aliquam esse
voluntatis actionem. Haec etiamsi subtilius disputari possunt, tamen ad
regendas mentes hoc modo proposita accommodata videntur. Accusemus ipsi nostram
voluntatem cum labimur, non quaeramus in Dei consilio causam, and contra cum
nos erigamus; sciamus Deum and velle opitulari and adesse luctantibus, (...),
inquit Basilius, (...): excitetur ergo cura in nobis, and laudetur Dei immensa
bonitas; quum and promisit auxilium and praestat, sed petentibus, ut inquit
Dominus, hoc est, iis qui promissionem intuentur. Nam a verbo Dei ordiendum
est, nec repugnandum promissioni, sed ei assentiam^r, nec disputemus antea,
tunc nos adsensuros esse cum arcanum decretum Dei nobis monstratum fuerit,
adsentientem autem Deus adjuvat, qui per verbum Dei est efficax. Haec non
scribo ut tibi tradam quasi dictata homini and eruditissimo ac peritissimo
exercitiorum pietatis. Et quidem scio haec cum tuis congruere, sed sunt (...)
and ad usum accommodata. By which it appears, that Melancthon was of his
Friends Stadian and Calvin's mind, but was loath to declare so much, because he
saw the point was intricate and perplexed, and like to procure him much
opposition: which was the cause also why he did not care to publish his mind
about the Sacramentary Controversy; though it be now well known, that, in his
latter days, he was as much against Consubstantiation, as Calvin himself:
therefore the Lutherans, or rather Anti-Lutherans, do some of them distinguish
betwixt public and private. Philip, and Benedict Morgensterus fear not to call
Melancthon, the Plague of the German Churches, Epist. ad Schlusselburgium.


If any would know how Calvin resented Melancthon's Answer about Free Will and
Predestination, he may be informed from Calvin's Letter, bearing date June 28.
1545. De responso tuo magnam habeo tibi gratiam; simul etiam de humanitate non
vulgari, quam sibi abs te exhibitam fuisse Claudius testatur. Qualis erga me
futurus ess^s, inde conjecturam facio, quod meos tam benign comiterque
accipias. Deo autem maximas gratias agere non desino, qui dedit ut in ejus
quaestionis summa de qua rogati eramus, sententiae nostrae congruerent; tametsi
enim paululum est discriminis in particulis quibusdam, de re tamen ipsa inter
nos optime convenit. Yet it seems by the former Letters, which are of a later
date, that others did object Melancthon to Calvin, which made him so earnest
with Melancthon to deliver his mind more clearly and plainly. If this give not
the Reader so ample satisfaction as he desires, he may please to consult such
as have professedly made it their business to prove, that Melancthon was no
Arminian in the five controverted Points. Among whom I principally find two
recommended by the Learned Rivet in his Apologetick for Peace; viz. Sopi^g^us
in Apolog^tica responsione ad bonam ^idem Sibrandi Lubberti a page 92, ad page
106: and Gaspar Peucerus, the Son-in-law of Melancthon, who, in an Epistle of
his to Iacobus Monavius, by many Arguments labors to prove, that the Opinion
of his Father and the Geneva Divines may easily be reconciled, and that they
differ not so much in the things delivered, as in the way and manner of
expressing and delivering them. If any one think this too much trouble, let him
consult Melancthon's Epistle to Br^ntius, among those Printed at Leyden 1648,
page 379, Thou subtly and afar off, out of Predestination gatherest, that to
every one his degree is distributed; and thou reasonest rightly: But I in the
whole Apology avoided that long and inexplicable Controversy concerning
Predestination; I every where so speak, as if Predestination did follow our
Faith and Works; and I do this on purpose, for I will not trouble Consciences
with these inexplicable Labyrinths.

Hunnius is thought to be, and that not without cause, a very Rigid Lut^eran;
yet hear what he says in the beginning of his Theses, Quod in divinis and
spiritualibus rebus nullum sit arbitrium humanae voluntatis, sed res de solo
titulo, est id in nostris Ecclesiis extra dubitationem positum. Et page 10, In
his ne modiculum quidem Illud, de quo Erasmus disputat, superest homini suis
viribus relicto; sed sunt haec unius ac solius Spiritus Sancti virtuti and
operationi in solidum adscribenda. I know some, and Doctor Heylin for one page
6, do make as if Luther did retract his Book De servo arbitrio; But that is a
most gross mistake, there being no Book that he did more glory in than that and
his Catechism; as is evident by a Letter written to Capito in the year 1539,
which was but 7. years before his death, De tomis meorum librorum dispo^endis
frigidior sum and segnior; eo quod Saturnina same percitus magis cuperem omnes
d^voratos: nullum enim agnosco meum justum librum, nisi sort De servo
arbitrio, and Catechismum. The Duke of Saxony in the Preface to the Corp. Doct.
writes, That they are bewitched with the frauds of the Devil, who say that
Luther 's Book was ever retracted. Schlusselburgh in his Catalogue of
Heretics, lib. 4. page 254, affirms, That the evil spirit cannot excogitate a
more evident lie than this, that Luther recanted his opinion De servo arbitrio.
The Divines of Saxony, in Collequio Alden. account all them Thieves, Robbers,
and Sacrilegious Persons, who repudiate the Book De servo Arbitrio, or
endeavor to alienate the Lutheran Churches from it. Now, I think, they that
hold with Calvin in the point of Free Will, cannot (if they will be true to
their own Principle) dissent from him in the point of Predestination.

Obj. But the Augustan Confession plainly condemns the Anabaptists, who teach,
That a man once justified, can by no means lose the Holy Ghost: Therefore
certainly the Composers of it did not hold Perseverance in such a way as is
commonly taught in the Schools of the Calvinists.

Ans. I must confess this is a specious Objection, and such as at the first
reading of it puzzled me; I understood not presently, how the Anabaptists could
with truth be charged to hold, that a man once justified, can by no means lose
the Holy Ghost; it being rather the opinion of the Anabaptists, that a man once
justified, may lose the Holy Ghost: Which made me think, there was some mistake
in the printed Copies which we do commonly use; or else, that this was some
expression that dropped from Melancthon in haste. I looked over the seventeen
Articles that were drawn up by Luther, out of which Melancthon composed the
Augustan Confession; in them I found not this expression, nor any like it: But
yet I dared not to lay much stress upon this my conceit, because I knew the
Anabaptists were a giddy Crew, and might differ among themselves as well as
from others; and upon examination, I found that there were Valentinian
Anabaptists in those days, who taught that when once a man was regenerate and
had obtained the Holy Ghost, he might live as he listed and do what he would,
for sin could not hurt him. Such Anabaptists, the Calvinists do as perfectly
abhor and would as soon condemn, as the most violent Lutherans: for Calvinists
do not affirm, that let regenerate men do what they list, and take what courses
they please, they shall continue in Gods grace and favor: but they teach, that
he who has the spirit, walks after the spirit, and shall by God be made so
to do. When it was objected by Bertius to Crocius, the learned Professor of
Br^me, that he, in maintaining Perseverance, did contradict the eleventh
Article of the Augustan Confession, how does he clear himself? Thus: de Persev.
Sanct. l. 5. c. 5. p. 585, Etsi Articulus undecimus confessionis istius damnet
Anabaptistas, qui negant semel justificatos iterum poss^ amittere Spiritum
Sanctum, tam^n, id meam ment^m non tangit; quippe quae non vult idem quod
Anabaptistae: Horum enim multi omnis generis flagitiis se audacter obstringunt,
more Borboritarum, nihilque se inquinare opinantur, quod Spiritum Sanctum
habeant, quomodocunque vivant. Ab isto ^^^^re horret animus. Thus this learned
Professor. And if there were nothing else, this one Argument would be to me
sufficient to prove, that in the Augustan Confession there is nothing contrary
to the conceptions of the Zuinglians or the Calvinists about the five Points,
viz. That the very year before that Confession was presented to Caesar there
was a Colloquy betwixt the Lutherans and Zuinglians, in which it must not be
denied, but that there was too great and scandalous a difference betwixt them
in the Sacramentary Doctrine: Nor could it well be conceived that it should be
otherwise; for Luther had written to the Landgrave of Hesse, that the
Helvetians would scarcely be brought to acknowledge their errors, and he for
his part could not possibly lay aside the opinion which he had embraced; and as
soon as he met with Bucer thought meet to bestow no better complement on him
than this, that he was Homo nequam, and nebulo, i. e. in plain English, A very
Knave: But yet, both by what Philip Melancthon writes to John Duke of Saxony,
and by what Oecolampadius writes to Bertholdus a Preacher at Breme, it appears,
that there was a sweet agreement betwixt the Divines on both sides about other
matters: Fourteen Articles were subscribed to, the sixth whereof is this, quod
Fides sit donum Dei, etc. Faith is the gift of God: which we obtain by no
precedent works or merits, nor attain by our own proper strength; but the holy
Spirit gives and works Faith in our hearts, when we hear the Gospel or word
of Christ: Which if our Arminians would heartily acknowledge, who is he that
would deny them the right hand of fellowship?

Moreover, the later Brood of Lutherans may do well to observe, that harsher
speeches do not occur in any Calvinist than are to be found in Luther himself;
and that he, as well as John Calvin, was charged to make God the Author of Sin,
and to put contrary wills in God, as may be seen 2. Tom. Epist. page 281.

Is not this enough? Why then let us proceed further, even to that second
meeting at Torga, held, as I take it, in the year 1576, in which these six men
were Presidents, Iacobus Andreas, Chemnitius, Selveccerus, Chytraeus, Musculus,
Cerverus, and composed that Book which is called Liber concordiae, which
contains in it, besides the Apostolical, Nicene, Athanasian Creeds, the
Augustan Confession, the Smalcaldian Articles, the two Catechisms of Luther,
etc. a solid, full, clear repetition and declaration of those Articles of the
Augustan Confession, about which there had been any controversy among Divines.
If the Arminians should have recourse to this Concord, all which they would get
might (as we say) be put into their eyes, and they see never a whit the worse:
The Doctrine of Free Will is laid down as Calvinistically as one would wish.
For, 1. It Is said, that the understanding and reason of man are altogether
blind in things spiritual. 2. That the will of man not yet renewed, is not only
averse to God, but also inimicous unto God, so as that a man not renewed, can
only will and desire and delight in those things which are evil and repugnant
to the Divine Will; and that as much as a dead Body is unable to vivifie or
restore it self unto a corporal life, so much is a man who is dead in sins and
trespasses, unable to bring himself to a spiritual life. 3. The Composers of
that Concord do reject expressly the Error of the Pelagians and Semipelagians,
and the Opinion of those who teach, that, A man not renewed, by reason of his
Free Will, is indeed weaker than to be able to make the beginning of his own
Conversion, or to turn himself to God by his own proper strength, and obey the
Law of God with his whole heart; but yet, if the Spirit of God by the preaching
of the Word have laid the foundation of Conversion, and offered his Grace in
the Word preached unto man, then man's Will does contribute something, though it
be but very little, to Conversion, by helping it on, and cooperating to the
perfection and complement of it. 4. The said Composers do reject the speeches
of those, who say, that The Will of man before Conversion, in Conversion, after
Conversion, does repugn the holy Spirit; and that The Holy Spirit is given to
those who do on set purpose, and pertinaciously resist him. These speeches they
reject, because God, in the conversion of men, of unwilling makes them willing.
5. They further judge, that those speeches of the ancients, Deus trahit sed
volentem trahit, and Hominis voluntas in conversione non est otiosa sed aliquid
agit, are not agreeable to the form of sound words, and therefore that we must
abstain from them.


As to the Doctrine of Predestination, it is so soberly and modestly laid down,
that a Calvinist may make a very fair interpretation of it, and subscribe unto
it. This I had thought to have shown, but I am prevented by the incomparable
Zanchy, who descanting upon the agreement made betwixt the Divines and
Professors of the Church and School of Argentine, Anno 1563, concerning the
Divine Prescience and Predestination, does also teach us how to interpret the
Book of Concord: Which yet, all things considered, might better have been
called the Book of Discord; so much variance did it create among those, whose
Wisdom and Piety it would have been, to unite against the common Enemies of
Reformation.

Here it may not be amiss to take notice, that when Marbachius, about the years
1561, 1562, did accuse Zanchy's Doctrine of Predestination as heretical, the
judgment of Churches and Universities and private learned Men was desired; and
the University and Church of Marpurg, the School and Church of Heidelberg, the
Church of Scaphusinm, the Tigurine Church and School, the Church and University
of Basil, besides many private Persons, did justify him; as may be seen in his
second Book of Miscellanies, page 79, 80, etc.

Object. But do not many of the Lutherans decry Calvin's Doctrine of
Predestination as injurious to God, and destructive of the power and practice
of godliness?

Ans. I must needs acknowledge they do, and that at such a rate and height,
that they have in virulence exceeded most of the Papists; Like deaf adders they
seem to have stopped their ears against the voice of all those who would have
charmed them into any moderation; and to have that always written upon their
hearts, which once dropped from Luther's Pen in a fit of passion, Blessed is
the man who has not gone in the counsel of the Sacramentarians, Epist. ad
Jacob. praepositum Brem.
nor stood in the way of the Zuinglians, nor sat in the seat of the Tigurines.

The first set and solemn Dispute I find betwixt Lutherans and Cal^inists about
Predestination happened in the year 1586, and was managed principally by the
learned Theodore Beza, and Iacobus Andreas (a man of mean birth, but advanced
at last to be Chancellor of Tubing;) the place Mompelgard; the occasion such,
as that no good success could be expected from it. Frederick the Prince was
from his youth trained up and instructed in the Ubiquitarian Doctrine; but by
going to Berne and Geneva, and frequent hearing the Lectures and Sermons of
Beza, began to have some more favorable thoughts of the Calvinists, and
therefore gave entertainment to some French exiles at Mompelgard: But as soon
as it was buzzed into his ear, that the Duke of Wittenberg had no Heir male,
that the Austrians would never endure him to be Successor if he favored the
Hugonots, and that he was already suspected so to do, both because he had been
at Geneva, and also because he had received and given entertainment to the
French Protestants: upon these reasons he yielded to the Conference, not to
find out truth, but to purge himself from any suspicion of being
Calvinistically affected. I would not have charged so great a Prince with so
carnal a design, but that Scultetus, in the History of his own life page 28,
assures me, that To^sanus told all this in his hearing to Pezelius. And indeed
by reading the Conference it self, as related by Lucas Osiander, I found reason
to suspect some such design: for whereas the Prince in his Letters missive
inviting to the Conference* mentioned no other cause of it but the unhappy
controversy about the Lords Supper; Beza and his Associates, must at the
Conference be put upon it, unpreparedly, to discourse about Predestination, and
the Prince, as if he could not in conscience endure to hear Beza's blasphemies
(forsooth*) must offer to put an end to his Speech, had not Andreas (who was
confident he should be able to answer him) desired his Highness not to give him
any interruption, lest afterward it should be said, that Beza was not
sufficiently heard in so weighty and great a matter. And yet I observe, that
Andreas so declares himself about the Doctrine of Election, as that Beza saw
no reason to contradict him: Andreas his Positions are these, 1. Deus salvandos
non modo praescivit, sed etiam ab aeterno elegit, and ad vitam aeternam
praedestinavit. 2. Electio facta est in Christo, priusquam fundamenta mundi
posita sunt, h^c est ut per Christum salvarentur. 3. Salvandorum apud Deum
certus est numerus.


These things he lays down as matters that come no^ under any Dispute. Beza
contradicts not any of these, nor had he any reason to contradict them. But
Andreas says, This is the question, Whether God have so predestined his own
Elect to eternal Life, as that he has also destinated some, and the greater
part of mankind, before they were born, to eternal Condemnation; and that by
his absolute and hidden decree, so as that he would not have them repent, be
converted and saved? This he denies, and so would any Calvinist that is in his
wits, till the terms be distinguished. I do challenge all the Jesuits and
Arminians now living, to name and show me that man, who has in Print ventured
to affirm, That God did Decree to Damn any one single Person but for Sin. When
it is charged on us, that we say, God would no^ have men Repent, what is the
meaning? Is this it? that there are some whose Impenitence God resolves not to
cure, unto whom he decreed not to give the Grace of Repentance? Why who can
question this? If the meaning be, that there are some whom God never put under
an obligation to Repent, unto whom he never made Repentance a duty, I must
needs say, I am yet to learn the name of that Divine who has affirmed any such
thing. Alas! that Scholars should not distinguish betwixt Gods will of purpose
determining of events, and his legislative will determining of the creatures
duty; or once imagine that there is a contrariety betwixt these two wills. The
Conference ended, Beza desired that notwithstanding any difference, they might
still look upon one another as Brethren; which Andreas would not yield to,
offering Beza dextram humanitatis, but not dextram fraternitatis.

The sum of all that I would have observed concerning the Lutherans, is, That
the more ancient of them do not differ from the Calvinists in the Articles of
Predestination or Perseverance; the latter do differ from them somewhat (though
not so much as the Arminians) in both: yet the latter and worser sort of
Lutherans, do so lay down the Doctrine of Free Will, that they may easily be
driven to grant both absolute Election, and absolute eternal Non-election or
Preterition. For as Hornbeck well, Summa Contro. p. 726, 727, This being once
granted, that it is not by our own strength or concourse that we are converted,
but only and merely by the grace and operation of the Spirit, it follows, that
men cannot be converted but by this his grace, and that they are then only
converted when this grace is given: Now all are not converted, but some; to
some therefore, and not to all, is this grace given. Could not God give the
same grace of Conversion to others? He could doubtless, but does not. If he
does not, it is because he would not. Whatever God does not in time do, he from
all eternity decreed and purposed not to do: If God from all eternity decreed
not to give his grace, he did also, I trow, decree not to grant them salvation;
for salvation is never promised but to the converted.

By this time it appears that the Doctor and his Party have little reason to
lay any claim to the Augustan Confession, or those who glory in following it.
But if it were granted, that the Composers of this Augustan Confession did
symbolize with the Arminians in the 5 Points; yet it would be remembered, that
there are extant other Protestant Confessions as ancient as the Augustan
Confession* in which the Doctrine of Gods Decree is laid down very
Calvinistically. In the Confession of Basil, there are these words which the
Arminian ear cannot hear; Confitemur, Deum, antequam mundum creasset, eos omnes
elegisse, quos haereditate aeternae salutis donare vult.

Confitemur, hominem ab initio secundum Dei imaginem, justitiam and sanctitatem
integre factum: Est autem sua sponte lapsus in peccatum, per quem lapsum totum
humanum genus corruptum, damnationi obnoxium factum est, etiamque natura nostra
vitiata est, ac in tantam propensionem ad peccandum devenit, ut nisi eadem per
Spiritum Sanctum redintegretur, homo per se nihil boni faciat, nec velit.

I now return to the Historian, who, page 35, thus proceeds. Dr H.
For the better carrying on of my design, I must go back again to Calvin, whom
I left under suspicion of making God the Author of Sin, from which though many
have took much pains ( none more than industrious Dr. Field) to absolve and
free him; yet by his Doctrine of Praedestination, he has laid such grounds as
have involved his followers in the same guilt also.

Answ. He had left Calvin under a suspicion of making God the Author of Sin:
Why but under a suspicion? Had he not totidem terminis placed him among those,
who by necessary consequence did make God the Author of Sin? And since other
Divines, as vehement maintainers of Hierarchy and Ceremonies as himself, have
thought it their duty and the Churches interest, to clear Calvin from the
odious imputation of making God the Author of Sin, why does he take so much
pains to prove that great Reformer guilty of so horrid a Blasphemy? At least he
should have showed us, that Doctor Field and those other learned men did but
laterem lavare, by confuting what they urge for the justification of Calvin.
But not thinking meet so to do, he contents himself to bring one Reason (such
as it is) to prove that Calvin in his Doctrine of Predestination has laid such
grounds, as have involved all his Followers in the guilt of making God the
Author of Sin.

Dr. H. Ibid.
Not content to travel a known and beaten way, he must needs find out a way by
himself, which neither the Dominicans, nor any other of the Followers of S.
Augustine 's Rigors, had found out before, in making God to lay on Adam an
unavoidable necessity of falling into Sin and Misery, that so he might have
opportunity to manifest his Mercy in the Electing of some few of his Posterity,
and his Justice in the absolute Rejecting of all the rest.

Answ. A very high charge; Which if it be not made good, all must needs say,
that Dr. Heylin's heart did not much stand in awe of that Precept, Thou shall
not bear false witness. And made good it is not to be sure; for we are not so
much as directed to any of Mr. Calvin's Works in which these words, or any
words of like import, are to be found. This is sufficient Answer; but yet we
will a little scan the Opinion here laid down by our Historian, and examine
wherein the heinousness and singularity of it does lie: Is this the heinousness
of it, that man being fallen, God should design to glorify his Mercy in the
electing of some, his Justice in the passing by of others? I should (...) her
think it had been a crime to say, that God would ever have suffered the fall,
had he not known how, and actually intended, to bring about his glory by it. Is
it strange that h^ should choose to show his Mercy in electing but of a few,
and his Justice in the rejecting of the greatest part of men? To me this is not
strange; for when all are alike obnoxious, and of themselves unmeet for Mercy,
what more injustice is there in rejecting millions of men, than in rejecting of
one single man? I, but this is harsh, that God should lay on Adam an
unavoidable necessity of falling into Sin and Misery: Perhaps if it had been
said, that God had laid on Adam an avoidable necessity, it would have well
enough pleased the Doctor; but then others would have thought, that an
avoidable necessity had bordered a little too near the coasts of nonsense and
contradiction. But is it not unworthy of God, to say, that he did lay on Adam a
necessity of falling into Sin and Misery? Not unworthy of him to be sure, to
lay a necessity of being miserable in case he sinned: Some rather question,
whether it would not have been unworthy of him to let sinful man pass without
punishment, unless on some such valuable consideration as the suffering of a
Mediator? As for laying a necessity on Adam of falling into Sin, that is indeed
an uncouth phrase; and if the meaning of it be this, that God compelled Adam,
of himself unwilling, to fall, I have not charity enough to excuse it of
Blasphemy. But, as I said before, we are not told where the phrase occurs in
Mr. Calvin. This seems to be the whole of his opinion, That God did eternally
decree to permit the fall of Adam; and God having decreed to permit his fall,
it was necessary he should fall. That man, whom we shall shortly have our
Historian endeavoring to justify, Arminius, has laid it down as a truth,
That if God permits a man to will this or that, it must needs be, that no kind
of argument can move him not to will it.

Dr. H. Ibid.
In which as he can find no countenance from any of the ancient Writers, so he
pretends not to any ground for it in the holy Scriptures: for whereas some
objected on God's behalf, De certis (Disertis he should have written) verbis
non extare, That the decree of Adam 's fall, and consequently the involving of
his whole Posterity in sin and misery, had no foundation in the express words
of holy Writ, he makes no other answer to it, than a quasi vero; as if (says
he) God made and created man, the most exact piece of his workmanship, without
determining of his end.

Answ. In which as he can find. In what does the Doctor mean? Nothing till now
has he quoted out of Calvin; and that Chapter which he now refers us to, viz.
Chapter 23. lib. 3. Institut. manifests that Mr. Calvin had some countenance
from S. Augustine, who is one of the ancient Writers; for in all his Answers to
the Objections of his Adversaries, he fortifieth himself with the Authority of
Augustine. Well, however we will consider the Objection made by Calvin against
himself, and his Answer to it, Disertis verbis hoc extare negant* decretum
fuisse a Deo ut sua defectione periret Adam: That Is the Objection which our
Historian either would not or could not rightly translate. What is the Answer?
Quasi vero idem ille Deus quem Scriptura praedicat facere quaecunque vult,
ambiguo fine condiderit nobilissimam ex suis creaturis. Who sees not that the
Answer does most fully enervate the Objection? Who sees not that Master Calvin
does here quote Scripture, and Scripture from which (if it be to be understood
as he understands it) it necessarily ^ollows, that God did decree and will that
Adam should fall, and by his fall perish? He advances another Objection
against himself in the words immediately following: They say he had Free Will
to make his own Fortune, and that God decreed nothing but only to handle or
deal with him according to his d^serts. If so cold a figment be received (says
Calvin) where will be that Omnipotence of God, by which he moderates all things
according to his hidden counsel, which depends on nothing else? But
Predestination, whether they will or no, discovers it self in the Posterity
of Adam; for it did not come to pass by any natural necessity, that all should
fall from happyness by the fault of one. What makes them they will not confess
that concerning one man, which whether they will or no, they must yield of all
mankind? Why should they lose their labor by tergiversation? The Scripture
proclaims, that all Mortals, in the person of one Man, were adjudged to Eternal
Death: this, seeing it cannot be ascribed to Nature, comes plainly from the
admirable Counsel of God, etc. What say, Reader? Was it not an immodest
calumny to affirm, that Mr. Calvin pretends not to have any ground for his
Opinion in the holy Scriptures?

Dr. H. Page 36.
Whereas others had objected on God's behalf, that no such unavoidable
necessity was laid on mankind by the will of God; but rather that he was
created by God unto such a perishing estate, because he foresaw to what his own
perverseness at the last would bring him: He answers, that this Objection
proves nothing at all, or at least nothing to the purpose. Which said, he tells
us further out of Valla, though otherwise not much versed in the holy
Scriptures, that this Question seems to be superfluous, because both life and
death are rather the acts of God's will, than of his prescience or
foreknowledge, etc.

Answ. For this, and what follows, we are referred to lib. 3. cap. 23. sect. 6.
That Section I have read, and by reading of it have taken up this resolution,
that I will never trust the Historian more. The Objection is framed in these
words, Si quis causetur nullam cis inferri ne^essitatem ex Dei providentia, sed
potius ea condition ab ipso es^^ creatos, quoniam futuram eorum pravitatem
praeviderit; To which is answered, Neque nihil dicit, neque ^otum, that is, He
neither says nothing, nor yet the whole: Whose confidence besides Doctor
Heylin 's, would have sufficed to English, Neque nihil dicit, neque totum, He
either says nothing, or nothing to the purpose? As for what is added out of
Valla, it is undoubtedly a truth, that To appoint or determine life or death, is
rather an act of God's will than of his prescience: No wise man can think that
life or death do depend on the Divine prescierce.

Dr. H. Ibid.
Notwithstanding all these shifts, he is forced to acknowledge, the Decree of
Adam 's fall to be Horribile Decretum, a Cruel and Horrible Decree: as indeed
it is a Cruel and Horrible Decree, to pre-ordain so many millions to
destr^ction, and consequently unto sin, that he might destroy them.

Answ. The expression of Horribile Decretum is indeed Master Calvin's; and glad
I am that the Doctor takes notice of it, because Master Pierce, who drew him
into the lists, makes such a noise about it, as also the Lutherans and Grotius
had done long before him. As for the Lutherans, I should think Wendelin in his
Divinity, Cap. de Reprobatione, had written enough to stop their mouths; for he
there produces out of Luther (whom his Followers will scarcely acknowledge
ever to have written a word amiss) several places, in which the word Horribile
is used in the same sense that here it is by Calvin. As to Dr. Heylin and Mr.
Pierce, I wonder why they should go about to persuade the World that Calvin by
Decretum Horribile, intended a Cruel and Horrible Decree. Are Horribile and
Crudele always equivalent? God is not cruel, but righteous in all the torments
that he has laid on the fallen Angels: yet, I hope, one might venture to call
them Horribiles Cruciatus. Who would construe Horribile supplicium, which
sometimes occurreth in good Authors, Cruel Punishment? The clamor that is made
against Mr. Calvin for using the word Horribile, brings to my mind a pranck
that was played by some Sectaries in Bark-shire against their Minister, (a man
of good parts and unblameable life;) They come and ask him, What was the
meaning of the Psalmist in that phrase, so he gives his Beloved rest? He
unawares replied, It was a plaguey hard place; meaning, doubtless, no more, than
that It was an huge hard place. But upon this, these malignant Sectaries,
betake themselves to the Commissioners for ejecting of ignorant and scandalous
Ministers, and put in a complaint against their Parson, and make this one
Article, That he had spoken blasphemously, or at least irreverently of the holy
Scriptures. Some color had these Sectaries for their simplicity or malice,
because the word plaguey does male sonare: but so does not Horribile; signifying
no more, than that which does incutere horrorem. Therefore the outcries against
Calvin for using it, and applying it to the Decree of Reprobation, are very
vain, and apparently, ^rivolous and malicious.

Dr. H Ibid.
A Doctrine so injurious to God, so destructive of Piety, of such reproach
amongst the Papists, and so offensive to the Lutherans of what sort soever,
that they profess a greater readiness to fall back to Popery, than to give way
to this Predestinarian pestilence (by which name they call it) to come in
amongst them*

Answ. Whether the Doctrine of Reprobation or Rejection, as stated by Calvin
and his Followers, be injurious to God and destructive to Piety, shall be tried
in the examination of what the Doctor has compiled out of God's love to
mankind. Now, we shall be content to enquire, 1. Whether this Doctrine be of
such reproach as is here intimated among Papists? 2. Whether it be so offensive
to Lutherans?

1. If it be of reproach among the Papists, it is so without any cause:
because, men of the highest esteem and renown amongst them say as much in this
matter, as ever did Calvin or any of his Followers. This I would the rather
prove, because it will wipe off the aspersion of singularity, which was in some
former words most unjustly cast upon Calvin. Who are of greater esteem among
the Papists than Lombard, Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure, Scotus?

1. Peter Lombard, the Father of Schoolmen, named (as every Fresh-man knows)
the Master of the Sentences, who lived about the year 1140, thus determines,
Lib. 1. dis. 41. A. Cum gratiae, quae apponitur homini ad justificationem,
nulia sint merita, multo minus and ipsius praedestinationis (qua ab aeterno
Deus elegit quos voluit) aliqua possint existere merita, ita nec reprobationis,
qua ab aeterno p^aese^vit quosdam futuros malos and damnandos: sicut elegit
Jacob, and reprobavit Esau, quod non f^it pro meritis eorum quae tunc hab^bant,
quoniam nec ipsi existebant; nec propter futura merita quae praevideret, vel
illum ^legit, vel illum reprobavit.

2. Thomas Aquinas* the Angelical Doctor, Canonized by Pope John XXII, said to
have got his Knowledge more by Prayer than Labor and Industry, upon whose
Scholastical Labors are publ^shed as many Commentaries as on the holy
Scripture, is rather an Hypercalvinian than not a Calvinist in this matter of
the absolute Decree. The Supralapsarian way is, by Arminius in his Conference
with Iunius, imputed to him. Least Arminius should be thought so kind-hearted,
as to grant more than was needful, let us hear Matthaeus Rispo^is: Divus
Thomas, ubicunqu^ de ea re loquitur, semper docet, nullam esse causam
reprobationis; sed sicut praedestinatio, ita and reprobatio, voluntatem Dei ut
causam habet. Quam opinionem sequuntur omnes Thomistae, and praecipue, etc.
Lib. de Praefia* qu^st. conclu. 3. But, it may be, Reprobation is not the same
thing with Thomas and Calvin. Let Aquinas speak for himself, part. 1. q. 23.
art. 3. Reprobatio non nominat praescientiam tantum, sed aliquid addit secundum
rationem, sicut and providentia: sicut enim praedestinatio includit voluntatem
conferendi gratiam, ita reprobatio includit voluntatem permittendi aliquem
cadere in culpam, and inferendi damnationis poenam propter culpam.

3. Bonaventure, Reader among Dr. Heylin's Franciscan Friars much about the
same time that Aquinas was Reader among the Dominick-Friers, canonized by Pope
Sixtus IV, called generally the Seraphical Doctor, of so much sanctity of life
and integrity of manners and profound knowledge, that his Master, Alexander
Ales, was wont to say, In hoc uno Adam non peccavit, thus declares himself,
Lib. 1. disp. 40. q. 1. Simpliciter loquendo, quantum ad principale
significatum, neutra (i. e. neque electio, neque reprobatio) cadit sub-merito;
quantum autem ad connotatum, reprobatio cadit sub merito simpliciter,
praedestina^io vero secundum quid. By the principale significatum, he means the
Act or Decree of Reprobation; by the connotatum, he intends the effect of
Reprobation, viz. Damnation.

4, Finally Johannes Duns, a man of stupendous subtlety, called by the
admirable Scaliger lima veritatis, is very express and punctual for absolute
Election and Reprobation. Places twice ten might be produced, but it is
needless to produce testimonies in a matter confessed by the Adversaries of the
Absolute Decree. Let Micraelius speak, Heterodox. Call. disp. 40. parag. 49.
Scotus, alias Johannes Duns, Doctor ille (...), seculo 14, contra Thomam
defendit illam rigidam sententiam, quod, Quicquid Deus operatur circa creaturas
operetur beneplacito voluntatis suae, ut s^per hoc non sit ratio vel causa
petenda ( lib. 1. did. 41.) quodqu^, Deus sola beneplaciti voluntate de tota
massa perdita voluerit quosdam homines misericorditer liberare, quosdam non, ut
bonitatem manif^staret, in electis quidem per misericordiam, in reprobis p^^
justitiam. Et cum alii Scholastici, ut Henricus, istam propositionem graviter
arguerent, dicendo, 1. Defectum culp^ non requiri per se ad manifestationem
bonitatis. 2. Malitiam in mundo and miseriam non esse de perfectione universi,
and propterea non placuisse Deo simpliciter ut aliqui in malitia and miseria
permanerent. 3. Dei intentionem non fuisse dum peccata permittit, ut habeat
quod puniat sed ut bonum inde eliciat. 4. Malitiam praevisam esse rationem
motivam ob quam damnare reprobum Deus constituerit. Scotus hic sese opposuit,
and defendit illam certam praevisionem futurorum contingentium esse ex
determinatione voluntatis divinae; and si offerantur duo aequales in
naturalibus, and ex iis unus praeordinetur ad gratiam and vitam aeternam, alter
non, non esse aliam rationem assignandam nisi voluntatem divinam: quae quidem
est ipsissima sententia Calviniana.

Is that a Doctrine of reproach among the Papists, that has been defended by
so many learned Doctors of the Papal Church? Perhaps though the Doctor will not
account the Puritan Protestant, worthy the name of a Protestant, yet he thinks
the Puritan Papist or Jesuit, the only Papist: If so, I cannot deny but that
the Doctrine of absolute Reprobation is to them odious enough. Molina in his
23. Quest. Art. 4, 5, having granted, that his Schoolmen do commonly maintain
absolute Reprobation, and not daring to deny but that Austin maintained it too,
concludes that Its too hard and unworthy of the Divine goodness and clemency,
more meet for a fierce and cruel than for a most clement Prince, the Author of
all consolation, goodness, piety.

But yet I am sure Bellarmine and Benedictus Pererius were both Jesuits, and
(if we may believe the judgment of learned men concerning them) as learned as
any two that ever were of that Order; yet either I understand not their Latin
(which is easy enough,) or they do not speak with reproach concerning the
absolute Decree. Bellarm. de great. and lib. arbit. lib. 2. cap. 16, Dicimus
reprobationem duos actus comprehendere, alterum negativum, alterum positivum;
siquidem reprobi opponuntur electis contradictorie, and contrary. Primum enim
non habet Deus voluntatem illos salvandi, deinde habet voluntatem eos damnandi:
Quod attinet ad priorem actum, nulla datur ejus causa ex part hominum, sicut
neque praedestinationis. Benedictus Pererius, in his Comment. on the ninth to
the Romans, roundly takes up Ambresius Catharinus, for reproaching the opinion
of the absolute Decree with those ugly names of cruel, impious, desperate.

2. The Doctor tells us that this Calvinistical Doctrine is offensive to the
Lutherans of what sort soever. Which whether he ever intended that we should
believe, I know not; but I cannot in the least imagine that he himself believed
it. For, page 34, he told us of some Rigid Lutherans, who having separated
themselves from Melancthon and the rest of the Divines of Wittenberg, did
gladly entertain those Doctrines, in which they were sure to find as good
assistance as the Dominicans and their party could afford them. What Doctrines
were these in which they might promise themselves as good assistance as the
Dominicans and their party could afford them, unless the Doctrine about the
absolute Decrees, and some other points annexed to them? Not many lines after,
it is acknowledged, that The Calvinian Faction's (so the Doctor will miscal)
Doctrines, though condemned by the Council of Trent, yet found countenance, not
only from the whole Sect of Dominicans but the Rigid Lutherans. What! are the
Calvinian Tenants countenanced by a sort of Lutherans, and yet offensive to
Lutherans of what sort soever? This I Will undertake to prove, that unless the
present Lutherans will reject the Opinion of Luther, Brentius, Heshusius, men
whom they pretend highly to reverence, the Calvinian opinion cannot be
offensive to them. If therefore any of them have said or written, that they
would sooner fall back to Popery, than give way to this Predestinarian
Pestilence, they were sure in some high fit of passion; such as they are in
when they speak of the Sacramentarian Pestilence, such as that Arminian was in
who professed, he would sooner turn Atheist than Calvinist.

Dr. H. Page 36, 37.
Having so great a Founder as Calvin was, it came to be generally entertained
in all Churches of his platform, strongly opposed by Sebastian Castalio in
Geneva it self: but the poor man so despightfully handled both by him and Beza,
that they never left pursuing him with complaints and clamors, till they had
cast him out of the City, and at last brought him to his grave. The terror of
which example, and the great name which Calvin had attained unto, as it
confirmed his power at home, so did it make his Doctrines the more acceptable
and esteemed abroad.

Ans. Was ever more dirt cast into the face of Calvin, Beza, Geneva and other
Reformed Churches in so few lines? What! Were they, who had suffered so many
things from the blood-thirsty Papists, so startled with Castali^'s banishment,
as not to dare to enquire into an opinion before they embraced it? Had all the
Reformed pinned their faith on the sleeve of one man, who never made any
pretense or laid any claim to infallibility?

Be it so: that, of what account the Master of the Sentences was in the Church
of Rome, the same had Calvin amongst the Preachers of the Reformed Churches
purchased; yet we know that the Papists themselves have their Points, in which
they say that Hic Magister non tenetur: so the Preachers of the Reformed
Churches would undoubtedly have rejected Calvin in the Point of the absolute
Decree, had they apprehended it to be either disconsonant to Scripture, or
injurious to God, or destructive to the power of godliness.

I cannot also but take notice of another Calumny, viz. that the cause of the
removal of Castalio, was his contradicting of Calvin and Beza in the Doctrine
of God's Decrees: whereas upon examination it will be found, that he was
commanded to depart Geneva for his notorious Calumnies against those that had
deserved better of the Church than himself. Indeed the man was grown to that
impiety, that he feared not to call the Divinely inspired Song of Solomon, an
impure and obscene Ballad, and to rail and reproach all those, who would not
consent to have it expunged the Canon. How great a Saint soever he may seem to
some, the Histories of those times tell us, that he was perj^red.

Page 37, 38.
Doctor H^ylin takes notice, that Though Ecclesiastical Discipline was made use
of, to crush all those who durst oppose the Doctrine of Calvin, yet it was
permitted to Beza to be somewhat wilder than his Master, in placing the Decree
of Predestination before the Fall, which Calvin himself had more rightly placed
in Massa corrupta.

Ans. And yet, p. 38. circa sinem, he tells us, that The Doctrine of the
Supra^apsarians was first broached by Calvin. A contradiction so gross, that
whosoever can reconcile it, must have a greater faculty than ever Aristotle
himself pretended to, or thought possible. But let us, to gratify this Author,
and for once, suppose that John was a Sublapsarian, and Calvin a
Supralapsarian; yet it would require a greater charity than ever I could attain
unto, to pardon his miscarriage, in making the Supralapsarian Doctrine no older
than Mr. Calvin. Est nobis necessario fatendum, non esse nuper natam aut
ignobiliorum Theologorum sententiam, quae ponit Praedestinationem priorem
praevisione peccati, says Bishop Davenant, Diss^rt. de prae. and reprob. cap.
1. page 115. This way went Scotus, gone to the generation of his Fathers some
centuries before Calvin: yea, and Aquinas, somewhat older than Scotus. And, for
a conclusion, the Bishop adds, Heac a me in eum finem adducuntur, non quod
huic sententiae adhaerescam, sed ut obiter perstringam illorum inscitiam dicam
an malitiam, qui Calvinum aut Bezam lacerant maledictis, quasi primarios hujus
sententiae Autores, quae inter Scholasticos and inter Pontificios ipsos non
minus recepta est quam illa contraria, quae ponit hominem peccato infectum
subjectum Praedestinationis. Which done, he proceeds to produce two clear
passages out of Calvin, by which it appears, that he made Massam corruptam, or
in Austin's phrase, Massam damnatam, the object of Predestination.

The next thing we shall take notice of in our Historian, is the account that
he gives of the Supralapsarian and Sublapsarian Opinion, and the Arguments he
brings against the one and the other. His account is drawn by the Pen of
professed Adversaries, viz. the Remonstrants, and Tilenus. His Arguments are
all of them transcribed out of that English Pamphlet, called God's Love to
Mankind; composed by the joint labors and endeavors of two Men that were no
Punies in these Controversies, viz. Mr. Mason and Mr. Hoard.

Where, first, I might take notice of this, as one instance of his failing,
that he has not reckoned up all the Opinions about the object of
Predestination. For as some make it to be mankind not yet created, massam
nondum conditam; others mankind created and corrupted: so there are who make it
to be mankind created indeed, but yet not corrupted or fallen. Nor are they,
who go this way, so obscure as not to deserve to be mentioned, by him that
undertakes to write the History of these matters. But this I could easily
pardon, did I not find him highly disingenuous, in laying down the Opinion of
the Supralapsarians: Which he represents from their professed Enemies charge in
the Hague-Conference. Just as if some angry Neighbor having preferred a Bill
against Dr Heylin, and in that Bill charged him with more than could be proved,
I should afterward make use of this Charge as a Picture to draw Dr. Heylin by.
A dispassionate Heathen would have had more candor than to Father upon any
party of Men, every Brat which a provoked Adversary had laid at their door.
What evidence is there, that the Opinion laid down by the Doctor, page 38, is
the Opinion of the Supralapsarian Divines? Have all of them or the most famous
of them either jointly or severally declared it to be their Opinion? The
Writings of some Antelapsarians I have read, and have not found that they have,
simply and without distinction, asserted that God ordained certain to eternal
life, certain to eternal death, without any regard had to their righteousness
or sin, to their obedience or disobedience: Nay, they seem to me plainly to
say, that God never decreed to bestow salvation on any adult person, but as a
reward of obedience, nor to inflict damnation upon any person, but as a reward
of disobedience: Only they say, If Election be considered quoad actum
elgientis, and Reprobation quoad actum reprobantis, then there can be no cause
assigned either of Election or Reprobation, but only the will and pleasure of
the Almighty. Res volita, and actus volendi, should not be confounded in a
Disputation so mysterious, as this about the eternal Decrees. Whereas therefore
Dr. Heylin, page 39, adds, That the Supralapsarian Doctrine, first, makes God
to be the Author of Sin, as both Piscator and Macarius, ( I suppose it should
be Maccovius,) and many other Supralapsarians, as well as Mr. Perkins, have
positively and expressly affirmed him to be; and then, concludes him for a more
unmerciful Tyrant, than all that ever had been in the World, were they joined
together, I do with some confidence aver, that this is a most manifest and
malicious Calumny, exceeding (I think) all the Calumnies that ever were uttered
by any Arminian. Mr. Mason in his Additions to Mr. Hoard had said, That none of
the Supralapsarians (Piscator only and a few more of the blunter sort
excepted,) had said, directly and in terminis, that God is the cause of sin.
The Doctor has changed Mr. Mason's few into many, and names Macc^vius and Mr.
Perkins, whereas Mr. Mason had only named Piscator. But this is strange, that
neither Mr. Mason nor Dr. Heylin should direct us to any one place of these
Authors, in which any such phrase or speech does occur. Do they think that
their Readers have leisure to turn over all the Writings of these blunter
Supralapsarians? or any divining faculty to find out, who are intended by the
few others, and the many others? For my part I will not think that any one
Supralapsarian ever affirmed God to be the Author of Sin, unless I see the very
place in which such affirmation is contained. But should I see any such thing
in the Writings of Mr. Perkins, I should be under a temptation to turn
Cartesian, and disbelieve my eyes; so improbable, and and almost impossible
does it seem to me, that a Person* of his piety and learning, should leave upon
Record, a Position so senseless, absurd, impious. I shall expect that the
Doctor, in some good convenient time, do gather together those expressions of
Piscator, Maccovius, Perkins, in which God is expressly made the Author of Sin,
and publish them to the World; or else he must give the World leave to think,
that he has too much communion with the Father of Lies. Further I say, that it
does not from any Principle of the Supralapsarian follow, either that God is
the Author of Sin, or that he is a verier Tyrant than ever lived upon earth;
though I shall grant, that for man to do as God does, would be the highest
cruelty. I believe, with the Supralapsarian, that God has decreed, not to
bestow converting Grace upon many whom he could easily (had he so pleased) have
converted. Should any man who could convert millions not convert them, and
afterward punish them with eternal torments for not being converted, he would
be more cruel than ever Nero was. But is God therefore cruel, in not giving his
converting Grace to those millions who perish eternally for want of it? Not at
all; because he is not under a Law to contribute all that in him lies toward
the conversion of Souls: but so would man be, if he had such a conver^ing
power. Suppose we, that the Doctor had been endued with a power to work those
wonderful things in Tire and Sidon which would have made the Inhabitants repent
in dust and ashes, he would have been cruel with a witness had he not caused
those wonders to be wrought; but I trow so was not God, though he never did nor
ever intended to work Miracle in either of those places.

Dr. H. page 39.
Well, but the Doctor proceeds further, and tells us, that this extremity being
every day found more indefensible, the more moderate, and sober sort of the
Calvinians, forsaking the Colors of their first Leaders, betook themselves
into the Camp of the Rigid Lutherans, and rather chose to join with the
Dominican Friars, than to stand to the Dictates of their Master Calvin.

Answ. It would be endless to discover all the weaknesses of this period. 1.
Calvin was a Sublapsarian; therefore surely not the Master of the
Supralapsarians. 2. The Dominican Friars do not all make the object of
Predestination massam corruptam; nor yet the Rigid (if rigid) Lutherans. 3.
Those that are Sublapsarians, do not judge the Supralapsarian way indefensible:
Witness Davenant, who has defended the Supralapsarian way against the
impertinent Objections of the Author of God's Love to Mankind; and yet was
himself of the other persuasion.

Thus of the Supralapsarians: Now follows the Evidence brought in against the
Sublapsarians, and the Dreadful Sentence pronounced upon them. Witnesses
against them, are the Remonstrants in the Hague Conference, published by
Bertius and Daniel Tilenus: which our Historian has taken word for word out of
a supposititious Tilenus, who has troubled himself and the world with an empty
piece, called Arcana Dogmata Contraremonstrantium, or the Calvinists Cabinet
unlocked, Printed for Richard Royston, 1659, having also Printed an Examination
of Tilenus before the Triers of Utopia. Mr. Baxter, in his Discovery of the
Grotian Religion, charged this Gentleman, with giving a false and odious
account of the Doctrines of the Synod of Dort. He in his Defense alleges,
that he never tied himself to the Decrees and Canons of that Synod. Yet Dr.
Heylin, page 41, calls them the Conclusions of the Synod of Dort, which is to
be conceived to have delivered the genuine sense of all the Parties, as being a
Representative of all the Calvinian Churches in Europe, except those of France,
some few Divines of England being added to them. The truth is, Not one of his
five Conclusions, page 41, 42, are the Conclusions of the Synod of Dort; nor,
as they are worded, are they so much as agreeable to the Conclusions of that
Venerable Synod. The Judgment of the Synod of Dort in the first of the five
Points, against which alone, or rather, against one part of which alone, viz.
that of Reprobation, the Arguments transcribed by the Doctor, page 42, 43, 44,
45, out of God's Love to Mankind do militate, though he through a stupendous
inadvertence, speaks of them as alleged against the whole frame of the Synods
Conclusion: The Judgment, I say, of the Synod, in the matter of the Divine
Decrees, was as follows. Article 7, Election is the unchangeable purpose of
God, by which before the foundation of the World, according to the most free
pleasure of his Will and of his mere Grace, out of all mankind, fallen through
their own fault from their first integrity into sin and destruction, he has
chosen in Christ unto salvation, a set number of certain men, neither better
nor more worthy than others, but lying in the common misery with others: Which
Christ also, from all eternity, he appointed the Mediator and Head of all the
Elect, and Foundation of Salvation, and so he decreed to give them to him to be
saved, and by his Word and Spirit effectually to call and draw them to a
communion with him; i. e. to give them a true Faith in him, to justify
sanctify and finally to glorify them, being mightily kept in the communion of
his Son, to the demonstration of his mercy, and praise of the riches of his
glorious grace, Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6. Rom 8.30. Article 15, The Holy Scripture
herein chiefly manifests and commends unto us this eternal and free grace of
our Election, in that it witnesses, that not all men are elected, but some not
elected or passed over in God's eternal election; whom doubtless God, in his
most free, most just, unreprovable and unchangeable good pleasure, has decreed
to leave in the common misery (whereinto by their own default they precipitated
themselves,) and not to bestow saving faith and the grace of coversion upon
them; but leaving them in their own ways and under just judgment, at last to
condemn and everlastingly punish them, not only for their unbelief but also for
their other sins, to the manifestation of his Justice.

The Reader may perhaps expect, that I should give him an account of the
Judgment of the Reformed Gallican Churches, in the five controver^ed Points:
But Grotius in his Epistle to N. N. Epist. Eccles. page 746, has saved me this
labor, averring that Moulin, a leading man in the Gallican Churches, was,
though absent, a chief forger of the Canons of the Synod of Dort, and the only
cause why they were without any examination received in France. Only I must
needs take notice of Grotius his calumniating humor, whilst he gives out, that
the Dort Canons were received in the French Churches without any examination;
Whereas it is certain, that in the National Synod at Alez. Anno 1620, the
Canons of the Synod of Dort were read, and expended severally and attentively,
and by the common consent of all and every one present approved, as agreeable
to the Word of God and the Confessions of the French Churches, as written
purely and wisely, and as meet to eliminate false Doctrine and to conserve true
Doctrine: Every man also swearing, that he did approve these Canons, and would,
according to his strength, defend the same to his last breath. It was also then
ordained, that these Canons should be sworn to and subscribed, by all that were
afterward to be admitted, either to the Ministry or to any Office in the
University. All this was also confirmed in the next ensuing National Synod at
Charenton, Anno 1623. Vid. Corp. Confess. edit. Gene^. Anno 1654. Can.
Dordre^htan. page 55. It is here said, that the Dort Canons were agreeable to
the former French Confessions of Faith: and that they were so, cannot be denied
by any, who will read the Confession of Faith exhibited to Charles IX, Anno
1561; for these are the words of that Confession, Article 12, Credimus ex hac
corruptione and damnatione universali, in qua omnes homines natura sunt
submersi, Deum alios quidem eripere, quos videlicet aeterno and immutabili suo
consilio, sola sua bonitate and misericordia, nulloque operum ipsorum respectu,
in Jesus Christo elegit: alios vero in ea corruptione and damnatione relinquere,
in quibus nimirum just suo tempo^e damnandis justitiam suam demonstret, sicut
in aliis divitias milericordiae ^uae declarat. Neque enim alii aliis meliores
sunt donec illos Deus discernat, ex immutabili illo consilio quod ante
seculorum creationem in Jesus Christo determinavit; neque posset quisquam sua vi
sibi ad bonum illud aditum patefacere, quum ex natura nostra ne unum quidem
rectum motum vel affect^m seu cogitationem habere possimus, donec nos Deus
gratis praeveniat and ad rectitudinem formet.

Against the absolute Decree, as stated by the Synod of Dort, and the French
Divines, let us hear what can be objected out of God's love to mankind; for
thence does the Doctor transcribe as confidently, as if there had never any
Answer been returned to that Book: whereas there are few Scholars (any way
inquisitive after Books) who do not know, that it has been answered by Bishop
Davenant, Dr. Twisse, Amyraldus; not to mention Dr. Ward and Mr. Aylesbury, who
have took occasion to refel some of the Book, though not all: it is out of that
Pamphlet that the Sublapsarian opinion is argued against, as,

Dr. H. page 42.
1. Repugnant to plain Texts of Scripture, Ezekiel 33.11. Romans 11.32. 2 John
3.16. 2 Timothy 2.4. 2 Pet. 3.9. Genesis 4.7. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. 2 Chronicles. 15.2.

Ans. Now if it should prove contrary to any one of these Scriptures, it were
meet to be abandoned by all good Christians: But many Opinions are confidently
affirmed to be contrary to Scripture, which are not; Such perhaps is this. I
needed not to have said perhaps; for let it be remembered, that the Opinion of
the Sublapsarians is but this, That God has decreed the infallible Conversion
and Salvation of certain singular Persons, and also the permission of some men's
Impenitence and Perdition, and it will soon be seen, that the Scriptures
produced, have not so much as as a seeming contrariety to it.

1. Ezekiel. 33.11, God says, yea swears, that He has no pleasure in the death
of a Sinner; Therefore God never decreed to let sinful Creatures finally run on
in their wicked ways.

What a wild conclusion is this? Hence indeed it might be inferred, that
neither spiritual nor Eternal Death do fall under that Will of God which is
called his Voluntas simplicis complacentiae: But Sublapsarians do not say, that
they do fall under that Will. If they did, they must also necessarily maintain,
that they be things in themselves good and lovely; which none of them (that I
ever met with) do.

2. It is said, Romans 11.32, God has concluded them all in unbelief, that he
might have mercy upon all. What can hence be collected? Why, The two Alls are
of equal extent; How many Unbelievers there be, on so many God has a Will of
showing Mercy; and if every Man be under Mercy, then there is no precise Will
of shutting out any from possibility of Mercy.

Well, 1. Let it be remembered, that here it is granted, that God has shut up
all under unbelief: Which is as high an expression concerning God's providence
about, and concurrence unto evil, as any used by Mr. Calvin.

2. When it is said, that God has a Will of showing Mercy on all Unbelievers:
If by Mercy be understood a general Mercy, we can grant it; All Men are not
only under a possibility of this Mercy, but also have some actual
participations of it.

But 3. It is plain, that the Mercy intended in the Text is not a general Mercy
common to all Mankind, but such a Mercy as was never vouchsafed to some whole
Nations, much less to every individual Member of those Nations; V. 30, For as
ye ( i. e. the Gentiles) in times past have not believed God, yet have now
obtained mercy through their unbelief: even so have these also now not
believed, that through your mercy they also may obtain mercy. Doubtless the
mercy that the Gentiles obtained by the unbelief and hardness of the Jews, was
the hearing of the word, and that which comes by hearing, even Faith: The mercy
also that the Jews obtained through the mercy of the Gentiles, was the being
provoked to jealousy; the seeing of him whom they had crucified, and being in
bitterness; the turning of them away from iniquity, and the turning of iniquity
from them. Now, does Dr. Heylin indeed think, that God did shut up every Jew
and Gentile in unbelief with a design and purpose to have the Gospel preached
to the singula generum? If so, he must unavoidably grant, that the Almighty is
marvelously frustrated in his design and purpose; for he is too good a
Geographer and Historian to think, that the Gospel was ever preached, or
entertained by all men that have lived, or do now live in the World.

3. John 3.16, God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life.

From hence it undeniably follows, that God will not damn any man merely for
not coming up to the terms of the old Covenant of Works; and that none shall
perish, whose heart is brought to believe in Christ. Nor have the
Contra-remonstrants denied this; and more than this cannot hence be inferred:
For whereas Mr. Hoard argues, God loves the whole lump of mankind, and loved
it fallen into a gulf of sin and misery: He did not therefore hate the most of
them lying in the fall; for love and hatred are contrary acts in God, and
cannot be exercised about the same objects. He sure could not but think, that
we would reply, that God does not love the whole lump of mankind with the same
degree, measure, and kind of love; and that a less degree of love is sometimes
in Scriptures called by the name of hatred. God had not such a love for the
whole lump of mankind, as to decree to bestow upon every particular person that
special grace which shall infallibly bring him to eternal life and glory. Any
love less than this, many consist with absolute eternal Non-election or
Preterition. Nay, God did never so love the World, as to purpose to bestow on
all the parts of it the very means of knowledge: How many, notwithstanding the
love this Text speaks of, are everlastingly punished, who never heard of the
way to Salvation!

4. 1 Timothy 2.4, Who would have all to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of
the truth. In these words the Apostle delivers two things: 1. That it is God's
will that all men should obtain an happy end. 2. That it is his will also that
they should use and enjoy the means, which is the knowledge of his truth, that
they might attain the end: There is no let in God, but that all men may believe
and be saved; and therefore there is no absolute will, that many thousands of
men shall never believe nor be saved.

The thing that should be proved, is, That there is a will in God to save all
men and to bring them to the knowledge of the truth; and we have here a
Scripture brought to prove, that God would have all men to be saved, as if
there were no difference betwixt these two Propositions, Deus vult omnes salvos
fieri; Deus vult omnes salvos facere. If a man should lay down this assertion,
that Dr. Heylin has a mind or purpose to bestow an hundred pounds per annum on
Abingdon, and when he is called to make good that assertion, should only prove,
that Dr. Heylin could be well pleased that an 100 per annum were given to the
Town, and that there is no let in him why it has not been given, would he not
become ridiculous? Never did sober Sublapsarian say, that there is any let in
God, but that all men may believe and be saved; but they do not think, that a
man must presently believe and be saved, if God do not hinder his faith and
salvation. It Is required that God should remove all the le^s and hindrances of
faith, cure us of our unbelief, and put his fear into our inward parts, else we
shall never believe, or be saved. Let any Arminian prove, that God has willed
and purposed to do all this for every one.

5. 2 Pet. 3.9, Not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance. This is a negative Proposition, and must be taken distributively;
and therefore it flatly contradicts absolute Reprobation.

Here is Logic that may well make younger men than Dr. Heylin and I to smile.
1. The Scripture produced is not one Proposition, but two; and if the first be
negative, the second is affirmative.

2. What if it be taken distributively? Is there no distribution, but only into
the singula generum? I thought that there might be a distribution into genera
singulorum.

3. I could (notwithstanding any thing brought by Mr. Hoard to the contrary)
hold, that the words are to be restrained to the Elect.

4. But because I can be not only honest but also liberal, I will grant, that
God is not willing that any one should perish, that he is willing that every
one should repent: But then I deny, that either of these two Propositions do
contradict Gods decree of Reprobation; which, as has been often said, is his
decree to permit, that many shall perish in their impenitence. Men's being under
this decree does not hinder, but that God may, voluntate complacentiae, will
their conversion, and patiently expect it, and afford them such means as will
leave them without excuse, though such as he foreknew they would frustrate and
receive in vain.

The conditional Texts of Scripture that follow, are so apparently impertinent,
that I will trust any Reader with them.

Dr. H. page 42, 43.
2. The Sublapsarian Opinion fights with God's holiness, and makes him the
cause of sin in the greatest number of men, 1. In regard that of his own will
and pleasure, he has brought mem into an estate, in which they cannot avoid
sin: that is to say, by imputing to them the transgression of their Father
Adam. 2. In that he leaves them irrecoverably plunged and involved in it,
without affording them power or ability to rise again to newness of life: In
which case that of Tertullian seems to have been fitly alleged, In cujus manu
est ne quid fiat, ei deputatur cum jam fit; In whose power it is that a thing
be not done, to him it is imputed when it is done.

Answ. If absolute Reprobation do indeed rob God of his holiness, let it for
ever be abandoned, and not so much as named with the least approbation among
Divines. But what wretched ignorance is this! whilst a man is pleading for the
holiness of his Maker, to lay down such a rule, which if it prove true, does
entitle him to all the wickednesses that ever were perpetrated by the sons of
men! I ask the Doctor, Could not he who kept the Heathenish King from touching
Abraham's Wife, Laban and Esau from doing mischief to Jacob, the Israelites
Enemies from having so much as a mind to hurt them, so restrain the lust of all
and every man, as that it should never conceive and bring forth sin and death?
If he could not, he is not Omnipotent, nor fit to govern the World: If he
could, since he has not, he is, by the Doctor's rule, become the Author of all
the pollutions that have been in the World through lust. The best is, the rule
is most apparently false even in reference to the creature; for a man is not
guilty of all the sins which he had power to hinder, but only of those sins
which by virtue of his calling and place he was bound to hinder. Let us see
whether the Sublapsarians be more happy in their Principles than the Historian
in his. Two Principles of theirs are taken notice of, 1. That God, of his own
will and pleasure, has brought men into an estate in which they cannot avoid
sin; that is to say, by imputing to them the transgression of their Father Adam.

Little did I expect to find this Principle charged with any opposition to the
holiness of God: For though it be most unhandsomly expressed, yet that which is
intended by it, is but this, that It was the free constitution of God, that if
Adam stood, he should transmit holiness to all his Posterity, and if he did
fall and rebel, then his Posterity should be born in a condition of sin and
misery.

If this be a truth, then it is not contrary to the holiness of God: If not a
truth, what shall become of Romans 5.12? Let (...) be rendered either in quo or eo
quod, it must needs hold forth this, that, when Adam sinned we sinned: Which
could not be, if Adam had not been made by God a common Person, a faederal as
well as a natural head. If he was made a common Person, so as that his will was
reputed our will, his fall our fall, he was made such by the mere will and
pleasure of God; for who can think that there was any thing that necessitated
God to make him such? It may be the second Principle is more heinous: That is
thus laid down,

2. He leaves men irrecoverably plunged and involved in sin, without affording
them power or ability to rise again to newness of life.


If this be understood of all men, it is a notorious calumny: For the
Sublapsarians hold, that there are a great number of men, upon whom God has
eternally purposed to bestow that grace which shall infallibly bring them out
of sin and misery. But there are some to whom he affords no such power: Well,
What then? Is he not therefore holy? Absit. If he had let all the race of
mankind perish, never sending his Son to take flesh, and so become a Mediator
betwixt God and Man, he had notwithstanding been every way as holy as now he
is. But it seems it is again come to that pass, that Deus non erit Deus nisi
homini placuerit, God shall not be God (God he is not if he be not holy,)
unless he have made such Decrees as please our Semipelagians.

Dr. H. page 43.
3. This Sublapsarian Doctrine is inconsistent with the mercy of God, so highly
signified in the Scriptures; in making him to take so small and speedy occasion
to punish the greater part of men for ever, and for one sin once committed, to
shut them up under an invincible necessity of sin and damnation.

Answ. Who would have looked for such stuff from the Pen of a Divine? If God
make man after his own image, allow him liberty to eat of all the trees but
one, and tell him most expressly, that if he eat of that tree he shall die the
death, Must he needs be thought, if he punish man for ever for eating of that
tree, to take a small occasion to punish man? Had not this eating of the fruit
of the forbidden tree, all the circumstances in it that may render it out of
measure sinful? Had it not something in it contrary to all the Precepts of the
natural Law? But besides, This charge of destroying God's mercy is grounded on
a gross mistake: For Sublapsarians do not make Reprobution to be Gods punishing
men for ever, or shutting them up under an invincible necessity of sin and
damnation: It is, with them, only the denying or not giving of an undue favor,
which yet he is pleased graciously to vouchsafe to others, who could as little
deserve it as those to whom it is denied.

Dr. H. Ibid.
4. This is incompatible with the Justice of God, who is said in Scripture to
be righteous in all his ways according unto weight and measure, that the far
greatest part of mankind should be left remediless in a state of damnation, for
the sin of their first Father only: that he should require faith in Christ of
those, to whom he has precisely in his absolute purpose denied, both a power
to believe and a Christ to believe in: or, that he should punish men for the
omission of an act, which is made impossible for them by his own decree, by
which he purposed that they should partake with Adam in his sin, and be stripped
of all the supernatural power which they had in him before he fell.

Answ. All this is but a bundle of impertinencies, improprieties, calumnies. No
opinion destroys the Justice of God, but that which ascribes injustice to him:
Injustice is not ascribed to God, till he be affirmed to do something that is
contrary to his goodness or his truth; Which he is not by those who maintain
his Decree of Reprobation. Sublapsarians do not say, that the far greatest part
of mankind is left remedilesly in a state of damnation, for the sin of their
first Father only. They affirm, that the first transgression was as truly the
transgression of every one descended naturally from the loins of Adam, as of
Adam himself the common Progenitor. They maintain not, that any is left
remediless in a state of damnation. They acknowledge, that a remedy is by God
prepared, sufficient to deliver them from the wrath to come, and that it is
through the fault of men, living in the Church, if the remedy become not
effectual. They also make damnation to come upon the Reprobate, not because he
is a Reprobate, nor merely and solely for original sin; but for their habitual
and actual sins. It is also most false, that by the Sublapsarians God is made
to require faith in Christ of those, to whom he has denied both a power to
believe, and a Christ to believe in. Those who did never hear of Christ, are
not required under pain of damnation to believe in him; faith to them is no
duty, and therefore infidelity is no sin: Those to whom Christ is manifested,
have a Christ given them to believe in; for he is propounded to them as able to
save them to the uttermost, as willing and resolved and engaged to save them
upon his own terms: which are no other, than their receiving of him, and
submitting to him as their Lord, to rule and govern them, etc. Yea, the
Sublapsarians affirm God to give the Reprobate a power of believing, as great a
power as the Arminians make him to give to any whether Elect or Reprobate. God
never purposed effectually to work in the Reprobate both to will and to do, say
the Sublapsarians: He never purposed effectually to work to will and to do in
any, say the Arminians.

I, but God punishes the Reprobates for the omission of an act, which is by
his own Decree made impossible to them, say Sublapsarians; ergo, he is unjust.

I deny the antecedent; Some Sublapsarians say, that faith is not impossible to
any who is in statu viatoris; no Sublapsarian says, that it was the decree of
God which made the act of faith impossible to any man. It is the corruption and
hardness of men's hearts that makes the act of faith impossible to men, (if
absolutely it be impossible;) but this corruption and hardness of men's hearts
is not an effect of God's decree.

Dr. H. page 43.
5. It is said to be destructive of God's sincerity, in calling them to
repentance and to the knowledge of the faith in Jesus Christ that they may be
saved, to whom he does not really intend the salvation offered: Which is as if
a Creditor should resolve upon no terms to forgive his Debtor, and yet make him
offers to remit the whole upon Condition, and bind the same with many solemn
oaths in a public Auditory.

Answ. This is indeed said (the more some men's shame and impudence) too too
often; but it is not proved. Sublapsarians do not feign God to have any purpose
to remit the debt upon no terms: they plainly say, that he has purposed to
remit, on the conditions of faith and repentance; should any Reprobate perform
and come up to these conditions, the whole sum, how great soever, should be
forgiven, and he put into the actual possession and enjoyment of the salvation
offered to him in the preaching of the Gospel. I, but these conditions are such
as God knows the Reprobate will not, cannot come up to: therefore, to offer
salvation on such terms, is but to delude. Why, but did not God foreknow, in
the Arminian way, that the Reprobate would not repent and believe? Ay; but they
do not say, that God ever decreed that he should not repent and believe. Well,
however he decreed, not to cure his impenitence or unbelief. If this be
granted, the Sublapsarian has as much as he need contend for; Reprobation
being with him, only a denial of that grace which makes men actually believers.
Judge now what cause the Doctor had, so reproachfully to conclude this piece of
his Charge,

Dr. H. page 44.
All God's passionate wishes, all his terrible threatenings, the whole course of
the Ministry, are by this Doctrine made to be but so many acts of deep
hypocrisy in Almighty God: though none of the maintainers of it have the
ingenuity to confess the same, but Piscator only, in his Necesse est ut sanctam
aliquam si mutationem ( lege simulationem) in Deo statuamus; which is plain and
home.

Ans. Some maintainers of absolute Reprobation do not deny this, but ascribe
unto God Sanctam simulationem, duplicem personam, duplicem voluntatem, says
Mr. Hoard. But Dr. Heylin, taking this to be a piece of commendable ingenuity,
will not allow any but Piscator alone to have any portion of it: all others are
disingenuous, and do indeed make God a dissembler, but will not say so much.
Surely did the Sublapsarians conceive that so ^orrid a consequence did follow
upon absolute Reprobation, they would acknowledge it, and withal renounce and
disclaim their opinion. Till they be thus convinced, it is no great charity to
fasten disingenuity upon men so renowned for Learning and Piety, as are the
Sublapsarians. But let us look once more on this scoffing passage; All God's
wishes, etc. must be but so many acts of deep hypocrisy; though none of the
maintainers of this Opinion be so ingenuous as to confess the same but
Piscator. The Opinion he is speaking of, is the Sublapsarian Opinion; and so
the sense is, None of the Sublapsarian Opinion, save only Piscator who was no
Sublapsarian, but a Supralapsarian: Is not this fine sense? Besides, sanctam
quandam simulationem, cannot well be rendered by deep hypocrisy. Lastly, how
shall I be assured that any such words as these here quoted, are to be found in
Piscator? Neither Page nor Book is quoted, yet I have met with the place; and
by reading it can easily gather, that Dr. Heylin either never read it, or had
not ingenuity enough to quote it aright: For whereas Vorstius had objected to
Piscator, that he fastened simulation on God in the case of the Ninevites, and
the message sent to Hezekiah* he replieth, Tu hic pugnas sine adversario; nam
neque ego affirmavi facile aliquam simulationis speciem Deo tribuendam esse,
neque exempla illa Ezekiae and Ninivitarum huc retuli: interim non puto ab
illis exemplis alienum esse, ut sancta Dei simulatio in illis statuatur. Here
is no necesse est; nothing like an affirmation, that the maintainers of
absolute Reprobation must necessarily ascribe a simulation unto God. Honest
Piscator never dreamed that the message sent to Hezekiah by Isaiah, or to the
Ninevites by Jonah, was the Decree of Reprobation: All he seems to intend, is
but this, that God seemed in those messages to be peremptorily resolved of
that, which he never resolved should come to pass: And if his expression were
not so accurate, Dr. Heylin, who almost in every period lies at the Readers
mercy, should not have cavilled at it.

By the way let it be noted, that how slightly soever our present Arminians do
think or speak of Piscator, yet Arminius himself either had honorable thoughts
of him, or else was a most notorious dissembler: For writing to Utengobard
concerning one to succeed Iunius, then la^ely dead; after mention of some
other, he says, Si Piscatoris aetas non obstet, illum unum omnium
commodissimum existimo, quem etiam fors non admodum erit difficile a Comite
Nassovio impetrare, si Comes Mauritius and D. Ordines intercedere non
dedignabuntur. Doctus est, diligens est, facilis, planus, and perspicuus.
Nominis celebritatem sibi editis scriptis comparavit apud multos. Hoc
potissimum videtur hoc Academiae statu requiri, ut succedat qui possit locum
pro dignitate tueri, unde tantus vir excessit; and quem posse, public
innotuit. The Letter bears date 3. Call. Nov. 1602, and is recorded Epistol.
Eccles. page 134.

One Arrow more the Doctor has to shoot at the absolute Decree, and then his
Quiver is quite emptied.

Dr. H. page 44.
Finally, it is alleged, that this Doctrine of the Sublapsarians, is contrary
to the ends by God proposed in the Word and Sacraments; to many of God's
excellent gifts to the sons of men; to all endeavors unto holiness and godly
living; and to those grounds of comfort by which a conscience in distress
should be relieved.

Ans. All this is indeed alleged by Mr. Hoard, but it is denied also by all
the Sublapsarians; and had the Doctor vouchsafed to bring Mr. Hoard's Reasons,
they should have had their Answer: but where he counts it sufficient barely to
affirm, there I count it enough to deny. But however, I shall take notice of
two Stories; whereof the first is said to illustrate, the second to evince.

The illustrating History in concerning Tiberius Caesar, of whom Suetonius
says, Circa Deos and Religiones negligentior erat, quippe addictus
Mathematicae, persuasionisque plenus, omnia fato agi.

The evincing Story is the miserable example of the Landgrave of Turing
(related not by Heistibachius, but Heisterbachius,) who being admonished of his
vicious conversation, and dangerous condition, made his Friends this Answer, Si
praedestinatus, nulla peccata poterint mihi Regnum Coelorum auferre; si
praescitus, nulla opera mihi illud valebunt confer.

A man would almost think that this profane Land-grave was a piece of an
Arminian, because he opposes praedestinatus and praescitus: whereas the
Calvinists take Predestination in its latitude, and make Election and
Reprobation to be contained under it. But however, this I am sure of, that a
Monk in S. Austin's time, being reproved by his Friends for his wickedness,
answered, Whatsoever I am now, I shall be such as God foreseeth I will be.
Shall we deny God's Prescience, because a wretched Monk abused it? No more must
we deny Predestination, because the Land-grave of Turing did turn it into
wantonness and lasciviousness. Had either Supralapsarian, or Sublapsarian, been
present when the Land-grave uttered these words, it would have been answered,
That though he were Predestined, yet should he never be saved if he continued
in his sins; and That though he were Reprobate, yet he should not miss of
Heaven, if he continued by patience in well-doing to seek for it. Salvation and
Damnation are always (if we speak of the adult) secundum bona, and mala opera.

Tiberius confuted himself; for though he pretended a full persuasion of a
Mathematical fate or destiny, yet, as the same Historian observes, he was out
of measure afraid of Thunders, and when the Air was cloudy, he always did wear
on his head a Crown of Laurel. We may pity his ignorance, in thinking that
there was any virtue in the Laurel to keep him from Thunder; but cannot choose
but detest his Hypocrisy, who in words maintained a Fate, and yet endeavored
to secure his life by as many means as were used by them that held no Fate. As
much is their Hypocrisy to be abhorred, who take occasion from the
irreversibleness of God's Decrees to neglect their Souls: and yet the
irreversibleness of those Decrees notwithstanding, mind their Bodies as much or
more, than any persons in the World besides.

To conclude; Would it not exasperate, I could instance in those, who whilst
they were profane, were Arminians to the full: but left their Arminianism as
they left their looseness; their own experience in conversion convincing them,
that Faith was the gift of God in another way than the Arminians ever thought
of. He that questioneth this, may be in part satisfied by reading the History
of the Life and Death of the executed Irish Bishop, published by Dr. Bernard.
To my grief I observe, that there are multitudes of stupid and profane
wretches in the World: With some of them I have occasion to converse; and I
find, that one main thing which keeps them in their carnality is a
persuasion, that there is an universal grace offered and tendered to all, by
which they may repent and believe when they will: they therefore resolve, they
will enjoy the pleasures of sin a little longer, and then they will receive and
entertain the grace of God; and so get to Heaven as sure as the strictest and
earliest Puritans. Yea, this was the refuge and (...) of that grand Propagator
of Arminianism Mr. Thomson: If any one in a fit of intemperance, minded him of
the wrath of God threatened against such courses, he would answer, I am a Child
of the Devil to day; but I have Free Will, and to morrow I will make my self a
Child of God.

So I come to the fifth Chapter of the Historian, in which we have some account
given of the Remonstrants; Unto whom it will be found, that he has discovered
too much charity, though he could find in his heart to show none at all to the
Contraremonstrants.

Dr. H. Page 47.
His first Proposition is this, That the Remonstrants Opinion though accused of
Novelty, is Ancienter than Calvinism in the Churches of the Belgic Provinces;
which being originally Dutch, did first embrace Religion according to the
Lutheran model, though afterward they suffered the Calvinian platform to
prevail upon them.

Answ. A Proposition, concerning which he has reason to pray, that it may meet
with very easy and credulous Readers, else he may well expect it will be
queried, 1. How it appears that the Lutheran and Calvinian model were then, as
to the points of Grace and the Decrees, any way opposite? 2. How it can be
proved, that on supposition the Lutheran and Calvinian platform were distinct,
the Belgic Churches did first embrace Religion according to the Lutheran, and
not the Calvinian platform? To which second Question, it will in no wise be a
satisfactory Answer to reply, That Hardingbergius, Clemens Martini, Henricus
Antonides, had opinions about Predestination differing from Mr. Calvin: For
granting this, yea, and granting further, that they had been through-paced
Remonstrants, it need not be yielded, that the Belgic Churches were Lutheran;
for there might be at the same time men every way as famous, and as likely to
draw Disciples after them, that were Calvinistical. It is a truth known to all
that are not altogether unacquainted with the Stories of the Low Countries,
that though in the dawning of Reformation, the Preachers were not all of a
mind; yet as things grew to a settlement, the Pelagian Leaven was purged out, a
Confession of Faith published, (which was afterward called Belgica Confessio,)
in which the Doctrine of Predestination is so explained as Mr. Calvin explained
it at Geneva: this was in the year 1566, or 1567.

Dr. H. Ibid.
Object. This Confession was ratified in a forcible and tumultuous way.

Answer. 1. This is said, not proved out of any Record. 2. There is usually
something of disorder cleaving to the best things that are done in dissetled
times. 3. Anno Christi 1571, there was a full Synod at Embden (the Town
e^^olled by the Doctor,) in which it was ordained* That none should be admitted
for a Minister, till he had been examined, and subscribed this Confession and
the Catechism of Heidelberg. Which De^ree was confirmed in the ensuing Synods
of 1576, and 1586, and approved of by the States of Holland: Yet not so
practiced, but that in the want of others more Orthodox, there crept in some
that taught things contrary both to the Confession and Catechism, whose hard
names I will not fill my papers with. These men had not, notwithstanding all
their restless endeavors, any great success: all things were reasonable quiet,
till Arminius came to be Divinity Professor at Leyden, which was Anno 1603.
Concerning which Arminius or Van Harmine, we must give a short account.

He was at first a Tapster or Chamberlain in a common Inn, from whence by the
care of some Guests (who were pleased even to admiration with his prompt wit)
he was removed, and set to School; maintained there out of the Public Treasury
of Amsterdam: where in process of time he was by the Magistrates of the City
made Pastor, and preached with that accurateness and solidity, that every one
thought him for his parts meet to be a Professor. Indeed magnus esse potuit, si
minor esse voluit: he might have been high enough, had he not thought meet to
raise himself higher, by trampling upon those whom the Churches of Christ have
most deservedly had in the greatest admiration. The learned Iunius being dead,
Utengobard thought none so meet to succeed him as Van Harmine; but the Belgic
Churches knew him too well, to let him easily come to such a place, in which he
might influence all that were Candidates for the Ministry. The Deputies of the
Churches did admonish Utengobard, that he would cease to commend a man so
suspected, to the Curators of the University of Leyden: but he, too proud to
regard such admonitions, desisted not to commend Arminius, till he had brought
him in to Iunius's Chair. But first a dismission must be obtained from
Amsterdam, which could not easily be got; the Inhabitants of the City being
taken with his Eloquence, the Presbytery (at least the wiser part of them)
thinking that he did far less hurt at Amsterdam than he would do at Leyden, a
place where Youth was formed, and where there was more liberty of teaching and
prophesying than in a particular Church. However, dismissed he was at last; bu^
upon this condition, that he should first have a Conference with the Learned
Gomarus, and, in that Conference, by a most free and open declaration of his
Opinion, free himself from all suspicion of Heterodoxy; and that he should
promise, if he had any singular Opinions, he would not discover them to the
disturbance of the Churches. Arminius, if we may judge of his mind by what he
writes to Utengobard, was not unwilling to come to this Conference; for these
are his words, from Amsterdam, to Utengobard, 4. Martii, 1603, Non vereor in
Arnoldi, Helmichii, Gomari, and quorumvis aliorum, qui istarum rerum
peritissimi habentur, conspectu and praesentia de illis disserere, probe mihi
conscius de sententiae meae veritate, and illorum censuram minime reformidans;
quod tibi idcirco dico, ne hoc ipse timidius urgeas. Haesi quidem aliquando
circa nonnullos articulos, non eousque tamen, ut quae de illis creditu
necessaria ex Scripturis probari possunt, non adprobaverim; sed jam per
diuturnas and assiduas meditationes id consecutus mihi videor, ut de omnibus
and singulis rationem reddere non extimescam. Accordingly a Conference there
was, before the Curators of the University, and the Deputies of the Synod; in
which Arminius most expressly denied and condemned the Opinions of the
Pelagians, concerning Grace, Free Will, Original Sin, Perfection in this Life,
Predestination; adding, that he approved all that Augustine, and other Fathers
had written against Pelagius; promising also to read nothing dissonant to the
received Doctrine. Hereupon he was admitted Professor; and for some time he
defended the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches in the Points of Christ's
Satisfaction, Justifying Faith, Justification by Faith, Perseverance in Faith,
Certainty of Salvation, and such other matters as afterward he denied, and
which he then (as is acknowledged by his good Friend Corvinus) maintained
against his conscience. He seems by all his carriage, to be one that was
resolved not to venture any further into the sea, than tha^ he might have
opportunity to step when he pleased upon the shore. Would Barnevelt have
publicly undertaken his Patronage, then he would have ventured to proclaim
defiance to all Dissenters; but Barnevelt not daring so to do, the valiant
Professor contented himself mostly to instill his Notions and Principles into
some of his Confidents: magnifying Castalio, Cornhertius, Suarezius, and as
much vilifying Calvin, Beza, Martyr, Zanchy, Ursin; yet when he was accused so
to do, he peremptorily denies himself to be in the least guilty of
discommending Calvin, or commending Cornhert; as may be seen in his Epistle to
Sebastian Egbert, bearing date May 3. 1607, page 236. (Which is the usual way
and method of Heretics,) he expressed himself in such terms, as would serve to
insinuate his own private Heterodox Opinions: and yet if he were questioned for
them, he knew how to reconcile them to the Confessions and Catechism; contrary
to which he pretends, in a Letter to Utengobard, that he never did say any
thing in public. He dreaded a Synod as the shadow of death; and thereupon set
himself to make the Authority of the Magistrate in Ecclesiastical affairs, to
be all in all: and when he saw that all his Policy notwithstanding, a Synod was
like to be called, and he in that Synod like to be made answer for himself,
seized upon with sorrow and overwhelmed with grief, he fell sick and died, Anno
1609, October. 19.

Two things more I would have observed concerning Arminius, 1. That in the set
Conference betwixt him and Gomarus, not long before his death, he declared that
he had never opposed the Doctrine of the certain Perseverance of Saints, and
that he would not then oppose it: because such testimonies might be brought for
it out of the Scriptures, as he was not able to answer: he would therefore only
propound such places as made him somewhat to scruple and doubt about that
matter.

2. He would not then consent to have Adolphus Venator dismissed, and to take
another Pastor in his place; though Venator was at that time, as well for the
impurity of his life, as his Doctrine, under the just censure of the Church.

If the Remonstrants count it any way for their honor, to fight under such a
Captain or Leader, let them enjoy their fantasy. Had not our first Reformers
been endued with more courage and resolution, Religion had never made that
progress among us, that now it has. I Will never think any Opinion worth
embracing, whose Author either doubts of it, or durst not suffer for it.
However, glad I should be if they who follow, or rather outrun Arminius in the
five Points, would be of the same mind with him as to the Pope of Rome: of whom
he thus writes in an Epistle to Sebastian Egbert, bearing date September. 24.
1608, Aperte profiteor me Pontificem Romanum pro membro corporis Christi non
habere; sed pro host, pro perduelle, pro sacrilego, pro blasphemo, pro
tyranno, and violentissimo injustissimae in Ecclesiam dominationis usurpatore,
pro homine peccati, pro filio perditionis, pro exlege illo celeberrimo.

Well had it been for the Belgic Churches, if Arminianism and Arminius had
both died together: but they did not. Breaches, as the Doctor truly notes, page
49, grew wider and wider. The Remonstrants, having no hopes their cause should
succeed, if debated in a full and lawful Synod, endeavor to shelter themselves
under the wing of the Civil Magistrates; whose favor that they might be the
more sure to gain, they ceased not upon all occasions to imbitter the Civil
Powers against all the Pastors that were of a persuasion contrary to theirs,
speaking and Printing of them, as if they were enemies to Magistracy, and
introduced an Ecclesiastical Power collateral and equal to the Civil: (an
Artifice that Heretics have always used when they have been put to their
shifts.) Not content thus to reproach their Brethren, they further propound, if
there must needs be a Synod, it might consist not of Persons delegated by the
Churches, but of certain nominated by the Magistrate. Thinking that by this
device they had put themselves out of all fear of Synodical censure, they make
an open Schism, and present a Remonstrance to the States of Holland and
West-Friesland; in which they neither nakedly and plainly declared their own
Opinions, nor heartily represented the Tenants of their Adversaries. Much they
endeavored that no Copy of this Remonstrance might be given out; but at length
a Copy was got, and a Contraremonstrance made. The Doctor tells us, that

Dr. H. Page 49, 50.
The Remonstrants gained exceedingly upon their Adversaries: for the whole
Controversy being reduced to these five Points; the Method and Order of
Predestination; the Efficacy of Christ's Death; the Operations of Grace, both
before and after Conversion; and Perseverance in the same; the Parties were
admitted to a public Conference at the Hague, Anno 1611, in which the
Remonstrants were conceived to have much the better of the day.

Answ. But if a man may be so bold, Who were they that conceived the
Remonstrants had much the better of the day? The Remonstrants themselves?
Proprio laus sordet in ore. The Contra-remonstrants? They never so conceived,
but rather reported themselves Victors. When were the Differences reduced to
five Heads? Not before the Hague Conference, I am sure; for the Deputies of the
Churches charged the Followers of Arminius with Heterodoxies, in more Points
than the five now mentioned, as appears by all the complaints exhibited against
them. And there fell out something, which might justly give the World occasion
to think, that the Remonstrants were leavened with Socinianism, as well as with
Pelagianism. For care being taken to chose one who might succeed Arminius in
his Professors place, the Remonstrants thought none so meet as Vorstius; a man
strongly suspected to be a great favourer of Socinus, and who had then newly
Printed a Book, in the which he ascribed unto God, Quantity, Composition,
Mutability, Passive Power, and such other imperfections, as are altogether
repugnant to his perfect Essence: yet at the Conference, the Remonstrants
professed unanimously, that they had found nothing in the Writings of Vorstius,
contrary either to Truth or Piety. At the Conference also the
Contra-remonstrants urged, that there were more things controverted betwixt
them and the Remonstrants, than were contained in the five Articles.

I shall make a few Annotations on the five Articles of the Remonstrants,

1. That Almighty God ordained to save all those, in Christ, for Christ,
through Christ, who being fallen, and under the command of sin, by the assistance
of the Holy Ghost, do pers^vere in Faith and Obedience to the very end.

This Article is such, as no Christian would deny; yet the Remonstrants do lay
down such Assertions, as do by most necessary consequence quite overthrow this
Decree. For Poppius, a man of note and renown among them, seems much to doubt,
Whether a late, though never so serious Repentance, do avail a man to
Salvation? Nay, he expressly affirms, ( in praxi Consolationis aegrotantium.)
that he is destitute of any Promise so universal, as that by it any one who
dies with but a deathbed serious Repentance, can be assured that he shall go
to Heaven; and that it is uncertain whether such late serious Penitents, go
with the Thief into Paradise, or with those that die in their Sins to Hell. Nor
is this the singular opinion of Poppius, I can show the same in Episcopius; not
to mention some of our own here in England. The Sublapsarians make the object
of Reprobation, man fallen into Sin; the Remonstrants say, that man recovered
out of Sin by true Repentance, may be the object of Reprobation and Damnation.
How easily might I, if I took pleasure in recriminations, tell them of
ascribing Tyranny, Hypocrisy, Respect of Persons unto God? But I only desire
my Reader to consider, whether the Remonstrant do not Preach another Gospel,
than what has been hitherto taught in the Churches of Christ? Nothing was
thought more undoubted, than that he who believes shall be saved: The
Remonstrant says, this is not necessarily true; and that thousands and
millions of true Believers may go to Hell. How will such as these deal with an
Unbeliever that is but twenty years old? Will they persuade him to believe in
Christ? He will ask them, what encouragement they can give him to believe? Will
they reply, Salvation is promised to Believers in Christ? He will rejoyn; Can
you give me any Promise, that I shall live long enough to show sorth my Faith
by my Works? If you cannot, there is but small encouragement to believe; for, to
a late, though serious Believer, you say, there is no certain promise of
Salvation. But let us leave the Remonstrants to reconcile themselves to their
own Decree, and take notice, that at the Conference the Remonstrants were
further asked, 1. Whether they made this Article to contain the whole and
entire Decree of Predestination? 2. Whether they made Faith and Perseverance in
Faith, causes or conditions which did antecede Election unto Salvation, or
fruits which grow out of Election and so follow it? After some tergiversation,
they said, 1. That they acknowledged no other Predestination, than that which
they had in their first Article expressed. 2. That Faith did, in the
consideration of God* precede Election to Salvation, and was not a fruit of it.
This is their opinion about the Decree, which, now that it is opened, appears
to be as repugnant to Scripture, as before, when it was wrapped up, it seemed
agreeable. Were this Opinion true, it should not be said, that we are elected
that we may be holy, but because we were holy: nor would the Holy Ghost have
said, as many as were ordained to eternal life believed; but, as many as
believed were ordained to eternal life.

The second Article, as translated by the Doctor, page 50 is, That Jesus Christ
suffered death for all men, and in every man; that by his death upon the Cross^
he might obtain for all mankind forgiveness of sins, etc. with this condition
notwithstanding, that none but true Believers should enjoy the benefit of the
reconciliation, and forgiveness of sins.

I have, if I forget not, in the Pamphlets of some Quakers, read this phrase of
Christ's suffering death in every man, and looked upon it as nonsense; so I do
still, and therefore will hope it never dropped from the Doctor's Pen, but is
to be put among the Errata's of the Printer. As to the Article it self, I can
easily grant it to be a truth, (though all Contra-remonstrants do not); but it
is not all the truth. Christ died not with an intent only to make man
reconcilable and salvable, but also to purchase for some, whom the Scriptures
call Elect, the very graces of Faith and Repentance. Here therefore is the
Question betwixt us, Whether Christ died with the same intention for all?
Remonstrants affirm, Contra-remonstrants deny. Christ has procured, that
whoever comes to the Father through him, shall be saved; but there are also
some, for whom he has procured that they shall come to the Father.

The third and fourth Articles are so worded, as to contain nothing but the
truth, though not all the truth; save that in the end of the fourth it is said,
that

As for the manner of the cooperation of Grace, it is not to be thought
irresistible, in regard that it is said of many in the holy Scriptures, that
they did resist the Holy Ghost, Act. 7, and in other places.

Which is a very rude Assertion, either impertinent or false. If the meaning
be, that some operations of the Holy Spirit are resisted, some of his motions
quenched, who ever denied this? If the meaning be, that the converting work of
the Spirit may be resisted in some degree and measure, that will not be
gainsaid neither: But this we say, that converting Grace does determine the
Will: that Grace effectual, does not leave the Will at liberty utterly to
resist it, or not; but takes away that which would resist or make head against
the Spirit.

As for the fifth Article, it seems they did not know their own minds: They
profess that such as are ingrafted into Christ by a lively Faith, may be
Conquerours; Christ is ready to assist them, if for the^^ parts they prepare
themselves to the encounter, and beseech his help, and are not wanting to
themselves in performing duties: But they say, it is first to be well weighed
and proved by the holy Scripture, Whether they may not by their own negligence,
forsake those Principles of saving Grace, by which they are sustained in
Christ? before they can publicly teach these Doctrines with any sufficient
tranquillity or assurance of mind.

All which is no more than may be said of that fundamental Doctrine concerning
the Trinity: for it must first be well weighed, Whether the Scriptures do hold
forth a Trinity of Persons? before a man ventures publicly to Preach that
Mystery. I think that if we search the Scriptures, it will soon be found, that
though the Regenerate may lose the Spirit of God, and would soon lose him if
they were left to themselves; yet there is a promise by which God has engaged
himself, not to let sin so far prevail in them as quite to extinguish the
Spirit, totally to destroy the new Creature and workmanship of God.

One would think that the Remonstrants, who thus poorly sought to hide their
Opinions, should not have much reason to brag of the success of the Conference;
yet Dr. Heylin is resolved to tell us, that

Dr. H. Page 54.
The Contra-remonstrants had the worst, and finding themselves not to have
thrived much better by their Pen-combats, than in that of the Tongue, they
betook themselves to other courses, vexing and molesting their Opposites in
their Classes or Consistories, endeavoring to silence them from Preaching in
their several Churches, or otherwise to bring them to Public Censure.

Answ. It would better have beseemed the Doctor to have answered Dr. Ames his
Coronis ad Collationem Hagiensem, than thus to have boasted of an imaginary
success; especially seeing the States ordered to leave these Articles just in
the same state that they were in before the Conference. After this Conference,
I find the States enjoining both parties to give in their judgments, what they
thought the best way for the composing of the Controversies that were in the
Church, which did much endanger the Peace of the Commonwealth. The
Remonstrants, in order to accommodation, propounded, that there might be a
Toleration, both Parties being permitted freely to Teach and Publish their
Opinion. The Contra-remonstrants judged the best way for the composing of the
Differences was this, that a National Synod should be called, in which it might
be determined which Opinion was most agreeable to Scripture, and to the common
judgment of the Reformed Churches. These two ways being propounded to the
States, they were divided in their Opinions, and so nothing could be
determined: only they enjoined, in order to the crushing of the Vorstian Party,
that none should teach otherwise concerning Christ's Satisfaction for our Sins,
the Justification of Men before God, Saving Faith, Original Sin, Certainty of
Salvation, than had been taught in other Reformed Churches, and in those
Provinces. If ever men forsook the Word, and betook themselves to the Sword,
the Remonstrants did. Adolphus Venator, when Magistrates were chosen that
favored not his Opinion, stirred up the common Rabble against them; nor would
this Rabble rest, till their Magistrates had been thrown out of their places,
and others put into them: who had no sooner got the Government of the City into
their hands, than they proceeded, by the instigation of Venator, to lay by the
Elders and Deacons, and to deprive the two Pastors, Petrus Cornelii and
Cornelius Hellenius, of their places. The like was done by the procurement of
that Superficiary Creature Grevinchovius to Cornelius G^selius. What should I
speak of the Persecutions raised by the Remonstrants against all those that
(not knowing how to join in communion with them) did only go to some Orthodox
Minister, that would feed them with Bread and not Poison? The banishing, or
incarceration of so many Contraremonstrants shows, that the Remonstrants would
not grant that Toleration unto others, which they so earnestly desired for
themselves. But at last King James and the Prince of Orange prevailed so far
upon the States, that a National Synod was like to be called: What do the
Remonstrants now? Why they go about to persuade some Statesmen, that a
National Synod was contrary to the Liberty of the Provinces; for every Province
had a Power, a supreme independent Power, to determine concerning Religion as
was by the Rulers of the Province judged most convenient: that this Power was
to be maintained even to the taking up of Arms, and the Hazard of their Lives.
These Seditious Speeches did so wor^ upon some Governors of Cities, that
making a conspiracy, they decreed to raise Soldiers, that should be neither
under the States General, nor the Prince of Orange. In how many places this was
done, it matters not to relate; but by this means such a Civil war had been
raised, as would have had worse consequents than ever had all the Wars with the
King of Spain, had not the States General required the Prince of Orange to
imprison the Heads of this Conspiracy, viz. Barnevelt, Hagerbetius, Grotius,
Ledenbergius; to disband these new Soldiers; to purge the Cities of
disaffected Magistrates, and to substitute better in their rooms: All which the
Prince with incredible courage and speed effected, and that without the
effusion of the least drop of blood. So at length Per varios casus, per tot
discrimina rerum -- a Synod is called, and did assemble at Dort, 1618. This
Assembly is sufficiently reproached by the Doctor, whilst it is for some Pages
compared with the Council of Trent, the worst meeting that ever pretended to
assemble in the name and fear of God. Yet may not the Assembly think much to be
thus maligned, when he is so hardy as to affirm, that

Dr. H. Page 55.
The States General put Barnevelt to death contrary to the fundamental Laws of
the Country, and the Rules of the Union*

Answ. Had he been pleased to name what fundamental Law this execution of
Barnevelt was contrary to, we might then have been in some capacity to examine
the truth of so high and deep a charge; but since he has not descended to
particularize wherein the contrariety did consist, we must look on the charge
as a calumny; so much the more improbable, because one of Barnevelt's
Confederates, viz. Ledenberg, was after his condemnation surprised with so much
horror of Conscience, that he turned his own Executioner: concerning which let
me have leave to say, I have but seldom observed, that true Christian Patriots
have been given up to self-murder, unless in some fit of frenzy or deep
melancholy, which I do not find the best Friends of Ledenberg allege on his
behalf. Barnevelt died more manfully, acquainting those who were present at his
Execution, how faithfully he had served his Country. I much wonder what was
the source of his zeal for the Remonstrants: Doubtless it was not any love to
their Opinions; for in the continuation of the incomparable Thuanus, ad annum
1618, we have his Apology to the States of Holland and Wes^-Friesland, in which
he tells us what his Opinion was then, being 71 years old, and what was his
Opinion whilst he resided at Heidleberg* and this Opinion was such as methinks
should not please the Arminians, I am sure it is a n^te above my ela, viz. That
every good Christian must believe that he is by the grace of God, and
satisfaction of our Lord and Redeemer Christ Jesus, predestined to Salvation;
that by the same grace of God he had received Faith, by which he firmly
believes that his Salvation has not any other foundation than the grace of
God, and merits of our Lord Jesus Christ; that if it happen that he fall into
grievous sins, he must firmly lean on this confidence, that God will not permit
that he should persevere in sins, and that it will come to pass, that if he ask
pardon, God would convert him through his mercy, call him to repentance, and
make him persevere in faith to the end. He adds, that he had showed this his
Opinion to sundry Divines, and even to Olevian himself; by whom he was told,
that he might acquiesce in that Doctrine, and that there was no need he should
search deeper in the secrets of this mystery. Again, speaking of Remonstrants
and Contraremonstrants, he says, that he did not more incline to one Opinion
than another. So that we may think that he had only some Political design to
drive on. What it was, and how much it failed him, I will not say; but go on to
see, whether the parallel do hold good betwixt the Council of Trent, and the
Synod of Dort.

Dr. H. page 55.
1. Neither of them was concerned to confute, but condemn their Opposites.

Answ. What shall be done to thee thou aspersing Pen? Did not the Synod of Dort
count themselves concerned to confute their Adversaries? Let all the English
Arminiuns, laying their heads together, name me that part of just liberty that
was denied to the Remonstrants. It was not only allowed, but also enjoined
them, by all the Power Civil and Ecclesiastical, to lay down their Opinion
concerning Predestination and Reprobation, together with their Reasons: But the
Politic Disputants say, they would begin at Reprobation, or do nothing at all;
they peremptorily re^used to set down their own Tenants, and to confirm them;
and will needs make themselves Opponents, and put the Synod to Answer Cavils
scraped up out of the Writings of Men dead, or not there to answer for
themselves. If they may not have a liberty to propound, explain, and defend
their cause in that very way they judge best, they will not lay down their
Opinions. Must the Synod be thought not to account it self concerned to confute
Adversaries, because men cited and summoned to appear, are not permitted to
give and prescribe Laws, to those whom in Reason they are bound to Obey? The
Doctrine of the Remonstrants is confuted in the Canons of the Synod of Dort, by
plain Texts of Scripture, or by covincing Reasons, and common experience. Their
Synodalia are refelled abundantly by Ames, by Wallaeus, Twiss, etc.

Dr. H. page 55.
2. The Council of Trent consisted for the most part of Italian Bishops; some
others being added for fashion sake, and that it might the better challenge the
name of General: as that of Dort, consisted for the most part of the Delegates
of the Belgic Churches, to whom the foreign Divines were found inconsiderable.

Answ. What a wild parallel is this? Is it equally faulty for a National Synod
to consist mostly of the Delegates of the Belgic Churches, and for a Council
pretending to be Ecumenical, to consist mostly of Italian Bishops, and those
many of them but titular? Far better, and with more color of reason it might
be objected against our Synods, or Convocations here in England, that they
consist not mostly, bu only of English Divines; not one Foreigner being
admitted either to consult or to decide, nor the Puritan Non-conformists so
much as invited to declare their Opinions, or to allege any thing in their own
Justification. Who ever till now found in any History, a National Synod branded
and censured, because as many Foreigners were not admitted to it, as there were
of that very Nation for whose sake the Synod was assembled?

Dr. H. Ibid.
The Differences as great at Dort as they were at Trent; and as much care taken
to addulce the discontented Parties in the one, as the other.

Answ. In this also the Parallel is unparallel. Differences there were at the
Council of Trent about the very fundamentals of Faith: but the Differences at
Dort were very slight and inconsiderable; lying in the way and manner of
expressing and wording the Doctrine, rather than the Doctrine it self; as will*
appear by examining particulars. It Is said that

Dr. H. page 55, 56.
The British Livines, together with one of those that came from Breme,
maintained the Universal Redemption of mankind by the Death of Christ: but this
by no means would be granted by the rest of the Synod.

Answ. Concerning this matter of Universal Redemption, it is noted in Dr.
Balcanqual's Letters, page 2, That as there was difference touching it in the
Synod, so there was much difference about it in their own ( i. e. the English)
College: The Question among them was, whether the words of Scripture, which
are likewise the words of our Confession, Christus oblatus est aut mortuus, pro
toto humano genere, seu pro peccatis totius mundi, be to be understood of all
particular men, or only of the Elect who consist of all sorts of men? Dr.
Davenant and Dr. Ward (says the Letter,) are of Martinius of Breme 's mind,
that it is to be understood of all particular men: the other three take the
other exposition, which is of the Writers of the Re^ormed Churches, and namely
of my late Lord Bishop of Salisbury: both sides think they are right, and
therefore cannot yield one unto another with a safe Conscience. Yet page 4. S.
D. C. Lord Ambassador, is desired to acquaint (if he thought fit,) his Grace of
Canterbury, that this matter is like to be a difference, not in the English
College, but in the Synod. How well this may be accorded with the former
Letter, is not for me to judge. Page 8, it is said that some of the Provincials
did use Martinius very uncivilly. He is a man very learned and honest, sound in
all the five Articles, as any man in the Synod, except the second; in which
when the Canons come to be made, your Lordship will hear there will be more of
his Opinion besides himself. Page 25, Dr. Balcan. gives us a relation of the
Judgment of the British Divines and others, concerning the second Article. The
Bremenses are affirmed, according to the number of their Persons, to have
delivered three several judgments. Martinius his judgment was first read, who
did stand in effect to the Tenants of the Remonstrants in the second Article,
he mainly overthrew the received distinction and restriction, and did determine
that Christ did truly die for all and every man; that he was made a
propitiation both for the godly and the wicked; and that by his death he did
impetrate reconciliation with God for them all: at the latter end he condemned
many things both in the Remonstrants and in the Contraremonstrants Opinion; but
more in the Contraremonstrants. Isselburgius defended both the received
distinction and restriction. Crocius propounded a middle way b^tween his two
Colleagues, granting (which we also in our College did,) that Christ by his
death did merit some supernatural things for the wicked, but nothing belonging
to the remission of sin, or reconciliation with God: and so indeed, for any
thing I could perceive, his judgment was directly against that of Martinius,
and in effect all one with that of Isselburgius. Finally, we are told page 26,
that in the second Article there was not altogether so uniform a consent, both
in regard of phrases and forms of speaking and in regard of some Propositions,
as were in the first; yet certainly there was very great, more than could be
expected from so great a number of learned men, in so hard and controverted an
Article. So that whereas Dr. Heylin counts it a reproach to the Synod, that
there was so much difference about universal Redemption, Dr. Balcan. thinks it
an honor there was no more. But not to leave this matter so much in the dark;
If Martinius was for the Arminian equal indifferent universal Redemption of
every one of mankind, I am well assured, that neither all the British Divines
nor any one of them was of his mind: but indeed his Opinion and the
Remonstrants Opinion, seem to be heavenly wide; as may be proved from his
subscriptions to the Synodal Determinations about the Death of Christ, and man's
Redemption by the Death, Acta Synodi page 356. for no man can think, that in
those Determinations, the Opinion of the Remonstrants was not condemned. But if
this be not thought proof sufficient, let the Reader be pleased to turn to Acta
Synodi page 639, etc. where the judgment of this Martinius is fully recorded.
In the very entrance he professes to follow Ambrose, Si Christus pro omnibus
mortuus est, specialiter tamen pro nobis passus est. Page 643, 644. he rejects
seventeen Errors, the far greater part of which are the Tenants of the
Remonstrants. As for Ludovicus Crocius, he has in his Duodecas Dissertationum
(provoked thereunto by the cavils of some) taken a great deal of pains to state
this Question about the universality of Christ's Redemption; in the tenth
dissertation, he explaineth the terms, and re^ecteth the extreme Opinions; in
the eleventh, he delivers his own Opinion, in no fewer than nineteen
Conclusions, in any of which, if the Remonstrants can find any lettice for
their lips, much good may it do them. For my part, I wonder that Dr. Balcanqual
should here write, that for any thing he could perceive, the judgment of
Crocius was directly contrary to that of Martinius. The judgments of both
those Learned men are recorded about the second Article, and there is not the
least contrariety betwixt them. Both hold universal Redemption in the sense
laid down by Dr. Davenant, in his most excellent Dissertation de morte Christi:
Neither of them maintain it in any other sense. Both of them heartily agreed
and subscribed to the Canons of the Synod of Dort made in the second Article,
as did also our British Divines; who yet had received it in charge from King
James, not to deny that Christ died for all and every man. Moreover, it is most
manifest, that Crocius did in the Synod maintain the Universality of Christ's
death, by a Letter written to him from one of his Colleagues from Burnt,
during the Session of the Synod Anno 1619, Feb. 25. For in that Letter, he has
thanks given him for maintaining the Universality of Christ's death; and is
told, that his Opinion was approved by all to whom he had shown it. Vide Crocii
Disser. secundam de Peccato Originis, page 61, 62.

Dr. H. page 56.
The general Body of the Synod not being able to avoid the inconveniences which
the Supralapsarian way brought with it, were generally intent on the
Sublapsarian way: but on the other side, the Commissioners of the Churches of
South-Holland thought it not necessary to determine which were considered, man
fallen or not fallen, while he passed the Decrees of Election and Reprobation. But
far more positive was Gomarus, who stood as strongly to the absolute,
irrespective and irreversibls Decree (exclusive of man's sin, and our Saviors
sufferings,) as he could have done for the holy Trinity, and delivered his own
judgment in writing apart by it self.

Answ. Thus our Historian: But what says Dr. Balcan. page 25, So ended the
reading of the judgments of all the Colleges concerning the first Article; in
which, praised be God for it, there was not the least suspicion of dissension
in any thing: And it is to be noted, that all of them determined homo lapsus to
be the subject of Predestination, except Gomarus, whom all men know to be
against it, and the South-Hollandi, who only said, they would determine nothing
of it. One Doctor upbraids the Synod with Dissension, another praises God (as
there was reason) for their Unity. Indeed if the difference betwixt Supra and
Sublapsarians be calmly considered, it will be found to be only in Apice Logico
(as Dr. Twiss speaks;) and to determine of Logical Niceties, is not work proper
for a Synod of Divines met together to settle the Peace of the Churches. I
believe the Divines Assembled in this present Convocation, have as considerable
differences among themselves about the Doctrine of the Trinity, as this comes
to; nor is it to be expected that we should all agree in minutiis Logicis aut
Metaphysicis, any more than that we should be all of the same stature or
complexion, as to the outward man. Mr. Hoard, so much made use of by our
Quinquarticular Historian, plainly confesses, there is no reason that the
Supra and Sublapsarians should differ about circumstances, since they agree in
the substance. Iunius thought the three Opinions about the object of
Predestination were rather seemingly than really opposite. Piscator will not
grant that they are opposite, but only different; and therefore, that all three
may have place, he resolves the matter of Predestination into three Acts, The
first is, the Decree of creating men to different ends; this must needs have
for its object massam nondum conditam. The second Act is, the Decree of
permitting Sin; and this must needs have for its object man created, but not
yet corrupted. The third Act is, the Decree of Electing and Reprobating; and
this must have for its object, man both created and corrupted. It Is besides my
purpose to enquire, how much or how little is to be said against this way of
reconciliation: but this I undertake to prove, that the distance betwixt the
Supralapsarians and Sublapsarians is not so great, but that they both may and
ought to look upon one another as Brethren, and walk in love, which is the bond
of perfection and fulfilling of the Law: The more pity is it that they should
so bitterly inveigh against each other, as it cannot be dissembled that
sometimes, they do; but this must be imputed to that (...), of which we shall
have some degrees, as long as we live in this World. But the Doctor, as if he
were perfectly free from this crime, thus throws his stones at others.

Dr. H. page 56.
Nor were the differences managed with such sobriety as became the gravity of
the Persons, and weight of the business; but brake out many times into such
open heats and violences, as are not to be paralleled in the like. Assemblies:
the Provincial Divines banding against the Foreigners, and the Foreigners
falling foul upon one another.

Ans. For proof of this we are referred to the Letters of Mr. Hales and Dr.
Balcanqual; from which-it does indeed appear, that some very unhandsom language
was used by Gomarus and Lubbertus against Martinius, and by Scultetus against
him and Crocius. But sure Scultetus was not Foreigners, but one Foreigner.
Gomarus and Lubbertus were, though Learned men, yet constitutionally hot and
choleric, and therefore apt to break out into unseemly speeches against those
who opposed them. Dr. Balcanqual says, he could no more blame them for being
angry, than he could a stone for descending to its center. I more wonder that
Scultetus, a man of better temper, should so far forget himself; but he was
transported through a misapprehension, that his reverend and dear Colleague was
abused. I scarce account it Christian in Dr. Heylin to rake up and bring to
remembrance the passionate speeches of men who have many years since given an
account unto their Master, and never to mention the satisfaction they made to
the men whom they had injured: For it is said, page 15, that they protested
they had no hard opinion of Martinius or Crocius; but accounted them Learned,
Religious, Orthodoxal, were sorry for what they had done, and would do so no
more.

Page 64, we have an attempt to make another parallel betwixt the Council of
Tren^ and Synod of Dort, the sum whereof is this:

Dr. H.
That the Canons and Decrees of the Council of Trent were so drawn up, as that
both Soto the Dominican, and Vega the Franciscan, did expound them all
according to their own Opinion; which yet did not only differ, but also were
expressly contrary: And so the Conclusions and Results of the Synod of Dort were
so drawn up for giving satisfaction to the Sublapsarians, that those of the
Supralapsarian faction might pretend some title to them also; in so much that
there was a bitter contention betwixt Voetius and Maresius about the sense of
the Synod.

Answ. A comparison that halts not on one foot, but upon every soot; concerning
which it is hard to say, whether it be more spiteful or ridiculous. The
Opinions of the Franciscans and Dominicans differ far more, than do the
Opinions of the Supra and Sublapsarians. Nor is it so material to determine,
whether truth lie on the side of the Supralapsarian or Sublapsarian, as whether
the Dominican or Franciscan be in the right. The parallel (a Fanatic would
say) had run better if it had been thus drawn, As both Franciscan and Dominican
lay claim to the Canons of the Council of Trent, so both Arminian and
Anti-Arminian lay claim to the seventeenth Article of the Church of England.
The holy Scriptures themselves are not so penned, but that men of contrary
persuasions do lay claim to them; upon which score yet, none but a professed
Papist or Infidel, will accuse them of insufficiency or obscurity: Particularly
the Apostle makes use, Romans 9, of the Greek word (...), borrowed from the
ancient Prophets; some say, that by it he intends the Mass corrupted; others
say, the Mass uncorrupted: some circumstances are picked up out of the Text and
Context that do favor both Opinions, What then? Must the divinely inspired
Scriptures be condemned? God forbid. Besides, how does it appear that the
Supralapsarian Divines in or about Holland do pretend some title to the
Conclusions of the Synod of Dort, or that there has been a bitter contention
betwixt Voetius and Maresius about the sense of the Synod? Voetius indeed is a
Supralapsarian; In his first Volume of Select Disputations p. 55, he lays
down the several moments of the decree of Reprobation: but p. 356, 357,
professes, he easily bears those who are of a contrary or different
judgment from him; provided, they do not rashly condemn the Supralapsarian
Opinion maintained by so many and great Divines; and confesses, the Synod
propounded the common opinion, concerning Election out of Mankind; but not so
as to reject the ascending above the fall: with other Heterodoxies, and
dangerous improprieties. If Maresius had any bitter contention with him on this
score, he may do well to enquire, whether such contending be not a fruit of the
flesh; and if Voetius in other Writings lay no more claim to the Synod, than he
does here, he can scarce be said to pretend any title to it.

Dr. H. page 65.
Here we have the old and several times confuted Calumny, of The Synods not
giving the Remonstrants leave to speak for themselves before condemnation,
renewed; and a Story concerning the Hard measure meted out to the Delegates of
the Province of Utrecht, which is the only thing that deserves to have any
notice taken of it.

Answ. Concerning these Deputies, I shall first observe what Mr. Hales says of
them in his Letters, page 29, and then relate the whole story concerning them;
and so leave it to any one, but Dr. Heylin, to judge, whether they were hardly
dealt with? I marvel much that the Province of Utrecht, being the strength of
the Remonstrants, could find no wiser men to handle their cause; for as they
did very foolishly in bewraying their private instructions, so in this whole
altercation they did not speak one wise word: So Mr. Hales. Matter of fact
stands thus; A doubt was moved concerning the Deputies for the Remonstrants of
Utrecht, Whether they were to be a part of the Synod, or in the number of the
Remonstrants who were cited to appear before the Synod? The Reasons of the
doubt were sundry; but the chief was, because in their credential Letters, they
were charged to defend the cause of the Remonstrants: now it could not be, that
they should be both Defendants and Judges in the same Cause. The answer to this
was, that they were not so limited, but that in their private instructions they
had leave to do otherwise if they thought good. But when the private
instructions were read, all that could be found was but this, that they had
commission to defend their Cause, or to labor at least for an accommodation,
or toleration of it: but that they had power to pronounce decisively, that did
not appear. Hereupon it was determined, that they could not be Members of the
Synod in this Cause (for in any other they might,) but only as Citati. Yet
notwithstanding, that they might see the equity of the Synod, it was permitted
them to keep their places, on these conditions: 1. If they would quit their
Defense of the Cause. 2. If they would give no Advice or Counsel, either
directly or indirectly, to the Citati; and by no means meddle with them in
their Cause, etc. Not liking these Conditions, they declared that they resolved
to leave their place of Judges, and to adjoyn themselves to the other
Remonstrants: which they did. What in all this proceeding is unjust? what
unworthy of a Synod?

Dr. H.
Page 66, the Synod is charged with being too favorable to the
Supralapsarians, and particularly to Maccovius, who openly maintained, that God
willed sin; that he ordained sin as sin; and that by no means he would have all
men to be saved; that God does propound his Word to Reprobates for no other
end, than that they might be left without excuse, etc. yet was he only
dismissed with a friendly admonition.

Answ. It Is true, that some of these speeches, though not all, were charged on
Maccovius: Nor could the Synod condemn them simply, unless they would also
condemn St. Austin, who is known in his Euchir. cap. 29, to have delivered this
maxim, Non aliquid sit nisi omnipotens fieri velit, vel sinendo ut fiat, vel
ipse faciendo: Many Scripture-expressions of like import might be produced. But
yet if Maccovius did use such expressions before persons not seen in these
Controversies, he did ill, and was to be blamed; for all truths are not fit for
all ears. Sufficient for the Synods vindication it is, that Maccovius was
brought before the Synod upon a by-occasion; and that the business betwixt him
and Lubbertus waas committed to the examination of some few Delegates,
according to whose report he was dismissed.

But the Contraremonstrants are cruel and malicious; How so? Forsooth,

Dr. H. page 67.
Because when the Synod had concluded in the condemnation of the Remonstrants
Doctrine, they next proceeded to the destruction of their Persons; calling upom
them to subscribe to the Acts of the Synod, and setting them a peremptory day
for conforming to it: And when they saw, that would not do it, by their
incensed importunity they procured a Proclamation from the States General, to
banish them from their native Country, with their Wives and Children, and so
compelling them to beg their bread, even in desolate places.

Answ. A very lamentable story* that Remonstrants should be banished and their
Wives and Children, and that they should be compelled to beg their bread, and
their begging be confined to desolate places! But what were the names of these
Remonstrants, who were put to all this extremity? Where is this Proclamation of
the States General recorded, that such an ignorant man as I am may come to the
sight of it? Certainly whatever these Remonstrants had of Free Will, they had
not much Wisdom in them, or else they would never have made choice of desolate
places to beg their bread in; places inhabited, and populous Cities, are the
places that our English Beggars resort to. The Histories that I meet with,
relate of attempts and endeavors, that were used in order to an accommodation;
and the Contraremonstrants easily granted, that the simple mere Arminian, might
be continued, and cherished in the bosom of the Church, provided, that he would
not disturb the peace of the Church: But the Remonstrants unhappily choosing
Episcopius to write their Confessio Fidei, broached and vented so many Socinian
Errors, that there was no possibility, without violating all rules of
discipline, of taking them into Church Fellowship. That no severity was used
against the Remonstrants presently upon the concluding of the Synod, I am not
able to say; It is not unlike, they might have a little of that measure meted
out to them, which they had meted out unto others: But I am sure that
Curcellaeus himself acknowledges, that Episcopius an Arminian, and somewhat
more than an Arminian, was not long after he was put out of his Professors
place, suffered both at Rotterdam and Amsterdam, to enjoy a preferment
honorable and gainful. Might the Non-conformists, who differ only in a point
of Ceremony and Discipline, have so fair quarter from their Episcopal Brethren*
as the Remonstrants had from the Contraremonstrants, they would not sure make
such loud Complaints of Trouble and Persecution, as now they do.

That the Remonstrants may be the more pitied, the Doctor acquaints us with

Dr. H. page 67, 68.
An History of the Netherlands, written by one Cross, a Fellow of no parts or
judgment; In which History it is affirmed, that there was a Synod called at
Dort to suppress the Arminians; and that the said Arminians held among other
Heresies, 1. That God was the Author of Sin. 2. That he created the far greater
part of mankind only of purpose to damn them; with several others of that kind:
Which every man of reason knows, not only to be the consequence and resuits of
Calvin's Doctrine, but to be positively maintained and taught by some of his
Followers.

Answ. But first, What if some ignorant Writer, abused with a false report, or
not well understanding the Language of the Dutch with whom he conversed, did
thus misrepresent the grounds of the Arminians condemnation, is this any other
cross (to borrow one witticism from our Historian) than what has befallen men
as honest and famous as the Remonstrants? Was not our own Countryman
Wickliff, who did write professedly against begging Friars, reported by his
Adversaries to be a favourer of begging? If it could be proved, that the
Contraremonstrants had set this Mr. Cross thus to traduce and calumniate the
Remonstrants, it had been a soul crime in them; but that they did so, is not
pretended. The whole blame therefore of this false report must be on our
English Bishops, who would admit a Fellow of no Parts or Judgment into holy
Orders, and license his History; and on the Author himself, who would venture
to write the History of things that he understood not. But what if this Cross
was of the Remonstrants own making? It has been usual for men, upon some
accounts truly guilty, and deservedly blamed, to procure themselves to be
accused of some other things that they were never guilty of, that so the World
finding them abused in one point, might think them innocent in all. In the late
Wars, I believe some Wags have framed stories against their own Party, and sent
them up to London to be Printed, with no other design than this, to make the
Diurnalists and Intelligencers ridiculous, and suspected even when they related
truth.

2. If this Cross is so much to be blamed for his malice, why does Dr. Heylin
imitate him, if not exceed him, in saying, that every man of reason knows that
these blasphemies are the consequence and result of Calvin 's Doctrine? Were
all those eminent Professors and learned Preachers, who in their Sermons and
Lectures and printed Treatises, have maintained, that it does not from Calvin's
Doctrine follow, that God is the Author of Sin, men of no reason? or were they
so base, as to go about to maintain a thing against their knowledge? Certain I
am, that they are not followers, but forsakers of Calvin, who positively
maintain and teach, either that God is the Author of Sin, or that he created
the far greater part of mankind only of purpose to damn them. That he again and
again denied God to be the Author of Sin, no man will gainsay, that has read
either his Institutions, or his Answer to the Calumnies of a Knave, or his
Discourse against the Libertines. As so creating men on purpose to damnthem,
let the Reader but observe what he says for himself, de aeterna Dei
providentia, Etsi quid toti generi humano futu^um esset, Deus ab initio
decrevit; haec tamen loquendi ratio, nusquam apud me occurret, Finem creationis
esse aeternum interitum.

3. What if a man should say, that some at least of the Remonstrants are guilty
of these Blasphemies? They make God to be the Author of Concupiscence, and
Concupiscence is Sin; therefore they make God the Author of Sin. They also make
God not to have decreed to any one that Grace, which alone can keep men out of
Hell; therefore they make him to create mankind with an intention to damn the
whole race. In the Calvinists method, some are sure to be saved: but in the way
of the Arminians, no man can be saved; all being left to the liberty and
indifferency of their own corrupt wills, which must necessarily ruin them at
last.

I will not justify Mr. Cross in what he relates concerning the Remonstrants;
but I will say this, that I can manifestly prove, that sundry who pretend the
greatest zeal against making God the Author of Sin, do themselves make him the
Author of Sin, or say he may be the Author of Sin. It is not unknown that
Socinians deny God's prescience of the free actions of men. Si omnia futura
Deus praesciret, opor^ebit omnium causas jam ante ab ipso ordinatas esse, atque
ita necessario efficeretur auctor peccatorum, are the words of the Compendium
of Socinianism, confuted by Cloppenber. cap. 6. When we urge against them that
of John 6.64. he knew from the beginning who should betray him: What answers
Volkelius? That the sin and punishment of Judas contained in them somewhat
singular. Well, allow them to have in them somewhat singular; yet this
Proposition, the sin of Judas was certainly foreknown, must needs be true: If
it were foreknown, then it was foredetermined: If foredetermined, then God was
the cause of it. I instance secondly in Episcopius, from whom I thus argue;
Christ may be the Author of Sin.
Christ is God: Ergo
God may be the Author of Sin.


The Major is most clearly laid down by Episcopius; and for many Pages together
defended in his Answer to the acute Camero, cap. 13. Yea, and he wonders that
Camero should think he had any fear, when this, so at least ill-sounding a
Proposition, was delivered by him. He alleges that some Schoolmen had said
so before him: Which may not be denied; but yet seeing actus sunt suppositorum,
he will be as hard put to it, not to make God the Author of Sin, as any
Calvinist.

I instance thirdly in Mr. Th. Pierce, from whom thus I argue: God is the Cause
of every Being, whether visible or invisible:
Therefore God is the Cause of Sin.


The Antecedent is an Article of our Creed. The Consequent is proved; because
Mr. Pierce again and again asserts Sin to be positive. His beloved Author Dr.
Iackson* in h^s eighth Book of Commentaries, hopes to bring himself off from
this argumentation, by limiting the Proposition, God made all things visible
and invisible, to substances; which only are the immediate and direct effects
and proper objects of creation. Accidents had their beginnings as appurtenances
to their subjects, by resultance only. But I answer, that I suppose he is the
first that ever said, that All accidents had their beginning by resultance; and
the first that so limited this maxim to substances. For though it may be
granted, that both creation and generation, strictly so called, are terminated
to substances; yet accidents are truly things, and must have a cause, a real
cause: and doubtless the Churches did ascribe the production of all things,
whether accidents or substances, unto God: and, in reason, he is as truly the
cause of what is comproduced and concreated, as of what is produced and
created. In page 35, this Dr. Jack. tells us, what emboldned Divines to assign
unto sin only a privative being, viz. the maxim that Omne ens est bonum: but
that he tells us, is meant only of a Metaphysical goodness. No Divines thought
otherwise, but they were afraid to assign so much as a Metaphysical goodness to
sin, which is simply evil: and such fear would have seized on Dr. Iackson also,
had he but well weighed, what that is which goodness Metaphysical does
superadde to entity. But that he had never weighed; and yet talks confidently,
in this whole Controversy, concerning the nature of sin, and the efficient of
sin, as if his eyes had been blessed to see the things that scarce any saw
before him. Book 10, page 3012, etc. cap. 5, 6, he goes about to make Apologies
for the harsh expressions of some good Writers, and well deserving of all
Reformed Churches: Yea, and for the Errors of the Dominicans, or other
Schoolmen, (more faulty than, as he says, Zuinglius or his Followers, in this
point.) He wishes that Paraeus had never entered into dispute with Becanus
about this Question, Whether God be the Author of Sin? and is sorry he came off
no better, for Calvin's credit, or for his own. Avers that Bellarmine, and
Aquinas his Followers, do make God the Author of Sin, by as clear and
infallible consequence, as either Zuinglius or his Followers have done. He
says the best Apology that can be made for Aquinas, or Calvin, is this, that
they were homines (...), Authors of many various Works; but of this Apology we
that follow them are not capable. That if we were called to a strict account,
or examination of our Doctrine by the rules of Art, a new question would have
risen in our Schools, Whether to attribut such acts and decrees unto God as we
do, and yet withal to deny, that we concludently make him the Author of Sin,
does not argue as great a measure of artificial foppery or supernatural
infatuation, as it would of impiety, to resolve dogmatically, in terminis
terminantibus, that God is the Author of evil? But what is it that may make
this Question allowed in any Academical Act? Why, it might be justly allowed,
though the Answerer were furnished with no other ground besides that usually
avouched distinction, between the act and obliquity of the act: especially if
the distinction were applied unto the first sin of our first Parents. In that
sin, the act and obliquity, are altogether as unseparably annexed, as rotundity
is with a sphere; and to imagine there should be one cause of the act, and
another of the obliquity of the act, would be as gross a solecism, as to assign
any other cause of the rotundity of a sphere besides him that frames it. A
discourse so loose, that I much wondered it could find any place in the
writings of an Author so famed for learning: For every Fresh-man knows, that
there is not the same relation betwixt the act and its obliquity, as there is
between rotundity and a sphere; every Fresh-man knows, that there may be a
sufficient ground of distinction, betwixt things that are inseparably annexed;
every Divine also knows, that the Calvinists do make man to be the cause, of
the sinfulness of the act as well as of the act it self: all that they say is,
that the first cause may af^ord that concourse to a sinful action, which is
necessarily required to every action, and yet not be the cause of the
sinfulness of the action. If Dr. Iackson think this impossible, he should have
told us, how God could concur to the good actions of his Saints, and not be the
cause of the sinful imperfection which is inseparable from every action that
does not flow from a principle that is perfect. I account he has forsaken the
Reformed Churches, who says, that God gives any one, in this life, such a
holiness as does not fall short of the Law: That habitual holiness which falls
short of the Law, must necessarily, when it is put forth, produce actions short
of the Law; and so far as they fall short of the Law, they are sinful: Now I
ask, is God the cause of my imperfect act of love to himself? If he be not, why
do I either pray to him for it, or praise him for it? If he be the cause, then
he is either the cause of that sinful obliquity necessarily cleaving to it, and
making it need pardon; or else he may be the cause of the act, and not of the
sinful obliquity that does inseparably cleave to it. If Dr. Iackson affirm the
latter, he contradicts his own Principle; If the former, he avoucheth that
blasphemy which all good men abhor. Wherefore he might have done well to
reserve the excuse of Polygraphy for himself: Calvin and Aquinas in this matter
do not stand in need of it. As little need had Paraeus of his sorrow for
entering into dispute with Becanus; for if ever man had the better, Paraeus had
it that day. About the year 1604, Becanus at Mentz had a disputation,
concerning God's being the Author of Sin; in which he expressly said, that the
God of the Calvinists was the Devil: For this, among other things, Paraeus
undertook him, and Ferarias and Malhusinus, and brought them to acknowledge,
that whatever became of Calvin, it could not truly be said, that the Devil was
the God of the Calvinists: What is victory, if this be not victory? when did
innocence triumph, if not that day, which was Aug. 1, An. 1608.

For a conclusion of the fifth Chapter, the Doctor takes a leap out of Holland
into the City of Sedan, and tells us, that

Dr. H. page 68.
It is said, that Franciscus Auratus was shamefully ejected out of that City,
for no other reason, but because from Jam. 1.13, he largely declared, that God
was not the Author of Sin.

Answ. This is said; but by whom? or upon what grounds? Were we promised that
the Historical Narration should be collected out of the Vide Title Page.
Public Acts and Monuments of the several Churches? and must we now be put off
with a it is said? If I should write all that has been said of Dr. Heylin and
his Party, the World (till such calumnies were confuted) would have but little
charity for them. It is said so perhaps by a Fellow of as little judgment as
Mr. Cross, or by some, who had taught his tongue to utter lies. That there was
such a Minister as Auratus, and that he was (being a well meaning man but no
deep Scholar) inveigled by the eloquence of Daniel Tilenus Professor at Sedan,
to favor and to vent the Remonstrants Opinions, I grant: but that he was
forced to leave his place, only for preaching that God was not the Author of
Sin, is a story fit only to be reported by those who have learned from the
Jesuits calumniari fortiter. I was much concerned to know, who it was that had
so much abused the Doctor, and at length I found him to be Episcopius, in his
Examen of the Theses of Iacobus Capellus. In the first page of that Examen, he
relates this improbable story: but neither tells where he read it, nor from
whom he heard it: and we all know, that Episcopius did never so regard his
conscience, but that he would sometimes defile it with a lie; for he came into
the Synod with a lie, and went out of it with a lie. On which account, the
Reader may be the less troubled, to find in the same page the Reverend and
Religious Peter Moulin accused, as one that was feign to leave France, not for
his zeal in Religion, but for pragmaticalness. Indeed I have rarely observed
Episcopius, either to give a Contra-remonstrant his due praise, or not to give
a Remonstrant more than his due. Vorstius, in his Answer to Camero, is a man
than whom he had never met with one more modest, and more studious of a good
conscience: in his Theological institutions, he counts it not sufficient to
vindicate the Latin Translation of Castalio from the censures of Albericus
Gentilis and Thuanus, but he must also commend the faithfulness and elegance of
his French Translation; whereas Doctor Rivet, a more competent judge of the
elegancy of a French Translation, assures us, that no French man can read it
without indignation and laughter, so foolish and ridiculous is it in many
places.

Dr. H. Page 70.
We are now come to the sixth and last Chapter of the first Part of the
Quinquarticular History: in which the Doctor goes about to enquire after the
causes that might move the Synodists to use such cruelty (severity, he says,
is too mild a word to express their rigor) toward all those who did maintain
the five Articles.

Answ. An enquiry which supposes that which is not to be supposed, viz. that
the Remonstrants error in the five Points, was the sole ground of all the
penalties that were inflicted on them. All men, who are any way acquainted with
the History of the Belgic Churches, do know that the Remonstrants were not
proceeded against merely for erring in these five Points, but also for
Socinianism and Skepticism, of which to this day they have never been able to
purge themselves. Indeed the Holland Remonstrants are a Sect of men, that are
not fitted for communion with any Christian Churches, except we will call the
Assemblies of the furious Anabaptists or the blasphemous Socinians, by the name
of Christian Churches. They can have no communion with any Church, that is
either idolatrous, or that makes any opinion necessary which they judge not
necessary, or that teaches that the Magistrate may hinder and ^orbid the
meetings of Sectaries; by which means they exclude Papal, Calvinistical,
Lutheran Churches from their communion, and so separate from all Christendom.
Whatever they write about Moderation, Toleration, Syncretism, is but
hypocrisy; for they cannot have communion with any Churches that will not deny
the Magistrates power to repress Conventicles, and the Churches power to define
Heresies and determine what is necessary to be believed. Arnoldus Poelenbergius
in that little piece of his, wherein he labors to prove, that the Remonstrants
cannot with a safe conscience join in communion with the Contra-remonstrants,
lays the necessity of separation, not on the Heterodoxy of the
Contra-remonstrants in the five Points, but on their tyranny in imposing
Confessions to be subscribed, and in going about to define what is necessary to
be believed. Episcopius in an Epistle to Grotius, bearing date April 29, 1631,
says Quinquarticulanam litem tanti non facerem, nisi conjunctam sibi haberet
eam, quae est de discretione necessariorum dogmatum a non necessariis, sive de
mutua Christianorum tolerantia. Video esse qui aliter sentiant, and intra
quinque articulos rigide and (...) consistendum esse arbitrantur; at eorum
sententiae ego non possum accedere, Epist. Eccles. page 694. Among which
Epistles also it may be seen how Andreas Reuchlinius does school the
incomparably learned Isaac Casaubon, because in his Epistle to Cardinal Perron,
he let fall an expression commending the fact of the King and Archbishop, in
burning the Book of Vorstius, de Deo and Attributis. But let us see how well
the Historian can acquit the Remonstrants in the five Points.

Dr. H. Page 70.
Their Doctrine (says he) is impeached in these Points of no smaller crimes,
than to be destructive of God's grace, introductory of Popery, tending unto
spiritual pride, and to sedition or rebellion in the Civil Government. Which
Objections I shall here present, as I have done the Arguments of most
importance, which were excogitated and enforced against the conclusions and
determinations of the Synod in the said five Points: and that being done, I
shall return such answers as are made unto them.

Answ. Here I cannot but observe, 1. That whereas he drew up the Charge of the
Remonstrants against the Contra-remonstrants, and took no notice of any Answer
that was or might be returned by the Contra-remonstants; yet now that the
Remonstrants are to be impeached, he either finds or makes Answers for them:
which is not fair in an Historian.

2. That one part of the impeachment is the creature and figment of the
Doctor's own brain, viz. that of tendency to sedition or rebellion in the Civil
Government, No Contra-remonstrant charge this on the Doctrine of the
Remonstrants, as to the five Points; though sometimes they charge sedition and
rebellion on the persons of the Remonstrants.

3. That all the impeachment is not exhibited. For the Remonstrants are charged
to overthrow the praescience, the simplicity, the immutability of God; yea, and
all piety and Christian consolation. But it is wisdom to raise no more enemies
than a man thinks he shall be able to contest with. I believe, had the Doctor
consulted with his Friends, they would have advised him to have mentioned no
Objections at all, so miserably and unfortunately are they answered.

Dr. H. Page 70.
First, It is objected, that this Doctrine (viz. the Doctrine of the
Remonstrants) is destructive of God^s free grace, reviving the old Pelagian
Heresies so long since condemned, To which objection it is answered, that the
Remonstrants speak as honorably of the grace of God as any other whatsoever;
as may be proved by comparing the first branch of the fourth Article with that
golden saying of S. Augustine, Sine gratia Dei praeveniente ut velimus, and
subsequente ne frustra velimus, ad pietatis opera nil valemus.

Answ. So much do all true Christians abhor whatever Doctrine does derogate
from the grace of God, that the greatest opposers of grace have found it
necessary to speak honorably of it. Pelagius indeed in his first attempts,
never so much as mentioned the word grace; but he soon saw, his opinions so
propounded would never take: therefore he began to use the word grace, but by
it understood no more than Free Will, as appears by that known and commonly
quoted place of S. Aug. Sermon. 11. de Verb. Apost. cap. 7, Disputantes contra
gratiam pro libero arbitrio secerunt auribus piis and Catholicis offensionem:
coeperunt horreri, coeperunt ut certa pernicies devitari, coepit de illis dici
quod contra gratiam disputarent: and invenerunt ad revelandam istam invidiam
tale commentum; non, inquit, contra gratiam Dei disputo quod liberum arbitrium
defendo: videte acumen sed vitreum, quasi lucet vanitate, sed frangitur
veritate: that is, God gave us our Freewill, and therefore whatever we do by
the strength of Freewill, is to be ascribed unto Grace. When this would not do,
then he began to allow another Grace, that was commonly called Gratia legis aut
doctrinae: allowing God not only to bestow on us Free Will, but also by his Law
and Precepts to show and discover unto us our duty. Aiunt ideo ista si^e open
divina non sieri, quia and hominem Deus creavit cum libero arbitrio, and dando
praecepta ipse docet quemadmodum homini sit vivendum, says S. August. de
spirit. Lit. cap. 2. adding also in other places, that they acknowledged a
Grace of remission vouchsafed to all such as did unfeignedly turn themselves to
him. Yea, he stuck not at last to anathematize any one that should say or
think, that the grace of God was not necessary, not only for every hour and
moment, but also for every one of our actions. Who would think that Pelagius
were not now become as Orthodox as any of the Fathers of the Council before
whom he was summoned to appear? But the wretch was as Heterodox as ever; for by
grace necessary for every moment, and every act, he understands either only
that it is needful that we should keep in memory that our sins are pardoned, or
that we should always have in our eye the example or Law of Christ. I list not
further to prosecute the several states and steps of Pelagianism; Great art was
used, as may be seen both in Vossius and Iansenius to refine the error, that
it might be the more easily swallowed down. What I have already noted shows
sufficiently, that men may in words acknowledge grace, and yet in works deny
it, sacrificing to their own nets, and burning incense to their own drags.
Whether the Remonstrants are not to be put into this number, will appear, if we
compare and put together their writings concerning converting grace. I grant
that they in the third Article, and in the greatest part of the fourth, speak
fairly concerning grace; but, Did they not in the Hague Conference deny the
infusion of any habit or new vital principle? Did they not say, that the Spirit
acted no otherwise upon the Will than by moral swasion? and that nothing was
put into the will, or did properly inhere in the Will, but natural Liberty?
That one clause, as for the manner of the cooperation of this Grace, it is not
to be thought irresistible, does (says Paraeus) take away all that from grace,
that was before given to it. Acta Synod. p. 311. and p. 317. If the grace which
causes conver^ion be not irresistible, but resistible, such as may be by the
will of man hindered or not hindered, all that in the third or fourth Article is
attributed to grace is but an empty smoke of words, and those effects they
speak of cannot be ascribed to the grace of God but indifferently and remotely,
to the wills of men not resisting they must be ascribed specifically and
nearly. If so, then all they so magnificently write of grace, will be either a
falsity, or a cheat: It will be a cheat, or a falsity to say, 1. That man has
not faith from himself, and in the strength of his Free Will; for from himself
he will have the specification of the operation of grace, because by not
resisting grace, he has distinguished himself from others. 2. That he cannot
of himself think, will, or do any good; for it is good, of a man's self well to
specify a resistible indifferent operation. 3. That God by his holy Spirit
does regenerate and renew us, etc. for God by his Spirit shall only resistibly,
indifferently and remotely, and therefore improperly; we our selves shall
specifically, immediately, and properly regenerate and renew our selves. Many
other things of this nature are by this learned Professor there urged, which
the Remonstrants will never be able by all their sophistry to evade.

This also will make good the other charge against the Remonstrants Doctrine,
taken notice of by the Doctor page 73, viz. That it does naturally incline a
man to the sin of pride: For the removal of which he would offer something, but
such a something as is next to nothing, viz. that

Dr. H. Page 74.
That Doctrine must needs more cherish humane presumption, which puffs men up
with the certainty of their election, the infallibility of assisting and
persisting grace, and the impossibility of falling from the attaining of that
salvation which they have promised themselves; than that which leaves these
Points uncertain, which puts a man to the continual necessity of calling upon
God, and working out the way unto his salvation with fear and trembling.

Answ. For who will not reply to him, that in the Contra-monstrant way there is
more ground for prayer and for fear and trembling; since the
Contra-remonstrants ascribe to God the working in us both to will and to do,
which the Remonstrants cannot? The Remonstrants must needs, if they will not
contradict themselves, affirm, that God does, pari gradu and modo, in the like
degree and measure, will and work antecedently, the conversion of those who are
converted and of those who are not converted. If so, what ground for fear, since
man can convert himself when he pleases, and restore the lost habits when he
lists? The Apostle Paul, one of the rarest examples of humility, did sure
best know, what is most likely to quel and subdue high thoughts and proud
imaginations: and what weapons does he make use of to this end? Why two such
interrogations, as must needs prick the bladder, with the Contraremonstrant,
but not with the Remonstrant. Let it be demanded of a Calvinist, What have
thou, that thou have not received? He will answer, Nothing. Let it be enquired,
Who made thee to differ? He will reply, The mere undeserved omnipotent grace of
God. But a Grevincovius will say, He made himself to differ. But perhaps no
Arminian else will say so: Yes, Mr. Playser in his Appello Evangelium has said
so; and all Remonstrants must say so, that will not fly from their principles.
To manifest which, I shall only English something out of the Declaratio
sententiae Remonstrant. circa Articul. cap. 3, and 4. page 21, If it be
enquired, why this man is converted, and another not? We answer, this man is
converted, because God converts him, not opposing any new contumacy; the other
is not converted, because he does oppose new contumacy. But you will enquire,
why this man opposes new contumacy, not the other? We answer, this man
opposes, because he will oppose; the other opposes not, because he is moved
by grace, ne velit opponere, to have no mind to oppose. If you enquire, whether
he who opposes not new contumacy, and by consequent is converted, has greater
grace than he that opposes, and by consequent is not converted? We answer,
that antecedent and preventing grace may be equal; but the former has
cooperating, the latter has not. Hence it is plain, that it is man, according
to the Remonstrants, who makes sufficient grace to be effectual; and by
necessary consequence, man does make himself a penitent, a believer, a
regenerate person: than which Pelagius himself could not write or speak, higher
or more proudly.

Dr. H. Page 72.
The Historian is pleased to mention another charge against the Remonstrants
Opinions, viz. That they symbolize so much with the Church of Rome, that they
serve only as a bridge for Popery to pass over into any Church into which they
can obtain admission. And further tells us, that this clamor being first raised
in Holland, was afterward much cherished, and made use of by the Puritan or
Calvinian party among us in England.

Answ. Where I take notice, 1. That he gives a false account of the rise and
first beginning of this charge, that These points do* where they are
entertained, dispose men's minds for the reception and entertainment of Popery.
For before the troubles raised by Barnevelt, our Divines did suspect
conditionate election, and falling away from grace, etc. to be an inlet to
Popery: as is manifest from the Letter of the Heads of the University of
Cambridge to their Chancellor, written upon the occasion of Baret's and Baro's
preaching or reading things agreeable to the Opinions that are now called
Arminian; in which Letter, bearing date March 8. 1595, it is affirmed, that if
passage were permitted to those Errors, the whole Body of Popery would by
little and little break in upon them; to the overthrow of Religion, and
consequently the withdrawing of many there, and elsewhere, from true obedience
to her Majesty; and therefore in the close they humbly beseech his Lordships
good aid and assistance, for the suppressing in time, not only of these
Errors, but even of gross Popery, like by such means, in time, easily to creep
in among them, as they found by late experience it had dangerously begun.

Unto this and many other testimonies, alleged by Mr. Hickman in his (...),
the Doctor will yield no assent; but answers three things,

Dr. H. Page 73.
1. Why should not a general compliance with the Friars of S. Dominick, be
thought as ready a way to bring in Popery, as any such compliance with the
Friars of S. Francis?

Answ. To which the Answer is easy, Because the Dominicans opinions do much
tend to the exaltation of grace, and the subjection of carnal reason to Faith;
so do not the Tenants of the Franciscans or Jesuits. Now where grace is
exalted, and carnal reason is sub^ected, there Popery, which has its
foundation in carnal reason and pride, does not so easily prevail or obtain.
This the Pope understood well enough; which made his Bull to roar so loud
against the, in this point, Orthodox Iansenians.

Dr. H. Ibid.
2. The Melancthonian, or moderate Lutherans, which make up infinitely the
greatest part of the Lutheran Churches, agree in these points with the Jesuits
or Franciscan Friars, and yet are still as far from relapsing to the Church of
Rome, as when they made the first separation from it.

Answ. Where, 1. It is strange that one pretending to History, should represent
the infinitely far greater part of the Lutheran Churches as Melancthonian, or
moderate Lutherans: When as it is known, that a very great, if not the greatest
part of the Lutherans, are as far from being Melancthonians, or moderate, as
Dr. Heylin is from being a Presbyterian or Puritan. But it seems, if men be
never so violent for Ubiquity, Consubstantiation, Images, if they be but
against Predestination, they shall pass for meek and moderate, and
Melancthonians.

2. It may a little be questioned, Whether the present Lutherans be as far from
relapsing to the Church of Rome, as were those Lutherans who made the first
separation from it? I know not how much there may be of truth in the talk that
has lately filled our ears, concerning Unions and accommodations betwixt the
Lutheran and Roman Churches. It would be very strange if the Lutherans, having
all this while been bred up among Images, should be as averse from
Image Worship, as were the first Reformers.

3. It is as false as what is most false, that the Lutherans do agree with the
Franciscans or Jesuits in these Points. Micraelius in his Heterodoxia
Calviniana, disput. 5. par. 15, rejects both the Dominicans and Jesuits: the
Dominicans, as inclining to the Stoics; the Jesuits, as falling in with the
Pelagians. Afterward he rejects the Jesuits Scientia media, confessing that
Voetius does well and unanswerably prove against them, that there is nothing
knowable but what is the object either of the knowledge of simple intelligence,
or vision. Speaking also of Arminius, he will not undertake for him. Tarnovius
openly rejects the Arminians, as of a contrary judgment from the Lutherans,
Miscel. Sacrorum lib. 2. page 710, Vorstiniani, Arminiani, and similes in
Belgio, quando aiunt fide nos praedestinari ad vitam aeternam, idem dicunt, non
idem nobiscum sentiunt. He that would be more fully convinced of this, that the
Lutherans are not Arminians, may please to consult what Durfieldus, a Divine of
Rostoch, has written against Johannes Assuerus Amsingus; where he shall find
the Arminians accused of Pelagianism, before the chief Doctors of those
Universities, that follow the Augustan Confession. This I take on trust from
Dr. Rivet, having not as yet had the opportunity to see the Author. But casting
my eye on Gerhard's Son's Epistle Dedicatory, prefixed to his Father's Comment
on Deuteronomy, I found him use no obliging language of the Arminians; for he
says, that they have ad dogmata Socinianorum admodum prurientes aures, and he
calls Simon Episcopius, the Infaelex Arminianismi interpolator. But the cutting
killing Answer (which he cannot mention without triumph) is still behind, and
is thus worded:

Dr. H. Page 73.
3. If Arminianism be so ready a bridge for passing over to Popery, it would be
very well worth the knowing, how and by what means it should come to pass, that
so few of the Remonstrants in the Belgic Provinces, and none of those whom
they call Arminians in the Church of England, should, in so long a time, pass
over that bridge, notwithstanding all the provocations of want and scorn, which
were put upon the one, and have been since multiplied upon the other.

Answ. If this be so well worth knowing, I shall be the more easily pardoned,
if I take some pains for the Doctor's information.

1. It is asked, Why so few of the Belgic Remonstrants did turn Papists? For
answer, I might ask, How, if the Contra-remonstrants Opinions did as much
incline and dispose men to Popery as the Remonstrants, it came to pass, that
not one Contra-remonstrant ever went over to Rome? But I forbear that, and
shall offer two reasons which might (as I conceive) hinder the Belgic
Remonstrants from turning Roman Catholics. 1. Their Wives and Children might
hinder them from passing over this Bridge: forsake these dear Relations they
could not, and yet if they did not forsake them, they could promise themselves
no good reception, or kind entertainment among the Pontificians. 2. The
Remonstrants might therefore not turn Papists, because they were resolved to
turn to a worse sort of Heretics, viz. the Socinians. But did the Remonstrants
strike in with the Socinians? Yes, that they did; as I will undertake to prove
by as good evidence as can be expected in matter of fact. Till I be called to
make good this undertaking, I refer my Reader to Vedelius's Arcana Armin. and
Horn^beck's Apparatus ad Soc. conf.

2. It is asked, Why none of those whom they call Arminians in England,
notwithstanding all provocations of want and scorn, are turned Papists? To
answer this, times must be distinguished; 1. Before Bishop Laud ruled and
governed, those who embraced the Opinions since called Arminian, were indeed
out of the way to preferment; but who knows not that many of them turned
Papists? Barret did so in Queen Elizabeth's time: And the Heads of Houses in
Cambridge complain in the before mentioned Letter, that they had found by
experience, that Popery came in among them at the door of Arminianism, (so I
may call it by a prolepsis.) 2. When Bishop Laud ruled and disposed of all
Ecclesiastical preferment, Arminians had no provocations from want or scorn,
yet even then some of them turned Papists. 3. Since the breaking out of the
late unhappy Civil Wars and Confusions, there has a cup of trembling and
astonishment gone round the three Nations, and Divines of all persuasions have
been made to drink of it; all Ministers, by what names soever dignified, by
what opinions soever distinguished, have been made the filth and offscouring
of all things: but that scorn or want has befallen any one merely for being a
favourer of Arminianism, is more than I know, more than Dr. Heylin can prove.
Sure I am, that many of those Army-men, who gloried in nothing more, than in
trampling all Law and Right under foot, were Arminians; and he who was the only
Divine that dared to justify that horrid fact, the murdering of the late King,
is known to all to be a great stickler for Arminianism. But it were to be
wished, that no Arminians had, during the late Troubles, forsaken the Church of
England, and took sanctuary in the Synagogue of Rome. I was bred up with Mr. W.
H. at Katherine-Hall in Cambridge, who was looked upon by the whole Society, as
a very studious, ingenious, hopeful person, and was thereupon chosen Fellow
before he was Master of Arts; but by acquaintance with some, he began highly to
dote on the Common Prayer Book, and would leave good Sermons at Cambridge, and
walk over to Coton on purpose that the might hear the Liturgy; withal he had
^ucked in Arminianism: but within the compass of two years, he fell to
downright Popery, and is now, as they say, a Seminary Priest. I would not have
mentioned this story, but that it is notorious, I suppose, all Cambridge over.
What shall we think of the late Bishop of Gloucester? was not he called and
reputed an Arminian? and did he not die a Son and Member of the Church of Rome?
The present Bishop of Exeter, I confess, makes an Essay to clear him from
Popery, but very unhappily: whilst he goes about to prove that he did not die
a Papist, he makes him not a Christian for the former part of his life. These
are the words used concerning him, page 637, No wonder if dying and dejected,
he chose rather to depart in communion with the Church of Rome, than to adhere
to the Church of England, which he thought now decayed and dissolved (at least
as to its visible order and polity,) if not quite destroyed: not that he owned
(I hope) a communion, or conciliation with the Roman Church as Popish, but as
far as it was Christian. If dying he was reconciled to the Church of Rome as
Christian, then before he was at enmity with it as Christian; and if so, he was
not a Christian. I hope a man may adhere to the Church of England, and yet
depart in communion with the Church of Rome as Christian? In a word, there was
not many years since a Book published, in which were contained the names of
many of those who had lately revolted to Popery: Let Dr. Heylin read over that
Catalogue, and then tell me, whether it was not a strange piece of boldness to
ask so confidently, Why none of those who are called Arminians, had in all
these times turned Papists?


Dr. H. Page 75.
Finally it is objected (but the objection rather concerns the men than the
doctrine) that the Arminians are a Faction, a turbulent and seditious Faction,
so found in the United Provinces from their very first spawning. To this he
answers, page 77, that there is nothing in the Doctrine of the Arminians (as it
relates to the five Points in difference) which can dispose the Professors of
it to any such practices.

Answ. I know not that any one has in print affirmed, that the Arminian
Doctrine does naturally lead men to Faction and Sedition; but if any one have
affirmed any such thing, he may prove his affirmation by an argument which
cannot easily be answered, viz. Those Doctrines which do incline men to Pride,
do naturally lead men to Faction and Sedition. The Arminian Doctrines do
incline men to Pride; ergo. The Minor has been before confirmed, the Major is
undeniable, as being built upon plain express Scripture.

But the Doctor, contenting himself nakedly to affirm, that there is nothing in
the Arminian Doctrines, which can dispose the Professors of it to seditious
practices; tells us from some, that it is not so with the Doctrine of the other
Party,

Dr. H. Page 78.
By which men's actions are so ordered and predetermined by the will of God,
even to the taking up of a straw, ut nec plus boni nec minus mali, that it is
neither in their power to do more good, or commit less evil than they do; and
then according to that Doctrine, all treasons, murders, and seditions are to be
excused, as unavoidable in them that commit the same, etc.

Ans. There is, I remember, a very noted story out of Holland, concerning an
Anonymous Libeller, who would needs father it upon the reverend and learned Dr.
Carolus de Maets, that God has decreed and determined, that all things should
be done in that time, manner, place, and order, that in time they are done; and
that according to this decree and divine determination, a man cannot do more
good or evil than he does or omitteth: quite leaving out the explication that
was used by the judicious Professor, viz. that in a divided sense, a man may do
more good, and avoid more evil than he does. Just so does our Historian
proceed, making the Calvinists to affirm that absolutely, which they affirm not
but with a distinction. In sensu composito, a man cannot do more good than he
does, nor abstain from more evil than he abstaineth from; but in a divided
sense he may. Which made our Divines of Great Britain, in the Synod of Dort,
among the Heterodox assertions which they rejected, place this; Hominem non
posse plus boni facere quam facit, nec plus mali omittere quam omittit: falsum
hoc est and absonum, sive de homine irregenito and animali intelligatur, sive
etiam de renato and gratia sanctificante suffulto. The learned Camero was
charged by his angry Adversary Tilenus, to hold, that man could not do more
good than he does, nor omit more evil than he omitteth. To this, what answers
he? Ego vero libens agnosco multa esse, etc. (page mihi 704,) I willingly
acknowledge, that there are many things, which uttered simply, do, and that
deservedly, breed offense; which very things, if they be expressed
conditionally, appear such, as that no man dare contradict them; e. c. If any
one shall say, that Pharaoh could not let Israel go, he would offend the ears
of all, if he add not, unless God soften the heart of the wicked man: but God
has not decreed to do that, therefore it shall not be, it cannot be, that
Pharaoh let Israel go. Now his speech will offend no man, no not Tilenus
himself; who does not deny, but that on hardened persons there does lie, and
that by the decree of God, a necessity of sinning. Nor can the Arminians (those
of them who assert Divine praescience) tell how to extricate themselves out of
the labyrinth, but by the help of this distinction, in sensu composito and
diviso: which is made use of by Curcellaeus, in his Epistle to Limburgius from
Amsterdam, December. 13. 1653.

To be short, there is no Doctrine that can more incline the heart to
quietness, patience, contentedness, (all which are perfectly contrary to
sedition and rebellion) than does the Augustinian, or (if that must be the
name) Calvinian Doctrine. For this being once firmly imprinted on our hearts,
that all things come to pass according to the determinate counsel of God's
will; that the worst of Persecutors are but the staff of his indignation, do
fulfill the will of his purpose when they most cross and go against his
legislative will, what place is there left for murmuring? what place for envy
or revenge against second causes or instruments? It was not an Arminian, but a
Calvinistical apprehension of God's providence about sin, which Joseph had,
when unto his Brethren, fearing lest after their Father's death their old
unkindness should be remembered, he answered, Genesis 50.19, 20, Fear not, for am I
in the p^ace of God? but as for you, ye thought evil against me; but God meant
it unto good, to bring to pass as it is this day, to save much people alive.
Nor would he be understood of the otiosa permissio (that Mr. Calvin writes
against) when he says, Genesis 45.8, It was not you that sent me hither, but God.

This notwithstanding, Dr. Heylin will quote some testimonies and authorities
tending to prove, that Calvinism or doctrinal Puritanism, is destructive to all
Civil Policy and Government. Some scraps he produces from the old Lord Burley,
from the Bishop of Oxford, Rochester, St. David's, from Dr. Brooks, once Master
of Trinity College: But he is, I believe, afraid to come either to the pole or
to the scale; either to weigh, or to number authorities with us. We'll
undertake among English Protestant Divines and Statesmen, to produce forty who
deny Calvinism to have any tendency to Sedition, for one who has laid any such
thing to its charge. And it is a shrewd sign that the Doctor was hard put to it
to find out Abettors for his Cause; else he would not have set Cerberus to bark
against his Adversaries, which yet, to his no small shame, he does, page 79,
80. This Campneys was in Edward the Sixths time a Papist, a railing furious
Papist; and as such did suffer, though not unto death. At the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth's, he began to make disturbance in the Church, nibling at the
Doctrine that was generally received and entertained, by men every way his
betters; in so much that he was generally voiced to be Popish and Pelagian. His
Pamphlet, (if it might be called his) unto which he was ashamed to put his
name, was quickly con^uted by Mr. Crowly and V^ron, men famous in their
generation; of more judgment and insight in the ancient Fathers, than to
ascribe the Questiones Vet. and Novi Testamenti to St. Austin, which every Puny
knows to be the fruit of some Pelagian brain.

I had thought to have followed our Historian, and to have given some account
of his second and third Part, in which he goes about to persuade us, that the
Doctrine now called Arminianism, was and is the Doctrine of the Reformed Church
of England: But this work is already done to satisfaction by Theophilus
Churchman, in his Revi^w. If any say, this is but a shift; I do here desire
either Dr. Heylin, or any Friend of his, to direct me to the best Argument in
either of those two Books, and if I do not presently make it appear that that
Argument is either so weak as not to need an Answer, or else already answered,
I shall then yield the Cause. Till this be done, I shall not think, that that
can be the Doctrine of the Church, which was contradicted by all or the major
part of our learned Divines and Professors; or that the whole Church, or any
lawful Authority in the Church, would impose it on her own Members, to recant
her own Doctrine. Seeing the Church is wont to enjoin Recantation to those who
contradict her Articles; why she should enjoin the Recantation of Arminianism,
if that be agreeable to her Articles, he had need have the wisdom of all the
seven wise men that can show a reason. I conclude, humbly beseeching all those
who are entrusted with Ecclesiastical Authority, that they would not be so
intent on Discipline, as to neglect Doctrine; that they would not let
Pelagianism enter in, under pretense of opposing Puritanism; that Calvin 's
Institutions, and the 39 Articles, which a Convocation in Oxford joined
together, may not now be put asunder.

Here I had thought to put an end to my Animadversio^ on the Doctor's History;
supposing it needless to wipe of^ the aspersion of Arminianism from the English
Church, which scarce any one of our own for fourscore years had the confidence
to cast on her. Yet having since considered, that men easily believe that which
they greatly desire, and finding many, very many men's wits at work, to gather
up any thing that may evince so much as the least probability, that a merely
conditional election, was never reprobated by the Martyrs, Composers of our
Homilies and Articles; I have taken up a resolution to give my self the
unpleasing trouble of running through the second and third Part of the Doctor's
History, that so the Reader may not have so much as a straw left to stumble a^.

The first thing done in the second Part, is to lay down the Doctrine of our
Church, concerning the fall of man, and his recovery ^y Christ. Which Doctrine
should have been gathered from our Articles, or from some Homilies purpos^ly
written of those subjects; but the Doctor gathers i^ from the Homily of
Chr^st's Nativity. Many of his dear Fr^ends w^ll con^^^im no thanks for so
doing; But I am content ^o ^et a^l that he has collected, page 4, 5, 6, pass,
as the unquestionable Doctrine of our Church: Yea, I rejoice to find it
acknowledged, that Adam by his Fall became the Image of the Devil, the
Bondslave of Hell, and nothing else but a Lump of Sin; and that this so great
and miserable a Plague, fell not only on him, but also on his Posterity and
Children for ever. Hence I infer, that they are no Sons of our Church, who
either quite deny Original Sin, or make it to be no Sin properly so called. I
infer also secondly, that the story of which the Doctor is so proud, page 7,
does not represent the case in which God found fallen man. For the King of
Lombard found in Lamistus both a power to lay hold on his Hunting-spear, and a
willingness to save himself by it: but if man be the Image of the Devil, and
nothing but a lump of Sin, he has no power till it be given him, so much as to
accept of Grace offered; nay, his carnal mind is enmity against all the Laws by
which God would bring him to happiness. As for the Principle laid down, page 6,
toward the end, that as were the Acts of God in their right production, so
were they primitively in his intention, it is very unfitly expressed, and
either the meaning of it is only this, that as God did put forth his Acts in
time so he purposed eternally to put them forth, or else it is most absurd and
contrary to all Principles of Philosophy and Theology.

The next attempt is foully to bespatter Wickliff, Frith, Barnes, Tindal. As
concerning Wickliff, it is said,

Dr. H. page 8, 9.
That it cannot be proved, that our Reformers had any eye at the man: and that
his Field had more Tares in it than Wheat: and that his Books afford all the
Sects and Heresies among us, the grounds of their several dotages. To make good
this charge, we are referred to Thomas Waldensis, and Nicholas Harpsfield; and
lest we should except against them, to (that which is more liable to exception)
the Convocation in Henry the Eighth's time, Anno 1536.

Answ. To which I say first, that neither Waldensis nor Harpsfield, nor that
discontented Convocation, are meet Witnesses against Wickliff or his Followers;
for they all lay to their charge things which we can manifestly prove they
always abhorred.

2. I set against these,

1. The University of Oxford, which in a Convocation Anno 1406, gave Letters
testimonial to Wickliff, declaring him to be a man of honesty and great worth.
2. The judgment of John Huss, and Hierom of Prague, who are acknowledged to
have lighted their Candle at his: and John Huss had such an opinion of him,
that he wished no greater happiness, than to be where the Soul of Wickliff was.
3. Finally his own works, whether printed or manuscript; out of which, or some
of which, Dr. James has collected enough to prove his conformity with the
Church of England Reformed.

3. I will take a particular view of all the Errors fathered on him by these
men, or rather by the Doctor out of them.

1. That the Sacrament of the Altar is nothing but a piece of Bread. Mr. Fox
makes mention of Wickliff's Wicket, and I my self have it, as it was reprinted
at Oxford by Joseph Barnes Prefaced by the Reverend Henry Iackson of Corpus
Christi College; by the which any one may see, he speaks reverently of the
blessed Eucharist, and strongly confuteth Transubstantiation. It is there
expressly said, the Bread consecrated is Christ's Body in figurative speech,
which is hid to the understanding of Sinners. 2. That Priests have no more
authority to minister Sacraments than Laymen. This is a calumny, as Dr. James
his Apology for Wickliff will manifest: Yet if he had maintained, that a
Layman, or Woman, in case of necessity, may administer the Sacrament of
Baptism, he had been in an error, but in an error common to him, with the
Popish Church, and the Lutheran Church, and our own Church, till headed b^ King
James; yea, had he held that a Layman, or woman, may administer the Lord's
Supper, I hope the Doctor will not much swagger against him on that score,
seeing the beloved of his Soul, Simon Episcopius, affirms as much as that comes
to, making also the immortal Grotius his Vouchee for this opinion: Lo his words
in his Answer to the sixty four Questions, page 39, It is not absolutely
necessary, that the Administration of the Supper should be performed by some
Officer of the Church; and therefore because in Christ there is neither male
nor female, it may in like manner be performed by all. Where that Order
obtains, that some Officer should perform the Administration, that Order is to
be kept for peace-sake, and reverence of the Order. Where the Officer is not
present, or cannot be present in the public Assembly, it is lawful for any
man, especially a meet man, to perform that Administration: For why should the
Administration of the Lord's Supper be thought forbidden to them, unto whom it
is allowed to speak and teach in the Assembly? But unto all men does the
Apostle permit to speak in the Church, because he does except women, though
meet understanding women, that are married, and subject to Husbands, as is
manifest out of both Texts, 1 Cor. 14.34, 35. 1 Timothy 2.12. For Virgins and
Widows the Apostle seems not to except, especially if endowed, with the gift
of Prophecy from God, 1 Cor. 11.5; because unto them do not belong the reasons
for which the Apostle would have women hold their peace in the Assemblies, not
to teach, but to be in silence. Although it is certain where men, especially
meet, are present, that it is fit that they should be preferred to any kind of
women whatever in teaching and administering. I add, where no men meet, but only
women religious and godly, that there is no cause why they may not teach one
another, and celebrate the Lord's Supper among themselves, seeing that the
precept of celebrating the remembrance of Christ's death, and of testifying our
mutual communion, belongs not less to women than to men, Gal. 3.28. Verily if
we view the ancient custom of the Church, which Grotius has alleged out of
Tertullian and Cyprian, we we cannot doubt but that the Administration of both
Sacraments were granted to Laics, and sometimes to women. 3. That all things
ought to be common. This is a most perfect calumny; Wickliff held no community,
except that which has nothing against it, but covetousness the root of all
evil, as Dr. James has manifested. 4. That it is as lawful to Christen a Child
in a Tub of Water at home, or in a Ditch by the way, as in a Font-stone in the
Churches. And what if Wickliff, at a time when the public Administration of
Baptism was defiled with most dreadful Superstition, did tell the People, that
Baptism was not by God's Law tied to a Font-stone in the Church? would not the
Doctor have told them as much had he lived in those days? yea, do not all say
as much at this very day? For my part I heartily rejoice in the usages of those
Churches, that have Baptisteries placed in the Temple, so as the Administration
of the Ordinance may be observed by all the Members of the Congregation.
Nevertheless Antiquity used Tubs of Water, and Ditches, or Lakes, not
Font-stones. Of the Apostolical times this will not be denied. For the two
following Centuries it is manifest by Justin Martyr, in his second Apology, and
Tertullian in his third Chapter de Corona Militis, that it was customary not to
bring water to the Church, but to carry the Church to the Water. I would thank
that Scholar that would from any undoubted Record of Antiquity show me that
Font-stones, placed near the Church door, came in before the fourth Century. 5.
That it is as lawful at all times to confess unto a Layman as unto a Priest.
Is not this a shrewd Heresy? delivered long before Wickliff by Saint James;
who not only allows, but enjoins us to confess our faults one to another? Yet
to say, that Confession unto a Layman, is to all intents and purposes as
availeable, as unto a Priest, is an Error, and never owned by Wickliff. 6. That
it is not necessary, or profitable, to have any Church, or Chapel to pray in,
or to do any Divine Service in. A Church is not necessary to perform Divine
Service in, that is certain: no, nor yet profitable, so as to commend our
Services to God. But yet usually Temples are more convenient than any other
places in our Parishes: and therefore we are to rejoice, that they are
continued to us, notwithstanding the fury of the late Wars; and to use them,
making no question for conscience sake. Wickliff doubtless used to Pray and
Preach in his Church at Lutterworth, neither thinking that his Church did
sanctify his Services, nor defile them: and of this belief am I. Never do I
find it so much as mentioned or objected against Wickliff, that he performed
Divine Service in any other than a Consecrated place. To William Swinderby
indeed I find it was objected, Vide Fox in Richard II.
that many times and often he had come to a Desert Wood, cleped Derwalf Wood, and
there in a Chapel not hallowed, but accursed Shepherds Hulk, presumed to sing,
but rather to curse in contempt of the Keys. But he replies, that this was
falsely put on him; saying, it was a Chapel where a Priest uses to sing
certain days in the year with great solemnity. 7. That burying in Churchyards
is unprofitable, and in vain. Wickliff's own Body was buried in his
Churchyard, after he had served God in his generation: Had he accounted it
unprofitable to have such a burying place, why did he not take order with some
of his Friends to have his Carcass laid elsewhere? Were it not a custom
received in our Church to bury in the Church, or Churchyard, I would never
petition that it might be made a custom; knowing that from the beginning it was
not so, either in the Jewish or Christian Church. 8. That Holy Days ordained
and instituted by the Church (and taking in the Lord's day for one) are not to
be observed and kept in reverence, in as much as all days are alike. The
Parenthesis here is of the Doctor's own adding. The Convocation represents the
Wickliffists as distinguishing betwixt Sundays and Holy Days, Article 35. We
may give a shrewd ghess at Wickliff's Opinion, by the Opinion of Hierom of
Prague, which was as Bernard Luzenberg represents it, that we must cease from
work no day but the Lord's day. To this the Bohemian Churches do stand to this
very day; keeping some days indeed besides the Lord's day, but merely as
circumstances, not as parts of worship: and therefore so soon as Divine Service
is over, allowing people to follow their work; yet granting no such allowance
on the Lord's day, which they aver to be of Divine institution. 9. That it is
sufficient, and enough to believe, though a man do no good works. This is but
the Heresy of St. Paul, only maliciously represented by Wickliff's
Adversaries; and it is at this day the stone that every Papist carries in his
pocket, to throw at the heads of all Protestants whatsoever, whether Calvinist
or Lutheran. It were to be wished that some Lutherans had no more given
occasion to this reproach, than Wickliff did. 10. That no humane Laws, or
Constitutions, do oblige a Christian. It Is added by the Convocation, but such
as be in the Gospels, or Paul 's Epistles, or the New Testament. And why the
Doctor omitted this addition, or restriction, no man can give a good reason.
Such limitation does take off all the offensiveness of the Universal negative;
for there can be no good Law, or Constitution humane, but what is to be found
either expressly, or implicitly in the New Testament. The New Testament
requires obedience to all humane Laws, that are not contrary to the eternal
Rule of Righteousness or some Divine positive institution, under the severest
penalties, and from the most perfect motive. 11. That God never gave grace or
knowledge to a great person, or rich man, and that they in no wise follow the
same. This was indeed the opinion of Pelagius, with whose Heresies Wickliff was
never thought to be infected: that Wickliff ever held any such opinion, is
neither true nor probable. He was so much favored by the Nobility and Gentry
of this Nation, who had great estates, and ever upon increase, that it cannot
be thought he would ever broach a Tenent, that left none of them any hope of
salvation. Dr. George Abbot, afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, mentions in
his Answer to Dr. Hill, a Manuscript he had seen of one Henry Knighton, a Canon
of Leicester. That Manuscript is now published, with some others, by Cornelius
Be; the learned Seldom having put a large Preface to the whole Book. From that
Preface I collect, that Knighton was contemporary to Wickliff, and so was the
more able to give us right information of him. He never charge Wickliff with
denying grace or salvation to all rich men: Some such thing indeed he fathers
upon William Swinderby* page 2646, but if he had indeed held any other
impossibility of rich men's salvation than what is the clear result of our
Saviors own speech, why was no such thing charged on him in the Process made
against him by the Bishop of Lincoln, or Hereford? Both which are related by
Mr. Fox, and have not one tittle of this import in them.
All that I shall further add, is

First, Wickliffists did maugre all the malice of their Adversaries increase.
Knighton says, page 2666, Secta illa maximo in honor illis diebus habebatur,
etc. that Sect in those days was in great honor; and so multiplied, that you
would scarce see two in the way, but one of them was a Disciple of Wickliff.

Secondly, That Wickliff laid the Foundation of our Reformation in England, as
well as of that in Bohemia. By three means especially did he advance our
Reformation in England, 1. By Translating the Scriptures into the English
Tongue: by this means kindling in his Contrymen a desire to understand the
last Will and Testament of their blessed Savior. By him, says Knighton, page
2644, the Gospel was made vulgar, and more open to Laics and Women knowing how
to read, than it was wont to be to the Clergymen very learned and well
understanding. 2. By asserting the due power of Kings in their own Kingdoms,
against the Usurpations of the Popes of Rome. Of this the Pope was very
sensible, and feelingly complained of it, in his Letter to the University of
Oxford, and to King Richard the Second, 1378, saying, Wickliff broached the
Errors of Marsilius of Padua, and of John of Gandune of unworthy memory. The
very same complaint did Pope Gregory the Twelfth make, in the time of King
Henry the Fourth: A Copy of this Letter I have not seen; but Dr. Abbot had seen
it, and any Oxford man may see it in the Book that Mr. Hare gave to the
University. How much Marsilius had shaken the Pillars of the Papal
Jurisdiction, is not unknown to Scholars: It were to be wished that his
Defensor were in more of their hands. And Wickliff indeed trod in his steps,
(or rather in the steps of William Ocham, his Senior in Merton College;) for
he strenuously asserted, That the Lordship of all Temporalities, both of
Secular men and Religious, pertained to the King; for else he were not King of
England, but of a very small part of it: and that the Kingdom of England may
lawfully (in case of necessity) for its own defense, detain and keep back the
Treasure of the Kingdom, that it be not carried away to foreign and strange
Nations, the Pope himself demanding and requiring the same under pain of
Censure, and by virtue of Obedience. 3. He corrected and curbed the exorbitance
of the Episcopal power also: asserting, that the Order of Priesthood in its own
nature and substance, receives no degrees of more or less; and yet
notwithstanding, the power of inferior Priests is in these days, upon due
consideration, restrained, and sometimes again in time of necessity enlarged.
See his exposition on the Conclusions in Mr. Fox, Rich 2. page 567. One of his
Articles condemned by the Council of Constance was, that Hallowing of Churches,
Confirmation of Children, the Sacrament of Orders, be reserved to the Pope and
Bishops only for lucre. This notion was sucked in by all our Martyrs, and even
by those Papists that were not wedded to the Court of Rome, as well as to the
Church of Rome; as may be seen in the Institution of a Christian man,
concerning the Sacrament of Orders. And that our first Reformers in King
Edward's days, proceeded on the same Principle, will appear undeniable by that
which Mr. Stillingfleet has Printed in his Irenicum, out of Archbishop
Cranmer's Manuscript. But enough of Wickliff.


Dr. H. page 9.
Tindal, Barnes, Frith, are the next whom the Doctor mentions; and about them
he spends page 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.

Ans. To what purpose he spent so much Paper, or made so bold with the Readers
patience, I wot not. Mr. H. H. had only said, that they, and as many others as
lived and suffered before the Reformation, if they gave us their judgments in
the five Points, gave them agreeable to Mr. Calvin. This the Doctor in effect
grants (...); only adds for a close, that

Dr. H. page 15.
As those suf^ered death before the public undertaking of Reformation under
Edward VI, so nothing was ascribed to their Authority by the first Reform^rs.

Answ. The latter part of which clause is as false, as the former is true.
Something was by the first Reformers ascribed to the Authority of Tindal; for
notwithstanding King Henry the Eighths Proclamation, the Act of Parliament, and
Sir Thomas More's active endeavors, to suppress and smother and abolish
Tindal's Translation, yet it came to light, and was, being corrected by Thomas
Matthews, printed with Annotations, by the special privilege of King Edward
the Sixth, Anno 1551. Yea, the Bibles used in Churches from 1549, to 1577, were
those of Tindal's Translation; called also Coverdale's, because he had made
some corrections of Tindal's. And they who have taken pains to compare Books,
say, that the Psalter now enjoined to be used, is agreeable to Tindal's
Translation: as also were the Epistles and Gospels, till this last Edition of
the Liturgy.

And if any thing in this kind was ascribed to the Authority of Tindal,
something also was ascribed, at least by Archbishop Cranmer (one of our
Reformers,) to the Authority of John Frith; for he seems to have received his
Faith in the Doctrine of the Sacrament from him: and with his Heifer did he
plow, in his Answer to Stephen Winchester; Rations argumenta atque e
Doctoribus petita testimonia (Johannis Frithi) singula commemorare, ut immensi
esset negotii ita nec valde necessarii: praesertim cum Archiepiscopus
Cantuariensis in suo adversus Wintoniensem Apologetico idem abunde praestitisse
videatur; hinc contracta maxima praesidiorum materia, quibus adversus cum
nititur, nec scio an ulli magis Authori hujusce doctrinae fidem acceptam debuit
Archiepiscopu^ quam huic adolescenti: John Fox in his Commentary in Latin,
page 130.

Dr. H. page 18.
Here the Doctor supposes a Question to be asked, On whom, or on whose
judgments the first Reformers relied in the weighty business? And answers it
first negatively. They had no respect of Calvin, whose offered assistance they
refused, when they went about it; of which he sensibly complains unto some of
his Friends in one of his Epistles.

Answ. Here are three things affirmed, 1. That our first Reformers had no
respect to Calvin. 2. That the Reformers refused his proffered assistance. 3.
That Calvin sensibly complains of this in one of his Epistles. But the
Historian is wiser than to tell us in what Epistle for number, Calvin makes
this complaint, or what was the name of that Friend to whom this Epistle was
directed. Such a reference might have spoiled his whole design, and discredited
his future proceedings; for it would have let his Reader understand, that he
could confidently aver things, that were neither vera, nor verisimilia. Is any
man so facil as to believe, that our first Reformers had no respect to Calvin?
when as, among the different opinions concerning the Sacrament, they followed
his, and sent for Peter Martyr, and Martin Bucer, and Paul Fagius (men that
they might be sure he had influenced and would influence) to assist them in
carrying on their work, and to defend them by their learning against all
opposition. I will once more look into Calvin's Epistles and Answers, that I
may see what thoughts our first Reformers had of that now so much decried man.
One, and but one Epistle, I find written by Cranmer to Calvin, intimating his
desire that learned and godly men, who excel others in learning and judgment,
might meet in some safe place, where they might handle all the heads of
Ecclesiastical Doctrine, and agree, not only as to the things themselves, but
also as to words and forms of speaking. This his desire being signified, he
entreats Calvin that he and Melancthon and Bullinger would deliberate among
themselves, how such a Synod might most commodiously be congregated: The Letter
bears date March 20. 1542. Calvin from Geneva answers this Letter; approves the
Archbishops design of calling an Assembly of Divines; adds, that if there
might be any use of him, he would not refuse to pass over ten Seas to further
it, but hoped that his tenuity would effect that he might be spared; he would
think he had done his part if he should accompany others with his Prayers. This
certainly is not profering his service, and complaining that his serv^ce when
proffered was refused. Calvin also did write to the Protector, the Duke of
Somerset: that Letter was so kindly accepted, that he of his own accord offered
to present another Letter, which Calvin sent to King Edward himself. But it may
be this Letter to the King was not accepted. I answer, It was not only accepted
by the King, but also pleased his whole Council. And Cranmer admonished Calvin,
that he could not do any thing more profitable, than to write often to the
King; as I find in a Letter to Farel from Calvin, dated June 15. 1557. Bucer at
Cambridge undestood that Calvin's Letters prevailed much with Somerset, and
therefore entreats him, when he did write to him to admonish him, not to suffer
the Churches to be left void of Preachers and so to be betrayed. Bishop Hooper
so much valued Calvin, that he did write to him, even when he was imprisoned;
saluting him with the Compellation of Vir praestantissime, earnestly^begging
his Churches prayers, and at last subscribing himself Tuae pietatis
studiosissimus Jo. Hooperus. These things put together, make it impossible that
our first Reformers had no respect to Calvin.

Let the Doctor now have leave to tell us, to whom or to what our Reformers had
respect.

Dr. H. page 18.
In the first place, says he, to the most pure and sincere Christian Religion
in the Scriptures, and in the next place to the usages of the Primitive Church.

Answ. This I grant, but must also add, that they had a respect unto the
condition of the English People, much at that time wedded to Superstition; and
therefore they were feign to recommend to Authority for establishment, not
every thing which they accounted best, but what they thought the weak People
would be able to bear.

Dr. H. Ibid.
Being satisfied in both which ways, they had thirdly a more particular
respect to the Lutheran platforms, the English Confession, or Book of Articles,
being taken in many places word for word out of that of Ausberg.

Answ. If this be true, that our Reformers had such an eye to the Augustan
Confession, I infer, that seeing Calvin could, and did subscribe to the
Augustan Confession, there is nothing in our Articles but what he might have
subscribed to. But the present Lutherans will hardly be persuaded, that the
Composers of our Articles had so tender a respect to the Con^ession of Ausberg,
at least as now by them understood; for Ubiquity in the Article concerning the
Lord's Supper, is plainly condemned, whiles it is defined, that the Body of
Christ cannot be present at one time in many and diverse places.

Dr. H. Ibid.
Fourthly, in reference to the Points disputed, they ascribed much to the
Authority of Melancthon, ( not undeservedly called the Phoenix of Germany,)
whose assistance they earnestly desired, whose coming over they expected, who
was as graciously invited hither by King Edward, his coming laid aside on the
fall of the Duke of Somerset; therefore since they could not have his company,
they made use of his Writings for their direction.

Answ. Of this passage I am not able to give such an account as I desire. Well
I remember I have read, that Melancthon in an Epistle to Camerarius, mentions
his being invited into England by King Henry the Eighth, about the year 1534,
and the cause of his refusal to accept the invitation, some intelligence he had
received, that the King had no great care of the affairs of the Church. That he
was ever invited by King Edward, I can neither affirm nor deny, having not
Melancthon's Epistles at hand. But when was it that this great Scholar's
assistance was so earnestly desired? The fall of the Duke of Somerset is placed
by Mr. Fox at the 22. of Ian. 1552, the sixth year of the King's Reign, but a
few months before the King's own death. He had indeed two years before lost
his Protectorship, and so as to that may be said to be fallen. Before either
his fall as Duke of Somerset or as Protector, Peter Martyr and Martin Bucer,
had been in England. Now both these Worthies I shall prove to be Calvinistical
in the Points under debate. And certainly the sending for two Calvinists, is a
better and stronger Argument, that our first Reformers had a respect to Calvin
in drawing up the Articles of Faith, than the sending for one Melancthon is,
that they had an Anticalvinistical project: especially if it be considered that
Hierom Zanchy, a Calvinist if not more than a Calvinist, was also sent for over
into England, and had come over to assist in carrying on the Reformation, if
when he was just upon his journey, a call to another Church had not diverted
him. Let me also ask, What Writings of Melancthon be they that our Reformers
had for their Directory? The first Edition of Melancthon's Common places,
approved by Luther, was written as Calvinistically as to the matter of
Predestination, as Calvin himself could desire. Calvin's own Book against
Pighius was approved by Melancthon, and indeed dedicated to him. If in any
other writings he seems to contradict Calvin (he does but seem) in these
matters, it is to be imputed not to any contrariety in his own judgment, but
to a contrariety in those men's tempers that he had to deal with: and there is
even betwixt St. James and St. Paul, writing against contrary errors, such a
seeming contrariety, as every man is not able to reconcile. Something there is
in what Lampadius writes, in the continuation of P^zelius his History, page
409, Philippus rigidissime olim, si quisquam alius, de praedestinatione
scripsit in Loc. communibus, Anno 1523. Postea cum videret infirmos duris
Lutheri phrasibus offendi, and perduelles eas passim cippo affixas ad
inflammandum Evangelium traducere and calumniari, mitigavit sententiam suam: ut
qui satis esse putaret, auditores deduci ad Christum, vitae librum; and tanto
magis fructus fidei deposceret, and urgeret, viz. concordiam and charitatem;
neque tamen ob hanc sobrietatem ab Orthodoxis unquam est repudiatus aut
condemnatus; neque ipse propterea a severioribus syntheticis alienior fuit, sed
ad Bezam se per omnia cum Genevensibus Orthodoxis ^acere scribit. No Church can
be more Melancthonian than the Church of Breme: it answering by Pezelius to the
Bes^huldigung van Calvinischer the accusation of Calvinism, has these words
(translated:) We and our Predecessors have always so declared our selves, and by
this do again declare our selves, that as by the Magistrate of this City we are
called to the Function Ecclesiastical, to teach according to the Prophetical
and Apostolical Writings, the Catholic Symbols of Christian, the Augustan
Confession, the Apology, the Franckford Recess, and the whole Body of the
Doctrine of Philip Melancthon; so we have by the grace of God hitherto taught
congruously thereunto, and by none have been convinced by solid reasons to
teach any thing different therefrom: in which kind of teaching, by the help of
God, we have moreover decreed to persevere. Yet the three Divines of this
Church did not refuse to subscribe the Canons of the Synod of Dort; so that in
the opinion of these men, who seem to have studied the five. Points as much as
any, Melancthonism and Calvinism are not irreconcilable: And if our first
Reformers were regulated by M^lancthon, they and the Calvinists may shake hands
as good Friends. But how comes the Dr. in this History to speak more favorably
of Luther than of Calvin? It was but Iu^e 6th 1654, that he did write a Preface
to his Fides Veterum, In that, thus he expresses himself, Though I had a good
respect both to the memory of Luther, and the name of Calvin, as those whose
Writings had awakened all these parts of Europe out of the ignorance and
superstition under which they suffered; yet I always took them to be men: Men
as obnoxious unto error, as subject unto humane frailty, and as indulgent too
to their own opinions, as any others whatsoever. The little knowledge I had
gained in the course of story had preacquainted me, with the fiery spirit of
the one, and the busy humor of the other: thought thereupon unfit by
Archbishop Cranmer, and others, the chief agents in the Reformation of this
Church, to be employed as instruments in that weighty business. Nor was I
ignorant how much they differed from us in their Doctrinals, and forms of
Government. And I was apt enough to think, that they were no fit Guides, to
direct my judgment in order to the Discipline, and Doctrine of the Church of
E^gland, to the establishment whereof they were held unuseful; and who by their
practices and posi^ions had declared themselves Friends to neither. Here Is
plain downright dealing indeed, sentence given impartially. Luther and Calvin
both, (...) by their practices and positions declared themselves to be Friends
neither to our Doctrine nor Discipline: both much differed from us in their
Doctrinals and Forms of Government: both were thought un^it by Archbishop
Cranmer, etc. to be employed as instruments in the Reformation of this Church.
Luther was of a fiery spirit, Calvin of a busy humor, and yet the Doctor
presently adds, he was never Master of so little manners as to speak
reproachfully of either Luther or Calvin. All other men whatever, I suppose,
think he has spoken reproachfully of both those Reformers, in sundry of his
Books; and in the passage before us, he speaks not over respectfully concerning
either of them: and I believe vilely wrongs both, and Cranmer too; For where
does it appear that the Archbishop thought either Luther because of his fiery
spirit, or Calvin because of his busy humor unfit to be employed in the
Reformation of this Church? Our Church was not reformed to any great purpose
till Luther was in his grave; for he died the 8 th of Feb. 1546, not a month
after King Henry the eighth, whose decease is placed by John Speed 28 Ian.
1546. How far Reformation was advanced by that King, may be collected from his
Will signed December. 30. 1546, in which Masses, multitudes of Masses, are
appointed to be said for his Soul. Indeed Mr. I. Fox acquaints us from A.
Cranmer, that the King the August before he died, declared his purpose to
abolish all Masses, and in stead of them to set up the Communion. Had he lived
and performed that resolution, and had Luther lived to hear of the Performance
of it, yet might not Cranmer perhaps have accounted it advisable to keep any
correspondence with him, because he had written against his Sovereign more
bitterly than was meet, and had repented of that repentance which he sometime
expressed for his bitterness. No such thing had the Archbishop to charge on
Calvin, and therefore, it is like enough* would have desired his assistance in
King Edward's time, had he not known, that G^n^va could not, or would not, have
parted with him. Certain I am, Cranmers and Calvin's principles differed very
little either as to Doctrine or Discipline; nor did either greatly dissent from
L^ther, unless in the matter of the corporal pre^nc^ of Christ in the
Sacrament. I have done, only desiring the R^ader to consider, (1) Whether it be
not difficult to reconcile the Author of the Fides Veterum, and the Historia
Quinquarticularis? seeing the one says that our first Reformers had ^n eye to
the Lutheran Platform, and took the Articles of our Church word for word out of
the Augustan Confession, the other says that Luther (by a spirit of Prophecy
no doubt) declared himself no friend either to our Doctrine or Discipline. And
if any one can reconcile this contradiction, then let him (2) compare our
Articles with the Augustan Confession, and see whether our Reformers were such
plagiaries as to take their Articles of Religion, all or any, out of those
drawn up at Ausberg. And then (3) let him also well weigh, whether it be not a
great discouragement to all good endeavors, to say that Luther and Calvin
after all their prayers and study were as subject to error and humane frailty,
and as indulgent to their own opinions as any men whatever. Learning and Piety
would scarce be so earnestly prayed for, if after we had attained both in some
good measure, we should still remain as subject to error, as obnoxious to
humane frailty, as indulgent to our own private opinions as any men how
unlearned and wicked soever.

Is there any one else that the Doctor thinks the first Reformers attributed
much unto? Yes, one; viz. Erasmus. Of whom he tells us, that he was Greek
Professor in Cambridge: Which every one knows, (as also that he is put in the
Catalogue of the Lady Margarets Professors of Divinity in that University; but
died 1536.) And though it be true which the Doctor relates out of Fox, that by
the Protector, in the first year of King Edward's Reign, it was commanded, That
Erasmus his Paraphras^s on the four Evangelists should be set in some
convenient place in Churches, and that every Priest should have of his own one
new Testament in English and Latin, with the Paraphrases of Erasmus on the
same: yet it does not follow, as is inferred, that our Reformers intended not
to advance any other Doctrine, than what was countenanced in the writings of
that Learned man.

I say this follows not: or if it do follow, then if follows much more from the
Canon of our Convocation, (...), that our Church never intended to propagate
any Doctrine, but what had countenance in the Martyrology of Fox. But that
consequence the Doctor will at no hand allow, but sets himself against it totis
viribus, Part 3. ^. 56. See the difference; King Edward's Council in the first
year of his Reign, when the Church was scarce crept out of Popery (if crept out
of Popery) placed Erasmus his Paraphrases in Churches; therefore the Church
intended no Doctrine, but that which was countenanced in Erasmus: This is a
good Argument. Queen Elizabeth, when Reformation was come to a great height, by
the advice of her whole Convocation, placed Mr. Fox in Churches and Houses of
great resort; therefore the Church intended no Doctrine, but what was
countenanced in the writings of Mr. Fox: This is no good Argument, because the
case is altered. But, I hope, the Doctor thinks the Protector did intend to
propagate some other Doctrine, than what was countenanced in the Writings of
Erasmus; Why else did he go to fight against the Scots, which War was unlawful
on the Principles of Erasmus? If the Protector warred against his conscience,
yet, I trow, the Articles were not drawn up against the minds of those that
formed the^ yet in one of them War is justified. Yea, I heartily wish that the
Article of the Trinity, were not against some Doctrine countenanced in the
Writings of this learned man Erasmus. The blot of Arianism shall not fall on
his face from my pen: but our new Arians, the Socinians, do boast of him as
their own. I hope not upon so good grounds as they may boast of Hugo Grotius
his Countreyman: But boast of him they do. The Ministers of Transylvania, in
the most cursed Book of the Knowledge of one God, number him among their
Ancestors: and Socinus himself in his Epistles says of him, that he was, not
undeservedly, suspected by the Trinitarians of Arianism; and of the
Antitrinitarians, reckoned among those who somewhat darkly renounced the
Trinity.

But now at last, that Dr. Heylin may say, that he has met with a very good
natured man, I will give but not yield, that Erasmus his Paraphrases were eyed
by our first Reformers, in making their Confession of Faith: What will he gain
thence? Truly just nothing at all, or less than nothing, if nothing more be
found in them than what is picked out, and set before us page 109, 110, 111,
For in all those collections, there is not one phrase or sentence, that does
contradict any one of the five Points, as stated by the rigidest Calvinists.
Even those who say, that Christ died only for the Elect (in which number I
never put my self,) will bring themselves off from all and every thing that is
here alleged out of Erasmus.

Dr. H. Page 110.
Of universal Redemption, says the Doctor, he tells us thus, This Lamb is so
far from being subject to any sin, that he alone is able to take away all the
sins of the whole World.

Answ. Will Amesius, Gomarus, or any other that most restrains the death of
Christ, deny this? Do they not all distinguish, betwixt the worth of the death,
and the will of him that died? and say, that the worth of the death was such,
that God might without any indecency, have accepted it for the redemption of
ten thousand Worlds, if there had been so many. But Erasmus further adds,

Dr. H. Ibid.
He is also so gentle, and so desirous of man's salvation, that he is ready to
suffer pains for the sins of all men, and to take upon him our evils, because
he would bestow upon us his good things.

Answ. This is so dilute a speech, that I will strengthen it, and say, that he
did suffer pains for the sins of all men: and yet dare peremptorily aver, that
no Gomarist would refuse to subscribe the saying; for he can grant, that Christ
died with an intention to purchase some benefits for the very Reprobates: and
he will further say, that for ought appears to the contrary, Erasmus might, by
all men, mean the genera singulorum, and not the singula generum; for doubtless
that phrase in Scripture, sometimes signifies no more, than men of all sorts,
ages, countries. I wish men would either not at all dispute for the amplitude
of Redeeming grace, or else bring more apposite and concluding testimonies and
authorities than any that the Doctor has here brought.

Nor is the Doctor more advantaged by any thing that he alleges out of the
Institution of a Christian Man; for if the Reformation in Henry the Eighths
time were looked on as a standard, (which it is not by any Protestant;) yet is
there not a tittle in all the five particulars gathered by him, Par. 2. p. 21,
22, that has so much as a face of opposition to any opinion of Mr. Calvin's
concerning Predestination. Had the Authors of that part of the Institution put
the Pen, after they had made it, into Calvin's own hand, he would not have
dashed out any one period or expression in it.

Many and just exceptions might be taken against sundry passages relating to
the Composers, and composition, of the first and second Book of Liturgy, and
the Book of Homilies of King Edward, page 23, 24. But being aprosdionysous to
our main Controversy, let them pass.

Nor will I wrestle with the Historian concerning any thing he says about the
Composers of the Articles, or the Articles themselves, or the authority they
carry in respect of the making, or how they are to be understood in respect of
the meaning, from page 25. to page 33. Though if I should wrestle, I were sure
to lay him on his back.

I will also submit to every Rule by him laid down, for the interpreting of the
Article concerning Predestination, page 34.

Let this be agreed on, 1. That that only is the Doctrine of our Church, which
is laid down expressly in our Articles, or by good consequence may be thence
deduced. 2. That if any phrase occur, about which there is any doubt, that be
taken for the meaning, that shall be found agreeable to the mind of those who
first composed, or were authorized to review the Articles, or were familiarly
acquainted with such, and may be presumed to know their meaning, or to have
received their notions from them. 3. Let this also be taken for granted, that
none are to believe, or think themselves elect, but those who find in
themselves a faith working by love: or that none can take unto themselves the
comfort of being given to the Son by the Father's decree, but only those who
are come unto him: and that no ones reprobation can be known by himself, or
another in any ordinary way, unless by discerning some such sin as is always
accompanied with final unbelief and impenitence; (such is only the sin against
the holy Ghost.)

But the thing to be enquired, is, Whether God's purpose to save out of fallen
man all that believe and persevere in believing, be his whole decree of
Predestination? and his purpose to condemn all who continue in unbelief, the
whole of his Reprobation? So say the Remonstrants. If our Church acknowledge no
other decree of Election or Reprobation but this, Dr. Heylin then has got the
day: But if the Church, besides this general purpose, do acknowledge a decree,
to give to a certain number of persons grace and glory, and a decree, to leave
others in that sin and misery that they brought on themselves by the fall, then
he loses the day.

But do the Remonstrants acknowledge no other Election and Reprobation besides
these?

Answ. Sometimes they do not; and then, all their Election notwithstanding, no
one man may be saved: but sometimes they are in a better mood, and give us
notice of another Election, according to which some shall certainly be saved.
This their decree is terminated to singular persons, but it is nothing else but
God's purpose to save S. James, or S. Clement (for example,) whom he eternally
foresaw persevering in faith unfeigned to the end of their lives. This latter
decree they speak of but rarely; (what our thoughts are of it, will be seen by
and by:) Nor does it honor Divine election at all; for when they are closely
examined, they say, the designation of S. James to salvation, was founded on
the foresight of a faith, not which he attained unto by virtue of any grace
prepared for him by Divine election, but which he attained unto by the good use
of his own Free Will. Never do I find them, or any that follow them,
acknowledge an Election of the Son of Zebedee, or any other person* unto Faith,
or unto any other part of Holiness. Other Questions there be betwixt the
Calvinist and Anticalvinist, besides the Question of Election; but such as are
reduceable to it, or at least such, about which they would easily agree, could
they but agree in this. I for my part would only ask that angry man, who calls
me Manichee, Blasphemer, etc. Why did James believe? why did he persevere? why
was he ordained to eternal life? If in answering these, he fly to a special
discriminating love and mercy, then will I never look on him as an Adversary:
But if he shall say, the cause of all is to be referred to James his own using
of such sufficient means as were vouchsafed to Judas as well as to him, then
must I needs think, that he takes from God to give to man; I must also needs
think, that he shapeth his Notion of the Divine decree and grace, neither
according to Scripture, nor according to the Doctrine of the Fathers who wrote
against Pelagius, nor according to the English Church.

As to our English Church, thus runs her Article, according to the Doctor,

Dr. H. Page 27.
Predestination to life, is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby (before the
foundations of the world were laid) he has constantly ordered by his Council,
secret unto us, to deliver from curse and damnation, those whom he has chosen
in Christ out of mankind, and to bring them by Christ to everlasting salvation,
as vessels made to honor.

Furthermore, we must receive God's promises in such wise, as they be generally
set forth to us in holy Scripture; and in our doing the will of God, that is to
be followed which we have expressly declared to us in the Word of God.

One would think that the many words used in this Article, were sufficient to
determine what kind of Predestination the Church means; For, 1. If she had
meant nothing but God's purpose to save all Believers, it had been but bringing
some one Scripture, in which eternal life is promised to Believers, and all had
been done. Nay, what needed any Article at all concerning Predestination and
Election, when we had one before concerning Justification; which according to
this Notion very little differs from Election? God's Justification considered
as an internal immanent act in himself, was nothing but his purpose to justify
fallen man believing in Christ. How much Mr. Playfer is gravelled with this
Argument, may be seen App. Evan. page 360. 2. If Election be nothing but God's
purpose to save Believers; why is it said, that as many as are endued with so
excellent a benefit of God, be called according to God's purpose; by his Spirit
working in due season, they through grace obey, and they walk religiously; and
at length, by God's mercy, they attain to everlasting felicity? The benefit
that any man has by Election in this way, is but to know, that if he believe
he shall be saved. And are all that know so much, called, justified, made to
live righteously, and saved? We know they are not. Again, it is said, that the
godly consideration of Election in Christ, is of unspeakable comfort to godly
persons, and such as feel in themselves the working of the Spirit of Christ.
But in the Doctor's way, Predestination is comfortable to those who feel
nothing of the Spirit; for the promise is to them, that if they believe they
shall be saved: and other promise the godly man has not; he may the next hour
lose all his holiness, and what certainty has he then of salvation? It is also
said, that for curious and carnal persons, to have always before them the
sentence of God's Predestination, is a most dangerous downfall, whereby the
Devil does thrust them into desperation, or into wretchlesness of living. But
now for any men to have the Doctor's Election, or sentence of Predestination
always before them, is no way dangerous, or apt to beget either despair or
wretchlesness. We cannot advise carnal persons to a more profitable and
pertinent object of meditation. In a word, the very calling of Election by the
name of Predestination, is enough to determine what kind of Election is meant:
The Doctor's Election is a Postdestination; for it then only makes men ordained
to eternal life, when having overcome all temptations, they are possessed of it.

But I must hear what the Historian has to observe from this Article, viz.

Dr. H. Page 35.
1. That Predestination does suppose a Curse, or state of Damnation, in which
all mankind was represented to the sight of God, which plainly crosses the
opinion of the Supralapsarians.

Answ. I have no fondness for the opinion of the Supralapsarians (though I
honor the memory of some Supralapsarians;) but yet cannot deem, that there is
any thing in the Article that does overthrow their Opinion. He that is of
another mind, may do well to frame a Syllogism out of the Article, and to try
his strength: And withal, he may do well to refute Mr. Wotton, who has so
expounded the Article, as to draw the Supralapsarian platform out of it; and
his Argument is not inconsiderable, page 137, Answer to Mountague.

Dr. H. Ibid.
2. That it is an act of his from everlasting; because from everlasting he
foresaw into what misery wretched man would fall.

Answ. Our Article does indeed call Predestination, the everlasting purpose of
God: but that it therefore calls it so, because God foresaw what misery man
would fall into, is to speak mildly an unproved dictate.

Dr. H. Ibid.
3. That he founded it, and resolved for it in the Man and Mediator Christ
Jesus, both for the purpose and performance: which crosses as directly with
the Sublapsarian.

Answ. The Article in describing those whom God has predestined, says, they
are such whom he has chose^ in Christ; therefore God founded Election, and
resolved for it in the Man and Mediator Christ Jesus, both for the purpose and
performance: This is an Argument that has scarce sense in it, so far is it
from having any strength of reason.

But how does this cross with Sublapsarian? Why, because,

Dr. H. Ibid.
They place the absolute Decree of Predestination to Life, and of Reprobation
unto Death, both of Body and Soul, before the decree or consideration of
sending his only beloved Son into the World, to be the common Propitiation for
the Sins of Men.

Answ. This may perhaps be true of some Sublapsarians; of all I am sure it is
not. The Sublapsarians I converse with, say, that if we respect God's nature
and perfection, he does, by one most simple act and at once, decree all things;
but if respect be had to the things decreed, some priority and posteriority
has place. They also say, that the Controversy betwixt them and the
Arminians, is not concerning the order of the Divine decrees, (which almost
every considerable Author has framed with some variety.) Would the
Remonstrants but acknowledge, that God did by his decree ordain men to Faith,
as well as to eternal life, they would permit them to abound in their own
sense, Whether he did first ordain to the means, or to the end? Christ is by
all Sublapsarians, that I ever heard of, made the meritorious cause of our
Salvation; but they say, he is not the impulsive cause, why one rather than
another is chosen to Eternal life, any more than he was the cause of sending
himself into the World. Whether the consideration of the Mediator did in God's
decree precede the consideration of Salvation to be obtained by him; or the
Salvation appointed to the Elect precede the consideration of the Mediator? is
a thing disputed among the Calvinists themselves.

Dr. H. Ibid.
4. That it was of some special ones alone, and not generally extended unto all
mankind; a general election, as they say, being no election.

Answ. This is a great truth, that Election cannot be of all; a General
election being oppositum in apposito: But the Doctor would have merited much of
the Arminians, if he had shown us what Election they acknowledge, which is not
of all. Arminius makes four Decrees, 1. The Decree to send Christ to Redeem
mankind. 2. The Decree to give Eternal life to Believers. 3. The Decree to give
Grace and Strength sufficient to Believe. 4. The Decree to give Salvation to
those particular Persons whom he foresaw would Believe, and persevere in the
Faith. The three first concern all, or at least all that hear of Christ. As for
the fourth, methinks it is not worth the name of a Decree, nor beseeming the
Divine Wisdom; for if our King foreknowing who would come in and acknowledge
their Rebellion, should decree that all comers in, etc. should be pardoned;
would it be suitable to Royal Wisdom to make another decree, to pardon those
whom he foresaw would come in, etc? Besides, this fourth Decree can be of no
use or efficacy to any man in this life: it conferred no more benefit to David
than to Saul, to Abel than to Cain; for this Decree supposes perseverance in
Faith to the last breath, and so belongs to the other world. Now let all
Christians judge, whether the Scriptures describe not such an Election, as has
its efficacy and fruit in this life.

Dr. H. Ibid.
5. That being thus elected in Christ, they shall be brought by Christ (but not
without their own consent and cooperation) to everlasting salvation.

Answ. The Historian would do well to ponder, Whether Infants be not brought to
eternal salvation, without their own consent or cooperation? whether they are
all placed among the Elect? S. Austin was wont to urge such an Argument against
the Adversaries of absolute Election, and it gravelled them: the Doctor dealt
wisely to take no notice of it. Of adult Persons his observation may be granted.

Dr. H. Ibid.
Finally, That this Counsel is secret unto us; for though there be revealed to
us some hopeful signs of our Election unto Life, yet the certainty of it is a
secret hidden in God, and in this life unknown unto us.

Answ. The Doctor should have said, if he would have kept to the words of the
Article, that God has ordered by his Counsel secret to us: the meaning whereof
seems to be, that the reason which moved God to predestinate this or that
person, is unknown to us. But this would have overthrown the whole Arminian
fabric. Therefore another sense is pitched on, no way deduceable from the
phrase; contrary to Scripture; contrary to the sense and judgment of our
Martyrs and Confessors: viz. that in this life we can have no certainty of our
predestination unto life.

Against this, thus I argue: If a man may certainly know that he believes in
Christ, he may know certainly that he is predestined unto eternal life. But
the antecedent is true, ergo so is the consequent.

I prove my major, Because every one that believes, is ordained to eternal
life. Which enunciation, if any one shall deny, I prove it, first, by the
saying of Mr. Latimer, quoted with applause by the Doctor, If thou believe in
him, then art thou written in the Book of life, and shall be saved: which
connection were not good, if there were any man, a Believer, whose name were not
found in the Book of life, or not saved. I prove it, because Faith is called,
the Faith of God's Elect, Tit. 1.1. I prove it finally, because it is said,
that as many as were ordained to eternal life believed, Acts 13.48. Why is it
said, as many as were ordained to eternal life believed, if any could believe
but those who are ordained to eternal life? But there is a place not to be
eluded, Whom he calls, those he justifies; and whom be justifi^th, those he
also glorifieth: Whoever are called according to the purpose of his will, are
justified and glorified.

As to the minor, that A man may certainly know he has says, methinks no
Christian should doubt it. We should not so earnestly be pres^ed to try,
whether we be in the faith, if we could not know, whether we be so or no. Are
there not some effects that are proper to saving faith? If there be, why may
not he who feels them in himself, conclude thence that he has faith?

As for our first Reformers, so far were they from thinking that Election is
not knowable, that some of them placed Faith in an Assurance of a man's Election
and Christ's dying for him. If I prove this, I shall prove ex abundanti, that
they were for personal absolute Election. Of others I shall prove, that they
have in terms express owned Calvin's Predestination, or some such Doctrine as
is necessarily connexed with it. Secondly, I shall answer every Testimony that
Dr. Heylin brings to prove, that the absolute Decrees were decryed by any of
our Martyrs, and pass to the other Points.

1. I begin with the Liturgy; In the Catechism whereof, after rehearsing of the
Creed, Question is made, What do thou chiefly learn in these Articles of thy
belief? Answer is returned, 1. I learn to believe in God the Father, who has
made me and all the world. 2. In God the Son, who has redeemed me and all
mankind. 3. In God the holy Ghost, who sanctifies me, and all the elect people
of God. The object of the Father's Creation, is here made, the Respondent and
all the World; the object of the Son's Redemption, is the Respondent and all
Mankind; the object of the Spiri^s Sanctification, is the Respondent and all
the Elect People of God. The second object is not so large as the first, nor
the third so large as the second* and the Catechumen is as well taught to
number himself among the Elect people of God, as among mankind. Who are these
chosen of God? Surely they are the Elect according to the foreknowledge of God
the Father; and to such is the Sanctification of the Spirit here limited. So
that if any one be chosen, he is sanctified; and if he be sanctified, he is
chosen; and every one who comes for Confirmation, is taught to profess himself
one of those whom the Spirit Sanctifies, and God Elected. I dare not direct
every Baptized person so to say: But by this we may see, what the opinion of
the Composers of the Liturgy was.

In the Catechism appointed by King Edward's Authority to be taught by all
Schoolmasters, fol. 38, it is said, To the furnishing of this Commonweal belong
all they, as many as do truly fear, honor, and call upon God, wholly applying
their mind to holy and godly living; and all those, that putting all their hope
and trust in him, do assuredly look for the Bliss of everlasting life. But as
many as are in this faith steadfast, were forechosen, predestinate, and
appointed out to everlasting life, before the world was made: Witness whereof
they have within their hearts, the Spirit of Christ, the Author, earnest
un^ailable, and pledge of their faith. How much Calvinism is here? As many as
fear God, were forechosen, predestinate and appointed out to everlasting life
before the world was made: therefore, if any man ^ail or miss of eternal life,
he never feared God; or, God never put his fear into any, but those whom he so
foreordained to everlasting life. Yet there is more, fol. 39, The first,
principal, and most perfect cause, of our justifying and salvation, is the
goodness and love of God, whereby he chose us for his before he made the world.
Now the Arminian election is not sure the most perfect cause of our justifying
and salvation; nor is it God's choosing of us to be his before he made the
world. And let it be observed, that it is said, that after that he has chosen
us for his, he grants us to be called by the preaching of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, when the spirit of the Lord is poured into us.

2. Our next task is to look into the sentiments of our Martyrs and Confessors;
such as lost their lives, or left their Country, or were deprived of their
Liberty or Dignities and Preserments, for bearing witness to the Doctrine that
was established by all Authority, Ecclesiastical and Civil, among us. Our first
Martyr in order of time was John Rogers; our first in order of Dignity, were
Cranmer of Canterbury, and Ridley of London, Bishops. I have not met with any
writings of either of these, in which they have expressly declared their
judgments in the Points under debate: yet we will see what may be at least
guessed concerning their mind.

For Mr. Rogers, I find he was the Convert of William Tindal, and Miles
Coverdale, and that he joined with them in making that Translation, which now
goes by the name of Matthews Translation: and what opinions that Translation
does favor, I leave it to indifferent persons to judge. I find him also among
those worthy Persons, who subscribed a Declaration sent abroad May 8. 1554. all
whose names are to be seen in Mr. Fox his third Volume, page 102, of the London
Edition, 1631. (which Edition I shall still follow, having not the last Edition
by me.) The purport of that I eclaration, is to show Reasons why they will not
otherwise ^ispute, than before indifferent Judges. In the Declaration also is
couched a Confession of their Faith, worthy to be ^ead by all, who would
understand the spirit of our Martyrs aright. The fourth branch of that
Declaration, is concerning Justif^cation by Faith only; Of which having
delivered their mind, they add in the close, By this we disallow Papistical
Doctrine, of Free Will, of Works of Supererogation, of Merits, of the Necessity
of Auricular Confession, and Satisfaction to God-wards. If they disallowed the
Papistical Doctrine of Free Will, whose Doctrine did they allow but the
Doctrine of Calvin and Luther, who in this matter perfectly agreed, ( Luther's
high flown expression being abated.) All that I shall more observe concerning
this Mr. Rogers, is 1. That he was a Nonconformist even to excess, (his zeal
out-running knowledge, unless he had some reasons proper to those times;) for
he never went otherwise than with a round Cap, and would not agree to use the
Attire proper to the Order of Priesthood, unless the Popish Priests might be
enjoined to wear upon their sleeves a Chalice with an Host. 2. That he was very
zealous to put to death the two Heretics condemned by Archbishop Cranmer, and
burnt 1550, 1551. A familiar Friend of his came to him, and desired him to make
use of his interest with Cranmer, that they might not be put to death, or if
they were put to death, that they might not be burnt; because that kind of
death seemed not so agreeable to Evangelical meekness. He answered, that the
punishment of burning men alive was not so tormenting, but mild enough. His
Friend replied, with a great ardor of spirit, holding his right hand, and
striking his own against it, Go too, perhaps it will come to pass, that your
selves may have your hands full of so mild burning. And he was indeed (as I
before suggested) the first that tasted of the Marian Meekness.

A. B. Cranmer must needs be supposed to have a great stroke in the framing of
the Articles of Religion agreed on 1552. So must Bishop Ridley also; for though
Cranmer was Metropolitan in Title, yet Ridley seems to be the greater Stickler
of the two, especially in the matter of Rites and Ceremonies. He forced Hooper
to be Canonically Ordained, against his inclination, against the King's Letter,
and the Earl of Warwick's Letter, the one bearing date July 23. 1550, the other
August 5. Yea, so violent was he, that he threatened or caused to be threatened,
death to Hooper, if he persisted in refusal. Haec Theologomachia sic tandem
exiit vincentibus Episcopis: Hooperus vel ad palinodiam, vel ad eas conditiones
adactus est, ut semel saltem in concione publica se ostenderet populo, more
caeterorum Episcoporum insulatus. Quod ni fecisset, sunt qui putant Episcopos
ultimum supplicium ei molituros: nam ita audivi a famulo ipsius, Duc^m
Suffolciensem clam Hooperum, qui eorum conatus non ignorabat, monuisse, Fox in
his Latin Commentary, page 280. I much wonder what stirred up this heat in
Ridley, and much doubt, it was some personal pique against Hooper, because of
his popularity, and boldness in reproving the manners of the time and the
corruptions of the Church. Marvelously was Hooper flocked after: Saepe adfui
(says Fox) quum in templi fores nemo ingredi concionante Hoopero potuerit;
tanta ejus diligentia fuit, ut nullum diem sine binis, aut ternis quandoque
concionibus praeteriret. Rursus ea in Scripturis promptitudo, ut si sexies ei
faciendum esset, tempore ci^ius quam materia eguiss^t, page 279. I say, I doubt
there was somewhat of a pique, because I find that the same Ridley did ordain
John Bradford a Deacon, without any of those Canonical Rites that were then in
use, as appears Acts and Monuments, page 280. But Ridley acknowledged his
fault, and God forgave him, and so must man too. In the Letter in which this
acknowledgement is made, he also accquaints Hooper, that he understood by his
works, which he had superficially seen, that they thoroughly agreed, and wholly
consented in those things, which are the grounds and substantial points of our
Religion, against which the world so furiously raged in those days. By which
works, in all probability, he means some Trearises Hooper composed against
Transubstantiation, which are exemplified in Fox his Latin Commentary. Certain
it is, that Ridley could not approve all Doctrines in Hooper's works, unless he
disapproved one Article of our Religion: For Hooper in his Commentary on the
Creed, does most expressly declare against the local descent of Christ into
Hell; which is asserted as a truth grounded on Scripture in the Articles of
Religion. And as certain is it, that Ridley could not join with him, if he
condemned the absolute decree of Election, (I shall show hereafter that he did
not,) or determining grace in conversion. The Article of Election, I have
already both transcribed and argued from; let us now see what may be collected
from the Articles of Free Will and Grace, which I will present as they were
Printed by John Day, with the King's Authority, 1553. The words of the former
are these, We have no power to do good works, pleasant and acceptable to God,
without the grace of God by Christ, preventing us that we may have a good will,
and working in us when we have that will. Of the latter these, The Grace of
Christ, or the holy Ghost by him given, does take away the stony heart, and
gives a^ heart of flesh: And although those that have no will to good things,
he makes them to will; and those that would evil things, he makes them not to
will the same; yet nevertheless he enforces not the will: And therefore no man
when he sins can excuse himself, as not worthy to be blamed or condemned, by
alleging that he sins unwillingly, or by compulsion. If this be not
Calvinism and Anti-arminianism, I know not what is. All power to good works,
pleasant and acceptable to God, without grace preventing and cooperating, is
denied to us. Grace also is said to take away the stony heart, and give an
heart of flesh; to make us to will (not only able to will) good things. And
when it comes to be explained, what it does not, it is only said, it enforces
not: and sinners are only said, not to act by compulsion, which may well
consist with some necessity. This is the sum of what the Calvinists allege,
when charged to destroy Free Will. But now the Arminians say, there is no
liberty, where no indifference; and that the grace of God leaves a man
indifferent, to turn or not to turn. I shall conclude what relates to Bishop
Ridley, with those words of his farewell, page 506, Acts and Monum. The Church
had holy and wholesome Homilies, etc. It had in matters of controversy Articles
so penned and framed after the holy Scripture, and grounded upon the true
understanding of God's word, that in short time, if they had been universally
received, they should have been able to have set in Christ's Church much
concord and unity in Christ's true Religion, and to have expelled many false
Errors and Heresies, wherewith this Church, alas, was almost overgone. He here
approves all the Articles, and therefore the three beforementioned, as
agreeable to God's Word.

As to Cranmer, we have him not only owning all the Doctrine and Religion set
out by King Edward, but also offering (if Peter Martyr might be joined to him,
with four or five more) to maintain that it was more pure, and according to
God's Word, than any that had been used in England for an hundred years. This
had been a most foolish challenge indeed, if he had not known full well, that
Peter Martyr and he, jumped in their judgments about all the Articles, and
particularly that of Predestination: With Heterodoxy in which, he might well
expect to be charged; for James Lambert had been apposed in that point in King
Henry the Eighths Reign; and our Martyrs in Queen Mary's time, were frequently
twitted with fatality, making God the Author of Sin, destroying Free Will, and
what not?

The next Martyr I shall instance in, is Mr. Philpot, to whom Mr. Bradford
refers his Friend for satisfaction in the matter of Election. What he did write
about Election, I do not find; but I find enough to make me confident, that if
he had written any thing about it, he would have showed himself sufficiently
Calvinistical. For in his fifth Examination, he took occasion to ask his Popish
Adversaries, Which of them all was able to Answer Calvin 's Institutions, which
is Minister of Geneva? To which Dr. Saverson replies, with lie and all, A godly
Minister indeed of receipt of Cut-purses, and Runnagate Traitors. And of late,
I can tell you, there is such contention fallen between him and his own Sects,
that he was feign to flee the Town, about Predestination. I tell you truth, ^or
I came by Geneva hither At which calumny Philpot^s zeal was stirred, as appears
by his words; I am sure you blaspheme that godly man, and that godly Church
where he is Minister. As it is your Churches condition, when you cannot answer
men by learning, to oppress them with blasphemies and false reports; for in the
matter of Predestination, he is in none other opinion than all the Doctors of
the Church be, agreeing to the Scriptures. If this be not full and home, what
is? The profound Disputant, and blessed Martyr, answering for his life, avows
Mr. Calvin's Doctrine of Predestination, to be agreeable to the ancient
Doctors, and Scriptures: And how could a Doctrine be more amply commended?

His Friend Mr. Bradford will say as much for the Doctrine it self, though not
taking notice of Mr. Calvin as delivering it in his Institutions. There is a
Letter of his concerning Election to two of his Friends, N. S. R. C. recorded
Acts and Monuments 352. Who the persons were, notified by these four letters,
N. S. R. C. I have no certainty; but suppose that N. S. was one Skelthrop, who
held conditional Election, and Free Will, but by the pains Mr. Bradford and
others took with him, was reclaimed. After this Epistle of Mr. Bradford's, Mr.
Fox adds some Notes appertaining to the matter of Election; which Notes do not
in the least contradict any one tittle in Mr. Bradford, but more largely
explain what he touched but briefly. But Dr. Heylin says,

Dr. H. page 42.
Fox his Notes corrupt the Text, and that Bradford's Notion of Predestination,
is plainly cross to that of the Calvinistical Party. Let us see whether there
be any such crossness or no. Bradford (says he) believes that Faith is the
work and gift of God, given to none other than the Children of God: Who are
they? Those whom God the Father, before the beginning of the World, has
Predestined in Christ unto Eternal life.

Answ. Is this Election cross to that of the Calvinists? Do not they say,
against the Arminians, that Faith flows from Election as a fruit of it, and
that it is commensurate with Election; so as none believe, but those who are
elected? It not this the very offensive Notion of Election, against which the
Remonstrants make such outcries? The Letter further adds; that though the
Election be first in God, yet to us it is last opened. But the Doctors Election
is last in God, as well as last opened to us. Let the Martyr proceed in his
Letter: By the light of the Spirit, a man may see this Faith not given to all
men, but to such as are born of God, predestinate before the World was made,
after the purpose and good will of God: which will, we may not call into
disputation, but in trembling and fear submit our selves to it, as to that
which can will none otherwise, than that which is holy, right and good; how far
soever otherwise it may seem to the judgment of reason, which must needs be
beaten down to be more careful for God's glory than man's salvation, which
depends only thereon, as all God's Children full well see. Lo here, he speaks
of a Predestination in which there is an unsearchable depth, of an Election
about which, if reason not assisted by revelation should pass judgment, there
would seem to be in it something of injustice. Whereas the Arminian Election,
making God to predestinate men to life, upon the foresight that they would
believe, and to pass by others, upon a foresight they would not believe, has
nothing of a depth in it, but is as easily accounted for, as any other act of
God's providence whatsoever. I said before, that I conceived one of those, unto
whom this Letter is directed, was by it rectified in his judgment touching
Election, and the use of Free Will which he had made a condition of that
Election: at least I am sure, one Skelthrop was made to see the light in this
particular. Mr. Bradford takes notice of the change wrought in him, and praises
God for it, in a Letter to Careless, page 336. Not doubting but that he would
be so heedy in his conversation, that his old Acquaintance may ever thereby
think themselves astray. In the same Letter he salutes in Christ, True and his
Followers, hoping that God had his time for them also. Now this True was a man
differing from Careless in the point of Election, as does most manifestly
appear by the Examination of Careless, related by the Doctor, page 15, 16, Part
3. He thought as the Popish Clergy did, that we be elect in respect of our
good works. But Mr. Bradford hoped he would come off from that opinion. But I
think he did not, but still continued to sacrifice to Free Will. And the
Protestant cause was not credited by him; for he played such a prank, as any
ingenuous Heathen would have been ashamed of; his Keeper showing him more
favor than he deserved, he ran away from him, and brought him into great
danger. Thus you may see (says Careless) the fruits of our Free-will-men, that
make so much boast of their own strength; but that house which is not builded
surely upon the unmovable rock, will not long stand against the boisterous
winds and storms, that blow so strongly in these days of Trouble. This is the
only Sufferer I know of, that held conditional Election; and surely his
carriage was not so commendable, that we should envy him unto our Adversaries.
But whereas the Doctor thinks, that the strong confidence which Careless had of
his own salvation, and of the final perseverance of all those who are the
chosen Members of Christ's Church, was a thought of his own, unto which the
Doctrine of the Church gave no countenance: It will appear, that this was no
singular opinion of his, but a kindly derivation from the Article of Religion,
concerning Predestination unto Life: and it seems to be that which he had
learned from holy Bradford, who in a Letter to Mistress M. H. under great
heaviness and sorrow, teaches her, That we should use all God's benefits to
confirm our faith of this, that God is our God and Father, and to assure us,
that he loves us as our Father in Christ, and that God requires this faith,
and fatherly persuasion of his fatherly goodness, as his chiefest service.
Adding, that no suggestion of Satan, grounded upon our imperfection, frailty,
and many evils, should make us doubt of God's savor in Christ; and that
obedience gives us not to be God's children, but to be God's children gives
obedience. And finally, that as certain as God is Almighty, as certain as God
is merciful, as certain as God is true, as certain as Jesus Christ was
crucified, is risen, and sits at the right hand of the Father, as certain as
this is God's Commandment, I am the Lord thy God; so certain she ought to be,
that God was her Father, page 327, 328. To another Gentlewoman, page 330, thus
he writes, If he had not chosen you (as most certainly he has,) he would not
have so called you; he would never have justified you; he would never have so
exercised your faith with temptations as he has done, and does: if (I say,) he
had not chosen you. If he have chosen you (as doubtless, Dear heart, he has in
Christ;) for in you I have seen his earnest, and before me and to me they could
not deny it, I know both where and when; if, I say, he has chosen you, then
neither can you, nor ever shall perish. And in the same Letter, page 331, he
says, Your thankfulness and worthiness are fruits and effects of your
Election, they are no causes. If once you had a hope in the Lord (as you
doubtless had it,) though now you feel it not, yet shall you feel it again; for
the anger of the Lord lasts but a moment, his mercy endures for ever. In
another Letter, page 349, the same blessed Martyr says, that One man which is
regenerate, well may be called always just, and always sinful: just in
respect of God's seed, and his regeneration; sinful in respect of Satan's seed,
and his first birth. Betwixt these two men there is continual conflict, and war
most deadly: the flesh and old man, by reason of his birth that is perfect,
does often, for a time, prevail against the new man, being but a child in
comparison; and that in such sort, as not only other, but even the Children of
God themselves, think they be nothing else but old, and that the spirit and
seed of God is lost and gone away: where yet notwithstanding, the truth is
otherwise, the spirit and seed of God appearing again, and dispelling away the
clouds which cover the Sun of God's seed from shining, as the clouds in the air
do the corporal Sun. Many things to like purpose follow in that Letter, by all
which, and by several Treatises in the printed Works of Mr. Bradford, it
sufficiently appears, that he favored the Doctrine of absolute Predestination.
And let any man judge, whether he thought the term of a man's life to be
moveable or no, by some passages in his Examination, page 286. As for my death
(my Lord) there are twelve hours in the day (as I know,) so with the Lord my
time is appointed, and when it shall be his good time, then shall I depart
hence; but in the mean season I am safe enough, though all the People had sworn
my death. Page 291, he desires them to proceed on in God's name, he looked for
that which God appointed them to do. Upon which the Chancellor lets fall these
words; This Fellow is in another Heresy of Fate and necessity, as though all
things were so tied together, that of mere necessity all must come to pass.
What replies Bradford? Things are not by fortune to God at any time, though to
man they seem so sometimes. I speak but as the Apostle said, Lord, See how
Herod and Pontius Pilate with the Prelates, are gathered together against thy
Christ, to do that which thy hand and counsel has before ordained for them to
do.

Consider we next the judgment of Peter Martyr and Martin Bucer, who, though
Foreigners, had a great hand in the English Reformation. As to Peter Martyr,
methinks there should be no question made of his judgment. In his Commentary on
the Romans, and in his Common places, he has gone as high in the matter of
God's decree, as ever Calvin did. But the Doctor tells us, that

Dr. H. Part 2. page 110.
Its more than probable that Peter Martyr, was not Peter Martyr, whilst he
lived in England.

Answ. If he would prove it but probable, he must prove that it has seemed so
to all, or to the most, or to the wisest, or to the most famous among those
that are wise; which I despair of ever seeing him prove, so far am I from
thinking, that he will prove more than this. The London Edition of his Common
places is not now in many men's hands; yet it is to be found in England and
elsewhere: and never did any one that was a possessor of it, so much as
adventure to affirm, that in that Edition, any thing was delivered concerning
Predestination, that was in the least contrary or seemingly contrary, to what
we find in the Editions more commonly used. This answer the Doctor himself was
somewhat diffident of, and therefore did not give it until he had before made
way by disparaging Peter Martyr as one

Dr. H. page 109.
Of whom there was little use made in advising, and much less in directing any
thing which concerned the Articles; and who having no authority in Church or
State, could not be considered as a Master Builder.

Ans. Is the Doctor of the Chair of no authority in Church or State? I had
thought that in matters Divine, both Ecclesiastical and Political Persons had
been wont to give much to his authority. Archbishop Cranmer it is most certain
made much use of him; keeping him at his own house, at his first coming over
into England, that he might have the more frequent and free converse with him.
And if Bishor Ridley was first converted to be a Protestant by reading of
Bertram; yet it will not be denied, that he owed his confirmation to discourse
with Peter Martyr. As for the Convocation 1552, he might be, for ought I know,
a member of it: Doubtless he was one of the eight appointed by the King to make
reformation of the Laws Ecclesiastical, and yet was there no use made of him in
directing?

Concerning Bucer, the Doctor would bear us in hand, that we have no reason to
reckon him ours in the Points under debate, because

Dr. H. page 109.
He well approved our first Liturgy.

Ans. Of which reason it will be then time enough to consider, when it shall be
showed, that that Liturgy had any thing in it that favored conditional
Election, and superable converting Grace, and total and final Apostasy. But,

Dr. H. page 110.
It is also affirmed, that he, among some other Protestants, assented in the
point of falling from Grace to the opinion of the Church of Rome, in the Diet
at Ratisbone.

Ans. It Is indeed so affirmed by Mr. Mountague (and, that I know of, by none
else,) that Bucer did at the Diet of Ratisbon, consent with some other
Protestants, to the possibility of the Saints falling from Grace: but Zanchy
tells us quite another tale, that Bucer has in the Relation of the Conference
at Ratisbon, laid down that which makes strongly for the certain perseverance
of the Saints. If Mr. Mountague had expected belief, he should have answered
those allegations, and brought others that might evince the possibility of the
true Saints apostasy. This may be sufficient to prove, that he was not against
us: that he was for us, Zanchy's quotations out of him will scarce suffer any
one to doubt; but we will see whether we can find out any other evidence.
First, whilst he was a Papist, he had his conversation among the Dominicans,
from whom it is likely he got nothing agreeable to the Jesuits notion of
respective Decrees, and frustrable grace. The Star that brought him out of
Popery, was Luther's Book de servo Arbitrio; by which Star it is not like that
he was lead to Pelagianism, or Semipelagianism, or any other Doctrine that so
advances the liberty of man's will, as sacrilegiously to rob the grace of God
of its due force and power in converting of a Sinner. What Doctrine he preached
or delivered in the Schools, whilst in England, may be collected from the
barbarous malice of his Romish Adversaries appointing his dead bones to be
taken out of the grave and committed to the fire; for Dr. Watson in his Sermon
in St. Mary's, charge Bucer to have defended that perilous Doctrine
concerning the fatal and absolute necessity of Predestination, and that he had
set it out in such wise, as to leave no choice at all in such things: as who
should say, It skilled not what a man purposed of any matter, since he had not
the power to determine otherwise than the matter should come to pass: the which
was the peculiar opinion of them that made God the Author of Evil; bringing men
through this persuasion into such a careless security of their everlasting
eternity, that in the mean season it made no matter, either toward salvation,
or toward damnation, what a man did in this life. And because it may be
replied, that he speaks this to disgrace and disparage Protestants in general,
let us therefore hear what Dr. Perne in his Sermon says concerning Bucer. In
it we are told, that he held opinion, that God was the Author and wellspring,
not only of good, but also of evil; and that whatsoever was of that sort flowed
from him, as from the head-spring and maker thereof: adding, that Bucer upheld
this Doctrine to be sincere; howbeit, for offending diverse men's consciences, he
durst not put it into men's heads. And in his sentence of condemnation, this is
laid to his charge, as a Doctrine defended by him, Omnia fato and absoluta
necessitate fieri. Vid. Mr. Fox, page 770, 772. I know the good man's soul
abhorred the things in these particulars charged upon him; nor did Dr. Perne
stick to acknowledge, that he wronged him against his own conscience: yet
seeing these Popish Agents can scarce be supposed so mad and furious, as to
charge things upon him without any color, we may and must suppose that Bucer
did, if not in his public determinations yet in his private discourses, let
the University know, that his judgment did not differ from Calvin's, in the
matter of God's decrees and concurrence unto the sinful actions of men. But if
so,

Dr. H. page 109.
Why then does Calvin himself blame Bucer, for being Author and approver of
such moderate courses, as the fiery temper of the Calvinists could by no means
like?

Answ. I answer, that Bucer, by his very best Friends, had been charged at
Zurick, Anno 1533, for speaking too doubtfully in the Doctrine of the
Sacrament, through a desire to appease Luther: He, then, and there, made such
an Apology for himself as was accepted. If at his coming over into England, he
fell into the same fault, Mr. Calvin did but the part of a Christian, to
admonish him. But certainly Calvin had high and honorable thoughts of him
while he lived, and after his death tells Viret, that he found his heart torn
in pieces as often as he remembered, how manifold a loss the Church of God
sustained by his departure. And so we leave Bucer and Martyr, with the Elogium
deservedly bestowed upon them by Dr. Iackson, The two judicious Commentators,
etc.

It is also worth while to enquire after the many worthy Divines, who to save
their lives, and yet keep that faith and conscience which they had professed in
the days of King Edward, did fly beyond Sea. We find some differences among
them, relating to Discipline and Ceremonies; an account whereof is given us in
the troubles of Frankford. Had they not all been of one mind in matters of
Doctrine relating to the Decrees, Grace, and Perseverance, their difference had
not been concealed. It had been easy for the party that sided with Calvin in
these points, to have crushed the Anticalvinistical party, if any such there
had been; but there is not the least ground to think there was any such. Those
English Divines who sojourned at Geneva made a Translation of the Bible, and
marginal Annotations upon it sufficiently Calvinistical. This was published
Anno 1560, and the Authors of it were so little conscious to themselves of
having delivered any Doctrine contrary to that which was received and allowed
in King Edward's time, that they adventured to dedicate their Work to the
incomparable Princess Queen Elizabeth, no favourer of Foreign Doctrine. She
accepted the Dedication, suffered the Book and the Annotations to pass among
her People, without any censure here. So much entertainment and applause did it
meet with, that some who have been curious to search into the number of its
Editions, say, that by the Queens own Printers, it was printed above thirty
times. I am not ignorant that King James highly censured this Transslation and
the marginal Annotations, in the Hampton Conference: the Translation he calls
the worst that ever he saw; some of the Notes he calls very partial, untrue,
seditious, and savouring too much of dangerous and traitorous conceits:
instancing in the Note on Exodus 1.19, and 2 Chronicles. 15.16. (which censure a
Jesuit takes as if spoken of the Translation used at Geneva it self.) But the
Annotations on both these places are satisfied for by Bishop Morton, page 104,
of a Book written by him, to show the Romanists Doctrine of Rebellion and
Aequivocation. As for Arianism charged on these Annotations by Dr H. they are
acquitted by the learned Letter of Sir Thomas Bodley.

I have all this while said nothing of Bishop Hooper and Bishop Latimer, out of
whose Writings the Doctor has transcribed so much. And truly the things
transcribed out of them are so impertinent* that it would be no hazard to my
Reader if I should wholly pass them over in silence. Yet I will not; but first
shall say something of the men, secondly of their writings. Latimer was once a
very hot Papist, as himself acknowledges against himself. Being converted from
Popery, he was as zealous for the Reformed Religion; boldly reproving the sins
of all, whether Rulers or Ruled. In his Sermons he used a style, which perhaps
was then accounted elegant; but would now be judged ridiculous, at least
unbeseeming the Pulpit. Hooper I look upon as one that feared the Lord from his
youth; for he chose from his youth to leave Oxford, that he might not ensnare
his conscience. Beyond the Seas he fell into acquiantance with the learned
Henry Bullinger; and returned not into England till the Reign of King Edward:
when he gained more love from the Laics, than Clergy, being a stiff
Nonconformist. Hand in drawing up the Articles of Religion he had none, one of
them being diametrically opposite to his declared judgment; yet because he was
very great, both for piety and learning, as his writings evidently show,
therefore his judgment is not to be slighted. And if Dr. Heylin have proved,
or any one else can prove, that he and Latimer held the opinions afterward
called Arminian; I will grant that those opinions were not by the Protestant
Church in King Edward's time adjudged intolerable. Whether they held them or
no? must be considered. First, I yield that they both asserted Universal
Redemption. This being granted, the Doctor dare say, that

Dr. H. Part 2. page 50.
He, (Mr. Hickman he means,) will not be confident in affirming, there can be
any room for such an absolute Decree of Reprobation, antecedaneous and
precedent to the death of Christ, as his great Masters in the School of Calvin
have been pleased to teach him.

Ans. Mr. Hickman's mind is best known to himself, so are his great Masters in
the School of Calvin, if he ever had any such; but this I am confident of, that
Calvin's Decree of Reprobation may be maintained, and yet Universal Redemption
not denied. Monsieur Amyrald, as great a Scholar as this last age has
afforded, has in a whole Book defended Calvin's absolute Decree against Mr.
Hoard; yet the same Amyrald most strenuously defends Universal Redemption. Two
Dissertations also of Bishop Davenant are published by careful and faithful
hands: in the first, he sets himself to assert Universal Redemption by Christ;
in the second, to assert Personal, both Election and Reprobation.

Let us see now what the Doctor can find in Latimer and Hooper.

Dr. H. Part 2. page 37.
Latimer in his Sermon on Septuages. rebukes those vain Fellows who abuse
Election and Reprobation to carnal Liberty, or Presumption.

Answ. Why so does Calvin, so does Ursin, so do our Divines at the Synod of
Dort.

Dr. H. page 38.
Hooper in his Preface to the ten Commandments, says, We must not extenuate
Original Sin, nor make God the Author of Evil; nor yet say, that God has
written fatal Laws, with the Stoics, and in the necessity of destiny violently
pulls one by the hair into Heaven, and thrusts the other headlong into Hell.

Answ. All this is just according to Calvin's method. No Calvinists say, that
God's Decree offers violence to Man's Will, or pulls a man into Heaven.
Only they say, that Electing love makes men willing, and that Holiness is an
effect of Election. As for Sin, that, they say, is not an effect of
Reprobation, but only a Consequent. I, but

Dr. H. page 39.
Bishop Latimer teaches us, that we are to enquire no further after our
Election, than as it is to be found in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Answ. Why so teach the Calvinists too, that our Election is not to be known,
but by our knowledge of our interest in Christ. But the Anticalvinist will not
say with Latimer, If thou find thy self in Christ, then art thou sure of
eternal life: He says, A man may be in Christ, and be a Reprobate; a man may
be in Christ to day, and in Hell to morrow.

Perhaps the Doctor will find more against Calvinistical Reprobation; or if he
do not, he must be concluded to have beaten the Air. First we must hear what he
makes Calvinistical Reprobation to be. It Is that, he says,

Dr. H. Part 2. page 47.
By which the far greater part of mankind are pre-ordained, and consequently
pre-condemned to the the pit of torments, without any respect had unto their
sins and incredulities. This is generally, he says, maintained and taught in
the Schools of Calvin.

Ans. If it be so, then I am sure I never was in any School of Calvin; for I
never heard or read of any such Reprobation: nay, I never read of any person
whatsoever, that asserted such a Reprobation. Sundry famous Schoolmen, quoted
by Dr. Rivet in his fifth Disputation de Reprobatione, were of opinion, that if
God had decreed even innocent creatures to eternal damnation, he had decreed
nothing unworthy of himself* and they seem to have but too much countenance for
this bold and audacious Tenent from a passage of St. Austin's, in his 16. cap.
de Praedestinatione and Gratia: But the Calvinists (as many as I have met with)
say, that as God never actually damned any man but for sin, so he never decreed
to damn any but for sin. All that they say is but this, that Whereas Judas and
Peter were both alike corrupted by the fall, and both alike apt by nature to
abuse and reject grace, the reason why God determined effectually to cure the
corruption of Peter and not of Judas, was the mere good pleasure of his will.
The Calvinists are not engaged to say, that God reprobates any man who was not
worthy to be reprobated. All that their opinion obliges them to, is but this,
Not to make sin the cause of preterition or non-election, comparatively
considered* And against such preterition there is nothing in the Prayers of our
Church, nothing in Latimer, nothing in Hooper, nothing in Cranmer, nothing in
the whole Tenth Chapter of the Doctor's second Part. And it is a wonder, that
so ancient a Divine should trouble himself in so many pages to do execution
upon a m^er Chimaera: and yet this employment was so pleasing and acceptable to
him, that he falls to it again in his ^leventh Chapter; In which, page 64, he
makes the main Controversy in the Point of man's Conversion to move upon this
hinge, Whether the influences of God's grace be so strong and powerful, that
withal they are absolutely irresistible, so that it is not possible for the
will of man not to consent unto the same? But they that have either read the
determinations of the Synod of Dort, or Calvin's own Institutions, know, that
the Controversy moves upon no such hinge: but this is the Question, Whether
when converting Grace has produced the whole effect God designed it unto, man
still remains unconverted, and indifferent either to turn himself or not turn
himself unto God? If converting Grace do leave a man thus indifferent, they
say, that Conversion is rather to be ascribed to man than God; and that Paul
made himself to differ from other Persecutors, and not God. But they never say,
that God forces or offers violence unto the natural faculty of the will, or
destroys any liberty that is essential to it. If any violence be offered, it
is only unto corrupt lusts, and sinful inclinations; in which, I hope, I may
have fair liberty to say, that the freedom of man's will does not consist. Let
but any one fairly and impartially state this Question, by drawing Propositions
concerning it out of the Writings before mentioned, and he will find nothing in
Hooper or Latimer contradictory. The tenth Article of King Edward's he will
find perfectly to express the mind of the Calvinists. And so I might dismiss
this matter, had not the Doctor thought meet page 67, as also in another
Writing, to smite at us with a Dilemma, or something like a Dilemma, grounded
upon the omitting of this Article in Queen Elizabeth's time. Either this
Article did favor Calvinism, or it did not: If it did not, why do the
Calvinists allege it? If it did, why is it in our latter Editions of the
Articles left out? We have learnt from Logic, that such Dilemma's are not to
be used, which may be inverted or retorted upon those that make them; and such
is the present Dilemma, apparently, notoriously such. For thus I argue, Either
this Article is Anti-calvinistical, or it is not: If it be not, why does the
Doctor produce it as such? If it be, why did our Reformers in Queen Elizabeth
's time (who were, as he would fain persuade us, Anticalvinistical) leave it
out? He must either answer for himself, or not expect that we should answer for
our selves: which yet we could easily do, did any Law of Disputation require it
of us; for this might be the reason of the omission, because there was nothing
in King Edward's tenth Article, but what does naturally and lineally descend
from our present seventeenth Article.

I will follow the Doctor whither he leads me, when I have first admonisht my
Reader, not ^o prejudice himself by what so frequently occurs among our
Protestant Writers, that Works done before the grace of Christ do not make men
meet to receive grace. For it will be found agreeable unto Scripture, that
Works done before Conversion, may leave in the Soul a material disposition, or
a passive preparedness to receive grace: no preparation can be wrought by them
that deserves grace, none from which grace necessarily flows; but yet such may
be wrought, as from which a man may be denominated more meet, and more likely,
to receive the undeserved love of God, than if he wanted it. Just as we say in
Natural Philosophy, that though the rational soul do not emerge out of the
organization of the matter, but is immediately inspired by God; yet an
organical matter, is a more prepared subject to receive such a soul, than a
matter not organized.

I promised, after I had laid down this caution, to follow the Doctor, and so I
will, to his Twelfth Chapter. But in it I shall not need to stay long with him;
for it is wholly spent in laying down the Doctrine of Free Will, as it was
agreed upon in the Popish Convocation, Anno 1543. Wherefore though there be
nothing in the Article of Free Will there delivered, but what a Calvinist
(allowing him but a favorable interpretation) may subscribe to; yet the
Doctrine of the Reformed Church of England, must not be measured by the
decisions of that Popish Convocation.

In the Thirteenth Chapter, entitled, Concerning the certainty or uncertainty
of Perseverance, (passing over the Council of Trent, which will be of no use to
us to find out the Doctrine of the Church of England) Page 81, the Calvinists
are charged to presume, not only to know all things that belong to their
present justification, as assuredly as they know that Christ is in Heaven; but
also to be as sure of their eternal election, and of their future
glorification, as they are of this Article of their Creed, that Christ was born
of the Virgin Mary. If any Calvinist ^ver said so, he erred greatly, not
knowing the Scriptures, or the deceitfulness of his own heart. But if never any
Calvinist said so, what shall then be done to him that so presumptuously bears
false witness against them? Certainly the Calvinists do not hold, that the
Doctrine of Perseverance is so fundamental, or so clearly delivered in
Scripture, as the Doctrine of Christ's Nativity; so far are they from holding
that they themselves, or any of them, do as certainly know the goodness of
their present state, or their eternal election, as they firmly believe the
Article of their Savior's being born of the Virgin Mary. They are all wont to
distinguish of a certitude of the object, and a certitude of the subject; they
say, it is certain from the Word, that he who is a sound Believer, shall
continue to be a Believer, until he attain the end of his Faith: But they say,
a man may be a Believer, and yet not be certain that he does believe; and if
once he had a certain persuasion of his faith, he may lose that persuasion: and
many of them (I am sure) say, that he must lose it as often as he falls into any
conscience-wasting sin. This is the Doctrine that agrees with our Articles, and
with the judgment of our first Reformers. If any man deliver the Doctrine of
Perseverance at a higher rate, the Calvinists are not concerned to defend him.

The sixteenth Article of our Church is brought by the Dr. against
Perseverance: The words of it are these, Not every deadly sin committed after
Baptism, is the sin against the Holy Ghost, and unpardonable; wherefore the
grant of repentance is not to be denied to such as do fall into sin after
Baptism. After we have received the Holy Ghost, we may depart from grace given,
and fall into sin; and by the grace of God we may rise again, and amend our
lives: and therefore they are to be condemned, which say, they can no more sin
as long as they live here; or deny place of forgiveness to such as truly
repent. From which Article they may, in the judgment of our Church, be
concluded to be in an error, who hold that every sin committed after Baptism,
is the sin against the Holy Ghost: but so do not the Calvinists hold. They also
are by this Article condemned, who say, they can no more sin as long as they
live here: but what Calvinists say so? They finally are condemned, who deny
place of forgiveness to such as truly repent: in which number the Calvinists
cannot be placed, but some of the Remonstrants may; and it were to be wished,
that some of our Arminianizing English Writers might not also be placed among
them. The Article having made a [ therefore] its strange that any one should
draw any other conclusion from it, than what it self has drawn: as strange
that any one should write, that our Church intended by this Article to
determine, that the faith by which the just man lives, may be totally lost. Let
an Argument be made, The Church says, after we have received the Holy Ghost, we
may depart from the grace given, and fall into sin; therefore it says, we may
fall into such a sin as quite extinguisheth grace; or therefore it says, that
grace may be quite and for ever lost, Any one that understands himself, will
deny both these Consequents; and deny them he may without danger or fear. But
let us view the Doctor's thoughts about this Article. Page 84, he bolts out a
Maxim in the Civil Law, Non esse distinguendum ubi Lex non distinguit; that no
distinction must be made in the explicating and expounding any Law, which is
not to be found in the Law it self. I acknowledge, that such a saying is
commonly quoted from the Civilians; and as they understand it, it is very
rational: But how do the Calvinists willingly oppose themselves against this
maxim? Their Tenent is, Regeniti nunquam totaliter excidunt a gratia; and some
of them perhaps say, Regeniti non possunt excidere a gratia totaliter. If any
man will disprove them from the Article, he must out of the Article draw some
conclusion that contradicts their Tenent: which if any one go about to do, he
will find himself at a loss, and will be never able to put them to the cost of
a distinction. Foreseeing that this maxim might not serve his turn, he tells
us that, for the clear understanding of the Churches meaning, we must have
recourse in this, as in other Articles, to the plain words of Bishop Hooper and
Bishop Latimer. But why must we have recourse to these men's Writings, above and
beyond all other men's of that age, Bishop Latimer never resuming his
Bishopric, cannot be thought to be in any capacity to sit so much as a Member
of the Convocation 1552. Bishop Hooper indeed had a right to a place in the
Upper House, and it is like took his place; but his Exposition on the
Commandments, was printed four years before that Convocation sa^e. My Edition,
which I use, was printed 1548, when he was a popular Preacher, and, I think, an
unlicenced Preacher: Bishop he was not till 1550* But if this Book had been
made after the conclusion of the Convocation, it could be no Rule to interpret
the Articles, which were drawn up, at least in one point, quite contrary to his
declared judgment. If every thing in that Book pass for the Doctrine of the
Church, down fall all our Gentlemen's Pigeon-houses, down falls, etc. But what
need all this? Bishop Hooper has not any thing in his Preface to his
Exposition on the ten Commandments for total Apostasy, or against
Perseverance. He only says, the cause of some men's damnation is this, that
after they have received the promise of the Gospel, by accustomed doing of ill,
they fall unto a contempt of the Gospel. Many a man receives the promise of the
Gospel, who does not receive it into a good honest heart, and therefore was
never sanctified or justified. Was not then the Doctor hard put to it, when he
could find no passage in Hooper to oppose to the Doctrine of Perseverance, but
only this? If Hooper speak no more plainly in his Paraphrase on the thirteenth
Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, than in his Preface to his Exposition of
the Commandments, he speaks just nothing at all to the Doctor's purpose. As
neither does Mr. Tindal in his Prologue to his Exposition of the Epistle to the
Romans; whose words are brought in for sundry lines, page 85, but tend only to
prove, that if a man break the Law, he must sue for a new pardon, and have a
new light against sin, hell, and desperation, ere he can come to a quiet faith
again, and feel that sin is forgiven; and that the promise of mercy and
forgiveness is made on this condition, that we sin no more. Some Followers of
Islebius Agricola, may peradventure enter their dissent from Mr. Tindal in this
matter; so may also the English Antinomians: but so need not any one who
embraces the Determinations of the Synod of Dort; for in those Determinations,
if they were searched with a candle, it will never be found, that men are not
bound to renew their repentance, as they renew their sin; or that they can have
a quiet conscience, or sense of pardon, till they have converted themselves out
of every snare of the Devil.

It had been, it seems, objected by Mr. Hickman, that Mr. Mountague himself,
both in his Gagg and his Appeal, had confessed* that the Church had left it
undecided, Whether a Saint may fall totally and finally? What has the Doctor
against this?

Dr. H. Part 2. Page 45.
That he does so in the Gag, I easily grant; where he relates only to the
words of the Article, which speaks only of a possibility of falling, without
relation to the measure or continuance of it; (Here, by the way, it is fairly
confessed, that the Article speaks not of the possibility of falling totally,
or finally; therefore, not against the Calvinists.) But he must needs be
carried with a very strange confidence, which can report so of him in his
Appeal, in which he both expressly says, and proves the contrary.

Answ. Does he indeed say so? Where may such a man as I am find him saying so?
Page, not 28, but 26, he says, That there is not from the Church any tie put
on him, to resolve in this much disputed Question, as these Novellers would
have it; for it there be any, it is for a possibility of total falling, as we
shall hear anon. Is this to say expressly, that the Church has so determined?
then farewell the study of Logic. I am sure however, that if he said it, he
has not proved it. Page 29, he quotes the words of the Article, After that we
have received the Holy Ghost, we may depart away from grace, and fall into sin;
and by the grace of God we may rise again, and amend our lives. After quoting
of them, as if his heart had misgiven him, he adds, Happily you will quarrel at
the sense of the Articles: but then you must remember, that the plain words
sound to the meaning for which I have produced them; and that until the Church
it self expound otherwise, it is as free for me to take it according to the
letter, as for you to devise a figure. Which done, he goes on most untruly to
tell the World, that this Article was challenged for unsound by the Ministers
at the Hampton Court Conference. Of which untruth, and sundry others relating
to Dr. Overal, and the Bishop of London, he has been told by so many, that it
is a wonder any man should not be ashamed to plough with his Heifer. The
Arguments out of the Liturgy, whether in the form of Baptism, or in the public
Catechism, or Rubric before Confirmation, are quite besides the Controversy;
which is by many Calvinists restrained to the grace bestowed on Adult persons,
and by none understood of that Sacramental grace given to the Seed of Believers
in Baptism. His Reasons from the Homilies, if they were of any force when
managed by another, do lose their whole strength when they come from him; who
has told us, That he willingly admits the Homilies, as containing certain
godly and wholesome Exhortations, but not as the public dogmatical Resolutions
confirmed by the Church of England: They may seem to speak somewhat too hardly,
and stretch some sayings beyond the use and practice of the Church of England.
But let it suffice, that he has trampled upon our Homilies with a foot of
pride. I dare not so do, honoring the memory, and reverencing the judgment of
those who made them; and much more the Authority that has enjoyed them to be
read in Churches. Let Mr. Mountague and Dr. Heylin argue from the Homilies, as
if they had never traduced them. Mr. Mountague argues from the title of one of
the Homilies, which is, Falling away from God: as if the very title were a
sufficient warrant for his opinion. Whereas no one of our Homilies is
entitled, Of falling away from God, but only Of falling from God. Ridiculous
it would be adds D. Heylin p. 88. to write a Sermon de non ente; to terrify
the people with the danger of that misfortune, which they were well assured
they should never suffer. By which addition he makes himself more than
ridiculous; for people are not by the Calvinists well assured, that they shall
never suffer the misfortune of falling from God: but are told, that they fall
from God, as often as they turn away from God's Law; and that by every such
turning away from God's Law, if wilful, they lose some degree of grace, and
expose themselves to the wrath of God, and lose all sense of his favor: and
this is sufficient to terrify any man that is in his right wits and senses.
Nor does the Homily it self more favor them, than the title of it; Out of
which neither collects more than a conditional, If they be unthankful, If they
do not order their lives, etc. Now the very Rule of the Logicians is,
Conditionalis nihil ponit in esse. Will Doctor Heylin quarrel against this
Rule? Yes; for Mr. Yates having brought such a kind of Answer, he says of it,
that it is a sorrier shift than any before; for if such conditional
Propositions conclude nothing positively, what will become of all those
Propositions in the Scriptures, by which we are assured, If we repent, we shall
find mercy of the Lord? Do they conclude nothing positively neither? Most
miserable were the state of man, if these conditional Propositions should
conclude nothing to the comfort of a troubled conscience, page 96. O dreadful
ignorance! Can a conditional Proposition conclude nothing positively and
determinately, unless it conclude, that its antecedent shall actually come to
pass, or may come to pass? When Paul says, If an Angel from Heaven preach
another Gospel, let him be accursed; this conditional will conclude, that
whoever preaches another Gospel, is accursed: it will not conclude, that ever
any Angel can, or shall preach another Gospel. What pity it is, that men should
adventure to write Books, after they have forgot the common Elements of Logic?
and what shame is it, that men should dare to bring in passages out of our
Homilies, and omit a material Parenthesis that occurs in all Copies of them? as
any one may see, that both Mr. Mountague and Dr. Heylin have done. I only
desire, seeing the Homilies are commonly to be had, that my Readers would be
pleased to compare them with the quotations of Dr. Heylin, p. 89, and remember
that the thing he is to prove out of the Homilies, is, that real Saints may
fall totally and finally from sanctifying grace received, and then let him be
deceived if he can: provided that he will also consider, what passages Mr.
Yates and Mr. Prin have collected out of the Homilies, to confirm Perseverance.

One more Authority Dr. Heylin produces, and it fills up, page 90, 91. It is
the Authority of Lanceiot Ridley Archdeacon of Canterbury, out of whose Comment
on the Colossians, he collects something relating to all, or most of the
controverted Points; but the Collections, if all truly made, have not in them
so much as a seeming contrariety to any of Mr. Calvin's Tenants. But in this
very Arch-deacon's Comment on the Epistle to the Ephesians, Mr. Prin finds
personal Election; and if Election, then Perseverance also. The Doctors not
meddling with that Commentary, his not mentioning Bartholomew Traheron Dean of
Chichester and Library Keeper to King Edward, nor Thomas Beacon, nor Anthony
Gilby, nor Stephen Garret, all famous in King Edward's Reign, and whose Books
might easily have been procured by one that lived so near Oxford as Lacy Court,
is an undeniable evidence, that he himself did not think, King Edward's
Divinity and his own to be the same.

In all the third Part, our Historian is put to horrible shifts, and plays a
very low game indeed. And no wonder; for he finds the opinions he contends
against, delivered out of the Chairs in the University, countenanced by all
Authority, Civil and Ecclesiastical: his own opinions he finds censured,
recanted, never printed, but in hugger mugger, and by stealth; and yet I do not
find him much changing countenance, but rather, with confidence enough,
asserting himself a Son of the Church, and his Doctrine a Doctrine of the
Church. His first attempt is to disgrace the Calvinists, by calling them
Gospellers; For thus he phrasifieth,

Dr. H. Part 3. Page 2.
There were some men, who in the beginning of King Edward 's Reign, busily
stickled in the maintenance of Calvin 's Doctrines; and thinking themselves to
be more Evangelical than the rest of their Brethren, they either took unto
themselves, or had given by others, the name of Gospellers. Of this they were
informed by the Reverend Prelate and right godly Martyr Bishop Hooper, in the
Preface to his Exposition of the ten Commandments. Our Gospellers (says he) he
better learned than the Holy Ghost; for they wickedly attribute the cause of
punishments and adversities to God's providence; which is the cause of no ill,
as he himself can do no evil: and over every mischief that is done, they say,
it is God's will. In which we have the men and their Doctrine; how the name of
Gospellers, and the reason why that name was ascribed to them. It is observed
by the judicious Author of Europae Speculum, that Calvin was the first of these
latter times, who searched into the Counsels (the eternal Counsels) of God
Almighty: And, as it seems, he found there some other Gospel than that which
had been written by the four Evangelists, from whence his Followers had the
name of Gospellers; for by that name I find them called frequently by Campneys
also, in an Epistolary discourse, etc. And finding it given them also by Bishop
Hooper, (a temperate modest man) I must needs look on it as the name of the
Sect, by which they were distinguished from other men.

Answ. All this I have at large transcribed, because I have sundry observations
to make thereupon. First, I observe, that in all probability the Doctor never
read Hooper, but trusted to other men's eyes; for he quoteth that as from the
Preface of Mr. Hooper, which is not to be found in the Preface, but rather in
his Postscript, or Appendix to his Declaration of the ten holy Commandments, or
his Answer to certain Objections, that keep men from the obedience of God's
Law, the fourth of which is Curiosity: Nor is this the first time that he has
suffered himself and his Reader to be abused. Secondly, I observe, that he
attributes ^hese words to the Reverend Prelate, and right godly Martyr, Bishop
Hooper; whereas Hooper, when he did write these words, was no Prelate, but only
a licenced, if licenced, Predicant. But I am glad however to find Dr. Heylin
speak of honorably of the Ringleader of the Non-conformists. It seems, when
he is pleased, he can allow one that scrupled the Habit, and expressly condemned
the Civil Offices of Bishops, to be reverend, and right godly, and temperate,
and modest. Thirdly, I observe, that he charge Mr. Calvin, from the Author of
Europae Speculum, to be the first in these latter times that searched into the
Counsels, the eternal Counsels, of Almighty God. That the Author of Europae
Speculum has any such observation, I am not sure: If he have, it no way
contributed to procure him that esteem with which the World reads his Book;
for, as all eternal Counsels are the Counsels of Almighty God, so all the
Counsels of God Almighty are eternal: And to say, that Calvin was the first,
who in this latter age searched into the Counsels of Almighty God, is in effect
to say, that none of this latter age before Calvin, regarded God's glory or
man's salvation. I suppose instead of eternal Counsels, the Doctor intended to
say, hidden, unrevealed Counsels. But the assertion of absolute Election and
Reprobation, is no searching into the secrets of God Almighty: or if it be, Mr.
Calvin cannot, by any one that has the least skill in History, be thought to
be the first that searched into God's secret Counsels; seeing both Luther and
Zuinglius had done it before him. Fourthly, I observe, the unrighteous censure
or calumny of the Doctor, that Calvin, by searching into God's Decrees, had
found out another Gospel than that which had been written by the four
Evangelists, from whence his Followers in these Points had the name of
Gospellers. Neither Calvin, nor Calvinists, ever found out any other Gospel
than this, He that believes, shall be saved; he that believes not, shall be
damned. Nor was the name of Gospellers given to Mr. Calvin's Followers, on the
account of their bringing in a new Gospel, or on any other account: but it was
the general name by which all that joined in opposing Popery called themselves.
Let any one but consult the word, Gospellers, in the Index of Mr. Fox's
Martyrology, and compare the places there referred unto, he shall find Papists
and Gospellers still opposed; and Gospellers used, not as a name of ignoming
but as a name of honor. Let him also read Bishop Ridley's Letter to his
Chaplain, he shall find the same word used, and contradistinguished to Papists.
Likewise in Latin no more usual distinction than Pontificii and Evangelici: So
that the Historian, in making the Calvinists the only Gospellers, makes them
indeed the only Protestants. Finally, I observe, that the words quoted from
Bishop Hooper are inexcusable, if they be not qualified with some distinction.
The Scripture does not oftener ascribe unto God the Creation of the World, than
it does ascribe unto his Providence all the Punishments and Adversities that
befall either good or bad men: yet it must be granted, that God does not
willingly afflict the sons of men; and therefore never punishes them, but when
he finds something in them which deserves the punishment; so that they may
thank themselves for all the evil they suffer from God.

The Doctor's next design is to vindicate one Campneys, a Fellow that was made
to bear a Faggot at Paul's Cross in King Edward's time, the learned and pious
Miles Coverdale preaching a Sermon when that punishment was inflicted on him.
This man, it seems, having either complied in Queen Mary's time, or saved
himself alive by flight, when Q Elizabeth had restored the true Religion began
to play his old pranks, i. e. to cause disturbance, by nibbling at such who
were deservedly honored and preferred in the Church; publishing a Pamphlet,
but unto which he had not courage enough to affix his name, against
Predestination. This Pamphlet was encountered by Mr. John Veron, a Chaplain to
the Queen, and Reader of the Divinity Lecture in S. Paul's Church, as also by
Mr. Robert Crowley, sometime Fellow of Magdalen College in Oxon, at that time
a famous Preacher in the City of London; Both these put out Answers unto
Campneys, and their Answers were both licenced and approved, and Veron's
Dedicated to the Queen her self; whereas Campney's virulent Pamphlet came forth
surreptitiously, neither Author nor Printer daring to put their names to it.
All this notwithstanding, the Doctor would have us believe, that Campneys
defended the Doctrine of the Church, Veron and Crowley opposed it; as if the
Church had so soon lost all her zeal for her Religion, and would give no
countenance at all to those that contended for it, yet would vouchsafe to
authorize the writings of those that vigorously fought against it. We need not
say, that Campneys deserved all the ill names that Veron and Crowley bestowed
on him, perhaps their zeal might be in some particulars too bitter; yet we
cannot think that men of so great repute and learning would charge Pelagianism
and Popery, upon one that had honestly declared himself against both Popery and
Pelagianism. -- The Doctor tells us that Campneys has sufficiently purged
himself of both these crimes; And indeed, by reading his Book, I find that he
has declared himself against Merit; but so has many a professed Papist done.
He does also muster up the errors of Pelagius, publicly recanted by him in the
Synod of Palestine, declaring them (or at least one of them) to be vile and
abominable: This notwithstanding, it is possible he might be a very Pelagian.
Austin himself does not speak more sharply against Pelagius than do the
Ringleaders of the Semipelagians, and yet they err as bad an error as the
Pelagians do. But of all these matters let indifferent Readers judge, by
comparing Campneys Book with the Answers made to it.

More I need not say about the sixteenth Chapter, had it not pleased the
Historian to defame Calvin, Beza and Knox. Calvin and B^za he charges with
unworthy practices used against Sebastian Castalio a man, he says, of no less
learning, but of far more modesty and moderation than either of them; yet they
never left persecuting and reviling him, till they had first cast him out of
Geneva, and afterward brought him to his grave, merely because he differed
from them about Predestination. Calvin and Beza's learning, modesty, and
moderation, are sufficiently vindicated by others. Castalio discovered little
either of modesty or moderation, in his bitter censures of the Book of
Canticles, or in the help and assistance he afforded unto the cursed Socinians.
Beza and Calvin are not the only persons that have condemned him; nor did they
condemn him merely, or principally, for differing from them in the point of
Predestination, as the Doctor might have known, if he had rather consulted the
impartial Historians of that time, than Castalio's own writings.

For Mr. Knox, styled page 5, The great Incendiary of the Nation and Kirk of
Scotland, I will not undertake an Apology. His own Countrymen, who were better
acquainted with his principles and practices, may better do it. Yet because I
find him to have taken great pains in promoting our Reformation here in
England, I shall adventure to mind the Doctor, that Spotswood, purposely
employed by our King to write the History of the Kirk of Scotland, and having
also by the King liberty given him to write truth impartially, does make very
honorable mention of Mr. Knox. And our own Bishop Ridley joins him with
Latimer, Leaver, Bradford, and commends them all for their sharp reproof of all
sins and sinners in King Edward's days.

Dr. H. Part 3. page 18.
No sooner had that gracious Lady, Queen Elizabeth, attained the Crown, than
she took order for the reviewing of the public Liturgy, appoi^ting for the
review Dr. Parker, Dr^ G^inda^, Dr. Pilkington, Dr. Cox, Dr. May, Dr. Bill, Mr.
Whitehead, Sir Thomas Smith.

Answ. It Is true, such a revision was appointed, and performed by the men here
mentioned. I intend not a character of them; they have their characters already
given them by abler Pens but so principled they were, that if any thing had
been left in the Liturgy favoring conditional E^lection, or the Apostasy of
Saints, it had not failed to be blotted out.

The Injunctions of Queen Elizabeth are mentioned by the Doctor page 19, in
which he observes, that Erasmus his Paraphrases were appointed to be provided
for every Church, Injunct. 6. and Injunct. 16, that every Parson, Vicar,
Curate, Stipendiary Priest, (he omits, under the degree of a Master of Arts,)
should provide and have of his own, the New Testament in Latin and English,
with the Paraphrases, (the Injunction says only, with Paraphrases.) The
conclusion he hence infers, has been before considered. I must take notice,
that the 51. Injunction straightly charge and commands, that no manner of
person shall Print any manner of Book or Paper, of what sort, nature, or in
what Language soever it be, except the same be first licenced by her Majesty by
express words in writing, or by six of her Privy Conncel, or be perused and
licenced by the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, the Bishop of London, the
Chancellors of both Universities, the Bishop being Ordinary, and the Archdeacon
also of the place where any such shall be Printed or by two of them, whereof
the Ordinary of the place shall always be one; and that the names of such as
shall allow the same, be added to the end of every such work, for a testimony
of the allowance thereof. From this Injunction I infer, that Campneys had no
respect at all unto the Queens Order, or else he would not have published his
Papers without Authority. I also infer secondly, that neither Queen, nor
Council, nor Archbishops, nor Bishops, were of Campneys mind, because else he
would have prevailed with some of them to authorize his Book, that it might
have been more passable. And now, if the Doctor have got any thing by these
Injunctions, much good may it do him.

Dr. H. Page 20.
Here he gives us a very merry conceit, that the Zuingl^ans being increased
exceedingly both in power and numbers, and notice being taken thereof by those
that were of most Authority in the government of the Church, it was thought
necessary that the Articles of Religion published 1552, should be reviewed,
accommodated to the use of the Church, and made to be the standing Rule by
which all persons were to regulate and confirm their Doctrines.

Answ. He would have extremely obliged us, had he but vouchsafed to name any
one person entrusted in the government of the Church at that time, who was in
the least offended with the Zuinglian Doctrine. We have Records, from which it
may appear who were Anno 1562, Archbishops and Bishops: amongst them all it
will be hard to find any one that was not a cordial Friend unto the Doctrine of
Zuinglius and Calvin; some of them are blamed for agreeing too well with them
in matter of Discipline and Ceremony also: the names of almost all may be found
in Mr. Fuller, Book 9. p. 69. But the Historian would have done no less than
wonders, if he had informed us, how the passing of the Articles in Queen
Elizabeth's first Convocation, could be a probable means to suppress the growth
of the Zuinglian Doctrine. Certain I am, that if they were designed for any
such use, they had no prosperous success; but were in the days of Queen
Elizabeth, and King James made use of to suppress the Antizuinglian Doctrine.
Indeed the seventeenth Article plainly lays down such a Predestination, as the
Anticalvinistical ear cannot hear: and the Homilies, so much commended in the
Articles, have a little too much Calvinism in them; for they place Faith in
such a kind of assurance, as Mr. Calvin indeed thought essential to Faith, but
is found by experience to be separable from it. I would transcribe the passages
in the Homilies that relate unto the five Points; but Mr. Prin has already
done it, and done it so thoroughly, that nothing considerable seems to have
escaped his diligence. I beg of my Reader, that he would vouchsafe to put
together Dr. Heylin's and Mr. Prin's Allegations out of the Homilies, and then
pass judgment.

There was a probable Argument drawn from the Prolocutor of this Convocation,
Mr. Alexander Nowel. He must needs be supposed fully to know the mind and sense
of those that confirmed the Articles; nor can it be supposed, that he had not a
great hand in the drawing of them up: yet this reverend and learned Person, in
his Catechism, published by him after this Convocation, does declare himself
for absolute Election. Places clearly proving this were alleged out of an
English Translation of that Catechism by Mr. Norton, dedicated to the two
Archbishops, the Bishop of London by name, and to all the Bishops in the
several Diocesses in England: this was printed by John Day, with the Queens
Majesty's privilege for ten years, An. 1575. In answering this Objection the
Doctor spends many words, even so many as make up page 24, 25, 26, 27. Of some
of these words I know not how to make any sense. Of others of them I think I
know the meaning, but cannot perceive their design; for admitting there has
been a greater Catechism of Mr. Nowels, admitting that which is authorized to
be taught in Schools is the less and not the bigger, what is either gained or
lost, unless the Author had declared his judgment with some diversity in the
two Catechisms? which is not, cannot be pretended. What though I do not find
any one single Question concerning Predestination or the Points thereupon, may
not the Author in Answer to other Questions sufficiently declare his mind? I
will set down the passages quoted by Mr. Hickman at large. To the Church do all
they properly belong, as many as do truly fear and honor and call upon God,
altogether applying their minds to live holily and godly, and, putting all
their trust in God, do most assuredly look for the blessedness of eternal life.
They that be steadfast, stable, constant in this Faith, were chosen and
appointed, and (as we term it) Predestined to this so great Felicity. Again,
The Church is the Body of the Christian Commonwealth, i. e. the universal
number and fellowship of the Faithful, whom God through Christ has before all
beginning of time appointed to everlasting life.

This the Doctor says is not to be found in the Latin Edition. But I say, and
am sure of it, it is to be found in the Latin Edition of 1570. set forth by
the Author, and printed by Reginald Wolf, the Queens Latin Printer.

He says secondly, It is taken almost word for word out of Bishop Poinet 's
Catechism; and therefore must be understood in no other sense than before it
was, when it was perused and approved by the Bishops, and other Learned men of
King Edward 's time. If so, then up goes Calvinism; for we have before proved
Archdeacon Philpot, one of those Learned men, expressly to own Calvin's
Predestination; nor is it possible to interpret Poinet's words so, as that
Faith shall be an antecedent and not consequent of Predestination. He that
says, only those who are predestined to Eternal life believe, does say, that
no Believer can finally fall from Faith, if he understand the necessary
consequences of his saying, as in justice we are bound to think so great a
Scholar as Bishop Poinet did. But of Poinet no more. Mr. Nowel's own words are
plain and clear for an election unto Faith and Salvation, before the
foundations of the World were laid; and that they who are thus elected, have in
their own minds the spirit of Christ, the Author of this confidence, and in
like manner a most certain pledge of it: The Scholar finally is taught to say,
that by the instinct of the Divine Spirit, he most certainly persuades himself,
that he also by God's good gift through Christ, is freely made one of this
blessed City. And it is further worth observation, that there is scarce any one
place of Scripture made use of by the Calvinists to prove Personal election,
which Mr. Nowel has not put into the Margin of his Catechism; Matthew. 16.18.
Romans 8.29, 30. Ephesians. 1.4, 5. Col. 3.12. Tit. 1.1. Romans 8.9, 15, 16. 2 Cor.
1.22. and 5.5. Ephesians. 1.13, 14. and 5.30. All this notwithstanding the Doctor
pleases himself, as if Mr. Nowel were his own. And that he might not seem to
lay claim to him without some gound, he produces two places out of his lesser
Catechism, promised by the Author in the Epistle Dedicatory of the larger, and
now, as more apt for youth, commonly taught in Grammar Schools, page 33. In
tender compassion unto him and my Reader, I will not relate them; but they are
both such, as any Calvinist will embrace with both arms, as savouring of that
special Faith that some ancient Calvinists, too securely following their
Master, contend for. In it the Doctor finds, that we are elected by or through
faith in Christ; therefore, says he, the Decree of Election is not absolute
and irrespective. Nor do the Calvinists say, it is, without a limitation or
distinction of the words irrespective and absolute. The second passage is such,
as no Remonstrant can mention without abhorrence; for Remonstrants do utterly
deny, that God made any Covenant with Adam, that if he stood all his Posterity
should stand if he sell all his Posterity should fall, and be corrupted with
Original Sin: but the Calvinist is eager for this Covenant; and no less eagerly
does he contend, that God promised to send Christ, the Seed of the Woman, to
break the Serpent's head, that is, the Devil, and so to deliver him and his
Posterity that believed the same; for this, if it proves any thing, proves
particular Redemption: which the most famous Calvinists now a days do not
contend for; some of them have written whole Books against it. I shall only
insert one passage more out of Mr. Nowel's Catechism, relating to the
peremptoriness and irreversibility of God's will of purpose; it is in his
Exposition of the third Petition of the Lord's Prayer: Non tantum precantur ut
quod illi decretum fuerit eveniat; quod, quum divina voluntas efficiendi
necessitatem secum semper adferat, evenire necesse est, etc. quoting in the
Margin Psalm. 115.3, and 135.6, 7, Romans 9.19. And so my Pen takes its leave of
this holy and learned Person a constant hearer of Peter Martyr; both
wonderfully preserved from the fury of the Bishops, and both, no doubt, of one
mind in these matters.

In the next place I am to wait on the Doctor to the Queen Elizabeth Homilies;
for he has adventured to look into them: and a great adventure it had been to
look into them, if so be he had looked into them with an intention as well to
answer what had been alleged against him by Mr. Prin, as to consider what made
for him. I have already entreated my Reader to give himself the trouble of
comparing passages of all sorts, and then there will remain no further trouble
for me. I am sure no man can think, that any thing in the 29, 30, 31, pages of
the Doctor's third Part, collected out of the Homilies, is contradictory to the
Calvinists assertions rightly understood. The Homily of the Nativity says,
Christ must be not only full and perfect man, but also full and perfect God; to
the intent he might more fully and perfectly make satisfaction for mankind.
This, says the Doctor, is as plain as words can make it. And plain indeed it
is, against any that deny either the Deity or Humanity of Christ (those that do
so, usually deny God's Decrees too;) but there is here neither plain, nor
obscure words, or word against Calvinists. Every one will laugh at the passage
brought for Universal Grace, out of the first part of the Sermon against the
peril of Idolatry; which amounts to no more than this, that Idolatry is against
the light of Nature as well as Scripture: Yet in this passage did he so much
please himself, that he proceeds to tell us, that in the third Part of that
Sermon, there are some passages, that do as plainly speak of falling from God,
the final alienation of the soul of a man once righteous from his love and
favor. Such passages as these would be worth Gold, the fine Gold of Ophir. He
names but one, which is this, How much better were it, that the Arts of
Painting and we had never been found, than one of them whose souls are so
precious in the sight of God, should by occasion of Image or Picture, perish
and be lost. This passage looks as if it were designed to persuade Christian
Magistrates to break down all Images of God, Christ, the Saints, especially in
Churches, (on which score these Sermons against Idolatry have been decried by
sundry of the Doctor's Friends;) but what has it in it, that by all the help
of the whole Art of Logic can militate against Perseverance? Better it were
that Painting had never been found out, than that by occasion of a Picture, a
precious Soul should perish and be lost; therefore the Souls of the Elect, of
justified and righteous Persons, may be totally and finally alienated from the
grace and favor of God. I will form his other Argument against Perseverance
out of the Homily of the Resurrection. The Homilist very affectionately
disswades those that are risen with Christ from returning to sin; therefore he
took it for granted, that some truly sanctified Souls might totally and finally
fall from grace. These two are pretty, but the prettiest passage of all is
still behind; The cooperation of man's will with the grace of God (he must
mean, or else he trifleth, in the very first moment of conversion,) is
presumed, or else our Church had not writ any Homilies at all. Just so he might
argue, that if Calvin had not held cooperation, he would never have preached
Sermons. And indeed out of Calvin, Beza, Zuinglius, may easily be gathered five
hundred places that have a more seeming and colorable face of contrariety
against Calvinism, than any that the Doctor has made a shift to gather out of
our English Homilies.

Yet least he might be thought faint-hearted, he goes on from the Homilies to
Bishop Jewel, the Copier out of Peter Martyr's Sermons and Lectures, his
intima^e Friend at Oxford, his Guest at Strasborough and Zurich, and his
Assistant in compiling his Comment on Judges. In his Defense of his Apology, he
says, that Christ by saying, it is finished, plainly signified, persolutum jam
esse prectum pro peccato humani generis: By which the good Bishop sufficiently
declared himself to be no friend to Popish Satisfactions. But what can hence be
inferred, either for or against Calvinism? Did ever any Calvinist say, that
Christ did not pay the whole price? or that God did expect any part of the
price from the hands of any other? I, but it was paid for the sin of mankind.
True; but not for the sin of every particular person of mankind: though if it
had been so said by Jewel, many Calvinists would have liked Jewel the better
for such a speech.

At length the Doctor hits upon one just of his mind, viz. Mr. Samuel Harsnet,
who preached at Paul's Cross October. 27, 1584, and preached Anticalviristically
in all the five Points under Controversy. This must be granted him, if the
Sermon were delivered as it was some few years since printed. Hence he argues.

A Sermon preached at St. Paul 's, at which no offense was taken, upon which no
Recantation was enjoined, nor any complaint made; had no matter in it contrary
to the Rules of the Church, and the appointment of the same.

Mr. Harsnet 's Sermon was such a Sermon, preached at St. Paul 's, etc. Ergo,
it had no matter in it contrary to the Rules of the Church, etc.

Either the Doctor thinks the major of this Syllogism true, or he does not. If
he does not, then can he have no confidence in his own Syllogism. If he do,
then will it evidently follow that, in Calvinism there is nothing contrary to
the Rules of the Church, because so many Calvinistical Sermons have been
preached at Paul's, which were never complained of to Authority, nor any
Recantation enjoined upon them, yea, for which the Preachers have had thanks
and preferments. Besides, if Mr. Harsnet had been complained of and Recantation
enjoined him, the Doctor would not have accounted him the less Orthodox on that
account; for he knows and will afterward confess, that Recantation has been
enjoined for such kind of Sermons as Mr. Harsnet's was. So that I can scarce
tell, whether it be worth while to descend to the minor of the former
Syllogism; for what will it advantage us to prove, that the Sermon was Censured
and Recanted, when as those we have to deal with are resolved to think, that
lawful Authority has enjoined Recantations of Sermons agreeable to the
Articles of Religion? Yet because we are in genere Historico, I deny the minor;
and say, It does appear that offense was taken at the forementioned Sermon,
that complaint was made of it, and that the Preacher did at least declare his
sorrow for it: perhaps not heartily, for he seems to have lived and died an
Arminian; yet he did declare his sorrow for the preaching of that his Sermon.
Had he not so done, the University no doubt had spewed him out; especially
living in a College where Dr. Fulke was Master, a man, that in his Answer to
the Rhemists, has thought himself as much concerned to vindicate the Doctrine
of Election and Reprobation, and the Points thereupon depending, as any other
Doctrine of our Reformation whatever. Does any one ask me, how it appears that
Mr. Harsnet and his Sermon was so censured and condemned? I answer, It appears
from the plain testimony of Mr. William Prin, page 304, of his Perpetuity,
printed at such a time, when Prudence as well as Conscience would have
restrained him from uttering an untruth against so great a man as Harsnet was
then become? Can it be imagined, that if this had been a slander, so great a
Prelate of our Nation would not have demanded reparation and satisfaction? As
for the Doctor's Argument, that seeing the Sermon was preached at the Cross,
the University could take no cognizance of it; it is such, as I suppose upon
second thoughts, he will wish he had never made use of.

And he has as much reason to wish, that he had never troubled his Book with
any thing of Bishop King's Lectures upon Jonah: in which nothing is to be found
against absolute Predestination; nor yet any thing from which any probable
collection can be made, that the Bishop had conceived in his own mind any
opinion about it contrary to Mr. Calvin's; nor could the Doctor himself collect
any thing from them, till he had first supposed, which no one will grant him,
that there is the same reason of God's eternal Election and his Promises, as of
his eternal Reprobation and his threatenings.

This done; the Historian fills his nineteenth Chapter with lamentations and
weeping, bewailing the sad condition of the Church, that was feign, in her
Reformation under Queen Elizabeth, to make use of any Learned man that had zeal
against Popery, to discharge the places of greatest trust and Authority in the
Church, how Calvinistical soever they were for Doctrine. But when was that it
the Church was put to this strait? was it not in the first years of Queen
Elizabeth? and particularly in the year 1562, when the first Convocation was
held? If so, what a piece of boldness was it to say, that that Convocation drew
up Articles with any purpose to give check to Doctrinal Calvinism? and what
uncharitableness is it to affirm, that our learned Divines did change their
minds, when for a few years they were forced to change the air in the Reign of
Queen Mary? What men of note had they to converse with beyond the Seas, whose
Opinions and Arguments they had not read and considered while in England? They
must needs be clouds without water, if the breath of Calvin and Martyr could so
easily toss them to and fro. But we know, those that went over Conformists,
came home Conformists; and those that went over Non-conformists, came back
Non-conformists, though somewhat strengthened in their Nonconformity, by the
communion they had with the Protestant Churches beyond the Seas. I shall
hereafter show, that not only Nonconforming Divines, but also the most zealous
Conformists, did set themselves with all their might to declare against and
crush the Arminian Doctrine, as soon as in any place it began to be be
delivered. And the Doctor may do well to remember, that Mr. Hooper and Mr.
Bradford, whom he has before made so much use of, though to little purpose,
were both of them Non-conformists in King Edward's days: and Mr. Latimer, whom
he also challenges for his own, was little better than a Nonconformist,
letting fly sufficiently at the Dignities of the Reformed Prelates. So that, if
these three men had been as much for him as he pretends, a man might say,
English Arminianism did spring out of the root of Nonconformity: but it will
appear, that it did spring from opposition to those wholesome Doctrines, in which
all our Reformers, how much soever differing about Ceremonies, agreed.

Mr. John Fox his Martyrology, though dedicated to the Queen and by her
accepted graciously, though highly honored by a Canon of the whole
Convocation, 1571, the Historian expressly says, he looks on as the first
great Battery which was made on the Bulwarks of this Church, in point of
Doctrine, by any Member of her own, page 58. A piece of confidence suitable to
that which carried him to say, King Edward was an ill principled Prince, and
that his removal by death was no infelicity of our Church. And it is the more
inexcusable, because in all his Histo^i^s about our Reformation, he lights
his Candle so often at the Martyrologist's. It seems he loves darkness rather
than light, if it come from Geneva. Bishop Hall, to whom Episcopacy owes far
more than to Doctor Heylin, calls Fox a Saint-like Historian; and for such he
will be accounted, as long as any one drop of good Protestant blood runs in
our English veins. But did the Convocation appoint no balm for that wound made
by the Martyrology? Yes, that it did, he thinks. What was it? Another Canon,
page 60, that men should teach no other Doctrine in their public Sermons to be
believed of the People, but what was agreeable to the Doctrine of the Old and
New Testament, and had from thence been gathered by the Catholic Fathers, and
ancient Bishops. I say, If this Canon had been observed, Mr. Harsnet had never
preached his Sermon: He thinks, Calvinism had never been preached, because
maintained by none of the Catholic Fathers, and ancient Bishops, but Saint
Augustine only, who was but one Bishop, but one Father. All Calvinists will now
easily forgive him his reproaches against Calvin, seeing he spares not St.
Augustine. But I hope he will not forgive himself that passion, which produced
so great an untruth. Had he said, none before St. Augustine maintained Calvin's
Doctrines, the mistake had been excusable: so is it not, to say, that no
Catholic Father or ancient Bishop, maintained it besides St. Augustine.
Doubtless Prosper and Hilary were both Catholic Fathers, and ancient Bishops;
yet they as much maintained Calvin's Opinions as St. Augustine does. Who are
the Bishops and Catholic Fathers, that the Doctor follows in these Points of
Predestination and grace? In his second Part, page 36, he quotes three ancient
Writers. The first, Ambrose on the Epistles: yet every one knows, that those
Commentaries on the Epistles are not his, but the work, as some think, of a
Pelagian; as others, of one Hilary, no Bishop, though a Catholic. He also
quotes the Commentary upon Saint Paul's Epistles ascribed to St. Hierom: but he
is not ignorant (or if he be ignorant, few other Scholars be.) that those
Commentaries, however formerly fathered on Hierom, do call Pelagius himself
Father; and he, I trow, was no Cathotholick Father, or ancient Bishop, but a
most vile Heretic. He also refers us to St. Chrysostom in Ep. 14. By which I
know not what he means; but am sure it is little credit to a Doctor in Divinity
living so near the University, to bring Chrysostom in Latin, whose Greek is so
easy as that Schoolboys are able to understand it: so that if this had been
any piece of a Sermon, I might certainly h^^e concluded, that the Doctor had
violated the Canon; and would fain know of him, how our ordinary Country
Preachers should be in any capacity to observe this Canon, whose Libraries
scarcely afford a Father of any Edition to be trusted to? The best advice I can
give them is, to buy such Books as contain a Confession of Faith confirmed all
along with Scriptures and Fathers; in which I cannot but commend the Orthodoxus
Consensus, dedicated by Gasper Laurentius to the Prince Elector Palatine, bound
up with the Corpus and Syntagma confessionum Fidei printed at Geneva, 1654.
There is also published by Cyril, late Patriarch of Constantinople, a
Confession of Faith as Calvinistical as if it had been extracted out of
Calvin's own Institutions, which is now extant; confirmed all along by
Scripture and Fathers, Catholic and ancient, in a little Piece put out by the
learned Hottinger: where also there is enough said of Cyril's life, troubles,
and death to free him from the aspersions cast on him by the Jesuits and by
Grotius.

We have brought off Mr. Fox, and must now see, whether the Historian do charge
Mr. Perkins with more success, of whom it is affirmed, page 62, That he did
open wider the great breach, that had been made by Mr. Fox. Sure it may easily
be pardoned him, that he made that breach wider which was made by the Church it
self, by putting so much honor upon the Acts and Monuments as did, if we may
believe this Doctor, manifestly tend to the subversion of that Doctrine that
she had about ten years before so solemnly ratified. But as it may well be
presumed, that the Church would not consent to the picking out of her own eyes;
so we have great reason to think, that Mr. Perkins did design all his
Treatises, only to commend that milk unto others which he had, with so much
delight and nourishment, sucked from the Breasts of his Mother, the Reformed
Church of England. The Treatise of his quarrelled at, is called Armilla Aurea,
composed by the Author in Latin, translated into English by Dr. Robert Hill,
at the request of Perkins himself, (says our Historian;) but tells us not
whence he had that information: nor indeed is it probable, that Mr. Perkins
would request another to do a work that might easily be done, and yet could be
done so well by no hand as his own. The Translator tells us plainly, in his
Epistle Dedicatory unto the Judge of the Admiralty Court, that he made the
Translation at the request of some well disposed, that his own Contrymen
might by it reap some profit: and perhaps also he had a design to reap some
profit by his Contrymen, presaging that it would be of very quick sale; as
indeed it happened, being printed fifteen times in the space of twenty years.
Many of the greatest learning and judgment, thought this left handed Ehud did
by this his Book, wound the Pelagian Cause to the very heart. Our Historian
thinks not so, and tells us page 64, that it found not like welcome in all
places, nor from all hands. Parsons the Jesuit is brought in thus sleighting
him, By the deep humor of fancy, he has published and writ many Books with
strange Titles, which neither He, nor his Reader do understand; as namely,
about the Concatenation, or laying together of the causes of man's
Predestination and Reprobation. And then Jacob van Harmin, he acquaints us,
wrote a full discourse against it. I know not what he means by, it: Arminius
his Examen, as we all know, being not designed against Perkins his Armilla
Aurea; but against another Piece called a Treatise of Predestination, and of
the largeness of God's grace. And that Examen of Arminius has been so confuted
by the learned Dr. Twiss, that no Remonstrant has as yet had confidence enough
to rejoyn. All the wind hitherto sent from the Doctor, has shaken no corn: We
can contemn Parsons, and not value Arminius. He therefore further acquaints us,
page 65, of a very sharp censure passed upon Mr. Perkins, by the Doctor of the
Chair in Oxford. What is this censure? No more, but that Mr. Perkins, otherwise
a learned and pious Person, (therefore surely able to understand the Title of
his own Books,) did err no light error, in making the subject of Divine
Predestination, to be man considered before the fall: adding also further, that
"some by undertaking to defend Mr. Perkins in this opinion, had given
unnecessary trouble to the Church. This censure is very gentle, in comparison
of what the same Reverend and Learned Professor, afterward Bishop of
Salisbury, thought meet to pass upon Arminius, Bertius, and all their
Followers; whom he accuses of most detestable Sacrilege. The same Doctor had
before undertaken a Defense of Mr. Perkins his Reformed Catholic, calling him
a man of very commendable quality, and well deserving, for his great travel and
pains for the furtherance of true Religion, and edifying of the Church: which
Reformed Catholic also is learnedly defended by Mr. Wotton. For a parting
blow, the Doctor tells us that Mr. Perkins scarce lived out half his days: and
that in the pangs of death, he spoke nothing so articulately, as Mercy, mercy;
which he hopes God did graciously grant him in that woeful agony. And I for my
part, do not at all doubt that God showed him mercy, and had showed him the
very riches of his mercy many years before; for God is not unrighteous, that he
should forget that labor of love with which Mr. Perkins had labored in
Cambridge. As little do I doubt, that there are hundreds in Heaven blessing
that Providence, that placed a light so shining and burning in that University.
His dying so soon is not to be imputed to his bloudthirstiness, or
deceitfulness; but to his hard studies and unwearied diligence, which must
needs wast his natural spirits, and bring him sooner to his grave than he would
have come, if he could have satisfied himself (as some do) to enter into the
Pulpit no oftener, than the High Priest entered into the Holy of Holies. He
always desired that he might die praying for the pardon of sin, and he had his
desire. If in his Sermon he pronounced the word damned with a more than
ordinary Emphasis, it was only to forwarn his Hearers to flee from the wrath to
come. If he so pressed the Law, as to make the hair of the young Scholars stand
upright, it was only, that being awakened o^t of their security, they might
seriously ask the question, How they should do to be saved? The Law was
designed to be a Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, and would not have that
effect, if it should not be preached with some of that terror with which it was
at first delivered. But he made the infinitely greatest part of all mankind
incapable of God's grace and mercy, by an absolute and irrespective decree of
Reprobation. So it is said page 66. but no such thing can be proved out of Mr.
P's Writings. Had he framed any such decree as made any one man or woman
incapable of grace and mercy, he must needs have affrighted away his Disciples
and Hearers: which he was so far from doing, that the Historian himself
confesses, that by means of him and Dr. Whitaker, the University had been
quite overrun with Calvinism, had not Dr. Baro, a Frenchman born, set himself
to pluck up what the other two had planted and watered.

Of this Dr. Baro we shall hear the Historian tell us a fine tale: Scilicet
liberanda veritas expectabat liberatorem Petrum Baro, the English Kingdom of
Heaven had fallen, had it not been for this Atlas that bare it up with his
shoulders. Let us see what the man was, and what he held, that we may know how
much we owe unto him; which yet we cannot well do, till we have taken in our
way the story of one Barret. This Barret in a Sermon ad Clerum, April 29. 1595,
had vented sundry Anticalvinistical Points, for which he was convented May 5.
before the Heads of Houses, and charged to have preached Doctrines erroneous
and false, and contrary to the Religion received and established by public
Authority in the Realm of England. He confessed the Doctrines charged upon him,
but denied them to be any way repugnant to the Doctrine of the Church of
England. Whereupon the Vice Chancellor and forenamed Heads, entering into mature
deliberation, and diligently weighing and examining these Positions; because it
did manifestly appear, that the said Positions were false, erroneous, and
likewise repugnant to the Religion received and established in the Church of
England, adjudged and declared, that the said Barret had incurred the penalty
of the 45th Statute of the University, de Concionibus: and, by virtue and
tenor of that Statute, they decreed and adjudged the said Barret, to make a
public Recantation, in such words and form, as by the Vice Chancellor and the
said Heads, or any three or two of them, should be prescribed unto him; or else
upon his refusal to recant, to be perpetually expelled both from his College
and the University. What the form of Recantation was, may be seen in Mr. Prin;
such it was, as gave sufficient honor unto Calvin, Peter Martyr, and the
Doctrines Preached and Printed by them. Lo here we have those that were always
entrusted with power to judge of, and to condemn false Doctrine, condemning the
Anti-Calvinistical opinions as false and contrary to the Articles of Religion
established in England. And when such an Authority has laid a Recantation upon
Mr Barret, how will Dr. H. get it off? Why First, He doubts whether any
Recantation were enjoined in so many words as are extant in Mr. Prin. This is
an irrational doubt; seeing Mr. Prin had the transcript under the University
Register's own hand. Secondly, He denies it as a thing most false, that ever
Barret published any Recantation, whatsoever it was. And yet Mr. Prin, tells
him that he had a transcript taken out of an Original copy under Mr. Barrets
own hand; and tells us, as also does Mr. Fuller, what words he used after he
had read the Recantation: and words they are from which it might be inferred,
that he was not heartily sorry for the errors delivered by him, nor really
changed in his judgment. But does it not appear by a Letter of the Heads of
Houses dated March 8, that Mr. Barret had never made any such Recantation? I
answer, It does not appear; for the Heads of Houses say not, that he had never
read the Recantation, but that he had refused to do it in such sort as was
prescribed: which might make those who were in Authority in the University,
both to mind him of his duty, and also to complain of him unto their
Chancellor for not doing his duty. Yet if it will do the Doctor a kindness,
let him enjoy his fancy, that Mr. Barret Recanted not; for to be sure he did
not credit his Recantation, returning to Arminianism and also to Popery, unto
which the Heads of Houses say Arminianism had been by sundry made a Bridge.
However here is the judgment of the Heads of Houses in Cambridge solemnly
declared, that he who strikes at Mr. Calvin in these points, strikes at the
Church of England also. Yea, says the Dr, but it will not hence follow that
Barrets Doctrines were repugnant to the Church of England, because these Heads
judged them so: for if so, we may conclude by the same Argument, that the
Church of Rome was in Light, in the Darkest times of ignorance and
superstition; because all that publicly opposed her Doctrine were enjoined
Recantation. Which evasion is so lamentable, that he had much better have used
none; for we do not from the injoyning of the Recantation infer the falsity of
the Doctrines to be recanted, but only their dissonance unto the Religion
established: and certainly the Church of Rome when it was at the worst, did
never enjoin Recantation of any Doctrine, which was not contrary unto her
present sentiments. And so I leave Mr. Barret and his opinions under the blot
justly dropped upon them by the University, only taking notice that Barrets
peremptoriness might occasion Baro to deliver his mind more plainly and
publicly, than before he had done; which occasioned the University to send up
Dr. Whitaker and Dr. Tindal unto Archbishop Whitgift, hoping that he who had
been so zealous against Cartwright in a point of Discipline, would be found to
have some zeal against Baro in matter of Doctrine: nor did their hopes fail
them; for he forthwith called to him sundry right worthy and Reverend Divines,
and drew up those Articles commonly called the Lambeth-Articles, agreed upon
November the 10th. 1595. nine they are in number, and were approved by the
Archbishop of York, as well as by his Grace of Canterbury. So that here are
the two Metropolitans, men no doubt considerable for Learning as well as for
Authority; for both of them had been Lady Margaret's and King's Professors in
the University. Now I ask, Did these know the Doctrine of the Church, or did
they not? If they did not, how durst they call men to subscribe what they knew
not? If they did, then either Calvinism in this matter, is the Doctrine of the
Church; or else the two Primates commended to the University, a Doctrine
against their own Light and conscience. And it is worth observation that the
Bishop of York in his Letter to his Brother of Canterbury, does give him to
understand, that his opinion he sent him concerning Election and Reprobation,
was but that in which they had both agreed while they professed and taught
Divinity in the Schools. Nor can it be said that Whitgift received his opinion
from beyond the Seas, where he never was; having such favor showed him by
Doctor Perne, that he never needed to leave the Kingdom. More probable it is
that he sucked in these opinions from his Tutor Mr. Bradford, and from Bishop
Ridley Master of Pembroke Hall, whilst he was a fresh-man. By whom also he was
so principled against the tyranny and Detestable enormities of the Pope, that
at the time of his commencing Dr. in Divinity, he gave this Thesis to be
disputed on, Papa est Antichristus. Wherefore let not the Historian spend time
to prove, that those Articles do not bind the Church as those did that solemnly
passed in the Convocations; for I ascribe no such Authority to them, only urge
them as Declarations of the Articles of our Religion; just as I would urge the
judgment of the two Lord Chief Justices, calling in to their assistance others
learned in the Law, for the expounding of a Statute: it is not impossible they
should be mistaken in their exposition; but it would be strongly presumed by
all modest men, that they were not mistaken. And so I could let go these
Articles, had it not pleased the Historian to tell us, of a mighty offense
taken at them by the Lord Burleigh, and a resolution of having all that acted
in them attainted of a praemunire; from the danger of which the Archbishop
could not get release, until he had promised speedily to recall and suppress
those Articles. All which we have laid down, page 81, 82, as things affirmed by
Mr. Mountague, from the Remonstrants, in an Answer of theirs published, 1618.
But where did these Remonstrants hear this story? Why, possibly they might have
it from the mouth of Baro, or some other Cambridge men. Will any man believe so
great things upon so slender proofs as the possibility of the Remonstrants
hearing them from the mouth of some Cantabridgian? when they do not so much as
pretend to have heard any such thing from any member of our Church, nor does
any one ever since offer to tell us when and where the Archbishop was forced
to make any such submission? The Heads of Houses in their Letter to the Lord
Burleigh, own the sending up of Dr. Tindal, and Dr. Whitaker, to conferr with
the Lord of Canterbury: and write of the great and comfortable quiet, that by
the coming down of the Articles, was brought unto the University; until that
Baro in January following, contrary to restraint and commandment, gave some new
disturbance. In the same Letter also, subscribed with their names, and bearing
date March 8. 1595, they resolutely tell the same Lord; that Baro had
determined, preached, printed diverse points of Doctrine, not only contrary to
himself, but also contrary to that which had been taught and received ever
since her Majesty's reign, and agreeable to the errors of Popery. Wherefore
they pray his Lordship to vouchsafe his good aid and advise to the comfort of
themselves and all others of the University truly affected, and to the
suppression, in time, of those errors, and even of gross Popery like by such
means to creep in among them. And upon this Letter, or something else, Baro
left his place in the University: because he could not keep it, say Dr. Ward,
Mr. Fuller, and all other Cantabridgians that ever I read; but this Oxford
Historian, who can easily affirm any thing that he much desires, tells us he
left his place, neither because he was deprived, nor because he had any fear of
being deprived, but merely because he had no mind to keep it any longer. Nay he
sticks not to affirm that in case it had pleased him to continue any longer
Lecturer, it is probable he might have carried the Lecture from any other
Candidate, or Competitour of what rate soever. But by what mediums did he bring
himself to this probable persuasion, or whence did he collect that Baro had so
great a number of adherents? Only from Dr. Overals being chosen to succeed Dr.
Whitaker. But if they were the Anti-calvinists that carried it for Overal, why
did they not rather carry it for Baro himself, seeing they had such fair
presidents of preferring those who are Lady Margarets Professors to be King's
Professors? Hutton had been so preferred, so had Whitgift, so had Chaderton. Or
if Baro's interest were so great, how came he to use so little care and
Conscience as not to provide a Successor of his own mind? Did he think his
opinions were not worth the knowing: If he did not, why did he trouble the
world with them? If he did, why would he so tamely yield to the choosing of
Doctor Playfer, than whom there was not a man in all the University more
opposite to him? The truth is Doctor Overal had not then declared himself to
differ from Calvin, and therefore was by the University employed to convince
Barret: and afterward when he delivered such things as some Calvinists
condemned him for, yet he never delivered his mind so, as to deny personal
election or the certain perseverance of all the elect. Something more of his
mind we shall hear hereafter, in the Hampton Court Conference.

In the mean time I must mind the Doctor of a certain Catechism, consisting of
Questions and Answers touching the Doctrine of Predestination, bound up with
our English Bibles, printed by Robert Barker, Anno 1607. but not then first
bound up with our Bibles, as the Doctor seems willing to think, page 101, 102.
The Questions and Answers are to be found in the Church Bibles, commonly called
the Bishops Bibles: printed by Christopher Barker. I my self have seen Bibles
printed twenty years before the coming in of King James, in which they were;
and for ought I know they were as old as any Translation of the Bible used in
Queen Elizabetbs time. He asks, by what authority those Questions and Answers
were put in betwixt the Old and New Testament? and so I remember he somewhere
asks, by what Authority the Metrical Translation of the Psalms was allowed to
be Sung in Churches? I am not able to give him a satisfactory answer either to
the one or the other question; no more than he is able to answer me, who made
our second Book of Homilies? Yet he thinks I suppose, that those who made that
Book were Authorized to make it: and so I think, that those who first bound up
those Questions and Answers and Singing Psalms with our Bibles, had Order and
Authority so to do.

All this while Cambridge has took us up. We must now look into the other
University, in which we are told that all things were calm and quiet, no
public opposition showing it self in the Schools or Pulpits. The reason of
this quiet is guessed at, because the Students of that University did more
incline to the canvasing of such Points as were in difference betwixt us, and
the Romanists. For witness he calls in many Papists, and on the other side
Bishop Jewel, Bishop Bilson, Dr. Humphry, Mr. Nowel, Dr. Reynolds, and many
others which stood firm to the Church of England. This last clause sure slipped
from him unawares. Upon second thoughts I fear he will scarce affirm, that all
these stood firm to the Church of England. If they did, no lot or portion has
he or any of his in the Church of England: most of them having declared their
minds point blank against conditional election, etc. Jewel has told us his
mind about Election in his Comment on the Thessalonians; so has Mr. Nowel in
his Catechism; Dr. Humphries in the Life of Jewel, etc. This nevertheless I
grant that in Queen Elizabeth's time, there were no disputings ex animi
sententia against Calvinism in Oxford Schools. No Oxford man, during her Reign,
declared himself for conditional decrees, or any thing else opposite to Mr.
Calvin in these poin^s: but many did, as they had occasion, declare themselves
strenuously for Calvin in Queen Elizabeth's days. We find the whole Convocation
appointing Calvin's Institutions to be read by Tutors unto their Pupils, and
other Books also as Calvinistical as the Institutions can be, by which means
our Divines there became prepared against the adversary as soon as he should
dare to show himself. Anno 1597, Robert Abbot proceeded Doctor, and being
alarummed from Cambridge gave these two Theses, Aeterna Dei predestinatione
continetur aliorum electio ad vitam aeternam, aliorum ad mortem reprobatio.
Electorum certa est salus, ut perire non possint. Dr. Field (qualis and quantus
vir!) gave these Theses, Doctrina Praedestinationis olim tradita ab Augustino,
and nostris temporibus a Calvino, eadem est, nec quicquam continet Catholicae
veritati aut Fidei regulae contrarium. Praescientia Dei aeterno decreto omnia
ordinantis, non pu^navit cum arbitrii liberate primis parentibus con^ess^.
Orthodoxi Patres qui liberum arbitrium esse dix^runt, and q^^ bodi^ s^rvum esse
docent, idem sentiunt. Five such Thesis as these, laid down by two such
Scholars, were enough to let the new Pelagianizers see, there was no quarter
for them in Oxford. Nor can I find, that they sought any; Calvin being there
all Qu. Elizabeth's days, in as much honor as at Geneva. And of this the
Historian seems sensible, confessing that even Barnabas was carried away into
Calvinism: only he labors to prove, that it was but in one point, that of the
not total or final falling away of Gods Elect. And that is indeed the only
point, for which Mr. Hooker was quoted; but that is such a point as with which
the other are necessarily twisted, and so defended by him as that he appears
Calvinistical to the utmost. For whereas there be that maintain the certain
perseverance of only the Elect, judging it not impossible that some might be
believers who were not Elect, Hooker plainly makes all true believers Elect to
eternal life, and therefore sure to persevere in the Faith; and he is so
confident in this point as in none more, prefacing his assertion thus, In this
I am sure I am not deceived, nor can I deceive you. At last the Doctor is faign
to fly to this (...), that his Discourse of Justification might be altered by
the Publisher of it, or it might be written by him as as an Essay of his
younger years, page 90. Had he not better have said, It is true that Hooker
also was a Doctrinal Calvinist, but I could heartily wish he had not been such?
And then I should have better liked him.

What then will the Doctor let go the whole University of Oxford? No. Ibid.
Some there were who spared not to declare their dislike of the Calvinian
tenants, and secretly trained up their Scholars in other principles. An answer
that may indifferently serve for any Novellists, by whatsoever names dignified
or distinguished. The absurd Quakers may say, that there have been in the
University many, that never bowed their Knees to Baal, and thereupon charge
flesh to be silent, and not object singularity to them: and they may further
add, that sundry great Scholars will be as free to join with them, as
Buckeridge and Houson were to join with Mountague, if ^ver there come a time in
which it shall be no more ^^^^rdous to own their friends than it was in 1626,
to ^wn Mountague. There is only one thing in which the Doctor can hope to
out-shoot them, and that is this, that Bishop Bancroft, when Baro died at
London three or four years after his leaving Cambridge, took Order to have most
of the Divines in and about London to attend his Funeral. This plainly shows,
thinks he, that there were many of both Universities that openly favored Baro
's Doctrines, page 90. But do we indeed favor, and plainly declare that we
favor, the opinions of those whose Funerals we attend? If so, then must we
never go to the Funeral of a Roman Catholic; then did Queen Elizabeth and her
Bishop Grindal plainly discover themselves friends to Popery, when they so
magnificently celebrated the Funerals of the Emperor. Besides, the Historian
would do well to consider, that when the Prophet Elijah thought himself to be
alone, Israel was manifestly apostatized from the God of her Fathers, and had
committed Whoredom with Idols; and so in Athanasius his time the world was
become A^^an. If the Doctor also will grant, that in Queen Elizabeth's time, the
Church was become Calvinistical, he grants the very thing we are contending
for. As for the truth of the Calvinistical opinions, that we are ready to try
with him by Scripture when he pleases. In this History we search not what
ought to be held, but what has been held: not of what mind our Reformers
should have been, but of what they were. If Calvinism be truth, it will be
truth, though it had never found entertainment in the Church of England. If it
be error, it will be error, though all the Church of England be for it; for the
Church cannot make truth or falsehood, but only declare what is truth and
falsehood. Whether the Church have declared Calvinism or Anti-calvinism to be
truth, that is the only (...). Seeing we have found Anti-calvinism
discountenanced by the Church, in Queen Elizabeth's Reign; let us now follow the
Historian to her Successors days, that we may see whether it were more
countenanced then.

The first thing we are led to Page 96, 97, 98, 99, 100, is the Hampton Court
Conference: in which he shall find nothing for him, but much against him. Dr.
Reynolds calls the Lambeth Articles Orthodoxal: no one intimated that they were
Heterodoxal. Dr. Overal declares against the total and final Apostasy of the
Saints: no one declared for it. His Majesty determined, that Predestination and
Election depend not upon any Qualities, actions, or works of Men, which be
mutable; but upon Gods Eternal and immutable decree and purpose: no one said or
whispered any thing against this determination It Is only said that the Bishop
of London told his Majesty how very many in these days, neglecting Holiness
of life, presumed too much of persisting in grace, (Calvinists would say, such
fellows never had grace to persist in) laying all their Religion on
Predestination, If I shall be saved, I shall be saved, which he termed a
desperate Doctrine, (and so the Calvinists term it also an hundred times over;)
showing it to be contrary to good Divinity, and the true Doctrine of
Predestination, wherein we should rather reason Ascendendo than Descendendo,
thus; I live in obedience to God, in love to my Neighbor, I follow my
occasion, etc. therefore I trust God has elected me and predestined me to
eternal Salvation: not th^^, which is the usual course of argument, God has
predestined and chosen me to life, therefore though I sin never so
grievously, yet I shall not be damned; for whom he once loves, he loves to
the End. In which words there is some thing Hypercalvinistical; for the Bishop
says, we must rather reason Ascendendo than Descendendo: but the Calvinist
says, that we must altogether reason Ascendendo, in such a way as he after
delineates. If the Bishop were not a Calvinist, I would fain know how a man
could, according to his principles, argue Ascendendo, I live in obedience to
God, therefore I trust God has elected me and predestined me to Salvation.
The Calvinist says, he that lives in obedience to God is predestined to
Salvation: but so does not the Anti-calvinist, nor has he any foundation to
build his trust of Predestination to Salvation upon; for, according to him, a
man who lives in all good obedience to God may be damned, because he may cease
to live in obedience to God, and has no promise that he shall not cease.

But if Dr. Bancroft had not by his speech declared himself Calvinistical; yet,
as has been said, his Chaplain's publishing his Exposition or Analysis of our
Articles, according to the Calvinistical frame, and that with his good liking
and approbation, is a sufficient argument that he was such. To invalidate this
argument it is only said, that That Analysis had been published 1585, which was
eighteen years before Bancroft was Archbishop. Which answer adds strength to
the argument; for by it it appears, that he took one to be his Chaplain, who
had eighteen years before published a Calvinistical Exposition of the Articles,
and suffered him after his own Consecration to republish it, and to dedicate it
to his own Grace: which it may be presumed, he would not have done, if it had
contained any thing contrary to his own judgment and sense.

Obj. But why would any one affirm, that Bancroft agreed to the
Lambeth-Articles, whilst Bishop of London?

Answ. It was Mr. Fullers mistake, in his Church History, so to affirm. Mr.
Hickman, whom the Doctor has chosen for his adversary, never so affirmed. Yet
he affirmed, that he agreed to them: and so it is like he did, in the capacity
of a Divine called in to consult. On which score I also reckon that Mr. Nowel
Dean of St. Paul's might agree to them; because he was Dr. Whitakers Uncle and
resided at London.

Object. 2. Did not King James reject the Lambeth Articles, when propounded as
fit to be inserted into the Articles?

Answ. He did not reject them, nor could he in honor reject them; having never
seen them before, nor having them read to him at that time. He was only told,
that the Articles were by the Archbishop, taking to him some Divines of
special note, drawn up and sent to the University for the appeasing of
quarrels. Whereupon his Majesty resolved, that when such questions do arise
among Scholars, the quietest proceeding were, to determine them in the
University, and not to stuff the Book with Conclusions Theological. Here is not
one word of leaving them to be canvased and disputed in the Schools: though if
they had been so left, they might not forthwith be held in the Affirmative or
Negative, as best pleased the Respondent; for the Respondent in our
Universities can hold nothing without the allowance and approbation of the
Doctor of the Chair, or Vice-Chancelor, or University. Yea King James did, some
years after, allow the putting of these Lambeth-Articles into the Confession of
the Church of Ireland, Anno 1615. To this the Doctor shapes an answer, page
101, consisting of sundry particulars.

First, That the Irish Articles were drawn up by Dr. Usher a professed
Calvinian, who not only thrust in the Lambeth-Articles, but also made others of
his own.

Answ. The Articles are the better to be liked because drawn up by a hand so
learned and peaceable.

Secondly, That the King might give consent to the confirming of these
Articles, though he liked them not. How so? First, Because the Irish Nation, at
that time, were most tenaciously addicted to the errors and corruptions of the
Church of Rome, and therefore must be bended to the other extreme, before they
could be straight. Secondly, It was an usual practice with the King in the
whole course of his government, to balance one extreme by another;
countenancing the Papists against the Puritans, and the Puritans sometimes
against the Papists.

Answ. I have heard much talk of the craft of King James; but did never before
hear, nor do I now believe, that this was any part of it: for what Policy is
it, to bring People out of one extreme into another? or what Piety is it, to
agree to Articles of Religion, the which all the Clergy must approve, merely to
keep the civil interest even? But I see what the Doctors fetch is in this; what
ever King James did in the affairs of Religion that his palate relisheth not,
must be thought to be done to gratify the Puritans: may not the Puritans also
say, that what ever was done pleasing to the Doctor, was done in compliance
with the Papists? and with whom then will the name of King James be precious or
honorable?

One piece of veracity I must needs commend the Doctor for, viz. his
acknowledging that Dr. Reynolds owned the meaning of the sixteenth Article to
be ^ound, page 98. This I commend, because Mr. Mountague found a forehead, in
his Appeal, to aver that it was by him and the other Ministers challenged for
unsound. I wish I had the like occasion to commend him for veracity to the end
of his Book? But I have not; for page 103, he tells us, that the opposites to
the Calvinians were by the grace and favor of King James invested in the chief
preferments of the Church of England, conferred as openly and freely upon them
as those who had been bred up in the contrary persuasion. This if it be
understood of men that had openly declared their opinions against the Calvinian
Doctrine, will be found to be an untruth. If any trust be to be given to our
printed Catalogues of Bishops, there were in that Kings Reign these
Translations, or Consecrations. Canterbury, Richard Bancroft, 1604. G. Abbot,
1610. Asaph, Richard Parry, 1604. John Hanmer, 1622. Bangor, Lewis Balie, 1616.
Bath and Wells, James Mountague, 1608. Ar. Lake, 1616. Bristoll, John
Thornborough, 1603. Nicholas Felton, 1617. John Scatchfield, 1619. Robert
Wright, 1622. Chicester, Lancelot Andrews, 1605. Samuel Harsnet, 1609. George
Carleton, 1619. Coventry, George Abbot, 1609. Richard Neile, 1610. John Overal,
1614. Thomas Morton, 1618. St. David's, Richard Milborne, 1615. William Laud,
1621. Ely, Lancelot Andrews, 1609. Nicholas Felton, 1618. Exeter, Valentine
Carry, 1621. Gloucester, Thomas Ravis, 1604. Henry Parry, 1607. Giles Thomson,
1611. Miles Smith, 1612. Hereford, Francis Godwin, 1617. Landaff, George
Carleton, 1618. Theo. Field, 1619. Lincoln William Barlow, 1608. Richard Neile,
1613. George Mountayn, 1617. John Williams, 1621. London, Richard Vaughan,
1604. Thomas Ravis, 1607. George Abbot, 1609. John King, 1611. George
Mountain, 1621. Norwich, John Overal, 1618. Samuel Harsnet, 1619. Oxford, John
Bridges, 1603. John Houson, 1619. Roch. Willam Barlow, 1605. Rechard Neile,
1608. Io. Buckridge, 1611. Salisbury, Robert Abbot, 1615. Martin Fotherby,
1618. Robert Tomson, 1620. John Davenant, 1621. Winchester, Ia. Mountague,
1617. Lancelot Andrews, 1618. Worcester, Henry Parry, 1610. John Thornborough,
1617. York, Toby Matthew, 1606. Carlisle, Robert Snowdon, 1616. Richard
Milbourne, 1620. Richard Senhouse, 1624. Chester, George Lloyd, 1604. Thomas
Morton, 1616. John Bridgeman, 1618. Durham, William James, 1606. Richard Neile,
1617. How few are they among these which the Doctor lays claim to? And how
little or no proof does he give us that those whom he claims had publicly
owned any of his Anti-calvinian Opinions? Bancroft is never affirmed to have
said or written any thing concerning Predestination, but what occurs in the
Relation of the Hampton Court Conference; and that can at most amount but to a
rebuke of some carnal Protestants, who did abuse the Doctrine of Predestination
to their destruction. Overal's Opinion in these points, if it somewhat differ
from Calvin's, much more differs from Dr. Heylin's. Yet on the account of
Overal's, and some others Episcopal preserments, the Historian grows so
confident, as to averr that his Conditional-decree-men found King James a
gracious Patron, and by means of his gracious Patronage, in the end surmounted
all difficulties, and came at last to be altogether as considerable, both for
power and number, as the Calvinists were.

He that will affirm this, and affirm it in Print, and whilst so many are
living that knew the Transactions of King James his Court, must needs lose the
credit of an impartial Historian. Yet the Doctor, as if he had not sufficiently
disparaged himself in affirming so great an increase of Anti-calvinists in
England, goes on to give a reason of it: just as some in Natural Philosophy
undertake to give us a cause of the Swans singing before her death, before they
have given us any good Authority that she does so sing. But what is his reason?
Why,

Dr. H. Page 103.
The differences betwixt the Remonstrants and Contraremonstrants, in Holland,
and their publishing of their Books one against another, by which the students
in the Universities were quickened to study the points.

Answ. That the breaking out of the Remonstrants could not, did not contribute
to the increase of Arminianism in England, we shall see by and by. In the mean
time, it is no great credit to the Doctors cause, that so few durst publicly
appear for it, till it had the encouragement of the civil Magistrate. If the
Primitive Christians had not published the truth, before Kings became nursing
Fathers to it, the world had been to this day under Paganish darkness. Let me
offer a Dilemma. Either there were some in England who thought Calvin's
Doctrines made God the Author of sin, destroyed liberty of will, opened a gap
to all profaneness; or there were not. If there were none, every one sees what
will follow. If any, how came they to have so little zeal against so damnable
blasphemies, as not to adventure the loss of all preferments, yea, of life it
self, in opposing of them?

Dr. H. Page 104.
But so it happened, that while matters went thus fairly forwards, Conradus
Vorstius, suspected for a Samosetenian or Socinian Heretic, etc was chosen by
the Curators of Leiden, 1611, to succeed Arminius.

Answ. While things went thus fairly forward: How fairly forward? You told us
before of the preferments of certain Bishops that had espoused your opinions:
several of whose preferments were bestowed on them after this election of
Vorstius, into the place of Arminius. You also little credit your History, by
saying that Vorstius was but suspected of Socinianism: and your friends the
Remonstrants did less credit themselves in appearing so stre^uously for a man
suspected of such prodigious blasphemies, if he had been only suspected. But
what ever secret good liking you had, either for the Remonstrants, or Vorstius
by whom they would feign have been headed, your Loyalty and Allegiance should
have kept you from saying, that King James used many harsh and bitter
expressions against Arminius and his followers, as if guilty of the same
impieties with Vorstius. For why might not King James charge the Remonstrants
with Vorstius his blasphemies, when as they so apertly declared, that they had
nothing against Vorstius, nor had found any thing in his Writing which was
contrary to truth or piety: and that it would be most profitable to Church and
Commonwealth, if his calling should proceed? Vid. praef. ad acta Synodi.

But how inexcuseable a piece of -- is it to say as you do, Chapt. 6th, Numb.
7, that King James was carried so to express himself against the Arminians, not
so much by the clear light of his own understanding, as by reason of State; and
that it was a part of Kings craft, to contribute to the suppression of the
weaker party? For does not King James in his Declaration tell you the clean
contrary? Does he not also call Arminius an enemy to God, his followers
Atheistical sectaries? Does he not call Bertius his Book of the Apostasy of
Saints, a blasphemous Book, worthy of the Fire for its very Title? Does he not
say, that Bertius l^ed grossly in averring his heresy, contained in his said
Book, was agreeable with the profession and Religion of our Church of England?
And will you after all this make the world believe, that setting aside
political considerations, and a design to serve the Prince of Orange, King
James had no zeal against Arminianism. What if one should say, that this Book
you have written is not the clear result of your Judgment, but wrested from you
by the importunity of your Friends, who would not suffer you to be quiet till
you had reproached the Calvinists, and wrested the History of Church affairs to
serve their ends? You would think your self wronged. And have not you then much
more wronged King James under whose Government you lived, in telling the world
so long after his death, that he put all the harsh expressions against Arminius
into his Declaration, to serve other men's turns rather than to advance his own,
as you speak, Chap. 22. Numb. 10. But you think you have reason to charge this
hypocrisy on him; for say you, page 106, That King James condemned not the
Arminian Doctrines in themselves though he had taken some displeasure against
their persons, appears, not only by rejecting the Lambeth-Articles, and his
dislike to the Calvinian Doctrine of predestination in the Conference at
Hampton Court, but also by instructing his Divines commissionated for the Synod
of Dort not to oppose the Article of Universal Redemption, which they
accordingly performed. You told us before Chap. 6. Numb 7th, that King James
sent such Divines to the assembly at Dort, as he was sure would be sufficiently
active in their (i. e. the Remonstrants) condemnation: and have you now so soon
forgot your self as to say, that he instructed his Divines thither
commissionated, not to oppose the Article of Universal redemption, which
accordingly they performed; and make this an argument that King James,
condemned not the Arminian Doctrines in themselves? Was that Universal
redemption which you say King James instructed his Divines not to oppose, and
which they did not oppose, an Ar^inian Doctrine* or was it not? If it was nor,
how is King James his directing his Divines not to oppose it, any evidence that
he condemned not the Arminians opinions in themselves? If it were, and that our
Divines did not condemn it, why is the King charged with sending Divines, that
would be sufficiently active in condemning the Arminian opinions?

Again you say expressly, page 107, that he gave command to his Divines, sent to
the Synod of Dort, not to rec^de from the Doctrine of the Church of England, in
the point of Universal Redemption by the death of Christ: a point so
inconsistent with that of the absolute decree of reprobation, and generally of
the whole Machina of predestination and the points depending thereupon as they
are commonly maintained in the Schools of Calvin, that fire and water cannot be
at greater difference.

Sir, I beseech you consider whether you do not contradict your self, whilst
you think you only contradict Calvin. Universal redemption by the death of
Christ overthrows the whole Machine of the Calvinian predestination and the
points thereon depending. Thus I argue from this, They that were sent with
Order to assert Universal redemption by the death of Christ, were sent with
order to destroy the whole Machine of Calvinian predestination. Our Divines by
King James were sent with Orders to assert Universal redemption by the death of
Christ. Therefore, Our Divines were sent with Orders to destroy the whole
Machine of Calvinian predestination. Again, They that asserted Universal
re^emption by the death of Christ destroyed the whole Machine of ^he Calvinian
predestination. Our Divines at the Synod of Dort, asserted Universal Redemption
by the death of Christ. Therefore, Our Divines at the Synod of Dort, destroyed
the whole Machine of the Calvinian predestination. The premises in both
Syllogisms are your own. Yet I suppose you disown the conclusion, naturally and
necessarily flowing from them: Or if you do not, why did you say, that our King
thought it a piece of King-Craft to contribute to the suppression of the
weaker, i. e. Remonstrant party, and sent Divines that would be active in their
condemnation?

Finally, you tell us that this point of Universal Redemption, was, together
with the rest, condemned in the Synod of Dort.

Now nothing was in that Synod condemned, but what our Divines consented to:
they have subscribed to all the determinations of the Synod, relating to the
death of Christ: Therefore either the Synod did not condemn Universal
redemption, of our Divines did not a^cording to their Orders.

The Reader, by this time sees what terrible executions the Doctor has done on
himself: and more need not be said about the Synod of Dort, as it relates to
our English affairs.

Some things done in England, and misrelated by the Doctor, must be rectified.
Page 105, he essays to make a Salve for the Recantation imposed on Mr. Sympson,
for some passages in a Sermon before the King, at Royston, 1616, and he would
fain have us think, that the King took no offense at his saying, that the
committing any great Sin did for the present extinguish grace, and Gods Spirit;
for in that he went no further than Overal had done.

This is very untrue; for Overal never said so, nor could say so, according to
his principles. But what then did the King take exception at?

At nothing but the Preachers expounding the seventh to the Romans as Arminius
had done, or rather, his Fathering the exposition on Arminius.

But either the Preacher did bring this exposition of Arminius to credit an
Arminian notion, or he did not. If he did, then it was the Arminianism of the
exposition that gave distaste. If not, would it not sound like tyranny in the
King, to enjoin a Learned man a Recantation, merely because he used such an
exposition of a place of Scripture as Arminius had used?

Take the place of a Regenerate man, Arminius his Doctrine cannot stand, as the
wise King well saw; and therefore he sent to the two Professors of Cambridge to
have their judgment in the case, who sent their judgment in favor of St.
Austins exposition.

But the Doctor observes, that the Professors did not do this of their own
Authority, but as set on by the King, page 106.

I wonder how they could give their judgments to the King at Royston, of a
Sermon Preached before him, until they were by his Majesty required so to do.

I, But the Professors were not so forward as to move in it of themselves; as
may appear by their not answering of Tompsons Book, de intercisione gratiae and
justificationis, though the Author of it were a member of that University, but
leaving it to be confuted by Dr. Abbot, their Brother in the Chair at Oxford:
so great an alteration had been made in Cambridge, since the first striking up
of their heats against Baro, and Barret.

O what superfoetations of Doctrines are here upon nothing, or what is less
than nothing? First, Dr. Abbot when he confuted Tompson, was not Doctor of the
Chair but Bishop of Salisbury and so no Brother to the Professors at Cambridge,
1616. Secondly, The Professors at Cambridge then, were Dr. Richardson
originally of Emanuel, a College that in those days afforded few Arminians;
and Dr. John Davenant, a very able and zealous opposer of Arminianism, as all
know. Thirdly, The Cambridge Professors might not count themselves concerned to
confute Tompson, because his Book was not Printed in their University, nor
indeed in England, and because Tompson's life had confuted his Book at
Cambridge. He was a man of a most debauched conversation, and confirmed himself
in his debauchedness, by his Arminianism; for when men reproved him for his
profaneness, he would say My will is free, I am a Child of the Devil to day, to
morrow I will make my self a Child of God: this more than any Answer to the
Book, would confirm the Cantabridgians, that he was not an enemy to
perseverance as a Doctrine leading to impiety.

Well, but Did not King James, by his Directions to the University, Jan. 18.
1619. require that young students in Divinity be appointed to study such Books,
as be most agreeable in Doctrine and discipline to the Church of England, and
excited to bestow their time in the Fathers, and Councels, Schoolmen,
Histories, and Controversies: and not to insist too long upon Compendiums, and
Abbreviations, making them the ground of their study in Divinity?

Really he did so, and I heartily wish the direction had been observed: for
then had Arminianism been crushed in the shell. I think next to the study of
the Holy Scriptures, the reading of the Fathers is the best preservative
against Arminianism; which came into the Low-countrys with the contempt of the
Fathers. As for Calvinism, it cannot be condemned, if sentence be passed upon
it out of the Fathers; those I mean, who professed to set themselves, to handle
the Controversies concerning grace and predestination. Sure I am the Royal
directions notwithstanding, the University continued as highly, or more highly
Calvinistical than ever: a manifest argument that the University looked upon
the Kings directions, as no way tending to root out Calvinistical Doctrine, but
rather as a means to confirm it, and so indeed they were.

The Doctor will not yet give over, but, page 108, tells us of certain Orders
sent out, Anno 1622, August the fourth, designed to put a bridle into the
Calvinists mo^ths.

These Orders it is notoriously known were put out at such a time when the
Spanish match was driving on, and common people began to have thoughts of heart
whither the releasing of Recusants, and the Articles of Marriage might tend. In
those Orders care was taken, among other things, that no undecent expressions
should be used against Puritanes; but it was also provided that no Preacher of
what title soever under the degree of a Bishop or Dean at least, should
thenceforth presume to teach in any popular auditory, the deep points of
predestination, etc. but rather leave those points to be handled by learned
men, and that modestly and moderately, by Use and application rather than by
positive Doctrine. And this was a right good Order for Calvinists, who never
suffer so much from any thing, as the declamatory attempts of men in popular
Sermons. In the Schools, where Syllogisms must be used, their Doctrine is not
in much danger; because he who disputes must keep himself close to the State of
the Question, through not representing of which, Arminians get all their
Advantage. Mr. Hoard did make choice of that piece of Calvinism which is most
liable to exception, the absolute decree of reprobation. And I confess, when I
was a young proud Graduate, I had read his Book, and did think it perfectly
unanswerable: but when I had the good hap to meet with Bishop Dav^nants answer
to it, I was marvelously altered in my opinion and estimation concerning the
strength of the Book, (keeping still an high opinion of the Author of it;) for
I found that the absolute decree of reprobation was quite another thing than it
was represented.

There was in Oxford, after the coming out of the aforesaid Orders of the King,
a Sermon Preached in the University Church by Mr. Gabriel Bridges, against the
absolute decree: this, says the Doctor, was a violating of the Kings Order,
(you must pity him, he had nothing else to say,) and this laid him open to the
persecution of Dr. Prideaux, and to the censure of the Vice-chancelor.

But all who have searched the Register do know, that violation of the Kings
Order was never so much as once laid to Mr. Bridges his charge. He was accused
for Preaching contrary to the Articles of Religion established among us: and
was Ordered to maintain in the Schools, the Contrary to what he had Preached in
the Pulpit: and he did so, and never altered his mind afterward. Indeed it had
been most ridiculous once to imagine, that a Sermon Preached in the University
Church, could violate the Kings Order manifestly restrained to popular
Auditories, in which number the University Auditories were never placed.

The Doctor has one Card more left to play, which if it hit not, he will have
a perfect Slam. What is that? It is his dear friend Mr. Mountague, whom he
imagines in his Gagger to have disclaimed all the Calvinian tenants, and to
have asserted the Church to her primitive and genuine Doctrines.

(Creditis? an qui amant ipsi sibi somnia fingunt?)
Well, what of this Gagger? Why, information was prepared against him by two
worthy men, Mr. Yates, and Mr. Ward. (A sign he was looked on as designing
innovation.) What does Mr. Mountague? After he had got a copy of this
information, be flees for shelter to King James, (Poor man! did he flee for
shelter, against the information of two Lecturers? What shelter did he there
find? Why,) King James (having now acted a Part at the Synod of Dort, condemned
the Arminians that he might save the Prince of Orange, and Archbishop Abbot
coming not at him, and Dr. James Mountague being dead,) was Master of himself,
(it seems before he had been a servant to others,) and Governed by the Light of
his own most clear and excellent judgment, took both Mountague and his
Doctrines into his Protection, and gave him a quietus est from all those
Calumnies of Popery and Arminianism that were by the Informers laid on him,
commanded Dr. Francis White to see his Appeal he was in hand with Licenced for
the Press, and finally gave Order to Mountague to dedicate the Book, when
Licenced, to his Royal self.

These things are very unlikely; that a King should give command to have a Book
Licenced before he had seen it or knew what would be in it, and that he should
give Order to have it Dedicated to himself: and because they are unlikely, I
could be glad to see them confirmed by some irrefragable Authority; but find no
Authority alleged. Wherefore I am a very unbeliever in all these matters: so
are most I meet with. But these things I am certain of, First, That in Mr.
Mountagues Appeal there be downright untruths in matter of fact; in which I do
not find the Doctor going about to justify or excuse him. Secondly, That never
Book gave more discontent than his did; for it was answered by no fewer than
five or six, all considerable in the Nation, all agreeing that he had departed
from the Doctrine of the Church. The Book was also censured in Parliament, as
contrary to our Articles. Archbishop Abbot endeavored the stopping of it
before it came to light. Dr. White who had approved it, did publicly complain
what a trick the Bishops had served him, promising to join with him in the
approbation of the Book, but yet cowardly slipping their necks out of the
Collar and leaving him to bear the whole envy of the Midwifery of so distastful
a Book. Finally, King Charles himself, was feign both to pardon Mountague for
all his Writings, and at last to call in his Book, as the great occasion of
many unneces^ary troubles. So I let pass Mr. Mountague, of whom Dr. Prideaux
publicly said that he was more a Grammarian, than a Divine.

As for King James, we are sure, from the Pen of Dr. Featly, (never used to
wrong his Sovereign,) that, not many weeks before his death, he called the
Arminians Heretics: and so we conclude, that, for all his and Queen Elizabeth's
days, they were accounted Heretics and their Doctrine Heresy. And seeing they
were then so accounted, why now the broachers of that Doctrine, should be
accounted the most obedient Sons of the Church, is a question in which I would
most gladly be satisfied. Until such satisfaction be gained, it will be at
least a pardonable error to suppose, that that is not the Doctrine of the
Church of England, which, for above threescore Years after her first
establishment, was not averred in any one Licenced Book, but confuted in many.

FINIS.
Postscript.
I Am given to understand, that I seem to some, not sufficiently to have taken
notice of what the Doctor brings, to invalidate the Argument drawn from
Barret's Recantation. I drew the Argument from the Heads of Houses in Cambridge
enjoining Mr. Barret to Recant what he had delivered against absolute
reprobation and against perseverance, and some other Calvinian Doctrines, not
only as false but also as contrary to the Articles of Religion here in England
established. The Doctor does not, cannot deny, but that such Recantation was
enjoined him. Now if the Heads of Houses in the University, who are authorized
to judge of the Sermons preached among them, and to censure what they find in
such Sermons disagreeable to the Doctrine of the Church, did judge Barret's
Doctrine, denying absolute reprobation and perseverance of Believers, to be
contrary to the Doctrine of the Church, and manifestly contrary to it, and
passed this judgment upon mature deliberation, I leave it to any ones
consideration, whether this be not a very vehement presumption, that Calvin's
Doctrine concerning absolute election and perseverance is agreeable to the
Articles of our Church, and Barret's Doctrine contrary to them. If this be
granted, what need I contend about by-passages relating to the Recantation,
being in a place where I can have no recourse to the Records of Cambridge? Yet
to make it appear that I did write nothing in this business rashly, and that
the Doctor has me at no such advantage as he pretends, I will now review all
he says, not already taken notice of. It signifies little that he says, 1.
That this process was made or procured by the Calvinian Heads, inflamed by Mr.
Perkins, page 70, Part 3. Seeing there were then no Heads but what were
Calvinistical, and no man can think that they should all be guided and acted by
Mr. Perkins a poor Preacher in the Town. 2. It is to be doubted, says he, page
71, whether any such Recantation consisting of so many Articles, and every
Article having its abjuration or recantation subjoyned unto it, was ever
enjoined to be made? But what reason have we to doubt of this? when as the Form
of Recantation is exemplified in Mr. Fuller (from whom I had it,) and also in
Mr. Prynne's Antiarminianism, and was fairly printed in Qu. Elizabeth's days,
some printed Copies of it being still extant, and seeing Mr. Prynne declares
that the Form of Recantation by him inserted into his Book, was a Transcript
taken out of an Original Copy under Mr. Barret's own hand? Why he doubts,
because though Mr. Prynne say, that the Recantation, in the same manner and
form as we there find it, was exemplified and sent unto him under the
Register's hand, yet he also confesses, that no such matter could be found
when the Heads of houses were required by an Order from the House of Commons to
make certificate unto them of all such Recantations as were recorded in their
University Register, and of this Recantation in particular. But first, Mr.
Prynne only tells us, that he had been certified and informed, that this Order
for Recantation could not be found among the University Records. 2. Mr. Prynne
does not pretend to have had in his hands the Form of Recantation exemplified
under the Register's hand, but only the Order for Recantation. The Form of
Recantation he tells us, he had another way; and perhaps the Form of
Recantation was never put into the University Archives, or Register. But if the
Order for the Recantation should not be found there neither, I should much
wonder, and yet less wonder, because Thomas Smith, who was Register at this
time, is branded for one that was very careless in Registring matters that
concerned the University; as may be found in Mr. Fuller's Hist. of Camb. p. 49.

But that which the Historian most contends for, is, that the Recantation was
never made by Barret. Page 72. It is to be denied as a thing most false, that
he never published the Recantation, whatsoever it was. It is to be thought that
the Printer has mistaken his Copy, and put never, instead of ever; for if it
be most false that he never published his Recantation, then it is to be
affirmed as a thing most true, that he sometime published it: which is that
which we believe Let us s^an the reasons of the Doctor to prove that he never
read the Recantation, ibid. For 1. It is acknowledged in Mr. Prynnes own
Transcript of the Acts, that though Barret did confess the Propositions
wherewith he was charged, to be contained in his Sermon, yet he would never
grant them to be contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England, and
therefore was not likely to retract the same.

The Argument framed stands thus,

He that would never acknowledge his Propositions to be contrary to the
Doctrine of the Church of England was not likely to retract the same. Mr.
Barret would not acknowledge his Propositions to be contrary to the Doctrine of
the Church of England: therefore, he was not likely to retract the same. The
Major certainly is most absurdly false; but the Minor cannot be proved. For Mr.
Prynne's Copy does not say, that he would never acknowledge; but only that at
first reading of his Charge he denied his Propositions to be contrary to the
Religion of the Church of England. Many a man at first denies what he
afterward grants. Secondly, says the Doctor, ibid. It is plain from Mr.
Barret's Letters, the one to Dr. Goad Master of Kings, the other to Mr.
Chadderton Master of Emanuel, that neither slattery, nor t^^^at^ings, nor the
fear of losing his subsistence in the University, should ever work him to the
publishing of the Recantation required of him.

The Doctor had in his Certamen Epistolare before told us of two Letters of
Barret's, written one to Dr. Goad, the other to Mr. Chadderton; and now he
tells us that from them it is manifest that neither flattery, etc. Yet he gives
us only a Copy of the Letter to Dr. Goad, and never tells us whence he had
that; nor does the Letter to Dr. Goad in the least intimate that any flattery
had been used to draw him to make the Recantation; but rather it manifests that
he used flattery to persuade Dr. Goad to be his Friend, and obtain for him,
that he might stay in the University, on solemn promise to keep his Opinion to
himself. A very sneaking Letter it is, and shows that he was a poor low
spirited man, valuing his Place more than his Conscience, and yet his Credit
more than his Place. Nor does he (if we may judge of him by the Letter
pretended to be his,) appear to be a toberable Scholar. For let any one read
the beginning of it, and he will scarce be able to find sense in it. My duty
remembered to your Worship, etc. Sir, according to your appointment I have
conferred with Mr. Overald, and Mr. Chadderton. Mr. Overald after once
Conference, refused to talk any more off these points, saying it needed not.
For Mr. Chadderton he is a learned man, and one whom I do much reverence, yet
he has not satisfied me in this point: for I required proof but of these two
things at his hands: that una fides did specie differ ab alia; and that it
was aliud donum ab alio. But for the first, whereas he should have proved it
did was differ specie, he proved it did differ numero, and that but out of
the Master of the Sentences; whose authority notwithstanding I do not impugn.
And for the other, that it should be aliud donum, he proves out of St.
Augustine that fides daemonum is not alia a fide Christianorum, which no man
ever denied; for fides daemonum is not donum at all; so that it comes not in
question. So that I being unsatisfied of one party ( meaning Mr. Chadderton)
and rather confirmed of the other party, I do hold my Positions as before.

He, (if he) says, he required proof but of two things, viz. that una fides
did differ specie ab alia, and that it was aliud donum ab alio. That it was;
that what was? Una fides. Can any one make sense of this, Una fides est aliud
donum ab alio? I must confess I cannot. But what success had he in his desire
to Mr. Chadderton? Why, whereas he should have proved that una fides did
differ specie ab alia, he proved it did differ numero; and that but out of
the Master of the Sentences, whose authority nevertheless, he says, he did not
impugn. Really I think he did not disgrace himself in granting upon the
authority of the Master of the Sentences, that una fides does differ numero
ab alia: but Mr. Chadderton did vilely disgrace himself, if he did bring the
Master of the Sentences authority, to prove that una fides numero di^fert ab
alia. He might even as well have brought the authority of the Master of the
Sentences, to prove that Mr. Chadderton and Mr. Barret did differ numero. But
why was Mr. Barret so simple, as to desire to have it proved, that Una fides
does specie differ ab alia? Could he once imagine that divine and humane
faith do not specie differ? or did he not know that the faith of Miracles did
specifically differ from that by which we are justified? If any man would be
satisfied that even the faith which is commonly called temporary, does
specifically differ from that to which salvation is promised, he may soon be
satisfied by reading the writings that passed betwixt Dr. B. and Mr. B.
concerning this point. Did Mr. Chadderton satisfy any better his second
desire? (which I for my part cannot understand.) Of that thus he writes. And
for the other that it should be aliud donum, he proves out of St. Austin that
fides daemonum is not alia a fide Christianorum: which no man ever denied, for
fides daemonum is not donum at all, so that it comes not in question. This is
the strangest stuff I ever met with. Did Mr. Chapter prove out of St. Austin that
fides daemonum is not alia a fide Christianorum, and did no man ever deny this,
and is this a good reason to prove that no man denied it, because fides
daemonum is not donum? Either this is nonsense or I have lost my reason and
senses. In the Form of Recantation I find it enjoined Mr. Barret to recant this
saying In fide nulla est distinctio sed in credentibus. Which undoubtedly was
unworthy of a Scholar; for what distinction could he mean, specifical or
numerical? If specifical, then his meaning must be, Una fides non distinguitur
specie ab alia, sed unus fidelis specifice distinguitur ab alio: If numerical,
then his meaning must be, Una fides non differt numerice ab alia, se^ unus
fidelis differt numerice ab alio: which was rare stuff to put into a Sermon ad
Clerum. If there be no difference in Faiths, there can be no difference in
Believers as such, that is certain. I believe this muddy Letter made Dr. Heylin
himself somewhat muddy: for page 75, he lets us know that it cannot be made
apparent that either Dr. Duport the Vicechancellor, which was most concerned,
or Dr. Baro the Lady Margarets Professor for Divinity there, had any hand in
sentencing the Recantation. Not Dr. Baro because by concurring to this
Sentence, he was to have condemned himself: (he might also have added because
being no Head of an House, he could not sit among the Heads of Houses.) But,
Why not Dr. Duport? For I find his Place to be supplied by Dr. Some, which
shows him to be absent at that time from the University, according to the style
whereof the title of Procancellarius is given to Dr. Some in the Acts of the
Court; as appears by the extracts of them in the Antiarminianism, p. 64,
compared with p. 63. Did I ghess amiss in saying the Doctor was muddy when he
writ this? Could Dr. Duport be most concerned to sentence the Recantation, if
he were absent from the University when the Sentence was given? Does the
managing of the business by Doctor Some show, that Dr. Duport was absent from
the University at the management of it? Might he not be in the University and
be sick, or or otherwise hindered from coming to the University Consistory.
Finally, it seems by Mr. Prynne's Transcript that though Dr. Some did as Deputy
manage some part of the Transaction, yet Dr. Duport himself managed at least
the latter part of it. I had almost forgot to take notice of one thing the
Doctor brings to discredit the Recantation page 73. It is the Title of it,
given by Mr. Prynne page 50, Antiarm. And really, had that Title been given to
it by the University, it had been sufficient to disparage the whole
Recantation. But Mr. Prynne does not affirm that Title to be made by any but
himself; who being a long-winded wordy man, and as fierce against the Arminians
as the Doctor can be for them could not mention Mr. Barret's errors without
showing his detestation, of them and Mr. Harsnet who held them as well as Mr.
Barret. To conclude, I hope, for Mr. Barret's sake, that he never did write so
silly a Letter to Dr. Goad: If he did, I cannot collect from it that he never
read the Recantation enjoined him. And I wish for Dr. Heylin's sake that he had
not depredicated the invincible constancy of Mr. Barret, as he does page 87:
and that he had used his art, rather any other way, than to put a fair face on
foul Opinions. And for my self, I desire thee Good Reader to believe, that as I
took but little pleasure in writing against Dr. Heylin whilst he lived; so I
take less to find any thing of mine printed against him since he is dead. If by
what thou read, thou be any way edified, give God the glory, and me thy
prayers.

FINIS.
Books to be Sold by Robert Boulter at the Turks-head in Cornhil over against
the Royal Exchange.
FOLIO.
THe Institutes of the Laws of England, in four parts, by Sir Edward Coke.
Spiritual Refinings, in two parts, by Anthony Burgess. -- His 145 Sermons on
John 17. -- His Treatise of Original Sin. The Merchants Map of Commerce,
wherein the universal manner and matter of Trade is compendiously handled; the
second Edition: by Lewis Roberts Merchant. Curia Politiae or the Apologies of
several Princes Justifying to the world their most Eminent Actions by Reason
and Policy. A Concordance to the Holy Scriptures with the various readings
both of Text and margin: By S.N. Sixty five Sermons by the Right Reverend
Father in God, Ralph Brownrig, late Lord Bishop of Exceter. Published by
William Martyn, M.A. sometimes Preacher at the Rolls. In two Volumes.
Quarto.
An Exposition with Practical Notes and Observations on the five last Chapters
of the Book of Job, by Joseph Caryl. Husbandry Spiritualized; or the Heavenly
use of Earthly things, by I. Flavel. An Exposition on the first eighteen verses
of the first Chapter of S. John; by I. Arrowsmith, D. D. A Treatise of the
Sabbath, in four parts; by Mr. Dan. Cawdry. Vindiciae Legis; or, a Vindication
of the Law and Covenants from the Errors of Papists, Socinians and
Antinomians; by Anthony Burgess. The Saints Everlasting Rest; Or a Treatise of
the blessed state of the Saints in their enjoyment of God in glory; by Rich.
Baxter. -- His plain Scripture Proof of Infant Baptism. Thesaurus medicinae
practicae, ex praestantissimorum tum Veterum tum Recentiorum Medicorum
Observationibus Consultationibus Consiliis and Epis^olis, summa diligentia
collectus ordineque Alphabetico dispositus, per Tho. Burnet.
Large Octavo.
Scholae Wintonieusis Phrases Latinae. The Latin Phrases of Winchester School;
Collected by H. Robinson. D. D. A Discourse of growth in Grace, in sundry
Sermons; by Samuel Slater, late of S. Katherines near the Tower. The Grounds of
Art, teaching the perfect work and practice of Arithmetic both in whole
Numbers and Fractions; by R. Record. A Cloud of Witnesses, or the Sufferers
Mirror; made up of the Swan-like Songs, and other choice passages, of several
Martyrs and Confessors, to the end of the 16th. Century, in their Treatises,
Speeches and Prayers; by T. M. M. A. A Treatise of the Divine promises, in five
Books; by Edw. Leigh Esquire. The unreasonableness of Infidelity, in four
parts; by R. Baxter. -- His method for getting and keeping spiritual peace and
comfort. -- His safe Religion against Popery. The Blessedness of the Righteous
opened and further recommended from the consideration of the Vanity of this
mortal life; by I. How, M. A. Quakerism no Christianity, clearly and
abundantly proved out of the Writings of their chief Leaders, with a Key for
the understanding their sense of their many usurped and unintelligible words;
by John Faldo. HSIODOY ASKPAIOY TA EYPISKOMENA. Hesiodi ASCRAEI QVAE extant,
Cum notis Cornelii Scrivelii. A Treatise of the Bulk and Selvedge of the World,
wherein the Greatness, Littleness, and Lastingness of Bodies are freely
handled, with an Answer to Tentamina De Deo; By N. Fairfax. M. D.
Small Octavo and Duodecim^.
A Saint indeed; Or, the great work of a Christian opened and pressed from
Prove. 4.23. by I. Flavel. Annotations on the Book of Ecclesiastes, by a
Reverend Divine. Artificial Arithmetic in Decimals, showing the Original,
Ground and Foundation thereof; By R. Iagar. Euphrates, or the Waters of the
East; being a short Discourse of that secret Fountain whose Water flows from
Fire, and carries in it the Beams of the Sun and Moon. The Greatness of the
Mystery of Godliness; together with Hypocrisy discovered in its Nature and
Workings; By Cuthbert Sydenham. Ieda Theologiae tam Contemplativae quam Activae
ad Formam S. Scripturae delineata, Opera Theophili Galei.

