A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of the RIGHT HONORABLE JULIAN VICOVNTESS
CAMDEN, At Camden, Jan. 12. 1680/1

Honor is deceitful and Beauty is vain, but a woman that fears the Lord
shall be praised, Prove. 31.3. Keep innocence, and do the thing that is just,
for this will bring a man peace at the latter end, Psalm. 37.38. printer's or
publisher's device

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University Anno Domini,
1681.

TO The Right Honorable BAPTIST, Viscount Camden, BARON of ILMINGTON and
RIDLINGTON.
My Lord,
HAVING Preached this Sermon, I had no thoughts of making it public; But
having been since solicited for Copies, by some very honorable Persons, whose
commands I cannot withstand, and whose judgments I cannot control; and
considering that Translating of Exemplars would be wearisome, if not endless: I
resolved to commit them to the Press, yet so as the Philosopher answered
Alexander his Books, (...), scripsi, and non scripsi, I have Printed, yet not
Printed them: Printed them that is, but with no intent to publish them, having
confined the number of my Copies, as near as I can conjecture to the number of
the Persons that may probably desire them: That so I might show my zeal to the
surviving branches of the Deceased Lady, whose memory I adorn, and subject my
self to the Censures only of an Honorable Family, and not of a Censorious
Nation. I add no more, but my hearty prayers to the Almighty, that the
Blessings of both hands, and both worlds, may be the portion of Your Lordship,
your Noble Lady, and your Hopeful Offspring.

My Lord, Your Lordships Most Humble and Obedient Servant Henry Hicks.

3. Phil. 20, 21. For our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look
for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ: Who shall change our vile body that it
may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby
he is able even to subdue all things to himself.


WHEN one of the Fathers was to Preach upon a subject of Mortality, he read the
text, shut the book, and spent the hour in groans and tears. This present Text
of Providence, Our loss of so Honorable and Religious a Mother in Israel, might
justify the action, should we follow the example. But being assured that death
it self, is but a passage to a better life, and the Grave but an entry to
glory, therefore though our hearts are sad with sorrow for our loss, yet our
Text revives us into comfort in her, and joy in our selves; minding us of our
Conversation in Heaven, where while she is by Fruition, let us be also by
Contemplation, remembering that Our Conversation etc.

The words read upon this solemn and very sad occasion offer more immediately
these two Generals to our consideration 1. Something to be known as Doctrinal.
2. Something to be done as Practical.


The things to be known are Three.

1. That there is a Change to pass upon all. 2. That this Change is for the
better, to advance our earthly natures, even to the conformity with the
glogrious body of Jesus. 3. That the efficient Author of this Change is our
Savior Jesus Christ.
2. The things to be done by us in order to this Change are, 1. To have our
Conversation in heaven. 2. To expect and wait for his coming.


The first is our duty, the Second, our constancy in it, for which our Savior
has recorded a blessing in the 24. of St. Matthews Gospel: Blessed is that
servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing; Blessed indeed he is
for he shall be rewarded with eternal glories.

And that we may be so too, let us consider the doctrinal part of my Text,
thereby to inform and engage us to the Practical.

1. Then there is a change to pass on all. Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the
kingdom of God, and this mortal must put on immortality before we can be
admitted into the heavenly mansions; and therefore does the Apostle to
encourage our hopes and excite our industry, speak out and tell us, That the
Trumpet shall sound, and the dead be raised incorruptible and we shall be
changed. The dead shall start at the shrill voice of the Trumpet from their
beds of dust, into the incorruptible conformity and likness of God.

They shall lay down their stench and corruption, frailties and decays, the
constant attendants of our mortal state, and be clothed with incorruption, and
a Robe of Glory: And they who then shall live, will not put off their bodies,
but their mortality, and be made like unto Christ both in the truth and glory
of his Resurrection: so great is our Change.

So great indeed, that all our imperfections will be done away: The Blind shall
have his Sight repaired, to see and admire his glorious Redeemer.

We shall not only be restored to our bodies, but to our youth and vigor also.
The walking staff, and the hoary head shall no longer be the support and
distinction of age; and those limbs which the unmerciful Saw divorced, or the
fire consumed, shall be restored with as much Miracle as Flesh, and the Infant
that left the world as soon as it saw the light, shall in a trice be as big as
its Parent, and as glorious as its Redeemer.

And thus it is, that we shall bear the image of the Heavenly, as we have born
that of the Earthly, (i.e.) As we have with our Protoplast Adam been mortal,
sinful, corruptible; so shall we be like the second Adam, pure, immortal,
incorruptible.

But to know what this Change that is to pass upon us at the last, will be, we
must discover what is meant in the Text by Our Saviors glorious body: which we
are not to collect from the dreams of Enthusiasts, and the conceited raptures
of some fanciful men, but from the spirit of truth, and those representations
of his glory, which are attested by the Sacred Oracles.

If therefore we look into the 17. of St. Matthew, we shall find that one
transient glimps of Christ's glorious body in his Transfiguration upon the
Mount, did so engross all the desires and ardencies of three very eminent
Apostles, that they could not breath out any thing but Lord it is good for us
to be here.

O happy place, here let us fix and rear Tabernacles, that we may joyfully
continue in such a presence: Here, that we may have the influence of that face,
which does outshine the sun, and the pleasure of that Raiment which is as
white and comfortable as the light. So glorious it seems was the
representation, that Moses thought God himself had buried him, and given him
such a reward as belonged to him that was faithful in all his House; yet will
he for sometime quit his enjoyments to behold that glorious body, to the
likness of which our Text warrants ours to be one day fashioned.

That glorious body, that transported its beholders, with such unusual
splendours that a voice from heaven was forced to settle and direct them to the
Object, by telling them, This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased, hear
ye him.

And in the 9, of the Acts, we find St. Paul in his journey to Damascus
surpised with an unusual glory, with an heavenly light and brightness, a
brightness that surpassed that of the Sun, as St. Paul afterward affirms to
King Agrippa, and a voice from above to attest that Jesus was not wrapped up in,
but was that light and glory; some rays of which were but darted upon the
Proto-martyr Stephen, and presently all those that sat in the Council looking
steadfastly upon him, saw his face as if it had been the face of an Angel.

God gave him a foretast and an earnest of his future happiness, to make him
steady and unshaken amidst all the assaults of his Persecutors, that he might
slight and despise all the gayeties of this life, in comparison of that glory
with which he should be hereafter encircled; for he that is able to perform,
has promised, That the Righteous shall appear as the Sun in the kingdom of
their Father, which he has purchased for all those, who looking unto Jesus,
shall endure the Cross and despise the shame, and fight the good fight of Faith
under the Lords Banner successfully.

2. And this leads us to to our Second thing Considerable, Namely, That this
change will be for the better, of a vile to a glorious body, from such vileness
as we cannot express, unto such glory as we cannot concei^e.

Having already, in some measure seen, what the glorified Saints shall be
fashioned to, we need go no farther for the proof of the advantage of our
Change, than to compare our present state with our future glorification.

And truly a man need not be very inquisitive to find out that this world is
the place of sorrow and disappointments, of regret and dissatisfaction, of lust
and wickedness. The whole world is full of snares and hazards, and we are no
sooner dropped into it, but we are encompassed with so many dangers, that we may
well say, that we are gotten into the quarters of an enemy, and every where
exposed to ruin. If we get into the shade and sollitude, there our passions
distract and worrie us, and we cannot be alone since the Devil is a Legion: If
in a Crowd and Company, we have vice and bad dispositions stamped with the
insinuating characters of Good Nature and Civility imprinted upon us, and from
such it is hard to think of a retreat. Indeed could we have a prospect of this
miserable Theater, we should quickly see enough to rebate our keenest
affections, and to make us nauseate the most splendid scenes and
representations that are acted in it.

The horrors of War, and Rivers discolored with humane blood, would make us
detest the ambition and avarice that shed it. The Cabinets of some great men
full of lust and treachery, cruelty and oppression, would stifle our envy,
notwithstanding their Gold and Embroidery, their long Retinue and splendid
Equipage, and the other Lacquies of greatness.

Alas! it is but all an imaginary pomp, and a mere ostentation of Vanities. The
spectacle vanishes whilst you look upon it, or death draws the Curtains, and
shuffles us into the Regions of darkness.

We being all of us placed amidst such troops of malicious accidents, that it
is a miracle parallel with our Creation that we stand one moment amongst them.
so that our preservation also is the effect of an Almighty power.

Nay! Our Friends which ought to be the greatest comfort of our lives, are but
sad uncertainties, like Amasa, or Julius Caesar; we often perish by the
pretended kindness of our Brethren and adopted Sons; However every Bravo that
dares but scorn his own Life, may be master of ours: And all the while our
health, the only relish of living, is the Slave of every season, it is
disordered by heat, and increased by cold; it shrinks and trembles at a frost,
looks pale and sickens at a Sunbeam; whilst the sons of Hypocrates, mortal as
our selves, offer at reasons to protract our lives, and in the midst of their
Projects, dye themselves to confute them.

Every man here is but too too truly a Benoni a son of Sorrow, for he that has
the concurrence of the most advantageous circumstances, sadly finds that there
is still something wanting to complete his happiness, which puts him upon
anxious solicitudes and tremblings, fears and restless importunities; so that
he spends his days in following what will be always out of his reach, till old
age and death kindly put an end to his desires and pursuits.

We are often sick of desire, and more diseased with enjoyment; our very
pleasures cloy and nauseate, and after a short conversation, they discover the
cheat, and show their insufficiencies which bring, us upon the irksome gratings
of a disappointment.

Our expectations are defeated, but our desires are restless and importunate,
which fastens upon some new Object, which after a long courtship only repeats
the cheat, and plunges us in a deeper dissatisfaction: still we are in misery,
and still liable to greater: Whatever our condition is, it has some mixtures
and alleys of misery; and when our delights flow in upon us, they do but bring
us sad tidings that they must also have an ebb; and our highest gratifications
offend us with the bitter remembrance, that they must also vanish and decay.

In short, There is no circumstance nor period of our present state that does
not preach over Jobs Lesson to us, that our time is not only short but full of
misery also; So full, that the Infant when it comes into the world, cannot
speak, but it truly Prophecies, and foretells by its Cries, the follies of
Childhood, and the cares of riper years, and the aches and Catarhs of the hoary
head: So that Life and Misery are but too twins, and must live and dye together.

Our Childhood is consumed in toys and foolish vanities, our Youth in lust and
frivolous exercises, and our Manhood, which at best is but a painful
carefulness, in crimes of a deeper dye; and when we have put all together from
our Cradle to our Gray-hairs, there is nothing that remains to us but anxiety
of thought, and the sad fruit of our Iniquity, Repentance.

This is our present state, and every man's experience attests it.

And now if we compare this state with that of our Glorification, we shall
presently be convinced that our Change is advantageous: A Change wherein
greatness is added to glory, weight to greatness, and eternity to them all.

A Change wherein there shall be no fears to disquiet, no enemies to alarm, no
dangers to subdue, no jealousies and cares to distract, no grief, nor diseases,
nor any of the sad attendants of Death to annoy or molest us.

A Change wherewith we shall be advanced above the regions of disappointment
and mutability, we shall have our habitations amongst the Stars, and shine with
a more continued glory.

A Change that will quite take us off our carking sollicitudes for the future,
for we are told that we shall become as the Angels of God, freed from all those
necessities and conveniences of support which we are constrained to, whilst
here muffled up in matter.

A Change that will most completely and adequately satisfy our most
outstretched desires, so that we shall never be plunged into want, or any
jealousies ever so to be.

A Change that will cloth us with Glory, and so we shall need no other apparel,
with immortality, and so we shall never crave the supports and reparation of
food, nor any drugs and antidotes, for we shall be above the power of an
Elementary composition, and the wounds of an Earthly constitution.

Diseases and Pains are but the Harbingers of death to usher in a final divorse
of Soul and Body, but our Change will conquer death it self; so that there will
be no farther use of his ghastly retinue.

We shall for ever bid adeiu to languishing pulses and broken sighs, and we
shall never again be in old Barzillai's condition, who could neither taste nor
hear, but had outlived his senses; for these shall be refined and sublimated
beyond the power of Age and Decay.

We shall be admitted into the presence and enjoyment of an everlasting
felicity, and when we are fashioned to his glorious body, shall be acknowledged
Sons of the most highest; and sure this is a happy Change

3. Which 3ly. is wrought by our Savior Jesus Christ.

Our Text tells us that he shall do it by that power whereby he is able to
subdue all things unto himself.

A Power to which nothing is impossible or difficult, a power that can rally
the separated parcells and ruins of our body to an union, as easily as at the
first he spoke them into being and activity, and as easily cloth the united
flesh with glory and immortality.

If he pleases he can dart such beams upon Man as he did upon Angels, and can
change him into such a life and luster, for he has all power given him both in
Heaven and Earth, and there wants nothing but his inclination to do this for
us, and that he will do it, he has engaged his word to keep us from doubt or
fainting; Father I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me
where I am, that they may behold the glory which thou have given me; and he
farther words himself thus, And the glory which thou gave me, I have given
them, (as it he had said) O Father it is my endeavor and desire that all those
faithful servants which thou have given me, may enjoy the full participation of
my glory, and that for this end they may at last be received up into thy
Heavenly kingdom, for the Glory which thou have given me I have not received
nor reserved for my self, but will communicate it to the members of my body,
and will stamp them with the same glorious impression.

Thus did our faithful High Priest stoop to the infirmities of our nature that
he might exalt it, and instate us in an Eternity of glory if we shall
faithfully approve our selves to him here, by keeping Consciences void of
offense toward God and toward man. Which more then hints to us to consider
the Practical part of our Text, namely what we are to do in order to this
glorious Change. Which is

To have our Conversation in Heaven: By which is meant, our leading such an
holy and godly life here, as our Religion bids us expect hereafter; or in the
words of the Apostle, To be holy as he that has called us is Holy: To be holy
in all manner of Conversation. And indeed till we are so, we should have no
relish even of Heaven it self, Nay we should grope for Paradise in the midst of
it.

What satisfaction can there be in that happiness to a man drowned in
sensualities, which is the Object only of pure and refined Souls, so that the
pure in heart must only see God.

What should the Luxurious man, who makes it the business and the design of his
life to eat and provoke Hunger, what relish can he have of the place where they
neither hunger nor thirst.

What should the man of Wantonness and Dalliances who will sacrifice his
manhood and his reason to a brutish sensuality? what should he do there where
they neither marry nor are given in marriage.

What should the stormy revengeful man, who delights only in Blood and
Slaughter? what should he do there where there is naught but concord and love,
and where there are no flames but such as kindle Seraphims.

Our senses cannot only not be admitted into Heaven, but if they were to be so,
they could not enjoy it, whilst blurred and sullied with the black characters
of an ill spent life.

If we could suppose a Vicious man should carry his evil inclinations of Pride
and Envy, Malice and Revenge, Lust and Intemperance, to that glorious Kingdom
with him; Heaven would be no Heaven to such a one, the Place would be odious,
the Company troublesome, the Employment ungrateful, and the Eternity a burden
intolerable, he would be uneasy to holy Souls and they to him.

So that Flesh and Blood not only must not, but cannot inherit the Kingdom of
God, not till our souls are conformed to such a rectitude as they stand
disposed in their respective offices, to perform their Makers will, are they
fit to enjoy him?

So that our Conversation must be in Heaven whilst we are here in our earthly
pilgrimage, if ever we intend to be glorified Citizens of the Jerusalem above,
and we must endeavor to make good by our practice, what we every day pretend to
desire of God by our Prayers, (namely) that his will may be done by us on earth
with as much cheerfulness and alacrity, as it is by his Angels his winged
messengers, in Heaven.

2. To which we must add the second part of our Text, and that is, To look for
and expect our Saviors coming, which implies Constancy and Perseverance in our
duties; to have our Account right stated and ready cast up, because we know not
how soon we shall be summoned to give an account of our stewardship. The Text
indeed seems to mean the last coming of Christ to Judgment, but every man's
particular doom to which the day of death consigns him, is approaching even at
the doors.

Therefore it highly concerns us all to keep our faculties wakeful and
vigilent, that we may not be surpised by the day of darkness, that we may
never go out of the world with the Fools Motto in our Mouths, with a non
putabam, I did not think.

It concerns us whilst it is called to day, to improve every advantage and
opportunity to our great and only interest, to settle our thoughts, desires,
and affections, upon Heavenly matters; and by our prudence, to anticipate that
farewell which we must give to all the enjoyments of this life, and to engage
not only our desires, but our endeavors also after that prize which God the
righteous Judge will give to all those who shall so expect his coming, as to
pass the time of their sojourning here in fear.

To all those who shall so wait for the appearance of our Savior as the
Scripture in other places phrases it, as to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts,
and live soberly righteously and godly in this present evil and wicked world.

I had proceeded to have enforced this great duty upon you by more Arguments,
had not I been sensible that Examples speak louder and more forcible then
Precepts, and insinuate themselves even into the heart and soul.

And here I most humbly desire this honorable Auditory to assist my
Meditations, and enrich their own, by the great and holy Example of that
honorable Person whose Obsequies have this day called us together, of that
person one of the greatest examples of Faith and Godliness, Grace and Goodness,
Piety and Purity, and all other great and illustrious Ornaments flowing from a
holy and noble Spirit, as ever our Nation has produced in this latter Age. Of
that Person whose heavenly Conversation and Religious Constancy, bespeak your
Imitation as well as Praises, which she did not represent to us in faint
Semblances and Speculation, but in a lively Operation and Activity through all
the course of a long and blessed age.

And now perhaps you expect her Character, but truly the Object is so
Illustrious, that it dazels, but yet so Eminent and Copious, that it would make
any man commence Orator.

Be pleased then to look upon her in her first Rise, and you will find her the
eldest Daughter of that Right Honorable Baptist Hicks Vicount Bampden, by
Elizabeth May his Lady and religious Consort, Persons not to be named without
Honor and Veneration, whose bounties in devoting to God and the Poor, each of
them their 10000 for Pious and Charitable uses, stand upon Record as Monuments
of everlasting Praise.

Their Honors were not acquired by a slavish prostitution of Conscience and
Honesty, but by Wisdom and Virtue, Integrity and Prudence, the best foundation
of a lasting Greatness. The very attributes of their Honor might be digested
into an Alphabet to register the Eternal Fame of this Ladies most worthy
Progenitors.

And how well and exactly she declared her self descended from such, by
building upon that foundation, is so universally known, as need not be insisted
upon.

She did not diminish, but add to the glory of her Progenitors; she did not
live as a monument, to tell the world that They had been, but what They were.

And though they religiously devoted such vast sums to Pious and charitable
designs, that they will always be recorded as lasting and perpetual monuments
of their Praise (as before was mentioned;) yet did this Honorable Lady Blazon
their piety with a more excellent Heraldry, whilst her graces and virtues which
were so conspicuously Eminent, were built upon that excellent Education and
Examples with which they had seasoned her tenderest age; which she did so
constantly improve, that they shined more and more to a perfect glory.

Look upon her Personal Endowments, and you will find a quick Apprehension, a
sound Judgment, a solid Wisdom, and a sprightful undaunted Courage, lodged in a
graceful Body, qualified with an excellent Mein and a winning Aspect, with a
condescending, courteous, affable, and truly Christian Deportment, which
demonstrated that She valued her self not upon the Grandures and Titles that
attend her Fortune, but that she had laid her Foundation lower, stronger, in
making it more solid and lasting, by building upon Virtue and Piety.

She was indeed a Constellation of Eminencies, every one like a Star of the
first Magnitude, shining gloriously in its single Luster, and all in
Combination like the Sun in its Zenith, enough to dazzle the eyes of our
inferior Capacities, and forbid me to say any more, because I can never say
enough.

Look upon her as a Wife, Mother, Widow, Neighbor, Subject, Christian, and
you will find her most Eminent in all capacities.

1. She was a most virtuous, loving, faithful and obliging Wife, though of a
vast and noble fortune; which swells too many into Pride and Forgetfulness, and
makes them rather Tyrannical than Endearing. But in this Lady nothing was
wanting of Humility and Pleasantness, of Wisdom and Subjection, of Wealth and
Beauty, of Chastity or Affection, to the making her a Principal and a Precedent
to the best of wives in the world.

2. She was a most indulgent, tender, and careful Mother, which extended beyond
the days of her Marriage even to her death, embracing all her Offspring with
the caresses of Nature and Religion; instructing and governing both Children
and Grandchildren in the fear of God, and loyalty to their Prince; with such
Gravity and Authority, tempered with winning Meekness, and more then ordinary
Prudence, as might reduce all Vicious Inclinations, and encourage every thing
that is good: So considerately kind, as not to neglect the welfare of their
Souls, in providing for their bodies, but principally taking care of that, as
knowing that to live splendid in the world without living unto God, was to die
whilst we live, and live and die miserably. The numerous and noble Stemns which
sprung from this noble Line, being genuine Heirs of virtues and goodness, blessed
in descending from her Loyn, but more in ascending to her Graces.

3. Consider her as a Neighbor, and you will find her Charitable, Courteous,
Prudent, and Engageing.

Her Doors without any tall Porters, Her Tables richly spread twice a day; so
furnished, that they were to others what her Conscience was to her self, a
Continual feast. Neighbors and Strangers might with greatest freedom, partake
of her liberal Provisions, and find a Cheerful, as well as Plentiful reception.
These her entertainments were not Cleopatra's Revels, nor Sempronia's Luxury,
whose feastings were always as great in Sin, as Abundance, and savoured more of
Wickedness, then Pomp. But whilst others feast their equals, their peers;
expecting returns and circular Retreatments, as if they did not make, but trade
Banquets; She fed such Pensioners as brought with them their wants: God that
provided her Plenty, provided her Guests, and what She gave to Hunger, She gave
to Heaven.

Therefore if the Poor do not extol her, if they do not cry out, the Stones
will; so do her works praise her in the Gates. Seldom indeed, if ever, did a
wise, a large Heart, and a plentiful Fortune, so lovingly embrance and kiss
each other.

If you will take a view of Her in her Family, you cannot but say that She
deserves Solomon's Character of a wise Woman, for she was one that looked well
to the ways of her own house: In the prudent managery whereof she seemed to
covet all, in her liberal dole she seemed to desire nothing.

4. Look upon her as a Widow, out of this cloud also will a great light shine,
to her eternal praise and honor.

The Fathers counted it no Paradox, to parallel the state of pious and
religious Widowhood, with that of the most cloistered and sacred Virginity.

St. Ambrose speaks to this purpose, non minus est tentata conjugii recusare
oblectamenta, quam nunquam tentare; It is no less victory to despise the
pleasures which they have known, then never to have known the pleasures which
they despise.

When the great Famine was at Samaria, in the days of Ahab, Almighty God did
not send his Prophet to Queens, or Empresses, or any great Ladies; but unto a
Widow of Sarepta, poor perhaps in state, but rich in faith, and as apt to
increase in grace by the love of the Lord, as the meal in the barrel, or the
oil in the cruse, by the Miracle of the Lord.

The first woman that received Christ in the Temple, was the Prophetess Anna, a
Widow of Fourscore and four years old, yet fuller of zeal then years; for she
was fixed to the Temple as the Stars to their Orbs, and never forsook it night
or day.

And this most Honorable Lady that we come now to Entomb (or rather to
Enshrine) may well be looked upon as her liveliest parallel, if not in the
years, yet in the devotions of her Widowhood: For though she honored and
frequented the public house of God, with as public and frequent zeal as any
of the most Primitive and Apostolical Widowhood; yet was she of such a
Sanctuary conversation, as well without as within the sacred Cloisters, that
she made all places holy ground wherever she came: Her Table was a Temple, her
Chamber a Chapel.

A Lady of so great a fortune and such rare accomplishments, could not (without
question) in her first years of Widowhood, but meet with some solicitations to
change her condition: but she stood resolved against all Presumers: God might
change her life, the whole world could not change her mind.

She might put off (in their season) her mourning weeds and forsake her first
garments, but never her first Love.

The Apostle speaks of some he calls Widows indeed (...): Widows in the work
and not only in the name of widowhood: Such an one he requires to be truly
honored as she is really honorable, and sets down her description, 1 Timothy
5.10. If she have brought up children, if she have been hospitable, if she have
washed the feet of the Saints, if she have relieved the afflicted, if she have
diligently followed every good work: All these religious Characters were
written in letters of Gold upon the Soul of our most noble and pious Lady now
with the Lord.

She was eyes to the blind, and feat to the lame, a mother to the fatherless.

If any in the Neighborhood were sick or sore, or languishing; she was a
Healer as well as a Reliever: Rich in Physical, as well as Christian graces.

Her Closet was a Treasury of the choicest Receipts, Cordials, Electuaries,
which were always as free as they were excellent, deriving virtue and efficacy
not only from their Ingredients, but also (and that more too) from their Donour.

5. She was a most obedient Daughter to her tender Mother the Church of
England, and a Loyal Subject to the Defendour of her Faith, and Father of her
Country.

She maintained that faith which was once delivered to the Saints, and so did
she constantly worship the God of her fathers.

So constantly, that no Mountebanks of the last age, could cheat her: none of
those furious Transports, and schismatical Innovations (though wrapped up in the
specious gilt of a solemn Covenant) could abate her Zeal, or devide her
Devotion; but still she professed, preserved, and practiced her obedience to
the true Church, and true Sovereign, constantly adoring God in the one, and
owning all due Loyalty to the other, worshipping her Maker publicly in most
exact conformity to the Law; so as she both glorified Him the Lord of Heaven,
and gave an eminent example of true Piety to all her neighbors.

6. Look upon her as a Christian, and you will find her as much as possible
avoiding the very shadows and appearances of Evil; desiring to be found in
holiness, as well as to abide in Christ; endeavoring to walk as he also
walked, to transcribe his great and excellent copy in his faith and patience,
in his meekness and humility, and in all the whole Constellation of graces.

In all her religion she kept the virtuous medium between Faction and
Superstition, between the abominations of Amsterdam and those of Rome, looking
upon a Conventicle and a Mass, as equally Apochryphal; and which is no small
honor, still making the Law of the Church, and the Peace of Jerusalem, the
touchstone of her obedience.

She stood unshaken in the midst of a Pr^fligate age, and was true to her
Virtue and Heaven, even then when it 'twas both a reputed Crime and assured
Danger so to do. And whilst others lived as if they had been sent into the
world only to eat and drink and rise up to play; her great care and design was
to pass through and behave her self amongst the contingencies of a fleeting
world, that she might not miss the haven of an eternal rest.

And whereas some we see sordidly besotted with vain pleasures, and their souls
in a tame compassion for quietness sake, content to connive at folly; this
Honorable Lady was so ambitious of the strictest commands of the most Holy
God, that (as they say Heaven is anima visibilis, so) her whole body seemed to
be converted into soul, all zeal and delight in his service: and so constantly
conversing with God in his word, that as St. Hierom speaks of Paulina, vertus
ferebat Bibliothecam Christi, she had transcribed the Bible in her heart.

Nor must I forget to tell you how duly the sacrifice of Prayer and Praise was
offered to God in her Family; every day three times in public; twice in that
excellent form of our Church; She constantly attending (when able) in her own
person, and expressing admirable and almost Seraphical devotion; endeavoring
to manage her worship in such manner, as became God who received it, and her
self who presented it. And a third time in a short form, at an early hour,
proper for Servants before they go to any wordly business, or their daily work,
that the first fruits of their time being offered to God, might Consecrate the
rest of the day.

Besides her Public, she was constantly in her Closet devotion, the way of the
closest-communion with God, where Heaven it self came down to receive her pious
Ejaculations and Prayers.

These are the things Right Honorable, that not only Men, but God applaudes;
and those that intend to purchase Honor to themselves, as we are all
ambitious, must tread the same path; and if we would be Happy as she is, and
that is the desire of us all, we must be Holy as she was, and that is the duty of
us all.

Indeed she was great and excellent, that is her Self, in every action, lived
as God required of his people, did justly, loved mercy, and walked humbly with
her God, so that graces and virtues seem to have been the very Elements of her
Constitution.

And were he that said, virtue was only an empty name, now amongst the Living,
he must have recanted his opinion, or betrayed his faculties; for it was in her
embodied, and he might have converst with it in an humane shape; as if God had
designed her to let us see how near to the divine Humane nature may approach.
So far was she from any indifferency in Religion, that I dare challenge the
most rigid Sectary, I mean the most censorius Person in the world, to produce
one single suspicion of the least hypocrisy, formality, or lukewarmness in her
Profession and Devotion.

No, the Religion of this excellent person was of another Constitution, it took
root downward in Humility, and brought forth fruit upward in every thing that
was praiseworthy.

If we know not what Virtue and Humanity are, what is comely and venerable,
what is lovely and praiseworthy, what is fit and equal, what is true and just,
we may learn by the words, and actions, and behavior of this Noble person, of
a great and harmless Wit, of cheerful Gravity, and obliging Behavior.

She could be cheerful without levity, speak merrily without uttering folly,
adorn her self in rich apparel without pride and a fantastic dress.

She was constant to her promise, and candid to others failures, preferring
fidelity before profit, and mercy before rigor; willing to reprove, yet loath
to exasperate.

Such an exact texture of Graces and Virtues, that in her departure there is a
universal Loss; to the good, because they will want the virtuous example which
they love; and to the bad, because they will want the pious example which they
need.

And for her several eminencies, I may take up the speech of St. Paul in his
Catalogue of those eminent Saints, Heb. 11.32. and what shall I say more.

Thus lived this most Honorable Lady, and thus she taught us to live.

Being so eminently pious, we may well say with the true Emphasis, that she
lived to a good old age, her years exceeding not only the lesser, but the
larger account given by Moses of Man's life, 70 or 80 years being extended to
96, which we may look upon partly as a Guerdon of her pious Life, and partly as
a pledge and consignment of Eternal life hereafter.

But it is appointed to all men once to die, and die she therefore must. This
house which our souls now inhabit, is but earthly, and sin has put it into
disorder, and has brought a Consumption upon it, as well through God's anger,
as its own distempers; and as it daily decays, so it will, so it must once
dissolve and fall.

The pale messenger therefore comes to give her a summons to appear before her
judge: Death with all his ghastly troops of Stone, Spleen, Aches storm and
dismantle her body: Est mihi creed virtuti etiam in lectulo locus, said Seneca
to his dear Lucilius, Then are virtue and fortitude best displayed, when our
strength lies bedridden, and our diseases inwrap us in sheets of Torture.

And yet in the midst of all these pining agonies, and faint languishings, her
patience stood unshaken and undisturbed, in the face of Death; And with that
strength of faith and undaunted courage, kept close to her God, as if she would
conquer Death before it encountered her: still maintaining that firm trust in
God through the merits of her Savior, that mortalitas potius finita est quam
vita, this frail body submitted to mortality and her heaven-born soul, when
death had opened the door, breathed it self into the hand of her Redeemer,
triumphantly singing her (...), Death has lost his sting, and I have got the
victory.

Thus this Heavenly Lady bequeathed her sacred body to the Grave, in assured
hopes of the Resurrection to Eternal life.

There shall these hallowed ashes be mummoyed up and preserved by the
protection of Angels; and from thence shall every atome of her sacred dust be
rallied, and recomposed into the glorious image of the Son of God.

Then shall this purified body (as it were) again woe its glorified soul, and
Christ being the High Priest, Eternity the Ring, the new-Jerusalem the Church,
Angels the Choyre, Peace of Conscience the Feast, Christ's Righteousness the
Wedding Garment, Soul and Body shall be Eternally married together, and her
Savior and the whole Trinity shall approve and applaud the union, saying, Well
done good and faithful servant, enter into thy Masters joy, joy unspeakable and
full of glory.

And now I should here conclude, but seeing such a solemn appearance of such
honorable Mourners before mine eyes, I cannot but humbly crave leave to
commend a word or two to their more personal Meditations; and the good Lord
make them Operative and Impressive.

She was the Rock whence ye were most hewn, the Pit whence most of you were
dug; O that her name might be Immortal in her Posterity; and her Posterity
Immortal in her virtues.

I do not believe the transmigration of Souls, I only desire transmigration of
Graces; that as ye are enriched with her Possessions and Legacies, so ye may
all be enobled with her Virtues and Excellencies.

Then shall her remembrance shine in her Relations, and her Relations shine in
her example. Pattern out her Piety, her Charity; pattern out her Zeal and
Devotion; her Justice and Chastity her Courtesy, her Constancy; Constancy in
all that was good, all that was praiseworthy; and ye shall become not only
her Posterity, but her Monument: A Monument of Gold, which if sin does not
corrupt, time can never deface.

Now indeed her Silver Cord is loosed, and her Golden Bowl is broken; yet she
is not dead but lives; lives in you as long as you live in piety; shineeth in
you as long as you shine in goodness: And be ye well assured, that those who
live as Saints on earth shall undoubtedly shine as Stars in Heaven.

Avoid (as this good Lady did) all appearances of evil, and then at the day of
the Great appearance, ye shall be as glorious among others, as ye are Noble
above others.

Blessed be God that you do not defile the dignity of your persons with the
indignities of sin: This were to bring a Cloud upon the luster of your line:
for alas they are Apostates unto honor that are Apostates unto grace.

The times indeed in which you live, are as truly the worst as the last of
days: Wickedness grown up to the excess of abominations, triumphing every where
effraeni and effronti audacia, without the conscience of Shame or the
controlings of Punishment.

So that except a man be an Abraham in Mesopotamia, a Job in the Land of Vz, a
Lot in Sodom, or a Joseph in Potaphars house, It is as hard to keep himself
from the Temptations of the times, as to reform the times from their headlong
Temptations. But it will be the honor of all your Honors, to look higher then
the days in which you live.

You have great Examples in your own Family: Piety, Loyalty, Charity,
Temperance, Continence, Religion, have for many years past found a Sanctuary
there.

Remember then that to carry on these Christian excellencies, is to carry on
the dignity of your Ancestors.

High Obligations lie upon you for Piety, not only from your God but from your
blood.

Look upon the Hearse that stands before you, it speaks, though dead.

St. Timothy was sent back to consider the faith of his Mother, and the faith
of his Grandmother: You have here also in this deceased Lady, a Grandmother
Lois and a Mother Eunice: The unfeigned faith and unstained goodness that dwelt
in her, must dwell in you likewise.

This will be your kindness to her and make her Name precious; this will be
your kindness to your selves, and make your Souls precious.

Blessed is that Family where holiness is cultivated: as if it were quartered
in their Escutchions as well as in their hearts: they shall inherit the
blessing: For the Lord our God is a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the
Fathers upon the Children unto the third and fourth generation of them that
hate him, but showing mercy unto thousands of them that love him and keep his
Commandments.

FINIS.

