A SERMON PREACHED Before the QUEEN, AT WHITE HALL, On Sunday, October. 2. 1692.

By CHARLES HICKMAN, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's.

Published by Her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1692.

Dr. HICKMAN's SERMON Before the QUEEN, October 2. 1692.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the QUEEN.
DEUTERONOMY. xxx. 15. See I have set before thee this day, life and good, and death
and evil.


THere is no man alive but will easily confess, That Life is good, and Death is
evil; and so far we are all ready to join issue with my Text. Nay, there are
few men either so negligent or perverse, but that they are sollicitous to avoid
the evil, and to choose the good; and thus far also there are fair hopes of an
Accommodation.

But then here lies the difference. Though we are all agreed in the main point,
yet we are apt to vary in our Notions of the subordinate kinds of Good and
Evil, according to the variety of our Tempers and Inclinations. Some men judge
of these things by their Reason, examine how agreeable they are to our
uncorrupted Nature, and what consequences they are likely to produce; a safe,
but withal, a tedious way. And therefore others, for more dispatch, make a
judgment of them only by their sense, and will allow nothing to be good, but
what gives them present Entertainment, nothing Evil but what brings them into
present Pain.

And hence it is, That they so studiously devote themselves to the Profits and
Pleasures of the World, which afford them some sensible Satisfaction, some
immediate Relief; But as for Virtue, all the good of it they think depends upon
such remote Consequences, such uncertain Fruits, that they utterly neglect it,
as a Plant of too doubtful a Product, or at best of too slow a Growth.

Some think it is not in their power to be good; and others think it not worth
their while: and though they are much concerned for the evil which they suffer,
yet they have no regard to the evil which they do. Either they look upon moral
Actions as things indifferent, that have no real intrinsic value, no natural
Obligation of themselves, or at most they do not think them of such Moment and
Importance, as to determine us absolutely either to Life or Death.

Against all which mistakes I must beg leave to speak briefly and plainly and
practically from the Authority of my Text, See I have set before thee this day
life and good, and death and evil; In which words Moses gives us to understand,
that the Law of God sets before us Good and Evil, in a twofold respect.

I. As a Matter of Information, to show us the real difference that is between
them, and the different Consequences which they produce. II. As a Matter of
Choice, that when we know the difference, we may be persuaded to refuse the
Evil, and choose the Good.
I. And, First, by way of Information. See, I have set before thee life and
good, and death and evil, says God; and yet there are men who live as if there
was no difference between Good and Evil; as if Sin were nothing but a
groundless name, and they resolved to follow the bent of their own
Inclinations, let the Law say what it pleases, or the Consequence be what it
will. They think the only Happiness of Man is to live without restraint, to
give a loose to his Lusts and Passions, and in all points to follow the
Extravagancies of his Nature. That it is below a Man of Spirit to be tied up to
servile Rules, and subject to the Reason of other Men, We are they that ought
to speak, and who is Lord over us?

This is indeed the Language of many in our times. But if they would let any
body speak beside themselves, they might easily learn, That there are Two
things which have an undoubted Right to be Lords over them, and ought, in
Reason, to be heard:

1. The Word of God, and 2. The Voice of their own Conscience: either of which
is able to convince them of their Error, and to show them a wide difference
between Good and Evil.
For, First, The Word of God sets before us this difference, in so plain
convincing Terms, that though we may be perverted by Evil, yet it is hard for us
to be mistaken. Though God has sent us into this Wilderness of a World, where
there are many intricate Passages to perplex us, and much Variety of Objects to
distract our Thoughts, yet he has not left us without a Guide, nor himself
without a witness. He has given us his word, as a perfect Rule, by which we
shall certainly be tried at last: and therefore by this Rule we ought to try
our own Actions now.

Here all the Doubts of our Judgment are expounded, all the Scruples of our
Conscience are resolved: He has showed thee, O man, what is good, and
whatsoever evil we are addicted to, in his Law we find the Folly of it plainly
exposed, and all its Dangers laid open to us. It gives us many glorious
Instances of Virtue to invite us, and many dreadful Judgments upon Vice, to
affright us into Religion; and whatsoever difficult Circumstances the natural
Man may labor under, yet here the man of God is perfectly forewarned against
every Evil, and thoroughly furnished for every Good work.

And therefore it was a very just and proper Commendation, which Philo the Jew
gives us of Moses his Design, That he has introduced his Law with the History
of the Creation, on purpose to show us how exactly the Commandments of God are
accommodated to the Nature of us Men. So very exactly, that if we will but
consult this Oracle with honest, humble Minds, we can no longer be at a loss to
find out the just measures of Truth, as far as we are concerned to know; and
the true bounds of Goodness, as far as we are obliged to practice; and any
farther, any nicer search, has more of Curiosity in it than Religion.

And now how great a Happiness is it, That we enjoy the benefit of this Holy
Word, and are infallibly conducted by a Light from Heaven, through all the
Uncertainties and Dangers that beset us upon Earth!

With what infinite Pleasure should we apply ourselves to the study of this
Law, which, like the Pillar of Fire that led the Israelites out of Egypt, is
not only our Guide, but our Encouragement in travail, and supports our Spirits
at the same time when it directs our Feet.

Indeed, the Light of God's Word is so convincing; so plainly does it set
before us the difference between Good and Evil, that for this very reason evil
Men find it offensive to them, and therefore they lay it by. It shines so full
upon their Face, that they cannot enjoy their sins in quiet for it; and it is
this that makes them cry out against Moses, as Dathan and Abiram did, Will thou
put out the eyes of this people?

But, Secondly, though they should lay aside the Law, and refuse to give
audience to the Word of God; though Moses and the Prophets should be silent,
yet Conscience, when it comes to speak for it self, as it will sometimes do, is
as convincing as any Revelation, and as obliging as any Law; it is a Witness
that will not be silenced, and a Judge that cannot be suborned.

It Is this that makes us look upon some Actions with Abhorrence, and upon
others with Delight; and according to the Result of our Love or Hatred,
according to this inward Relish or Disgust, so we learn to discover the
difference between Good and Evil, and find that every Action of Man has an
indelible Character stamped upon it, by which its value is easy to be known.

It Is true, that this Evidence also may be stifled for a time; and there are
those who, with much ado, wear out these Characters of Good and Evil, which
Nature has imprinted in their Souls, That when they have conquered their
Conscience, and kept it under, they may for a while enjoy their sins in peace,
and live as if there was no God in the World.

But how noble a Conquest this is, and how long the peace is like to last, we
shall consider under the following Head: in the mean time I shall only say,
That they who despise the Majesty of God, can have no regard to the Rights of
Men, but as often as a fair occasion offers, they will be for levelling all
above them, and trampling upon all below them, and therefore are so far from
deserving favor, that they are not fit for humane Conversation: for when once
they have thrown off all concern for Virtue, how easily do they break down all
bounds of Law, and allow themselves in such Extravagancies, as are a
contradiction to the reason of all Mankind: there is nothing so profane which
they will not practice; nothing so sacred which they will not profane: and
think it a peculiar Honor of their own, to be above the common Ordinances of
the World, and to despise a tame, governable Creature. With them it is accounted
no Virtue to forgive an Enemy, no Vice to betray a Friend; Nay, Virtue it self
shall be called a Weakness, and their Vices honored with the name of Wit: as
if they had not only a peculiar Law, but a peculiar Language also of their own.

And yet, for all the pretended Wit and Honor of this Race of Men, there is
not so vile, so foolish a Creature in the World as they. Nay, it is only the
vileness of their practice that is their Protection; for should other Men but
follow their Example, and assume the same Liberties which they allow
themselves, should other Men but let their Lusts and Passions loose like them,
they would soon grow weary of this Heathenish State, and fly for Sanctuary to
Religion.

For after all the Attempts that Vice can make upon it, yet Virtue is
established upon such a Foundation, as never can be removed. It has stood its
ground through all the Ages and Revolutions of the World, and there never yet
was a time when true Goodness was not held in Honor, and Wickedness looked
upon with Reproach. The Heathens themselves, though they often changed their
Gods, yet they never changed their Virtue; but in their several Writings have
left us their Notions of Good and Evil, so fairly represented, and so
faithfully described, as may serve for the Reproach of many Christians, and the
Instruction of All.

Nay, those Heathenish Nations, who have yet no Knowledge of the Law, are,
nevertheless, a Law unto themselves, and keep so strict to the Rules of
Justice, as shows, That Virtue is a thing of Universal Obligation, of Eternal
Truth, and whosoever refuses to be governed by it, is worse than an Infidel, a
Rebel to Nature, and an Outlaw both to God and Man. He breaks off all Commerce
and Communication with Mankind; will not be joined in any League, Friendship,
or Society with his Fellow Creatures, nor submit to any of those common terms,
whereby we hold a Conversation with one another.

In a word; Without Virtue there is no Peace, without Goodness there is no
living in the World. And this Argument alone is demonstration enough, That
there is a real difference between Good and Evil; which difference though many
of us neglect it in our Practice, yet in speculation, there are a few, and but
a few of us, that have the confidence to deny it. But then,

II. There is another, and a more numerous sort of Men, who though they do
allow the difference, yet do not think the difference is so great, as that Life
or Death should be the necessary consequence of Good or Evil: Like ignorant
Men, who think there is no need of forfeiting their Bond, though they do not
perform the Obligation.

In the day that thou eatest thou shall surely die, says God; a very plain, and
very pressing Text, and yet if the Devil may be allowed to make the Comment, he
will give us a very different account, so far from dying, That in the day thou
eatest thou shall be like God himself, and in a way to live for evermore. Thus
poor cheated Man loses one Paradise for the false expectation of another, and
forfeits all his Happiness, by taking the Devil's word for his Security. Thus
we also, to humor our Lusts, and indulge our Passions, still catch at the
forbidden Fruit, and in the fond Pursuit of some childish Hopes, we lay aside
all our reasonable Fears.

Though we know that Good and evil have their distinct Regions, their proper
Roads, and are parted but by a single Line; yet we love to allow our selves a
little latitude, and think we may do it without losing of our way. Though we
see the Bounds of Virtue set out before us, and hear God himself saying to us,
Thus far shall thou go and no farther; yet we take a Pleasure in making our
excursions, and hope that a little trespass will break no measures, and so, by
degrees, we are drawn on to trespass more and more, till we utterly lose our
selves, and both God's measures and our own are broken.

So dangerous a thing is it to border upon Vice, and play upon the Confines of
Destruction; for when our Foot is once taken in the snare, it is no hard matter
for the Devil to draw in our whole Body after; and all this comes by presuming
too far upon God's Goodness, and when he bids us obey his Commands and live, we
hope to live nevertheless, though we let his Commands alone. He sets before us
death and evil as things inseparably joined together, but we presumptuously
embrace the evil, and yet think to escape the death.

And yet do we not know the necessary connection that there is between the
Punishment and the Offense? Does not our own Reason, as well as the Word of
God, assure us, That Death is the natural Consequence of Sin? Is not our own
experience a demonstration, how miserably Vice corrupts our Nature, and how
certainly it brings us to an untimely end? And without the Spirit of Prophecy,
any one might easily foretell, That a wicked man shall not live out half his
days.

If the just revenge, of both God and men, should spare him, yet how
effectually does the Sinner destroy himself? by Covetousness we starve, and by
Luxury we over-charge our Nature; Anger inflames our Blood, and Envy consumes
our Flesh, and every inordinate Desire is a secret exhausting of our Strength.
No Lust but feeds upon our Vitals, no Passion but preys upon our Spirits; and
Sin no sooner enters into our Heart, but it opens the door for Death. Then the
Worm insensibly grows upon us, the Grave gets us under its dominion, and from
the very day that Vice took possession of our Soul, we must date the
dissolution of our Body.

Nay, this is not the worst of our condition neither; for Sin corrupts the Soul
of Man also, and depraves all our brighter Faculties; it debauches our Will,
and darkens our Understanding, and extinguishes that Reason which is our great
Property and Prerogative. God breathed into our nostrils the breath of Life, a
beam of Divine Light, a spark of Heavenly Fire, to ennoble our Nature, and make
us a living Soul; the Image of God, and Heirs of his Eternity. But Lust puts
out all this light within us; enslaves our Mind, and makes us degenerate into
mere earth again; it weighs down our Nature, checks all our aspiring Thoughts,
and allows us to think of nothing but our Flesh.

Where Vice prevails, and takes possession of our Senses, it shuts up all the
avenues of our Soul, and lets nothing that is generous or commendable enter in.
The Beauty of Holiness cannot be seen; the Charms of Wisdom cannot be heard:
nothing can be admitted but what will sooth our Lusts, and flatter us in our
iniquity.

And then it is no wonder if we grow profligate in Vice, and abandoned to all
manner of Uncleanness: and can we suppose, that such a Soul as this is fit to
appear before the presence of its Maker? Is there any place in Heaven for such
impure Thoughts as these? Unless we come there with a better mind, and in a
cleaner dress, Go, ye cursed, will certainly be our doom; Go to the torments
which you have prepared for your selves; let your Envy gnaw you still like a
worm that never dies, and your Anger still burn within you, like the fire that
never goes out, and let your greedy desires be always craving, but never
satisfied, like the bottomless pit, that is ever filling, but never full.

Oh the bitterness and anguish of this second Death! When the Soul of Man must
be always dying but never dead, when eternal Torments will brood afresh upon
his Nature, and insufferable pains will propagate themselves within him: when
his own guilty Conscience shall always keep him waking, his own desperate
Resolutions shall strike him like spears and arrows to the heart, and the
remembrance of all his multitude of Sins shall stare him like so many ghastly
Apparitions in the face.

These are the necessary consequences of an ungodly, unrepented Life; these are
the genuine fruits of Sin, which naturally grow upon a vitiated Soul; so very
naturally, that our own Reason tells us it must be so, that the Soul which is
corrupted, even that shall die, and our vile Imaginations shall haunt us to the
other World, where all our immoderate delights shall be sower'd into so many
intolerable torments.

Something like this every wicked man finds within himself, even before his
death; as often as he allows himself to think, so often his own Conscience acts
the part of Hell, and in the dismal remorses of his Soul, he sees a resemblance
of his future Judgment.

And now having set before you life and good, and death and evil, as a matter
of information, I come, in the

Second place, to set them before you as an object of your choice. It Is Moses
his own Use and Application of my Text, in the following verses, I call heaven
and earth to record this day against you, that I have set before you life and
death, therefore choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live.

I shall not here dispute with Moses, whether it be in our power to choose or
not; but, taking for granted that it is, I shall only infer, That when things
of so very different natures are set before us, one would think it an easy
matter to be determined. If our notions of Good and Evil are too weak to work
upon us, and hold our minds for some time in suspense; yet surely Life and
Death admit of no dispute. One is the sole delight, and the other the utter
abhorrence of our Nature, and a powerful instinct within us always inclines us
to the better part.

And yet so absurd are we in our Practice, as to follow those courses, which in
our judgment we condemn, and our lives are the very contradiction of our
desires. We engage our selves in desperate ways before we consider where they
are like to end, and every appearance of pleasure drills us further on; and
when we do see at length what our end is like to prove, we find it too tedious,
and perhaps too late to return.

Could we plead ignorance in our excuse, we might have some hopes of mercy. But
when all these things are plainly set before us, when we see the penalty, and
notwithstanding this, will venture upon the offense, what remains then but a
fearful looking for of judgment?

Could we pretend impotence or incapacity in the case, it might be a proper and
allowable Plea, but when these things are not only plainly represented to our
judgment, but are fairly offered to our choice, and yet we will choose amiss,
What can we say to stop the hand of Justice? or when Justice lays hold upon us,
what can we say to excuse our folly? Why did we run so blindly on and never
look before us? Why, we supposed perhaps that some lucky mischance might stop
us in our full career, and the breaking of a Leg might save our Neck. A wild
course, and as extravagant a supposition.

We hoped the time would come when we should be disabled from following our
Vices any longer, and then we should have leisure to stand still, and repent,
and be very virtuous again. A strange kind of hope, that can never take place
till we come to the very season of despair.

We expect perhaps, that some violent motion of the Spirit should carry us up
to Heaven like St. Paul, and if we are but passive in the case, if we are not
disobedient to the heavenly motion, we presume there is nothing more for us to
do. And it is a presumption indeed, too groundless to be believed, and too
senseless to be answered.

We may flatter our selves, if we please, with such airy hopes, and depend upon
a Salvation of our own contriving; but if we would go upon certain grounds,
it is sufficient for us, That God himself, whose gift it is, has told us upon
what terms we must live and prosper, See, I have set before you life and good;
and if after this we will venture upon Evil, we our selves are answerable for
the Event, and it is but just that God should take the forfeiture. Death and
Evil, we know, must go together, unless we can separate them by our Repentance,
which it self is a death unto sin, and a greater evil than we know how to bear.

It Is sufficient that we see our way before us, that we ly no longer under any
dark uncertainties, any dismal suspense, but our work is laid open to our
hands, and our reward is ready for us. Our work itself is very good, and our
reward is exceeding glorious; but if we resist these gracious offers, and still
persist in a senseless provokeing course of Life, we deserve the severest
punishment, not only for our sin, but for our obstinate folly too.

These are the things which the Law of God daily sets before us, and if the
charms of goodness cannot draw us, yet one would think the terrors of Evil
should drive us into Virtue. What would we not do to purchase Eternal Life?
What would we not suffer to escape Eternal Death? What should we do but
renounce our Sins, what should we suffer but this reasonable Divorce, and then
the thing is done? and what does God require of us, but those very things which
our own reason requires of us too; things that are most suitable to our nature,
and most likely to promote our happiness in this World, though we had no
expectation of a World to come? when it is so easy a thing to prosper, who
would take such pains to be undone? when it is in our own choice to live, Why
will ye die, O house of Israel?

The reason is plain, we are deeply engaged, Body and Soul, in another
interest; our Lusts, by a long familiarity have so endeared themselves unto us,
that we know not how to part. We are so tied and bound with the Chain of our
Sins, that when God calls us to Repentance, we are not able to move a step. Not
able? That is indeed we are not willing to advance, we have such a load of
iniquity upon us, that we think it more easy to ly down and die, than to shake
off our deadly weight, and live.

But if we seriously considered what it was to die, we should quickly be of
another mind. When Death with his cold frozen hands lays hold upon us, and is
dragging us out of a soft sinful Bed, into an uncomfortable Dungeon, a noisome
Grave, then all our heats will be abated, and we shall repent indeed, and wish
that we had repented sooner, before 'twas too late to be reformed.

Let us consider this in time; now, that it is fairly set before us, and it is
in our power to make our choice. And if we see that wicked men find it so
difficult to dis-engage themselves, that the prospect of Death it self, with
all its terrors, cannot affright them from their Sins, let us beware of the
dreadful Example, let us beware how we admit a Guest into our Bosom, who is
like to stick so fast upon us, and brings after him such a deadly train. Let us
keep him at a religious distance, and superstitiously avoid his sight. Let us
enter into no Parley or Combination with him, but maintain the integrity of our
Soul, as we would do our Soul it self, and stand in aw of Sin, as much as Death.

If we have unfortunately let him in, and the Enemy has already got some
advantage of us, let us redeem our selves in time, and use all diligence to
dispossess him; though he has tied and bound us never so fast, yet one vigorous
resolution may break the Chain; it is but resolving to be free, and then, by
the help of our Redeemer, we shall be so.

And have we no sense of Life, and Liberty, and Happiness? shall one vain
foolish Lust weigh down all the considerations of Eternity? surely there is
some Witchcraft in this Sin, and we are not so much persuaded by it as
possessed: but in the name of God we will cast it out. We will set before us
Death and Evil, as God himself has set them both together, and then there is no
danger that we should be imposed upon: for Sin cannot possibly be so much our
delight, but Death is much more our aversion. The very thoughts of it, if we
can but think at all, will take off the relish of our vicious enjoyments, and
make all our headstrong Passions give way, and our empty airy pleasures will
fly before it.

Now that Sin has conceived in the World, it is our Happiness that it has
brought forth so deformed a thing as Death; that though the Mother may disguise
her self, and delude us with false Colors, and flattering words, yet the
foulness of her Offspring cannot be concealed, and in the Face of Death we may
read the natural deformity of Sin.

Let us consider this, and then let us entertain it if we dare, nay let us
embrace it if we can; for how temptingly soever Sin may look upon us, yet Death
is a powerful Antidote, it is enough to damp our Spirits, and chill our blood,
and to change not only the inclinations, but the very constitution of our Flesh.

Knowing these terrors of the Lord, surely we shall be persuaded: considering
the sad consequences of sin, one would think there should be little or no
temptation in it; to a thinking Man, indeed, there is none at all, and it is a
wonder that any Man can so far lay his thoughts aside, as to hug a slavish
gilded Chain, to fall in love with a fulsome painted Sepulcher, and doze
himself in poisonous Wine, only because he sees it sparkling in the glass.

All these are but imaginary Pleasures at the best; and yet these are all the
Pleasures that a Sinner has; and what are all these, in comparison of that
real, substantial eternal Joy, which we part with for these trifles sake: after
such an exchange as this, we must never pretend to Judgment or Discretion more.

We that are so circumspect and wise in the little inferior concerns of Life,
where is our wisdom in our great Affair, where is our circumspection, when our
whole Happiness is at stake.

To get a poor livelihood upon earth, we can labor and toil, hunger and
thirst, and sweat and starve, and applaud our selves for doing so: but here we
can be content to stand all the day idle, and have our thoughts otherwise
employed, and are so far from laboring for life, that we will not be at the
trouble so much as to look before us. Nay, for the most part we make it our
business to look the quite contrary way.

What indefatigable pains do we take to gratify our foolish Lusts, when with
half the pains we might learn to live much happier without them.

What violence do we use upon our selves, to lay our Souls and Consciences
asleep, for fear the beautiful Prospect of Life should tempt us to be virtuous,
or the dismal Apparitions of Death should affright us from our Vice, when half
that force employed against our Vanities and Corruptions, would suffice to take
Heaven it self by violence, and make us for ever happy.

But when Men have once sold themselves to work wickedness, how obstinately do
they refuse to hear their own Reason speak! How do they disdain to be
reclaimed, though it be by the Word of God! That word which is piercing as a
two-edged sword, they labor to put by with all their art, and defend
themselves against it with the whole Artillery of the Devil; with the Helmet of
Pride, the Shield of Obstinacy, and the Breast Plate of Unbelief, Armor that
is hardened in the bottomless Pit, they maintain a desperate Cause, and wage a
senseless War against the Powers of Heaven.

So dangerous a thing is it to give way to Disobedience, that by degrees, it
betrays us into Unbelief; and by slighting the notions of Good and Evil, we
come at last to make no difference between Life and Death.

Thus the Devil, who is conscious of his own doom, and officious to prevent the
like in us, teaches us not to believe, for fear we should tremble too: and the
terrors of the Lord, are the very reason why some men will not be persuaded.

But let us bring more tractable dispositions to the word of God, and when he
sets before us life and good, and death and evil, let us for our Information
submit to his Judgment, and in our Choice let us comply with his desires. It Is
no disparagement for the wisest Man to be instructed, and surely it is no
condescension for the greatest Man to be saved. If we are desirous of Life, we
know now upon what terms it must be had: if we will still follow after Evil, we
know what will be the consequence: nay, the consequence will fall the heavier
upon us for this very reason, because we know it; our condemnation will be the
more just, our death the more unpitied, because it has been so often and so
plainly set before us.

Seeing therefore we have so many Sins and sinful ignorances to be accounted
for, let not our knowledge also be numbered amongst our transgressions; let not
our means of grace, and opportunities of Glory come to inflame our Reckoning
against the great Day of Account.

Many a time have we been admonished of our Sins, and now once more are we
forewarned of our danger. See I have set before you this day also life and
good, and death and evil. God grant that we may even in this our day see the
things that belong unto our Good, before they are hidden from our eyes.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
DR. Burnet's Theory of the Earth, the two last Books; concerning the
Conflagration of the World, and the new Heavens, and the new Earth. Fol. --
Answer to Mr. Warren's Exceptions against the first Part. -- Consideration of
Mr. Warren's Defense. -- Relation of the Proceedings at the Charter House, upon
occasion of King James II. his presenting a Papist to be admitted into that
Hospital, in Virtue of his Letters Dispensatory. Fol. -- Telluris Theoria
Sacra, Libri duo posteriores de Conflagratione Mundi and de futuro rerum statu.
Quarto. -- Archaeologiae Philosophicae: sive Doctrina antiqua de Rerum
Originibus, Libri duo. Bishop Overall's Convocation-Book, 1606. concerning the
Government of God's Catholic Church, and the Kingdoms of the whole World.
Quarto. Mr. Nicholl's Answer to an Heretical Book called, The Naked Gospel.
Quarto. Turner de Lapsu Angelorum and Hominum. Quarto. Mr. Lamb's Dialogues
about the Lord's Supper Octavo, Mr. Raymond's Pattern of pure and undefiled
Religion. Octavo. -- Exposition on the Church-Catechism. Octavo. Animadversions
on Mr. Johnson's Answer to Jovian, in Three Letters. Octavo. Mr. Dodwell's Two
Letters of Advice about Susception of Holy Orders, etc. Mr. Milbourn's
Mysteries in Religion Vindicated; Or, Filiation, Deity, and Satisfaction of our
Savior, asserted against Socinians and others; with occasional Reflections on
several late Pamphlets. Octavo. Dr. Sharpe's (now Archbishop of York) Sermon
before the Queen, Apr. 11. 1690. on Gal. xv. 13. -- Fast Sermon before the
House of Commons, May 21. 1690. on Deuteronomy. 5.21. -- Farewell Sermon at S. Giles,
June 28. 1691. on Phil. 4.8. -- Sermon before the House of Lords, November. 5.
1691. on Romans x. 2. -- Sermon before the King and Queen, on Christmas Day,
1691. on Heb. xix. 26. -- Sermon on Easter Day, 1692. on Phil. iii. 10. --
Sermon of the things that make for peace, before the Lord Mayor, Aug. 23. 1674.
on Romans xiv. 19. -- Sermon before the Lord Mayor, Jan. 1675. on 1 Timothy iv. 8.
both new Printed. Dr. Grove's (now Lord Bishop of Chichester) Sermon before the
King and Queen, June 1. 1690. Dr Hooper's Sermon before the Queen, Jan. 24.
1690. Dr. Hickman's Thanksgiving Sermon before the House of Commons, October. 19.
1690. -- Sermon before the Queen, October. 26. 1690. Mr. Lamb's Sermon before the
King and Queen, Jan. 19. 1689. -- Sermon before the Queen, Jan. 24. 1690. Dr.
Worthington, of Christian Love, Octavo. Faith and Practice of a Church of
England-Man. Twelves. Fourth Edition. Mr. Jeffrey's Religion the Perfection of
Man. Octavo. Dr. Scot's Sermon before the Queen, May 22. 1692. Mr. Young's
Sermon of Union, May 20. 1688. The Protestant and Popish Way of interpreting
Scripture, in Answer to Pax vobis.

