II. DISSERTATION CONCERNING THE ANTIQUITY OF CHURCHES. Wherein is shown, That
the CHRISTIANS, In the Two First CENTURIES, Had no such Public Separate Places
for Worship, as the Papists generally, and some Protestants also Presume, and
Plead for.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside
near Mercers-Chappel, School.

NOBILISSIMO DOMINO, Do. ROBERTO SOUTHWEL, Equiti aurato.

Summis virtutibus, perinde ac eruditione ornatissimo,
Longo rerum usu, and Prudentia civili celeberrimo.
Magnis merito Officiis and Honoribus decorato.
Sub Carolo II.

Ad Aulam Portugalliae semel atque iterum, Ad Bruxellensem quoque, and
Brandeburgicam Legato.

Necnon Sanctiori Concilio a Secretis.

Gulielmo III. In Regno Hiberniae ab Epistolis.

Itemque Regalis Societatis Praesidi. Hanc qualemcunque Dissertationem, Quam
humillime D. D. C. JOSEPHUS HILL.

THE CONTENTS.
SECT. 1. THE Question stated. SECT. 2. The first Argument, that the Apostles,
and Primitive Christians had no Public separate Places for Worship, taken from
their Persecution, vindicated and enforced. SECT. 3. A second Argument, from
the defect of Proof for Churches so early. SECT. 4. Our Adversaries Proofs from
Scripture Considered, and Answered. SECT. 5. What kind of Places were used for
Worship. SECT. 6. Testimonies for our Opponents in the first Century answered.
SECT. 7. Testimonies in second Century answered. SECT. 8. As also in the third
Century. SECT. 9. Their Reasons answered, and of Churches standing and
worshipping toward the East. SECT. 10. Several Considerations, for
corroborating our Assertion. SECT. 11. Testimonies of the Persecution of
Christians, and how continued in the first Ages. SECT. 12. Concerning the
number of Martyrs. SECT. 13. Testimonies that the Christians had no Churches in
the two first Centuries. SECT. 14. And that they assembled frequently in the
Night, and always in the most Private Places, during their Persecution under
the Heathens,
DISSERTATION II. Of the Antiquity of Artificial Churches under the Gospel.
SECTION I.
HAVING Discoursed in a former Dissertation, Of the Antiquity of Temples in the
times of the Old Testament: I proceed in this, with the Consideration, Of the
Antiquity of Churches in Gospel times under the New. Wherein the common Opinion
of Protestants is maintained, not only against Bellarmine and Baronius, but
some Protestants also, as Fuller in his Miscellanea Sac. l. 2. c. 9. who
undertakes to prove that Christians had their Churches or Temples built, even
in the days of the Apostles: And more especially Mede, who has largely handled
this Subject in's Treatise Of Appropriate Places for Christian Worship, both
in, and ever since the Apostles time. Both these state and maintain the
Question as they do, and light their Candles at their Torches. In this
Controversy our Adversaries take the Word (...)(which we render, when taken
for a Religious Assembly, by the word Church; from (...), whence the Saxon
Cyric, and the German Kyrk, and we by adding a double Aspiration Church, or
Church) as it was in after Ages (not in the beginning) taken for a Public
Place for Worship. Concerning which, here let me premise, That although we have
no particular command for building of Churches, as of Old for the Tabernacle
(which was a moveable Temple) or the Temples, which were standing Tabernacles,
(their Names being frequently interchanged;) nor do they recommend our Services
to God, as those that were Typical of our Savior did: Yet are Edifices very
convenient for the Worshippers, and are so far necessary for the advancing Gods
Service, as appears by the Light of Nature, and the use of Synagogues amongst
the Jews: That by such Structures we are better defended against the injuries
of Wind and Weather; as also, the Voice of the Minister is in them more Audible
than in the open Air, and that thereby we have greater convenience of excluding
such, as ought not to Communicate with us: Besides that after the spreading of
the Gospel, they were more necessary for the containing a greater number of
Christians, than could meet together in private Houses, or Places: which
occasioned afterward, as liberty was granted, or encouragement given by
Christian Magistrates, the building of Oratories and Churches. So that tho we
grant the Primitive Christians had always Places for Public Worship; yet we
deny they built any Edifices publicly for the exercise of their Religion, or
had any such appropriate places, as our Opponents call Temples or Churches; but
worshipped God in such numbers, as could conveniently meet together, only in
private Houses, or such places as were obscure, for above 200 Years after our
Blessed Savior's Ascension. Although in the Third Century, they had some
Oratories or Conventicles, here and there, even in the Roman Empire, as well as
in Persia, and other Nations, where the Gospel was spread. For Arnobius, who
flourished about 285, mentions, l. 4. the Christian Conventicles. And
Lactantius his Scholar ( Justit. l. 5. c. 2.) a Temple destroyed in Bithynia.
Who being Schoolmaster to Crispus, the Son of Constantine, it is probable, the
public Places, granted the Christians by Galienus, were then enlarged, which
were before called Conventicles; as he says, One in Phrygia set a Conventicle
on Fire, and burnt all assembled therein, cap. 11.

SECT. 2.
The Reasons for this our Assertion are, (1.) The great Persecutions the
Christians lived under for the most part, all that time. Which is so apparent
from all Histories, Sacred and Civil, that I wonder Fuller should say, That
Persecutions in the beginning were more rare, and for the most part private.
Both which are notoriously false, as appears from the Acts. For no sooner had
the Apostles begun to preach the Gospel, c. 2. and 3. but they were by the
Rulers imprisoned, beaten and charged to desist, c. 4 and 5. Stephen taken and
stoned, c. 6 and 7. And thereupon the Church of Jerusalem by a great
Persecution, scattered, c. 8. and 11. v. 19. After we have Herod's persecuting
the Christians, killing James, and imprisoning Peter, with intention to put him
to Death, c. 12. The Rulers persecute Paul and Barnabas at Antioch, c. 13. and
at Iconium; and at Lystra Paul is stoned, c. 14. He and Silas whipped and
imprisoned by the Roman Magistrates, c. 16. Persecuted at Thessalonica, c. 17.
A Tumult against Paul, etc. c. 19. He says, bonds and afflictions wait for him
in every City, and that grievous Wolves should enter among them, not sparing
the Flock, c. 20. And what Persecutions he suffered at Jerusalem, not only from
the Rabble, but the Chief, both of the Jews and Romans, may be seen in the
following Chapters. Most of his Epistles were written in Bonds. And its
generally said, that he suffered at Rome under Nero, as Peter, many say, did
also. And St. John's Banishment into the Isle of Patmos, is certain (as it is
said) by the Emperor Domitian. And Hospinian has observed, that from the
Apostles time, till Bishop Sylvester and the Emperor Constantine's, for above
300 Years, not one of all those 30 Bishops of Rome, but suffered Martyrdom. But
Fuller adds, that the same public calamities were usually common to the Jews
with the Christians; and therefore if they kept their Synagogues, why might not
these their Churches. Mede also urges this of the Jewish Synagogues, because
the Jews Religion was no more the Empires than the Christians. Both which we
deny, for the Jews were the Persecutors, and the Christians the Persecuted:
they usually stirring up and incensing the Gentiles against these, as the Acts
of the Apostles testify, and St. Paul, 1 These. 2.14, 15, 16. Nor had the
Christians then any Churches, as the Jews had Synagogues, tho they had in some
Cities separate Meetings. Of the Jewish Synagogues we read in Scripture, but
neither Scripture nor History mentions any public Churches for 200 Years. And
afterward, when they had some Oratories, we read of courses taken for
demolishing them: but not (much less at the same time) of the Jewish
Synagogues. These having been long before, publicly tolerated in many Places
to the Jews where they resided. And they having now renounced Christ, the Devil
and Heathen Emperors had no cause to disquiet them, but made use of them in
opposing Christianity. As Julian we know, employed them for building again
their Temple at Jerusalem, to despite the Christians. And no Religion is more
hated of a Natural Man than the True; all others being preferred before this.

Mr. Mede in answering the Objections against his Opinion, endeavors to
enervate this of Persecution two ways. (1.) By asserting, that the greatest
Persecutions (as the five last of the Ten) fell out in the Third Century,
wherein it is granted the Christians had some Oratories, and therefore why not
in the two former, seeing their Persecutions were not continual, nor of long
duration. But tho we grant, in regard of the abundance of Bloodshed, the last
were the cruellest; yet was there always such as hindered, both the erecting and
appropriating Churches, and publicly assembling (the Laws and Emperors being
their Enemies) contenting themselves to meet as they could with the most safety
in secret. And tho their Persecution was not constant, yet were they constantly
liable thereunto, as the Apostle tells us, Romans 8.36. For thy sake we are
killed all the day long, we are accounted as Sheep for the Slaughter. Histories
also show us, their Sufferings were more continual, and less interrupted, in
the two first, than third Century. Wherein after a sore Storm under Valerian,
they enjoyed a comfortable calm, under his Son Galienus, who restored to them
their Cemeteries, and all other places of Worship; which was such a favor or
Tolleration, as we read not of in the two first Ages. (2.) Mr. Mede argues from
the credibility of the Christians having Oratories in the Roman Empire, as well
as in the Persian. Which we deny, for it is the Roman Empire only, that is
represented under the Shape of a Red Dragon with 7 Heads and 10 Horns, making
War with the Saints of God. Nor are we now dealing with a matter of Opinion, or
Credibility, but matter of Fact and History; which ascertains the Persecution
under the Roman Emperors for 300 years, but mentions little or none at all,
under the Persian Monarchs, during that time, tho afterward, as Sozomen l. 2.
c. 8. relates by Saporez, which was long before Isdigerdis, who was
Contemporary with Theodosius.

Nor does the Churches of Persia prejudice our Opinion; seeing they were but
(by Mr. Mede's acknowledgment) in Constantine's time. Before which, there were
some Churches in the Roman Empire. For Dioclesian his Predecessor made an Edict
for the demolishing them.

Having thus vindicated our Argument from several Attacks: We may further
enforce it, both by the experience of former Ages, and also our own. The
Israelites in Egypt, tho they dwelt together, a long time at least, yet we read
not of any Temples they built there. And when they were in Captivity in
Babylon, tho we read of their building Houses, Jer. 29. yet nothing of
Synagogues. Pass on from the Heathenish to the Popish Persecutions, former and
latter: Where at this day, in Italy, France, Spain and Portugal, are any
Churches built, or Public Meeting-Places for Protestants? Nay even the
Lutherans will not allow the public exercise of the Reformed Religion. The
Story of the German Church under Johannes a Lasco, who fled from London, to
avoid the Persecution under Queen Mary, to the Lutherans, and how barbarously
treated, is well known, and lamentable to consider. And the same spirit
continues, so that the Dutch Church at Hamburg go to Altena, and the English
are confined to their own House. Sweden is expelling them, and several Princes
persecuting them. Nor need we go so far, the experience of these Three Kingdoms
is sufficient. Where although the Persecution of the Nonconformists, was not from
the Heathens, (as the Primitive Christians:) Nor from Papists (as the Waldenses
of old, and all Dissenters from them generally ever since:) Or any Protestants
of a different Denomination; nor to death; but only Fines or Imprisonments.
etc. Yet who went about to build any public Places for Worship, or had such,
till a Tolleration was granted them? Who can imagine any so mad, as to build or
buy public Places, where their Enemies are Rulers; and having all Civil Power
in their hands, would not only shut them up, or demolish them, but also
severely punish such presumption.

SECT. 3.
Our 2d Argument is from the defect of sufficient Testimonies from Scripture,
of the Christians having any public appropriate places in the Apostles time;
or from authentic Authors, of any such the two first Centuries. Nor let any
think it sufficient to say, that Argumentum ab autoritate non valet negative;
an Argument from authority negatively, is of no force. For in Religion,
Scripture so argues, not only in matter of our duty, because never commanded;
but also in matter of History, as Hebr. 7.14. Our Lord sprang out of Juda, of
which Tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning Priesthood. Whence by the way, we
may gather, that our Savior never went further into the Temple, not being a
Priest of the Tribe of Levi, than the Outward Court. And in matters of Fact so
many Hundred Years ago, this way of arguing is generally used and received. As
Baronius uses it in a like case, A. D. 48. and others also frequently. For how
should we know, what was done so long since, but by History. Now in all the
diligent searchers into Antiquity, as Eusebius, Hierom, Clemens Alexandrinus,
and other Ancient Fathers and Authors, we find no footsteps of any public
Churches, the two first Centuries; but many against them.

For the Scriptures, whosoever reads the Apostles Acts, which contain their
History about 32 Years; will find the Church assemblies still in private
Houses, as c. 12. v. 12. so c. 20. v. 8. and to the very last, c. 28. v. 29,
30. so also in their Epistles. And the all places were indifferent to them in
respect of holiness, yet not of convenience; so that according thereto, no
doubt they were appointed; and in the heat of Persecution, such as were most
secret and secure.

And will never find the Church therein taken for a Place. It being the general
Opinion of Protestants, which the Learned Lutheran, Gerrard de Eccles. c. 2.
relates. In S. literis significatio Ecclesiae pro loco non occurrit; sed
progressu temporis factum, ut a Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis tandem reciperetur.
Sed quilibet videt hanc appellationem esse impropriam, and (...). In the Holy
Scriptures, the Church is no where taken for a Place; tho in process of time,
it came to be so used in Ecclesiastical Writers. But every one sees, the taking
of it in this sense, is improper and catachrestical. Camero likewise, a Learned
Calvinist, in's Tract. de Ecclesia, and generally all of both Professions. So
that we may conclude as to the Scriptures, that however the grand Tyrant Custom
prevailed in after Ages, to call the Place by the name of Church, yet from the
beginning it was not so.

And for human Testimonies; for the first Ages succeeding the Apostles, we
might here produce very many, to prove the Primitive Christians had no such
public Churches or Temples. But in regard we sustain the negative part, and
our Opponents the affirmative, to whom the Proof most properly belongs,
according to the Maxim, affirmanti incumbit probatio: And those that favor our
Adversaries Opinion, will be apt to say, we do but beg the Question; for that
they have both Scripture, and good Humane Testimonies for them. We shall
therefore first examine what they allege; and afterward produce such
Witnesses against them, as we shall willingly submit to the judgment of all
impartial Men, on which side the Truth lies. For if they can either by
Scripture, or approved Authors, mantain their cause, we shall yield it;
notwithstanding the improbability thereof, from the Persecutions the Christians
were under in the first Ages. But here we must profess, that this being matter
of fact, we are not to be put off, nor shall we acquiesce with conjectures or
probabilities, such as Platina, Polid. Virgil, etc. urge, from the Apostles and
Primitive Christians zeal to promote Religion, (as if there could be none,
without such appropriate and consecrated Places, as they call Churches) But
there must be authentic Records, from approved Authors, that there were such
in the Apostles days, and the two first Ages after our Savior; otherwise we
can have no certainty of what was done at such a distance from us, so many Ages
agone.

SECT. 4.
We shall therefore now enter the Lists with our Adversaries, and not decline
any of their Weapons, being well secured by the shield of Truth. Tho we take no
notice of several flourishes they make, that being needless, in regard of the
several Editions of the Authors, wherein they may be seen, and especially of
Mede, our principal Adversary.

From Scripture, especially 1 Cor. 11.18, 20, 22. which Bellarmine c. 4. de
cultu sanctorum, and Baronius, produce for Churches and Oratories distinct from
private Houses in the Apostles days. Answered at large by Vedelius in his
Exercitation upon Ignatius's Epistle to the Magnesians.

Mr. Fuller likewise, who argues that from that the Apostle having said, v. 18.
when you come together in the Church, forthwith expounds it by v. 20. when you
come together in the same place; showing by the Church he denotes the Place.
But here he supposes, that (...), is to come together in the same place; which
is denied. For men cannot come, or meet together, but in some place, either
natural or artificial. Beza renders it in unum, others simul or conjuncti: I
should ad idem. For the expression is Hellenistical, and signifies not only a
Concourse in the same place, but agreement. in condition, and concurrence in
the same action, tho in different places, according to the Septuagint. Even as
in Acts 2.44. and other Texts it must be understood; for both the diversity of
Tongues, and multitude of Christians, as five thousand, c. 4. v. 4. manifest it
could not be in the same place. Camero in his Myrothecium, shows the Phrase is
taken from the Septuagints Version of Psalm. 2.2. where the Princes assemble
together,(...), not in reference to the same place, but to their conjunction in
heart and counsel about the same thing. Which sense Dr. Hammond follows, on
Acts 1.15. If any object, if the Church be not the place, but the People, it is
as much as to say, when you meet together in a Meeting. But this is also
denied, for (...)signifies only the general Notion of coming together, or
assembling, as Acts 11.26. but the Church, a special, viz. a holy Meeting. So
that it is not the place, but the employment, that gives the denomination. For
as it is not in every place, where the Senators or Parliament Men meet, that
there is a Senate or Parliament. Nor in every place, where the Pastors of the
Church meet, is there forthwith a Synod. Seeing both sorts may come together at
Fasts or Feasts, or other occasions. But there and then only, where and when
they meet to deliberate about affairs, Civil or Ecclesiastical. So wheresoever
the Members of a Church come together, they are not for that said to come
together in the Church, but only then and there, when and where they come
together for the exercise of Religion.

But the chief Argument all our Opponents make use of, is from v. 22. where
they assert an Antithesis or Opposition, between private Houses proper to each,
and the Church which is common to all. Let us therefore duly consider it. And
(1.) That tho the word (...) be used above 100 times in the New Testament; yet
this is the only place our Protestants insist on for their Opinion. Although
Bellarmine alleges also, 1 Cor. 14.25. which yet clearly proves the contrary.
(2.) We deny, as Camero in his Answer to Fuller, (Tract. de Eccles. c. 1.) that
the opposition here, is made between the doing of any thing in this or that
place; but in the presence of others, or not in their presence. As when one
does that in public, which should be done at home; we rate him saying, Have
thou not an House of thy own? Do thou despise the City? understanding not the
Structures or Streets, but the faces of the Citizens who are there. And that
this is the Apostles meaning, appears both by the following words, and shame
them that have not: that is the poor Brethren, that had neither Money to buy,
nor Provisions to bring for their Feasts of Charity (then in use at the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper.) So that it is not despising the Place, but the
Persons; putting the poor (who are a great part of the Church) to blush and be
ashamed. And also by a parallel Place in this Epistle, c. 14. v. 34 and 35.
where the Apostle forbids their Women to speak in the Churches, And if they
will learn any thing, let them ask their Husbands at home; for it is a shame
for Women to speak in the Church. Where we see a plain opposition, between the
Church and their own Home; which yet cannot be understood of the Church as a
Place: The Case being clear, that it was not unlawful for Women to speak in
such a Place simply, but only at such a time when the Congregation was at
Divine Worship: otherwise, it would be unlawful for any Woman, before or after
Public Worship, to speak in the place. Nor was it sinful surely, for Women to
speak at their Love Feasts, tho in the Church. Besides, it is said, your Women
in the Churches, which implies, there were more than one Congregation in the
Church of Corinth.

I shall not stand to allege Commentaries on 1 Cor. 11.22. as Cajetan, who is
absolutely for the Congregation, and Aquinas, and Carthusian, as also Dr.
Pearson on the Creed, p. 337. say, it may as well be so understood as of the
place. But further prove the Truth (3.) By the Argument which the Apostle draws
from the holiness of the Meeting, and not from the holiness of the Place, to
take the Corinthians off from their Dissentions, v. 18. for in every Meeting,
Dissentions are to be avoided; but in a holy Meeting, ordained for Religion,
they ought to be detested. And so from Intemperance, v. 20, 21. showing unity
in the Truth of Doctrine, and unanimity in affections are necessary for the
right receiving the Lords Supper, in the following Verses. And I would further
argue with mine Opponents, suppose their meeting had been on some Mountain, or
in some Cave, (which was not unusual) and the faults here mentioned had been
committed; should they not have been liable to the same censure of despising
the Church of God? But (4.) Should we grant the opposition they make, between
the Church and their own Houses, yet will not this serve to overthrow our
Opinion, or establish their own; except they can further prove, this Church or
Place to have been public, and not in a private House, like unto others
mentioned throughout the Acts.

Mr. Mede carries this 22d verse, for a reproof of the Corinthians, for using
profane Banquetings and Feastings in a sacred place, to introduce his Opinion
of the holiness of Churches, as Bellarmine c. 5. de cultu sanct. says, Satis
inn^it^r, tunc etiam Ecclesiam aliquo modo sacratam fuisse, hence it is
sufficiently gathered, that even then the Church was some manner of way holy;
which he says, was for consecration. But Mede runs against the stream of
Interpreters, who expound it of their Love Feasts. Neither does the Apostle
reprove them for any such thing, but for their schismatical, unbrotherly and
intemperate Carriage therein. These Love Feasts, a Lapide, as Austin, Aquinas,
Cajet an, and others, think preceeded; and Justinian as Chrysostom and diverse
others, that they followed after the Communion. The Opinions of the Ancients
concerning their order, are cited by these two Learned Jesuits upon the place,
where they may be seen; and the manner of them in Kerchers Roma Subterranea l.
6. c. 27. As far as my reading reaches, tho these Love Feasts sometimes were
before as in the Church of Alexandria, (as Sozomen says, l. 7. c. 19.) and
some others: Yet more usually they followed after the Sacrament. However, we
have multiplicity of Testimonies in the Writings of the Ancients, for them at
the Communion in the Primitive Church: and none I can find amongst them for Mr.
Mede's Opinion, except Sedulius; nor amongst the Modern, but Salmeroni; and
these quite contrary to the genius of the Text.

But he proceeds to tell us, that as most of the Words signifying an Assembly
or Company, are wont to be used also for the place; so here (...). Which we
deny not in common Speech; but then the expression is not proper, but
figurative, continens pro contentis, the Place containing, for the Persons
contained. He cites St. Austin taking the Church here for the place of Meeting.
It Is true, he does so, on Leviticus, l. 3. c. 57. to which Bid on the Text
refers, but only for the time wherein the Congregation met, Ecclesia dicitur
locus, quo Ecclesia congregatur: And it is apparent, that the faults mentioned
by the Apostle, are such only as were committed, at the time of their
assembling for the Worship of God. Nor does Austin appropriate it to a Place
civil or artificial, as our Opponents do, not considering such abuses have
their course in their Meetings in what place soever, natural or civil.

The next Author he produces is Basil, who pleads for the Holiness of
Churches; of which hereafter.

Commentators follow. The Author of the Comments on the Epistles (falsely
ascribed to Hierom) a Pelagian, seems to deliver the Opinion of others, rather
than his own, saying, Quidam hunc locum ad illos referunt, qui Epulas in
Ecclesia faciebant: facientes eam trielinium Epularum. And Sedusius (whom the
former Author seems to point at) is of that Opinion, thinking it unlawful to
keep their Feasts in the Church. Wherein he is singular, and contrary to the
Apostle, who rectifies the abuse only, by admonishing them to stay one for
another, and make their poor Brethren partakers with them of their Viands.
Furthermore, even those that take the Church for a holy Place, and cite this
(as Sir H. Spelman and several others) of the Corinthians making the Church
trielinium Epularum, make it only a private Room, for trielinium was never
taken for a House, much less a public one. To which may be added, the practice
in after Ages, in St. Austin's time, when the Christians kept their Love Feasts
in memoriis Martyrum, or in their Churches, as appears by his Answer to Faustus
the Maniche, l. 10. c. 20, 21. at large.

As for Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophilact and Cecumenius, tho they take the
Church for a Place; yet none of them as Mede, that the Corinthiaws fault was,
in keeping there profane Banquetings: Nor otherwise than in reference to the
very time only, of their meeting therein. And whereas Chrysostom says, the
Church as well as the Poor were wronged; he cannot, I suppose, mean it of the
Place, for Time and Place cannot be said to be despised or dishonored, but by
an extrinsecal denomination, when God is dishonored, or our Brethren, by our
unchristian behavior in the place. As here the latter member, being joined
thereto by a copulative, may fairly expound the former (as usually) viz. in
shaming them that have not, you despise the Church, as Cajetan and Piscator
expound it. So that tho the Grammatical opposition be between two places; yet
the Logical and Theological is between a place of many present therein, and a
private place. From these Testimonies, Mede concludes there were places
appointed, and set apart for Christian Worship, even in the Apostles times.

But tho no Man doubts, that believes the Gospel, that the Christians had
places for Worship; yet it follows not thence, that they were set apart from
all other uses, for Christian Worship. Neither does he, or any other Opponent
prove this. Places of meeting, the Ancients suppose, but separate Places they
suppose not. It was 200 Years and more, ever they had Public Oratories. And
when the Heathen objected they had no Temples, Altars nor Images, they freely
confess as much.

Having vindicated this Text in the Corinths, we shall briefly mention some
others, alleged for separate and public Churches: Tho some are so
far-fetched, they deserve not mentioning. As Mr. Fuller from 1 Cor. 14.40. That
all things be done decently, and in order, inferring that public Offices be
done in public Places, as much as may be. And what, I pray, is more public
than the open Air, Mountains and Fields where our Savior instructed his
Followers?

Likewise from Acts 19.9. Paul separated the Disciples, disputing daily in the
School of one Tyrannus: As if this School was one of the Temples of Christians,
which he confesses was but borrowed, or hired for the urgent necessity.

His next place is Acts 15.21. whence he argues, the Israelites from the
beginning of their Commonwealth had Synagogues; so the Christians from the day
of Pentecost, Churches. But that is very dubious; for tho I judge Synagogues
much Ancienter than till after the Captivity (whence many Learned Men date
them;) yet that they were so Ancient as he makes them, cannot be proved. Nor
will Ps. 74.8. serve, admitting various Translations. The 70, They have put
down the Feasts; Hierome, Tabernacula; Montanus, Conventicula; Junius,
Synagogas, which denotes all kinds of Assemblies, Civil and Ecclesiastical, in
their places; as Gerhard de Eccles. c. 1.. 4. shows at large. Nor that of Ps.
83.12 of which Sir H. Spelman has a Discourse, at the end of his Tract de non
temerandis Ecclesiis. And who sees not a vast difference; the Israelites were a
free State of themselves, and had Governors Civil and Ecclesiastical, supreme
and subordinate, in the Land of Canaan, of their own: Whereas the condition of
Christians was quite otherwise, till Constantine's time, as all know. His last
Scripture is James 2.2. where (...) Synagogue, is much more pregnant to denote
a Place, than (...) the Church; for of above 100 Texts where this is used, no
one, except that in 1 Cor. 11.22. is with any color alleged for a Place;
whereas Synagogue is frequently so taken, both in the 70, and in the New
Testament, when applied to the Jews, as Acts 13.14. and 14.1. etc. tho
sometimes for an Assembly, and most usually so when applied to Christians. As
the Syriac here renders it; and Beza, coetum: the vulgar Latin (which some say
is the Vetus Italica, and make great account of it, (as our Bishop Andrews,
etc.) conventum; as our last Version Assembly, and the former company;
declining the Word Synagogue, for no other reason, that I can conceive, but
because they judged, that Christians had no separate Places in those days, as
the Jews had; James we know wrote to the Twelve Tribes dispersed, with whom the
Word (...), was in use, as Hellenistical; so that after they became Christians,
they might well call their Metting, of what condition soever it were, by that
name: For the Word signifies all kinds of Assemblies, Civil and Sacred, as Dr.
Hammond shows on Matthew. 6.2. from many Texts; and here in James, Consistories
for Judicature, by 5 reasons. And the Apostles having used the Word (...), or
Church, to distinguish the Christians meetings from the Jewish, and as more
proper, etc. (which Gerhard in the Chap. above cited, notes;) the Name of
Synagogue was soon given over among Christians, and such places called (...)
and (...); but whether before they became separate places, or after; and about
what time such were built for Prayer, is the question.

SECT. 5.
Mr. Mede from Scripture, proceeds to enquire, what manner of Places these
appropriate were, before he produces the testimonies of Antiquity for such.
Where first he acknowledges (as Baronius had before him) that they were not so
goodly and stately, as after the Empire became Christian, and we now enjoy: But
some capable and convenient room, within the Walls or Dwelling of some pious
Disciple, dedicated by him to the use of the Church, usually an Upper-Room,
such as that called Caenaculum Sionis, where the Apostles and Disciples after
our Savior's Ascension, usually assembled, and the Holy Ghost fell upon them,
on the day of Pentecost. Concerning which place he brings a long Train of
Traditions from Nicephorus; a most fabulous Author, in the judgment of all
Learned Men; not worthy to be mentioned.

Here let me observe the Difference amongst our Opponents. (1.) As to the
Place, Bellarmine and Baronius, as also our Fuller, conclude from that Text in
the Corinths, for appropriate Houses or Churches; but Mede only for one Room,
usually an upper, in an House. (2.) Bellarmine would have these Houses to be
holy Temples, from the Christian Sacrifices therein, meaning the Mass, which he
thinks is alone sufficient for the denomination of a Temple. For c. 4. de cultu
sanctorum, he says, Templum nihil aliud est, quam locus Altaris. A Temple is
no other thing than the place of an Altar: called also, basilica, says he, as
erected at some Saints Sepulcher. Baronius and Fuller content themselves with
the distinction of Oratories, which tho poor and mean amongst Christians, in
comparison of the Heathens Temples, yet were those Temples, as well as these.
But Mede will have his rooms, by reason of the Owners Dedication, to be
Oratories and Churches: Tho Justinian distinguishes these, (on 1 Cor. 11.)
saying, Christians had their meetings first in private Houses, afterward in
Oratories and Churches.

And whereas Mr. Mede discourses of a room and House, in the singular number
(as best suiting his Opinion of appropriate places, even in the Apostles days)
meaning without doubt, wheresoever there was a Church, as he instanceth in the
coenaculum Sionis, in Jerusalem. All this is nothing better than building upon
the Sand. For considering the several circumstances in Acts c. 1. and 2. its
far more probable, that that (...), or upper Room, was in the Temple, than any
private House As appears from several Authors and Arguments gathered together
in Pool's Synopsis, on Acts 1 13. to which I refer, being unwilling to
transcribe such Authors, as are common, and easily come at. Then what room
could contain such numbers, as 3000 Acts 2.41. which soon increased (as some
think) to 5000, or more probably, (as others gather from the Text Acts 4.4.)
were so many more. The ingenious Potter on 666. chapter 36. from the multitude of
Believers in Jerusalem, computes that each of the Twelve Apostles might have
about 500 under his care. Besides, the Gift of so many Tongues, implies their
several meetings accordingly: for we must not fancy, as Salmasius and some
others, that whoever spoke in any Language, was understood by all: because this
makes the Miracle to be in the Hearers, and not the Speakers; who were inspired
for preaching the Gospel abroad in the Nations, whose Languages they were
ignorant of before. Consider also that hot Persecution that presently followed
the year after, in the 8th of the Acts, and whether this did not necessitate
them, often to change the places of their assembling, it being neither safe to
meet in great multitudes, nor always in the same place. It Is probable also,
from v. 3. by Readiness entering (...) into their several Houses, was either when,
or where they assembled; for into every House (as we render it) of so many
Christians, as were in Jerusalem, seems to me improbable.

I pass over the fabulous Traditions, and fictitious Glosses on Acts 10.9. and
18.22. especially, as unworthy the Author, and the least consideration. And can
grant him that which follows, of some giving whole Houses, for sacred
Assemblies, as the multitude of Believers increased; tho this cannot be proved
in the two first Centuries. As also, that at length, they built Structures in
the Coemeteries of Martyrs; which yet Platina and Polid. Virgil say, were but
Sacella, Chapels, and those in secret and unknown places

SECT. 6.
We shall now proceed to examine their Testimonies: which Mr. Mede having most
fully gathered, and regularly, of all our Opponents, ranked throughout the 3
first Centuries: We shall therefore follow his order, and paticularly consider
them, as he represents them. Although we think it not necessary to express all his
words; his Works by many Editions, being in most Scholars hands. He begins with
Eusebius's relating a passage out of Philo the Jew, concerning the Essenes,
whose manner of Life and Worship Philo describes ( p. 376. etc. and more fully
in his following Book de vita contemplativa, p. 893. etc. of last Edition
1691.) Which place in Eusebius l. 2. c. 17. Hist. Bellarmine before him had
alleged, c. 4. de cultu sanctorum: tho they both knew Eusebius's being
generally censured, for his accommodating it to the Christians. For its plain
to any that peruses Philo, that he speaks of a Sect of Jews, who were Monks,
and had each their proper place for Worship, called (...), and one (...), or
common, wherein they assembled for Worship every 7th day. Whereas the
Christians neither withdrew into Cells, nor observed the 7th, but the first day
of the Week, from Christ's Resurrection, and the day of Pentecost, which fell
on the first, and after, as appears by Scripture. And however confident Mede
is, of Eusebius being of his Opinion, the contrary appears in's Book de prepar.
Evangel. l. 7. c. 6. and l. 13. c. 13. and Philo's Book of the Cherubims, shows
he was not of Mede's mind.

His next Argument is from the Apostles Salutations of several Persons, and the
Church in his or their House. Which he understands not of Families, (as he
grants it is commonly taken) but the Congregation of Saints. Whence he infers,
appropriate Places, and their Dedication by their Owners, to be Oratories for
the Church in their several Cities. And he cites Lucian's Philopatris, for
their Description.

To which we reply, (1.) That this proves no more, than that Christians had
meetings in private Houses, which none denies: which yet were often
interrupted, not only in Dioclesian's time, when they were examined if they
kept their meetings in their Houses, as appears in the Acts of Martyrs, but in
Tertullian's time also. (2.) The Place in their Houses, was but a caenaculum,
or Dining Room, as Mede grants; which as it was incapable of salutation, so of
containing the whole Church in most of those Cities. For who can think their
Houses, much less one room, so large, seeing Aquila was but a Tent-maker,
banished from Rome by Claudius, after whose Death he returned, before St.
Paul's Epistle to the Church there, wherein c. 16. v. 5 he salutes the Church
in their House. And not only at Rome, but at Philippi, or Ephesus also, the
Church that was in his House, as 1 Cor. 16.19. And what the rest were that had
Churches in their Houses, we read not. (3.) The Church in their Houses is
considered as distinct from themselves, that were Masters and Owners, and thus
it is fairly applied to their Families: But if to the whole Congregation, the
Persons whose Houses they were, being Members thereof, as well as any others,
it were very improper. For so when St. Paul bids the Church of Rome, Salute the
Church in Aquila and Priscilla's House, Romans 16.5. his meaning is, that the
Romans should salute themselves. So in wishing the Colossians (4.15.) to salute
the Church in Nymphas's House, he desires them to salute themselves. And so of
the rest.


Now to say these Masters of Houses, bestowed some part or place thereof to the
Churches use, needs no proof (for none can lawfully enter into another man's
House, without his allowance) but that they Dedicated them, does: For if
Dedication was then used (of which hereafter) yet surely not by a private
person. And whereas some singular thing must be meant, says Mede, he
concludes, this of the whole Church in their House, must be it. Which is
inconsequent. And tho it be unreasonable, to demand a reason of another
actions, which himself conceals; yet something may be gathered for this, from
the Apostle. As for Aquila and Priscilla from Romans 16.3, 4. and Acts 18.26. And
as they were his helpers in Christ Jesus, that is in reference to the promoting
the Gospel: so were Nymphas also, and Philemon, whom Paul calls his fellow
labourer. As for Lucian, cited also by Baronius, for proof of Houses separate:
Vedelius answers, (1.) That the Dialogue Philopatris, is none of Lucian's, sed
alterius alicujus scioli: and (2.) That the place may as well be understood of
a private as a public House.


His 3d proof is from Tradition, That Theophilus to whom St. Luke inscribes his
Gospel and Acts, converted his House into a Church; derived from the Traditions
of Clemens. As Indens likewise mentioned, 2 Timothy 4.21. a Roman Senator and
Martyr from the Acta Pudentis.

This of Theophilus mentioned by Bellarmine c. 4. de cultu sanct. from Clements
Recognit. l. 10. and Baronius A. D. 58. number. 32. that had not found who he was,
but in Clements Recognitions: Vedelius answers, -- (in Epist. Ign. ad Magnes.)
scriptis quae citat Baronius tantum deferendum est, quantum citanti: To the
Writings cited by Baronius we are to give as much credit, as to the Citer. See
the judgment of Papists concerning these Recognitions, in Coci censura
Scriptorum, p. 20. of Pererius, Sixtus Senensis, Driedo, yea Baronius himself,
A. D. 51. number. 53. who says, That out of these Books, as out of a dirty Sink,
are taken such prodigious Lies, and mad Dotages, as are not only to be
reproved, but extremely rejected by the Learned, etc.

His last Testimony is from Clemens's Epistola ad Corinthios, who speaking of
Gods Worship under the Gospel, says, He has determined where and by whom,
etc. Whence Mede concludes, Places, as well as Times and Persons, were
appropriate and distinct, in the Apostles days. Adding, that this Divine
Ordinance is found in the Analogy of the Old Testament.

To which I answer (1.) That it is granted this Epistle is authentic. Grotius
has in a large Epistle approved it. Salmasius de Epise. and Presbyt. and
Blundel and Hammond in their Disciplinarian Controversies, own it for genuine.
Junius and Dr. Fell, in their Notes vindicate it; tho I know, a late Author,
Ernestus Teutzelius a German has largely answered them, and pronounces the
Epistle spurious; especially for the mention of the Phoenix therein. Whom I
have had thoughts to refute, and animadvert on some others that have nibled at
it, when I get time to publish various Observations I have upon it. For Dr.
Wake in's Introduction to his Translation, c. 2. has only touched thereon. But
(2.) What needs Mr. Mede to make such a stir about Clemens's (...), when the
Scripture has determined, that God under the Gospel is to be worshipped every
where, as Malachy 1.11. From the rising of the Sun to the going down of the
same. And our Savior himself signifies as much, John 4.20, 21, 22, 23. where
he declares who are the true Worshippers of God under the Gospel, without any
reference to place, in opposition to the worshipping him, in this or that
place; whether on the Mount where the Patriarchs worshipped him of old, or at
Jerusalem where the Jews worshipped him afterward. As Gorran observes,
localitatem excludit: He excludes appropriation to any place, as necessary to
Gods worship; and adds, non determinat locum orationis alienbi, sed ubique;
determines not the place of prayer to any particular place, but enlarges it to
every place. To every private House, Acts 9.11, to the top of an House, 10.9.
to the Sea shore, 21.5. so the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1, 2. In every place call on the
Name of Jesus Christ our Lord; and 1 Timothy 2.8. I will, that men pray every
where. And undoubtedly Clement could not be ignorant of this, considering the
persecuting times wherein he lived, when the Churches of God were driven from
place to place, and constrained to meet as they could, with most safety.

And Mede's saying, that Clemen's Divine Ordinance, for the place of Church
Service, is to be found in the Analogy of the Old Testament; seems very
strange. For the Temple at Jerusalem was the only place God appointed for the
Jewish Worship. And should the Christians by Analogy have but one Temple? They
had also many Synagogues, which our Churches more resemble; yet where did God
prescribe the place wherein they were to be built? And as to his Principle.
That as the Divine Majesty is most sacred, and incommunicable, so the things
wherewith he is served, should not be common, but appropriate to that end. This
proves nothing of the place, but only its qualification, that it ought to be
appropriate, whereof any place is capable: nor does Clemens mention any such
separate or appropriate places; of which we shall have occasion to speak more
hereafter. As also how this Analogy has misled him and several others, to
assert the holiness of Places by Dedication, and Temples, Priests, Altars, and
proper Sacrifices under the Gospel.

SECT. 7.
In the Second Century, Mr. Mede begins with the Testimonies of Ignatius the
Martyr, A. D. 107. First with his confessed Epistle ad Magnesios; and then with
the spurious ad Antiochenos.

But had he lived to have seen what is now extant, of and concerning these
Epistles, by the great Luminaries of Learning in this Age, A. B. Usher, Dally,
Bp. Pearson, Larock, etc. he would never have laid such stress upon them. The
manifest difference between the ancient genuine Copies, and the latter, is
evident by their Translations; particularly that of Caius College in Cambridge,
which A. B. Usher prefers to the common Greek Copies. Wherein this very place
(...), etc. is quite differently rendered from Mede's; carrying the words for an
unity in Doctrine, not Devotion: and that they should all come into Christ, as
into one Temple and Altar, making him both; as alluding to 1 Pet. 2.4. where
the one Temple, into the which we are built up, coming unto him; and one Altar
Jesus Christ, and spiritual Sacrifices offered to God, in him as on an Altar,
whereby they become acceptable.

Not to insist upon (...), or Temple, no ways agreeing to the meeting places of
the Primitive Christians: as both Bellar. de Romans Pontif. l. 3. c. 13. and
Vedelius has shown sufficiently, from the Ancient Fathers. And that which
follows in Mede, of one Bishop, and one Altar, in every Church, is not only
alien to the scope of Ignatius, but the Truth also. For the Church of Ephesus
had (...), or Bishops, Acts 20.28. so had the Philipians, 1.1. and of
Jerusalem, Narcissus and Alexander, who at the same time jointly governed the
Church, as Eusebius relates. Gersom Bucer in's Answer to Downam's Sermon, p.
302. proves the like in other Churches, by ten instances: and Vedelius the
same, Exercit. 8. in Epist. Ignat. c. 3. And Epiphanius of old, professed that
the Church of Alexandria was singular in this, of having but one Bishop. It Is
true, the Inscription of the 7 Epistles, Apoc. c. 2 and 3. each, to the
particular Angel of the Church, seems to imply that they had but one apiece.
Which yet Mr. Mede himself sufficiently shows is inconsequent, in's Comment on
Apocal. p. 265. where he observes it the course in Scripture, to attribute that
to one Angel, which is performed by the Ministry of many. What Is alleged from
Justin Martyr is answered by Bucer; and Sozomen acquaints us, ( Hist. Eccl. l.
7. c. 3.) That even Villages had their Bishops; and no wonder then, if one
Lords Table in each might suffice to make them correlatives.

Mr. Mede proceeds with another proof out of Ignatius's Epistle ad Antiochenos,
(wherein he salutes the Keepers of the holy Doors) concluding thence holy
Houses. This Epistle he endeavors to persuade us is genuine (contrary to the
judgment of all other Protestants) from sundry probabilities.

But this is a strange way of reasoning, That it is likely such a thing should
be done, and therefore it was done. And to say, because the Antiochians were
his own Flock, I think rather makes it improbable; because he had sufficiently
established them in the Faith before he lest them; which, when he went thence
to Rome, to receive the Crown of Martyrdom, he endeavored by his Epistles to
do for other Churches. And surely they would have been careful above all other
Churches, in keeping their own Pastor's Letter, if he had sent them one. And
was not Polycarp as likely to be acquainted with this, as the rest. Besides
that, if he or Eusebius had had any inkling of such an Epistle, surely they
would have mentioned it, tho they could not meet with it. And how does Mede
prove any such Officers in the Primitive Churches? that which he alleges for
this from the Apostolical Constitutions, falsely fathered on Clemens, is yet
stranger. For besides others, my Learned Countriman Cook, in's censura
Scriptorum, has detected so much vanity, and many Lies therein (whereof he
reckons Eight) besides the censures of Athanasius, the 6 Synod in Trullo,
Binius, Baronius, Bovius and Bellarmine; that I wonder Mr. Mede, who knew all
this, should once offer to produce them. I know Mr. Cook and many Learned
Divines reject all Ignatius's Epistles: although others, considering the
Testimonies of the Ancients, acknowledge 7 for genuine, specified by Eusebius,
Hierom and others, tho robbed of some passages mentioned by the Fathers; and
also have a number of beggarly patches added to his Purple, as A. B. Usher
says: Of which 7, this ad Antiochenos is none, and therefore not genuine; for
more were not found nor acknowledged by Polycarp (who composed them together)
Eusebius. Hierome, Sophronius and Ruffinus.

What Mede observes besides, is the Argument of Baronius An. 109. numb. 19. and
Gretser against Whitaker de S. Script. l. 4. c. 7. Which I shall not need to
answer, it being done already so fully by Vedelius on Ignatius's Epistles (whom
Mede more especially undertakes in this Treatise) in's pref. c 3. (wherein he
refutes Martialis, Mastraeus, Baronius and Pellarmine) and his Exercitation on
this Epistle: that I need not mention, Cook, Scult^tus, Rivet, Gerhard,
Erockman, etc.

Mede's next Testimony, is from two Epistles of Pius the First, Bishop of Rome;
relating in the former how Euprepria, titulum domus suae pauperibus resignavit,
ubt nune cum pauperibus nostris commorantes missas agimus; resigned the Title
of her house to the Poor, where now (says Pius) we residing with our poor, say
Mass. And in the latter of a Presbyter that erected a Titulus or Church.

To this, which Baronius alleged before to the same purpose, an. 57. numb. 98,
99, 100. and Vedelius answered: We further say, (1.) These Epistles are forged,
as Causabon's Exercit. 16. shows, For if Mass was so early, how came it, says
he, that no footsteps thereof is extant in approved Authors, for above 300
Years? And Bishop Morton in's Book of the Mass l. ^.. 1. not before St. Ambrose
time, about A. D. 373. who uses it in another Notion than Papists do since. And
Morney of the Mass, l. 1. c. 1. says it was unknown for 400 years.

Not to mention the many Authors, who have handled this Argument of the Mass,
against Bellarmine, and other Papists largely. I shall only name du Moulin on
the Mass in French, and more largely in Latin, c. 1. for the Pedigree of the
Mass. (2.) We answer, This was most likely some room in the House (seeing they
dwelt therein) where they said Mass; and were it the whole House, yet was it
but a private one, which scarce any wise man would call a Temple. And for the
name of Title, that was given at pleasure. So that were these spurious Epistles
authentic, they neither prove our adversaries Opinion, nor disprove ours.

Mr. Mede produces next Theophilus Antiochenus, l. 2. ad Antolycum; who says,
God has given Synagogues, which we call holy Churches, etc. Which yet is
confessed by him to be doubtful. For (says he) if it were probable Synagogue was
here taken, as usually in the New Testament for a place, then Church likewise
for a place.

To which we say, that if Church, in a hundred places of the New Testament, be
taken for a Congregation: then it is most probable, it is so taken here. And the
sense of the words makes this evident; for Theophilus compares Heresies to
rocky Islands; and the wholesome Doctrine of Truth and Holiness, to good and
habitable Islands; and not the places of Truth and Heresies.

The last Author in this 2d Century alleged, is Clemens Alexandrinus; who
uses the word (...) or Church, for the Place, and not the Congregation only,
Stromat. l. 7. And so again in the story of the young man, who had left the
Church, and betook himself to a Mountain with Robbers.

That Christians had places of meetings is beyond all doubt; but we say in
private Houses and Places for 200 years and upwards. Nor does Clemens or any
other, prove they had public Oratories. And Vedelius, p. 74. upon this passage
of Clemens, shows, they did not think this appellation so proper and
convenient. Therefore Salvian 200 years after, l. 3. de gub. Dei, Itaque
Ecclesias vel potius Templa, etc. correcting the impropriety, in using
Churches, for the places of assembling, and preferring the word Temples.

And for the opposition of Church and Mountain, in the story of the young man,
that became Captain to a Band of Robbers: The sense is plain, that he left the
company of Christians, rather than the place of their Assembly, to associate
with Robbers on the Mountains.

Thus for the two first Centuries, we have heard the noise of our Adversaries
Artillery, which was nothing but Powder, and vanished into Smoke, without any
Shot, that might in the least wound our cause.

SECT. 8.
Mr. Mede goes on with the 3d Century, wherein we shall follow him at the
Heels, tho not obliged thereto, by our Assertion. For I know no Protestant that
in this Century denies Christian Oratories; but only in the two first. And
therefore it is not fair to feign Adversaries, and represent us as denying that
we willingly grant. We know well, the Church being considerably increased,
Oratories were built; and the fate that followed them, namely, to be
demolished. For Eusebius relates, how before Dioclesian's days, there was both
an enlargement of Churches formerly built; and an addition of new, more large
and stately than the former, which were also destroyed in his Reign; and
toward the end of this 3d Age the Christians not only questioned for affording
their private Houses to meet in, but moreover tortured for it. Add hereunto,
that Mede still goes on to pervert the state of the Question: as if private
Houses and secret places in sore Persecutions (which none denies) were public
Oratories, Churches or Temples. The first Author cited by him is Tertullian in
three places, whereof the first has reference to the Assembly; and if to the
place, yet only to the time of Worship; for which an upper room served; as
Hospinian (de orig. Templ. c. 3.) explains him; and the second citation implies
as much, where it is said their House was in editis and apertis, in high and
open places, as their coenacula or upper rooms were; seeing in Temples tho
never so large, people are upon the Ground.

I shall not meddle with what is added of Churches anciently looking Eastward;
(for which Bellarmine gives ^ive reasons, c. 3. de cultu sanct.) further than
by referring to such Antiquaries, as have treated thereof; Walfridus Strabo,
Hospinian and others. The 3d is in's Book de corona militis; several others
being waved: (all which are brought to the same purpose by Baronius, A. D. 57.
number. 99. except that one out of l. de spectaculis.) There c. 3. its said, those
that were to be baptized, first made their abrenunciation of the Devil, etc. in
the Church, and after again at the Water. Upon which Mede, to serve his own
Hypothesis, supposes their Baptisteries, were not then, as now our Fonts,
within, but without the Church, and often in places very remote from it. But
how will he, or any other prove that there were any Baptisteries in
Tertullian's time, distinct from the places of their Assemblies. Hospinian that
was well versed in Ecclesiastical Antiquities, finds none before Constantine's
time, de orig. baptisterii, p. 30, 31. For as no place for Baptism was
prescribed by Christ, or his Apostles, but lest indifferent, and accordingly
used at first: so we find nothing certain concerning this in the Primitive
Church. The History of Basilides in Eusebius. l. 6. c. 5. manifests that some were
baptized in Prisons, and Cyprian's Epistle to Magnus, that sick persons were
baptized in their Beds. Nor does it follow, the Church here is not the
Assembly, because that was also at the Baptistery. For if there were such (as I
think there was not) yet a part more likely was only there; and probably the
abrenunciation was not the same day. However, without all doubt, it was not
made but when the Church was assembled, and respected the Assembly and not the
Place. Consider but those times, and what Tertullian says to encourage the
Christians to meet, notwithstanding the danger thereof, Si Fides transfer
potest montem, annon potest militem? Can Faith remove a Mountain, and can it
not remove a Soldier? and again, If you cannot keep your Dominicals in the Day,
keep them in the Night: and, then judge, if he can be thought a support to our
Adversaries.

His next Witness in Hyppolytus, who in's Tract de Antichristo, says, then
(...), The Temples of God should be as common Houses: And Churches every where
demolished, etc.

This Author is cited by the Rhemists, to prove that Antichrist should abolish
their Mass: but of small or no account with Protestants. For he makes
Antichrist to be the Devil, appearing in the shape of a Man; and that John the
Evangelist is not yet dead, but shall continue with Enoch and Elias till the
time of Antichrist. And lived in Cryptis, or subterraneous Vaults, as Baronius
writes A. D. 259. numb. 10. where he officiated also, as Eusebius relates. So
that Mede's inference, that he was well acquainted with such places, as Temples
and Churches, seems less probable, (seeing we read of none before) than that
this Tract is supposititious. Besides that (...) agrees not to Christian
Churches, as both Bellarmine and Vedelius have largely proved, which we
mentioned before.

For the same time Lampridius an Historian is cited, who reports, Quod cum
Christiani quendam locum, qui publicus flier at, occupassent; contra Popinarii
dicerent, sibi cum deberi; Alexander Mammeae Imperator rescripsit: melius esse,
ut quomodo cunque Deus illic colatur, quam Popinarits dedatur. That when the
Christians had possessed a public place; which the Victualers challenged to
belong to them; Alexander the Emperor determined; it was better, that God
should be there any manner of way worshipped, than that the Victualers should
have it.

This Passage is brought by Baronius, A. D. 57. number. 101. for the same purpose;
who yet afterward, A. D. 224. confesses, that at that time the Christians had
no Church there, but chose that place to build one in. For which he alleges a
fabulous Miracle. But Platina in the life of Calixtus, believes not this, by
reason of the frequent Persecutions in those days. Calixtus himself having
suffered Martyrdom. And Baronius acknowledges, that Persecution was frequent
in this Emperor Alexander's days, and diverse suffered Martyrdom, even the
Bishop of Rome himself. So that it is doubtful, whether they built any public
Oratory, in that public place, during his Reign; and if they did, it is the
first we read of in any Classic Author.

The next Author is Gregory of Neocaesarea, Surnamed Thaumatourgus, who in an
Epistle called canonica, describes the Discipline then in use, with the
distinct and regular places for Penitents, (who stood without the Gate of the
Oratory) Auditors, and others that stood within, as the Catechumens and
Faithful in distinct places.

And further in's Life written by Gregory Nissen, it is said, that he was a
great Founder and Erecter of Churches; whereof that built by him at Neocaesarea
in Fontus (where he was Bishop) Gregory Nissen says, was still standing in his
time, having remained unshaken in a great Earthquake, which had thrown down all
other Edifices both public and private.

Now let it be granted, That this Canonical Epistle is genuine; tho I will not
say, as Bellarmine, that without controversy it is so; even for that which he
says is certain. That this Gregory made a short Confession of Faith, which he
learned of John the Evangelist, appearing unto him in the company of the
blessed Virgin, the Mother of God: and the many monstrous Fables fathered on
this devout Man, by the name of Miracles. But because Balsamon, the learned
Canonist, has commented upon it, I shall not reject it; tho neither Christ our
Lord and Lawgiver, nor his Apostles, no nor the Church of the First Age,
(wherein like occasions were given by defection) ever made such orders, or used
such distinctions of places: which any considering man will judge, more
befitting peaceable than persecuting times.

And (2.) We further grant, as we have several times suggested, that in this
Third Century the Christians had their public Oratories, small at the first,
and afterward enlarged, as Eusebius testifies, Hist. l. 8. c. 1. tho most in
secret, by reason of Persecution. So that neither this, nor the following
Testimonies, prejudice our Assertion: nor prove theirs, of such public and
separate places of Worship, both in and ever since the Apostles times.

But how Gregory Nissen came to believe, that the Temple Thaumaturgus built,
continued till his time, I know not. For whosoever considers the many Edicts,
made by Heathen Emperors between these two Gregory's days, for demolishing them
all, will think this incredible. Except some Ruderaes remaining, and a Temple
after built upon them, was accounted the same; like as that which we read in
the Gospel, of Solomon's Porch. Or that it was preserved by a Miracle, as
Baronius thinks, and that a greater, than its preservation in the Earthquake.
For the Decree of Dioclesian was very general and severe, for demolishing all
Churches; which both Theodoret and Eusebius write, was so punctually executed,
that all were pulled down, not one by them excepted. And this Decree came forth
from Nicomedia, a City in Bithynia, upon which Pontus bordered, wherein
Neocaesarea stood, and therefore very unlikely this should be spared.

But if any have so strong a Faith to believe, what is reported of this great
Wonder-worker Gregory, he may possibly think that he had sufficient power to
restrain Dioclesian's Agents, and defend the Church he built. For Baronius at
the Year 253. number. 135, 136, 137. relates what power he had over Devils, to
cast them out of their Temples, and drive them out of any place, whither he
pleased, and restore them also at his pleasure: which he did, to show his
power, to one in writing under his hand, says Baronius, in these words,
Gregorius Satanae, ingredere; Gregory to Satan, enter in, that was into his
Temple again. And Bellarmine relates another Miracle of him upon this very
Argument, c. 4. de cultu Sanct. saying, That when he would have built a Church,
and wanted room, by reason of a Rock, that bordered on the place, where he
would build it, he by his prayers removed it away. Mr Mede was wiser than to
mention this, for Gregory's building of Churches. And indeed none can imagine,
how much prejudice such fabulous Miracles and lying Legends (decryed and
detested even by many sober and Learned Papists) has done to Christianity. Let
but any one read a Pamphlet Printed this very Year, of a Conference between a
Jew and a Jesuit, at Amsterdam; concerning Christ being the true Messiah,
which this undertaking to prove by his Miracles; was replied upon by the other,
with a Number as great, out of many Popish Authors, insomuch that the Jew quite
confounded the Jesuit.

And whereas Mr. Mede notes, that a little before the persecution of Decius
(which was A. D. 252.) the Christians erected Oratories, in the Name of Christ.
I desire Baronius may be consulted, and then let any one judge, how improbable
it is that Christians had public Churches, with such distinction of places, as
is mentioned or built such Public Oratories, as our Adversaries say. For
Decius gave express order to forbid all Christian assemblies; upon pain of
Death, threatening accurate observing them; (because many Heathens were
converted thereby to Christianity.) As appears by Aemilianus his writing to
Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria in Eusebius. l. 7. c. 9. vel 10. and Baronius ad A.
D. 260. Number. 17. who further relates, how their very Coemateria or burying
places (which were Vaults under ground, called cryptae, as Baronius shows A. D.
259 number. 16.) usually a Mile or more from their Cities (which were often after
some time discovered; and then how dangerous it was to meet there, he shows. A
255) were now strictly forbidden them in particular, as well as in the general
all other places whatsoever.

Cyprian contemporary with Gregory, is next alleged for Christian Oratories.
(1) In his book de Opere and Eleemosynis, by the Name of Dominicum brought also
by Bellarm. c. 4 de cultu Sanct. (2) In 55 Epistle, by the Title of Ecclesia.


We never doubted, but Christians had from the first Oratories, or places of
Meeting: And that in this Century some public, which as the Church increased,
were enlarged. But that even in Cyprian's time their assembling were in
subterraneous Vaults; both at Alexandria, as we have shown; and Rome, as is
clear by Pope Cornelius's Letter to the Bishop of Vienna, as Baronius testifies
A. 255. n. 47. and here at Carthage in Africa, A. 260. n. 37. Where the
Proconsul urged Cyprian himself with the Emperors Edict, ne in aliquibus locis
conciliabula fiant, nee caemeteria ingrediantur; that the Christians should not
meet in any places, nor enter into their Coemeteries. In which they usually
celebrated the holy Mysteries; which Pameltus calls the Sacrifice; but
Goulartius, the Word, Sacraments and Prayers; performed only, when the Church
assembled. Nor is the opposition mentioned, of any force, as we showed on 1
Cor. 11.22.

Another Contemporary cited, is Dionysius Alexandrinus in's Epistle to
Basilides, declaring his Opinion, That Women during the time of their
Separation, ought not to enter into the Church, which he calls the House of
God. By which we learn, says Mede, not only the Christians had their Houses of
Worship, but a religious respect also, to difference them from common places.

To this we say, as formerly, That Christians had always places for meeting in,
but still whether in private Houses, or in public lies the question. And if
but a Chamber in a private House, where they worshipped God, it was sufficient
to denominate it the House of God, as well as a Cathedral. And that their
Assemblies then were very private, appears in that they were forbidden on pain
of death (as we have shown) and yet where this is related by Eusebius,
Dionysius testifies, that nevertheless they kept them. But surely not in the
usual places, where they had easily been discovered, to the loss of their
lives; but in all likelihood often changed the places, for their security. And
whether every such, was thereby so sanctified, that it was unlawful for a
menstruous Woman to enter thereinto, let any one judge. Nor was this a Canon,
as Mede calls it, Baronius has made apparent against Balsamon; and by the
equity of a contrary course taken by Pope Gregory, in regard that legalia or
ceremonials are now abdicated. And if it were in force, it relates not to the
Place simply, but the Offices there performed, and the time thereof, which
suppose the Congregation present, from which such an one was to be excluded,
whether the meeting was on a Mountain, or in an House, or under Ground, in
Caves and Dens of the Earth.

Nor need Mr. Mede tell us, such places were known to the Gentiles, and called
worshipping places. For when the Christians were grown so numerous, before this
time of A D. 260. as Tertullian thinks, near to equalize the Heathens; their
Assemblies could not possibly be concealed, whether above or under the Ground
(especially when they enjoyed any tolerable freedom from Persecution) as
appears by two Rescripts of Gallienus in Eusebius. Hist. l. 7. c. 12. one for
restoring all places in general to the Christians, and the other their
Coemiteries in particular.

Nor does Aurelian's Speech in Vopiscus evince a public place; nor the
opposition between the Capitol and Church imply the place; but the Congregation
rather, that stands in congruous opposition to the Sibyls Oracles. For they
might be Masters of the Christian Oratories when they pleased, and there
consult of what they list, even of setting forth the Books of the Sibyls.

But Mr. Mede thinks his cause is supported by that of Eusebius l. 7. relating
how Paulus Samosatenus being deposed by the Council, Aurelian decreed, that
(...), the House of the Church, should be taken from him, etc. This Bellarmine
c. 4. de cultu sanctorum, and also our Fuller allege to the like purpose. Yet
both ours confess, that some interpret it of domum Epifcopalem, the Bishops
House. Belike Christopherson, tho a Popish Bishop in Queen Mary's days, and
zealous for the Opinion of our Opponents. So Baronius takes it, A. D. 272. number.
18. and our Learned Antiquary Sir H. Spelman, de non temerandis Ecclesiis, p.
64. for a House belonging to the Church of Antioch. And indeed it is not
reasonable to understand it, of a public Temple, as Fuller calls it; for to
what purpose should he keep that, which could be of no use to him, neither for
an Habitation, nor for public Worship, being deprived of his Bishopric for
Heresy, and Domnus in his place: and the Congregation could keep him out of,
without troubling the Emperor. Nor is it denied, that in the time Eusebius
mentions between the 9 and 10 Persecution, for about 30 Years, several old
Oratories or Churches were enlarged, and new built; like as it is manifest they
were demolished by Dioclesian 40 years after. And were the 3 places of Eusebius
alleged, taken for the place; they speak of no more than an House or Houses,
which denotes them private, not public, as Churches and Temples.

Mr. Fuller lays mighty stress on Eusebius calling them (...), which he renders
prisca aedificia, ancient edifices: and from thence infers, that therefore
there were Oratories or Churches, even in the Apostles times. For he tells us,
the Learned define saeculum, an age, to denote 100 years: and that one age is
not sufficent to denominate houses prisca, or ancient; considering that monas
an unity, is not to be accounted a number; wherefore they must be of two Ages
at least, or more, to be termed Ancient.

But all this is very strange talk. For (1.) Eusebius has nothing answerable
to saeculum an age. (2.) If monas an unity be no number; then one hundred
years, or one thousand. is no number; and so should be insufficient to
denominate any thing ancient. (3) The Phrase may either import the distance of
time, between their erection and amplification; or the distance between their
erection, and the time when Eusebius wrote, which was considerably longer, and
more probably I think to be here meant. (4.) Let it be considered, that we read
of no Edifices before Decius and Valerians Persecution: and those specified
only by coemiteria, places of Burial, in which they had their cryptae, Vaults
under Ground; which were forbidden them, and again restored and granted them by
Gallienas. Now this Persecution by Decius and Valerian, was but about 40 years
before Dioclesian's: so that if we take the Phrase for the time intervening, it
imports no more than Edifices formerly built, and those not very ancient. (5.)
New and Old, are Terms of respect, and taken in great latitude; so that now a
Man of an hundred years, is truly accounted a very old man; tho in the
antedeluvian days, one of 200 but young, when Men lived to eight or nine
hundred. And tho some of our Churches in England may be termed truly ancient,
being perhaps of 6 or 700 years standing; yet the eldest in Eusebius's time,
could not be 300; nor has any yet been proved to have been then an hundred
years old. Such a Critic as Mr. Fuller might have observed the word (...) is
such, being both variously rendered, and applied in the New Testament. Sometimes
to great Antiquity, as Mat. 11.21. Hebr. 1.1. and Jude 4. Sometimes to things
not long before, as 2 Pet. 1.9. He has forgotten that he was purged from his
(...), old sins; and sometimes to that lately past, as Mark 15.44. Pilate asked
the Centurion, if Jesus had been (...), any while dead. But the Latin Version
prisca aedificia, ancient Edifices, better suited his Hypothesis; which made
him adhere thereto rather than the Original Greek; which may well be rendered
priora aedificia, former edifices.


Mr. Mede's last Witness, which he says will dispatch all at once, and depose
for the whole, and thinks alone sufficient to carry his Cause, is Eusebius. Hist.
Eccles. l. 8. c. 1. Where describing those Halcyon days, from Cyprian's
Martyrdom to the Persecution of Dioclesian, the shows the vast multitude of
Christians and their Meetings, cum antiquis illis aedificiis (i. e. Oratories)
satis amplius loci non haberent, amplas spaciosasque in omnibus urbibus ex
fundamentis, erexerunt ecclesias; so that having no longer room enough in their
ancient buildings, (i. e. Oratories, as he had named them) they erected large
and spacious Churches from their foundations, in all their Cities. Here Is not
only Churches in those days, but such as might then be called (...), ancient
Edifices, which how far it may reach, let others judge.

But if this Witness will depose for the whole, there is no thanks due to Mr.
Mede; considering that long before, this was dispatched; Baronius having
alleged the same, and Vedelius answered him, (as he could not but know)
Exercit, in epist. ad Magnes. Tertio, Eusebii l. 8. c. 1. citat Baronius, and
dicit eum asserere, long ante Dioclesiani tempora fuisse Ecclesias. Sed falsum
est, etc. Thirdly, Baronius cites the 8th Book of Eusebius c. 1. and says,
that he affirms Churches to have been long before Dioclesians time. But it is
false to say, Eusebius speaks of the time long before Dioclesians Reign. For he
speaks only of that part of time, intermediating between the 9 and 10
Porsecution, (or according to the computation of others the 8th and 9th) as the
series of the preceding story, and the Text it self sufficiently show. Now the
Persecution preceding Dioclesian 's began A. D. 272. under the Emperor
Valerian, and ended about 10 years after. And the Persecution by Dioclesian
began, as some account, A. D. 306. Whereby the ridiculousness of Baronius 's
inference appears, viz. There were Churches long before the time of Dioclesian;
therefore in the very days of the Apostles there were such. As if I should say,
Eusebius testifies, That for about 30 years before Dioclesian there were
Churches: therefore he says that there were Churches 300 years before
Dioclesian. But this course is frequently used by Baronius, that corrupter of
Chronicles.

But that Mede insists on most, (as others before him) is that Phrase in
Eusebius (...) ancient Edifices. Which how far it may reach, faith he, let
others judge.

Belike he trusted more to his Readers forwardness, to embrace the suspicions
this Phrase might raise, at first sight in their minds, than his own
improvement of it; that he turns it off with so short and slender a Remark,
which in show was his most pregnant proof. Or knowing that Fuller had done his
best on the Phrase, waved the speaking further thereon. However, having spoken
sufficiently, I think, to it in the former Paragraph, I need say nothing more
in this.

But that Eusebius mentions there, and also c. 2. and 6. is very remarkable;
and lets us see, that tho Prosperity be desired of all, yet few can use it
aright: so that we may conclude, if it were best for God's People, they should
enjoy it. For from Valerian's Persecution to Dioclesian's, the Church had a
comfortable calm ( Aurelian's Edict made for Persecution, being never signed by
him, God having terrified him with Lightning (as Eutropius and Vopiscus affirm)
and so stopped his wicked Tyranny.) But alas, instead of being bettered, they
extremely degenerated: So that Eusebius says, God sent that direful storm of
Persecution on them under Dioclesian, for the corruptness of their lives and
manners. Maxim vero Ecclesiasticorum, in quorum vultu simulationem, in cord
dolum, verbis fallaciam cernere licuit: livore, superbia, inimicitiis inter se
certantes, tyrannidem potius quam sacerdotium sapere videbantur; Christianae
pietatis omnino obliti; divina mysteria profanabant potius, quam celebrabant.
Which I forbear to English. Those that please may read more in Fox's
Martyrology in the 9th Primitive Persecution? tho he misreckon it, there having
been no general Persecution in Aurelian's Reign, who as he himself says,
rather intended, than moved Persecution. But for their wickedness followed the
10th. When their Churches were demolished, their Bibles burnt, their Persons
punished with all kinds of cruelty; neither Courtiers, nor Friends, not the
Empress Prisca, nor Daughter Valeria spared; his Decree was aut Deos Gentilium,
aut mortem eligerent; That the Christians should choose either the Heathen Gods
or Death.

Of this Tenth and greatest Persecution, Eusebius in his 8th Book of History.
Lactantius de mortibus Persecutorum, from 7 to 49 Chap. with the Notes in Latin
of 1693, which are 10 times larger than the Text. And Fox in his first book of
Martyrology, from Eusebius and several others, have written largely; which I
shall not transcribe, but dismiss with this short remark; That of all the 10
general Persecutions, this last (which was the forest, and continued above Ten
Years,) only reached England; wherein Albanus first, and very many after,
sealed their Faith in Christ with their blood; so that Christianity was almost
with the Scriptures, and Churches destroyed throughout the whole Kingdom, tho
shortly after revived by the blessed Constantine.

Having now examined all our Adversaries Witnesses we leave the Impartial
Reader to judge of their validity; and whether they prove the Christians to
have had any public appropriate places for Worship in the two first Centuries.
Which tho undoubtedly most sit and convenient always; yet in times of
Persecution, men must do as they may, and meet as secretly as they can, and be
constrained, often to change their meeting places, and when private Houses will
not serve for secrecy, to seek out Vaults under ground, where they may worship
God. And yet not even in the most secret and retired places, without fear of
their enemies, and danger of their lives: which shows our happiness in this
regard, above theirs, who were much better than we.

There is but one scruple, that I can imagine, remaining: and that is, tho
these places were private, yet they might be, as Mede terms them, appropriate.

To which I answer, that his first Argument for his Opinion, which immediately
follows, from their worshipping toward the East, implies that he takes them
for Public, and purposely built accordingly for that end. And (2). who ever
diligently peruses his Treatise, will see that he founds their appropriation
(as also their holiness, of which in the next Dissertation) on their
Consecration, (or as he sometimes calls it Dedication.) Now if we consider when
this begun, Platina in vitis Pontif. tells us, That Telesphorus having suffered
Martyrdom, in the first year of Antomus Pius (which was about the year of our
Lord 142.) Hyginus an Athenian succeeded him. Who ordained these two things.
First the use of those Witnesses we commonly call Godfathers and Godmothers, in
the Administration of the Sacrament of Baptism. Which was then, I confess, more
necessary, by reason the generallity of those amongst whom the Christians
lived, were Heathens. And therefore in case the Parents, on whom it is
incumbent to see they Children educated in the Christian Religion, came to die;
they that were Sponsors, might take care to see them brought up therein. Which
Institution (as likewise Confirmation) is now degenerated into a mere
Formality: few regarding their solemn Engagements made for that end. And (2.)
he ordained also Templorum consecrationes; the Consecration of Temples, that or
Churches, being the usual Names, given to all places for Gods Worship, in after
Ages. So that Consecration being but introduced in the second Century; if Mede
takes it in the usual sense; his Opinion that There were appropriate Places for
Christian Worship both in the Apostles days, and ever since, falls to the
Ground; except it can be proved, that some of them at least, lived so long.

But if he takes it for a private House, or some room therein, where the Church
met together, as he seems in the beginning, and by the expressions of the
Church in their House: then whenever any Owners thereof, gave leave for the
Christians to assemble therein, their permission was a Consecration thereof,
whereby they appropriated the same to the Churches use; and so, according to
his Tenets, employed them no more for their own Civil use, being appropriate to
a Sacred. Or else some pious Christians, gave their Houses, as he thinks, and
dedicated them to the Church for a Meeting Place, by which Dedication it was
appropriated. But neither of these can be reasonably imagined. Considering (1.)
That we read of several that sold their Possessions, for the Maintenance of the
Poor: but we read of none that gave their Houses to the Church for meeting in.
(2.) The multitude of Christians increasing, many Houses were requisite to
contain them, as we have formerly observed. (3.) How often in those bloody
Persecutious, they were forced to shift their Meeting-Places, to shun the loss
of their Estates, Liberties and Lives, we may easily conclude. And lastly, Had
any either granted, or given any House, or certain place, for such an use, as
therein constantly to assemble: they had thereby, without all doubt, been
quickly discovered, certainly dispersed, and often times most severely
punished. So that tho we are not to question the readiness of many that were
able, nor their pious liberality: so we must also consider their Prudence, the
times wherein they lived, and what was most conducible to their preservation,
that they might not run themselves on the rocks of destruction.


SECT. 9.
Our Opponents besides the Authorities mentioned, produce several Arguments for
their Opinion; whereof 3 are made use of by Mede, which we shall now consider.

First, It Is certain, says he, That in their Sacred Assemblies, Christians
used then to Worship and Pray toward the East. Which how it could be done,
with any order and convenience, is not easy to be conceived; unless we suppose
the places, wherein they worshipped to have been situated and accommodated
accordingly, that is chosen and appointed to that end. This he had touched on
before, from Tertullian in the beginning of the 3d Century; for which no
authority is vouched, but that only of the forged Apstolical Constitutions,
falsely ascribed to Clemens.

Here let me observe, whereas Mede says to worship and pray, Bellarmine c. 3
de cultu sanct. rightly restrains to prayers only, and those made publicly in
the Temples. For having mentioned several Authors for this, adds, Et omnes illi
Veteres, qui scribunt Apostolicam esse traditionem, ut oremus conversi ad
Orientem; id praecipue servari par est, in solemnibus precibus, quae funduntur
in Templis: And all those Ancients which write, that it is an Apostolical
Tradition, that we pray turned toward the East: that ought especially to be
observed in the solemn Prayers, which are made in Temples.

Secondly, Tho we grant this an ancient Custom; yet is it without Command, or
Example in the Scriptures; for Christ never required it, nor was it practiced
from the beginning of Christianity. Where Is the Proof they then used so to
Worship? Or when this Custom first came up? For as to the Constitutions,
rightlier to be called Apocryphal than Apostolical (as we have formerly
observed) they deserve no Credit at all.

Thirdly, If this necessarily implies Edifices so situated, which I question,
and he supposes, (but has not proved) then those (...), upper rooms, the
coenaculum Sionis, that upper room in Sion, and private Houses, which were the
first Churches, he grants in the beginning of his Treatise, were all so
situate, which I hardly think, he himself thought. And much less that the
Coemeteries and Vaults under Ground, which so many Authors mention for their
Meeting Places (as we shall show hereafter) were so: or had such Light
Eastward, more than from other Quarters of the Heavens.

Fourthly, Bellarmine there treating of the Form of Christian Churches, says
only, Vt plurimum eas ad Orientem conversas fuisse, and quatuor latera habuisse
quibus quatuor Mundi parts aspicerent. That for the most part they were turned
toward the East, and had four sides, turned toward the four parts of the
World. Likewise Walfridus Strabo de rebus Eccles. c. 4. says, Majorem partem
Ecclesiarum ita fabricari; That the greater part of Churches were so made. So
that by their saying, all were not so; some might be round, as we have an
ancient Church in Cambridge so built, which some say, was the usual Form of the
Jewish Synagogues, such as the lesser, at Amsterdam. And some sited otherwise
than Eastward, as the Church of Antioch in Syria, as Socrates l. 5. c. 21.
testifies. And if they were oblong, and stood East and West, seeing they had
four sides, it is meant doubtless of the Chancel, which was Eastward. Of which
distinction in Churches; when first it began, or who was the Author thereof, is
not set down by any Writers I have met with. Tho we know, in Constantine's
time, when stately Churches were erected, this was used. And if we take this in
the first Ages, for private places, frequently styled Oratories and Chapels,
such as were in Houses and Vaults under Ground, or above in the open Air; to
say their aspect was Eastward, is to beg the question, and cannot be proved. We
may well imagine, those built, were rather according to the convenience of the
place, or pleasure of the Founders. As the Chapels of Emanuel and Sidney
College in Cambridge, which stood rather North and South. Tho the former has
now a new one built in Mode and Figure; and is no more to be derided, as
formerly, by Cart-wright, an Oxford Poet: Much like the Chapel Ominous,
Of 'th College called God with us.


Nor the other now in danger to be demolished, as Mr. Mathews, an ancient
Fellow thereof, told me, was in the days of A. B. Land, threatened therewith.

I confess Bellarmine brings several Authors for this situation of Churches;
but none that proves there was always such, nor that they were all such; as
also for the Ceremony of praying toward the East, for which he produces 5
reasons, (such as they are) I shall briefly represent them, to show the sorry
grounds of this practice, which takes away the liberty Christ has left us, to
advance a Custom of humane Constitution.

1. Because Paradise was in the East, and we being here but strangers, should
labor to regain our ancient Country, which we were cast out of. Which is
produced by several other Papists, as the Opinion of the Fathers, and lately by
the Learned Huetius c. 3. de situ Paradisi.

As if Paradise, where ever it was (the place thereof having puzzled so many
Learned Inquisitors) whether in or near Mesopotamia, or elsewhere, was not as
well West to the Christians beyond it, as East to us on this side. Or that we
were to look after a Terrestial Paradise, more than a Celestial, whereof that
was but a Type. And as the Saints in the Old Testament looked from all parts
toward the Temple, as a Type of our blessed Savior; so under the New, we are
directed to look toward Heaven, as the Habitation of our Heavenly Father,
where Christ sits at his right hand to make Intercession for us.

2. Because the Sun rising there, it is the most excellent part of the World.

But supposing its motion, does it not continually arise in the several
Horizons, to those of the same Latitude throughout the World and there set to
their Antipodes? so that the East of Jerusalem, as Gregory explains it, must
needs be West, to the further parts of the World. And how can that be most
excellent to any, which is equally alike to all?

3. Because Christ whom we Worship, is the light of the world, Vir Oriens, the
Man of the East.

Its true that as the blessed God, is called light, which of all creatures is
the most pure: So Christ is called, the Sun of righteousness, the light of the
world, and the day spring from on high etc. But this is only metaphorically, in
regard of his illuminating us, and not at all to the place of East or West,
North or South, all being equally alike to him for that end.

4. Because Christ was crucified with his Face Westward, so that we look
Eastward to behold his countenance. And he ascended toward the East, and from
thence shall come to Judgment.

But where is the proof of that posture in his Crucifiction? Not in the
Scripture sure. And how should the Christians beyond Jerusalem pray toward his
Face so, who lived in Persia, and other Eastern Countries. Math. 24.27. is
meant of his Gospel Dispensation, or his speedy coming to destroy Jerusalem, as
Hammond and Lightfoot think; or by that Emblem to Judgment: the point of East
in the Heavens, being no where so to all the World he is to Judge.

5. Because the Jews prayed, and pray toward the West, we toward the East; to
signify theirs to be the killing Letter, and ours the Vivificating Spirit, and
that the Veil still remains over their hearts, which we converted unto the
Lord, have laid aside.

That the Jews at the Temple looked Westward, was because the Mercy-Seat, in
the most holy Place was at the West end thereof. But that they do so still, as
Gregory also says, I think is a mistake; I never observed it in any of their
Synagogues, tho I have seen several, and their Worship: yet I never saw any
People so regardless therein as the present Generation of the Jews. But why may
we not pray in the same posture with the Jews of old, which were Gods People,
and had his direction? as well as in the posture of those Gentile Idolaters
that worshipped the Sun ( Ezekiel. 8.16.) as the Persians and many other Nations?
Truly if you will believe the Cardinal, because this posture signifies so much
more excellent things than the Jewish, which he there mentions; even the
difference between the Gospel and Christianity, from the present Religion of
the accursed Jews, the Enemies of our Lord Jesus Christ. Here recommend me to
the man that has so strong Faith, as to believe a bare posture can denote such
great things, to which it has no tendency, or likeness at all.

But if any one has list and leisure, to see a deal of dry Learning thrown
away on this subject of praying toward the East; they may peruse the 18th
Chap. of Gregory's Notes on Zachary 6. v. 12. Who had written also a Treatise,
he entitled Alkibla (i. e. the place toward which men worship) as the
Publisher of his posthumous Works acquaints us: the loss whereof he laments,
tho for my part, I think it not great.

Before I pass to another Argument, let me set down the Opinion of Strabo in
the place forementioned; (an Author near 800 Years old, when Ceremonies and
Superstition were in Vogue, and near their Altitude) concerning the site of
Churches Eastward. Et quia diversitas Idololatriae, diversis modis Templa
extruxerat: non magnopere curabant illius temporis justi, quam in partem
orationis loca converterent, dum tantum videretur, ubi eliminatae sunt Daemonum
sordes, ibi Deum creatorem omnium, qui ubique est, coli and adorari. And
because Temples were built after diverse manners, according to the different
ways of Idolatry: The righteous men of those days, did not much care which way
the places of Prayer stood; their consideration being only this, that look
where the filth and abomination of Devils were cast out of Doors, there God the
Creator of all, who is every where, might be worshipped and adored.

Now that by the righteous men of those times, which cared not which way they
converted their places, or selves in Prayer to God, were the times of the
Conversion of the Empire from Idolatry to Christianity, is plain by what
preceds, c. 3. where he says, After the time was come, wherein the true
Worshippers in Spirit and Truth, not in Jerusalem only, or in the Hill of
Samaria, that is not locally but spiritually, began to worship the Father, and
the Doctrine of Salvation went forth into all Nations, according to the
commandment of the Lord, the Faithful began to seek loca munda, clean places
(which he interprets by that which follows) and removed from tumults and
affairs of men of carnal conversation, therein to celebrate pure Prayers, and
the holy Mysteries, and the comforts of mutual edification. For tho we read in
the Gospel, the Disciples were with the Believers always in the Temple, or in
some upper room, praising God, and giving themselves to Fasting and Prayer; yet
after the coming down of the Holy Ghost upon them. we read Act 1. and 2d chap.
that they Celebrated Prayers and the Eucharist circa domos, from house to
house: and they met together not only within the City, in some house or other,
but without also in secret places, as at Philippi. Acts 16.13. But when the
number of Believers was multiplied, they began to make their Houses, Churches,
as we often read in the Legends of the Saints. Oftentimes also declining the
rage of Persecutors, they had their meetings in Vaults under ground, and in
places of Burial, and in Caves, and desert Mountains and Valleys. Then as the
Miracle of Christian Religion profited more and more; and the Devil loosing
ground, as Christ gained: New Oratories were built; nor so only, but also the
Temples of their Gods and Idols, with the abominable Worship thereof, being
thrown away and banished, were changed into the Churches of God.

It Is true, that he dislikes not praying toward the East, but gives reasons
for the congruity of it; yet upon consideration of the Temple at Jerusalem,
that the Holy of Holies was Westward, and that Solomon in's Prayer at the
Dedication thereof, turned his Face that way, he concludes, His and aliis
exemplis edocti, cognoscimus, non errasse illos, vel errare, qui Templis vel
noviter Deo constructis, vel ab Idolorum squalore mundatis, propter aliquam
locorum opportunitatem, in diversas plagas altaria statuerunt; quia non est
locus, ubi non sit Deus. By these and other Examples, we learn that they who
either in Temples nowly built for God, or purged from the filthiness of Idols,
did according to the opportunity of places, set Altars toward different
Coasts, did nothing err, seeing there is no place where God is not present.
And accordingly proceeds to show, that in the Temple built by Helena at
Jerusalem, upon Christ's Sepulcher; and in the Pantheon at Rome, converted to
Christian use; as also, in St. Peter's Church there, Altars were Erected, not
only toward the East, but also, other Quarters of the Heavens. And adds, Haec
cum secundum voluntatem, vel necessitatem fuerint ita disposita, improbare non
audemus. So that tho he approves rather, of praying toward the East; yet
professes, he dares not blame those, who otherwise ordered the matter, and
that not only in case of necessity, but of mere will and pleasure. Concluding
thus, Vnusquisque in suo sensu abundet, prope est Dominus omnibus, invocantibus
eum in veritate. Let every one abound in his own sense, the Lord is near to all
that call upon him in Truth. I must add to all these, the Example of the Church
of England, in reading the Liturgy, Ministers Prayers, and Peoples practice;
and further show, that tho Mede joins the position of Churches and Prayers; yet
neither of these necessarily infer the other; but I have run out too far on
this Argument already.

The second is drawn from the Discipline of the Church, which required distinct
and regular places in their Assemblies, for Penitents, Auditors, Catechumens
and the Faithful; which argues, they had places accommodated for that purpose.

We had this Argument before, in the middle of the Third Century, where we
answered the same; and therefore shall be briefer here.

Where I shall not insist upon it, That distinctions might be made in private
Houses or Places; tho not so well or great as in public Churches. Nor deny the
authority of that obscure Epistle; however called Canonical, of Gregorius
Neocaesariensis, which was a little before alleged for this Discipline, and
also considered. But roundly answer, that no such distinction of places can be
proved in the days of the Apostles, or an hundred years after. It Is therefore a
strange inference, that if there were such different places, for the several
sorts of Church Members, in Gregory's time; which was about 250 years after the
Nativity of our blessed Savior; that there were such in the Apostles days, and
ever since; as our Adversaries would persuade us. But they must have stronger
reasons than these, before they gain our assent. For who sees not, that such
distinction of places is more sit for times of Peace than Persecution (such as
were mostly the first 300 years of Christianity) wherein men must be content to
do as they may, and can, seeing they cannot do as they desire.

The Third Argument is drawn from the Example of the Synagogues and Proseucha's
of the Jews, whose Religion was as contrary to the Empires, as the Christians,
and yet in their dispersion amongst the Gentiles, had appropriate places for
the exercise thereof. Who can believe that such a Pattern should not invite the
Christians to an imitation of the same, tho we should suppose there were no
other reasons to induce them, but that of ordinary convenience.

This Reason supposes the Christians might do, as the Jews, who built them
Synagogues in those Cities where they resided; having a legal Tolleration for
the exercise of their Religion; whereas the Laws of the Empire were against the
Christians. Which makes me wonder such Learned Men, as Fuller, Mede and others,
that could not but know so much; should produce this Plea for their Opinion.
Just as if they should argue, The Jews in many Popish Countries, build and
enjoy their Synagogues, whose Religion is more contrary to Popery than the
Protestants; and therefore the Protestants should follow their Example, and
build themselves Churches for their public Worship. To which the answer is
easy; that so they would if they had the like Tolleration. But to what purpose
should they build up that which the Magistrates would throw down, and they
should never enjoy, but instead thereof be more persecuted and punished. Whence
in several great Cities, where there are some Protestants, Ministers are sent
them, which they call, sub Cruce, or under the Cross of Persecution, as the
Learned Professor Hornbeck was in his younger years in Collen, (where I have
seen the Jews Synagogue) and others I have known at Ghent, and elsewhere,
incognito, or disguised, exercising their Office with great secrecy, for their
greater security. Not to mention the Persecutions the Christians were under in
the first Ages of Christianity, when the Jews enjoyed the Liberty of their
Religion: having spoken something thereof in the second Section, and shall more
fully in the following.

Nor let any one stop me, with objecting the many Thousands of Jews under
Caligula and Claudius Reigns, for their Tumults and Insurrections: or the Wars
in the Reigns of Nero and Vespasian, wherein eleven hundred thousand perished,
Jerusalem taken and demolished, with the Temple burnt. Nor after under Aelius
Adrianus, about A. D. 130. who tho he built Jerusalem, calling it Aelia by his
fore-name, (as he did Adrianople by his other) yet made miserable Havoc of the
Jews and their Country. For this was not by Persecution, but by open Wars with
them for 6 Years together, which they brought upon themselves. The occasion is
said to be, quod mutilare genitalia vetarentur, arma corripuerant; that being
forbidden Circumcision, they took up Arms. Instead of humbly addressing for a
revocation, they betake themselves to Warlike Opposition; being also set agog
by Bencochab, who gave himself out for their Messiah. In which Wars this their
false Messiah was slain; and more Thousands of the Jews, than the number of the
Israelites that came out of Egypt, as their Rabbis report; or as our
Historians, five hundred thousand, and a thousand of their Villages burnt down
to the Ground.

SECT. 10.
Having now Answered their Reasons, We shall proceed to lay down several
Considerations for the corroborating our Assertion. Which amount not to a
Demonstration, I confess, That there could be no public Places erected, for
the Exercise of the Christian Religion, in the two First Centuries; yet
compared with our Adversaries Arguments, will render our Cause much more
probable, and weigh down theirs so clearly, as to satisfy all unprejudiced
Readers.

1. Let Us consider the State and Condition of the World as to Religion, when
our blessed Savior, after his Resurrection, sent forth his Apostles to Preach
the Gospel to all Nations. In which were two sorts of Men, Jews and Gentiles;
of whom it is hard to say, whether were the more implacable Enemies to the
Christian Religion, and the Professors thereof.

As for the Jews, what Calumnies and Tumults did they raise against the
Christians, not only in Judea, but wheresoever they resided; accusing their
Doctrine as Blasphemous, their Persons as Factious and Seditious, and setting
up a new King instead of Caesar. And where they had no power to Persecute them,
they stirred up the Magistrates in the Empire to do it, as we find frequently
in the Acts of the Apostles.

And as to the Gentiles, what Ignorance, Wickedness, and abominable Idolatries
they lived in, Scripture has abundantly declared. God having in times past
suffered (...) all the Gentiles, rather than as we Translate it, all Nations,
to walk in their own ways. Acts 14.16. For the Jews had the way of Salvation
made known to them; but the Gentiles ways were in gross Idolatry, setting up to
themselves multiplicity of Gods, whom they worshipped and served; although some
of the wiser sort of them held one Supreme, whom they called Jove, contracted
from Jehova, (...) the Father both of Men and Gods. And this their Idolatrous
Worship and Religion was so ancient, even from Time immemorial, and so
universal in all the Nations of the Gentiles; that none can imagine but the
Gospel, which opposed and condemned this wherever it came, should have the
utmost Opposition, and its Publishers and Professors Persecutions, rather than
a Toleration or Permission to set up a Religion in public, destructive of
their own.

2. Consider the Power of the Roman Monarchy, which was then at the height;
having Conquered the greatest part of the Western Nations, both in Europe and
Africa, and Eastward as far as Euphrates, in which especially the Gospel was to
be Preached, though it was carried also into the remoter Parts elsewhere, over
which the Roman Eagle never stretched her Wings. In the City of Rome, Tacitus
Reports, Hist. l. 11. there were not fewer than 6944000. and what vast Nations
were then subject to its Empire, is sufficiently known; and what numerous
Armies they constantly kept up. All which Power was Unanimous for the defense
of their Idols, and their Idolatrous Worship, against all Men and Means that
would defame them, or tended to their Demolition.

3. Consider also, That at that time there was not only the greatest Power to
oppose Christianity, but also the greatest intellectual Helps and Means,
Learning being then in its full Meridian of Glory. They had subtle Philosophers
for defending their Religion, and as good Arguments for its Verity, as
Bellarmine, and the Papists, allege for theirs, such as Antiquity,
Universality, Extent, Succession of their Priests, Prosperity, and the like.
They had Eloquent Orators to Plead their own, and Implead, Tertullus like, the
Christian Religion; besides the vast multitude of Priests, and those employed
for the training them up in their Idolatrous Worship, whereby they became
prejudiced to the utmost against the Gospel of Christ, especially considering
the nature and tendency thereof, either as to the Credenda or Agenda, things to
be Believed or Practiced, enjoined therein.

For Sinners to be Saved by a Crucified Jesus, might well to the Carnal and
Unbelieving Jews and Gentiles be a stumbling Block, and accounted Foolishness;
as the Resurrection of the Dead, and other Articles of our Faith, strange
Doctrines: And things so contrary to Flesh and Blood, as Self-denial,
Mortification, Suffering joyfully Persecution, and even Death it self for
Christ's sake and the Gospel, might well be accounted hard Sayings not to be
born, but rather derided and rejected, as indeed they were generally by the
wise Men of the World.

Nor let any here object Mahometism, for that was set up when the Empire was
broken to pieces under Heraclius, by the Irruption of the Barbarous Nations;
and in Arabia, amongst an ignorant People, where few Christians were, and no
Learning, but ready to embrace any Innovations, and receive any Impressions of
Religion, especially such a Sensual one as the Alcoran holds forth; when there
were neither Men of Knowledge and Parts to oppose it, nor Princes of Power to
persecute it, but worldly Power to set it up and support it. So that it is less
wonder that soon grew public: Whereas it was quite otherwise with the Gospel,
which was neither set up, nor carried on, by Might and Power of Arms, but by
the Spirit of the Lord accompanying it all along, where it was carried, to make
it Efficacious.

4. Consider how strongly Gentilism was guarded by Laws. For all Nations,
though they had several Idol Gods, and Worship, yet accounted their Religion to
be of a Divine Original: As the Romans from the Goddess Egeria, and others from
some God or Goddess they Worshipped: and would never suffer their Gods to be
dishonored, or their Rites of Worship, how Ridiculous soever, to be defamed by
any amongst them, though Foreigners they could not hinder, did, as the Romans,
the Jews and Egyptians especially. I shall not abuse the Reader's Patience, in
citing Histories and Poets for these things, they are so many, and so well
known; nor how they always provided by their Laws, Security for their own, and
Prohibition and Penalties against other Religions. The Romans, by the Laws of
the 12 Tables, forbad Nequis alios inducat Deos, sed Patriam sive Romanam
Religionem sequatur. That none should introduce other Gods, but follow the
Country's, or Roman Religion, and that under severe Penalties. Of which Cicero,
l. 2. de Legibus largely. By virtue of which Laws alone, many Christians were
extremely punished by the Praetors, and Presidents of Provinces, and put to
Death, without any Edicts from the Emperors; though where these were added to
enforce their Execution, Persecution was much more fierce and cruel: And this
appears plainly by Pliny's Epistle to Trajan; who having Condemned and Executed
many by the Laws of the Empire, deterred at length by the multitude of those
that were to be punished, Consulted the Emperor what he should do in that case,
the Emperors having power to Suspend Execution, though not to Abrogate the
Laws, which Senatus Populusque and Principes Romani decreverant ut non sint
Christiani: The Roman Senate, People and Princes had decreed, as that no
Christians be tolerated. Another early Law made by the Senate, mentioned by
Eusebius, 5.21. Non debere demitti Christianos qui semel ad Tribunal venissent,
nisi propositum mutent: That the Christians which once came to public Trial,
should not be dismissed, except they changed their Religion.

5. Consider the Policy of the State, which was against Tollerating any diverse
Religion amongst them, and much more a contrary to their own. As the Christian,
which wholly changed the Face of the World, accounted their Deities Idols, and
their Devotion gross Idolatry; which was therefore judged dangerous for raising
Tumults and Commotions among the People, which might end in Civil Wars for
Religion: So that they Unanimously concluded it best for the Public Safety, to
Extirpate Christianity, and the Professors thereof. Yea, so Jealous were they,
that all Societies, or Conventions, were forbidden, as appears by 42. and 43.
Epist. Plinij, l. 10. And much more of Christians, as Ep. 98. Acquaints Trajan,
How the Christians forbore post edictum meum, quo secundum mandata tua
hetaerias esse vetueram: After my Edict, whereby I forbad, according to your
Command; all Conventions of Societies.

This Consideration of State Policy, has been the great Argument and Engine in
all Ages for Persecution; insomuch, that some Christian Writers of Politics,
upon this account, justify the Heathens, and Popish Inquisition; though S.
James calls this Wisdom earthly, sensual, devilish, quite contrary to that
from above, which is, first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be
entreated, full of mercy, etc. And oh! that it had not prevailed amongst
Protestants, to the great Scandal of the Prince of Peace, and his peaceable
Gospel, which they profess! It was far more tolerable in the Gentiles, who had
only the Light of Nature for their Guide; as the Romans, who yet tolerated the
Nations they Conquered, to retain their Religion, not only Gentilism, but
Judaism also, both in Judea, and in their dispersion in the Roman Territories:
the Jews having before submitted to the Roman Government, and become their
Tributaries, when Subdued by Pompey. By reason whereof, the Christians coming
from Jerusalem, and passing in the Empire, a while at the first for Jews, whose
Synagogues they used then to frequent, passed undiscerned, without Persecution;
'till afterward that they were discovered, and then both Jews and Gentiles
became their implacable Enemies, those frequently stirring up these (as we read
in the Acts) to Persecute them. For they both accounted them setters up of a
strange God and Religion, in their worshipping Christ, whom they both took for
a mere Man, whom their Ancestors had Crucified; and that the Gospel tended to
overturn both their Religions, and ways of Worship; which will yet more
evidently appear, by that which in the next place follows.

6. Consider the many and grievous false Accusations brought against the
Christians, which greatly incensed all sorts of People against them. They were
accused of Atheism, and all manner of Impiety, as killing and eating Children,
Incest, and impure Mixtures, Magic, and every Evil almost that might render
them odious, which may be read in the Primitive Fathers, Greek and Latin, in
their Apologies for Christianity; summarily mentioned in Spencer's Annotations
on the First Book of Origin. So that the Christians for their Impiety, were
accounted the Cause of all those public Calamities that befell the Empire. If
there was a Famine, Pestilence, etc. the People cried out Christianos ad
Leones, cast the Christians to the Lions, as Tertul. Apol. c. 40. Cypr. Ep. 75.
and others. So when Rome was taken by Alaricus, it was imputed to the Anger of
the Gods, for the contempt of their Religion; which occasioned S. Austin to
write that excellent Book de civitate Dei, and Orosius his Orchestra, for the
Refutation of their Heathenish Folly, which was so great, that they still
thought to appease the Anger of their Gods, with the Blood of the Christians.

Nor were they less traduced for being Enemies to the State, and such as turned
the World upside down; notwithstanding all their peaceable Demeanor under the
Civil Government; because they would not Pray to their Idols (though they did
to Almighty God) nor offer Sacrifices to them for the Prosperity thereof.

In like manner also were they Accused, for being Rebels to their Emperors;
because they refused to frequent their Solemn Feasts and Spectacles for their
Victories; nor would Swear, as others did, by their Genius; nor give them
Divine Honors, by offering Sacrifices to them, together with their Idol Gods.
For as Julius Caesar, as Suetonius tells us in his Life, c. 76. Decerni sibi
passus est, Templa, Aras, simulachra, juxta Deos: Suffered Temples, Altars and
Images, to be Decreed for him near the Gods. So his Heathen Successors in the
Empire continued the same, as may be seen in Pliny's Epistle to Trajan. Hence
they were called Sacrilgi, Sacriligious, and Lawless, because this Worship of
the Gods and Caesar, was by Law Established: Yea, the Enemies of Mankind,
because by their Contempt of the Gods, they brought Miseries upon the World.

So that being accounted by the Heathens Enemies of their Gods, and Religion,
their State, Emperors, Laws, Manners, and all Mankind: No wonder if they became
the object of public Hatred, according to that of Tertul. l. Scorp. c. 11.
Odio habemur ab omnibus hominibus nominis causa. We are hated of all Men for
the Name of Christians, and his, and Athenagoras, and Justin, likewise in their
Apologies, as our Savior had foretold, Matthew. 10.22. So 24.9. and Luke 21.12.

And it had been happy for after Ages, since the World turned Christian, if
these Calumnies had not been used, to represent the best sort of Men, as
Enemies to Princes and States, who could not in Conscience comply to worship
the Image they set up. How have not only Papists under such Pretexts, all along
Persecuted all that would not submit to their impious Impositions, but even
Protestants also, frequently for small Matters, all such as refused to Dance
after the Fidle of the Times.

7. Let us further consider the Temporal Interest of most, which carries all
before it, with those that regard not their Spiritual and Eternal: The whole
World turning continually upon the Hinge of Self-Interest. And herein the vast
number of those engaged thereby against the Christians; some for preserving the
Dignities and Revenues they had, and others for Augmenting them.

Of the former sort were the several Religious Orders of Priests, or Flamines,
and Augurs or Prognosticators, with the whole Rabble that depended on them.
Which must needs be many, considering the multitude of Places and People, as
also of Idols and Temples they were to serve, by performing their Religious
Functions in Sacrifices, Lustrations and Supplications. All which had great
Credit, as in all Religions such have, especially amongst an Ignorant and
Superstitious People. And understood very well, that Christianity, would ruin
at once all their Offices, Honors, and Profit. Knowing that thereby their Gods
would be derided, their Worship neglected, their Oracles remaining contemned,
and proved often false; many of them being already silenced; which the learned
Plutarch both confessed and wondered at in's Book de defectu Oraculorum, amongst
his Works, and with Camararius's Notes alone. Which Consideration stopped two of
the Heathen Emperors, which had most kindness for Christ, if we may believe
Lampridius in the Life of Alexander Severus, who writes thus. Christo
(Alexander) Templum facere voluit, eumque inter Deos recipere. Quod et Adrianus
cogitasse fertur, qui Templa in omnibus Civitatibus sine simulachris jusser at
fieri: Quoe hodie idcirco, quia non habent numina, dicuntur Adriani, quae ille
ad hoc parasse diccbatur: Sed prohibitus est ab iis, qui consulentes sacra,
repererant omnes Christianos futuros, si id optata evenisset, and Templa
Reliqua deserenda. Alexander Severus would have made a Temple for Christ, and
receive him amongst the Gods. Which Adrian, also is said to have determined,
who had commanded Temples to be made in all Cities without Images; which
therefore still, because they have no Gods, are called Adrian's; which He was
said to have prepared for this; but was prohibited by those, who consulting the
Oracles, found all would turn Christians, if that had happened well, and all
other Temples would be forsaken.

Of the latter Sort, that were for augmenting their Estates, were especially
the Magistrates, both Supreme and Subordinate. For knowing they might gain, by
the Execution of the Laws: Those especially that were Superstitious, Covetous,
and Cruel, were thereby induced to fly upon the Spoil, by confiscating the
Estates of Christians, who endured a great fight of Afflictions; were made a
gazing Stock both by Reproaches and Afflictions; and were Companions of them
that were so used, and took joyfully the spoiling of their Goods, Heb. 10.32,
33, 34. and elsewhere their Sufferings are set forth, comprizing their Losses:
Yea, even Felix the Governor hoped to have got Money from poor Paul for his
Freedom; and communed with him oftener for this End, thinking belike, that his
Friends would contribute thereto, Acts 24.26. So that Temporal Interest engaged
all Officers, Sacred and Civil, to prevent and suppress Christianity, and the
Professors thereof.

8. To all the former Considerations, which suggest sufficient Reasons for the
Christians to keep themselves as private as possible, we may add several other
Particulars.

As the vast Multitude of their Enemies, whose extreme prejudice against
Christianity, and inveterate hatred of the Christians, stirred them up
frequently to raise Popular Tumults against their Persons, Families, and
Societies; as we read in the Acts of the Apostles, and other Authors.

And if the People were suppressed by the Magistrates from exorbitant Violence,
they had always Liberty to accuse them, and bring them to Trial. And such was
their Malice and Rage, that sometimes they hurried them by Violence before
their Rulers; and sometimes exhibited Multitudes in the same Libel, or
Accusation. Then were they strictly examined, and put to purge themselves upon
Oath. And if they denied, were commanded, for further Proof thereof, not only
to Worship and Sacrifice to the Idol Gods and Emperors, but also to curse
Christ. And if they confessed, were certainly condemned to Punishment, which was
of several kinds, most usually Death. Although no other Crime was alleged or
proved then their Christianity. Their Christian Constancy, termed inflexible
obstinacy, was judged sufficient ground for their Condemnation. Of which the
Primitive Fathers Apologies, and Pliny's Epistle to Trajan, inform us
sufficiently.

And if they were brought to a Public Trial, where less Tumultuousness, and
more legal Proceedings were used: Yet how little Hopes they could have, of
escaping the utmost Severities of the Laws against them, may be easily
imagined, seeing all that Tried them, as well as those that Accused them, were
their implacable Enemies. For when an Accusation was brought in, the Praetor in
Rome, and the Proconsul or Supreme Governor in the Provinces, having appointed
the Time of Trial, then came and sat on the Tribunal, and the Judges chosen by
Lot (more or fewer, according to the Quality of the Cause) sat on Benches. And
all the Favor the Accused had, was to Object against those he thought good,
(as we are wont in England of the Juries) which the Accuser had likewise
Liberty to do; and the number of those rejected being again supplied by Lot,
the Cause was pleaded, and the Judges gave Sentence, by Capital Letters in
Tables, A. absolvebat, absolved. C. condemnabat, condemned. N. L. non liquet,
Its not manifest. As our Juries pronounce, Guilty, or Not Guilty, or Ignoramus.
I know the manner of the Grecians passing Sentence was otherwise, by casting
small stones into an Urne, the White and whole signifying Absolution, the Black
and Holed Condemnation. But this only by the by.

Having thus laid down so many Considerations, to support our Assertion; I
submit them to the Judgment of all impartial Readers, if they do not
preponderate our Opponents Reasons for theirs; and proceed in the last Place,
to produce several Testimonies, for Defense of the Truth we have laid down, and
undertaken to prove.

SECT. 11.
We come now to allege several Testimonies to make good our Position; which we
shall take from such Authentic Authors, as are beyond all Exceptions; and not
such spurious ones, as several that have been brought against us.

And for the more distinct proceeding herein; we shall reduce them to these
three General Heads.

1. Such as speak of the Persecution of the Primitive Churches; whereby any one
may judge, whether they were in a Condition suitable to the enjoyment of
certain appropriate Places, call them Oratories, Churches, or as some of our
Opponents falsely Temples (for that Name came not in for them, till the fourth
Century) if you please; much less to build such publicly in the first Ages,
for their constant worshipping in. 2. Such as declare, that for two hundred
Years at least they had no such, as our Adversaries avouch. 3. What kind of
Places they then assembled in: Which were the most Private they could find or
contrive for their Security.
As to the first of these, concerning the Persecution of the Primitive Church,
mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles; we have spoken something already in the
second Section; and shall therefore proceed to that part of Nero's Reign, that
immediately Succeeds. For St. Paul's coming to Rome, about the fifth of that
Emperor, and Imprisonment there for the space of two Years, concludes the
Acts. There he found a flourishing Church, as appears by c. 1. v. 8. of that
admirable Epistle he had Written to them, between two and three Years before.
Whether Founded by those Strangers of Rome that were at Jerusalem in the Day of
Pentecost, Acts 2.10. Or by those mentioned in the 16. Chapter of his Epistle,
or jointly by them all, I determine not: But that it was not by Peter, who had
not as yet been there, is apparent by the Series of History. During his
Imprisonment, he wrote several of his excellent Epistles, as that to the
Galatians (a People inhabiting Tanium pessinunt, and Anoyra in Asia) the
Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, Philemon, and as most think, even those
that were last, as that to the Hebrews, and those to Timothy. Though Dr. Cave and
others Judge, the first to Timothy was written in's return to Rome, and the
second in the Year following. For both, some Places of Scripture, and many
Ancient Fathers testify, that being released after two Years by Nero, he went
and Preached the Gospel, in the East, Italy, France, and Spain for about four
Years, and being apprehended and brought again to Rome, was there Beheaded. For
Nero now enraged at the increase of the number of Christians, and the decrease
of the Worshippers of the Idol Gods, made that bloody Decree, Quisquis
Christianum se confitetur, tanquam generis humani convictus hostis, sine
ulteriore sui defensione, capite Plectitor. Whosoever confesses himself to be
a Christian, shall as thereby a convicted Enemy of Mankind, without any further
Defense of himself, loose his Head. And Orosius l. 7. c. 7. Primus (Nero) Romae
Christianos supplicits and mortibus affecit; ac per omnes Provincias pari
Persecutione execruciari imperavit; ipsumque nomen extirpari conatus, etc. Nero
was the first at Rome, that punished the Christians, and put them to Death; and
commanded that through all the Provinces, they should be tormented with like
Persecution; and endeavored to extirpate the very Name of Christians. Where
Note, that though all Authors generally make him the first Persecutor of the
Christians, it must either be understood, as first of the Emperors; or the
first general Persecution, after the Constitution of Churches amongst the
Gentiles, which is usually reckoned from our Saviors Ascension, the Time of
twenty five Years to Nero. For that both particular Persons, and the Church at
Jerusalem, were persecuted before Nero's Time, is manifest in the Acts of the
Blessed Apostles.

There is a Passage in Tacitus Annals, l. 15. c. 44. transcribed by Sulpicius
Severus, l. 2. Hist. very remarkable, for Congruity with Scripture, and
clearing some Places therein. Which I shall therefore, though somewhat large,
relate, and improve.

Having set forth the burning of Rome, attributed to Nero, Abolendo rumori
subdidit reos, and quaesitissimis paenis affecit, quos per flagitia invisos,
vulgus Christianos appellabat. Auctor nominis ejus Christus, qui Tiberio
Imperitante per Proconsulem Pontium Pilatum supplicio affectus erat.
Repressaque in Praesens exitiabilis Superstitio, rursus erumpebat, non modo per
Judaeam, originem ejus mali, sed per urbem etiam, quo cuncta undique atrocia
aut pudenda confluunt, celebranturque. Igitur primo correpti, qui fatebantur,
deinde judicio eorum multitudo ingens, haud perinde in crimine incendii, quam
odio humani generis convicti sunt. Et pereuntibus addita ludibria, ut ferarum
tergis contecti, leniatu canum interirent, aut crucibus affixi, aut flamandi,
atque ubi defecisset dies; in usum nocturni luminis uterentur. Hortos sui ei
spectaculo Nero obtulerat. Nero to extinguish the Rumor of his burning the
City, falsely accused, and exquisitely tormented those, odious for their
wickedness, which the common People called Christians. The Author of that Name
is Christ, who in the Reign of Tiberius, was executed by his Proconsul Pontius
Pilate. And this Pestilent Superstition having been repressed for a Time, broke
out again, not only in Judea, the Original of that evil, but also in the City
of Rome, whither all heinous and shameful things from all parts flow together,
and are had in Estimation. First therefore they were apprehended, who
confessed; then a great multitude of them being discovered were convicted in
Judgment, not so much for the crime of burning the City, as the hatred of
Mankind. And mockeries added to their Deaths, they were covered with the Skins
of wild Beasts, that they might be torn in Pieces by Dogs, or Crucified, or
Burnt, and when the Day was spent, they were used for Lights in the Night. Nero
had offered his Gardens for this Spectacle.

Here we have the Heathens Opinion of Christianity and Christians: An
Attestation to that great Article of our Faith, Christ's Suffering under Pontius
Pilate: And the Sufferings of his Servants (for which I allege the Place
especially) These caused that Defection of many, the Historian briefly touches
in saying, this Pernicious Superstition (meaning Christianity) was for a Time
represt. That is, by those former Persecutions, we have frequently mentioned in
Paul's Epistles (and also those of James and Peter.) Whereby some forsook the
Christian Assemblies, others apostatized from the Faith of Christ, against
which the Apostle warns the rest, Hebrews, 10.23. to the end of the Chapter.
Others mixed Christianity with Judaism (which was tolerated) lest they should
suffer Persecution for the Cross of Christ, Gal. 6.12. Although those Sanguinary
Laws and Bloody Persecutions that followed, had not as yet fallen on them, as
Heb. 12.4. shows, where the Apostle says, Ye have not yet resisted unto Blood.
For these were begun by Nero, about the seventh or eighth Year of his Reign. I
suppose, before the Conflagration at Rome (usually reckoned the tenth) but for
these, see the several Notes on c. 2. of Lactantius, de mortibus Persecutorum.
Domitian about thirteen Years after Nero is made Emperor, who in Cruelty
surpast him: Taking Pleasure in beholding those in Torments, nor sparing some
of his nearest Relations.

Confirmatissimam toto orb Christi Ecclesiam, datis ubique crudelissimae
Persecutionis Edictis, convellere ausus est universali Persecutione. Says
Orosius l. 7. c. 7. That is, He adventured to pluck up by the Roots the Church
of Christ, that was most firmly settled in the whole World, by universal
Persecution, Edicts for most cruel Persecutions every where being given out by
him. So that how privately soever the Christians kept their Assemblies, most of
their Pastors were forced to fly, according to the Verse of that Time.

Vrbibus antiqui Patres fugere relictis.
The ancient Fathers leaving the Cities fled.
Trajan about a Year and four Months after Domitian, follows in the Empire,
under whom the Third General Persecution is reckoned. For that many Christians
suffered under him, by his Governors executing the Laws against them is
manifest. For, Suidas says, Tyberianus the President of Syria writ him Word,
Se non esse parem Christianis occidendis, eo quod ultro illi se neci offerrent.
That he was not able, or sufficient for killing the Christians, because of
their own Accord, they offered themselves to Death. And Pliny his Proconsul in
Bithynia, after he had put many to Death, affrighted with their Multitude,
consulted the Emperor what was to be done with them, in that excellent Epistle
to Trajan, l. 10. Epist. 98. (mentioned by Tertul. in Apol. Eusebius and
others) which I shall not transcribe, being in most Men's hands. Only let me
observe, that so severe was the Persecution, that many for fear, denied they
were Christians, though they had been they confessed, but had forsaken it, some of
them ante plures Annos many Years before; and that after he had forbidden their
Societies, according to the Emperors command, they had forborne them; and having
faithfully declared, their Manner of Worship, and Innocence of Life; yet Trajan
answers him, They should not be sought after, but Connived at, except they were
Accused and Convicted, and then if they persisted, they should be punished.
Conquirendi non sunt: Si deferantur, and arguantur, puniendi sunt, by which
occasion, says Eusebius, l. 3. Hist. c. 33. Plurimi ex fidelibus multiplicis
Martyrii certamen subjerunt. Many of the Christian suffered manifold Martyrdom.
And thus I have gone through the first Age, and the Times of all the Apostles;
St. John who outlived all the rest, till the third Year of Trajan (as Iraeneus
and Hierom affirm) and dyed 100. or more Years of old Age. From what is said,
let any impartial Man judge, If in the Apostles Times as well as ever since,
the Christians had such Places for Worship, as our Adversaries contend for.

I design not a History, and therefore shall not proceed to the General
Persecutions that follows in the Second and Third Century, which together with
the former, are generally counted Ten (though differently reckoned) that they may
answer the Ten Plagues of Egypt, but by some Twelve in Number. In regard it is
needless; so many having related them at large, Eusebius especially, at whose
Torch most after him Light their Candles. And in our own Language, Fox in the
beginning of his Martyrology. I shall only request, the considering the History
of those general Persecutions in the Roman Empire; and it will appear, that
though they were not continual, yet the Christians in the first Ages had not any
long time of Repose, though some lucid Intervals sometimes, when the Affairs of
the Empire were disturbed and turbulent, (as is usual we know by Modern
Examples) especially from Commodus to Severus, and from Severus to Decius. So
that it was the wonderful Work of God, and Power of his Grace, that carried on
the Work of the Gospel, against all Opposition; and let the World see how vain
the Attempts of Men were, against what Gods Hand and Counsel determined before
should come to pass. As Tertul. in c. 5. Apolog. Cruciate, torquete, damnate,
atterite nos --. Plures efficimur quoties metimur a vobis. Semen est Sanguis
Christianorum, Torment, torture, condemn, break us to Pieces. The oftener we are
Mowen down by you, the more we are made. The Blood of Christians, is the Seed
of the Church. And because some pretend, the good Nature of some of the
Emperors, and their peaceable Reigns: It is not denied, that some were far
better, comparatively than others, as Nerva, Domitians Successor, who recalled
those he had Banished, as John the Evangelist, with many others, and acquitted
the Christians from the Rigor of the Laws. But Alas! this was but a short
Breathing Time, he having Reigned but four Months and nine Days above a Year;
so that it is scarce accounted; nor some that were longer, no nor any, as the
effect of their Clemency, but Reason of State, and their being imbarrest in
other Affairs, or imbroiled in Wars. For this we have Theodoret's evident
Testimony, Hist. l. 1. c. 38. Quotquot Imperatores ante Constantinum M.
regnarunt, contra Veritatis Professores insana rabie furere non desierunt. All
the Emperors that Reigned before Constantine the Great, ceased not with mad
Fury to Rage against the Professors of the Truth. So that we may conclude,
there was no trusting to their Friendship, or Favor, further than their
Temporal Interest, and their own Safety, and Security of the Government were
concerned. And therefore small Opportunity or Encouragement for Christians
enjoying any public Places for Worship constantly, much less for Building any
such.

SECT. 12.
Here occurs an Objection, made against the Greatness and Cruelty of these
Persecutions, by Reason of the Paucity of the Martyrs comparatively, with the
common Opinion of their great Multitudes. Which is especially managed, by my
old Friend, the Learned Mr. Dodwel, in's XI. Dissertation on Cyprian.

But in this he seems not only singular, but to found his Opinion upon a false
Foundation; that because we find not so many mentioned in Antiquity, therefore
they were fewer, than we commonly account them. For some Presidents of
Provinces prohibited the reserving the Records of the Martyrs Trials: And most
of those that were recorded, and remained to the Times of Christian Emperors;
afterward by the Irruption of the barbarous Nations into the Empire, were
lost. So that we have little more than what Eusebius had gathered up, and
Published, in's Ecclesiastical History, and more particularly in two Books of
the Martyrs; the former a Collection of the Ancient Martyrs, which is lost. The
latter of those of Palastine that had suffered in his Time. Besides, it is
observable, that great numbers were slain, both by the Magistrates and People
without any formal Process of Law, and so could not be taken Notice of. Propter
Confessionem torquetis. Causa non judicata supplicia infertis, says Justin
in's Apology, Upon our Confession you Torment us. No Judgment being given of
the Cause, you punish us. And to the same Purpose, Tertul. in Apologet. c. 37.
The Governors of Cities and Provinces, being stirred up by the Priests and
People; made no great difficulty many Times, to Sacrifice them to the Popular
Fury. For Things being carried often by Tumults, many were slain quasi jure
Belli, as if it were in War, sometimes 10, 20, 30, 60, and sometimes 100, Men
and Women with their little ones were Massacred in a Day, as Eusebius tells us,
l. 3. c. 33. and l. 4. c. 8. and l. 8. c. 9. of his History.

Insomuch that the Emperors were forced to give Orders for restaining them, as
Hadrian Ne quis posthac sine objectu criminis and legitima accusatione
condemnaretur. Let none hereafter be condemned without setting forth the Crime,
and a legal Accusation. Nor are we to reckon the Persecutions, or number of
Martyrs, by the Emperors Edicts; for it is evident, the Roman Rulers and
Governors, waited not for any such Decrees, but when any were Accused, they
Tried, Condemned and Executed them, according to the Laws made against them.
This is evident by Pliny's Proceeding, when he was Proconsul in Pontus and
Bithynia, without Trajans Order. Yea, under some of the Emperors that more
favored the Christians, as Alexander Severus, through his Mother Mammea's
Persuasions, though they emitted no Edicts for prohibiting their Persecution,
many Martyrs suffered in their Reigns.

But this Question relating to Matter of Fact, cannot be determined otherwise,
than by having recourse to the Historians and Ancient Fathers that have written
of those Times. Which whosoever peruseth, may soon see that vast Army of
glorious Martyrs, which may astonish him, and sill him with Admiration of their
Christian Fortitude, under such direful Sufferings as they underwent.

It would be endless to recite their Sayings, for the great number of Martyrs.
In the Third General Persecution there were innumerable Martyrs. The Menologia
Graecorum say, December millia Christianorum in Monte Ararat cruci suffixa sub
Trajano. That there were ten Thousand Christians Crucified under the Reign of
Trajan in the Mountain of Ararat. In the Fourth under Adrian, Passim Martyrum
millena, there were frequently Thousands of Martyrs. And so in the following,
many thousands in the general, are reckoned by several Authors. Chytraeus in's
Historical Calendar, reports from the forementioned Menology, 28 Decembris bis
december millia Martyrum in Nicomedia ustorum, That on the 28th of December Twenty
Thousand were burnt in Nicomedia. And if so many on one Day, what numbers in so
many Years? And if so many in one Place, how great must the number be in all
Places? But we must not stay upon Particulars. Eusebius. l. 5. says under the
Emperor Antoninus, Innumerabiles prope Martyrs per universum orbem enituisse;
That Martyrs almost innumerable, were famous throughout the World. And if in
the Fifth Persecution (as that is usually reckoned) alone, were so many, what
were there in all the Ten or Twelve? Prudentius Hymno xi. l. de Coronis, says,
In^u^eros Martyrs; Rome ignoros fuisse; That there were innumerable unknown
Martyrs at Rome; and if at Rome alone, what in the whole Empire?

And of them all Cyprian says, l. de Exhort. ad Martyr. Non posse numerari
Martyrs Christianos Novi Testamenti; That the Christian Martyrs of the New
Testament cannot be numbered. And St. Augustine often in's Sermons de Temp.
mentions the millia Martyrum, Thousands of Martyrs: And Tract. 113. in Joh.
innumerabiles, innumerable.

I shall only further recite what Fox, l. 1. p. 44. says from an Ancient
Author, Hierom or Heliodorus, where he makes this Calculation. Nullus esset
Dies, qui non ultra quinque millium numerum Martyrum, reperiri posset
ascriptus, excepto die Calendarum Januarii, i. e. There is no Day in the whole
Year, unto which more than the number of five Thousand Martyrs cannot be
ascribed, except only the first of January. Which by Computation amounts to a
Million and Eight Hundred Twenty five Thousand.

To animadvert on Dodwels Dissertation, is not necessary; in regard the
Considerations laid down in the Tenth Section, with what is here added, I
suppose sufficient. If any desire further Satisfaction, I must refer them to
such Authors, as have industriously answered him. As Monsr. Jaquelot, in
French, Dissertation, 4. c. 5. in the general. Pagius in Critica Baroniana,
frequently in several Places. Mabellonius in Itinere Italico. And the Notes of
several on Lactantius de mortibus Persecutorum. But especially, Theodor.
Ruinartius in Praefatione ad acta Martyrum, most particularly.

To conclude this Discourse of the Primitive Persecutions, I shall likewise
refer the Reader to such as have more largely treated thereof, besides those
formerly mentioned. Lactantius de mortibus Persecutorum cum notis variorum.
Ultrajecti, 1693. 8vo. Meisnerus de Persecutionibus and Martyriis Christianorum
veterum. Witteb. 1654. 4to. Gerhardi Vossii Commentarius in Epist. Plinii and
edicta, Caes. R. Adversus Christianos, Amsterd. 1654. Christ. Cortholtius de
Persecutionibus Ecclesiae Primirivae sub Impp. Ethnicis, deque veterum
Christianorum Cruciatibus. Jenae. 1660. 8vo. A Table of whose several sorts of
Torments, may also be seen in Fox's Martyrology.

SECT. 13.
We shall now proceed, to confirm our Opinion, by producing undeniable
Testimonies, from approved Ancient Authors, such especially as writ Apologies
for the Christians against the Gentiles. Wherein they plead for those of former
Ages, as well as their own; and in all places, as well as where they lived;
though especially where their Enemies endeavored to defame their Holy
Profession.

1. Minutius Felix, who flourished as Dodwel thinks about the end of M.
Antoninus's Reign; but Bellarmine, under Alex. Severus, or about A. D. 206. And
Baldwin yet later. However Cecilius the Heathen Objects, Cur occultare and
abscondere, quicquid illud colunt, magnopere nituntur? Cum honesta semper
publico gaudeant, scelera, secreta sint? Cur nullas aras habent, Templa nulla,
nulla nota simulachra? Why the Christians greatly endeavor to keep secret and
hide, that they Worship: Seeing honest Things may rejoice to be Public, but
wicked Things would be kept secret? Why they have no Altars, no Temples, nor
known Images? To which Octavius the Christian replies, by way of Concession,
think ye that we hide that we Worship, if we have no Temples or Altars? What
Image shall I make of God, since Man is his Image? What Temple shall I build
for him, seeing the whole World made by him cannot contain him? Concluding it
better. He be set up in our Minds and Hallowed in our Hearts.

2. Origin, who flourished by Bellarmin's account, about the Year 226. in his
excellent Book against Celsus, the Epicurean Philosopher. Which he wrote at
above sixty Years of Age, as Eusebius. says l. 6. c. 36. Therefore A. D. 245.
having been born, 185. Wherein Celsus Objects in the end of l. 7. That the
Christians (...), could not endure to see the Temples, Altars, and Statues, and
l. 8. p. 389, 390, and 391. of the Cambridge Edition, objects the same. To
which Origin replies, That the Christians had for Altars spiritual Minds, and
Prayers out of a pure Conscience for Incense. For Statues, the Image of God
their Maker; and Temples agreeable to these; Holy Bodies, and the most
excellent Temple of all, the Body of Christ, John 2.19, 22. 1 Pet. 2.5. Isa.
54.11, 12. Not regarding liveless and senseless Temples, which senseless Men
admire: Because taught to shun those counterfeit Religions, which make all
those impious, that depart from the Religion of Jesus Christ, who is the Way,
the Truth and the Life. By which some might think, Origin thought it unlawful
to Worship God in a Temple, as when He says (...). We avoid to Build liveless
and dead Temples to him that is the bestower of all Life. But Origin has no
such meaning, as the Series of his Discourse shows: But that wheresoever
Righteous Persons are found, that offer up Vows and Prayers to God from a pure
Mind and Conscience, there God is worshipped after the best Manner, whether
within a Temple, or without, elsewhere. And Lil. Giraldus in's Hist. Deorum
Syntagm. 1. Commends this as a most acute Discourse in Origin. For, whereas the
Pagans thought they performed, a great piece of Service and Worship to God, by
building Temples to him: This Origin opposes, because a Temple is a senseless
or a liveless Thing, and Contributes nothing to the pleasing of God in his
Worship. Our Savior and his Apostles, having by Word and Prayers, worshipped
God as acceptably often in the open Air, as in the Temple of Jerusalem. So that
hitherto the Christians had no Public Places of Worship, but only in Private,
may be rationally concluded.

3. Arnobius, who flourished by Bellarmin's account about A. D. 285. or as
other later, brings in the Gentiles objecting against the Christians as the
greatest Crime, that they had no Temples, Altars, nor Images; and answers not
by denial, but granting what they said; and for Temples, In cujus rei
necessitatem, aut dicitis esse constructa, aut esse ^ursus aedificanda
censetis? What Necessity think you does urge Men to build them, or after they
are pulled down, to repair and restore them? See his Reasons for the Christians
forbearing to build them Temples, l. 6. He shows that Temples were not
necessary, though convenient for their Religion. Therefore when they had
Liberty, they built them Oratories, in the Third Century, which were now
demolished by Dioclesian. For the Christians in all Times, and Places of the
Empire, understood very well, that it was in the Emperors Power to pull down,
whatsoever they Built, whenever they pleased. And therefore if their Religion
depended on Temples or Structures (as the Religion of the Heathens did, who as
Lactant. says l. 5. c. 19. found it all there, and left it there) they had
been in an ill Case. If they have but a Private House, or Room, as our Savior
when he instituted the Sacrament of his Body and Blood, or the Disciples met in
at Troas, their Service is as acceptable to God, as if performed in a Temple as
glorious as Solomon's. And this is the meaning of Arnobius, when he says, Neque
aedes sacras ad venerationis Officia extruamus, They did not build Temples, to
perform Off^ces of Worship. For that God is equally served, honored, and
worshipped, as well without Temples as in them: Which Clemens Alexandrinus,
Eusebius, Athanasius, etc. have often asserted and proved.

4. Lactantius, Arnobius's Scholar, Condemns the Gentiles for their Temples,
Altars, and Images. Quid sibi Templa, quid arae volunt? Quid denique ipsa
simulachra? What means your Temples, Altars, and Images? In his Instit. l. 6.
c. 25. Non Templa illi congestis in altitudinem saxis extruenda sunt: In suo
cuique consecrandus est pectore. Temples are not to be built to God, of Stones
raised on height, every one ought to Consecrate him in his own Bre^st So
again, Si Deus non videtur, ergo his rebus coli debet quae non videntur. If God
be Invisible, He is to be Worshipped with such Things as cannot be seen.

From these Ancients, it appears, the Primitive Christians held it as a Thing
indifferent, as to the acceptableness of their Worship to God, whether they
performed it in Temples, or without: And that Gods Worship being merely of a
spiritual Nature, the Place though never so magnificent and glorious,
contributed nothing thereto: Which was directly opposite to the Opinion the
Heathen had of Temples. And Secondly, The Gentiles Objections against
Christians, shows that they had no Temples in the Days of Minutius Felix, and
Origin.

For we deny not, that there were Churches or Houses of Divine Worship in
Arnobius or Lactantius's Time, who lived in the end of the Third or beginning
of the Fourth Century. For they both acknowledge them, though but in some
Places (it being improbable that Christians in all Places had them) Lactan. l.
4. mentions a Conventicle pulled down, and l. 5. c. 21. Of one burnt in Phrygia
with all the People therein. and l. 5. c. 2. Of a Temple of God demolished. For
about his Time, in the F^urth Century, begun the Christians to use the Word
Temple, for the Place of Christian Assemblies: Which formerly, to distinguish
them from the Gentiles Temples they called, Oratories, Assemblies,
Congregations, Collects or gatherings together, Churches, and sometimes also
Stations; as Bellarmin, and Vedelius, formerly mentioned; and Bauldrus in's
Notes on Lactantius, de mortibus Persecutorum, and Spanhem have shown.

Nor say we, that Lactantius taxed the Heathens barely for their Buildings; but
for their Error, in thinking, God was better served in Temples than without:
And that the more glorious they were, their Service was more grateful to God.
Whereas the Christian Religion, tota in animo colentis est, is all in the mind
of the Worshipper. And this appears all along in his Book, l. 2. c. 6. l. 5. c.
19. and l. 6. c. 1. and 25.

Also Chrysostom, Homil. 36. on 1 Corinthians. says, That in the Apostle's Days,
Houses were Churches, meaning Private Houses no doubt. And Isidore Pelusiota
his Scholar is very plain and positive, l. 2. Epist. 246. That in the Time of
the Apostles, when the Church abounded with the Graces of the Spirit, and
Holiness of Life, there were no Temples, though ours now are adorned more than
is meet. And having distinguished between (...) and (...), the Church, and the
Place, as (...), and (...), the Sacrifice and Altar, (...), and (...), the
Council, and Place of their Convention; concludes that in the Apostle's Times
(...), there were no Artificial Churches.

These with other of the Ancients, are followed by many of the Learned in after
Ages. Gerhard the Glory of the Lutherans for Learning, c. 2.. 9. de Ecclesia,
says, Ex Actis Apostolicis, and Seriptoribus vetustioribus constat, quod
Christiani. Apostolorum tempore nondum habuerunt Publica Templa, sed in
Privatis Domibus convenerunt. That it is manifest from the Acts of the Apostles,
and Ancient Writers, that the Christians had no Public Temples in the Apostles
Time, but met in Private Houses.

The Learned Jesuit Justinian, in's excellent Comments on the Epistles on 1
Cor. 11.18. says, The Christian Assemblies were first in Privatis Domibus in
Private Houses; afterward in Oratoriis and Ecclesiis, in Oratories and
Churches: Plainly distinguishing Oratories from Private Houses, and shows by
Reason of Persecution, they met very often in Vaults, and Burying-places. Our
renowned Bishop Pearson in's Comment on the Creed, p. 337. having said Acts
11.26. and 1 Cor. 11.18. seem to take the Church for the Place, in the
following Page says, its not certain the Apostle uses them in that Sense, nor
that there were any Houses set apart for the Worship of God, in the Apostles
Times, which then could be called by the Name of Churches.

And that the Primitive Christians thus continued, without Public Oratories or
Churches, is concluded by Vedelius in Ignat. Vltra ducentissimum annum, nullum
Oratoriorum Publicorum vestigium apparet: That there is no footsteps in
Antiquity of any Public Places of Worship for above the first Two Hundred
Years after Christ: And upon the same grounds Spanhemius in Hist. Saeculo 2do.
That Templa adhuc Christianis nulla, ex silentio veterum and condition
temporum liquet, etc. That the Christians had no Temples in the Second Century
is apparent, from the Ancient Writers making no mention of any, and the
Condition of those Times, by Reason of Persecution. So also Cuperus in's Ep. ad
P. Voet. amongst the Notes on Lactantius de mortibus Persecutorum.

I shall add no more Testimonies for this, that the Christians had not any
Public Places to assemble in from the Times of the Apostles and ever after, as
our Adversaries affirm; having shown the Opinions of Clem. Alexandrinus,
Eusebius and others, concerning Temples in my first Dissertation. But proceed
to the Third Thing proposed, which will further clear this Controversy: In
showing, what Time, and in what kind of Places they assembled, during their
Persecution under the Heathens.

SECT. 14.
First, How careful the Primitive Christians were, of keeping their Assemblies
for the Worship of God, as Private as possible; appears by their holding them
frequently in the Night, of which we have unquestionable Witnesses. Pliny in's
Ep. to Trajan, writes Se de sacris little nihil aliud comperisse, quam caetus
antelucanos, etc. That he found nothing concerning their Religious Worship, but
that they held their Meetings, in the Night before Daylight, wherein they sung
Hymns to Christ as God, etc.

The same is Recorded in Tertullian's Apol. c. 2. Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c. 32. And
Hiecrom in Chron. Eusebius. Gerh. Vossius in's Comment on the forementioned
Epistle says, It was necessary for them so to assemble in the Night, because
of the continual Persecution they were under, Persecutio totis sae^^lis
duravit, ut passim necesse fuerit conveniri noctu.

Tertullian, l. 2. ad Vxorem, dissuading her from Marrying an Infidel, brings
this as one Argument, that He would not willingly suffer her to leave him in
Bed, to frequent the Nocturnal Assemblies of Christians, if it were needful.
Quis Nocturnis Convocationibus, si ita oportuerit, a latere suo eximi libenter
feret? And the Learned Heraldus in's Notes on Tertullian, de Corona Militis,
says, That the Christians often assembled in the Night, saepius Noctu
Congregatos. And so do several others: Whence the Learned derive that Ceremony,
of Burning Wax Candles before the Shrines of Saints even in the Day Time (as is
usual in all the Popish. Countries) to retain that Custom of the Primitive
Christians, who in Times of Persecution met in the Night, and usually in the
Burying Places of the Deceased Christians.

Secondly, Let us consider what kind of Places, the Primitive Christians held
their Assemblies in, for Worship: And we shall find them the privatest
possible, that they might not be discovered. So that Celsus p. 4, and 5. in
Origin, makes this his very first Objection against the Christians in general,
and not of that time only, that they held their Meetings in Private and obscure
Places. The which none ever doubted of or denied, that are not strangers in
Ecclesiastical History or Antiquity; wherein this is so frequently mentioned.

Alexander Hales Writes of the whole Time in general, related by G. Biel on the
Canon of the Mass, Lect. 13. Ab Episcopatu Petri Apostoli, usque ad Tempus
Sylvestri, etc. That from Peter to Sylvester Persecution raging, the Episcopal
Station of the Bishop of Rome was uncertain: But wheresoever the present
Necessity constrained them to be, whether in Vaults underground, or the Houses
of Christians, or what other places soever; there they celebrated Mass upon an
Altar of Wood, made hollow like an Ark, which was carried by the Priests to the
Place, wheresoever tho Bishop of Rome lay hid.

And Hierom on 40. Chap. of Ezekiel describes those Vaults, which they often
made their Meeting-places, Dum essem Romae Puer, etc. When I was a Youth at
Rome, and instructed in liberal Studies, it was my Custom with others of the
same Age and Profession, on the Lords Days to visit the Sepulchers of the
Apostles and Martyrs, and often to enter into the Vaults, which were dug
deep in the Earth; wherein were on each side as we went, the Bodies of dead Men
buried. And all Places there were so Dark, that it might well be said of them,
according to that of the Prophet, The Living go down into Hell. And rarely
Light was let in from above, to qualify the horror of the Darkness, through a
Hole rather than a Window.

And again, going on Foot by Foot, and being compassed about with dark Night,
we are minded of that which Virgil says, Horror ubique animos, simul ipsa
silentia terrent. Horror on every side, and Silence therewithal affrights Men's
Minds. A like Description of these Vaults where tho Christians met, we have in
Prudentius his 11th Hymn, in excellent Verses, but too many to be here inserted.

Not that these Burying-places were peculiar to the Martyrs; for other
Christians were also Buried there, though not in the same Graves, till under
Christian Emperors, Churches were Erected in Cities, into which the Martyrs
Bodies were brought from without, and Superstition prevailed to make them the
Common Burying-places: Which many Learned Men both Papists and Protestants have
written against, and shown how Injurious it is to the Health of the Living, with
many other Reasons; but the Tyrant Custom has always conquered the strongest
Arguments.

Nor when they met in such Places, was it for their Worshipping the Relics of
the Martyrs, as the Papists thence infer: But (besides their Privacy, being
remote from their Cities,) for the preserving their Memories fresher in their
Minds, and by their Examples be excited to Constancy in the Faith, and
Suffering Martyrdom. And though Onuphrius de Caemiteriis, maintains, that
Structures were made for Worship in these Burial-places; and Hospinian grants
it came to that at length; yet were they but Sacella, or Chapels underground;
as Platina tells us in the Life of Calixtus, who having said he did not believe
that famous and large Church which Alexander the Son of Mammaea (who began his
Reign, A. D. 225. according to Baronius) had granted the Christians, to be the
same, with that which Calixtus was said to have built, on the other side of
Tiber, he gives this Reason, Cun^a tempestate, ob crebras Persecutiones,
occulta essent omnia, and sacella potius, atque eadem abdita, and plerumque
subterranea, quam apertis in Locis and Publicis fierent. For in those Days, by
Reason of frequent Persecutions, all Things were carried secretly: And they had
Chapels rather, and those hidden, and for the most part underground, than in
open and public Places. Which last Words are also recited by Pol. Virgil. If
any desire further Satisfaction, concerning the Primitive Christians meeting in
those Burial-Places: He may find it in Kercher's Roma subterranea, l. 1. c. 2.
de Coemeteriis.

But though these Places after some time, and Martyrdom under Nero and
following Emperors, were used more especially by the Christians, as appears by
the Edict of Decius, Nec usquam omnino vel vobis, vel aliis quibusque potestas
erit aut celebrandi conventus, aut in ea quae coemeteria appellantur ingredi;
Thus the Christians in Alexandria, and all others were prohibited their
Meetings, or entering into the Coemiteries particularly. As also by the Edict
of Valerian, whereby all their Assemblies being strictly prohibited, these
Places in special were forbidden them; And as Gallienus his Son by his Rescript
graciously restored the Places of Worship in general: So by another these
Coemeteries in special, Eusebius. Hist. l. 7. Yet as Necessity required, by Reason
of Persecution, their Meetings in these Places, being found out and known by
the Heathens, they met elsewhere some times in one Place, and some times in
another, as in Woods, Caves, Mountains, etc. When they could not in Private
Houses, that they might not be discovered. Our Learned Hooker in's fifth Book
of Eccles. Pol.. 11. has a short, but very comprehensive Passage for this.

The Church of Christ (says He) which was in Jerusalem, and hold that
Profession, which had not, the public Allowance, and countenance of Authority,
could not so long use the Exercise of christian Religion, but in Private only.
And as God gave Increase to his Church; they sought out both there, and abroad
for that Purpose, not the sit (for so the Times would not suffer them to
do) but the safest Places they could. In Process of Time, some whiles by
Sufferance, some whiles by special Leave and Favor, they began to erect to
themselves Oratories. Thus Hilary also in his Book against the Arrians and
Auxentius, speaking of Christians in the Apostles Days, affirms that they were,
Per caenacula and secreta coenutes, such as had their Meetings in Chambers, and
secret Places. Afterward most commonly in caemiteriis and cryptis, in
subterraneous Vaults. And in the Time of his Banishment warns them to whom he
writes, to beware of Antichrist, for you are unhappily taken with the Love of
Walls, you do not well in venerating the Church of God for Structures and
Edifices: Is it doubtful that Antichrist shall sit in these? Montes mihi and
sylvae, and lacus, and carceres and vordgines tutiores sunt, etc. Mountains and
Woods, and Lakes, and Prisons, and Gulfs, are more safe to me. For in these,
the Prophets either abiding or drowned, have Prophesied by the Spirit of God,
And Walafudus Strabo to the same Purpose, whose Words we recited in Ninth
Section, Page 40.

So Polid. Virgil, a good Antiquary in's Book de Inventione rerum, l. 5. c. 6.
affirms that, a Christi ascensu, ad Dioclesianum and Maximianum, toto fere
temporis intervallo tantum aberat, ut aliquod templum a Christianis, public
aedificaretur; ut etiam ommia essent occulta and sacella potius, atque etiam
abdita, and plerumque subterranea quam apertis in Locis ac Publicis fierent.
That from Christ's Ascension to Dioclesian and Maximianus, for that whole
Interval of Time almost, the Christians were so far from building any Temple in
Public, that all Things were kept secret: And Chapels rather, and those also
hidden, and for the most part underground, than in open and public Places.
Though He thinks it credible, where the Fury of persecuting Tyrants reached
not, the Apostles might Consecrate some Temples, as Matthew in Aethiopia,
Bartholomew in India, and Andrew in Scythia, and James at Jerusalem. But these
are but this Conjectures (for which he brings no Proof in founded upon the
Piety of the Apostles, who always employed their utmost Power to propogate
Religion amongst all Nations. For: we no where find that any of the Apostles
required the erecting of Structures for Worship, or Consecrating any for that
end: Nor the least Signification, that without such, Religion could not be
propogated.

And the Renowned Sir H. Spelman, p. 70. De non temevandis Ecclesiis, having
mentioned the Consecration of Churches in Constantines Time, adds, That the
Christians being in Elder Ages in Persecution, might hardly Build or Dedicate
any Churches; but were constrained to use Private Houses, and Solitary Places
for their Assemblies. The Learned Mr. Robert Cook Viccar of Leeds in's Censura
quor. Script. shows Dionysius Works to be Counterfeit, because he mentions
several Things, and particularly stately Temples, after the manner of that at
Jerusalem, having their Sancta Sanctorum divided from the rest, into which it
was not lawful for the Monks and Lay People to enter. Whereas there were no
such Things in those Days, says Cook, but Christians met together after the
Manner of the Apostles, Acts 1.13. and 12.12. and 20.8. in private and secret
Places, and there had their Prayers and Sermons: Public Temples they had none
by reason of Tyrants.

I might bring in the like Attestations from our famous Jewel Article 3. p.
145. Willet's Synopsis Papismi, sixth General Controversy, Quest. 6. With
several others: But I shall conclude all with the Testimony of a great
Historian yet living (of whose Acquaintance and Friendship I have the Honor to
partake) viz, Dr. Spanhem the Honorary Professor at Leyden, who in's learned
and useful Ecclesiastical Hist. of the New Testament says, Loca Sacrorum
Conventuum fuere saeculo secundo, partim aedes privatorum, caenacula, balnea,
porticus, cryptae, loca abdita. Partim caemeteria seu Sepulchreta Martyrum ad
quae Conventus indicerent, zelo accendendo, his constantiae exemplis. The
Places of the Christians Meetings in the Second Century, were partly Private
Houses, Dining Rooms, Baths, Galleries, Vaults, and secret Places: Partly
Burial-Places or Sepulchers of the Martyr, which they appointed their
Meetings, for the inflaming their Zeal, by those Examples of Constancy. And
afterward shows, the Manner of notifying their Conventions, was by their
Servants from House to House: For as yet neither the beating of Wood, nor sound
of Bells, or Brass, or Voice of Cryers were used for, this end, lost their
Assemblies should be known to the Heathens.

In the Third Century, whether the Christians had any Temples or Churches
Dedicated or Consecrated by Sacred and Christian Rites is, says He, a
Controversy amongst the Learned. Pol. Virgil, Durantus, Baronius, Bellarminus,
Ciaconius and Valcsius affirm it. And of ours also Wower, Fuller, Seldom and
others.

That Churches are frequently mentioned in this Age, is out of doubt: At nec
Temptorum illis aut Nomen, aut Forma, aut Splendour, aut Species quaedam. Aedes
fuere Privatorum, Domus, caenacula, sed plorumque caemeteria, Cryptae
spatiosissimae, quas areas Martyrum dixere; etiam latibula, stabula, oremi,
carceres, agri ex Antiquis Scripporibus, and ox Condition Temporum, saeviente
ut plurimum Persecutions. Quanquam sub. Al. Severo, and Philippis, and
Gallieno, conveniendi libertas Christianis major. Hinc nulla esse Christianis
Templa. Quae memorantur Templa, Tituli, Consecrationum Ritus Sacerdotales, a
Baronio, Ciaconio, Fr. Bivario, aliis; ea ex Apocryphis Decretalibus, ex
Pontific. vitis, ex Flavii Dextri Chronico Supposititio, id genus fontibus
lutulentis hausta. But they had neither the Name, nor Form, nor Splendour, nor
Shape or Kind of Temples. They were the Dwellings of Private Persons, Houses,
Dining-Rooms, and for the most part Burying-places, very spacious Vaults, which
they called the Floors of the Martyrs: Also Lurking-places, Stables,
Wildernesses, Prisons, Fields, as from Ancient Writers, and the Condition of
those Times is manifest, Persecution then for the most Part raging. Allthough
under Al. Sevetus, the Philips, and Gallienus, greater Liberty was given for
Christian Assemblies. Hence we conclude, the Christians yet had no Temples.
Those Temples, Titles, and Sacerdotal Rites of Consecration, mentioned by
Baronius, Ciaconius, Fr. Bivarius, and others; are all taken from the
Apocryphal Decretals, the Lives of the Popes, and the Supposititious Chronicle
of Flavius Dexter, and such like impure Fountains. Thus far that Learned
Professor.

To draw up all in a short Conclusion. We read in Eusebius of the Christians
building Public Oratories after Deeius and Valerians Days, not of any built
before. These were by Public Decrees, commanded to be pulled down by
Dioclesian and Maximus, and not long after restored by Consiantine. Those
formerly taken from the Christians by Decius and Valerian, were expressed to be
Caemeteria Places of Burial in which they had their Cryptae or Vaults
underground, formerly represented. So that for separate and public Places for
Worship, for Two Hundred Years and more after Christ's. Nativity, we have no
Records in approved History.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of BOOKS sold by Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns,
in Cheap Side near Mercers-Ckappel.
THE Fountain of Life opened, or a Display of Christ in his Essential and
Mediatorial Glory; containing Forty Two Sermons on varions Texts. Wherein the
Impetration of our Redemption by Jesus Christ is orderly unfolded, as it was
begun, carried on, and finished by his Covenant Transaction, mysterious
Incarnation, solemn Call and Dedication, blessed Offices, deep Abasement and
Supereminent Advancement.

A Treatise of the Soul of Man, wherein the Divine Original, excellent and
immortal Nature of the Soul are opened; its Love and Inclination to the Body,
with the necessity of its Separation from it, considered and Improved. The
Existence, Operations and States of separated Souls both in Heaven and Hell
immediately after Death, asserted, discussed, and variously applied. Diverse
knotty and difficult Questions about departed Souls both Philosophical and
Theological, stated and determined.

The Method of Grace in bringing home the Eternal Redemption, contrived by the
Father, and accomplished by the Son, through the Effectual Application of the
Spirit unto Gods Elect being the second Part of Gospel-Redemption.

The Divine Conduct or Mystery of Providence, its Being and Efficacy asserted
and vindicated. All the Methods of Providence in our Course of Life opened,
with Directions how to apply and improve them.

Navigation spiritualized, or a new Compass for Seamen, consisting of Thirty
Two Points of pleasant Observations, profitable Applications, serious
Reflections, all concluded with so many spiritual Poems, etc.

Two Treatises, the first of Fear, the second the Righteous Man's Refuge in the
Evil Day.

A Saint indeed, the great Work of a Christian.

A Touchstone of Sincerity, or Signs of Grace, and Symptoms of Hypocrisy,
being the second Part of the Saint indeed.

A Token for Mourners, or boundaries for Sorrow for the Death of Friends.

Husbandry spiritualized: Or the Heavenly use of Earthly Things. All these Ten
by Mr. John Flavel.

A Funeral Sermon on the Death of that Pious Gentlewoman Mrs. Judith Hammond,
late Wife of the Reverend Mr. George Hammond, Minister of the Gospel in London.

Of Thoughtfulness for the Morrow. With an Appendix concerning the immoderate
Desire of foreknowing Things to come.

Of Charity in Reference to other Men's Sins.

The Redeemer's Tears wept over lost Souls, in a Treatise on Luke 19.41, 42..
With an Appendix, wherein somewhat is occasionally Discoursed concerning the
Sin against the Holy Ghost, and how God is said to Will the Salvation of them
that Perish.

A Sermon directing what we are to do after a strict Enquiry whether or no we
truly Love God. These Five by Mr. John How.


