Hagnelion ^ Jechidatho Ruahh Turak Jehovah Ehhad.

OR, EYE SALVE, Recommended to the World in a Short Essay, Occasioned by the
sight of a Discourse set forth Since the Kings Injunctions, CALLED, Some
CONSIDERATIONS CONCERNING THE TRINITY.

Ps. 8. 2. Out of the Mouths of Babes, and Sucklings have thou ordained
strength, because of thy Enemies, that thou may still the Enemy, and the
avenger.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1696.

The Author TO His Book on the Holy TRINITY.
MY (...), a most sad and lamentable Consideration it is, on which I can
neither think, Speak, or write without great Concern, and Grief of Heart, that
the present age being filled with Controversy about no less a matter than the
Holy Trinity it self, the greatest Divines in the Church should be mistaken, as
they are, in the most fundamental Article of the Christian Faith, the
Profession, and Belief of which is formally, and essentially necessary to
Baptism, to be Administered always in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost by the special Command, and Order of Christ himself, the
great Apostle of our Profession; and that the Church should thereby be filled
with Scandal as it is, not only to the Confirming of Deists, and Arians in
their wickness, and Heresy, but also to the turning aside of God's People from
the right way, who seeing their Leaders Contesting so hotly with each other, as
they do, about the very springs of all Divinity, and Religion, cannot therefore
but waver, and be brought to doubt of the Verity, and Sacro-Sanctitie thereof.
Surely, to be feared it is, that Christendom is even now called to an Account
and Recconning for this, and I am tempted, methinks, upon it, with Jesus Ananai
in Josephus, to fill the streets of our Citys with (...) for it. For what can
be the Consequence, and Effect of such great Mistake, but that our Blessed
Savior (so little Faith being found in the Land) should come at last in
Judgment against us, and that our Jerusalem should be destroyed? Is there any
Remedy or Prevention for so great an Evil? There is one only, that the Mistake
be rectified. Wherefore, I tell Thee, and Tell it Thou again to all that read
thee, that the wrapping up the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, which God has
revealed, and the Church in her Holy Creeds sufficiently Explained, in the
Clowd of Misteriousness, has been the cause of this Evil, it being a Papistical
Doctrine, which serves only, as it has been made use of, to cover over another
Error, as bad, or worse, that of Transsubstantiation. Must we look on now, and
suffer this? let those, who are so Earnest to bear up the Grandeur of the
Church, more then Gods Holy Truths, making Religion to be a Scala ad
Eminentiam, instead of a Scala Coeli, Consider of it. I, for my part, for the
Truth's sake choose rather to take up the Cross of Christ, as a Donative of
his, who took it up for me first, that I might obtain Eternal Life, and be
Numbered amongst those blessed ones, who, having their Reward in Heaven, shall
for ever praise him. Go therefore, My little Book, into the world dreadless,
(fearing neither Kings, nor Princes; Pope, nor Cardinals; Archbishops; nor
Bishops; Conclave, nor Sanedrim,) and carry thy Eye Salve to them all, telling
them, it is the Counsel of him, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, to
anoint their Eyes with it, that they may See. Go, and God Bless thee with good
Success. So prays he, who beleiveth a Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity;
but does not believe that Trinity Is Unity, or that Unity is Trinity; that is,
Believes three Persons to be one God, so is no Tritheita; that Three Persons
are one Person, cannot Believe, so, is no Sabellian.

S^.

THESE Three are One. OR, A Distinction of Persons in the Trinity, yet in
Unity, clearly, though briefly, asserted.
HAS this Church, the Church of England, at this Day need of Eye Salve? it
appears by the many Errors, concerning the Trinity, which go abroad in Print,
that it has: yea, that it has need of more Epistles yet from him who walks
betwixt the Candle-Sticks, and holds the Seven Stars in his right hand.
Wherefore, choosing to be under Hherem rather than Suffer the Truth to fail,
for Sion's sake I shall not hold my Peace. Once have I written, and twice will
I do it, making only this Apology for saying so little on a Subject
controverted so much, that the less is said of it, if it be enough, it is so
much the better. So, Aspirante Spiritu Sancto, into the Deep I lanch forth,
craving leave, in Order to what I shall say, to premise this little,

That, as I do, and must grant, that there is but One God, which we are as sure
of, as that there is but one Sun to rule the Day, and One Moon to give light in
the Night; So, it be granted me likewise, that there were two more, before the
Worlds were made, what ever we may take 'em to be, WITH THIS ONE GOD.

This will be granted me, I presume, by all, because he that denies it, owns
not Revelation, and it is Confessed by the Arrian. So that, The Questions to be
regarded by us are, whether he, who is said to be begotten, the Other, who is
said to proceed, in Scripture, from the One God, be truly, and properly, each
of 'em, Themselves God? Further, whither these Two are, together with him, who
is called in Scripture the Father, THE ONE GOD, or no?

What, (to let go Socinus,) does the Arrian say to this? He, Poor Man, (I call
him so, because he is a follower of Ebion,) denies, it utterly, yet in my Eye,
not without reason, because of the Scandal that is given him. For, he knows as
well as any man, that to say, that Three Distinct Infinites are one Single
Infinite, as he is told, Implies, and is false; that, to say, a Mode, a
property, or Faculty can Constitute a Distinct Person, as he is told likewise,
Obtrudes on him an Impossible Notion. He says therefore, The Son, and the Holy
Ghost cannot be God, which, we are sure, is false if the Holy Scriptures be
true.

What next does the Author of the Considerations, mentioned in the Title Page,
Say? He likewise, seeing the same Absurdities as the Arian does, and very well
perceiving the Son, and Holy Spirit's Characters in Scripture, Concludes,
because he dares not go against his Creeds and Litany, that they are Persons;
but that they are not so distinct as Three Angels are, etc. No; Says he, it is
an Impossible thing this.

What, lastly, say I now? truly, what he averr's I cannot possibly grant him.
Here, my Author wants Eye Salve. Consequently, in Opposition to what he
Contends for so Earnestly, as if 'twere the Faith once delivered to the Saints,
I lay down this for Truth.

First, that the Father Son and Holy Ghost are Persons, and that, as Distinct
as three Angels Persons, or as the Persons of Peter, James, and John, are.
Secondly, That the Son, and Holy Ghost (Persons as distinct as I Have Expressed
'em to be) are, in the Concrete, truly, and properly, God, and that each of
'em is Infinite. Thirdly, Forasmuch as the Godhead, in the Abstract, is, and
can be but One, That the Son, and the Holy Ghost (their Personal Distinction
notwithstanding,) are, together with the Father, ONE, and the SAME GOD.

Will some say, (perhaps startling) is this the Truth? I answer that it is for
certain the Mystery, and must be maintained, if any thing may be done, to
Convince our Modern Arians, who are so rooted, and Confirmed in their
Misbeleife, that it is hard to move 'em; in regard they are so much poisoned by
that Miscreant Bernardin: Odhinus, the Author of MO-CHRI MA, called so amongst
his Friends, but set out under the Name of his Labyrinths; as also by that
Spawn of his lately set out by an Anonym, who wrote Notes on the Creed of St.
Athanasius; which by the way, is not, as, some would have it to be, falsely so
called, but truly; witness that Arian, who wrote that Pestiferous Sheet,
himself: he (viz.) tells us that the Greeks (meaning Arian Bishops, no
Question,) said, that the Holy Father was drunk when he made his Creed, (then
that he made it is plain,) Quoting for it Gennadius Bishop of Constantinople in
his Catul. Illustr. vir. per (...) Schol. A. which Gennadius lived in the next
Century after the Death of Athanasius.

It will be Objected here, must we then Maintain a Substantial Trinity?
distinct Persons, we all Know, are distinct Intelligent Substances, and may we
say, they are one Substance again? here is the Riddle, here is the Knot; is it to
be untied by us? Yes, say I. For the Nature of Spiritual Substances is such,
that, if they are Intimately in Unity, they may truly be said to be Vnius
Substantiae, and are, sure enough, Vnum Totum Spirituale. If Spirit, Soul, and
Body, for being in Unity, are one Individual Man, why should not the Persons in
the Holy Trinity, being much less Different from each other, as all will
acknowledge, than Spirit, and Body are, be One Individual God?

Surely, Dr. Sherlock, the Reverend Dean of St. Paul's, in that he assert's a
Substantial Trinity, is in the Right; what he is wrong in, is this; that he
asserts the three Persons in the Trinity to be three DISTINCT INFINITES. For
herein he is false, the Difference is so wide, that it Constitutes Tritheism.

For my part, I deny Absolutely, that they are three DISTINCT Infinites, yet
that they are each of 'em Infinite, I as positively affirm. Is it a
Contradiction this? No such matter. St. Athanasius tells us, that the Godhead
of the three Persons is but One, and that the Son, and Holy Ghost, are Co, that
is to say, WITH GOD: Here is Distinction* then plainly, how can they be With
God else? but then, he tells us also, that they are Equal with the Father: How,
I pray, may this be? he says, for having the Father's Glory: So also that they
are Coeternal; how again? for having he says, the Eternal Majesty of the
Father: Is not this plain? surely, granting the Unity, (that the Son is
begotten in Unity; that the Holy Ghost Proceeded in Unity with the Fathers
Glory, and Majesty,) I do not see how it is possible they should not be God
Themselves, and the Same God, seeing that each of 'em is (...) clearly; for,
what, I pray, is (...)? It is, if we take the word, as the Nicene Fathers, (not
as Paulus Saemosatenus) understood it, (...); which is as much as, Another
Person having the Unbegotten Substance of the Father Undividely, or, having the
same Substance, which the Father has, together with his Own.

What Is the sequel of all this? is it not, that they are, after the same
Manner, Co-Infinite too, as they are Coeternal, and Coequal? surely Yes.
Therefore, say I, The Father is Infinite: The Son is Infinite: And the Holy
Ghost is Infinite: And yet there are not three Infinites, but One Infinite. The
reason is, because they are all three Infinite, not by sundry, or diverse
Infinities, peculiar to each Person One; but, by One, and the same Infinity,
Common to 'em All.

The Convocation at Oxford should have taken Notice of This, when they Issued
out their Decree irrespectively to what is suggested. Had they so done, they
might have Escaped the Censure of those, who say, they trusted not their own
Judgments in the sense of their Creeds, but Abetted only the Hypothesis of a
Reverend writer, whose Learned Book no Man need be at the pains to Answer,
because he has Answered what he himself writ, solving the Mystery at last by
Modes, whereas before he had determined it (I wonder it was not Spied,) to be
altogether unintelligable, and past the reach of human Understanding. But,

To come close the Author of the Considerations, are the three Persons so
distinct indeed, as three Angels, or, three men's Persons are? No, says he;
take heed of saying it, here is a manifest Implicat, so it is an impossible
thing, and false. Is it so? we are undone if it be; but praise be to God, it is
not so. I confess, it seems a Riddle somewhat difficult; but it is not so
difficult, for all that, but it may be Explicated: I shall distinguish
therefore between a Person, and it is Shechinah.

What Is a Person first? it is an Intelligent Substance, is it not? it is so. Is
every Angel a Person therefore? it is surely. And is not a Soul, though distinct
from the Body, a Person too? it is likewise. Yea, a Soul, though separate by
Death, I aver to be a Complete Person, though it be not a Complete Man. For Man
is a Person in Unity with Earthly Substance; he is Maden, or Man'e, that is his
Root, for which he is called Man. Shall we call the Soul, being separate from
the Body, but a piece of a Person? God forbid. What is wanting to make it a
Person? is it not Substance? is it not Intelligent? It must be granted this. A
Person therefore it must needs be, or, we are to seek for it is Definition, yea,
it is nothing at all.

What Is a Shechinah next? it is that which a Person dwells in, is it not? it is
the very same. For it comes from Shachan, the English of which is, He
Dwells, and the Constant word it is in Scripture, when the Sublime Mysteries
of our Faith are spoken of there: yea, if rightly, and well Understood, I
conceive, it would solve all Mysteries clearly. For that which I say, I shall
referr, at present, only to the Eighth Chapter of the Proverbs of Solomon,
where Wisdom, the same whom St. Paul calls the Wisdom of the Father, says thus:
Any Chochmah Shachanti Cnormah, ('it is a Metaphor taken from the Mathematics,
the Hebrew Gnormah seeming to answer Norma in the Latin, which shows that the
Divine Counsel is the Rule of all things made,) I wisdom dwell in Skill; or,
(because in the Latin it is in Consilio,) I wisdom dwell in Counsel. From which
I argue, that by Shechinah we are to understand the Tabernacle, or Dwelling of
a Person; in a word, that Substance which a Person is strictly in Unity with,
or, dwells in by an Unitive Tie intimately, that is it is Shechinah.

What follows hereupon? verily it is that the three Persons in the Holy Trinity
are truly as distinct as the Persons of three Angels: yea, as the Persons of
Peter, James, and John are, and that these last differ in this Respect, that
the Persons of Peter, James, and John have distinct Shechinahs, whereas the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost have but one only, Singular, and Common Shechinah.
Now applying this Eye Salve to our Eyes may we not see, that Peter, James and
John (being both for Person, and Shechinah distinct) cannot possibly be one
man, and yet that the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost (though as distinct Persons as
they) can be one God? see it we may plainly, forasmuch as the Everlasting
Substance of the Father, which neither is nor can be Multiplied, is their
common Shechinah, for which it cannot be otherwise. Not otherwise? No. For
before the worlds were made, there was, as the learned Jews speak, but One
Place, which they call, with an (...) Emphaticu^ Hammakom, The Place, meaning
by it that there was but one Vbi, and that a Repletive Vbi having no distinct
Rooms, no Apartments for ^ Person to be in. That which follows, Consequently,
is, that a Person, if Produced before the Worlds, must of necessity be in Unity
with the Divine Substance, or, which is the same thing, in Unity with the
Godhead of the fist Person, or else be no where. Is it so? then follow it does
again, that if the Unoriginated Substance cannot be Enjoyed per parts, that is
to say, by Parcels, Parts, or Portions, in Regard it is Repletive, and fixed
Substance, it must be Enjoyed, if at all, whole, and so I affirm't to be, as
thereunto directed by St. Paul. For so he speaking of the Second Person, the
Son, says, in Him dwelt ((...), and Shachan are the same) (...), All the
fullness of the Godhead, as much as, the whole Godhead of the Father, the will,
and Understanding only of the Father, which are his own, not the Son's,
Excepted. I add the Last words, because the Distinction is only Personal, the
Son's Person, though emerging, in it is begetting, out of the divine Counsel, and
will, yet abiding still in his Fathers Substance, and Bosom: Not emerging
(though) per modum Facturae, or, Creationis, which is of things ad extra, and
belongs to creatures, but per modum Resultantiae, resulting just as the image
of a Man's face does from a Mirror, yet Substantially, as if he were his
Fathers Effigies, for which he is called (...), and (...), the express, and
engraven Image of God, himself saying of himself, he that has seen Me has
seen the Father.

And have we not here found the true Alkaist? in my Conceit, we have; for the
word is to be Understood, without peradventure, Symbollycally only. Gods
Substance, we may be sure, is the only Substance that may be called fixed.
Therefore, with Reverence, may we not say, that when God begat his Son, he
volatlised the fixed, and fixed the volatlised again? It may be said, as it
seems to me, rationally enough. Lo then! Here Is the true Alkaist, the true Tree
of Life, the leaves of which are for the Healing of the Nations. But, to
return; the Coelum, or, Domus Sacro Sanctae Trinitatis is the Everlasting
Hammakom, Place, or Vbi, as aforesaid, and because that is the Blessed Trinity's
mutual, Common, Shechinah, or, Dwelling, therefore are they, all three, but One
only Everlasting God.

That such as this was the sense of the Ancient Homoousians, or, Nicene Fathers
I am very well assured, consequently, that the Primitive Church may bring the
present Church out of Error, I shall endeavor to prove what I assert from
Antiquity; that I may do what I say, laying down, among multitudes, three
clear, and manifest Testimonies.

The first shall be taken (that I may go upwards,) out of Venerable Bede, who
in his Ecclesiastical History, lib. 4. Chapter 17. tell's us of a Council of
Bishops held here in England about a thousand years since under Theodorus
Archbishop of Canterbury, and says that all of 'em to a Man Unanimously
agreed, according to the Nicene Faith, as his Book will show, propersonis
Consubstantiallibus, and, which is accurately to be observed, that they
declared the Father alone to be sine Initio, and the Son, with the Holy Ghost,
to be ante Secula only. An unbegotten Son, we see, was not in their thoughts in
the least, but they confessed clearly, to believe in an only-Begotten Son, as
he, who is the word, is called by both St. John's. Which accordingly Pamphilus
the Martyr would never depart from, having It always in his mouth, viz. I
believe in the only Begotten Son of God, for which we have the Testimony of
Valesius. Vid. Vales. in Vit. Eusebius.

The Second Testimony shall be of Synesius Bishop of Cyrene, who in his Hymn on
the Holy Trinity has such words as these,

(...)
(...)
(...).
An Intellectual Section, or, Division is spoken of here, inferring Distinct
Persons, or, Understandings plainly: One of which he supposes to be the Birth
of the Fathers Intellect, yet, Remaining in his Spiritual Bosom, to wit, the
Son; the Other, viz. the Holy Ghost to be a substantial Spent, or Aporrhaea, as
of a precious Ointment filling All Room, All Place, yet, abiding still in the
great Name, even as the Scent does in the Ointment from which it flow's. Made
good in both these is the (...), and (...) of Synesius; the Two Persons,
considered as distinct, being separated from the first, but considered as
Con-Substantial, still, or, (...), yet, undivided. Here then, First, we have
Hagnelion, as in the Title Page, as much as to say, the Most Highest, (viz. for
Person,) that is the Father. Secondly, We have Jechidatho, his begotten, or
only One, which is the Son in his Fathers Bosom. Thirdly, We have Ruahh, or,
Shemen Turak, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Scriptures call Unction, or,
the Oil of Gladness, though power'd out, yet remaining in the Godhead of the
Father also. Lastly, We have Jehovah Ehhad, because the Son, and the Holy Ghost
are uncut off from the Fathers Substance, who with him consequently, are but
one Lord. It is for this that St. Paul call's the Second Person (...), the Beam
of Gods Glory; being as a Beam of the Sun, which, though divided, is not cut of
from the Body of the Sun.

The third Testimony is of the First Christian Emperor truly August, by name
Constantine, who, speaking, in his Orat. to the Convent. of Saints, of the
(...), (which however the learned think of it, seems to be nothing else but the
Translation of Mijmro in the Targum,) says, that in the Mystery of the Trinity
there is a Disjunction-Conjunction: he means, as the following words show, a
Disjunction performed Intellectually only, not Locally; or, a Disjunction of
Two of the Persons abiding in Conjunction with the substance of the First; I
say, abiding in it, as Eusebius speaks, (in which he accords with Synesius,)
without Abscission, or, without Disruption.

Many more Testimonies might I produce to like purpose, but I forbear, because
I suppose these are enough. Yet forasmuch as many, with Erastus* and Hobbs,
have more kindness for the Sacro-Sanctity of human Laws, that they have for the
Holy Cannons of the Church, I shall add one Testimony more out of the Civil
Law. It is in an Edict of Theodosius the Great called Filia ejus Primogenita,
because set forth the next year after his Baptism, and it is, Vt, secundum
Apostolorum Disciplinam, Evangelicamque doctrinam Patris, Filij et Spiritus
Sancti Vnam Deitatem sub parili Majestate, ^ sub pia Trinitate credamus. Is not
here Paritis, an Equal Majesty? Is no here, Pia, a Godly, or, divine Trinity?
and is not here Vnica Deitas, be One Godhead all the while? Let them Judge, who
cry out so much, it is Law, it is Law, which is the worst of the Two, in Earnest,
Outlawry from the Civil Sanction, or, Excommunication from the Eclesiastical.
And,

What now, since these Testimonies make out the Mystery, so plainly, the way
that I take, can we see any reason why we should check at the Subordination of
the Son to the Father, and of the Holy Ghost to the Father, and Son? For my
part, I see none. What though the Arian says, impudently enough, it is a
Derogation to one who is God to be an Underling, adding, how come the Son, and
Holy Ghost to be sent, to be put in Office, to Minister? why is One said to be
the Son of the Highest, the Other to be the Power of the Highest? if we anoint
our Eyes with Eye Salve, we shall not be long without an Answer to this. For, that
Two of the Persons are Subordinate (qua Persons) we may acknowledge freely,
having sufficient warrant for it from the word of God. For why? The Son himself
says, I came into the world, not to be Minister'd unto, but to Minister; and,
St. Paul, speaking of the Gospel, calls it the Ministration of the Spirit.
Besides, we find, that as the Son Ministers to the Father only because He is of
the Father alone; so the Holy Ghost is called, sometimes, the Spirit of the
Father, sometimes the Spirit of the Son, because, as he Proceeded from both, so
he Ministers to Both. I say therefore, that they are capable of Mission, and
Commission; consequently, may be put in Office, though as in Unity, they are
really and truly God. The reason of this we may Conceive well enough. For,

We are taught by our Savior himself, when we pray, to say, Our Father which
art in Heaven. May we say therefore, that the Father's Godhead, which is the
place of the Son, and the Holy Ghost, is the Place of all Spirits too? for my
part, I dare not do it, least I should seem to Deify the Devils. With Aquinas,
rather, Deitas est immobilis, say I; for where it is now, it ever was, will be,
and Is immovably; of the Godhead there is no going forth, it is Quiescence, it
is Everlasting Sabbath. The Totsaoth, or Goings forth are of the Son, and Holy
Ghost only, and they as they may, so they have, as the Prophet speaks of the
Son, their Egressions, or, Outgoings indeed; and, Blessed be God's holy name,
we see the Effects of all, of their Subordination, I mean, and comings forth in
our Redemption, and Sanctification, wherein they Minister to the Father for our
Salvation. Accordingly I shall lay down Two Querae's to be considered of.

Whether the Second Person, the Son, be not the Illustrious Prototype of the
Souls of Men, who beget their Like?

Whether the Third Person, the Holy Ghost, be not also the Illustrious
Prototype of Celestial Wights, or, Angels, proceeding, in their Creation, all
at once?

So it seems to be. First, because there are but two sorts, or kinds of
Rational Beings to be called Persons besides the Trinity. Secondly, because any
kind of Person, if it be Con-Substantial, or, in Unity with the Godhead, must
needs be God of God.

To speak of the Son first. If it Be not so, I ask, why is he said to be
Begotten? why, as Adam, is he called the Son, and the Image of God? Why, as a
nurse Child, or Foster-Babe, is he, long before God's Madeworks, said to
rejoice, and to have his delight in the Sons of Men; and, when Incarnate, why
did he call men, and women Brothers and Sisters? yea, since the Father, and
Holy Ghost could not so be, by reason of the Ones Immensity, the Other's
Ubiquity, why is He only Prophesied of to be a man, whom a woman, or rather a
Virgin should Compass? and how could he say, I came from the Father into the
World, and now I leave the World, and go to the Father? And, what though he be as
the Arian says, but the Son of the Highest? I can tell him, that he
notwithstanding is most High too, yea, as High as the Highest; for so the Holy
Church in her Hymn at the close of the Communion Service Sings, Thou only, O
Christ, with the Holy Ghost, art most high; ask we how? She says, In the Glory
of God the Father. What is it I hear? O Depth of Wisdom! O Abisse of Love, though
faintly, yet, someway Comprehensible! On it, because he that is Gods fellow,
(being made man,) is my fellow also, my heart Exults, and Rejoices in Hope,
that he will be as kind to me, as to any Sinner else, and keep my wretched Soul
from Hell. Whether this be true, or no, it seems to be a suitable, sweet,
ravishing, and lovely Contemplation; for which, if I had Solomon's Wisdom, I
would Compose another new Song of Songs, and, as an Higgajan, (which comes from
Hagah mporting meditari, and Eloqui both,) with heart, and Voice sing it to my
Beloved. For, what though he came forth from the Father, into the World, so, left
his Glory behind him for a while, and appeared as a mere Man? 'twas in love to
me, and such as I. But, was the Unity dissolved by it? no, nor did he thereby
cease to be God. For the Holy Ghost, who is an Vbiquitary Spirit in Heaven and
in Earth at once, and was Vinculum, and Nexus Vnitatis, as the Fathers tell us,
came along with him, abiding with the Father at the same time. It was by the
Overshadowings of the Holy Ghost that the Son was conceived, and from him
afterward he never departed. Now,

Next, to the Holy Ghost himself. He also seems to me to be the Illustrious
Prototype of Heavenly Wights, or Angels. Is it asked, why? I answer, because,
as the Son is called (...), the Only-begotten one, to distinguish him from men
who are created Sons; so is the Holy Ghost called, with three dictinctive
Articles, (...), The Spirit The Holy of The God, to distinguish him, as it
seems to me, from Created Angels, who are called by St. Paul (...) only, and in
their nature are such. If so it be not, why are they called Ruchoth, i. e.
Spirits, as the Holy Ghost is called a Spirit? Why are they said to be Gibbore
coa^h, great in Power, and Strength, as, He the power of the Highest? And why
Elohym, mighty Powers? for so are they called too, and by this Stratagem, I
conceive, (Sc: fallacia aequivocationis,) did Satan deceive Eve, telling her,
that She should be like Elohijm, meaning by it, like himself, and his forlorn
Partners, the fallen Elohijm, whereas she thought of none else, but Jehovah
Elohijm, counting that she should be more like her God than she was before, so
by that means was deceived. In short,

Whatsoever sort, or kind of Persons the Son, and the Holy Ghost may be thought
to be, they are God for being in Unity with the Divine Substance, by which they
have all the Noble, and Supereminent Attributes of the Father, over, and above
the Communicable ones, which mere men, and Angels have, and these being as the
Taches of the Curtains of the Tabernacle of the most High, they are One most
High God, together with the Father.

And here now I freely profess, that if the Papists could argue for their
Hypothesis of Transubstantiation so rationally as I have done for this Mystery
of Mysterys, I would not separate, for that at least, from their Communion.
But, though I can easily conceive, that the Body of Christ can be present to
Beleivers in the Sacrament, Mediante Spiritu Sancto, that is to say,
Spiritually, just as he is present, as Head, to his Mistical Body the Church,
the Holy Ghost dwelling in him, and the Members thereof; for which I except not
so much against the Lutherans, who say indeed, that the Body is Vbiquitary, but
say withal, it is Supernaturally, or, illocally, as the Holy Ghost makes it be:
yet, since I cannot conceive, how Christ's natural Body should be every where,
or, in all parts, and places of the Church and be whole, and entire in all such
parts, and places, they of the Roman persuasion must pardon me, if I except
against Them, notwithstanding the pretense of Tradition so much urged for it;
and I cannot sufficiently admire at Mounsier Malebranch, for that, having laid
down his Excellent Rule, not to grant a full Assent to any thing, whilst Reason
Checks, yet himself, reluctante ratione, gives Assent to the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation upon such Tradition as is not Ancient, much less
Apostolical. Is he a Protestant in this point? if not, it must be Interest, or,
Fear that sways him; That Christ's Body is present in the Sacrament, I
sincerely believe; it is what the Martyrs of our Church, before they suffered,
acknowledged freely, in their Disputes with Cox Oglethorp, etc. yea they said,
Ipsissimum corpus Christi est in Sacrimento Eucharistiae, as appears in Dr.
Willet's Century's, but then they added still, that the Modus is Spiritualis,
and, is it not true this? it is, and we must take heed of saying otherwise,
though the Definitions of the Counsil of Trent for the Capernaitical way, are in
nowise to be allowed. For, if the Church be the Body of Christ, because the
Holy Ghost is with it, and in it, why should not the bread together with the
wine, as the New Testament Shechinah, be the Body, One; the other the Blood of
Christ, for the Holy Ghosts being with Him, and with the Signs, and Symbols at
once? is the Church the Mystical Living Body of Christ, for such reason, as
Consisting of living Wights, living Members? why then should not the Sacrament,
after the like manner, be the Mystical Dead Body of Christ, as by liveless
Elements represented? such an Vbiquity of Christ's Body if the Lutherans are
for; such change of the Elements if the Papist will agree to, I am heartily
with Them, and as the Jews called the Paschal Lamb the Body, so will I call the
bread I eat at the Sacrament the Body too, even of Christ; (for Mystically or
Spiritually it is so,) and, without making every (...) of the Father's a Dogma,
as they of Rome do, we may do it well, and truly enough. And,

Here I shut up, hoping that this Eye Salve of mine, which for truths sake, and
with perfect Charity I have presumed to offer to the world, will be accepted by
it, because it is wholely Compounded of Scripture, and Ancient Records going no
further then Revelation lead's, within which Bounds I Have taken care to keep, as
my Duty is. For secret things belong to the Lord, but things Revealed only to
us, and our Children; and I humbly acknowledge, Let Arians flout at the (...)
as they please, that the manner of the Son's Generation, and of the Holy
Ghost's proceeding a Patre Filioque, as not revealed, are above mine, and, as I
believe, all others Comprehension.

It is as Usual as it is pious to Conclude Discourses of this kind with Prayer.
Therefore, with hearty good wishes to all whose hands this little somewhat
shall fall into, I shall do the like, adding this short Prayer following, and
Recommending it to the Devotion of such as are disposed to use it.

O Almighty God, and most merciful Father in Jesus Christ, most humbly I
beseech thee, for thy Mercys sake, and for that great lover of Souls sake, thy
Only Begotten Son, in whom thou art well pleased, to open the Eyes of all those
among us, who have imbibed false Notions of thy most Holy Faith, that, all
Scandals being removed and cast out of the Church, and perfect Charity planted
in it, Heresy, and Schism may be put an end to amidst thy People; and also,
that Millions of Thousands, according to the Blessing on Rebecca, of Jews,
Turks, Heathens, Infidels may come into thy Holy Church, and being made One
Flock, together with us, Under the One great Shephard of the Sheep, may obtain
the End of the Hope of all the Faithful, even the Salvation of their Souls,
and, at the last Day, rise out of the dust, to Sing with Angels, and Saints,
everlasting Halleluijahs to Thee, O Holy Father, with thy Son, and the Holy
Ghost One God, blessed for evermore, Amen.

These Three are One.
Father Jehovah. Son Jehovah. H. Ghost Jehovah.
Je is the sign of a Proper Name, Proper Names are of Persons, Hovah is that
Necessary Being, which is the Father's Originally; the Son, and Holy Ghost are
God for being Consubstantial, or in Unity with the Substance of the Father,
which substance being but one, they are all Three One God.

(...)

Postcript, Containing a few Items not unworthy Observation.
THE Word Trinitarian is a Nickname given to the Orthodox by the wretch
Servetus. vid. Sixth. Seneus. Lib. 8. p. 789. It seems to come from Trinitare,
and supposes Three Persons to be One Person. Quaere, whither Unitarian be not a
word of the same stamp, supposing more Persons, Indefinitely, one Person.
videtur quod sic. Let the Arians consider this.

The word Existence not suitable, or fit to express God by, because the Godhead
is Necessary Being, and causes has None, whereas, Existentia in Actualitas
Essentiae, as Essence, yet Naked, is Potentialitas Essendi. Neither, in
Divinis, seems fit to be used.

(...), with St. John, is but the Translation of Mijmro with the Targumists,
who wrote thus; Mijmro daihovah, as much as the Word which is Jehovah; for
(...) in the Syriack, and Chaldee both, is, Qui est; but Daihovah, in reading,
they skipt over, whither for Reverence, or some other reason, we can guess
only. In compliance, St. John does the same, writing (...) only, the word
Jehovah, in Greek Letters, being not capable of Pronunciation.

Hammakom, with the Jewish Doctors, is the Name of the Godhead considered
abstractly, by which is meant THE Place. It is Vbi Repletiour, (...), or as
Trismegist, Centrum Vbique, sc. in se, to be Out of which is to be Nullibi. In
respect of its Excelling, or Transcendent Greatness, the whole world is but as
the drop of a Bucket; it Exceeds the powers of Imagination.

Hashechijnah, with the Jewish Doctrine, is the Name of the Son of God, whose
Shechijnah is not single, out Twofold. 1. The Everlasting substance of the
Father, in which he is Begotten: Then the Temporal or Bodily Substance, in
which Conceived by the Holy Ghosts Overshadowings. Seen this, Esai. 57. 25.
where himself says, (for it is he speaks there, calling himself the High, and
lofty One, etc.) I inhabit Marom, vekadosh, i. e. Height, and Holiness, viz. of
the Father: also, ethdachche, ushepal Ruahh, (as made Man,) The bow'd-down One,
humble of Spirit. Therefore a suitable Mediator betwixt God, and Man, to take
Care for the Authority of Gods Law's and to take Care also, and to have a
Respect to Man's Infirmity.

Follows an Item to the learned; so run, that ye may be Adepts, 1. Cor. 9. 24.
And, who is He that may be called an Adept? One that knows Him, who, to the
Confusion of Grammar, is a Past, and Future, as well as a present Is: who, to
the Confusion of Logic, is an Ineffable Syllogism, without Major, and Minor,
yet has a Medium agreeing to Each: who, to the Confusion of Metaphysics, is
True Personally, Good Personally, yet remains but One Substantially: who to the
Confusion of Arithmetic, is truly Multiplied, yet is not to be numbered by
Any: who, to the Confusion of Mathematics, is a Triangle, the Corners of
which, like the Ends of the Colures, are to be found nowhere; who, to the
Glory of Divinity, is Intellectually Three; Three, yet still Himself, One, and
not Many; the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, of whom each is God, and all three
the same God. Again,

An Adept is One, who Beleives in Him, who, though Begotten, is without
Beginning; is without Beginning, yet Begotten, and has a Father: who, though he
made All things, which are Made, yet was Made himself of that which he Made
first: who, though the very Fountain of life to Men, yet for them died once, and
was Buried: who though Always Within, and at Home, was found without, and gone
abroad: who, though in his Fathers Bosom, as Great as Heaven, was in the womb of
a woman, small as an Embryo: who though in highest Glory, was wrapped up in most
profound Humility, whose Name is God-Man, a Thing heard of but Once, will be
again never, the Newest thing of All things called New, since the Birth of light
on the first Day of the Creation. Again,

An Adept is One, whose Eye, though he be on Earth, is where the Eyes of Angels
are; whose Feet have Wings, and are washed with Milk, and Clean; who Begets with
his mouth, Creates by his Example, and his Birth's are Virgin-Souls, being
turned into the way of life by him, and Righteous: his life is All Praise; his
Death is sweet sleep, being to rise again in the Morn; his Dust as the Odours of
the precious Ointment of old, with which Kings, and Priests were Anointed. Here
in the Psalmist Hayh who is Crowned with Ashre's, the Man whom this Honorable
Name is to be Given to; for he is an Adept truly, and his Name is written in
Liber Tsoar, among the Fulgeburt's of the Man dearly Beloved, and shine as the
Stars of the Morning shall he, in the Future standing stillness, ever making
Haste for Ever to Be, the Adepts only End it is self without Conclusion.

To The Father of an Infinite Majesty, His Honorable, true, and only Son, Also
the Holy Ghost the Comforter Three Persons, Buy the Truth, and sell it not.
And One Eternal God Be All Honor, and Glory, Le-olam Olmijn, Amen.

