Jeremiah Hignell's Loving and Friendly. ADVICE AND COUNCIL, Given forth to the
Inhabitants of Bristol, And all others that may be concerned in other Places.
MY Loving Council and Advice to you all who are my (...) Citizens and
Neighbors, and Country Men and Women, without exception, is this, I would have
you consider your (...) plainly with the Lord whom we have to do with, and deal
plainly wit^ your own Souls, and Read in the Book of Conscience, what you are
doing, and in plainness, see how your lives are squared by the Truth, or by the
Law of God written in in your Hearts or according to the Testimonies of the
Prophets of God in times past, or according to the Testimonies of Christ Jesus
our Lord, and according to his Apostle's Doctrine. This will hurt none either
Men, or Women, young or old, to have this Search pass through them in time,
before it be too late; for late Repentance is not so good as early Repentance.
Remember Esaw, that sought his Birth right with Tears, but could not obtain it:
Yet I would not discourage any one that has a true desire to turn unto the
Lord God of Life, and Power, for it is left upon Record, i^ the Scriptures of
Truth, Isaiah, 55.6. and 7th. Verses, Seek ye the Lord whilst he may be found,
cast upon him whilst he is near: Let the Wicked forsa^e his wa^, and the
Ungodly man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have
Mercy upon him; and unto our God, for be will abundantly Pardon: So I would
desire all to consider, who have spent their time in Valnity and foolish
Pleasure, which will not profit, and still spend their time in Pride, which is
grown to a great height, the more is the Pity, and I doubt, without timely
Repentance, and the great Mercy of God, it will cause great Sorrow; for the
long suffering and Patience of God has been great toward this City, and our
Native Land, wherein God has raised up such Instruments that has sought unto
him in the time of Need, to send yet a Blessing upon poor England: But if God
should make a Desolation in the Land, and particularly in this City, the
Righteous, I believe, should not be forsaken; and I hope the Lord will be yet
entreated for this Nation, if People would but return from that which is Evil,
and turn to that which is Good. Now some may say, How shall I learn to do that
which is Good? Oh! Man, or Woman, whosoever thou art, thou do see that Pride
is a great sin, and Drunkenness is a great sin, whereby the Creatures are
abused, that God does give for the good of Men, and Women, and not to be
wasted, but received with thankfullness, that so many poor People in the Land
that may want the Comforts of them, even in this City, and other places that
may be destitute, and Whoredom is a great sin, let it be never so private; the
Lord God of Heaven and Earth he sees you that are Guilty. He that made the
Heaven and the Earth, he beholds all things, he Searches the Heart, and
tries the Reins, he is near unto all. He that made the Heart, he knows the
Heart, and he will Judge them: Swearing is a very great sin, even a crying sin,
and it is grievous to hear so much of it about the Streets; so is Murder a
great and crying sin, which calls for Vengeance, and which the Commandments of
God do testify against; and Theft is a sore Evil, which hangs in the Skirts of
some, and I would to God these things were laid aside by all that is guilty,
and Coveteouness is a great sin, which is said to be Idolatry, as it is
written, and many other great Evils does attend the Sors and Daughters of Men,
Emulation, Wrath, Prejudice, Backbiteing, all this is for want of Love, and
the great fear of God to be set up in the Heart, for the fear of God leepeth
the Heart clean. But I cannot pass by this great sin of Pride which has been
set before me for above this two Years, and I have reasoned with my self, how I
should manifest my Mind unto them that are walking in this way: But now I
humbly desire the People to leave off this great sin of Pride where ever it is
found, whether in Man or Woman, of high or low degree, which is gotten up, as I
may say, into a Monster, if it be well taken Notice of; and with Lamentation I
speak it, for it is a grief to my Soul, and therefore I beseech you, O
Neighbors and People, who are guilty of it, to lay it aside speedily, with all
other the Evil and ^i^uities of what kind soever; for these things will move
God's Wrath against the Guilty, and draw down Judgments upon this City, which
has so many People in it that my Soul does love; and I travel for the good of
all sorts, Pride, Idleness, and Fullness of Bread, as I remember, was the sins
of ^odom, and shall not those that fear God, mourn before the Lord, that he may
divert he Judgments, and turn away his displeas^re that is against the
Inhab^tants of this our City and Native Countries, I speak and write, I
Testify in much Meekness, and in humility of soul, if it were possible to
persuade my Loving fellow Citizens, and Country folks to turn to the Lord,
with a Humble Heart, and in this Humble persuasion, I believe the Lord will be
with me, so I commend you to the Grace of God, which is able to help in this
great work of Salvation, if you Join with it, and turn not from it, for it
teaches all that will be taught by it, to deny ungodliness and worldly Luts,
and to live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this present World, Tit. 2.11.
For all have a Measure of the Grace that comes from God, and measure of the
Heavenly gift and Manifestation of the spirit of God, which is given to every
one to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. for God condemns not any for that they
never had, but for what they have had, and not improved, but misused according
to the Testimony of the Holy Scriptures, John 3.19. And this is the
Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and men Love Darkness rather
than Light because their Deeds were evil. And further, I have to signify, that
some that believe have a sight of Spiritual things, for God does Reavel his
Mind and Will by his Spirit, but they will not take up the Cross for fear of
others, or being accounted Fools, or differing from their Neighbors; and this
is the true State of some, but I pray God to help those poor People out of this
state, which will be an happiness to them, and so I will leave you all to God's
Grace, as I have done before, to teach you who are in any of the foregoing
states and conditions, and commend my faithful love to you, desiring that God
may be with you in the great work of his Salvation, which is Revealed, and
begun to be right spoken of in this day among a despised People, even Christ in
Man, the hope of Glory, Col. 1.27.

THE END
BRISTOL, Printed, by Will. Bonny, on the Back.


