A TESTIMONY TO THE TRUE JESUS And the Faith of him, Wherein the Way of the
People called QUAKERS is in Meekness and righteousness summed and weighed.

First in a General Examen of their spirit and chief Principles; after in a
particular reveiw of the same, as it is distinctly set forth in a book of
theirs, called, Love to the Lost.

Wherein are many things useful for the discerning of Spirits in this hour of
darkness and temptation.

By T. HIGGENSON.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Brewster at the three Bibles near the West end of
Paul's. 1656.

A Testimony to the True JESUS, and the Faith of Him.
COncerning the People called Quakers, and that way, a sum of their faith and
profession is come forth signed by James Naylor, who seems to be chief; whereby
having obtained through Grace a more perfect understanding of them then I had
before, his Trumpet giving a more certain sound than others had done: and
having observed that Spirit to show it self therein with more nakedness and
less covering (at least to me) than at other times; I shall in righteousness
and love to them and others present a veiw thereof according to the same form
and visage it there presents it self under.

The ground of my appearing herein is, not any interest I have in Court or
Clergy, from both whom I stand at a distance so far as they appear at a
distance from Christ and his work; not any zeal I have to any form or way of
worship cried down by this people; my heart is knit to all the Lords people,
from the Priest to the darkest forms, though I am not joined to them outwardly
in the letter; nor that I am ignorant or a stranger to spiritual mysteries or
inward truths, at least in part; touching which I may say, that my thoughts and
zeal for Christ within have abounded so above the thoughts I had of his blood
without, that I account it infinite mercy. I am not at this day in unity with
that Spirit that makes the death of Christ of none effect, instead of this my
appearing against it: but my ground is this, that I might bear some testimony
to the blessed Mystery of Christ crucified, and against this or any people, so
far as they appear against it: and that according to my measure I might set
forth and justify the harmony that is between the perfect Redemption in Christ
for (...), and the Revelation of him in us: which two have been (...) the
Mystery of Iniquity divided and set up one against the other; the first against
the last, by men zealous for the dead faith of Christ without, against his
Spirit; and the last against the first, by men pretending to the Mystery of
Christ in them, against the Redemption in Christ for them.

The Law was given by Moses in darkness, blackness, and tempests, and with loud
noises; but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, in a still and meek way, no
cry nor voice to be heard in the streets; like as it was then, so will it be
now; if the loud noises of the Commandment and Condemnation by Moses be brought
in again, the still voice of Reconciliation and Peace by Christ may not be
heard as to many.

The Law was given by him that spoke on Earth, commanding things to be done by
men in the flesh; the Gospel by him that spoke from Heaven revealing our
Righteousness already wrought in the Lord himself: as many as are not ignorant
of Satan's devices do know, how easily, having begun in the Spirit, we return
back to the bondage of the first, but how hardly we stand fast in the Loyalty
of the second: if such a spirit or faith shall cover this Land, that says, we
are not perfected for ever in Christ the Head, before any good be done in us,
what remains then but that sacrifices for sin be offered again, though not in
the Temple at Jerusalem, yet in the Temples of our bodies, and so build up
again the old worldly Sanctuary, only changing the manner and form of
administration.

Concerning the Righteousness of the Letter, of Angels, and of God.
What may be useful for us to know, as to the general Consideration of this
and many other Spirits, the things following may in part acquaint you, in whose
hearts the faith and love of Truth does yet remain.

There is a Righteousness according to the Letter, consisting of bodily
exercises in the earthly members after the outward Commandment, which is but
the purifying of the flesh, Hebr. 9.13. herein stood the Religion of the carnal
Jews under the first Testament; this became a covering upon their eyes, a vail
upon their hearts, that they could not see nor receive him who was the
righteousness of God.

There is a Righteousness of Angels, or a worshipping of Angels Col. 2. which
is the Spirit of Man retired into things within, passing beyond the things of
the letter, or of the body into speculations of the Godhead, understanding of
Mysteries, to a certain perfection of knowledge and holiness, all which is but
the Glory of Man: herein stands the Religion of the Antichristian Gentiles now
under the new Testament: this was the sum of all the divinity the
School-Doctors did know or deliver: this Angelical Perfection (falsely so
called) laid the foundation of the Eremites living by roots in the wilderness,
of Anchorites shutting up themselves from Communion with men, of Monasteries
and holy Houses, for mortifying the flesh, and perfecting in holiness: these
things, while they bear a show of wisdom in humility and neglecting the body,
have been in every age, and still are set at enmity against him, who is the
Righteousness of God, in the several approachings and manifestations of
himself; so what Satan cannot do in a weaker way by the Righteousness of the
letter, he will endeavor to effect by a Ministry of Light and Righteousness;
that appearing as in the glory and purity of an Angel of God, he may darken or
diminish the righteousness and glory of the Son of God.

There is the Righteousness of God, Jesus Christ, who by that fullness of Spirit
and Life dwelling in him, did at once, and for ever; not in ours, but his own
body, triumph over, and put an end to the Law, Sin and Death on his Cross, and
rising from the Grave, raised up, and set up, together with himself, his Church
in the heavenly Righteousness in him: this Righteousness is as far above
either of the former, as Christ is exalted above all Principality and Power;
therefore can they not add nor extend any righteousness to this, no more than
the Glory of Man or Angels can add glory (...) Jesus Christ.

This Righteousness is the Word made flesh, not the W^ alone, nor the flesh
alone, but the Union of these, God and the ^n Christ in One, and the operation
proceeding from this Union wrought and remaining in the Person of Jesus Christ:
this Righteousness being broad and perfect, according to the Person in whom it
is, extends it self unto all and upon all that believe, and (...) them perfect
and without spot to God in it self, without and before any work or good done
whatsoever: let this righteousness shine forth ^ongst us, and our eyes shall be
kept seeing, our judgment sound (...) either philosophy of men, nor perfection
of Angel shall spoil us; neither iniquity in the Letter not in the Mystery
shall beguile us; but where this Righteousness is denied or out of sight, there
darkness had covered the mind, there spiritual wickedness will be taken for
Gospel-mysteries.

What is Idolatry: God may be known three manner of ways.
AMong the works of the flesh, Gal. 5.20. Idolatry is one, the knowledge and
worship of God according to the Law, according to Philosophy, and not after
Christ, this is Idolatry; until Christ be formed in thee not as a Lawgiver,
but as a mere Savior, not only as putting away sin and perfecting
righteousness in thee, but as having already put it away, and perfected thee in
himself, thou art in Idolatry, Hebr. 9 26. and 10.14. That of God which is
manifest in all men, presents God according to one form in his eternal Power
and Godhead: Moses presents God in another form, in his back parts, as a
Lawgiver and a Judge: Christ presents his face to us, Glory in the Highest,
Peace on Earth, good will toward men; all these prepared already: Hence may be
observed:

That God may be Known three ways: first, to that in every man by the things
that are made: this may discover to men the invisible things of him, his
eternal Power and Glory, but not his good pleasure or purpose of Grace, this
may raise up to high imaginations of the divinity, as over all, through all,
and in all to a glorious show and height of seeming holiness and perfection,
but knows nothing of the Mystery hid in God, redemption by Christ, nor can lead
any into it; unto these Christ crucified is foolishness.

2. God may be known by the Law from Mount Sinai; but this fight is so
terrible, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake: this knowledge
exercises the body, purifies the flesh, compels unto works, but opens not the
way into the Holiest, the heavenly righteousness hid with Christ in God: unto
these Christ crucified is a stumbling block.

3. God is seen in the face of Jesus Christ, without a vail, as in a glass;
there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus,
1 Timothy 2. the invisible, inaccessible God comes down in the Man Jesus, and
appears in him as upon a Mercy-seat, unto him let all men look that would see
the Father: the crucifying of his flesh was the renting of the vail, that Grace
and Glory before hid in God might now shine forth in him: so Jesus Christ alone
in his Person is the face and Image of God, wherein he may and will be seen. If
any man, though an Angel from Heaven, shall not point you unto a crucified and
glorified Jesus for fight and access to God, know this, that he leads you out
from the New and Living way, unto the old and deadly Gate, where the flaming
Sword turns every way, that no flesh can enter in and live, Genesis 3.24. Curious
speculations of the divine Majesty without Christ Jesus, are the proper work of
Reason, and the highest divinity of Philosophers, Jesuits and Justitiaries; if
thou think to approach the divinity, h^s Light and holiness, excluding the
Mediator, thou shall be confounded of his Glory. Let J. Naylor and his
followers with fear and trembling hear and consider.

Who hold not the Head, and how Christ is Head.
DOctrines and Spirits are spoken of fair in show, high and perfect, which yet
hold not the Head, Col. 2. what are the doctrines, and what is the Head? the
Doctrines are first of men; such are they who come in the words and wisdom of
Man; their Doctrine a leaven of the Pharisees, that is a compound of humane wit
and learning, Law and Gospel letter, Jesus Christ having only a Name among
them, himself being not believed nor known by them, neither in his crucified
body, nor quickening Spirit; these being of a lower and common nature are
received by the greater part of men.

Secondly, there is a doctrine of Devils, of Satan transformed into Angels of
light; such preach a Jesus, Gospel and Spirit, but not the true; speak great
things, abstaining from meats, from marriages, neglecting of the body, as
things base and sensual; imagine and intrude into things in show more
excellent, things not seen, purity, perfection life of Angels; but the true
perfection and life which is in Christ alone they deny, and set up another in
work; that which is prepared and finished already in one, the body of the Man
Christ they destroy, and teach another to be wrought or done again in many by
Angel or Spirit, in the bodies of all the Saints; these are they who worship
Angels, who hold not the Head; their doctrine by how much in show more
spiritual, by so much does it spoil and bewitch the minds of men above all
other.

What then is the Head?

The Head over all things, the Head of the Church is Christ, of this (...)
understanding; First according to his Godhead only; that God is Head over all
things, to be feared and worshipped of all men; thus Jews, Turks, Pagans and
all men do know and profess; this is that which may be known of God by all men,
and is manifest in them, the enlightening upon every one that comes into the
world. Secondly, according to the whole Person, God and Man in one; as such he
received power to become Head over all things to his Church; against him drove
two great and dreadful enemies, the handwriting of Ordinances, charging our
sins and Curse upon him, and Principalities and Powers with their spiritual
wickednesses to have swallowed him up; against both these he prevailed,
blotting out the one, having nailed it to his Cross, and spoiled the other,
making a show of them openly, and triumphing over them in it: and thus he was
declared Head over all things, which is to be rightly understood, not only as
he is in the form of God, equal with God, able to subdue all things in us to
himself (for this is true of him, had he never been manifest in flesh at all,
and is known and professed by all Nations, though they believe not, or know
nothing of Christ come in the flesh, as Jews and Pagan;) but he is Head
according to his whole Person, Emmanuel, God and Man in Union; in that, not
often and in every generation, and in many bodies, but in one body by one
offering once and for ever he has, not in our Persons, but in himself already
subdued for us all things whatsoever are named in heaven, on earth, or in the
deeps, the Law, sin and death, with all their might, dominion and power. Hence
are these sayings faithful and true, and if any Man or Angel preach another
Doctrine, believe him not.

That Jesus Christ the brightness of the Fathers glory has already by himself
without us, and before any good wrought in us, finished transgression, made an
end of sin, abolished condemnation and death, and that not by Spirit only, but
by spirit, water and blood.

That though in the Kingdom of the Law, of Reason and sense, that is, in the
flesh, sin, condemnation and death are seen and felt; yet in the Kingdom of
Grace and Faith, that is, in Christ, they are vanquished and appear no more.

That a beleiver while enclosed and shut up in a body of sin and death,
fightings and fears within and without, as he is in flesh, is at the same time
raised up into the heavenly righteousness, immortality and freedom above all
sin or shadow of evil, as he is in Christ the Head; as redeemed in Spirit, a
Christian is in heaven, in rest, in victory and perfection; as not yet redeemed
in the body, he is on earth, in labors, infirmities and imperfection.

These blessed sayings, whosoever holds fast in faith and love, will be in him
as a lamp leading him through the thick vail of Legality, the vain speculations
of Philosophy, the mysterious depths of Antichrist; and will be to him a Light
to discern the Doctrine, Spirit, Ministry and Church of Christ, from them that
say they are so, and seem to be so, but are not, but are of the Synagogue of
Satan.

Ye are complete in him. Upon this truth has the Church of Christ been built,
as upon a rock, higher than all the floods and storms that have gathered
against her during the long Night of Antichristian darkness; as this Truth
shined forth, literal and mystical Idolatry in England, France and Germany, as
shadows of the Night fled away: On the other hand, this Truth dying and
decreasing out of the Churches of Galatia, Colosse, etc. prepared the way of
the Man of Sin into them, and to this day has exalted him over all Nations:
when the knowledge of Christ as Head shall more increase, and the Church grow
up more into him who is Head, Antichrist in his highest forms, his deepest
speech, his fairest shows, worshipped and wondered at by the unbeleiving and
unstable world of Professors shall be revealed and consumed.

Three chiefest Principles of this people called Quakers, examined and weighed.
COncerning this people, passing by their language postures, and all other
respects as to Person or Circumstance; the trial and knowledge of theirs or any
other Spirit may more certainly be had from the substance and ground of their
doctrine and faith; the sum and scope whereof (as to me it appears) may be
fully and faithfully gathered up in these three following principles.

1. That the Light which enlightens every man, accusing of sin, is Christ and
God, the Pure and Perfect, the Eternal and Just One, and so the Redeemer and
Savior, and the All, to be known and believed, not as do others, in word,
letter, or person without, but as within, redeeming, reconciling and making
atonement, not without in another, but within in our selves; out of which
Light man departing was lost in darkness and the fall; into which Light
returning again, he is restored and redeemed as at the beginning.

2. That this Light as condemning of sin and death, and restoring out of it
into Righteousness and Life, this is the blood and death of the Cross, the
resurrection and second coming of the Son of God; and that Obedience without
mixture unto this Light working all our works in us, this is our Redemption,
Justification, Mortification and Sanctification; so much obedience, so much
redeemed: thus the Law and Gospel, Faith and Obedience, Death, Resurrection,
Redemption, Justification and Sanctification are not things distinct, but one
and the same within us.

3. That the way to come to all this, and to Christ, and the Father is the
Light in every man condemning of sin, the sure word of prophecy, wherein we
must wait within, and not as others, go out unto a Christ without, a letter
without; Christ and the Scriptures only delivering their own experiences and
conditions not as a Rule or word of faith to others; and giving their Testimony
only to the Light within, and not to any Person, Redemption, or operation
without; also his and their Ministration in work, words, or letter, without
being only the literal Covenant that makes nothing perfect. This is the
justest description, and my truest understanding I can give of their faith and
principles; their other doctrine are but conclusions proceeding from these.

Three Principles of Truth are perverted and denied by these three principles
of theirs; the Person of Christ as the Object of Faith: the Scriptures as the
Rule of Faith, and Faith it self as the evidence of things not seen: of each of
these a word, whereby both Truth and Error may appear.

Jesus Christ was in the beginning with God, the Word, the promise, the Life;
yet fore ordained in the end of the world to be manifest in flesh, to put away
sin therein by the sacrifice of himself.

Unto him, that is, Christ as to come in the flesh, the two great witnesses
under the old Testament, the Law and the Prophets did testify and point as the
true Promise and Sacrifice; the Law having a shadow of things seen afar of,
not then received; of good things to come, not present and done; of Jesus the
High Priest to minister in flesh, and therein to offer himself the one, the
perfect, the eternal Sacrifice once and for ever, no more to be offered from
thenceforth in any age or generation.

In the fullness of time, the Word was made flesh, and being greater than Moses,
the Prophets, or John, he gathered up their several ministrations and finished
them in himself; the fullness of the Godhead in him, as a Sea of righteousness,
life and blessing, abolishing and overwhelming the sin, condemnation and curse
of the world, as the less is overcome of the greater.

And hereunto when he ascended on high, he gave gifts unto men, whom he
ordained as Apostles and Witnesses to the world, that the Purpose and Grace
which was given us in Christ before the world began, which was shadowed by the
Law and foretold by the Prophets, was now made manifest by the appearing of our
Savior Jesus Christ, who has abolished sin and death in his crucified body,
and has brought forth immortality and life in himself in spirit.

Thus the Mystery of Grace and truth lay hid in the divinity, but came forth,
and was acted in the humanity; neither is the divinity without the humanity,
nor the humanity without the divinity but both one in Christ: thus the
crucified and glorified Person of Christ is the express Image of God, the alone
object of faith, the way whereby God came down in salvation unto men and by
which we ascend and have access unto God: thus Redemption and Righteousness is
gloriously wrought without us in the person of Christ; to point to any Person
or Spirit within for the working Redemption over again, other than to him that
descended and ascended again, is to bring Christ down from above, and up again
from the dead, to raise up Moses out of his Sepulcher, which no man knows to
this day, with his ministration of death, and to make the blood of Christ a
common thing, or as the blood of another Man: consider this and fear ye people
of whom I speak.

To conclude this first principle with one other note: the Person of Christ and
Redemption in him is veiled and denied by two sorts of men, legal Teachers of
the Gospel, and mystical Teachers of the Law; they differ herein, the first set
forth Christ in words of man's wisdom, conditions of law, and as only in the
flesh without, not discerning him spiritually: the other speak of him in more
spiritual words and deep speculations, but only as redeeming within us, in
spirit, not discerning nor beleiving the Glory of that Redemption without us in
his Person; they agree in this, by both Christ is known only after the flesh,
by the one only as in the form of a Man or Person without, by the other as a
Redeemer only within, that is, as not having finished already Redemption on
earth, nor as being Head over all things in the Father: wherefore to know
Christ as having aleady redeemed by his blood without, and as the
incomprehensible fullness of Spirit, and life above all, through all, and within
all his people, this is the true, the safe, the blessed knowledge of Christ;
and by this the first of their Principles above named is weighed and reproved
of error.

How Faith is the evidence of things not seen.
COncerning Faith; it is the evidence of things not seen: heavenly things were
in God from everlasting by way of purpose, yet unseen, unsearchable by any eye;
in fullness of time they were manifested in the Person of Christ, as by him
perfected and wrought at once, yet seen and discerned only by faith; according
to the measures of Grace they are shed forth by the Spirit from him upon all
the members and manifest to our sense: all things of the first Creation were
made by Christ, all things pertaining to the second are ceased in him; thus
Redemption is first entire in him, afterward in measures revealed in his, a
work once perfected for ever in him, not to be done by pieces in us; and so it
is in being and finished already, but hid with Christ in God.

Now upon these heavenly things there is a vail, whereby they are hid, the law
in the conscience, Reason and sense in the flesh, and there is an evidence
whereby they are seen, that is, Faith; unto such as are under this vail nothing
is seen nor heard but the Commandments to work, and the sentences of death
where work is not; the Law in the letter, and deeds in the flesh, as the face
of the covering spread upon the heart that Christ cannot be seen: the highest
divinity of men in this state is this Perfection by obedience to the letter
without, or at the best to the Spirit within; Christ as a Lawgiver in their
Conscience and a worker of it in their Persons, not as a Savior having once
fulfilled it for them in himself: what of God is felt and wrought in
themselves, that they believe, and by that Rule they judge, while the
unspeakable righteousness, operation and life hid in Christ, and with him
reserved in God, with the faith, liberty, joy and peace thereof is hid from
their eyes; such is the vail and the people thereof.

But where Faith is come the vail is done away, the earthly man with his deeds
and death, his hopes and fears, and all things belonging to him are seen to be
abolished and overcome by the everlasting righteousness and Spirit of Life that
is in Christ, even as the night is overcome by the day; and this is to be
understood to be true in him, a Covenant in him, ordered in all things and sure
to us, not always perceived in feeling to our earthly members, yet seen and
fulfilled in the inward man through faith.

It is said, 2 Corinthians. 5.7. We walk by faith not by sight: Faith and sight are
to be understood, either as they are perfecting each other, or as by men
divided and made contrary one to the other; sight of God has a glory and
sweetness; faith in him, though not so seen, has a certainty and evidence;
faith beholds things as true in Christ, though hid to sense and feeling; sight
knows them only as shining or flaming forth upon the heart: visions and
revelations bring joy and comfort, but they are things that go and come, and
the breathings of the Spirit may blow when they list, but when these streams
are withheld and as passed away, yet he ever lives, and we also in him: God
spoke in times past with the Fathers and Prophets by visions to sense; he
speaks in these last times in his Son to faith: visions by figure, as those
were, they were but given at times and passed away; the face of Jesus Christ
beheld by faith is the constant and standing vision now under the Gospel:
spiritual influences and actings do yield some reflection, and vision of God,
but as a Man sees his face in a troubled water, broken and changeable; but the
face of Christ as the Crystal and still waters presents God always in his
clear and blessed Image as full of Grace and Truth: they who put spiritual
workings for the Grace that is in Christ, and a sense of the spirit for faith
in him, they do under a pretense of Spirit destroy Christ Jesus, they take away
that Gospel which presents us in him before any work done, our perfection, our
Sabbath, our Rest, and leads us to work again for perfection by obedience to
the Light within, that is, by the Law.

Concerning Faith and Sight.
FAith and sight, the Gospel-Christian is for both in their season and place;
all other Religions have divided them and erred; as it is very observable, that
sight being alone, that is, sight of the Godhead without faith in Christ has
been and is the foundation of all false, fancied and Idolatrous worships that
are named: fight of the deity by the things that are made is the highest
Religion of Philosophers and Pagans; sight of God by the Golden Calfe, by the
Idols of gld and silver was the idolatry of Israel in the wilderness and
Canaan: Conceiving the things of the Spirit of God by the sight and judgment
of natural Reason is the foundation of Arminians, a Sect of Morality, and of
Socinians a Sect of subtilty: a Kingdom with observation and fair shows in the
flesh to the sight without, was the Religion of Pharisees and legal Gospellers:
some are of a weaker spirit, their Religion is about things of sight, touch
not, taste not; some are of stronger heads, such are for divinations of the
brain, things seen to Reason; babes in Christ are for enlightnings and tastes,
and gifts, things of sight to the inward sense; and they that would seem to be
the highest, are for all to be known and believed as done only within: thus
nothing is less learned and understood by the most of Religions and Opinions
that are, than faith in Christ, and the life of faith: sense, or reason, or
fancy, or mystical legalitie, (all which in the account of the Spirit are but
sight and appearance) having left no more room for true Gospel faith, than
only in that Church of the faithful that holds the Head, even him that is far
above all things and they in him by faith.

And hence it is, that where sight or sense as to spiritual things is by any
spirit or doctrine made a principle and rule of judgment, these and such like
conclusions follow; do this and live; if thou sinnest after faith, thou art
under the law; so much obedience, so far justified; while flesh lusts within
thee, no freedom from sin; to be perfectly justified by Christ and reconciled
to God is not till fully mortified and obedient to Christ within thee, all
which are sentences of the Law, not of Grace, denying Christ, overwhelming the
afflicted in sorrow without hope, and turning the feet of the lame out of the
way; of such doctrines beware.

On the other hand, where faith, or things not seen, or things in Christ are
made the rule or principle of Judgment, these sayings are blessed and true; I
am black but comely; as dying and behold we live; when I am weak then am I
strong, Enoch, Noah and Abraham dyed in the faith, yet received not the
promises, only saw them afar off; all things are put in subjection under
Christ, though we see not all things yet put under him.

The sum of all is, measure not things by sight but faith; the door of faith is
open when that of sense may be shut; rejoice always in the Lord, though thou
may not always see him: sight as alone is the foundation of idolatry, if
thou be led by that, thou fallest back into the Law, though in a mystery of
deceit; if thou walk by faith, thou shall be led on to sight, not that of
reason or dry speculation, but of spiritual, sweet and gracious mainfestation
of Christ, as in person a Savior for thee, and as in Spirit revealing himself
in thee: and hereby their second principle above named of justification and
redemption to be the light within, as obeyed within may appear to be a mystery
of iniquity to my understanding, affirming in effect, that Christ is divided,
Paul and every Christian crucified and made an offering for himself, and
thereby justified, reconciled and accepted; and if it be so, let this people
consider and fear; but if not so, let plainness of speech be used and not a
vail.

Concerning the Spirit and Scriptures as together making up a perfect witness
or rule of faith.
COncerning the Scriptures, passing by all other distinctions; they are first,
the Law of Commandments ordained by Angels, a ministration of the letter
answering to that of God in every man, the law in the conscience; this within
and that without being one in substance, a light and a law of things to be done
for righteousness and life; thus all Nations have received a law, having a law
in themselves, though suppressed and veiled; thus all have a law, though dimmed
and darkened, pointing to the righteousness of the law or first Adam, but not
attaining thereunto: and herein all Nations are one, whether Jews, Turks or
Pagans, their Light one, Law one, Religion one, all following one
righteousness, that is, of the Law; only in difference of notion, and form,
and manner of worship; all equally concluded under the law of sin, and all
equally ignorant of the second Adam, and righteousness by him: thus if
Scriptures were not, by that Candle in man God might be known, and the law and
righteousness, yet but as in a ministration of death: the righteousness of God,
and the law of the Spirit, and God manifest in flesh being a mystery hid from
the natural man, declared only by the Gospel, and discerned by the Spirit.

2. The word of the Gospel or Reconciliation being the joyful tidings of an
heavenly Person and an heavenly gift, both equally wonderful, God manifest in
flesh, and our righteousness in him; in whom old things, or things belonging to
the first Adam, whether the Law of God, or deeds of the flesh are passed away,
having in him received their period or perfection, and all things, though not
yet to us fully seen, in him become new.

Thus the Gospel being a mystery of things hid in Christ, is neither written
not to be seen in the heart of man; and being a mystery of things of the new
Creature, and of another world, cannot be known by the wisdom of this world,
that is, by the wisdom, spirit and light of the natural Man: as he that gave a
law to all the world, has set in every man a light to know that law; so the
ministration of Grace being a far other thing, and exceeding it in glory,
cannot be known but by a far other Light than that in every man and exceeding
it in glory, that is the Spirit of grace. Wherefore the bringing the Gospel to
Light is after this manner; it first lay hid in God, unknown to Angels or men,
as the deeps that are beneath; afterward was declared and administered by the
Word made flesh in the Person of Christ, as the spring head bring forth the
deeps beneath, thereby him revealed through the sending of the Spirit to them
that were with him, and to this day by the same spirit to them that believe
through their word: and hence these things follow.

That the knowledge of God according to the law all Nations may have by his
enlightening within them; the mystery of God in Christ not so, the first being
engraven in the spirit of man, this having not so much as entered into the
heart of man, and being only revealed by another Light far exceeding in glory,
even that Spirit which the world never saw nor can receive.

That the Scriptures as joined in one are the only sufficient, warranted and
standing evidence of Christ to men; the Scriptures as the Image of him without,
and the Spirit as the light shining upon them, bring forth the true and living
image of him into the heart: if Grace have appeared to any, where Scriptures
are not, the Spirit is free to blow where he lists, but this spirit or grace
the light in the natural man, knows nothing of.

That the Spirit and Scriptures together, as they are a full witness to Christ
and Truth, so they are as the standing Oracle or constant Vision, unto which
all ought to come for the knowledge of Truth, the perfect Judge for ending all
difference about spiritual matters, and the perfect Rule for trial of all
spirits and ways of Religion; the Scriptures as the lanthorn, and the Spirit
as the candle therein; they as the Commandment of Christ to his Church, and the
Spirit as the Judge giving the true understanding thereof, and bringing forth
the Mystery and Majesty that lies hid therein.

Either of these, if set up asunder without the other, brings forth a twofold
error, both perilous and hurtful.

1. Imposing the letter of Scripture without the light of the Spirit, whether
by Churches or Councils, may be an opposing the Scriptures against the Spirit,
and sets up another dominion over the conscience, which is subject to Christ
alone.

2. Imposing any thing for vision or Spirit without liberty of appeal, or
reference to Scripture, whether by an Angel from heaven, or an Apostle, is a
shaking men's minds from off the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus
Christ being the chief corner stone, and a carrying them away as by a blast of
wind unto another Jesus, another Spirit, of whom God never spoke: he that
imposes any thing upon conscience for Spirit without testimony of Scripture,
is as he that imposes for Scripture without testimony of the Spirit; both
equally seeking to bear dominion over our faith: the second error, if either,
is worse than the first; the generations that are past, who lived more in the
letter, suffered much by the first; these last times, which profess more of the
Spirit, may suffer an hour of sore temptation by the last.

The conclusion is; A call to any light, or voice, or word within, as the way
to Christ, from the Spirit and Scriptures; unto spirits in distemper, who take
apparitions of the night for dawnings of day, the sparklings of fancy for the
true beams of faith, unto such th^s may seem a ministry of light; but he that
through Grace has still the faith of Jesus, knows it to be a foundation of
Satan laid in the deep, in order to a design of blotting out the Gospel, and
therein the face of the Mediator, the Church in him, their liberty, their joys
and songs in Christ: and hereby their third principle aforesaid, affirming the
Light in the Conscience the way or guide to Christ, whereto only to attend,
appears to be a darksome, fleshly and most legal Principle, a very grave,
wherein Christ, Redemption, Atonement, our Victory, and Triumph, and Sabbath
in him lies buried, despised and forgotten for ever: thus according to my
measure, their main Principles are weighed, let the spiritual judge.

The Light in all men, what it is, and of what use.
THere is one thing more which I may not pass, as being the soul and life of
all their principles, that the light which is in every man is Christ the
Redeemer, the Spirit, a twofold error may be discerned herein by the things
following. Christ as in the beginning, the Word, was he by whom all things
pertaining to the first Creation or natural man were made and do consist; and
so he was and is the fountain of being and life to every Creature, in him we
live and breath.

Christ, as the Word by whom all things were made, is the splendor and image
of the invisible God to the first Creation; as brightness to the Son, so Christ
to the Father, is a face of light sending forth his lightenings upon every
Creature, as a Rule or Law to every motion and operation; and as thus, he has
lighted up a candle in the natural man's heart, and also presents some beams of
the Godhead, and therein of justice, equity, soberness, etc, to be discerned by
his candle, and observed as his law: thus all natural principles, moral virtues
and just laws of Nations, are beams from Christ, as he is the Word and Light of
God to the natural man, not as he is a Redeemer.

The highest office and use of this Light within, or of the natural man, is
this, to receive from God the manifestation of the invisible things of him,
that is, the divine power and Godhead, and to return to God obedience thereto
just and perfect, as God is just and perfect, that is, to know him as God, and
glorify him as God: thus the fullest account of the light within every man,
according to the Spirit and Scriptures, is this; as in it self it is the work
of the Law written in their hearts; as to its object, it is the candle of the
Lord in the Spirit of man, beholding God according to some speculations of the
divinity, knowing nothing of the precious Gospel Mystery, God manifest in
flesh; and as to its exercise, it is a doing by nature the things contained in
the law: hence as the sum of things spoken these conclusions follow.

That the Light within for matter and substance is the fame with the law of
Moses, that was written upon tables of stone, this upon tables of flesh in the
conscience; both were given for transgression, not for righteousness; neither
of them could reveal or give life, both Jews and Gentiles being all under sin.
From both these Laws, whether in tables of stone or tables of conscience,
Christ came to justify and deliver, bringing forth in himself instead of both
a more excellent and perfect law, as far as the Sun of Righteousness himself
excels that which is but a beam or letter of righteousness only: according to
J. Naylor and the people of that way, Christ came to redeem Israel in the flesh
from the Law and every letter without, but to establish in force that within in
the conscience, by obedience unto which men come to be redeemed: this is the
first error; the Light within or work of the Law in the heart, from the
terror and condemnation whereof the blessed Lord Jesus came to deliver, is
called and worshipped by them as the Redeemer and Spirit.

Secondly, while they affirm the light within, or in every man, is the
Redeemer, they know Christ only as a Lawgiver and worker, not as a Justifier
and Savior; naturally, according to the Godhead, as judging and purging away
sins within them, not Evangelically, according to that blessed union or
marriage with the humanity, as having already therein purged away all sins by
himself.

Christ is formed in the minds, and described in the writings of men under a
twofold image or resemblance; one according to Gospel mystery by the Spirit of
God, the other according to natural Reason by the spirit of this world: Christ
beheld as having our sinful flesh, condemnation and death as a garment upon
him, and as having rent and torn the same from off him again by the power of
the Spirit of life in him, and having so taken them all away, as if they had
never been; this is a true resemblance of him; thus is he seen in his proper
colors; thus Christ is no Moses, no Exactor, no giver of Laws, but a most
sweet Savior and giver of Grace, thus is he nothing else but infinite Mercy
and Goodness, freely given, and freely giving to us all things in himself;
Christ according to this form shining in thy faith, shall put to flight Armies
of thy temptations, shall try the Spirits, shall preserve thee from being
spoiled by any false doctrines, either of subtle philosophy, or specious
Legality, if this image of him thou suffer to be defaced, or any other ways
painted out unto thee, when the hour of temptation or trouble comes, thou
shall soon be overthrown.

By the Spirit of this world Christ is set forth under another resemblance, by
some more according to the Godhead, as the Word, the Light, the Truth, the
Spirit; by others according to the humanity, as a man holy, spotless, separate
from sinners, and by both as a living example unto the world of perfect
obedience to the law of the Spirit and the life of God; this sets forth Christ
indeed as a divine Person and so has a Truth, but presents him only as giving
a Law and working it in us, and so denies and blots out the Glory of his Grace,
as being the end of the Law: this is the divinity of Sophisters and
Justitiaries, and all that they know or can teach of Christ; let such Teachers
know, who cry up the Spirit to cry down the blood, who teach him as an Example
and cast out the Atonement, let all such know, while they vaunt of sublime
divinity and mysterious truth, they do but set Christ in Moses chair as
Lawgiver and Judge, but the great love in him as propitiation for sins, they
know nothing of: the highest Religion of natural Reason, is to pierce far into
notions of God, and to set him before it as a pattern to obey; but faith only
sees the deep secret of Grace laid up in a crucified Christ: he that would
behold the glory of God, and would be set up in those heavenly places, let him
lay down his Reason how heightened soever, and begin in the simplicity of faith
at the crucified body of Christ, in whom he shall see himself dead, and buried,
and raised up also together with him, not by any work or obedience to Christ
within, but by the faith of the operation of God, who has raised Christ from
the dead.

Hence these things follow. 1. That the Light within, or of the natural man,
with the work of Reason together, is that spirit of this world, which has
formed this false resemblance of Christ as a Lawgiver, and Worker, and
Pattern; as upon the Cross, an Atonement to Justice, the victory of sin, curse
and the grave, and the Head over all (which is the true likeness or image of
him, terrible to others, but the joy of his own) so he is not known to the
Light within. If a man should be born into the world, and in the space of one
hour should grow up to the perfection of a man, to the fullness of Light and
Reason, propound unto him these doctrines whether he will choose, that Christ
has already by himself purged away his sins, and sanctified him for ever before
any good work wrought in him; or that not Christ without, but the Light within
him is the Christ, which through obedience thereto purges away sin in him, and
redeems him that way; the first would seem foolishness and a contradiction to
his Light, the last would be received as the more reasonable and excellent way.

2. That this false conception or resemblance of Christ as a Lawgiver and
Worker is an Idol, and the root of idolatrous Religions: doctrines of
Circumcision added to Christ by the false Apostles; of charity, humility and
bodily chastisements by the Church of Rome; preparatives before faith by the
Teachers of the Law; and obedience to the Light within, as the way of
Redemption, by the people called Quakers: all these, though diverse as to
Parties and Notions, yet are one in the root and foundation of their faith, all
looking upon Christ, according to the Law, as perfecting out in part or in
whole Redemption by work within them. Conceptions of Christ, how divine soever,
if not as crucified for our offenses, and raised up again for our
justification, are but Idols set up of a more spiritual nature, as the Gods of
Gold and Silver

Lastly, That they who affirm the Light in every man that condemns of sin to be
Christ, the Redeemer, have set up an Idol for Christ, they are gone back from
that Christ that came not to judge but to save the world, that speaks not
condemnation, but mere joy and sweetness to the weary and weak, and have set up
another Jesus, and another Gospel, neither of which, nor the worshippers
thereof, shall be able to stand when the true Jesus shall appear; this is the
other error as to the Light within.

Two things charged upon us by this people: first, that we deny the Light
within, and set it against Christ, weighed and removed.
THis blessed doctrine of Grace, Christ bearing away sins as in his crucified
body, and justifying the ungodly as in himself, is by the words and writings of
this people often and principally charged of two things 1. As denying the Light
within, and setting it against Christ. 2. As teaching Christ at a distance, and
only without: A word to both may not be unseasonable. While the Light within
condemns of sin, to believe by Christ, I am justified from sin, is not this to
make the light within against Christ? no, no more than the Law is against the
Promise; the Light in the Conscience and the Law of Commandments for substance
are one, their power one, their kingdom one, that is, the flesh or first Adam;
Jesus Christ came forth one greater than the Law, greater than our Conscience:
against him arose the Law of commandments, the Law in the conscience, sin in
the flesh, death and the curse, all great and mighty Lords, who had devoured
the earth, sparing no flesh, neither Kings, Princes, nor People, whom he having
vanquished and triumphed openly over them, he took the Law out of the tables,
the work of the Law out of the heart, and sin out of the flesh, as the
Conqueror takes the conquered Kings out of the Throne of their Kingdoms, and
nailed them to his Cross: according to the flesh, he was, as it were, given for
a prey to the fowls of Heaven, and the beasts on Earth, principalities on high,
and the miseries of the flesh: according to the Spirit of glory and power, he
redeemed the prey, brought back the spoil, raised up his flesh, and therein his
body mystical, and gathered together all things that were against him, that are
against us, buried them in his grave, and therein shut them up for ever.

Hence then a beleiver is divided into twain, and accordingly lives in two
Kingdoms, according to his faith he is a man in Christ, raised in him, and set
up in him above the law of his flesh, of conscience or sin, above the whole
world, with all things therein, into the glorious liberty and blessedness of
Jesus Christ; as thus he is to be known no more after the flesh, but as having
put it off in union with Christ; according to reason and sense he is a man in
the flesh, subject to the Law, to infirmity and death, the life of his
spiritual man being many times hid from the sense of his natural, as the Life
of Christ in the Godhead was sometimes hid from his flesh.

According to this twofold state a beleiver is under, he does at the same time
give a twofold account of himself, both just and true; in my body indeed I have
a law of sin, but as I am in the Lord I have put it off; as I walk by sight I
am in the earth, in labors, in groanings, warfare and imperfection; but as I
walk by faith, I am in heaven, received into glory, walking on my high places
in Rest, in victory and perfection, where I shut my eyes from looking upon my
self, and forget all my fears, infirmities and bondage, leaving them all behind
me as under my feet; and so is that word fulfilled in him, as sorrowful yet
always rejoicing, as having nothing, and yet possessiing all things.

This is some of the mystery and knowledge of Christ crucified, not like unto
that of the Schools and Lawmakers, whose highest knowledge therein comes to no
more but this, that the Humanity on the Cross resigned up it self in profound
humility and meekness to the will of the Divinity, as the Popish Doctors, or
that he yielded perfect obedience to the Light within him, for a living example
to the world, as this people called Quakers: I say, this knowledge and such
preachings of the Cross of Christ are poor, barren and empty, reaching only to
the morality thereof, the praises of a just man dying without cause, and of his
spirit and temper; but not discerning the mystery therein, that is, an end put
to the Law, to sin and the flesh, to and upon all them that are given to him:
thus their first charge is weighed and resolved in this, that to a man in
Christ, the Light within accusing of sin, pertains only to the flesh, and
should abide in the flesh; that Christ alone as justifying from sins, as joy
and sweetness, should abide in the conscience as the chamber of the Bridegroom
and Bride, into which no Law, nor Light, nor any thing that accuses, may in
any wise enter, Christ reigning therein over every Law; thus according to the
flesh and light within, there is conscience for sin in the justified man,
according to faith and union with Christ there is no more conscience of sins,
Hebr. 10.2.

Second thing charged, That we believe in a Christ without, and at a distance,
weighed and resolved.
THe other charge follows, that to believe Christ has redeemed us as in his own
body without, is to believe in a Christ without and at a distance: this charge
examined will appear to be vain: the faith of the Gospel says, that Christ
descended into our nature, and therein came down to us in our blood, our
prisons, under judgment, and thence raised us up together with himself into
the heavenly places; he descended first into the lower parts of the earth, into
the lowest estate of lost and undone sinners, and thence ascended up far above
all Heavens, and raised us up together in himself; this sets forth Christ as
near, and not at a distance, as one within us, wrapped in our sin, as our sin,
and us as one with him in Righteousness, and his very righteousness; oh the
blessed nearness between him and the beleiver.

That Christ comes down in Spirit into our Persons, not to redeem, but to
manifest the Redemption, not as a light accusing of sin, but as revealing
righteousness and liberty from sin in himself, and gathering us out of the life
of reason and sense, the law and things without, into the glorious rest and
victory in himself; he there lets us know, that we are in him his Sister and
Spouse, that he is in us our Head and fullness, and that all things are ours,
that we are Christ's, and that Christ is Gods: Thus Christ is beheld both as
without, having wrought all things for us, in the Person of the Mediator, and
also as within us, working all our works in us as a quickening Spirit.

On the other hand, the faith of the Quakers, so called, says thus; that
Christ indeed took on him our nature, but not our judgment and sin, that he
dyed at Jerusalem, but by way of example, not as a sacrifice putting away sin;
that he did not the work by himself at that once, but only showed us the way
how he redeems within us in every generation.

That Christ is come in our flesh, but as a light accusing and judging,
renewing a law, and requiring obedience thereto through the fire and the sword,
by them called the blood of the cross, and so through perfect obedience
justifying and redeeming. O what darkness and confusion has covered this
people, thus to make faith void, and the blood of Christ of none effect, and
now let the spiritual-wise judge, unto whom Christ is known, as nigh, or as
afar off, to them, or to us: to us who behold him as having already scattered
the clouds of the law and darkness, dried up the floods of sin and death,
opened a way into the Holiest, and received us into his glory; and besides all
this, showing himself in the nearest conjunctions and freindliest appearances
of a Brother, a Father, and Husband, after an unspeakable manner filling us
with his fullness: or to them, who draw the vail over this most comfortable face
and aspect of things, set up the law, sin and death again to be suffered,
satisfied and done away within us, and Christ standing upon terms with us of
obedience and death, without which no remission of sins, no redemption, nor
benefit to be expected from him: I say, let the wise judge, who of these have
Christ most nigh, most as unvailed, in the most inward and freindly way: let
the charge then of Christ without return from whence it came.

I shall only mind ye of the Parable of the wounded man lying between Jericho
and Jerusalem, there came first a Priest and a Levite, looked on him and passed
by; after came a Samaritane, had compassion and bound up his wounds, putting in
oil and wine, set him on his own beast, and brought him to an Inn, and took
care of him there: according to the severe and unmerciful doctrine of this
people, Jesus Christ came down into our nature, beheld it wounded and lying in
blood, able enough to have said to us, while in our blood, live, and to have
made us so; but only leaving us an example of perfection and sufferings,
wherein, if we followed him, we should live, and so departed, leaving us as he
found us, till the Light within come and cured us; so they reckon of the Man
Christ to be such a one as was the Priest or Levite: but blessed be that Gospel
that says, he passed by, beheld us in blood, and it was a time of love; with
the blood of his Humanity, and the love and glory of his Godhead, he bathed our
wounds, suppled and healed them, and after set us upon his own beast, carried
us to the Inn, bare us in his body, and carried us into his Mansion in the
Fathers house; according as it is said, He has born our griefs, carried our
sorrows, for he was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our
iniquities, the chastisements of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we
are healed: This sets forth Christ to be the kind Samaritane, the neighbor
nighest unto us; the other makes him unmerciful, going afar off, not tarrying
with us.

What is the inward Life, and who is the retired Christian.
THis gives occasion, among other matters, to cast in a word conconcerning the
inward life or retired Christian; as all other spiritual things, so this has
its truth and its counterfeit, by mistake whereof of one for the other, the
faith may be perverted and our minds soon shaken.

Separation from the world, the company of men and affairs of this life, in
stilness and silence searching into the knowledge of mysteries, the divine
being and things of the inward world, was the Religion of some Jesuits,
Schoolmen and others; that superstition in the Conscience and fancy in the
Head was all in this, may appear by their writings, which are filled either
with perplexities of wit, natural speculations of God, or rules of Legality,
leading men unto God by a perfection of obedience, Christ crucified as the way
into the Holiest being not known unto them; these had but a show of the inward
life, for they entered not by faith within the vail.

Retirement from the Scriptures and administrations without, from Religions and
Assemblies, from all order and form, professed and practiced by whomsoever,
unto the Light within, and to it alone to attend, as to the only Scripture,
the voice of God and light of men, without respect to person or work, Redeemer
or Redemption without, this is the Religion of the people called Quakers: they
who by the Light within peirced into invisible things, the eternal Power and
Godhead had but the wisdom of this world, Romans 1.20 1 Corinthians. 1.20. and were
of the world under sin as all other; again, they who excelled in shows of
humility, wisdom and all outward holiness, as to the exercise of the body, and
neglecting the same, yet their Religion was no more than the Rudiments of this
world and perishing Ordinances, Col, 2. I must say the same of this people and
their Religion, to be both of this world, until they give faith or
acknowledgement to the flesh or dead body of Christ to be the only way into
the inward life or within the vail; which whilst they deny, instead of bringing
into Heaven, into the peace of God, and rest from their labors, they shut up
the Kingdom, and keep men on earth to perform sacrifices and obedience in flesh
for their atonement; these have a pretense to the inward life, but are not
entered through the vail of his flesh by faith into the Holiest.

He that by faith goes out of all things in himself, whether perfections of
Reason, or the Light in the Conscience into Jesus Christ crucified, and in him
beleives, all things of Law or Nature, with the works of both, to be passed
away, and himself crucified, and washed, and perfected for ever; and not
considering his body now dead, nor yet the deadness of all things as to any
good in his flesh, but shutting his eye and ear from all things of sense and
reason in the world or his flesh, cleaves only by faith to the dead body of
Christ, and therewith mounts up into the spirit of his mind into Christ Jesus
alone as his own victory, righteousness and life, this man is he that enters
into Rest, into the inward life; he is truly separate from all the Religions of
the world, and yet exercises a Religion in the world, he is free from all men,
and yet a servant unto all; his life is in the Head, while decays and deaths
in his flesh; and of him is that true, he is as unknown, and yet well known.
This is the retired Christian, that most truly lives and rejoices in things not
seen to sense nor reason, nor the light in the natural man; he has the
clearest, surest and sweetest beams of Christ, leading him not into Pharisaical
austerity, nor wanton libertinisme, but into a spirit of holiness, quietness
and stilness in the Lord, yet so as that, according to grace received, he
desires to become all things to all men.

The^e is a generation who have the form of faith and knowledge, of the words
and profession of Christ, but have not the faith whereby they are dead in
Christ, and he lives in them; it suffices them to know Christ dyed for sins,
which faith is common to all men; but the mystery of faith they have not, that
is, union with him in it, or that they are buried with him into death in the
flesh, and raised up with him into life in the spirit; they behold Christ as
without to be the end of the law, of sin and death, the fullness and fulfilling
of all things in himself, wherein they do well and taste some joy therein; but
they receive him not by faith into themselves: my root and foundation is this,
what Christ is and has done without me in himself, but the way to partake of
the benefit of it is my union with him; these do confess to the truth of the
first, but are not joined to it by union with it, and so fail in the last.
Christ indeed is by these honored only as without, while in his Spirit and
Grace he is by lust crucified within: from such do ye turn away.

Another generation there is, not beleiving the end of sin in the death of
Christ, nor themselves perfected only in the Head, look for a Redemption, not
that already in being in Jesus Christ, but to be wrought out by him in their
own persons; that is, after the example of Christ, turning away from all things
inwardly and outwardly, every thought, desire, pleasure or affection and every
creature, till they come to the Light and Being of God, and become so passive,
and in all things subject thereto, that God may do all things in them: A chief
Master of this way speaks plainly thus; Though God should assume all men that
are unto himself, and should become Man in them, and they in him should become
God, and the same should not be done in me, my fall should never be recovered
nor yet my sin done away, except the same were also done in me: These are the
words of a Germain Priest, written (as is said) above two hundred and fifty
years ago: this doctrine, as it carries upon it the notion of God or the divine
Nature doing all in us, has a show of glory, but as it denies that God has done
all things for us in Christ, so it has no glory, but rather spreads again the
vail which Christ rent in his blood, that the riches and glory of grace may not
appear: if any of the fiery darts of hell have ever been shot against the says
whereby I stand, and if by any of them I have ever been near to staggering,
this doctrine was one: if Scriptures and a crucified Jesus may stand for a
little aside, among all the doctrines either named or professed this day among
men, for shows of light, spirituality and holiness, I know none to be compared
with this; yet if I much mistake not, the glorious and eternal efficacy,
victory and triumph of the Son of God upon the Cross over the whole world and
all things against us, is by none so much obscured and debased as by this; of
which I think it meet at best in this place to say only this, that if the
sins, transgressions and evils of mankind were so great before God, that all
the wood of Lebanon, all the Rams of Nebaioth, ten thousand rivers of oil, and
the first born of our body, were not sufficient to offer for the sin of our
soul, that the blood of Jesus, and in him the eternal wisdom and righteousness
of God was found only among all things in heaven and earth to be sufficient to
take away the same; then let all high thoughts come down whereby any do or
shall exalt themselves into an equal capacity with Christ Jesus of drinking
that cup, and being baptized with that baptism in the measure and manner as he
did, in hope to make that atonement for their own sins, which only could be
made once by Christ never to be renewed more: wherefore coming to God through
the blood of Jesus, beholding the glory of God in the safe of Christ, and
communion with God in the Spirit of Christ, this is the true inward Life; but
he that enters in any other way, may break through unto the Lord and gaze, but
he shall perish.

A twofold departure from the faith in the last days: what the first is.
NOw the things hitherto spoken off give occasion to admonish you of a twofold
departure that should come to pass in the last days; the one of men holding
the form of godliness, but denying the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3 the other of men
denying the form of godliness, or of the words of faith and good doctrine, but
pretending to the power thereof, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 6. seducing spirits and worldly
interests mingling themselves with the Gospel and Church of Christ, have in
every Age since the Apostles fell asleep, been as the two Arms of the God of
this world; with the one he has defaced and veiled the image and glory of
Christ in Gospel Truths, with the other he has quenched the love of Christ and
the power of godliness in the hearts of men.

The one of these defections is to be seen at this day in this our Nation, in
degrees of wickedness beyond what has happened in former generations; namely in
the Army, their Leader and Commanders, their Court and Clergy, with all their
stupefied admirers and servants, who have sometimes been as the sword of the
Lord, as the Chariot of fire, wherein our Lord Jesus has ridden forth against
the interests of usurpation and tyranny, and against his and his peoples
enemies in this Nation, this was their ministry, the eyes of their
understandings enlightened with beams from the face of Christ; their hearts as
burning coals consuming them with zeal to Christ; their hands stretched up
toward heaven to receive him coming; their feet with wings setting them up
upon the Head of all worldly and lower interests to prepare the way of the
Lord, this was their spirit and posture: against the whole kingdom of
Antichrist, both in its forms and powers, either in the civil or spiritual
state, went forth their prayers, professions and undertakings, the sound
whereof went abroad almost through all the earth; from off them is this Spirit
of glory and virtue departed, and in the place thereof it entered another
spirit, feirce, ruling the people by laws and weapons of war, instead of
pure, spiritual righteousness and meekness: without natural affection peircing
the hearts with unkindness, and the sides with sufferings, of them who have
been as a Mother that bore and nourished them with their own blood, life and
spirit all the days of their youth, while they were little in their own, and
despised in the worlds eyes: blasphemers, thinking, speaking and measuring evil
to that spirit of faith, light and expectation in others, which they had tasted
and testified of formerly in themselves: traitors, betraying that Right and
liberty, the price of much precious blood, the succouring and defense whereof
was committed to their trust unto the will and pleasure of unlimited Monarchy:
heady, proud, high minded, imposing laws, constitutions, powers, forming,
transforming all things in the spiritual and civil interests, in a way of
superiority and mastership above and apart from others, without taking in the
hopeful assistances of more light, by the conjunction of the counsels, hearts
and hands of their sometimes dear brethren unto themselves, as if the Spirit of
the Lord came forth only from them, or came only into them: incontinent, not
behaving themselves toward the wife of their youth, the new Jerusalem, to
which they are joined as one flesh, and one spirit, but have poured out
themselves upon every one that passes by: unholy and profane, defiling their
holy things, the appearances and gifts of Christ, the buddings, beginnings and
earnests of a more excellent way both in Church and State, by mingling them
with a strange seed, the dark and fleshly principles, policies and
administrations of worldly Reason and Prudence: despisers of those that are
good, casting contempt upon those Principles and Persons which were a cheering
and strengthening to them in the day of their streights, refusing the one as
not squaring to their greatness, and imprisoning or shaking hands with the
other, as too sullen or noble to be vassals thereto: Lastly, lovers of
pleasures more than lovers of God, careless Daughters at ease in Zion, who are
gone up to their fathers bed, and have bestowed the ornaments the Lord put upon
them, for the dressing up the old Harlot again, which though themselves had
been teaching before, yet fell in love with her after above measure, to wit,
greatness and glory in the flesh, while Christ stands without door as crucified
and forgotten; so that they having lost their savor, from them has proceeded
sourness upon the spirits, and filthiness upon the actions of many others who
had a savor before: their fall being not alone, but thereat, as it were, the
heavens were removed, and the stars therein darkened; Righteousness and Truth
being as the Heavens over our Land, and many excellent spirits, as lights and
stars to men, are also darkened and fallen together with them; this first
departure is a sorrow, but the other adds thereto.

Second departure from the Faith, what it is.
NOt many years since Jesus Christ began to shine forth in clearer principles
and doctrines of light and grace, justification and faith, whereby the darkness
and bondage of the Law, with the Teachers thereof, passed away, and liberty and
peace in him brake forth: severe descriptions and preachings of Christ as a
Lawgiver and Judge, which were as the vail upon him, gave place to more
evangelical manifestations of him, as a Savior of sinners; the Covenant is
heaven, compleatness in the Head began to be more opened, and the People came
to Mount Sion, as the children of the freewoman, as saved already in the Lord,
and set up above all things in him.

This Grace and Liberty in Christ being by some turned into wantonness and
liberty in the flesh; by very many into dispute and contention about the letter
and form, has given occasion to the old Spirit to enter again into the house
new swept and garnished, that is, the Law-working spirit, denying the blessed
Atonement and Righteousness as already in the Head the Person of Christ, in
zeal to another Atonement and Righteousness by obedience to the Light within:
which mystery of iniquity works more secretly in the Churches, who too much
press and praise a certain perfection by their rule and order, but more
manifestly in the people called Quakers, of both whom it may be said, whilst
their first light and love, liberty and perfection in Christ the Head was
turned into strife about the letter and bitings of one another by the first,
they are in danger to be consumed and destroyed by the last; a people indeed
that have show like a Lamb, but speak like a Dragon devouring words to destroy
both old and young, not sparing the flock, whom nothing suffices (as to me yet
appears) but to tear out of our faith, knowledge and profession the blood of
atonement, redemption and reconciliation by that one Sacrifice offered once
and for ever, to blot out of our hearts the name, remembrance, the light and
joy thereof, till no other Redemption nor liberty be known but by a pretended
divinity or light within, working it in us through our perfect obedience
thereunto; which his true sense is to say, the vail is yet spread, the Law yet
is standing, the Lamb is to be slain, all things continue as they were from the
beginning, ye are yet in your sins, till by obedience to the light within you
be redeemed.

The glorious Rest and Liberty in Christ the Head, as it is the light of our
eyes, the girdle of our loins, to conduct and defend us from the mists and
darts, whether proceeding from the Law, Philosophy, or Satanical mystery; so if
once we suffer our selves to be spoiled of them, our strength is departed and
our eyes put out, and we betrayed unto every Fox out of the hole, and Boar out
of the wood, unto every confusion, distemper, or deceit which may come amongst
us; therefore stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made you free,
that Liberty in him, which is in being as to the Spirit, when in you are felt
nothing but buffetings and streights as in the flesh: thus these departures
from the faith have been as a door set open, the one to let in upon us the o^d
spirit of tyranny upon our bodies, the there of legality upon our spirits, and
the darkness and rebuke that is upon us is very great.

The Christ that dyed at Jerusalem, how far acknowledged and how far denied by
this people to be the Redeemer.

THis leads me to two Questions of weightiest consideration as to this people.

1. Whether they deny the Christ that dyed at Jerusalem to be the Redeemer?

2. Whether they establish a Righteousness by the Law?

As to the first, how far they affirm or deny: I shall give that just
judgment, and therein do them that right I desire they may do unto me: That
Christ became flesh, was made in the likeness of men, therein humbled himself,
and became obedient to death, that he might become a living example to all
generations of perfection, thus far they affirm and have a zeal for Christ:
that in that body of his flesh, through that obedience to death, he crucified
our old man, purged away sin, made reconciliation for iniquity, and perfected
for ever all that are sanctified, this they deny (as to me it appears) and the
faith thereof.

The Gospel has in it morality and mystery; the morality of it is this, that
Christ came forth from God, a man holy and innocent, obedient in all things to
the light or will of God, and left that obedience for an example unto others;
this sets forth Christ only as a Lawgiver, as one who came to give a Law more
divine and perfect than others before him had done; and as thus he is known by
this people, and set forth by their words and writings. The mystery is this,
that Christ the righteous, the blessed and Lord of the Law, was made for us
sin, a curse and under the Law; that was we who believe, being the unjust, the
cursed and under the Law, are made in him the righteousness of God, the blessed
and no more under the Law.

The Gospel, as a Commandment and piece of morality, may be read and believed
by every man, and so was taught by the Popish School men, and is at this day by
such Ministers as are more zealous for duty than grace; the Gospel as a mystery
or free gift can only be known to whom it is given, and so is clearly known
and sincerely and worthily preached not by many: obedience to moral Principles
is the divinity of Pagans; to the Law of Moses the divinity of the Jews; to the
preceptive part of the Gospel of Jesuits and Papists; to the Light within of
the so called Quakers; these indeed excel one another as to Notion and Rule,
but they agree all in one as to principle or bottom, that is, that work or
obedience to some law or rule, is the way to redemption, perfection and God,
the sum of all is this, a Jesus in flesh as a Preacher of perfection, also as
dying for an example to us they believe and teach; the Jesus that dyed, and
therein by blood and spirit perfected us for ever in himself, they deny, they
know not: whosoever deny the blood of atonement in the death of Christ, know
not the Son, not the Father in him, nor the grace in his bosom, nor our glory
in him; and to all such in some bowels of compassion, I say, you may walk a
while, during your hour, in the light of your fire, and warm your selves in the
sparks you have kindled, conceits of approaching perfection and the glory of
God by a righteousness and cross set up in your flesh, but you shall not be
able to stand before God and the Lamb in the day of his appearing, whose blood,
whose travels, whose sacrifice on the Cross is of no more account with you?

Whether this people build up a righteousness by the Law.
THe other Question is resolved in this, only for fuller satisfaction it may
be weighed by it self. The Law and Prophets testifified of Christ, and
continued till he came, who fulfilled all that was written therein, even the
righteousness of the Law, whereby he was justified according to the Law; and so
it is said, he was a Minister of the Curcumcision: being made thus under the
Law or first Testament, he was to stand or fall, to live or dye upon account of
works according to the nature and terms of that Testament he was under, as it
is written, he that does these things shall live by them, and therefore the
reward unto Christ that worked was not reckoned of grace, but of debt; and so
he was made under the Law, fulfilled the Law, and was justified according to
the Law.

That God requires the same obedience of us as of him, and that through
offering up our selves in the same obedience he did, we become justified in
measure and degree according to the measure of obedience; being perfectly
justified, when come up to the same measure of obedience that Christ did, not
before, this they affirm.

The conclusion is this, that even as Christ by doing the works of the Law was
justified according to the Law, after the same manner by the same works done by
us in the same spirit, unto the same measure we become justified and accepted
with God, that is, by the works of the Law; the righteousness of the Law says
thus, he that does the will of God commanded in the Law is sanctified thereby,
and shall live therein; the righteousness of faith says, he that works not but
beleives the will of God is already done by the offering of the body of Christ,
by this will is he sanctified and perfected for ever; of these they take away
the second, and establish the first, that is, the righteousness of the Law.

God having wrought all things for us in the Person of Christ, this is our
righteousness, and that Truth which is first; God working all things in us by
Christ is the fruit or manifestation of our righteousness, and that truth which
comes after; these when together are both Gospel Truths, yet in their own
order; when the first is alone without the other, it is turned into a principle
of carnal Libertinisme; where this last is alone without the first, it is made
a principle of mystical Legality: both these Truths have their glory, but in a
different respect, the first as in Christ the Head, only visible to faith,
therefore to the Children of Reason, the law and the letter not known nor
discerned, nor by them desired nor praised; the other has its glory in the
members, upon the flesh, as therein seen and felt, therefore more eyes are upon
it, more admirers of it, and a greater name and show thereof in the world than
of the other.

The Mystery of God manifest in flesh was a ministration of infinite necessity
as to us, that thereby all sin might first be taken away, and the
reconciliation made; this being done in him for all, made way most blessedly
for the other mystery of God, Christ in us, to be brought forth: I cannot, I
did not know Christ Jesus a fountain of living waters in me, until I first knew
and believed that I was washed, sanctified and justified in him before any good
done in me or by me: we love not him by bringing forth the fruits of love to
him in our members, till we knew that he loved us first by the fruits of love
manifested for us in our Head: God as having perfected me for ever in the body
of Christ through the Spirit, appears to me with open face as love, as light, a
father and friend, as nigh me, I in him, and he in me: God as having not saved
me in himself already, so he appears with a vail upon his face, the sight of
him terrible, and to come near him is consuming fire; can two walk together
except they be agreed:

It is a faithful saying, and a sure rule of judgment, and will stand for
ever; that as the greatest zeal for the sacrifice in the body of Christ,
excluding his spiritual appearance in us, is a professing him as afar off,
but not a joining or bringing us together into one; so the most spiritual
pretenses to Christ in us, excluding the sacrifice for us in the body of his
flesh, is to bring God and us together before we be agreed, that is, before the
propitiation for sins or atonement be performed or done: woe unto them that
profess they are brought nigh unto God in the death of the Mediator, but come
not unto God by him in the spirit of him, these have only the form, but not
the power of faith; woe unto them that would enter in or come nigh unto God,
excluding the death of the Mediator, the Man Christ Jesus, as the only way
unto him, such have lost both the form and power of faith. Darkness and
delusion works upon men by these two mistakes; some preach Christ as the Head,
but bring not men into union with him; others preach Christ as doing all things
in union with us, but hold not the Head as having done all for us in himself;
these condemn each other, both are condemned by the children of faith, who
rejoice in Christ Jesus as having overcome all things for us, as the Head over
all things to us, and who wait till the same victory be declared in us by his
appearance in us.

Christ's first and last Comings what? and a Question answered.
FOr further satisfaction, another great Question concerning this people may be
taken into serious and humble consideration; whether may not they be that Angel
of God that should fly through the midst of Heaven preaching the Gospel of the
Kingdom unto all Nations a little before the end should come?

Two things searched out, may give light and resolution herein; the Comings of
Christ first and second, and the last coming of Antichrist: the Comings of
Christ and his work in both are expressed, Hebr. 9.26, 28. once in the end of
the world has he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself; so
Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for
him the second time shall he appear without sin unto salvation: the flesh, sin
and death, with all the evils of mankind, were laid upon Christ together, who
being the righteousness, wisdom and power of God could not be held of them, but
as Sampson the new ropes, so he rent them from off him on the Cross, and
together with his body buried them in his grave, wherein a mystery unknown to
sense and reason, but known to faith, they lie to this day hid and covered,
taken out of the sight of God, and the conscience of the beleiver, as perfectly
as if they had never been; so that as the flood of Noah overwhelmed the old
world, that it was not; or as the Sun shining at noonday vanquisheth the least
shadow of darkness that it is no more, so he that was the brightness of the
Fathers glory, and the deep fountain of David, abolished and purged away sin by
himself that it is no more: if sense, or reason, or the natural conscience may
be judge in things of God, these things are not so; but let all such know, that
this Gospel of Christ is a mystery hid from such eyes or principles of flesh:
that Religion that says sin is not done away for us in the Head, because felt
in part in our earthly members, whatsoever honor it may take to it self as
above others, yet is but built upon the same principles with all the false
Religions of the world, to wit, sense, reason and unbeleiving conscience, that
is to say, the Law, thus Christ's first coming was to take away sin.

As Christ first appeared bearing and taking away sin, so he shall appear the
second time without sin, that is, not as at first condemning, bearing and
taking away sin, for th^s he did once when he offered up himself: as he first
came clothing himself upon with our sin, so he shall come again clothing us
upon with his everlasting righteousness; once he came in Grace, taking upon
himself the sin, the sentence that was upon us, then he shall come in more
grace as having taken away sin both from off us and himself: his first coming
united him to our flesh, and us unto him, all his were gathered together in him
in one body on the Cross, his second coming shall unite us together with him in
one glory and spirit, and shall gather all Saints into one in himself, as it is
said, The Lord my God shall come and all his Saints with thee: we who believe
are entered into Rest, we have Redemption, perfection and life already, but hid
in him; we wait for the same at his second coming, not to be done over again,
but to be revealed in us: those that shall trouble them who have believed in
Jesus, by charging them of sin, and calling to a Redemption as a thing yet to
be done, or that shall declare him coming again to charge or accuse his people
of sin, to set up in them a cross of atonement and redemption from sin; such
do make void his first coming in flesh, which was to beat away sin; such are
not the Angel that shall publish his second appearance, which is without sin
unto salvation.

Jesus Christ in Person, as raised up above all Principalities and Powers, is
the Head of his Church; all that are Christ's, whether those that are fallen
asleep, or that yet remain alive, are in a mystery, raised up already in him,
as in union with their Head; they are so, but they appear not so: as all that
were Christ's were raised up together with him when he was raised up, so they
shall all come together with him when he shall appear again, the dead out of
the graves, and the living changed, and all this by virtue of union, the
members with the Head: as Christ is not Head in Spirit alone, but as the whole
Person; so his second appearance will not be in Spirit alone, but also in
Person; and as we are his members, not as to the Spirit alone, but also as to
the body spiritual, so our gathering together unto the coming of the Lord will
not be in Spirit only, but also in the spiritual body: thus the coming of the
Lord in his heavenly Person, and our meeting of him in our heavenly tabernacle
or incorruptible state will be together; the union of Head and Members, and the
evidence of Scriptures agreeing thereto persuading me so.

Let this union be kept clear as to our understanding, and entire from first to
last, so shall the disputes of many and the diversities of their faith about
the coming of the Lord be cleared and ended, and the professions of this people
will appear to be not according to Truth, who some of them say, to us the Day
is come and the shadows are fled away; that Day being as the Lightening that
shall shine from East to West, that is, not coming to some first, but to all
that are Christ's together, bringing forth Redemption, not of the Spirit alone,
but also of the body, and bringing forth our Lord Jesus, not only in Spirit
but also in Person, and with him all that are his at coming.

Wherefore our union in Christ the Head, and his union with us the members, are
Truths of a distinct nature and consideration: according to the first we are in
him complete already; according to the other we know him in part, and grow up
in measures: to be in him complete is a state more inward, mor hid, seen only
to faith; to have him in us increasing and in part is a thing more in sight,
and seen to sense and feeling: learn and believe your selves perfect in him,
and wait and groan for the manifestation thereof in your members; let no man
spoil you of your reward in the first, if you would not fail and come short of
the last; live by faith always in him, though the clear and comfortable sense
of him live not always in you: thus much of Christ his first and second
Comings.

Anti-christ's last coming, what and how.
COncerning Antichrist in his last coming it may be said; a conjunction of
carnal things with spiritual, Law and Reason with Christ, was the Egg of Anti
christianisme, wherein that Kingdom began, and whereby it has been nourished
and continued unto this day: Circumcision and Philosophy under the Pagan power;
Ceremony and works under the Papal; subtle speculations in the days of the
Schoolmen; and fair shows in the flesh in these our times; all these in their
several seasons having been coupled and mingled with the things of Christ, and
standing where they should not, have made Antichrist appear as a mystery,
worshipped and wondered as the true Christ. In times of light, or of the
Apostles and first Churches, he came forth in a ministry of light and
righteousness of works, that he might dishonor and diminish the righteousness
of Christ; in after ages as spiritual lights and truths decreased and declined
into more carnality and darkness, he likewise took up and worked by more carnal
principles; in later times as truth has begun to shine forth again, he also has
transformed himself into an Angel of light again.

Thus the way and method of Antichrist in general has been by a similitude of
truth to deface the Truth, or by lesser truths to oppose the greater, by
p^inciples of reason to oppose the things of faith, by the letter to oppose the
Spirit, or by the Spirit as working all in us to oppose Christ as having
wrought all for us in himself.

That Antichrist in his last coming will observe the same method as before, to
wit, a counterfeit of truth seems to be expressed by the Lord himself in his
speech to his Disciples concerning Antichrist's and his own last coming. Math.
24.5, 26, 27. Many shall come in my Name, saying, I am Christ; some shall say
he is in the desert, some in the secret chambers, but my coming shall be as
lightening shining from East to West.

The last Truths, or Truths last to be revealed before the coming of the Lord
will be such as relate to his coming; spiritual whispers and voices from Christ
to the Virgins, behold I come quickly; and a call of the Virgins one to
another, saying, let us go trim our lamps, and go forth to meet him, this will
be the work of the Spirit and Saints at that time: Antichrist will come forth
in the same form and language, as suiting with that season, speaking words not
of mean and low strain, but of high and spiritual things, I am Christ, or he is
come; his doctrine will be of things of note and wonder, deceiving and drawing
many, behold he is in the desert, among us the lovely, despised, afflicted and
cast out, not among the wise, mighty and noble; behold he is in the secret
chambers, not in the multitude, the assemblies, the common ways of Religion,
but among us a people separate, and gathered, and called out of the world into
the more inward and spiritual way: moreover he will come forth with power all
men, all things of the earth the faith religion, souls and bodies of them which
professed the Truth, but were not of the Truth, shall be given into his hand,
and be at his devotion; the true Christ with his Church shall be as poor, weak
and inconsiderable in comparison of him: lastly, he will come with signs; the
world looks for a sign, and he will come with signs of light, zeal and
holiness; signs tokens and wonders to sight, sense and judgment of all that
are not in Christ, such as if they were the very truths, workings and comings
of the Son of Man himself; only the Elect, such as chose not God, but were
chosen of him, such as have not their life in gifts and workings in the
spiritual vigor and activity exercised in themselves, but in the root of all
this, that is hid with Christ in God; who have their redemption, their life,
their religion in something that is perfect without, and beyond all work in
themselves, that is in Christ himself; these are those Elect that have that in
them which shall keep them that they cannot be deceived: he that in that day
shall have a name written in Heaven, that is a life complete in Christ, shall
be greater than he that shall say, Lord in thy Name have we cast out Devils,
that is, we have prophesied and gone forth in the gifts, activity and power of
thy Spirit.

Wherefore it may be concluded concerning this people and all other; whatsoever
spirit or doctrine in them or any other shall teach the coming of Christ to
make redemption or reconciliation in us, as having not fulfilled the same for
us already in himself, I testify against it, as no other but the old
Law-working Spirit under a new name and form, and therein the power of
Antichrist coming forth in one of his highest and last counterfeits of truth,
thereby to pervert the faith, and draw away the eyes and expectations of men
from the true Savior, and his true appearance, which also draws near.

An account of the hope that is in me concerning the first and last appearances
of Christ.
COncerning both whose appearances, that which is past, and that which is to
come, I shall give a short account of that faith wherein I stand, from which I
trust neither Word nor Spirit shall ever remove me. That Jesus Christ first
manifest in flesh came forth, not only as an example of Perfection (as some
say) nor only as a type or figure without of things to be fulfilled in us; nor
only as a Lawgiver (as others) but that in his own body on the tree, through
union with the eternal Spirit, he bore away and abolished our sin and death,
and fulfilled the Law and Prophets, wherein God so rested and therewith was so
well pleased, that he signified the same by causing the blackness, darkness,
thunderings and lightenings of Sinai, in the midst whereof he dwelt before, to
pass away, and the vail of partition between him and us to rent asunder;
besides which redemption there is none other either before or after, by Angels
without, or by Spirit within, that is or shall be wrought as to the thing, but
only as to the manifestation thereof.

That not by following his example, or by any work, but by faith I come to know
and partake of this Redemption, which was in being before in him, but with
other the heavenly things hid in God, and in time manifested to my faith and
feeling; so that I began not to be redeemed or loved when I first believed, but
I began by faith to behold and enjoy that love and redemption which was
prepared and entire for me in him, before I had done either good or evil; sin
and death being finished, and my old man crucified before in him as to God with
whom all things are present; by faith I come to know it, and do reckon with
him, I am as truly crucified, buried and raised up according to the
comprehensiveness of his death and crucified Person, much more than if the same
had been acted in and upon my own Person.

That while according to my inward man or in a mystery I am in heavenly places
above Law, sin and death, yet for the exercise and trial of faith, according to
sight, or my earthly man, I often walk in the valley of the shadow of death, in
the feeling of infirmities, buffetings and fightings in the flesh: thus I am at
once both weak and strong, on earth and in heaven, a sinner and righteous; thus
I know my redemption and victory as in him complete, while I feel the same
redemption and victory, as in me but in part and increasing; if my redemption
were not more than what I feel, the Gospel were not a mystery, nor faith would
be any more than sight, nor grace have any glory.

That I look for Jesus Christ to come in me more in Spirit, manifesting his
death, his cross and life in me, not thereby to make atonement for sin, but to
gather me up through daily dyings and quickenings into the full sight, union
and profession of that redemption, and grace, and glory already given me freely
in him: also I look for the appearance of the Lord Jesus as God and man, who
shall enlighten the Saints with his brightness, and shall cover the earth with
his righteousness, before whom all that which is against him shall be consumed
by him, and that which is of him shall yield up it self to be perfected in him,
as the lesser in the greater; this is my Testimony and my hope.

Light, Purity and Power of this people examined what it is.
AFter all that has been said, some may retain this persuasion of this people,
that they are a people of light, purity and power above all others: As to their
Light I would say; That there is a Ministry that knows Christ only as in an
History, and teach him so, that presses only the outward letter according to
principles of Law and natural Reason, but know not the mystery and Spirit
therein; what they can comprehend by the letter and reason, that they teach,
and what is more they do judge error, heresy, and to their power oppose and
persecute; this is a Ministry of darkness.

There is a Ministry also, that teaches Christ only as an Allegory or figure
of things to be done in us, the cross and blood without only typing and
signifying the cross, and blood, and spirit within us; Moses, John and Christ
with their several Ministries being only as transient forms, figures and
examples of another and more spiritual Ministry within that only makes
perfect; this doctrine indeed has a glory with the natural man, or him that is
led by the principles of Law or heightened Reason, but has no glory with
afflicted ones, who are under workings of wrath, and spoiled of all, let the
Masters of such doctrines with all their disciples know, the Law was an
Allegory or shadow of good things in Christ, had nothing in it self, but
signified all in another, and referred us over to him; this was but the
weakness and emptiness of the Law, it was but an Allegory.

So they that preach the Person of Christ, and Redemption in him, to be only
an Allegory of things in us, such set not forth Christ in glory but weakness;
this is the emptiness of Christ, that he was but a figure, having done nothing
for us in himself, but only pointing us to another, the Spirit to work
Redemption in us, this is a Ministry of darkness, but under a form of Light.

Which sets forth Christ in most light, let it be judged, he that says Christ
has already by himself done away the ministration of condemnation and death,
which was as a cloud of darkness spread over us, as a thick vail before us,
that we could not come unto God, and in the place thereof has brought forth a
ministration of righteousness and life, whereby a way is opened into the
holiest, into the light and glory of God; that says, Sing oh heavens, for the
Lord has done it, shout ye lower parts of the earth, break forth into singing
ye mountains, oh forest and every tree therein, for the Lord has redeemed
Jacob and glorified himself in Israel; all things that were against us are
overcome on his cross, and descended into his deep grave for ever; nothing
remains but that you receive this Savior as having done all things for you, as
working all things in you; or he that says, Christ came once into the world a
Teacher of Perfection, and a living Example therein; but is now come in us,
setting up a Law of condemnation and death, wherein if we abide, and bear the
indignation of God and punishment of sins, in his Spirit and after his example;
through these sufferings as by the blood of the Cross shall the Atonement and
redemption be made and perfected, if we be perfect in obedience; and that we
are not to believe any such thing that the blood of Christ without takes away
sins; sin is not taken away, nor redemption made till the same obedience and
sufferings be fulfilled in us as in him: this doctrine because pointing to the
blood, the Cross, the Redeemer within may by shaken and darkened hearts be
called a doctrine of light, but indeed it brings back the shadows and terrors
of the Law again, remembrance of sin, suffering, sacrifice, wrath; and so far
from being a Light, that it shuts up the light, grace and glory of God, that he
cannot be seen any other ways than through a vail far thicker than that of
Moses.

Christ as appearing above all mountains, as Head over all Principalities and
Powers to his Church, so he is a Light; as by the brightness of his glory he
has vanquished that darkness and death brought in by sin, so he is a light; as
he has in himself the second Adam destroyed all that which came in by the first
Adam, so he is a light, he that brings not this doctrine makes Christ no more a
Light, but either a figure and example without, or at the best a Lawgiver, a
Moses and an Exact or within.

Their Purity and Power examined, what it is.
THere is a Purity that is so with men, but not before God; Reason says Man's
nature is defiled by sin, and must be washed by our obedience; disobedience to
God was the defilement, and by obedience and mortification we return to Purity;
but faith says, Purity before God is the conscience purged by the dead body of
Christ, and the heart purified by the Spirit of faith, beleiving the same: who
are most for spiritual Purity, they that believe sin already done away in him
that came by blood, water and spirit, and by union with him are therein washed
and made clean every whit; or they who contend sin not yet done away, take away
our righteousness in the Head so pure and perfect, and affirm our righteousness
to be but in part till perfection in obedience? if bodily exercise or purifying
the flesh may be called purity, diverse Monks and Jesuits especially of old may
claim a name herein, who yet knew little of Purity by the righteousness of God:
when alms, bodily chastisements, retirement into holy houses, and going on
pilgrimage was believed as the way to be perfect, no wonder if this Religion
abounded; so where this Principle is received in power, that obedience to the
light within, and all the several acts of that obedience till come unto
perfection are the only Redemption and way to be perfect; to see zeal and
exactness, labors and sufferings, denying the pleasures, fashions and customs
of the world in such, it is not to be wondered at: to purify the earthly members
by the spirit is good, while the inward Man abides as in a more excellent way
purified in the Head; but to purify the members, as reckoning it our
redemption, our righteousness, all such Purity is sin, blindness and Idolatry,

Lastly, as to their Power; the Law is mighty to kill, because of sin, weak to
save, because of the flesh; he that takes out of our sight our righteousness as
in heaven, in the Lord already prepared, brings us back into weakness and
bondage again, and leaves us without light or strength to withstand in the hour
of temptation that may come either by spirits from without, or our flesh from
within: that doctrine that declares our liberty, victory and triumph to be
already in being in Christ the Head, that shows us a life given unto us above
all spiritual actings, exercises and comforts felt in our selves, a life,
liberty and perfection hid in Christ, this doctrine brings power and a spirit
of power,

Compleatness in the Head without Law or work, being believed and learned,
gives a spirit of judgment over all spirits and doctrines, interest and kinds
of life, and a strength of righteousness which preserves from the evils of all:
whilst this Truth lay hid, the Church was in bondage unto the elements of the
world, will worship and monkish holiness having overspread all; instability
and unfaithfulness to this Truth does at this day deliver up many unto
principles and practices not according to Christ: thus where righteousness in
the Head without work is denied, there is neither light, purity nor power,
though a show of all: speech, or words and outward appearance was one thing,
and power another with him that said, I will know not the speech of them that
are puffed up, but their power.

Opposition and persecution that is raised against this people, what to be
thought of it.
HAving given this general view of this people and their way, I shall conclude
with a word concerning the opposition and persecution that is every where
practiced against them, and my sense thereupon. The opposition made against
that or any way that pretends to be of God, may be said to proceed either from
ignorance, or enmity, or truth. As to the first, they that have not the Spirit
of light in themselves oppose the same and the very appearance of the same in
others; the Religion and faith of the greatest part of the Nation is no more
but traditions of others, or inventions of their own reason; the teachings of
God through the Son and Spirit being things they know nothing of, and therefore
the more lively, inward and spiritual manifestations of Truth they oppose:
being in darkness themselves they know not the light nor the workings of it in
others, and therefore think no man sees more than themselves, and so measure
all things by themselves, by this sort of men is this way every where spoken
against, because under shows of light and spirit it testifies against them as
in darkness and the flesh: as to this, I testify against the Nation as
fighters against God, while they ignorantly oppose any spirit or way, whether
it be of God, or do but appear to be o^ Christ and the light of him is an
offense to this world, therefore is his way such an offense, because having
some resemblance of him, though to me no more; what is done against them,
though it be not done against him, yet is done as against him, and the Nations
sin is not the less.

Others have had a taft of Light and Truth, and begun in the Spirit, but are
returned back to the flesh, and are sit down at ease in their forms and
interests; and having lost their simplicity, savor and love to the interests
of Light and Truth, the Gospel and Kingdom of Christ; further measures and
manifestations of Christ and Light and of obedience thereto are as much an
offense to them, as the least measures thereof are to the other: stinted forms
of words and worship were the interest of the Bishops; stinted measures of
light and profession are the interest of these; those were at war with every
thing that was beside their form, because against their interest; these are at
war with what is beside their measure, because against their interest, while
the tyranny of Princes and idolatry of Religions was heavy upon them, that
Righteousness and Light was sweet that redeemed and led them out: Liberty and
pleasures in the flesh having since flattered them into the policies principles
and customs of the world, they take up the same weapons against increases of
light and reformation in others, which their oppressors took up against the
beginnings of it in themselves; by this sort are this people and others opposed
and persecured, because pretending to higher measures of light and
righteousness than they can bear, unto such I say, it is a shame and sadness in
such a day as this, that for mere differences and offenses about spiritual
things, where no more occasion is given men should be delivered up unto bonds,
prisons and unreasonable men: let them live under you in peace, who break not
your peace: let the true Jesus and the true Gospel Spirit shine forth more in
our hearts and ways, and there will not need the arm of flesh either against
the Whore or the Beast, spiritual or outward enemies.

Truth as it is in Jesus is the only principle whereby to oppose error, unto
which Truth I do here bear witness, and have so far herein appeared against
this people, as they have to me appeared against the truth in Christ: disputes
and strifes among brethren divided in the letter, where the spirit is one, I
avoid and forbear: Enmity and opposition against spiritual enlightenings in
others has been the sin of many in this Nation; if I had been left to my own
heart, I should have been as they; but a searching for more light, and a
readiness to receive it has been my frame, having through grace learned, that
one beam of true Gospel Light is more worth than the reading of many books,
more mighty than all the Kingdoms of the world with all their policy, force and
greatness. The difference between me and this people is (as I judge) no other
but what is between them and Christ, not about words, or postures, or glits, or
operations, but about the blood, the atonement, the person of Jesus Christ; if
after diverse conferences, readings and hearings their words and writings, I
could have found the difference no more than in gifts and measures of light and
knowledge; if I could have found them holding the Head, the Person of the
Mediator and compleatness in him by faith, I should have been silent and
studied unity with them.

God indeed is Love, but Christ coming forth as righteousness and peace was the
manifestation of this Love, in him is our victory, liberty and songs; this
Truth sense feels not, reason cannot reach, law vails it, flesh and blood
resist it, spiritual wickednesses in all false Religions fight against it; if
our faith and sight hereof be taken from us, we are delivered up to the power
of some of these earthly, dark and worldly principles; as this truth is
darkened or denied by this people, I have appeared for it: it has been my light
herein by which I have written; as it is opened or shut upon my heart, I did
herein go or stand still; if it had pleased the Lord to have increased my light
and faith herein, I might have written with more evidence and power; that
little strength that has been lent I have not denied, not knowing what use it
may be of.

An account of the Faith of this people in the several parts and principles
thereof being made public by a chief Leader of that way, J. Naylor, in his
Book called Love to the Lost; I shall gather up every principle by it self into
a short and just sum; and therewith the principles of truth, according to the
Prophets and Apostles, whereby we may come to an understanding both of their
faith and the truth, and to a right judgment of their agreement or difference
therewith; in doing of which I trust the Lord of light and truth shall so
command me, that I shall present this faith to others, as their own writings
present it to me; and also set out the faith of Christ no otherwise then as it
is in him.
Concerning the fall of man.
THe sum of things spoken by him is, that Gods own wisdom and power or Spirit
was placed in man, whereby he had power to be the Son of God, and Ruler over
all the creatures; this was the state of the first man; that man's departing out
of Gods own wisdom and power or spirit put into him, and joining to another,
the disobedience entered in; Gods own wisdom and spirit remaining yet in him,
but as a Captive; this was his fall: that by looking and turning not to any
thing without, but to that of God lying under and covered within him, the same
makes atonement in him, and reconciles unto God through his yielding up
himself thereunto, which is the blood of the Cross; this is his Redemption.

The account of truth is, that the first man Adam was made a living soul, 1
Cor. 15. had a beam of light, and power, and glory of God, as to that
appearance of him to the first creation, yet still but a living soul, not a
quickening spirit: as to his outward part, earthly, not heavenly, created of
earth, and feeding upon things created: as to his inward, natural not
spiritual; that is, having in him the perfection and beauty of a created
wisdom and power, not the eternal wisdom and power; a candle of light, not the
Sun or fountain of light it self: by that in him he saw the Godhead as Light,
righteousness, and power, but as giving a law, and a sentence of death; thus
God appeared and appears to the first creation; he saw him not as his light,
righteousness, and power, by himself fulfilling the law, and abolishing death:
this appearance as then lay hid in God, reserved to be brought forth in the
second creation; thus was man in his first estate.

That by one man's disobedience many were made sinners; Adam was so one, that he
was many in one; as the root before the branches is one, yet many as a root:
departing from the commandment, and therein from God, he disobeyed and died,
yet not as alone, but we all in his loins: the root being unholy, so were the
branches; all flesh was defiled in him that was the father of all flesh; his
sin and death like a flood having overflown himself and all the earth with a
curse. This was his fall, and all ours in him.

That by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous: Christ was One, as
to person, yet many in One in a mystery: so his obedience was not the
righteousness of one, but of all in him: not by looking back and returning to
the first Adam made a living soul, or the glory of the Godhead shining forth
upon him; but by looking out of every thing in man to the second Adam, made a
quickening spirit, and the grace of God shining forth in him through the blood
of his cross, we are redeemed, and that not unto the righteousness of the
first, but of the second Adam: thus Christ crucified was that wisdom hid in God
before the world unto our glory, not known by the natural or first man,
neither before nor after his fall: if there be that in the natural man, which
being turned into and followed can redeem and make atonement for him (as this
man says) then the blood of Christ is of no more effect; but do this and live.

Concerning Light and Life.
He says, that the light shining in every man is Christ the true light and
life of men. That the going out of this Light is the cause of all false
Religions, Sects, and errors; that redemption out of all these, out of sin
and death is by the Light within all men as minded and obeyed; that a
righteousness done as far as India, and preached as far as Corinth, where the
same is not done in us, is the profession of Pharisees, hypocrites.

Faith says, that God manifest in the flesh, and his glory shining forth in
the man Jesus, vanquishing and doing away the ministration of the law, sin, and
death for us by his own righteousness and life, as excelling in glory, this is
the Christ and light of men: the word made flesh as the Mediator, having
purged away our sins by himself, so he is light unto us, the same word as the
spirit of revelation in us, so he is light within us, so he is not light in
every man.

That where faith in the blood of the Mediator is not, there is darkness the
mother of Errors, and all false Religions; every of which are more or less
bottomed upon the Law in the Conscience that is the light within, righteousness
by obedience or work being the Root of all, they only differ in the Rule; some
are for Moses, others for the Alchoran, others for Holy Church, these for the
Light within. That the righteousness done in India, and Preached at Corinth is
the light that scatters the Redemption, that leads out of all erring Religions,
from sin and death, and that the Righteousness as far as India (a term of
dishonor by them put upon it) is to the true spiritual believer not confined
in the Land of India, but according to the Divine Person in whom it is, is
extended unto and upon all that believe, as a garment spread upon them for the
covering of sins, a fountain of life within them for the washing away sin.

Concerning Righteousness.
The sum of their faith is, that the imputed righteousness that justifies is
the Light within, or that of God in every man, which is the free gift that
Saints are justified with this righteousness by obedience to it; so much we
work or obey, so much justified and no further. That the righteousness that is
made a covering for sin is an invention of men, and will not stand in the last
day. Nothing said of Christ manifest in flesh, or his crucified body and
righteousness that way.

The Gospel-faith said, that the Righteousness that justifies is Christ not as
God alone, nor as Man alone, but as God-man in one, who being made sin for us,
did most graciously and gloriously upon the Cross abolish and overwhelm sin,
condemnation and the Curse laid upon his flesh, by that Omnipotent
righteousness, life and blessing that was in his God head.

That not by the works of God in us, but by the work of God in Christ, with the
brightness of his glory purging away our sin in himself are we justified
without works, only through faith: Redemption is a work wholly and entirely in
the Person of Christ as Head, revealed and given unto us through faith, and
confessed and manifested by works: by once offering of his body he has
perfected for ever all that are his; he that truly believes this is perfectly
purged, and there is no more Conscience of sin though yet the feeling of sin;
by this faith is the creature made perfect in righteousness at once as in
Christ, by the Light within he is not made perfect till obedience be perfected;
judge whither Doctrine leads to perfection.

That the righteousness of Christ as a covering upon sin presenting the
believer in him as righteous to God, while ungodly and in sins, as to his own
sense, is a mystery of God that never entered into the heart or invention of
man: but that righteousness that covers us no further then our works, is the
invention of man's reason, the very life and soul of all false Religions: the
first is Jerusalem above, bringing forth her children unto liberty, joy and
rest, as complete in the Lord; the last is Jerusalem beneath, bringing forth to
bondage, and hanging down the Head, laboring for a perfection in the flesh,
not discerning that already in the Lord. Was the woman that touched but the hem
of Christ's garment made as whole as they whom he touched with his hand? were
the Disciples that sat at Jesus his feet made clean every whit, as he that
leaned in his bosom? or was as the Child while under Tutors and Governors yet
heir of all things? and is it not so now? does God measure out his love and
everlasting righteousness by inches and else according to our obedience as men
in a bargain? what grace or glory is in such a faith? where such a Gospel is
received, judge what is their spirit; unmerciful, censorious. Let these people
know, that the righteousness as in the Lord though now least in fight shall be
a shadow, a Cover, a Cloud upon Saints under which they shall be safe, where
righteousness as only within, or the Light within where the blood is not,
though now having a glory with Religious Reason and unstable souls, shall be
condemned as found wanting: let Saints stand fast in their Liberty in Christ,
while infirmity is in themselves, yet let them look for the Revelation of it in
themselves, if it may be to swallow up all infirmity; let such as boast of
their Liberty in the Lord, and desire not to be gathered into it in their
members, know, they have neither liberty in him nor in themselves.

Concerning the Word.
They say, That the Light within all men is the word of God, sufficient in it
self without any other word for Counsel and strength: that this word or light
in all men is that of which the Scriptures were given to declare, and can be
understood only by it, That this Light or word be obeyed, washes, cleanses,
and conformeth man to God, and this is the Reconciliation. The inference. If
the light within every man be the word, the Gospel, then all Ages have had, all
Nations have had the Gospel in equality of Light and fullness, if they would
obey it; then Moses, Prophets and Christ were all but as one in Authority and
Ministry; equal and one, that is, testifying and pointing to the light within
men, not to the son of David, the Mediator, him that came as none before him,
nor after shall, by Spirit, Water, and Blood.

Truth says, that the light within every man, is the remaining sparkle of that
Law or light that God set up in greater glory in the first or natural man, and
serves in all Nations as the Candle of the Lord, representing God only as under
a vail, that is, according to the Law, and by things that are made.

That Christ come in the flesh, in himself fulfilled the voices of the Law and
Prophets, and put an end to their Ministry, as being the Minister by whom God
would speak in the last times; this is the Word, the Oracles, Figure, and
Tables, with all the diverse manners of God's speaking under the Law, being all
to serve but for a season, and to be silent when he came who was the Living
Word. Christ is the Word according to a twofold Ministry; as without us in
flesh, dying for our sins, and rising for our justification, so he was the
Minister or Living Word of reconciliation; as within his in spirit, so he is
the inward Word or Spirit of Revelation; these two Ministries are not one
without the other, both are needful for us, yet each in their order; Christ's
Ministry in flesh must first make way for his Ministry in Spirit; till the Word
of reconciliation had finished his work of redeeming us to God by his blood,
the spirit of revelation could not come; as it is said, the Spirit was not
given because that Jesus was not glorified; if no redemption by his blood in
that Ministry without, then no Revelation of the Spirit of grace within; this
people believe not the first, therefore they have not the last; but I entreat
them to hear, that the blood, the Cross, the grace, the crucified body of the
man Christ was and is to the true believer as the loud voice of God, speaking
reconciliation and redemption to be already finished in himself, not to be done
in us; as it is written, when he had said it is finished, he gave up the ghost;
by that Ministry without in flesh he brought us unto God, by that Ministry of
his spirit he reveals God in us; this Christ is the Word as in both these
Mysteries, and one is not without the other, but the Light within every man
knows him in neither; therefore together with the Law with which it is one,
ought to give place.

Concerning Worship.
He affirms, that the spirit of life from God, wherein is the mind, will, and
love of God, the Name, power, and wisdom of Christ, wherewith alone God can be
acceptably worshipped is in every man; that the way whereby the movings of this
spirit of life and leadings may be seen and attained, is the Light within every
man, and waiting therein; that the light or spirit within every man is the
pattern of true worship; they who abide and serve God therein, deny all the
worship and Religions of the world, and are well pleasing to the Father; they
who go out of this light into the letter or any thing without, go into the dead
works and worships, darkness and Idolatry.

The word of faith says, that the law without or spirit in every man that
says do this and live, are the vail, and do keep them that are under it in the
first Tabernable, that is washings, righteousness, redemption by obedience in
us; that Christ's dead body was the rending of the vail or first Tabernacle and
the way into the holiest, through which we draw nigh unto God by the faith
alone of Christ crucified for us, without works; to abide in any law or light
whatsoever either from within or without, and to be exercised therein, as to be
redeemed or perfected thereby, this is to worship God according to the Law, and
as in the flesh; but to worship God as already redeemed from the Law, flesh,
and sin, as already freed and set up through faith in the life, spirit, and
righteousness of Christ; this is to worship the father as in spirit and ^h.

The the way to attain to this spirit of Christ is not by the (...) of the Law,
or waiting in the light within every man, which is all one, but by the hearing
of faith, or Christ revealed in the soul as the end of all Laws, curses and
evils, and the fullness of all good things unto us; that principle placed in all
men may lead unto a spirit of fear, zeal and activity for God in the
Contemplations of him as a pure and holy God; but it is a far other principle,
that is, Christ crucified for us, and the faith of him that leads unto that
spirit of peace, power, and joy, in the beholding of God as our father in him;
so then that spirit that shows the commandment, and leads to the services
thereof to be redeemed thereby, is a spirit which all men may attain unto; but
that spirit that reveals the things freely given of God without Law or service,
is that spirit that is not given unto all; nor eye, nor ear, nor heart of man
can see or find this out; he only descends and blows where he lifts; neither
being received can he be retained any longer then he pleases, no more then we
can restrain the breath in our nostrils; that spirit exercises the servants
thereof with labor and hard bondage and then kills them, as preferring the
commandment of the Old before the blood of the New and everlasting Testament;
this makes his Children free and saves for ever, as rejoicing in the Head, and
having no confidence in the flesh or the works done therein.

That the pattern of true worship is Jesus Christ as the Oracle speaking from
Heaven, and the Gospel as the Preacher on earth; the one being the substance of
Heavenly things themselves, the other but the Copy; that doctrine or spirit
whatsoever it may seem, that calls you to the light in every man and to that
alone as the only pattern of faith and worship, does but build up a worship
upon the same foundations with the worships of the world, that is,
righteousness by the Law, and serves to no other end then to blot out the true
atonement, the blood and water, that fountain of healing in the Person of
Christ, with the very name and remembrance thereof, to bring forth instead
thereof another atonement to be made in our persons, which in true sense is no
other but the righteousness of the Law.

Concerning Error, Heresy, etc.
He says, that the light within every man is that Spirit of truth which
judges all deceit, but can be deceived by none that to divide or go out from
this Spirit or light is error, and the mother of all false worship, and
Religions.

It has been before proved, that the light within all men is the candle of the
Lord in every natural man revealing the law and the offenses against that law;
but the Spirit that reveals the gift of grace by one man Jesus Christ the
natural man neither knows nor can receive.

There are three that bear record in heaven, and they are one; there are three
that bear witness on earth, and they agree in one; God sending forth his Son in
our flesh for a propitiation for sins, this is the witness of the Father, as
the fountain of grace and truth; Christ coming forth as the Image and
brightness of the Father, purging away our sins by himself, and returning to
God, this is the witness of the Son, as the fullness of grace and truth; the
spirit of Christ coming into our hearts, revealing the righteousness of Christ
and the life of Christ in us, this is the witness of the Spirit.

Now among these witnesses there is such an Unity, that he that denies one,
denies all; the witnesses are one and their testimony one, yet each in their
order; the Father spoke, and appeared, and bowed himself to sinners, but so as
in the Mediator the man Christ; the Son redeemed sinners, but so as he did in
his own body, not in ours; the spirit comes unto such, but so as he leads them
into the Light and fullness of Christ, not the light in every man; to divide
from any of these, or to set one against another is Error; Jews and Turks
believe in God, but not as in the Son; they divide from the Son, and so have
not the Father; the litteral and carnal Professors after a sort believe in God
as in the Mediator, but deny his spirit in their hearts; these divide from the
spirit, and so have neither the Son nor the Father; this people believe in God
as by the Light within men redeeming from sin, but not as in the Man Jesus
having done it already; and so deny the witness of the Son, and have neither
Son nor Father.

Christ is the band of unity between God and men; in him Mercy, and Truth,
righteousness and peace do kiss each other; in him, God and sinners are met
together, reconciled, and at unity; in him God comes down to sinners; by him we
come unto God; in him the blessed Divinity, and the seed of Abraham, that is
the humane nature are in covenant, in union; the Covenant, the union was made
by the Cross, by blood, by the body of Christ, this was the Sons witness; take
heed, he that divides you from the Son and this his witness, sets you at such
a difference with the Majesty of God, as no light nor spirit within you can
atone or make up; thus Error is not to divide from the Light within all men,
but from Christ the Head, the fullness of all Truth, in whom we only see and
have the Father and Spirit, and without whom all Religions are fleshly or
mystical Idolatries.

Concerning Faith.
He says, the measure or light of God in every man is Gods righteousness,
perfection; that turning into this righteousness and adiding therein, is the
receiving of the righteousness of Christ by faith; that by waiting in the light
within through faith and obedience thereto righteousness is wrought in, and
unrighteousness wrought out; and so the creature is made free from sin, not a
word of the Faith in the person of Christ, or the operation of God in him for
us.

The scope of their Doctrine herein, and in all the height and depth of it,
seems plainly this, that a measure of the eternal Divinity is in every man, by
turning whereinto, out of all sayings, writings, persons, operations,
Scriptures, or Christ without, the same does through obedience thereto destroy
and purge away sins out of us, and so redeems and reconciles unto God.

The precious faith says, that the eternal word manifest in flesh, being the
substantial fullness of the Divine life and righteousness, and having thereby
vanquished in his flesh, and buried in his grave our sins and death with all
powers visible or invisible that were against us, this is he who is the pure,
perfect, and acceptable righteousness of God.

That to look away from all the voices and condemnations of the Law without, or
conscience within, from all things in our flesh and heart, whither good or
evil, unto the person of Jesus Christ himself; and to believe him to be our
righteousness, salvation and liberty, as in the hidden mystery of faith; which
to our sense or earthly members we are in infirmities, buffetings, and bondage;
this is to receive the righteousness of Christ by faith; the faith of things
not seen to sense and reason, yet hid in God.

That by him all that believe are justified from all things by the Law of the
spirit according to the Conscience, from which they could not be justified by
the Law of Moses without, or the work of the Law written within according to
the flesh; by the eternal spirit in the blood of Jesus were sins washed away in
the person of Christ before either faith or work; by faith the same is brought
to light in the Conscience, by the works of faith is manifest in the body; as I
am in the flesh I labor between light and darkness, flesh and spirit, in
fightings, in work; as I am in Christ, I am entered into rest and victory, and
know no more work but Christ to be all; that faith that cannot see
justification in Christ till full mortification in the flesh, will be found to
be that fleshly Reason that cannot enter within the vail, that is, beyond the
Law, sense, and reason.

Let these things be weighed, that the purging away sin by a measure of God or
light within, is a baptism devised by reason, and may wash away the filth of
the flesh before men, and has a glory in appearance; but the answer of a good
Conscience in the death and resurrection of the man Jesus, will be found to be
the Baptism that saves before God, and brings forth the true glory within.

That this people seeking after righteousness by perfect obedience to the light
within, and the Jews seeking it by obedience to the Law of Moses without, are
both in one spirit and under one law of work; and differ no more but in the
Copies of the Law; those say, the Law in the Conscience is holy, just, and
pure, and by obedience thereunto the unholiness and sin is taken away; these
say the Law upon Tables of stone is holy, just, and spiritual, and by obedience
to it they think to attain righteousness; let both these know, that neither the
letter of the Law without, nor the light of the Law within, how holy and pure
soever, but Christ Jesus crucified as the end of both, and faith in him is that
which shall preserve men blameless and without spot before him at his coming;
all other coverings, whither by Law, letter, or light within, if without that
in him, shall be too short in that day.

Concerning Hope.
He says, to hope that that of God in every man or a Christ may be revealed to
take away sin; to give freedom from sin in this life, is the pure, the
reasonable hope that makes not ashamed; that to hope salvation while the
witnese in the Conscience condemns of sin, is the Devils hope, and the
unreasonable hope; that they who have this hope, look only for spirit, light,
word, and righteousness without, and deny the witness within, and Christ within
the hope of glory.

To believe Christ has already once in the end of the world appeared to put
away sin by the sacrifice of himself, whereby we are saved through faith
according to the inward man, Heb. 9.26. 1 John 3.5 and to look and long for him
to appear again without sin unto salvation and redemption of the body or
outward man; this is the lively hope that makes not ashamed, that gives
perfection and strength in him, while yet poor and wanting in our selves.

That to rest in hope that I am saved already from sin and wrath in Christ the
Head through his blood and spirit, whiles conscience condemns of sin in my
flesh; this is the hope against hope, the hope of grace and faith, against the
hope of Law and conscience, or sense and feeling; this is the hope unreasonable
indeed according to the Law, and natural light; but most true and reasonable,
according to an higher Law and reason in God, that is, the Word made flesh, and
made sin for us; this hope in many is no more but an imagination or idle
notion, living in the pleasures of sin; in such it was begotten by the letter
or Reason, or at the best by a vanishing flash of Light; but where it is
begotten by the inhabiting and abiding spirit, there it is a hope beholding the
glory of the Lord, and changing the creature into the same image in the Lord;
the hope that sees the love of the father shed forth upon us in the blood of
atonement, and all sins and evils finished therein, is the hope that gives
rest to the afflicted, wearied, and not comforted, and lifts up the head above
the floods of all waters that can come against them.

He that truly looks unto the righteousness and grace in the person of the
Mediator, does also wait in hope for the righteousness, light and spirit of the
Mediator to be revealed within him; therefore his words are a slander; to know
Christ only as without, and to know him only as within are both a like Error;
to conclude, they that are Christ's are saved already, but it is by hope, not in
clear and full enjoyment; the hope is laid up in him, but not seen to sense and
feeling; what a man sees or enjoys, why does he yet hope for it?

Concerning Love.
His Doctrine is, that Gods love to the world in sending his Son is this, that
God had given a light in every man to condemn sin in the flesh, and take it
away through walking after the spirit, and denying the works of the flesh; that
God's love in the creature, does likewise condemn all sin in others, not
flattering or sparing any, and then covers them with righteousness.

Was this Gods great and abounding love in sending his Son? is it no more but
God giving a light in all men condemning of sin, and taking it away in them? or
was it not rather herein, that when the Law was weak, the flesh weak, while we
were yet sinners and in our blood, while there was no man, no Intercessor, that
even then God sent his Son a propitiation for sins: who came down unto us not
in the nature of Angels, but in our flesh, and therein through death quenched
in the still deep waters of his meekness and love, the anger, enmity, sin and
death, with all things that might separate us from the love of God; which of
these was the great love? let the Scriptures, spirit, and spiritual man be
judge; or is this God's love in men to condemn, curse, and judge others as not
justified and saved in Christ, whilst they feel sin in the flesh? to take away
my liberty, joy, and peace, which I have in Christ, witnessed by the spirit to
faith, until the same be witnessed in my flesh to sense; is this divine love?
to trouble them that have believed in Jesus, the afflicted and wounded and
weary, by calling them unto the ministration of Moses, the fire and the sword,
the suffering, the indignation for sin, and unto perfect obedience, all this as
the way to redemption and righteousness by Christ, is this the love that is of
God, the grace, the meekness of the Gospel? or rather is it not the love of the
false Apostles, calling them to the fulfilling of the Law, that were at liberty
in Christ? who indeed zealously affected, but not well, that is, that they
might glory in their flesh.

God's love to his people speaks woe and wrath indeed, but to the wise and
strong who will not bow to the weakness and foolishness of a crucified Christ,
to be saved in him; but to the hungry and weary, to the least of the little
children that are in Christ, it speaks peace; fear not, your sins are forgiven
you for his names sake; wherefore to bring forth a full Christ, a fullness of
righteousness, life and liberty in Christ to a creature empty and destitute of
any such thing, this is that love that feeds the hungry, clothes the naked,
and gives water in the wilderness; there is a generation that flatters, and
spares in sin them whom the Lord condemns; this is to justify the wicked;
there is another generation that charges and reproves of sin whom the Lord has
justified; let this people fear that this is their error; both are alike
abomination to the Lord.

Concerning Judgment.
His words summed up are, That the light in every man condemning of sin is the
ministration of judgment and condemnation, and as it is received is light and
salvation, redeeming from all uncleaness; that the spirit of judgment that
went forth in the Prophets against all unrighteousness, is come forth in a
people now; I understand, in him and in them.

The faith of the Gospel says, that Christ having all judgment committed to
him; in the body of his flesh, judged and gave up to condemnation and death,
the prince of this world, the flesh, the glory of man, his sin and
righteousness, and having done all, he went to the father and was seen no more;
he being the brightness of Gods own righteousness, and being to be made
righteousness to men, he judged and put an end to all other righteousness, even
to that which had a glory, as having no glory; so that it may be said by him,
that is, in his Cross fell all the mighty Lords and Tyrants of the world, Law,
sin, and death, all which are judged and overcome by that righteousness and
spirit of life in him; by this judgment are sinners redeemed already as in him
the head.

That as Christ has in every Age come forth more or less, so in this last time
he will come forth the righteousness and salvation of his people, whose
appearance does and will judge the works of the Law as well as the lusts of the
flesh, with all things that shall not be found in him and of him; God will
judge the world by Christ, not by Moses, nor by Angel nor by any other spirit;
the Gospel and spirit of Christ in his people, shall judge both Angels and men,
spiritual and fleshly wickedness.

The spirit of judgment is found either in the natural or spiritual man; the
natural man being under the Law, has a light within him to discern the things
of the Law; his judgment reaches only to the righteousness of the Law, and to
sins against the Law; the spiritual man being freed from the Law in the
glorious righteousness of Christ, is able to judge of all things, all
Religions, spirits, kinds and conditions of life whatsoever; judgings do abound
amongst all men in this Age, but few have the true spirit or rule of judgment;
Law, or form, or light within are the principles of judgment with most; with
the spiritual man so far as he abides free in Christ, it is a small thing to be
judged by any of these, yea he judges not himself; therefore let all take heed
with what spirit you judge, lest you judge, and not by the Gospel, nor in the
Lord.

The Prophets and John had a spirit of judgment, but they testified also of
righteousness only by him that was to come; they called not the people to a
redemption present or to be done in that Age, or by the light within every man;
let this people bear testimony to that alone righteousness as already fulfilled
for us in him, and not call away from that unto another redemption to be done
over again, of which no Prophets spoke, that is, by the light within all men;
and then shall true judgment be given unto them; till then they will but err
in judgment and stumble in vision.

Concerning Perfection.
His Principle matter is, That Perfection is that gift or light in every man by
joining to which he is made perfect; that God sent his son into the world to
preach perfection, a perfect example, which whosoever believe and follow him in it
are made perfect; that nothing but perfection, that is, freedom from sin in the
body before death can give rest and Redemption; that imperfection of
righteousness and gifts came in by the ministry of Antichrist, and is of the
Devil.

The Gospel mystery says, that Christ being the perfection of grace and truth,
of life and righteousness, came forth in flesh, and therein on the Cross put an
end to the imperfect Ministry of the Law and Prophets, to the pollutions and
imperfections of flesh, and by one offering in his own person perfected for
ever all that were sanctified; he being the perfection of love, life, light,
and righteousness, slew in himself the enmity, the power of death, and all that
darkness and sin that was by the Law; the Law could not give life, men could
not obey, all creatures could not find out an Intercessor; at this time Christ
came forth in the glory of the Godhead, in the weakness of our manhood, that in
the one he might bear all that was against us, by the other he might spoil and
triumph over all for us; he was love and bowels to perfection, a Savior to
perfection; so that not by the Law without, nor light within, nor any other
imagined or pretended perfection; but in him ye are complete, who is the
fullness of the Godhead; in whose death you are dead and buried, and in him
raised up into the heavenly liberty and perfection, if you do believe, though
darkness, imperfections, and fightings may yet remain in your flesh; Christ
first descended into the lower parts of the earth, our weakness and death, that
he might finish them in himself; after he ascended far above all heavens, that
he might fill all things, that he might make the Angels, life and death to
minister, to be for his own; as it is said, all are yours; this is perfection,
yet hid; not in every man, but with Christ in God, and in the hearts of the
children of faith.

And if so, then was Christ in flesh no more then a Preacher or example of
perfection? was that fullness of the Godhead, that brightness of the fathers
glory in him, no other then such a light as God has set up in every man? or
was his bearing our sins, and the wounds for iniquities no more, but to show
unto us how we should bear them in our selves? then what pre-eminence had his
person above Moses, Noah and the rest who were Preachers of righteousness and
perfection? or wherein is his Gospel above the Law, which is a rule of
perfection? or what were his sufferings more then those of Paul, who was in
deaths often? let the spiritual judge which is the Doctrine of Perfection.

Perfection is either that in the head, hid for us there until he shall appear,
or a measure and earnest thereof manifest in our bodies; according to the
first, a believer overcomes, possesses all things, is dead, raised up, and
received by Christ into the glory of God, Romans 15.7. according to the other, a
believer knows but in part, sees, enjoyes, and prophesies but in part, and so
is in imperfection; wherefore let the Children in Christ know that they are
saved and perfected in the Lord for ever, whilst yet their seeings, prayings,
and actings in the Lord are but in part; and let this people know, if they look
away from that one offering in the head, and be not first perfected therein,
that all other perfection by the light within and utmost obedience will not
stand them in stead in the last day.

Concerning Obedience.
The sum of things spoken by him is, that to be guided in obedience to the
spirit or light within us, as Christ was by the spirit of the father in him,
this is the righteousness of Christ; and thus by the obedience of one are many
made righteous: that the father calls for the same obedience of the believer,
as of Christ; and the believer offers up himself in the same obedience Christ
did; and so is the obedience of Christ and a believer one: that the creature is
not made perfectly righteous by the obedience of Christ, till he comes to the
same perfection of obedience that Christ did; and so he is made righteous no
further then he obeys.

If nothing should be said, the swelling pride of this spirit in lifting up it
self in an equal sufficiency with the person of Christ, to drink the same cup,
and offer up the same obedience for the purging away sin, may hereby appear;
yet I may not be silent in the cause of my Lord, although I am the least in my
fathers house. Although this Doctrine may have a glory with the sublime wits of
speculative Pagans, who know not, or deign not to know any other way of
approaching the Divine Glory then the way Christ did, that is, without a
Mediator; yet unto the true Christian who through many tribulations has seen
an end of all perfection, whither fleshly lusts, works of the Law, or heights
of Philosophy, it is known to be but a depth of Satan; but who art thou Oh man
that utterest these great words? have thou all the fullness of the Godhead in
thy self, in the measure the man Jesus had? have thou all those treasures of
Light, wisdom, and Power in the same fullness that he had? that thou can
follow him into the perfection and glory of God, by the same way of obedience
he did; art thou able to bear the sins of many, to sustain the sentence and
terrible Majesty of the Law in thy body, to encounter with all the Angels and
powers of darkness, to lay down thy life for many, and take it up again? was
not this and much more the obedience of Christ? was not he made perfect by
these sufferings? and do thou think to come to perfection or the glory of
God by doing the like, or not rather by believing he has done all this for
thee?

Wherefore let it be known, that the spirit has testified in Scriptures of two
things in the obedience of Christ; a Mystery to be believed, and an Example to
be followed; Christ as Mediator, being the only person in whom all things
pertaining to God and men, the repairing of the breach, and the making up of a
blessed union between them were to be transacted, received into himself, and
therein slew our old man, the enmity, and all the evils of the world, and being
in the glory of the second Adam, put an end in himself to the glory of the
first, and in the place of all this brought forth in himself everlasting
righteousness, liberty and peace, into and upon all them that believe;
whereupon a believer may say, as I am in the first Adam, where the Law, reason,
and sense bear rule, so I am in a Tabernacle of flesh, an house of darkness, so
I often neither feel, nor know, nor behold any redemption, liberty, or peace;
but as I am in the second Adam, I neither know law, reason, nor sense, flesh,
world, nor work, but Christ to be all in all; this is the mystery to be
believed, a mystery hid from the spirit of this world, or the purest and
clearest principle in the heart of the natural man; if this mystery of Christ
in his death were known to any as it is in him, Christ would appear to that man
as a fullness of light and glory, in, through, and over all things; or were a
believer known to himself or the world, as he is known in Christ to Christ, he
would not be able to bear the world, nor the world him; therefore blind or
worse, are those reproaches that are cast upon this mystery of the death of
Christ, and redemption by it, as a knowing of Christ without, at Jerusalem, or
after the flesh; nothing brings forth Christ more as a spirit of wisdom,
power, and holiness within me unto good works, then when I behold him as made
righteousness and sanctification to me without work; whosoever takes away the
last, does also take away the first, and at best has no more but a divised
likeness, or imagined shadow thereof.

As Christ suffered for us in the flesh, that the father in him as his head and
life, might be revealed and glorified in him; so in the same spirit and mind
ought the believer to suffer in the flesh, that Christ in him as this head and
life, might be glorified and manifest in him; thus is Christ's obedience an
example to be followed; our dyings and perfectings in the body by obedience,
when proceeding from our first being dead and perfected in the head by faith,
so they are the precious savours and fruits of Christ and grace; but if dyings
and obedience in us be made the way unto perfection and justification in
Christ, then they are no other but works of the Law, disguised with names of
Christ and spirit; as this people stand divided from the first, so am I divided
from them, and so does this testimony go forth against them.

There are diversities of operations, but the same spirit; his Doctrine says,
that we are perfectly justified by Christ's obedience, when we perform
obedience in the same measure he did; if so, then the obedience of the man
Jesus and ours are no more one then the obedience of Paul and ours, that is,
one in spirit, but two in operation; thus by his Doctrine, we are justified as
much by the obedience of Paul, as of the man Christ, as to the operation; let
him, and them, consider if it be not so, and fear.

Concerning good Works.
His account is, that by obedience to the light which reproves of sin,
following it out of the world, and bringing forth the fruits of it, the
creature comes into the good work or obedience of Christ, and so is by Christ
redeemed; that by being diligent in this light, waiting and obedient therein,
the believer is led into the obedience, sufferings, tribulations, and
temptations of Christ; that all the works and measures performed by the
creature in obedience to this light, do all complete but this one work of the
creatures redemption.

Where faith and unity with the head is lost, no marvel if all the thoughts of
that man run into confusion; that the obedience or righteousness in Christ for
justification, and good works in us are one thing, his own words at large may
manifest, if this short account of them may not; and thereupon what foundation
they build, I need say no more; only for the weaks sake I shall speak a word;
Christ was in the beginning with God, that good Word whereby all things were
made; the same word in fullness of time became flesh in him that was the holy
and just One, who in his own person eternally vanquished all the evils of the
world, and to the utmost fulfilled the holy and perfect work of God, for an
everlasting and only righteousness upon all that believe; of the greatness
whereof might I speak, it is higher then the Heavens, deeper then the Sea, and
the utmost bounds and ends thereof can no more be known, then can the heights
and depths of him be known, that is, the holy one of Israel.

And this is the one obedience, one righteousness, one good work in one person,
one in spirit, one in operation, never to be renewed more in any other; the
same being not of a private nature, nor for a private spirit, but one for all;
he that has made of one blood all Nations of men, has by one blood created
anew out of all Nations, a people for himself; and if the natural heavens over
us were spread forth at once, in length and breadth large enough to comprehend,
preserve, and nourish all Nations and all things therein; how much more shall
that One righteousness of Christ, which is one with himself, be as spiritual
heavens large enough to take in, to cover and preserve the second creation,
without any other to be added thereto, how low and narrow, yea, how unbelieving
and unworthy are their thoughts and esteem of the person and righteousness of
Christ, that think otherwise, I leave to be weighed.

Through faith I come to read this most good and glorious work of God, and
therein to understand how that this world and my old man or flesh, with all the
evils of both by the operation of the blessed Divinity in his body were
abolished in himself through death, whilst yet darkness, pollutions and
fightings, and thereby heaviness for a season is felt in my flesh; wherein I
also reckon my self to be as truly crucified and buried with him, through the
operation of the Godhead, in the man Jesus for me, as if the same had been done
in me; and this is the mystery of faith, and the praise thereof is great, but
not before men, who esteem of nothing but of what appears, or is seen, felt, or
handled; and hence I think it necessary to give this warning, that all
approaches unto or converses with the majesty and glory of God by any
redemption or operation of whatsoever spirit or light within, and all mysteries
of light and perfection so reputed whatsoever where that blessed and eternal
redemption in the person of Christ for us is excluded; I say through faith,
that all such are no other but some of the brighter sparks of Satan's fires,
kindled on purpose to lead the creature to God by such a door, as wherein he
will be unto it a consuming fire; can two walk together except they be agreed?
that man knows neither what God is, nor himself, that thinks to attain, or to
have attained the glorious presence of God by spirit within him, who is not
first reconciled through the propitiation of grace in the blood of Jesus.

If any man ask (as they often do) how can Redemption be where it is not
witnessed, where conscience charge of sin? my answer is, who shall lay any
thing to my charge, it is Christ that died? my witnesses are the spirit, water,
and blood; the spirit of Revelation shining in my heart, and the power of his
death and redemption in part manifest in my body; whilst heart and flesh, that
is reason, and sense and law witness against me, yet Christ and grace is
greater then all, let him alone speak, let these be silent.

But if they ask, to believe redemption whilst sin in me, is not this the
unreasonable hope? No, the father laid our sins upon Christ to take them away,
whilst we were yet enemies that he might commend his great love to us, this was
reasonable with God; the Son rent our sins from off him in his own body on the
tree, because he could not be held of them, this was reasonable with Christ;
the spirit bears witness that all things are finished, sin, death, and the
flesh, in the body of Christ unto him that works not but believes on him, that
justifies the ungodly, this witness is reasonable; through faith I receive
Christ into my self, and am received into him, and through this oneness am made
righteousness, life, and light, in the Lord, whilst yet I am in many darknesses
and deaths as to sense and feeling; and this is reason as in the mind of God,
and according to the mystery of Christ; that doctrine or spirit how mysterious
soever in words or show, that teaches redemption to be by the operation of the
spirit within us, and not by that alone operation of God in the man Christ
Jesus, is indeed the excellency and height of man's reason and thoughts, but a
fearful contradiction to that higher reason, or rather that blessed mystery of
grace that appeared in Christ.

Whereas he says, that all the works and measures performed by the creature in
obedience to the light within, do all complete the one work of the creatures
redemption; to this I shall only say, how is the day of free grace set upon us,
and how are the thick clouds of Legality and misterious reason spread over us,
if this may be received for truth; and let me only remember you of the words of
Luther a man wiser and mightier in Christ then I, which follows.

It was indeed a great glory that Abraham received circumcision at the
commandment of God, that he was endued with excellent virtues, that he obeyed
God in all things, but all this avails nothing, to righteousness before God;
the excellent deeds and virtues of Abraham were not the cause that he was
counted righteous before God; so the following of the example of, does not make
us righteous before God; for to that there is a more excellent price required,
which is neither the righteousness of man, nor yet of the Law, here we must
have Christ; how? not by works, but by faith; therefore as there is a great
difference between Christ blessing or redeeming and Christ working or giving
example; wherefore we must separate the believing and the working Abraham as
far asunder as there is distance betwixt heaven and earth; Abraham believing in
Christ is altogether a divine person, the child of God, inheritour of the
world, conqueror of sin, death, the world, and the Devil; therefore he cannot
be praised and magnified enough; let us not suffer this faithful Abraham to lie
hid in his grave, as he is hid from the Jews, but let us highly extol and
magnify him, and let us fill both heaven and earth with his name; so that in
respect of the faithful Abraham we see nothing at all in the working Abraham;
for when we speak of this faithful Abraham we are in heaven, but afterward
doing those things which the working Abraham did, which were carnal and
earthly, and not divine and heavenly (but as they were given unto him of God)
we are among men in earth; the believing Abraham fills both heaven and earth;
so every Christian through his faith fills both heaven and earth, so that
besides it he ought to behold nothing. Thus far his words. Good works or the
works of God in us are in comparison of the righteousness in Christ but carnal,
like as Abraham's good works (a thing worthy of note) are but accounted flesh
in comparison of the righteousness of Christ, Romans 4.1, 2.

Concerning Election and Reprobation.
He says, that the light in every man which reproves of sin is Christ, and is
the election, elect seed, the mercy of God placed in all men, that this light
being believed and followed, till by it a man be changed and purged from the
oldness and lusts of flesh, to the newness of the spirit then he comes to the
election, or to be selected.

Truth says, that in every man which reproves of sin is not Christ but the
Law; by the Law is the knowledge of sin; that Christ the Elect and beloved of
God is he in whom the purposes, promises, counsels, and all the works of God
were laid up and known unto God from before the world began; Christ was from
the beginning the common seed or Father, in whose loins God in his
foreknowledge beheld, and in his love choose a seed or offspring whom he would
beget of his own will by his spirit.

God that separated the Jews from all other Nations only because he loved them;
that said of the children of Isaac being not yet born, Jacob have I loved, but
Esau have I hated; that called them his beloved, which were not beloved; that
separated Paul a persecuter from his mothers womb; that has mercy on whom he
will have mercy; the same God has foreknown and chosen and loved a people in
Christ the beloved, who though for the present, as concerning the Gospel they
be enemies through wicked works; yet as touching the election they are beloved
for Christ's sake; you have not chosen me, but I have chosen you: If I be
lifted up from the earth, I will draw all men unto me; Christ drawed up all his
own in his body into himself in love; this love shed forth into our hearts,
draws us up in love into him again; thus we love him because he loved us first:
the father gave a people to the Son from everlasting, and saw and loved them in
him before the world was; the Son came forth to manifest and make way for this
love through his righteousness down unto men; the spirit reveals that love, and
by Christ leads us unto the father; thus redemption and sanctification are both
fruits of that love and election that was given us in Christ before the world
began: by receiving Christ the Image of the father I come indeed to know his
love and election, but he both loved, elected and redeemed me in Christ the
head, before I was. Wherefore they that deny election, and redemption, until
the creatures obedience to the light within, do measure the thoughts and ways
of the unsearchable goodness of God with the low and narrow thoughts and ways
of man; being zealous indeed for the righteousness of God according to the Law,
but darkning and denying the glorious righteousness of God as in Christ Jesus.

Concerning the New birth.
He says, that by abiding in the seed or light within every man, thereby the
old man is put off with his deeds: that they who are guided by this light
(called by him the eternal spirit) do follow God as he goes out of one form
into another; all others stay therein after God is gone, as seeing but the
outside or form only; that they who joined to the light within that reproves of
sin, to be led by it, are and ever were hated and persecuted of all others.

His silence throughout of that more excellent and truly misterious way of
crucifying the body of sin in the person of Christ, whose body and blood is by
him made as no more but figuers of the body and blood within, that is, the
light within all men, this does sufficiently manifest his mind and principle,
and the end whether it leads, unto mount Sinai, to press through unto God by an
atonement and mediation to be made in our bodies, that is, obedience to the
light within.

The new creature is not a Jew, one seeking righteousness by the Law, either in
the letter or conscience, nor a Gentile, one thinking to know, comprehend, and
worship God by the light or wi^edom of the natural man, but a man in Christ,
dead, buried, and risen with him into heavenly places above the world, sin, and
death, by faith alone without work, that is, before these things be manifest or
wrought in his members: also he is one in whom Christ dwells by faith, and so
made partaker of the divine Nature, that spirit which the world sees not, has
not, nor by any light they have can find it out, the world's light is a candle
from the Lord, saying do this and live; the spirit of the new creature is the
Lord himself, saying, I have done it, only believe and live. According to the
mystery of faith, the new man is in heart and spirit gone out of all the
world, and is in heaven perfectly justified, redeemed, and saved, but in a way
above sense and feelings, yet seen by faith; according to present manifestation
he has the spirit of Christ whereby he sees, knows, and enjoys in part those
perfect things, in Christ, till they be fully revealed; if any man boasts of
the first, that he is redeemed by Christ, and has not the other, that he lives
in some measure after the spirit, that man's boasting is in vain; likewise if
any man glories of the spirit, that he walks in the spirit, in mortifyings of
the flesh, neglect of the body, reproaches, necessities, labors, stripes,
prisons, in weariness, painfulness, watchings often, in hunger, thirst, cold
and nakedness, and yet has not that which is above all these, the heavenly and
glorious righteousness in Christ by faith, let such know, their glorying is but
in the flesh, and shall not profit before the Lord.

Concerning ministrations, and following God out of one into another, it may be
said, that the Law, Prophets and John were ministrations typing and testifying
of things in the heavens to come, and so were done away; Christ was the
substance of heavenly things themselves, and so his ministration remains to
this day; as that of the letter was perfected and given at once by one man at
mount Sinai, yet to be continued till he came who was the end thereof, so this
ministration of righteousness and spirit was perfected and given at once by one
man Christ, on the Cross, yet to stand in force, by diverse measures and
manifestations of spirit and truth to be revealed and brought to light till he
comes again, and takes his people unto himself; now of the diverse
manifestations of spirit, some are true, some deceiveable; for discerning of
which we have a good rule, 1 Cor. 12.4.5. now there are diversities of gifts,
but the same spirit, and differences of administration, but the same Lord;
administrations of light and truth, though diverse as to the measure and manner
of the gifts, yet if agreeing in one Christ, are all good and useful in their
seasons; to follow God into the purest and best is a glory upon them that do
it; to be left behind may be weakness in them that are Christ's, but is
wickedness in the world.

On the other hand, those pretended Ministries or Angels of light whatsoever,
that do teach another Jesus, another spirit, another faith, that is, redemption
by obedience to the light in every man, such are not of God; and to call that a
ministration of spirit and life is no more true, then to call the Law so; the
light in every man and the Law in the letter being the same: if any shall leave
Christ crucified as but a figure of redemption, and shall follow the light in
the conscience, as the substance thereof, let him know, out of Christ crucified
is no more sacrifice for sin, nor will God be found but as consuming fire.

If any shall think that redemption without by the blood of Christ is done away
when that by the light within is perfected; to such I say, till mortality be
swallowed up of life, and the body now dead because of sin be thereby freed
from all corruption, until then I judge both Christ crucified for us, and the
faith therein will be of necessary and blessed use.

To what he says of persecution, this may be said; they that followed after
the spirit and teachings thereof were indeed always persecuted by the children
of the flesh and letter; but they that sought righteousness by the Law and the
principles thereof in the conscience, were those children of the flesh by whom
the blood of them that were after the spirit has been shed in every Age; was
not the blood of Saints formerly in England, France, and Germany, shed for
bearing testimony to the righteousness of faith alone without works.

Concerning the Baptism of Christ from that the world so calls.
His profession herein is, that the Baptism of Christ is (I understand the
light within all men) by which a man being baptized into his death, buried with
him unto the world, its ways and worships, loves and friendships, so he is
baptized with the Batism of Christ. That Baptisms of water as now are carnal in
the world, about which all are divided and contending that are in them, being
gone out into the world.

The Baptism of Christ is that in Christ wherewith he was baptized in his own
person, not for himself, but for us, and we in him as in our head, that is,
when together with his own body through death he put off our old man and all
the sins of our flesh at once in himself, by whose baptism our sins, death, our
flesh, and all this world were really, yet in a mystery dead and buried with
him, and as by an overflowing River washed clean away by himself, before either
the faith or power thereof was known or wrought in us; this baptism is a
mystery unknown to all Law-workers whatsoever, whither the more mystical or
literal sort of them, who know no higher baptism then by deeds of holiness in
obedience to a light within or letter without; also to the masters of reason
who know no other baptism then by refined principles and exercises of morality;
this is the baptism of justification and sanctification in the head, wherewith
we were washed, sanctified, and justified in him even before we were; the same
being revealed in us by faith sprinkles from our hearts an evil conscience, and
then the spirit of him dwelling in our mortal flesh washes our bodies with
pure water; thus the baptism of Christ is one, first in him perfected for us,
afterward in measures revealed in us.

Whereas he concludes only baptisms of water to be carnal washings; I say both
baptisms of water in what form soever without the spirit, are carnal; and also
all baptisms by what name soever, particularly that of retirement out of all
things into the light in every man, where that Baptism in the head by the
offering up of his body once for all is denied, will be found to be but carnal,
that is, serving to the washing off the filth of the flesh only; take away that
baptism in the head, wherein the first Adam with his disobedience and death was
crucified and purged away, and all other baptisms whither by reformations
within, or fair shows without, whither by the Law, letter, water, or whatsoever
will be found equally carnal, equally insufficient to present the sinner holy
and without spot to God. His judgment against all indifferent baptisms, that
they are gone out into the world savours of a spirit as divided and carnal as
they can be whom he judges so; are they carnal that judge and contend for one
form against another, and are not they as carnal that judge and contend against
all forms, because not in their form of doctrine, and posture, and way; when
Christ shall sit as Judge, as there shall be no advantage to them that are in
one form more then another, so neither to them that are gone out of all
professed forms; but to be found in him who is the head, is more then all.

Concerning the Lords Supper.
These things are said, the true end of the Supper is moderation, to keep men
from excess and lust in eating aad drinking; that to do it in remembrance of
his death till he comes, is to eat in fear without lust till he comes to govern
in the the creature himself, to keep out of lust in all, and this is the
restoring and reconciling to God the creation by Christ. That Christ's
Disciples were not changed, nor he born in them when he gave them this
commandment, nor was Christ yet appeared to those believers among whom the
Apostles continued it. That to eat of his body is to discern his body to be the
body of all creatures, and to fill all htings.

How is the Gospel-mystery become a doctrine of bare morality with this people?
to see God in all things, to discern him as the body and virtue of every
creature, and to use all things in moderation; what is this more then the purer
principles and practices of Pagan divinity? is this all the effect, all the end
of the blood of Christ?

He that appointed this Supper, said, drink ye all of it, for this is my blood
of the new Testament which is shed for many, for the remission of sins: Christ
as he gave his flesh for the life of the world, that is, as he abolished death
and brought forth life to light therein for us, so he is the true spiritual
passover which was sacrificed for us, so his death is a mystery, whosoever can
look therein may see the first Adam with all his deeds, the world with all its
works and all old things done away therein; traditions of men, and rudiments of
the world shows of wisdom, will worship and humility were tares the Lord
foresaw would spring up in the Churches from the root of reason and the Law;
that they might avoid the same, he ordained the Supper for a rudiment to all
that should have need thereof, to be as a figure of his death, and therein of
the crucifying of flesh with all the glory and works thereof.

Wherefore eating the flesh of Christ is to be esteemed, neither as any
natural thing, as the Jews did, nor as any moral thing, as this deluded people
do; but a divine and heavenly mystery, that is, to believe, and rejoice in
Christ crucified, as made the remission of sins, the destruction of death,
the grace, and the end of this world and all evils therein unto us; likewise
the discerning the Lord's body therein is not a bare speculation of Christ or
the divinity, as filling all things (for the natural man by that of God in him
may know so much) to discern together with his dead body our sins, our old
man, the Law and all perfection, whither by nature, morality or the Law, to be
already dead, buried, and abolished in his grave, and our selves raised up into
the life, liberty, and righteousness of Christ in him; this is the use of
eating the Lord's body; if any be become so vain in imagination as to think it
is no more then the exercise of temperance and moderation to be performed by
us, let us know that it is the blood of the New Testament for remission of sins.

That Christ coming in the creature, governing it himself, so reconciles it
to God, is true indeed according to reason, the Law, and this people, but in
the person of Christ through death did God reconcile the World to himself;
Christ revealed in a man is not that he may reconcile, but being reconciled
that he may bring him to himself. But can thou poor sorry sinful man bear
in thy body the justice of the Law, the punishment of thy sins, the shedding
of thy blood, and raise up thy self again, and through thy obedience come forth
out of all thy sins before the majesty of God, in that perfect and spotless
righteousness that he shall see no sin in thee? and if thou say, Christ in
thee can do all this; I answer, if thou believe not God has already
reconciled thee to himself by the death of his Son, that spirit that thou
think does reconcile in thee, will be found most wicked and provoking
delusion, except Christ died in vain.

That Christ's Disciples were not changed, nor he born in them, when he
appointed this Supper, and that Christ had not appeared to the Believers with
whom the Apostles continued it, are both contrary to truth; they were clean
every whit through the word he had spoken, or as in him, and their bodies the
Temple of the holy Ghost, though they were as yet carnal and ignorant of the
more spiritual truths; so the Church of Christ is pure and beautiful as in
him, whilst fleshly and weak in many things as in themselves; rejoice in
Christ, as your liberty in whom you are made free; let him dwell in you
crucifying your flesh, and manifesting his life; wait for his great and last
appearance to reign over all; of which day it shall not need to be said, lo
here, lo there, but as lightning from East to West it shall bear witness of it
self in and over the whole creation.

Concerning Redemption.
He says, that redemption is not of sinners that take delight in sin, but of
the light within, that is it which wants redemption; and of the it is said, he
took not on him the nature of Angels but the seed of Abraham. That this light
or seed as it is raised to reign in us above all, so it is redeemed, and so is
the creature made free from the law of sin, and no redemption while this is in
prison, and not brought above all our lusts.

How has the blackness and darkness of mount Sinai covered the heart of this
man? how are the abounding riches of grace, the fullness of the Mediator, and
the power of his Cross resolved at once into the light or Law written in the
heart of every man; but the spirit of faith says otherwise, Man formed to be a
living Image of the glory of God, but fallen short of his glory, separate from
the life of God in spirit, soul and body fallen into darkness, death, and the
curse, this was it that wanted redemption, that was redeemed in Christ;
scarcely for a righteous man would one die, yet paradventure for a good man
some would dare to die, Romans 5. to give ones life to save a righteous man, the
heart and love of man may be enlarged to that; but herein divine love appeared
beyond all number, measure, or the heart of man, in that whilst yet sinners we
were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, and raised up together into
heavenly places, before we either knew desired or sought after the same; but is
the light, or seed, or Christ under the Law, sin or curse? or needs he to be
redeemed or saved from these? the children are pertakers of flesh and blood,
therefore Christ pertook of flesh, and bringing his divine nature thereinto, he
crucified and abolished our sins and death out of it, and so presented us to
God a sanctified, cleansed, and perfected people in himself, before we did obey
or believe, or were; therefore let us say with joy, in the Lord we have
righteousness and strength, in the Lord are we justified and do glory.

To what he says, as the light within is raised and reigns, so is both it and
the creature redeemed and no more; the Law of commandments has dominion over
the flesh as long as it lives; a greater Law came forth, Christ in flesh, and
there in put an end both to the Law and the flesh; thus we are delivered from
the Law by the body of Christ, and are joined to one husband, not to the Law
and Christ, but to Christ alone; according to the inward man we dwell in the
curtains of Solomon, in the liberty and rest of Christ as in him, while
according to the flesh we are in the tents of Kedar, tempted and dark, and weak
as in our selves; thus in the dead body of Christ I am dead and buried unto the
Law, sin, death, and the whole world, and raised in Christ; and this is my
redemption, which neither the principles of reason, nor morality, nor Law, nor
light of conscience can discern and teach, but the alone light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ shining into the heart.

Wherefore there is a redemption that is according to reason, and a redemption
that is in a mystery; to return to that light and purity by obedience, from
which we are fallen by disobedience, this is redemption according to reason,
the Law, the light within, and the judgment of this people; herein is no
mystery, for the wise men of the heathen wrote of it, and pressed after it; all
Nations imagine such a redemption; but that the fall should be amended, and the
creature restored, not into the state of the first Adam, but a greater and
better, the righteousness of God; and all this without any virtue or work, or
service on our parts, but by the alone operation of the blessed Godhead in the
man Jesus; this is that mystery hid in God, whereof the highest speculations,
the clearest light of that candle in the natural man is utterly ignorant and
unlearned; otherwise it were not a mystery, if any light whatsoever set up in
man by his first creation could have found it out; wherefore to live to the
Law, that thou may live to God, is the redemption that reason and this people
teach; I through the Law am dead to the Law, that I may live unto God, is the
Redemption that brings glory, the other will end in death.

Concerning Justification, Sanctification, and Mortification.
He affirms, that to walk in the spirit and not fulfill the lusts of the flesh;
or Christ fulfilling the Law in us, or the spirit mortifying and sanctifying
and so fulfilling the Law in us, this is justification, sanctification and
mortification, and these are one, and so a man is justified, as he is
sanctified, and mortified, and no further.

Will you adventure your souls upon such a justification as this, therein to
appear before God? if it be not too late to tell you, know that justification
is a free gift already prepared and wrought for sinners, in the person of him
who is greater then Angels or men; who being the fullness of all divine virtue
and perfection, did thereby as by an overflowing flood upon his Cross bear
away our sins and death, all the evils of this world, and buried them in his
grave for ever; Angels though great and mighty in power could not save; the Law
being greater then they could not give life, Christ came forth mightier then
all, gathered together in himself the enmity, death, and Law, and all things
that were against us, nailed them to his Cross, and took all out of the way
gloriously in himself; and so was that saying fulfilled, his voice then shoak
the earth.

He that believes this truly, according to his faith, so is it done unto him;
the Christian as believing is a man in Heaven, in Christ, sit down in rest,
liberty and perfection in Christ; as working righteousness, he is on earth,
groaning after rest, liberty, and perfection.

But can there be Rest and liberty where there is a groaning for it? yea, oh
man, as well as Paul could be present in spirit where he was absent in body;
whilst at home in the body we are absent from the Lord, yet by faith we are
present in the Lord; things of nature are taken in by reason or sense; reason
has knowledge and communion with things before the sense feels or tastes
them; so the things of the spirit are taken in by faith or spiritual sense;
through faith the believer has communion with spiritual things, before they be
in their power and fullness attained by sense and feeling; the mystery of grace
in Christ is not limited, yet love of God and righteousness of Christ are not
more or less for the Believer, because the manifestations thereof in him are
so; the vail is rent, sin finished, all old things are passed away, but by
faith I understand it to be so, as in Christ my head, and therein am justified;
the manifestation thereof in my self I wait for, and therein is my
sanctification as in my members; take away that justification in Christ for
you, and all sanctifications by obedience to the light within will profit you
nothing.

Concerning the Law.
The things of note said by him are, Law is the ministration of the letter
without, the Gospel or ministration of the spirit is the same Law, but written
in the heart of all men; they that believe Christ fulfilled the Law for us in
his own person, and what we do he makes it accepted with the father, as though
we did perform all that is required, none such know his commands in spirit;
that righteousness by faith is when the Law is performed in us by works in
spirit; righteousness by works is when the Law is done by us without life and
spirit; that the offering and blood without could make nothing perfect, that
within being more pure and perfect; and that the Law in the conscience is
answered by the resurrection of Christ within.

Are the Law and Gospel the same? ask the wounded spirit beset with the
terrors of the Law of God, who lie under the sharpest sense of the Law, and
can give the best account thereof? whither redemption was finished in One, the
person of Christ alone, or yet to be done in many, the persons of all the
redeemed, let the Scripture with the spirit be your light and rule until the
day declare.

The holy, just, and perfect will of God revealed to the world, first: by that
in the conscience, after upon Tables of stone, reproving for sin, and requiring
righteousness by obedience, whether to the Letter without, or Light within;
this is the ministration of death, mighty to kill, because it was the working
Covenant; weak to give life, because it was not the Mediator.

Christ the fullness of all heavenly things, came forth in flesh; and being in
lengths and breadths, sufficient for that purpose, did in himself fulfill what
the Law required, and sustain all the Law had to charge upon us, and so in
himself, put an end to the Law, for all that should believe: that which
requires works to be wrought in us, as the way to attain righteousness,
whether it be Letter without, or Light within, it is the Law; and herein do all
the false and fleshly Religions of the world agree in one: the Pagan seeks
perfection by his Law, natural Reason and Virtue; the Turk by his Alchoran; the
Jew by Moses; the Monk by the Rule of his Order; the Spiritual Papist, by
mortification of the Spirit; and this People by perfect obedience to the Light
within, that is, the Law; in this all are one, all seeking righteousness by
work in the flesh, in obedience to Tradition, or Letter, or Spirit: The Law is
a great light manifesting all flesh and the deeds thereof, a great Lord ruling
over all flesh as long as it lives: Christ came forth greater than the Law,
crucified the flesh, and the body of death in himself, and thereby put an end
to the dominion of the Law, unto all that believe; thus in his Cross, I am
dead to all things, and they to me.

Whereas he says, they know not his Commands in Spirit, who say, Christ
fulfilled the Law for us in his own person, or that he makes what we do
accepted with the Father; I ask of him, and of all in his persuasion; Can ye
pass through the depths of Sin, Death and the Curse, that he passed through?
ye neither know the Law, nor what spirit ye are of; Can ye bring forth the
works of obedience, an incorruptible righteousness, in your corruptible bodies,
answering to that pure Law, and most pure God, before whom Moses did fear and
quake, and Abraham by works could not glory, and no flesh can be justified?
were not all we like sheep gone astray, and the Lord has laid on him the
iniquity of us all, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his
stripes we are healed? where this is truly and purely believed, Revelations of
Christ are most desirable and glorious; where this is excluded, all pretended
approaches to God, Revelations of God, or perfections of obedience, will be but
as hotter fires, to consume first your faith and interest in Christ, and after,
your precious souls, with all your labor, and pains, and works.

To what he says, the blood within makes perfect, that without could not; let
it be said, the blood of the Man Christ, through the eternal Spirit working
therein, became the death of the first Adam, with all his deeds, and all the
evils that came in by him; so with him am I already dead and freed from sin, as
in him the Head; as this my death and freedom in him does reveal it self in
me, so I dye daily as in my earthly members. If by the blood within, be
intended this; that as the blood of Bulls and Goats, was a figure of the blood
of Christ, so his blood, was but a figure, of blood or Spirit within us; then
know assuredly, that as the blood offered in the first Tabernacle, was offered
without the Holiest, though within the Tabernacle; so the blood within, all
purifyings by the light within, will be found to be but the blood without, that
is, offered without the veyle, without the Holiest, though within your Persons.

But is not the Spirit sufficient in power to redeem from sin, by his work
within us? let this be said as of use, in most things that have been spoken;
the power of the Spirit is unsearchable, and unlimited, but the mystery of his
Will is declared in Christ; that not by Spirit alone, but by Spirit and Blood,
and that in one man, he has redeemed and purged all the evils that came by the
offense of one: of old God filled Heaven and Earth, yet he would be known and
sought only in Jerusalem; nothing could comprehend the God head, yet the
fullness of it dwelt in Christ bodily; so the Spirit dwells in all his people,
yet through the blood of the Man Christ alone, did God choose to go forth in his
power, to the abolishing of our death, and manifesting eternal freedom for us:
so when it is said, ye are justified, redeemed, and saved by God, by Grace, by
the name of Christ, by the Spirit of our God; we are to understand, that the
Name, and Grace, and Spirit of God, went forth against our sins and death in
the blood of Jesus, and thereby did them away forever; which by faith we
behold, and as we behold, we are changed into the same Image, from glory to
glory, by the Spirit of the Lord.

Wherefore the proper use of the Law, is first to bridle civil transgressions,
and then to reveal and increase spiritual transgressions; the Law is a Light,
which reveals not the Grace of God, not righteousness and life, but sin and
death, wrath and judgment; and as in Mount Sinai, the thundering, lightning,
the thick and dark cloud, the hill smoking and flaming, and all that terrible
show did not rejoice nor quicken the children of Israel, but terrified and
astonished them, and showed how unable they were with all their purity and
holiness to abide the Majesty of God; so the Law in its true use, does nothing
else but reveal sin, work wrath, and bring into desperation, and here it has
an end, and ought to go no further: the use of the Gospel, is to reveal the
end of the Law, of sin and wrath in the death of Christ, and the righteousness,
peace, and love of God, brought forth for us in him.

I shall add an observation of Luther; of this difference between the Law and
Gospel, there is nothing to be found in the Books of Monks, Cannonists, and
School men, no nor in the Books of the ancient Writers; there was a wonderful
silence many years as touching this difference, in all Schools and Churches;
and this brought men's consciences into great danger, for unl^ss the Gospel be
plainly discerned from the Law, tru-doctrine cannot be kept sound and
incorrupt; but if this difference be well known, it is an easy matter to
discern faith from works, Christ from Moses, and all politic works; for all
things without Christ, are the Ministry of death, for the punishing of the
wicked.

Concerning Christ Jesus.
HIs Faith is, that Christ humbled himself and became obedient unto death, that
he might become a living example to all Generations; that the Light within
every man, un^ted and followed will lead unto Christ, and will reveal the
power and Godhead, and so the Light within, is the sure word of Prophecy.

The word of Faith says, that Christ being the brightness of the invisible
God, came forth in flesh, and being the eternal word, wisdom, and power of
God, and so having obtained a name and supremacy above all other Lords; he put
an end to the Law, Sin and Death, and the dominion thereof over us in his
Cross, that he might bring forth Grace, Righteousness, and Life, for us in
himself, that so we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might
serve him without fear; and is this no more than a living example to you? and
if so, can ye after his example, break through the gates of sin, wrath and the
grave, and make your access unto God through all, as he did? is so great a
mystery of Faith as this, become no more with you than a lofty imagination of
Reason, only enlivened with an active spirit of bondage?

That not the Light within every man, but the word of the Apostles and
Prophets, and the spirit of Revelation, shining according to their Testimony,
is that which leads to the Lord Jesus: the incomprehensible divinity cannot be
seen nor approached unto, but in the Mediator, the Man Christ, so Christ is
the image of the invisible God; the unsearchable Mystery of Christ, is brought
to light by the Gospel, and to be learned by the Spirit, so the Scriptures are
the Image of Christ; he that shall seek for God out of the Humanity of Christ,
he shall loose both God and himself; so he that to find out Christ, shall go to
the Light within every man, and not to the Testimony of them, who spoke of him
what they had seen and heard he may come to behold him as the Lawgiver, and
Judge, but as a Justifier and Savior he cannot know him: The Light within all
men, may find out the Godhead; but the Mystery of Grace and Love, cannot be
known but by that Spirit, that blows where and when he lists. Would the light
within have showed you the Atonement, Redemption, the blood and sacrifice, or
have put these words in your mouth?

Concerning the Ministry of Christ.
HE says, the Ministers of Christ have the Word in them, and so declare it to
others; that they Preach not for hire or gain; that they are persecuted of the
world.

He says rightly; that is a Ministry of Christ; but Ministers of
Righteousness, are of Satan, or of Christ; zealously to affect, to compass Sea
and Land, to make fair shows in the flesh, to be as touching the Law,
blameless, to preach freely, suffer labor, stripes, imprisonments: Satan's
Ministers may be herein transformed as the Ministers of Christ: wherefore
Ministryes are to be judged by their Spirit, and Spirits by Doctrines: If an
Angel from Heaven, if any Persons coming forth in the wisdom, holiness, power,
and glory of an Angel, shall not confess that Christ was made Sin and a Curse,
and the end of both through his death unto us, let them be accursed; their
Doctrine takes away the blessing of Abraham, which is in Christ, and brings men
again under the Curse of the Law, which by Christ is abolished to all that
truly believe: I am jealous that the Teachers of the People for the greatest
part, are carnal, formal, and but in the Letter, and walking as men: yet the
Lord has his chosen ones among them: I am as jealous that the Teachers of this
People, are the Ministers of that darkness and wroth, by which God will punish
this faithless, perverse, and backsliding Generation: Let thy Spirit of Grace
be poured forth upon thy Sons and Daughters, and the Spirit of error and
uncleanness, shall be revealed and cast out.

Concerning Free Will.
HE says, the Light within men, which reproves the evil deeds, is that Will of
God by which we are sanctified, and saved; that in every man which shows him
his sin, and reproves for it, is Free Grace: This Light in every man is the
Free Will, which is free to God, and free from sin.

If the first be so, then is the death of Christ of no effect, wherein the
whole blessed Will of God was done, by which Will we are sanctified through his
Body: how is Christ crucified become foolishness to you, who whilst to your
selves and others, you have a show of humility, are vainly puffed up with your
fleshly mind, not holding the Head?

If the second be so, then the Law and Free Grace are the same; if the Light
God has put into all men accusing of sin, be the gift of Grace, the gift of
heavenly Righteousness by Christ, wherein is the end of the Law and Sin heeded:
not that we are delivered from that Law in the Letter or Conscience, that
reveals sin and wrath, and while enemies in our minds, were reconciled to God
by the death of another, this is Grace; that we are saved in him, raised up
into heaven in him, whilst compassed about with a body of death, in our selves,
this is a mystery to all the Children of Reason, the Law and the Letter; the
darkness that is upon it, is that which keeps the Saints in weakness and
unstability, the world in blindness and Idolatry, and Antichrist, with all his
righteousness, wisdom and works after the Law, Reason, and Flesh, in his power
and greatness.

If the third be so, then there is that in the natural man, whereby he is able
to know and receave the things of the Spirit: there is a candle in all men,
upon which some beams of the Godhead do descend, and may be known thereby,
also the righteousness and transgressions of the Law; but the deep things of
God, his Grace in Christ, sparkling in old time now in one promise, now in
another, figured by the Law, and foretold by the Prophets; whereof the
righteousness of the Jews, the Philosophy of the Greeks, knew nothing; this
cannot be discerned by the clearest Light in the natural man.

Thus the Mystery of the second Adam, and the restoring of all things in him,
is levelled and brought down by the Divinity of these People, to be no other
thing, than that Light of the Law and Reason, which all Nations have; and so
whilst they are condemning all other Religions, may be concluded in one common
Faith and Principle, with all those Religions whom they condemn, herein only
excelling them, that those are Iniquity more manifested, these are Iniquity in
a Mystery: When they shall cease to make the death of Christ, and the whole
Mystery of Grace in him, of none effect; I shall cease any longer to account
them so.

The End.
A TABLE of the several particulars, spoken to in this Book.
1. COncerning the Righteousness of the Letter; of Angels, and of God. 2. What
is Idolatry: God may be known three manner of ways. 3. Who hold not the Head:
and how Christ is Head. 4. Three chiefest Principles of this People called
Quakers, examined and weighed 5. How Faith is the Evidence of things not seen.
6. Concerning Faith and Sight. 7. Concerning the Spirit and Scriptures, as
together making up, a perfect witness, or rule of Faith. 8. The Light in all
men, what it is, and of what use. 9. Two things charged upon us by this People:
first, that we deny the Light within, and set it against Christ: secondly that
we believe in a Christ without: these weighed and resolved. 10. What is the
inward Life, and who is the retired Christian. 11. A two fold departure from
the Faith in the last days and what they are. 12. The Christ that dyed at
Jerusalem: how far acknowledged, and how far denied by this People, to be the
Redeemer. 13. Whether this People build up a Righteousness of the Law. 14.
Christ first and last Coming, what: and a Question answered. 15. Anti christ's
last Coming, what and how 16. The Authors Testimony, concerning the first and
last Appearances of Christ. 17. Light, Purity, and Power, of this People
examined what it is. 18. Opposition and persecution, that is raised against
this People, what to be thought of it.
At Page 47. begins the Review of there Principles, as laid down by J. Naylor,
in his Book called Love to the Lost: under these several Heads.

1. Concerning the fall of Man. 2. Light and Life. 3. Righteousness 4. The
Word. 5 Worship. 6. Error and Heresy, etc. 7. Faith. 8 Hope. 9. Judgment. 10.
Perfection. 11. Obedience. 12. Good Works 13. Election, and Reprobation. 14,
New Birth. 15. Baptism of Christ, and that the world so calls. 16 the Lords
Supper. 17. Redemption. 18. Justification. 19. Sanctification, and
Mortification. 20. The Law. 21. Christ Jesus. 22. The Ministers of Christ. 23.
Free Will.


