THE PROVIDENCE OF GOD In sudden Death ordinary and extraordinary vindicated
and improved.

In a funeral SERMON for Mrs. MARY REVE, Wife to Mr. NICHOLAS REVE, Merchant.

First preached to the English Church in ROTTERDAM, January 14. 1685. and since
enlarged By JOSEPH HILL. B. D.

At ROTTERDAM, Printed by REINIER LEERS.

M.DC.LXXXV.

TO RICHARD HUNTINGTON Esquire.
SIR,
THis Sormon which I preached for your daughter's sake' out of my respects to
her, and supposal of this office for her had she died with you, I now send you
enlarged and printed. Not for any solicitations, which is the usual modest
excuse, although I wanted not these from some Gentlewomen in her late condition:
but because I have not seen this subject, notwithstanding the many occasions
thereof, handled by any, tho it may be by some, and I not know it. And
especially, because God's providence which is as the soul in the worlds body,
ruling and acting all things in it, is frequently misunderstood by many. Some
not only complaining when their exspectations are crossed, as Cato did, of its
darkness and obscurity, and saying with Brutus, that virtue is but nomen inane,
an empty name, when they see such things befall the virtuous: but are even ready
with Epicurus to deny it altogether, because of its seeming irregularity.
Others reading the many temporal promises in the Old Testament, mostly relating
to the Jews, and some to particular persons, as David, or such places of
Scripture, as Psalm 91, are apt to judge providence to be so far from
fulfilling the word, that it is contrary to it; and being not able to reconcile
them, are greatly staggerd and perplexed. I have therefore cast in my mite of
endeavors to reconcile God's word with his works, in this one branch of sudden
death, for satisfaction therein: and from that ordinary in the Text and example
taken occasion since, to treat of most of those extraordinary in Scripture, for
the better illustrating thereof, and this kind of providence both in general
and particular, in infants as well as aged, by reason of the little one we have
also lost. The blessing of heaven accompany it for good to those that peruse
it, that God may have the glory of his truth and faithfulness in his word, and
of equity and righteousness in his works. For your self, Sir, I am sensible
what a full and home blow God has reached you, in cutting down tree and fruit
together: the loss of such a daughter with a grandson is great, but it is the
will of your heavenly Father, to which I hope you have learnt to submit. You
might perhaps have been better satisfied, if she had died by you, rather than
at this distance; but tho Rebekah like she left her native country, and
Father's house, yet not God's, nor without his especial providence, who sets
the solitary in families, and fixes the bounds of our habitations. And here she
lived beloved, and died lamented, and tho she is buried in the dust, yet not in
oblivion: all which to her is indeed fruitles, yet may somewhat alleviate your
sorrow, that she was amongst those that valewd her worth. That this sharp
affliction may be sanctified so that you may make the best improvement thereof,
and that the blessed Spirit, which is styled the Comforter, may comfort you and
all concernd therein, is the prayer of

SIR, Your Servant in the Lord. J. H.

GOD'S PROVIDENCE in sudden death vindicated and improved.
GENESIS xxxv. verse. 19. And Rachel died, and was buried in the way to Ephrath,
which is Bethlehem.


Jacob's life, as most of God's eminent servants, was made up of providence,
all in checquer-work: being a mixture of mercies and miseries, for the most
part successively, and some times jointly, throughout his pilgrimage. And is
more particularly described, than any of the saints of God, in Scripture; he
being the root of the future Church, which God more regards, then all the great
Kingdoms of the world; that are therefore past over in silence, whilst poor
Jacob with his staf and travels, family and flocks, remain upon record to all
generations. That as Abraham and Isaac, so he especially might be a pattern to
his posterity: whose servitude, sufferings and increase in Egypt, resembled his
in Syria; their being pursued at their coming thence, with all their little ones
and great riches, his by Laban; and their passage to, and abode in Canaan, and
after going into captivity, his in many things, and going in's old age into
Egypt. But not to them only, being now written for the instruction of us
Gentiles also, on whom the ends of the world are come: and is as all
particular histories, most profitable for all, tho general may be more
pleasing to many, Romans 15:4. 1 Cor. 10:11. Let us therefore view a little the
variety of God's dealings with this blessed Patriarch, that in this Chapter
lead to the text. Whereby we may see, how God freed him from his fears, that he
and all his should be destroyed; by calling him to Bethel, discouraging his
enemies, and bringing him safely thither to pay his vows, which the good man
had too long neglected, v. 1-7. But tho this removal from his own dwelling to
God's house, made a comfortable change, yet he soon meets with an alteration,
for Deborah a grave and picus matron, his mothers nurse, and his dear friend
dies there, and is buried with great lamentation, v. 8. Which the God of all
consolations, who usually knits his comforts to his people's crosses, lets him
not long proceed in; but cloths him afresh with the garments of praise, by
appearing to him again, changing his name from Jacob to Israel, and making
great promises to him and his seed, v. 9-15. But this glorious day of grace is
followed with a very dark night of providence, in the death of his most beloved
Rachel: which yet was not without the appearance of a bright star in the
firmament of the Church, by the birth of a 12th Patriarch, his mothers Benoni,
but his fathers Benjamin. From all which we may gather, There Is no exspecting
constant prosperity for Gods people on earth; mercies without miseries are
reserved for heaven.

Being now come to the paragraf of Rachels death, which I have chosen as
suitable to our Sister's departed, let none stop me with her father's speech to
Jacob concerning her, It must not be so done in our country, Genesis 29:26. For
tho I will not say, as some do, that the want of funeral sermons makes funeral
sorrows so small amongst us: yet this I must and will say, that all are too apt
to run into extremes, and either desspise the chastening of the Lord, or faint
when they are rebuked of him, Hebr. 12:5. And therefore whatsoever may tend to
remedy this, is not only seasonable, but very needful. I know at the
reformation of these Churches, when the generallity of Magistrates and
Ministers prevaild for this setlement (tho Prince William and some others were
Lutherans) and this amongst other things of funeral sermons was ventilated;
they were not judged necessary at the interment: there being neither precept,
nor precedent in Scripture for more, than decent burial with lamentations; nor
any reason why they should not be made, for the godly poor of exemplary lives
and deaths; as well as the rich, whose purses generally procure them. Yet upon
occasions it was judged very necessary on the Lord's day or in weekly lectures,
to admonish the living of their mortality, direct the sorrowful Relations in
their duty, and stir up all to immitate laudable examples, and prepare for
following those departed in the faith. Seeing then it is not material, whether
we have the corpse in a coffin before our eyes, according to the custom in
England, or it be coverd with earth, as here; so that we have but the
Deceased's life and death in our minds and memories for our betterment; I shall
proceed to show you, the agreablenes of this portion of Scripture, to the
present occasion.

Verse. 16. Shows, where Jacob and his family were, viz. but a little way from
Eprath, whither they were going. [How exactly does God in his providence set
the bounds of journeys as well as habitations; the places and times of our lives
and deaths.] And what befell them there. Rachel travailed and had hard labor.
The best of women may have the bitterest pains in childbirth, and the saddest
remembrance of God's sentence; In sorrow thou shall bring forth child'ren. Genesis
3:16. Verse. 17. The midwife incourages her in her pains and fears, with having
another son, i. e. besides Joseph she had already. But all in vain, she
regards it not, as in the like case Phineas wife, 1 Samuel 4:20. [Earthly
comforts signify little to dieing persons] Verse. 18. Rachel, who was not
satisfied with Joseph alone, but desired another son, Genesis 30:24. now when she
haith him calls him Ben-oni, the son of my sorrow. It is dangerous not to rest
contented with our present enjoyments. When we desire creature comforts
immoderatly, God may grant them so that they not only prove comfortles, but
bitterness to us. Numb. 11:4, 33. and Ps. 78:29, 30, 31. The time when she thus
named him was, as her soul was in departing; whereby her death, as all others,
is set forth to us, which the following words, for she died, declare. Souls die
not with our bodies. They go to God that gave them, to be judged by him,
Eccles. 12:7. The union of our souls and bodies being life, and their parting
again, death, 1 Kings, 17:21, 22. therefore dieing Stephen prays, Lord Jesus
receive my spirit. Act. 7:59. But Jacob lost that name should be a continual
renovation of his sorrow, calls him Benjamin the son of the right hand,
denoting his affection to him. Ps. 80:17. It is wisdom to suit names to
occasional providence.

Verse. 19. In the Text we have, I. Rachel's death. II. Burial. III. Place of
both.


I. Rachel died. Beutiful Rachel, Jacob's dearly beloved Rachel dies, whilst
blear-eyed Leah lives. The more we love any creature, person or thing, the more
danger we are in to lose it. God often times crossing our inordinate affections
for our good, in taking away our beloved comforts, and sparing those that are
despised. Rachel, that so passionately desired children, that she said unto
Jacob, give me children, or else I die, Genesis 30: 1. now dies by having them.
Our immoderate desires many times cost us very dear.

II. And was buried. The most beloved alive, when they are dead, we desire to
have buried out of our sight. as Abraham said of Sarah, Genesis 23: 4. A decent
burial of the dead is the living Relations duty. Yea sometimes memorials of the
deceased may be expedient, when free from ostentation and superstition, as we
see in the following verse, Jacob sets a pillar upon her grave, as a standing
monument of his affection and her desert.

III. In the way to Ephrath, which is Beth-lehem. Renowned for our Savior's
birth; called Beth-lehem Ephratah, Micah 5: 2. and of Judea, Math. 2: 1, 5, 6.
to distinguish it from that in Galilee; and the city of David, Luke 2: 4 John
7: 42. for his birth and education (as Zion was for his building and
habitation, 2 Samuel 5: 7; 9. etc.) which is by interpretation, a house of bread,
and so most fitting for Christ's birth, who was the Son of David according to
the flesh, and the true bread of life, as he inculcates at least 7 times on one
occasion, John. 6 About a mile (as some say that have seen the place) short of
this Beth-lehem, Rachel dies in the way: distant from her own and husbands
friends, in an unsettled condition, without habitation. [We all may know where
we were born, but none knows where or in what condition they shall die.] And is
there buried. [If we live the life and die the death of the righteous, it
matters not much where we are buried: nor at what distance from the rest of our
friends.] How delicate soever the body may be, the carcas is not curious, in
what bed of dust it sleeps; and the souls of Gods people, find as near a way
to heaven, from any one place upon earth as other. Many superstitious people
now adays, would think themselves happy, to die so near Beth-lehem, that they
might be buried there. But Jacob well knew, that burial places are not of
religious consideration: but any fit place pointed out by providence, might
serve well enough for the best of his family. Tho he, and his son Joseph
likewise that died in Egypt, would have their body and bones buried in Canaan;
yet that was to testify their dieing in the faith of God's promis of that land
^o their posterity, and to assure them of their return thither; and therefore is
otherwise of no consideration to us. It is but of later times that any were
buried in Churches or cities but allways abroad; as all scripture, and other
Histories, and laws also witness. When the opinion of Purgatory and holiness of
places prevailed, at first men would be buried nigh the Churches, that they
might be remembered in the prayers and oblations of those that met there, and
afterward in them, because they thought them more sacred; which tho opposed by
V. Durantus de ritib. Ecclesiae, l. 1. c. 23. Gerhardus de morte.. 78-88.
many laws, civil and Ecclesiastical, and writers ancient and modern; by some,
as an innovation, others as superstitious, and many as dangerous to the health
of the living, especially in times and places of infection; yet all in vain,
the tyrant custom has so prevailed, that its grown too strong for all
contradiction.

But I have deteyned you too long from that I chiefly design: which is not so
much to speak of death and mortality, as such a surprising death as this
Scripture speaks of, clearly to the occasion, and to vindicate God's providence
therein, and show what improvement we should make thereof,

D. God takes from us our dearest Relations and creature comforts, sometimes
suddenly when we least exspect it and want them most.

That God the Author of life and death, and all other mercies and miseries,
does deprive his best servants, as well as others indifferently, of their
greatest earthly comforts, is most apparent by this and other Scriptures,
Eccless. 8: 14. 9: 2. And that he does this sometimes with most imbittering
circumstances; not only suddenly but unexspectedly also (which makes the
providence more grievous especially at present, as the sudden death of younger
friends not exspected is hardlier borne, than that of aged, having been
exspected long) and at such times, as these comforts are most wanted (whereby
their loss becoms a continued affliction, and matter of constant grief
afterward) is also most evident by this history, and many others I need not
mention, seeing the experience of all ages attest it. For what Saint alive then
or now so dear to God as Jacob? what Relation so near as a wife? and what
wife so beloved of a husband as Rachel? for whom he served a 7 years
apprenteship and how hard soever it was, they seemd to him but a few days for
the love he had to her, Genesis 29: 20. Yet notwithstanding God takes away from
him this desire of his eyes, with a sudden and unexspected stroke: as he did
after from the prophet Ezekiel, c. 24. v. 16. For she had not gone her full time
with child: as may be gatherd from their removal from Bethel and traveling
toward their father Isaac's house in Hebron; which in common prudence they
would not have done, if they had expected her coming in labor, before they
could have reached thither. And was in a place of no accommodation, being in
the way nigh Ephrath, before they could reach it, surprisd with her pangs, and
must stay there, whether in house or tent is not mentioned; then which, for a
woman of her quality and estate, nothing could be less exspected. Moreover this
being her second child, it might be hoped in reason had she gone her full time,
she might with as much or more safety bring forth this than her former son; in
regard the first birth is usually the most dangerous, and the fruit of the
womb, like that of the trees, is easily gatherd when com to maturity. Yet God
that has all persons, times and places in his power, brings her presently here
not only to pas through the valley of the shadow of death, as all women do in
travail, but also through the gates of death it self, dashing all their hopes
of her safety: and good Jacob, tho very sorrowful no doubt, is silent at it,
not once complaning the least that we read of, because he knew, it was his
heavenly father's pleasure. Tho it was also at such a time, as made his wound
the deeper, this befalling him when he had most need of her; for his present
solace in his afflictions, from his childrens miscarriage and other crosses;
and future comfort in his old age, his elder children being ready to marry and
leave him; and for the helping him in the education of Joseph, and especially
Benjamin now borne to them. For as no earthly comforts are so great as those of
man and wife, or more alleviate their troubles from others; so no nurse for a
husband like his wife, nor for children like their own mother.

I have been the larger in these circumstances, because they set out history to
the life, and correspond most of them to the occasion (our deceased Sister
having come in travail before her time, died of her second son etc.) and to my
design, of speaking to such a death as is in the text, suitable to the example
before us.

Reasons of these kind of providence are many; which I shall now proceed to
handle: taking it for granted all along amongst Christians, that it is God that
does all these things by his overruling providence, as Scripture every where
declares. But shall pas over most of the Efficient causes, that are well known;
the Principal; as God's being our sovereign Lord, and therefore may so deal
with any of us sinners; and his will and pleasure, which is so to deal with
some, as we see; as also because he is infinitely wise, knowing what things most
conduce to his glory and our good, and how by his Power to use them, as well as
work them, for these ends; and J^st or righteous in all his ways; and Holy in
all his works; and Good also, yea very Merciful; his tender mercies are over
all his works, Ps. 145: 9. and 17. Every of which, and much more all of them
serve to silence us, and teach us submission: tho we know not how to reconcile
these concurring causes, in many particular occurrences. And the Instrumental
causes, as Angels, men, and other creatures, employed by God herein, actively
commanding them, or permissively suffering them to execute his pleasure,
allways powerfully limiting, ordering, and overruling them, so that he is to
be eyed and owned in all that befalls us, Job. 1. And shall only speak of the
Impulsive causes, wherein the maine difficulty lies, and afterward of the Final

I. The meritorious cause of these and all other punishments is sin, for which
the Justice of God inflicts them. Sin being the transgression of Gods law; and
death the punishment threatened on all mankind for the same; every death must
needs be a punishment; seeing it is the execution of the threatening, and the
destruction of the sinner. And much more that which is sudden, this
circumstance being an aggravation thereof, as appears by its being as such
denounced Deutr. 7:4. 1 Samuel 2: 31. Is. 29: 5. and 30: 13. Prove. 6: 15. and 29:
1. executed Job. 22: 16 and 36: 14. Ps. 37: 2. Eccles. 7: 17. 1 These. 5: 3.
bewailed Jer. 4: 20 and 6 26. imprecated Ps. 55: 16 and deprecated as such Ps.
102: 25. The Pelagians indeed of old (as the Socinians of late) denied man's
mortality to be the effect of his sin, affirming it to arise from his natural
constitution at the first: but were generally opposed therein, and refuted by
the Orthodox, as Councels, Fathers, and Histories both general and of them
particularly written by many Alvarez, Latius, Vossius, Jansenius, Norris.
do declare. It having been the constant opinion both of the ancient Jews and
Christians, that every kind of death was the punishment of sin, as the learned
Grotius de satisfactione, assures us. I confess many of our Divines writing
against the Popish opinion of humane satisfaction to divine justice, by
sufferings in this life and purgatory afterward, granting death to be a
punishment, per se and natura sua, Dallaeus de poenis.
do yet deny it to be properly so, to those whose sins are pardond through
Christ: distinguishing the afflictions of this life and death also, into
chastissements of the righteous and punishments of the wicked. But Scripture is
not so nice, calling those that befall the righteous punishments sometimes. Ezra
9: 13. Ier. 30: 11. and 46: 28. Lament 3: 39. Amos 3: 2. and sometimes those
that befall the wicked chastisements. Levit. 26: 28. Deutr. 11: 2, 3. Ps. 94:
10. Ier. 30: 14. Nor do I well understand, how that which is in it self and
own nature a punishment, should ever be otherwise: tho it com from different
causes, I know, and is used for different ends and effects: or how tho
afflictions may be chastisements to the righteous whilst they live, their death
can be so to them; and much les how that of Infants, which make so great a part
of mankind, and if of believing parents are charitably judged by most, (and I
would be glad to see well proved) are righteous and saved; for the Apostle
makes it the effect of Adams transgression, and therefore properly a
punishment, Romans 5: 12, 13, 14. 1 Cor. 15: 21, 22. And therefore that
distinction also used by Dally and others, that death to the righteous is only
materially or improperly a punishment not formally; as the cutting or burning a
patient by a Physician differs from the like inflicted out of Justice by a
Judge on an offender; seems not consonant to the Apostle's doctrine, seeing
death is inflicted by the lawgiver for the breach of his law, whereas a
Patient suffers not as a malefactor.

It is true, that neither death nor any other punishments of the Righteous, are
merely vindictive in reference to satisfaction for sin, as the Papists
mantaine: Christ having fully satisfied for their sins, and procured the pardon
of them, which upon their believing is granted them by the covenant of grace;
but not so as to free them from the temporal evils of this life; or death and
their bodies lieing in the dust, these being excepted after the promis of the
Messiah, Genesis 3. For God having given man a law, and threatened his
transgressing it with death (which implies the temporal of the body, the
spiritual of the soul, and the eternal of both) our first parents,
comprehending all mankind, having trangrest it; God coms and hold Assizes,
summons them to appear before him, charges them with their sin, convinces them
of their guiltines, and then allaying the severity of his Justice with Mercy
and free Grace, first promises a Messiah, and Salvation and deliverance
through him from their Sins, by his satisfaction to Justice for them, so as he
had determined, and after agreed with Christ the seed of the Woman, in the
Covenant of Redemption: so that though they, and all in them had Sinned and
come short of the Glory of God, being Spiritually dead in Tresspasses and Sins,
and thereby liable to eternal Death, yet they and all their rightteous Seed
should be Saved by the Messiah, from these two kinds of Death, which are the
great destructive penalties of Sinners. And then proceeds to Sentence them,
what they should all suffer notwithstanding: First the Woman who was first in
fault, declaring her peculiar Punishment as to her Sex, besides those common to
her with Man; in her sorrowful Conception, bringing forth, and subjection to
her Husband; and then the Man, and all mankind in him, both Men and Women, are
sentenced to Misery, in this Life mortality, and their Bodies lying in the dust
from whence they were taken: The Promise, and its preceding the Sentence
implying, that all those that embraced God's Mercy through the Messiah should
have no other Punishment then these temporal; and all those that rejected it,
and so remaining on their first terms with their Creator, commonly called The
Covenant of Works, should suffer the Death threatened therein for their
Transgressions. The Execution of this Sentence has continued ever since, and
will continue till the Resurrection; that all may feel the bitter fruits of
their Apostasy, in these temporal Punishments; for the bettering of God's
People, not for their satisfying Justice for their Sins (as the Papists affirm)
seeing they neither can, (no mere Man, much less Sinful, being able to satisfy
divine Justice for the least offense) nor have need, Christ having done this
sufficiently for them; and for the leaving the incorrigible Wicked, that will
not be bettered by them, the more inexcusable, in their suffering Eternal
Punishment. So that those metaphorical expressions of Pardon of Sins, by God's
not seeing or remembering them, blotting them out, covering them, casting them
behind his back, and into the bottom of the Sea, etc. denoting the plenariness
thereof; and those sayings of our Divines, remtssa cuspa, remittitur poena, and
that Justification takes away all Punishment, etc. must be understood according
to the Covenant of Grace, and agreably with the execution of God's sentence
upon Sinners. For tho remission on of Sin, be nothing else then the remission
of its puishment; yet its that punishment only which is opposite to pardon,
such as belongs to the impenitent, and is Eternal; whereas all those whom God
justifies, he also glorifies. Insomuch that tho the righteous have through
Christ the remission of their Sins and eternal Punishment granted them in the
Covenant of Grace, together with a sanctified use of their temporal, that they
shall all work together for their good; and the sting of Death taken out of
their (Sin that brought it in being now thereby turned out again) and victory
over the Grave, in the Redemptiom of their bodies from their Captivity under
it, at the Resurrection: yet Death is still, in all the degrees of it
antecedent in the miseries of this Life, and kinds of it, first and second, or
temporal and eternal the wages of Sin, according to the original threatening.
And temporal Death a punishment in all, according to the original Sentence: tho
to the Righteous Eternal Life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ their
Lord: who has abolished Death, or Sin, which is Spiritul Death, and Eternal
the consequent thereof, tho not their Temporal, and brought Life and
Immortality to light by the Gospel, from the first promise of himself, still
more clearly, and by himself at last most fully, to whom be Glory. Romans 6: 23.
2 Timothy 1: 10.

2. The causes or reasons of the Adjuncts of Death, in the kinds, manner, and
other circumstances thereof, as why some die a violent, others a natural Death,
these suddenly, those leisurely, one sooner, another later, or at such times or
places rather than others, are in the ordinary course of Providence, of which
we speak, secret to us, tho well known to the all-wise God. There being such a
stupendous variety herein, that as in living faces, so in dying persons,
there is no perfect agreement in all circumstances: each of which are
particularly and only known to him, who numbers the hairs of our heads, and so
orders and governs every single person and thing, as if it were all he had to
do, and so all things, as if he were not employed in any particulars. The
Apostle gives us the clearest account hereof, that I know, in few words,
saying, God works all things after the Council of his own Will, Ephesians. 1: 11.
where we have counsel directing, will determining, and power working or
executing all things: so that as he has right by Creation, and continual
preservation of all his Creatures, to govern them as he pleases; so his
understanding being infinite, his will just, and his power almighty, his
government in all he does, must needs be most excellently perfect. But who has
known the mind of the Lord, or been his counceller, and acquainted with his
secrets? for which reason we should with the Apostle humbly adore them, and not
vainly enquire after them, presumptuously prying into those things which belong
not to us. O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom aed knowledge of God!
how unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out, Romans 11.33,
34. But tho we must not be curious to know what we ought not, we must not be
careless to know what we ought: Scripture frequently requiring us to observe
God's dealings, encouraging us thereto, and condemning the neglect thereof. Let
us therefore proceed more particularly, and for the understanding these riddles
of Gods Providence, plow with his Heifer the Sacred Scriptures; wherein we have
a multitude of examples for our instruction, and rules also for our direction,
that we may wisely consider his doings, as we are commanded.

These kinds and manner of Death are considerable in reference to God, the
persons that Die, and the Living that survive. As they come from God, so they
are in themselves Punishments for the breach of his law; but very different in
their causes and effects, according to the diversity of the subjects they are
inflicted upon, or that are therein concerned; which we must carefully regard,
lest we dangerously mistake. For which end we must consider.

I. That as all God's glorious Attributes whereby he is pleased to display
himself are equally in him, so those that relate to his government are always
jointly, though unequally exercised in his works in this world, even those that
to us seem most opposite, as his Mercy and Justice, which are singly exercised
in the world to come. Even the Devils have some Mercy and Patiance mixed with
Justice at present: being reserved in chains as malefactors unto Judgment for
greater Punishments; who yet feel so great, that they believe and tremble for
fear of their future, Jude 6. James 2: 19. And in the greatest severity toward
Men, God in wrath remembers some Mercy, even to the worst that he suddenly
destroys (besides the remnant that he saves) in warning them before, delaying
till their iniquities be full, and mittigating their Punishment in taking them
away; none suffering to the utmost here, nor none so much hereafter as they
should had they lived longer', to treasure up more Sins against the day of
Wrath, as the old World, Sodom and Gomorrah, the Amorites, Amalakites, and many
others. But though Justice be very apparently the chief reason of some
Punishments, especially those extraordinary, commonly called Judgments, and
such as are general: yet for the most part, especially in particular and
ordinary cases, God has many other reasons, and greater than that we imagine.
some of which (though unkown at present) are yet well known afterward. If not
here, to be sure hereafter; when we shall see a distinct exercise of those
Attributes that here are mixed; so that there will be no Atheists or Unbelievers
of Gods Justice in Hell; nor no mistakes of Gods Judgment and Mercies in
Heaven. In the mean time from this manifold Wisdom of God, and the mixture of
causes jointly acting in this Life, we may see the fundamental ground of our
mistaking Gods dealings with us here; and learn to take heed, that we separate
not those reasons which appears not to us, from those which seem most apparent,
and so divide, where we should only distinguish; which often arises from our
narrow conceptions of the great and holy God and his ways, judging of him too
often by our selves, tho he has told us that his thoughts and ways are not
ours, but as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are his thoughts and
ways higher than ours, in Pardoning the Penitent which is the choicest of
Mercies, however they be otherwise dealt with in this World. Isa. 55.7, 8, 9.
So that though we must take notice of Gods Justice in all Punishments,
acknowledging our Sins to have deserved greater; yet not only, and as separate
from his goodness and Mercy (which may be greater therein, for any thing we
know, though not so manifest at present) lest we mistake the Righteouss God, in
these his judicial dispensations, Lam. 3: 18-26.

In the next place, let us consider the dieing Persons themselves; and they are
either Righteouss or Wicked, there being no middle state; and consequently
their Death is an entrance into their future Happiness, or Misery. Now in
regard we cannot judge of the Spiritual and Eternal condition of those that die
suddenly, but by their lives'; for us to conclude either way of them (as is too
customary) from the manner of Death, seeing all these externals fall alike to
all, is great uncharitableness on the one hand, or gross presumption on the
other. To be sure if they belong to God, it is more in Mercy to them than in
Justice, as in freeing them from the fear of Death, that King of Terrors, as
Job calls it; or future backslidings, and loss of God's Favor, which is worse
to God's People than Death it self, his loving kindness to them being better
than Life; or taking them away from the evil to come, and many other ways
unknown to us. And is more eligible to those prepared, then a lingering, in
regard of its end, and for a greater good, as the sudden cutting off an Arm or
a Leg to save the Life; so that the Apostle groand, earnestly desiring it, not
for that he would be unclothed or desired only to die, but for its consequents,
to be clothed upon, that Mortality might be swallowed up of Life, 2 Cor. 5. v.
4, Though to the wicked or unprepared, this circumstance is a sad aggravation,
as I suggested before; and the best of God's Servants in the want of Assurance
cry with David to God, O spare me, that I may recover strength, before I go
hence: yet to them there is more fear than danger; their great and blessed
Physician so mixing the poison of Death with stronger ingredients, that
sometimes are cordials to comfort them, and always means to cure them perfectly
of all their and Sins Miseries; so that Death in general, of what kind soever
is reckoned amongst the privilidges of Believers, in subordination to their
future Glory, 1. Cor 3.22.

As to the surviving, the Death of Relations and Friends in what manner soever,
is to be accounted an Afflilction in the general; but very different many ways,
according to the qualifications of the Dead and Living, their nearness in
Relation, dearness in Affection, kindness, and other circumstances aggravating
or extenuating the loss; and according to their future use, both as to Temporal
and Spiritual good, and their being Sanctified accordingly, or otherwise not
improved. But herein we must not judge by Sense, but by the light of God's
Word, weighing them in the balance of the Sanctuary; for Sense is altogether
for present enjoyments, and suggests nothing but bitterness and sorrow in their
loss; crying out continually, can there be Mercy in such an Affliction as this?
can I gather grapes off these thorns, or figs off these thistles? These are
like Samson's riddles to Sense, unanswerable, but by Scripture, rectified
Reason and Experience are unfolded, so that the Wise, that will observe, shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord. Ps. 107.43. According as the
deceased were, or in moral probability might have been, if public Persons,
Blessings or Judgments to the Church or State, or if private, helps or
hindrances, or comforts or crosses, in regard of Heavenly or Earthly things,
more or less to us, so we should account their Death at present, and afterward
according to the Spiritual benefits we reap, or might have reaped thereby. As
good Magistrates and Ministers that were, and might have been more useful
Instruments of public good, being cut off suddenly, as Josia and Stephen were
greatly lamented; and Absalom and the Prophets of Baal that were quite
contrary, their being slain was accounted accordingly. And not judge by our
affection to them, which is many times inordinate, or theirs to us, which we
often prise and rely on too much; for though the cross thereby becomes the
heavier to us, yet more necessary for us; so that the Wise and Holy God
designing our good, bleeds us in the right vein, to cure us and bring us nearer
to himself. As he did Jacob here in Rachel, and afterward in Joseph; and David
even after he had pronounced by Nathan his Sin Pardoned, Punishing him for the
same, not only for his Spiritual but Temporal benefit also; by taking away his
Child by Bathsheba, which would have been a perpetual reproach both to him and
Religion; and his beloved Absalom, whom he so laments, thereby restoring him to
his Kingdom, and that to him, and both to Peace.

But it is high time that we draw down these considerations to our present
purpose. And first in the Death of Infants, there is the manifestation of the
truth of God's Threatenings, and his Justice in executing his Sentence against
Mankind for their first Trangression; but whether it is more in Mercy or
Judgment to them, we know not, and therefore not the reason why these more
than others die so soon, and oftentimes suddenly, but must acquiess in the
Pleasure of the Allwise God. If they be such as belong to the Kingdom of
Heaven, it is many ways Mercy, in freeing them from the Sins and Miseries of
this Life, and making them sooner Happy with Himself: If not, there is yet some
Mercy mixed with Justice, their Punishment being less in the other World. And we
have less reason to doubt of Mercy for Infants, who die before they have done
any good or evil Personally, than for those that have done much evil; seeing
God promised Christ to mankind before he past the Sentence of Mortality; but
especially for those born of Believers that are within the Covenant, and styled
Holy in Scripture. For they are not only capable of Happyness, as well as Aged
Persons (their Souls being alike, and no such incapacity as here will be in
their Bodies hereafter) but also of Adoption, and Justification through Christ,
and conformity to Him, which are the absolutely requisite means thereof; tho
not of actual Believing, I think, notwithstanding the Lutheran, and some others
assert it; unnecessarily in my Opinion, because it is only of absolute necessity
to those of years, that are partakers of the outward dispensation of the
Covenant, but not in it self; in regard that Believing, and the Gospel
believed, and outward Ordinances, are not substantial parts of our
Righteousness, but only accidental means thereof, according to the capacity of
the Subject. Besides this we may observe, God uses not to send any
extraordinary Judgments, only for Origiral Sin, and confutes Jonah with this
Argument of his Clemency toward Nineveh, that there were more than sixscore
thousand Persons therein that could not discern between their right hand and
their left; the Parents, for whose Punishment the Children are often taken
away, and in general Judgments with them, having now Repented. Though we have
examples of their slaughter, not only for their Fathers Sin, but for peculiar
reasons and ends. As the Egyptians drowning the Isralites male Children; God
therein letting forth their Wrath, to Praise him, and try his People, whom he
had promised to multiply; making this there last and greatest Trial, (as is
usual) before Deliverance, and an occasion of manifesting his Justice and Power
in Punishing the Offenders in the same kind; both in destroying their first
Born (whereby also he fulfilled his threatening, and forced them to let Israel
his first Born goc, laden with their spoils, through hopes they would return)
and also by drowning Pharaoh and his host, thereby also fulfilling his Promise
to his People. Like as afterward the Babylonians, who in many things resembled
the Egyptians, in their carriage toward the Church, had their cruelty justly
retalliated on their own little ones, Ps. 137.8, 9.

But however Infants be cut off, whether by the hand of violence (as the
Bethlemitish by Herod, Math. 2. prefigured as the Prophet Jeremiah declared) or
by Natural Death, it is a Punishment to their Parents and Relations, the manner
only augmenting it. And not only a Punishment, but the greatest for kind, of
all Temporals that befall the living, (Children being their greatest earthly
Blessings) and greater or less in degree, according to circumstances; as the
mourning for an only Son, and bitterness for the first born, justly exceeds
that where other Sons, and that for other Chrildren, by which the sorrow for
Sin is set forth, Zach. 12.10. But tho this proceeds from Justice for Sins
past, yet more from love, when Sanctified to the Parents, both for their
greater future good, which in part they shall know hereafter, and happily for
the preventing greater evils then they can ever know. Because they neither know
how their Children might prove, or how their own hearts might be tempted, or
perplexed by them. For tho we always hope the best, yet frequently we find the
contrary; and no bitterer crosses, then from those we exspected greatest
comfort; Children when young, treading on our skirts, but often when elder,
piering our Hearts. This Punishment is generally inflicted on Mankind; both
Children and Parents, besides their Original Sin common to all, for the breach
of the second Commandment in their open or heart Idolatry, as is there
denounced (to deter Men that are so much concerned for their Children) as their
desert de jure, tho God reserves always liberty to himself de facto to dispense
his Punishments or favors as he pleases.

Secondly in the sudden Death of those of riper years; where God does declare
in his Word the causes thereof; or manifest them by the particular ends and
effects, especially joined with clear circumstances; there we may judge of the
chief reason or cause, though there be several others concurring; that we may
make better use of examples, as Scripture teaches us, 1 Cor 10.5-10. Otherwise
we must take heed of rushing into God's Secrets, which belong not to us, and
only eye the general ends, to make use of his Providence accordingly. As where
great and crying Sins go before, and the end is demonstration of Justice,
there we may see that is the chief cause, especially in extraordinary
Punishments, whereof we have many examples in Scripture. And where also such
Sinners are threatened, there also truth appears in their being Punished, as the
Egyptians first born; Ahaziah, Joram, Ahab, Jezebel, etc. So when the Sin is
clearly visible in the Death a Haman's Agag's, and innumerable others that shed
Man's Blood, and accordingly have their own unexspectedly shed. Or when
destruction follows at the heels of great Sins, as the three thousand
Israelites slain for the molten calf. Exodus 32. and while the flesh was between
their teeth, the wrath of the Lord was kindled against them, Numb. 11. and
Herod immediately simitten and eaten of worms, Acts. 12. And yet when the
vindication of Gods laws and ordinances is manifested to be the end, its hard
to say, whether his love to the truth and ordinances of his institution be not
the chief reason, tho justice be more discernable; for we must not judge all
those that are simitten and destroyed, even by God's immediate hand, to perish
eternally. And therefore it is observable, that as God never appeard so
terribly, as at the giving the law from mount Sinai; so his wrath was never so
hot, nor such severity used, as against the first trangsgressors, to assert the
honor of his laws, and make them more regarded afterward. As in the first
idolatry after their promulgation, Exodus 32: 10. At the first burnt-offerings,
when Nadab and Abihu offered strange fire, (that is common and not from the
altar) there went out fire from the Lord and devoured them, the punishment
suting to their sin, Levit. 10. As afterward Numb. 16. when Corah and others
descended from Levi endeavored to make the priesthood common to all the
Levites, v. 10. and Dathan and Abiram Reubenites and others the politic power
of Moses and the seventy elders, newly established by God ( Chapter xi.) common with
the rest: the earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up, v. 32. and fire
from the Lord consumed the two hundred and fifty that offered inconse v, 35.
whose censers God commanded to be used for a sign and memorial thereof. v. 38.
and 40. and for the peoples murmuring at this dispensation, fourteen thousand
and seven hundred of them dyed of the plague. v. 49. So when God appointed the
punishment for presumtuoussins, the first offender, the man that punishment
sticks on the sabbath day, is by God's appointment stoned to death, Numb. 15.
Thus God vindicated the honor of his ark, with smiting the Philistines; and
after it is return above fifty thousand of the men of Beth-shemesh, showing
thereby that the ark was the same, tho it had been among the uncircumcised, and
the effects of fear were answerable; 1 Samuel c. 5. and c. 6. and after that,
Vzzah for his rash taking hold of it, tho as seems to us for a good end, for
the oxen shook it, so that David was afraid, and we may suppose the people
much more, 2 Samuel 6. And thus also God vindicated the honor of Christianity,
at the first planting of the Gospel, in smiting Ananias and Sapphira: so that
great fear came upon all the Church and upon as many as heard these things,
Acts. 5.

But where no notorious crimes preceed, and other particular ends than justice
appear; there sudden death is the Occasion, and God's love to his truth, and
messingers that declare it, or servants that profess or suffer for it, the
chief cause and reason thereof. As the widow of Sarepia's son, raised to life
by Elijah, by which he is acknowledged a man of God, and the word of the Lord
in his mouth, truth, 1 Kings 17. the Shunammite's son by Elisha whose miracles
resembled his master Elijah's, 2 Kings 4. So Lazarus's, as Christ declares to
the messinger his sisters sent to him, This sickness is not unto death (tho in
its nature and next end it was, yet not irrevocably as they feared) but for the
glory of God, that the son of God might be glorified thereby; intimating that
this of Lazarus, should be used as a means of glorifying God, and his son in
miraculous raising him again to life, and thereby confirming his office of
Messiah, and Doctrine of the Gospel, as we read it did most eminently, J^hn.
11. And the noble army of Martyrs, whom God brings forth, as his Champions for
the truth: showing the power of his grace and their sincerity, that they do
not serve God for wordly things, as the devil slanderd Job, but love him, their
Savior, and his truth above their own lives; and making their death, which
their enemies count ignominious, honorable to him, religion, and themselves;
and using it to quite contrary ends than their persecutors design, namely the
increase and confirmation of his Church and people.

I have been the longer upon these extraordinary examples, both to clear the
truth in the general, and the several kinds of sudden death, and also in the
ordinary cases, that now follow to be more particularly spoken of. For by a
parity of reason, it will follow; that as God makes different use of like
providence, suting them to different ends, and making them occasions and means
of different effects, in wonderful variety according to his infinite wisdom and
power; so he has accordingly particular reasons that are just and weighty for
his dispensations, tho unknown to us, except he discovers them, as his justice
in extraordinary punishments for enormous offenses, or his goodness, mercy and
other causes, when it is otherwise. So that where no sins, or ends and effects
more than common, there we are not able, nor ought we to judge of God's reason,
why these rather than others are suddenly taken away; either by diseases, as
apoplexies, convulsions and the like; or by pains as women in travel, or by
wars, fire, water and other accidents, these things falling alike to all; for
if the kinds of death, or any temporal punishments were infallible signs of
God's hatred and temporal blessings of his love, we could never reconcile God's
word, we are bound to believe, with the works of providence, which are but the
fulfilling of it, and the execution of his purposes. In such cases therefore
when God exercises us, as Job (who is set forth to us as a pattern of patience
in dark providence) prayed show me why thou contendest with me (c. 10.) and
waited for the end of the Lord, so should we; God many times dealing with us as
Christ said to Peter, what I do thou know not now, but thou shall know
hereafter. As any one hearing Solomon's sentence of dividing the child, would
have thought it cruelty, if he had gone away without seeing, or after knowing
the end and effect: much more may we mistake the Allwise God, if we look on his
providence by piece-meals and wait not till we see the issue. For tho there be
sin in all, and that be the only meritorious cause of death, yet that is
original sin, that is alike in all from Adam, all being equally related to him,
so that thence coms no distinction of this or that kind of death, but as most
conceive from actual transgressions. Which being not discernd in infants, who
yet die in great variety both in regard of diseases and violent murders, their
death is generally laid on their parents, as the widow of Sarepia cried to
Elijah, art thou come unto me to call my sins to remembrance, and to slay my
son? I Kings. 17. For the Jews knew well that God visits the iniquities of the
fathers on the children, by many Scriptures threatening it, and examples of it is
being executed: and appears particularly in that fearful imprecation, that
Christ's blood might be on them and on their children, the fulfilling whereof
the whole nation lie under, to their confusion and the confirmation of
Christianity, to this day. But we must take heed of applying this alike to all,
for where no extraordinary sins God may, and sometimes does in sovereignty take
away children elder or younger, as Job's, for trial and other ends, more than
in justice: lest we judge and speak amiss of God's dealings with men, as Job's
friends, and many others are accustomed to do. For when men see any misery
befall any one out of the common road of providence, having natural conceptions
that sin and punishment are related, they presently conclude, that some
extraordinary sins either of them or their parents are the procuring cause on
their parts, and punitive justice answering to it, on God's part; whereof we
have many narratives in Scripture (to which I confine my self) of Barbarians,
Jews, and Christians; but I will only mention that in John. 9. at present,
which has occasioned most of the thoughts I have imparted concerning these
impulsive causes; considering that there is the same general nature in all
evils of punishment, as consisting in the privation of their opposite good. The
disciples rightly supposed that the blindness of the man so born was from God
justly, and that he punishes children, for their parents sins; but mistook in
taking it for granted, that either his parents, or he in his soul before his
body was formed, had been more than ordinary sinners, or in some kind at least,
which was the cause of his blindness, and asked Christ, whether it was: who
answered, neither has this man sinned, nor his parents, that is, as they
meant, and their question employed, not greaters sinners than others, or in
relation to this as the cause to the effect: But that the works of God should
be made manifest in him, which intimates a quite different reason, from what
they imagined, not God's punitive justice for either of their sins, but his
love to Christ and his doctrine, in the manifesting his power in a miraculous
cure, and mercy to the blind man's soul to be the chief causes. Where we may
observe, how Christ diverts them, as every where else, from curious enquiries;
resolving this affliction, as an insaelicitas or misery into Gods sovereignty,
that denies or gives his blessings, in kind or degree, to whom, when, and in
what manner he pleases, it being lawful for him to do what he will with his
own; and denying it to be poena from justice for any greater or particular
sins, as they judged (tho otherwise both were sinners, and so a sufficient
ground in point of justice to deprive either of sight, or any other blessings
in life, or all in death, yet this difference proceeded not therefrom) and
then directs them by the final cause, to judge of the impulsive or reason of
this providence, and to regard the ends and consequences thereof, as that which
concernd them; which in this case were extraordinary in respect of the miracle,
and ordinary in regard of the spiritual good this affliction occasiond and
wrought both for himself and others.

Les us therefore accordingly now apply our selves to the final cause or the
reasons taken from the end: not in reference to the dead which in ordinary
cases is a secret to us, as I have shown, but the living. Which we must
understand, not of the finis operantis, or what God designs in particular
thereby, which is different in all, and no further known to us, than as
manifested by the effects; or in general only as tending to his glory (which if
we speak properly is only his end, and all things whatsoever without himself
but means jointly considered tending thereto, and which he uses for the same
Romans 11: 36) But the sinis operis in reference to us, as these providence are
means fitted by him for such ends, as tend to the common good of the living;
which is allways superior to particular sufferings. And tho sad experience
shows us, that for the most part providence have not the effects upon us
answerable to their ends; yet that is through our default (as we see also in
the ordinances) and if so be these moral means obtain not their primary end as
medicinal to better us, yet their secondary, serving at least to justify God,
and render those that make small or no use of them, or contrary than they ought
wholly inexcusable, and more especially those who have the word to direct them
and interpret to them their end and use. For the end God's word declares,
allways implies the use we should make of every thing, both in the general, and
particularly according to their kind and degree. But I shall pass by the
general ends of afflictions and death, and only speak of those more peculiar to
this kind of death I am upon; nor yet of many that might be drawn from the ends
thereof in reference to God, his son and our Savior, his word, ordinances and
graces of his spirit, the good and evil things of this life, our sins, and
those concernd nearly and remotely; but of a few that are most comprehensive;
suggesting the suitable use of them the end implies, that my future discourse
may be more practical; reserving those that are more particular for the
Application.

I Then God thus suddenly and unexspectedly takes away some, that the supremacy
of his providence may be more apparent, and himself thereby better known and
acknowledged in the world. That this is the general end of God's unexspected
dealings with men, in mercies and judgments extraordinary, and all other cases
above their-thoughts and contrivances, appears by hundred places of Scripture,
relating both to his people and heathens, expressed in those phrases, that ye or
they may know that I am the Lord, and implied in the effect (which is the end
accomplished, for finis in actu positus dicitur effectus) and ye or they shall
know that I am the Lord. And experience shows us, that while things go on
smoothly and evenly as men suppose they should, all run along with them, and
are apt to judge them the effects of humane counsels, and actions in the use of
such means as conduce thereunto: but when any thing happens above or contrary
to their thoughts and expectations, and is accomplished by such means and in
such a manner, as they could not think of or imagine, and cannot find out any
satisfactory reason for, then they look above and beyond natural causes, and
acknowledge the finger of God. Who frequently deals with us in our lives, as
Jacob with Joseph's, sons crossing his hands contrary to exspectation, and in
our death also, making one or other that we thought should live drop down dead
unexspectedly; whereby we are put to a stand and look on, as all the people did
at Amazah's and consider whence this came; and not satisfying our selves
concerning any visible cause of this difference, are ready to acknowledge an
invisible power and providence in both the parts of it viz: preservation and
government, in preserving us and others that were as likely to die, and taking
away those that were as likely to live. So that God's extraordinary providence
being the great witnesses of himself to the world; it becoms our duty to eye
and acknowledge him in them accordingly; his wisdom in contriving such a
concurrence of causes and circumstances as we never thought on, his power in
executing what we never feared, his mercy in sparing greater sinners, his
justice in cutting off whom and when he pleases, and his dominion over all,
ruling high and low, rich and poor together, so that as men see or may see, so
let them say among all nations, that the Lord most high reigns over all the
inhabitants of the earth.

II. That all men may see more clearly, that their times are only in God's
hand, Ps. 31: 15. or in his sole power, his constant care and custody, and his
disposal at his pleasure. All its true have or may have a notional knowledge of
this from the light of nature, and those in the Church most fully from
Scripture; but this is too weak, to make us look beyond the course of natural
causes, above to him who has the ordering of them all, so as to keep the eye
of our souls habitually fixed upon him, as we ought. He is therefore pleased
sometimes to use such providence in great daingers, deliverances, and deaths so
circumstantiated, as therein we may acknowledge his hand, and thereby gain
such experimental knowledge of him and his dealings with us, as will lead us to
the owning and acknowledging of him, and seconded by grace set up his
soverainty in our souls. For it is not so much death in it self that affects
us, because it is common; as the remarkablenes of it one way or other, which
leaves an impression upon us, and raises our sluggish minds to consider, from
what hand such a blow should come. Who except some few Relations think
themselves concernd at the death of weak infants, and sickly persons, or aged?
But when the young are taken away in the flower of their age; or the strong
that were most likely to live, are dead on a sudden and laid in the dust; or
the great and rich that have all means possible to preserve them, are cut down
like the gras and wither as the green herb; these are so many sensible
demonstrations to convince us, that our times are not in the hands of second
causes, or merely casual and fortuitous, seeing these are so frequent, but
only in God's, who disposes of them as he pleases. Time indeed strangly wears
out the present sense we have of these things: but God is pleased so often to
give us such pregnant examples hereof, as if we duly regard them, are not only
sufficient to renew the former impressions upon us, but afford us stronger
convictions of this truth. This improvement of such providence, would bring us
as Moses desired the Israelites, to acknowledge God, as the cause of our lives
and length of our days, who gives them at his pleasure, and for his pleasure
continues them, that orders them as he pleases, and cuts them off when he
pleases; and to depend upon him continually for them; and with holy Job not to
charge God foolishly, but whether he gives, continues, or takes away, still to
bless the name of the Lord. As we learn this lesson more or less, so we shall
find it accordingly not only thus useful, but also comfortable to us: by the
assurance God's people have thereby that in all times, trials, and changes they
are allways in the hands of their tender father, that knows their frame, and
remembers they are dust; tho the wicked that will not be instructed, are in the
hand of God as a Judge, whose sentence and execution they shall not escape.
Considering that if our times were in Satan's or our enemies hands, they would
swallow us up quick; or in our friends power, they would not suffer us to
depart, and be with Christ which is far better; or in our own, we should in our
discontents be weary of them, and ready to cry out as Moses, Elijah, Job,
Jeremiah, and Jonah have don, now Lord take away my life, rather than patiently
wait his pleasure.

III. That sin may be imbittered, and mercy embraced: and particularly our
first apostasy from God, and our Savior and the means of recovery. For as God's
sentencing man to bodily penalties after his first sin for good to his soul,
was to humble him for that, and all other sins that followd upon it, and make
him fear his justice by seeing and feeling such effects of it, and fly to his
grace and mercy through the promised Messiah: so his inflicting them must
therefore be accordingly accounted a means for these ends conjointly. The
All-wise God knowing what prodigious blindness of mind and security of heart
followed sin in us; is therefore pleased for our awakening to use outward
punishments ordinarily, these being only visible, and so fitter to have
influence generally on all men, and being also more feared by the secure
world, than those inward and spiritual judgments on the soul. So that the very
heathen, who being through their forefathers separate from the Church, are
ignorant of the causes and manner of the entrance of these punishments by the
fall, and much more of Christ, and so account death because common to all, a
debt to nature, and the grievous accidents thereof punishments only for actual
offenses: yet by these external judgments they may and should be brought, and
when extraordinary and general often are, to fear God's justice and fly to his
mercy in the general, tho they cannot make that especial use of them, for those
higher ends and in subordination to especial grace, that Scripture declares;
and which the Jews who have the Old Testament showing the fall and clearly
testyfying of Christ (tho they wilfully reject him) and we Christians ought and
should; and for which God is pleased to use them in his Church. For tho we have
the law that discovers sin, and condemns sinners to eternal punishments; and
the Gospel that tenders us pardon, and eternal salvation; yet so great is our
unbelief and the love of our lusts, that we little regard them; till God awaken
us, and lets us see and feel experimentally by outward or inward troubles or
both, the evil of our sins and how destructive they are to us, and thereby bring
us to condemn and loath them, and our selves for them, and value his mercy
through Christ for pardoning them. For which ends he makes use especially of
those, that are most powerful to convince men of, and affect them with his
justice, sins hainousnes, the sinners desert, and need of mercy. Of which kind
are those punishments, which are generally inflicted on all apparently
according to his threatenings: wherein are seen, the greatness of the offense,
God's resolution to punish, his power and impartiality in punishing great as
well as small, so that none can flatter themselves with hopes of impunity. And
those that have the offense legibly written upon them, so that all may read the
sin in the punishment, and see God's equity therein; whereby he is justified
and the offender condemned, even by himself as well as others, as we find among
the very heathen Judges 1. v. 7. And those punishments that are great, and so
show the greatness of the offense, justice never proportioning them greater, but
mercy mitigating them to less than the offenders deserts. All which kinds of
punishment concur in death, as most clearly appears by the scriptures; which
declare God's threatening thereof before, and sentencing all it to it after for
our apostasy ( Genesis c. 2. and c. 3.) as a suitable punishment for our wilful
despising of life, virtually promised in the threatening of death; and that which
shows us the greatness of our offense, in that it is the greatest of
punishments, comprehending all other miseries, as life it deprives us of all
other mercies, Romans 6: 23. And yet more signally do all these appear in the
kinds of death we this day celebrate: the mother bringing forth in sorrow,
because the woman was first in the transgression, and dying for her having
transgrest, and the little infant for that only. So that its better for us to
go to this house of mourning than feasting (as Solomon says Eccles 7: 2.) for
that is the end of all men, and therefore will be thine and mine, and the
living will lay it to heart: intimating the reason of that being the end of
all, from the usefulnes thereof to the living, that seriously will confider it,
as a spectacle of their own mortality, whereof sin especially original was the
moral cause, whatever were the natural, together with the manner thereof in
regard of their inward and outward man. How bitter therefore should the
remembrance of and sorrow for our first transgression be to us, and all other
sins as proceeding from it; especially our wilful and deliberate offenses, which
are as so many approbations of our first parents apostasy, whereby we have so
often declared, we should have done as they did, had we been in their place;
how hardly soever we are apt to think, and many also to speak of them! And how
acceptable should Christ be to us, as the only Mediator to bring us back again
to God from whom we have fallen, and reconcile us to him, whom we have
offended: who by his death has redeemed their souls from destruction that will
embrace him, taken away sin the sting of death, strength from the law to
condemn them eternally, sanctified the grave to their bodies by his own lying
in it, and by his resurrection given them assurance of their victory over it,
in their bodies rising again, and being fashioned like to his glorious body!
For it is this our apostasy from God at first, that brought in this sad
separation, of all our comfortable relations; both spiritual between God our
father and us, and natural between husband and wife, parents and children,
kindred and friends, and soul and body at last here, and both from happiness for
ever hereafter; and also intaild upon us all miseries, which are more in this
life than can be numbered, and greater in that to com than can be expressed. And
Christ only that makes up again the union for his people in spiritual
relations, his father ours, himself our husband, all his brethren and fisters,
and all necessary comforts in natural relations in this life, and soul and body
to meet again, and both with happiness for ever; freeing us from eternal
miseries, and all those temporal which he procures not to work together for our
good.

4. That such as are taken away by untimely death, may be examples and warnings
to the living. 1 To deter them from the like sins, where they were notorious
and the cause of their punishment: every example of punitive justice being a
fulfilling of the threatening of the law on the Offender, and vertually a
threatening for the like offense to others. This course God took especially with
his Church in its infancy, training them up, as we do our children, with
temporal threats and promises, mercies and judgments: whereas now in its
maturity under the Gospel on a better covenant, he uses more especially
spiritual promises of grace and salvation, and threatenings of spiritual and
eternal punishments, and deals with us accordingly, the more powerfully to
allure us to holiness, and deter us from wickedness. Yet in regard we are still
men of like passions, and no less moved with examples, he declares this to be
the end of all such temporal judgments to us Christians, and requires us to
make this use of them, 1 Cor. 10.6. The Israelites suddenly destroyed several
times in the wilderness, says the Apostle, were our examples, to the intent we
should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted; commanding us to avoid
their sins thereafter mentioned, and declaring that ( all these things happened
to them for ensamples, or types, and are written for our admonition, upon whom
the ends of the world are come. v. 7. -- 11. Thus the untimely death of many of
the Corinthians for their profanation of the Lord's supper is recorded, that we
should beware thereof; 1 Cor. 11. v. 30. So also when the crime is apparent in
the punishment; as Paul's being guilty of stoning Stephen in his being stoned
by the Jews, and drawn out of the city supposing he had been dead, tho he was
miraculously revived, or at least restored Acts 14.19, 20. And this use we are
to make of those extraordinary examples of God's judgments, that fall out in
all ages and nations, for execrable murders, perjury and dreadful imprecations,
great persecution and oppression etc. wherein histories abound, and Reinold's
God's Revenge of murder Camerarii opere subcisiva centur. 1. c. 86. and contur.
3. c. 3, 33, 34, 36.38. Gorrutius de providentia. l. 3. c. 24.
several have collected examples thereof, that all that know them might be
affrighted from the like offenses. This being the end of public punishments,
as scripture declares by the effect and use the living should make of them; and
all or those which remain shall hear and fear, and shall do no more any such
wickedness Deutr. 13.11. and 19, 20. to which both the Greeks and Latins agree.
Grotius de I. B. and P. L. 2. c. 20.
For by the proportion of justice, do alike and have alike, as well in
punishments as rewards; which allways first or last has place with God, who
changes not through defect of knowledge, wisdom, or power as men do
frequently. Not allways in this life nor in the same manner, as in his
miraculous judgments; or in the same measure, but the examples show the desert
thereof; as in the decimation of an army, the General's putting some few to
death, to prevent future mutinies, shows the rest what they have deserved, and
what so offending they may exspect for the future. God usually reserving the
wicked to the day of destruction, they shall be brought forth to the day of
wrath, Job. 21.30. and exercising riches of patience and forbearance toward
them, and upon their humiliation and disciplinary repentance, deferring or
remitting their temporal punishments, even after their denunciation, as in Ahab
and Nineveh, and others generally Jer. 18.7.8. and on the contrary, where
unfeigned repentance makes way for the prerogative to pardon, often punishing
his own people in this life more than others; but allways in the world to come,
divine justice will render to every man according to his deeds, Romans 2.2. -- 11.

But where no extraordinary sins are manifest, these examples serve 2. to
caution us and restrain us that we offend not God presumtuously in any kind:
But that we stand in awe and sin not against him, who can every moment bring us
to judgment. For this is the end why God does such things, that men should
fear before him. Eccles. 3.14. the neglect whereof becoms the cause of the
sudden destruction of secure sinners. For the sentence of death being past upon
all sinners, if the execution of it more speedily upon less offenders, and the
delaying of it upon greater be so abused by the wicked, that therefore their
hearts are set in them to do evil; yet Solomon tells us of his own certain
knowledge, that though a sinner do evil an hundred times and his days be
prolonged, so as he lives his full time in the course of nature yet surely I
know, it shall not be well with the wicked, as it shall be with the righteous
in their future state, neither shall he prolong his days which are as a shadow,
in regard the days of the wicked are cut off suddenly before the time of their
exspectation, or at least preparation for death, because he fears not before
God, in an awful shunning to displease him. Eccles. 8.11-13. And Solomon's
observation in this kind has been made by many, that those who, in their
health despise both God's word and warnings, when death threatens them, cry
out, oh call time again! oh that I might live a little longer! oh that God would
but try me once more! and make great promises to God and men of their future
amendment, usually in their own strength which oftentimes com to little if they
recover, and if they die, declare their unpreparednes for death. And yet better
some sense of God, and fear of his future judgments at the last than not at
all, but spend their days in mirth, and in a moment go down to the grave, Job
21.13 The Apostle's therefore admonition is good, and holds in all examples in
those of like condition, not to be high minded, but fear, for if God spared
not them, take heed lest he also spare nos thee Romans 11.20, 21 and Hebr. 4.1.
And 3 to cure sin in us. For these are means whereby we are brought to the
sear of the Lord, by which men depart from evil, Prove. 16.6. Thus God cured
the remnant of the Jews of their Idolatry, which they were so addicted to
formerly, and ever after detested above all others. Ezech. 23. Where J^dah and
Israel are set forth as two spiritual adulteresses being at ease, and God
says, I will bring a company upon them, namely the Assyrians and Chaldeans,
that shall stone them with stones, as the Jews punished adulters, and dispatch
them with their swords, they shall slay their sons and their daughters etc.
thus will I cause lewdnes to cease out of he land, that all women may be taught
not to do after your wickedness, that is other cities and nations compared here
to women, especially where his church should be planted may learn to refrain
from Idolatry, and if they will not to see what the cure thereof will cost
them. And David a type of Christ prophecies, this should be a means of
reforming the visible Church, God shall suddenly shoot at them, with an arrow
suddenly shall they be wounded, and all men shall fear and shall declare the
works of God for they shall wise^y consider of his doings. Ps. 64. see also
Is. 25.2.3. And as in general so in particular examples this is not to be
doubted of; as that the sudden death of Eli has been, and is instrumental to
cure, the fond indulgence of many parents to their children in wickedness, and
of Absolon, their inordinate affection. If so be no sins are mentioned, or more
than ordinary apparent to us in any so taken away; then to cure us of those
sins we know our selves guilty of before God; and more especially those that
are relative, as good Jacob's too much love and doting upon his Rachel here in
the text. 4. To awaken us out of our security. For which end especially, we
have security as the forerunner, and speedy destruction that follows it. joynd
together by our Savior, in the types he has given us of his coming to
judgment, both of all in general, and every one in particular, As the
destruction of the old world, Sodom and Gomorrah, and Jerusalem; they were
eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, buying and selling,
planting and building; whereby Christ declare. how little they exspected, they
should be forthwith speedily destroyed; and that so also shall his coming be,
even like to lightning for its suddemnes, or a thief in the night for its
unexspectednes; and then makes this inference watch therefore for ye know not
what hour your Lord does come, calling it such an hour as they think not,
declaring he would honor those that made this use of it, but if, the evil
servant say in his heart my Lord delays his coming etc. The Lord of that
servant will com in a day when he looks not for him, and in an hour that he is
not aware of. Math. 24. and Luke 17. Nothing more exemplifies this than sudden
death, which cries to every one, behold the bridegroom comes, go ye out to
meet him, to awaken all; for its said they all slumbred and slept, the wise
virgins slumbred and the foolish slept, so that none in the visible church but
have need of wakening, Math. 25. For as in nature troubles either feared or
felt both awaken us out of our sleep, and keep us from sleeping: so in grace,
there being few Christians to be found, that either the fears of death and
judgments, by some warnings of them, or some inward or outward troubles have
not awakend and kept watching. We are naturally so sensual and immerst in the
things of this life, so regardles of God, his word, and our eternal
concernments, and so apt to put the evil day far from us: that God is
mercifully pleased by examples, as well as precepts and threats to rouse us up
to consider our latter end, that we may not run heedlesly on to our eternal
destruction. As it is usual with God to forewarne both nations and cities
before he smites them, as all histories both sacred and prosane testify, we
never reading of judgments but for mercies abused: so also particular
persons, there being none of years, but have warning in this kind, and may
every where see graves shorter than their own. For as security shakes off the
fear of sin and misery, and makes us look on death and judgment at a
distance: so the fear of them makes them seem near us, and to reflect upon our
selves and the desert of our sins, and consider our later end, thereby
becoming instrumental to make us serious, which is the first step in religion,
and to turn our sloth into diligence, our indifferency into earnestnes, and our
inconstancy into stablenes and resolution. Lastly To bring us to repentance. As
this is the end of God's threatenings, that he may not punish if we will repent:
so its also of his executing them, that others may take warning; all his
providence being a fulfilling of some threat or promis in his word. This even
the Ninivites understood as appears by their practice upon Jonah's denunciation
of their destruction: and thus our Savior expounds these providence, which are
rich in sense as well as the word, howbeit we seldom fully comprehend it. Who
preaching in Galilee, was interrupted by some News-mongers from Jerusalem, that
told him of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their
sacrifices, (in Jerusalem, for Pilate had no jurisdiction, but Herod over the
Galileans) supposing they were some extraordinary sinners, because they
suffered such things, Luke 13. Christ according to his great wisdom, neither
taxes Pilat's fact of cruelty (as they might possibly suppose) nor approves it;
nor denies those Galileans to be sinners and suffer justly, but only that they
were greater sinners than all the rest, showing that they were not to be judged
as such, because of their suffering, and adds the like concerning those 18 on
whom the tower in Siloam fell and slew, declaring from both these examples, the
general use the living should make of the sudden death of others, which is to
repent; this being the end of Gods sparing us to give us time and space for
repentance, and his taking away others to stir us up to make use of our time
accordingly. And the more to awaken them to this duty, shows the more especial
use of these to them, in a prophetical commination from the manner of their
perishing, making it a type or emblem to the living of their future destruction
(as Samuel did by Saul's rending his mantle, of God's rending the Kingdom from
him) saying, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Denoting, that as
those Galileans were slain by Pilat the Roman governor and his soldjers, so the
Galileans should after by the Roman army: and as the 18 in Jerusalem were slain
by the fall of the tower in Siloam, so the dwellers in Jerusalem should be by
the fall of their other towers and walls. Which, they not repenting was
accordingly accomplished in both. For the Romans first fell upon Galilee, and
destroyed great numbers of them, and the rest flying to Jerusalem, at the time
of the passover were with other Jews slain in such abundance, that the altar
for sacrifices swimd with blood: and multitudes of the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, it being besieged and taken by the Romans, were slain by the
battering of their walls, and buried in the ruins of their city. So dangerous
is it to neglect repenting from the warnings given us, and especially for those
more immediately concernd! So great wisdom and safety is there in true
repentance, which will certainly save our souls from eternal, and is the only
way to save our persons also and estates from public calamities and temporal
destruction! But oh the blindness and stupidity of most part of men, that when
God's hand is lifted up, they will not see it! when he hedges up their sinful
ways with thorns, will needs run through them! when he smites some on their
right hand, and others on their left, regard it not! that can go and com from
funerals without a serious thought of their own! Common providence are but
little observed by us, and therefore do but little move and affect us: but when we
meet with unexspected occurrences, or interruption of the ordinary course of
time and nature in the death of any, this is apt to startle us, and make us
bethink our selves more than usually, and where grace sets in with it, becoms a
means to better and reform us. Thus God often makes use of the sudden death of
some, to bring others first to themselves by consideration, and afterward to
himself by repentance; and especially those in the like condition, when one is
taken and another left, some destroyed and others saved, this making both a
deeper and lastinger impression; and those more nearly concernd in, or related
to the deceased. For as we often think this or that occasiond their death, and
these or those things might have prevented it, the thoughts whereof frequently
trouble us afterward: so our former carriage toward them, and theirs to us
coms now afresh to our remembrance, feeds our sorrow, and lays the foundation
of our repentance. These and those things says conscience thou should have
done, and so and so thou should have carried toward them, and did not; and
this and that thou should not have done, nor carried in this or that manner
to them, and did; thou might have got much good by them, and have not; and
done more good to them, and would not; thou matterdst not what became of
their souls, and know thou what will become of thine? Then thinks the sinner,
what if their case had been mine? where had I now been if I had been so hurried
to judgment? my conscience tells me I am not fit to die, I cannot say my sins
are pardond, and my peace made with God whom I have so greatly offended: he
has now warnd me to flee from the wrath to com, and should I not take it?
shall I still except my self and say this shall not be to me? why should I
think to be spared, when others are taken away whose sins mine have exceeded?
the time bypast is too much to have wrought the will of the flesh, I am
resolved now to make better use of the present and future, so long as God shall
spare me, to prepare for death and for eternity. And as these providence are
thus merciful means to bring about a blessed change in us, so also to carry it
on still further and further. How livelily does sudden death set-forth to us
the necessity of repentance in all the kinds of it! As the vanity of the
creature, and the necessity of making God our portion; the shortness of our own
righteousness, seeing we must appear before a just and holy God, and the
necessity of Christ and his righteousness; the evil of sin, whereof we have
nothing to exspect but shame and sorrow, and the necessity of holiness, all its
paths ending in peace, and without which we shall never see God in happiness.
And how much the same contributes, to promote these gradually also in us, the
constant experience of all Gods people abundantly witness.

5 That all may learn experimentally many particular and necessary lessons they
formerly disregarded. The light of nature shows us sundry of them, and the
light of scripture more clearly all of them; but unbelief doubts of them,
sensuality constantly opposes them, and as men asleep we generally neglect
them. God is therefore pleased to use unexspected providence, which draw the
curtain, and let in the light so convincingly and sensibly upon us, that
without wilful shutting our eyes we cannot withstand it: that so his truth being
taught and backed by our own experience, may be more readily embraced and
obeyed. For experience is a more sensible argument than notions to convince us
of the truth, and less liable to ignorance and mistake for confirming us in it,
and more particular and prevalent with us to practice it. Let me therefore name
some of those excellent lessons which still hang on this one bough suddenly
broken off from us. As 1 the vanity and frailty of life. Such a death cries to
us with the word, all flesh is grass, and all the goodlines thereof is as the
flower of the field: the wind passes but over it, and it is gone; and the
place thereof shall know it no more. Is. 40.6. Ps 103.16. 2 The nearnes of
death and judgment. If thou willst put these far from thee, this summons will
convince thee of thy folly, that this night thy soul may be required of thee
Luke 12.19, 20. 3 The necessity of being prepared for thy dissolution. For the
night of death comes whether thou thinks of it or no, when no man can work;
there being no knowledge nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go; no casting
up thy accounts in the dark, nor perfecting them with God in the grave. Joh.
9.4. Eccles. 9.10. 4 The danger of deferring thy preparation. For in an hour
thou thinks not of, may Christ call thee to give an account of thy stewardship,
for thou shall be no longer steward. Math. 24. Luke 16. v. 2. 5 The pretiousnes
of time to prepare for eternity. For time is short, and were it longer little
enough for so great a work, and also uncertain, as thou see: and therefore
not to be lavisht out upon thy lusts, seeing thine eternal welfare depends upon
it. 1 Cor. 7.29. 6 The vain hopes of living many years. Since thou know not
what a day may bring forth, no more than what a woman with child, whether male
or female living, or dead as it is this day, Prove. 27.1. 7 The groundles
presumtion of a lingering death, when thou see some in a moment go down to the
grave, and many die in their full strength. Job. 21. 13, 23. 8 How quickly the
greatest hopes are dashed and expectations disappointed. Here Is a child com to
the birth, and no streugth to bring forth, but mother and child die together:
there is a strong man says with Agag surely the bitterness of death is past, and
the next hour it returns and carries him away, 1 Samuel 15. 9 Moderation toward
the things of this life. For the Lord is at hand, ready to call thee quickly
from thy good things, who makes them thy portion, and then whose shall they be?
and where will thou be? and to take thee, who makes him thy happiness, from the
evils of this life, that they no more shall torment thee. Philip, 4.5. 10 The
different nature of earthly enjoyments and heavenly. Earthly promise much and
in the trial fail our exspectations: But heavenly we find best upon trial, and
such as will never fail us nor forsake us Heb. 13.5. And lastly, the vast
difference between our present and future: state. Here we meet and part
presently; there we meet and never part, here is nothing but changes, there is
none but a stable eternity. 1 These. 4.17.


These Reasons I hope may suffice for the several sorts of sudden death
mentioned on this occasion, to justify God's proceedings therein; and to show
us the gracious design of these kind of providence, that seem of all others
most dismal to us; none so much as these conducing to the general good of
mankind, as tending to awaken us out of our security, cure us of our spiritual
distempers, and point out to us and quicken us to our duty. Let us see to it,
that we make use of them accordingly: and what further improvement may be made
of the present providence we shall now speak to by way of inference and
application.

Use 1. Hence learn the uncertain tenure, or manner of holding our nearest
Relations, and dearest friends and acquaintance. That seeing them liable
continually to be lost, we may be more sensible our enjoying them is but of
mere curtesy, and that we are but tenants at will for them, and all our other
earthly comforts to God the great Lord of all: having by our sinful apostasy
lost our right and title to the enjoyment of them, which he gave us at first by
the covenant of works in our creation. For had we continued in our original
state of integrity, there would have been none of this sorrowful parting of
friends; but we should either have continued happy together on earth, or
without suffering death have been, as S. Anstin and others think, after some
certain time translated into heaven; and whether all together at last, or
successively at such a term of years, it would have been matter of triumphant
rejoicing to all. But now having by sin forfeited and lost all our mercies, God
has been graciously pleased in the covenant of grace to alter his
dispensation; not to trust us bank-rupts with a new stock in our own hands, but
to commit all to Christ, in whom he has treasurd up spiritual life for his
people; so that that is now in safe keeping, being hid with Christ in God,
Colos. 3.3. And this he has assured us of by promise, upon our fulfilling the
condition of the covenant: but has reserved temporal life and the comforts
thereof in his sovereign pleasure, to give, continue, or take away ^^^n and in
what manner he pleases; that we might entirely depend upon him for all. So that
if he will any day write a Jacob wiveles, a Job childles, a David friendles, a
Jeremiah comfortles; there is no reason to gainsay it, no cause to complain or
murmur at it, much less to implead him for it; seeing he takes but his own that
he had only lent us for a time, never given or granted us absolutely to enjoy.
Is it any injury then when the time is expired to require his own? Does he make
the matrimonial bond natural that husband and wife should die together? Has he
tied children to their parents feet, or fastend them to their houses, as their
pictures not to be parted withal or removed? If he lets us have our Relations a
while here, and then takes them into the gallery of heaven; is it any detriment
to them or us? Are they not so better cared for and bestowed, than they can be
by us, what ever we think, and how much soever discontented? Thou will be ready
to say, But why so soon? Why so unexspectedly? Has not godliness the promise of
this life, as well as that to come? And obedient children of their days being
prolonged? Very true, godliness both interests us in God the giver, and in all
the promises for every good gift; but for this life and all other temporal
mercies only conditionally, so far forth as is good for us; So God will not
only givo grace and glory, but will withhold no good thing from them that walk
uprightly Ps. 84.11, But what and how must we account good things? Spiritual
good things indeed are absolutely good in themselves, and for all, and allways;
but temporal, tho good in themselves, yet neither for all nor allways; but
relatively only in reference to the persons, for that which is good for some
is hurtful for others, as one man's meat we say is another's poison, and in
subordiuation to greater good, as this life in relation to eternal. Now who is
fittest to judge what is best for us and when? The Father or the child? the
physician or the patient? the all-wise God or foolish man? We sind what we
thought worse proves for the better to us frequently; and God's time fitter
then our own, tho hardly persuaded thereof at present: so that referring our
selves to him, our uncertainty is our greatest safety; and the condition annexed
to temporal blessings so far from a diminution, that it is an inhancing and
confirmation of their promises. For thereby we are assured, that God will
neither give his children any thing to their real prejudice, nor take ^way any
thing that was the best for them: that if he deprives them of temporals it is
for their spiritual good, and all the crosses that befall them are better for
them than the things they desire. All which not only recommend godliness even in
regard of the things of this life: but are the greatest stay and security we
can possibly have, to support us under all the variety of changes, that befall
us in this evil world.

2 This serves to weane our hearts from being immoderatly set on any of our
Relations or creature comforts. Which is the Apostle's inference 1 Cor. 7.29,
30, 31. Brethren, the time is short, it remains, both that they that have
wives be as though they had none: and they that weep, as though they wept not:
and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not: and they that use this
world as not abusing it: for the fashion of this world passes away. Our
forefathers are past away before us; the marriage knot loosens daily, and is
either cut asunder by a violent, or untyed by a natural death at last; Brethren
and sisters and a friend sometimes dearer than a brother part, and are no more
seen in the flesh; our children that are our selves only wrapped up in other
skins, in whose life ours are ofren bound up, are frequently snatched out of our
arms, and if they crowd us out of the world quickly follow us to our long home.
That as Xerxes beholding his great army wept to think, they should all of them
shortly be laid in the dust: so may we over our living Relations as well as
dead, considering we are liable continually to lose them. Let this then make us
sit looser from them, and take off our hearts.

1 From our inordinate affection to them. It is our wisdom to set our hearts
upon nothing, but that which is above the reach of dainger and disappointment:
and to love nothing much, but what we cannot love excessively. As God that will
be our portion for ever, when all these and our own lives fail us: and Christ
our Savior that will make us happy with himself in heaven. If any steal away
our hearts from them, and perk up in their place in our thoughts and
affections; its mercy that breaks down such idols and grinds them to powder, or
turns such comforts into crosses as would carry it in the competition with the
blessed God and our dear Savior. We are so bewitched with these sensible
enjoyments, and are so taken up with them; that even good Jacobs have need of
imbittering circumstances to wean them from their Rachels and Joseph's; and holy
David's from their Michals and Absolons, and all from their over-loved Relations
and creature comforts. How immoderately for the most part do we desire them!
How eagerly do we pursue them! How ardently do we love them! How highly do
we value them! How excessively do we delight in them! How anxiously do we
keep them! How passionate are we when crossed in them! How fearful are we of
losing them! How loath are we to part with them! How perplexed when we have lost
them! And yet all these inordinacies must be cured in us or we cannot be
Christ's disciples. Math. 10. v. 37. Luke 14.26. Which ordinary medicines will
not do, these distempers are so strongly rooted in us; and therefore the wise
Physician of souls is pleased often mercifully to use such severities as are
necessary to imbitter our earthly comforts and endear himself and our Savior to
us. Who that duly considers how little God's commands, the promises of heaven,
the threatenings of hell, Christ's calls, and his Ministers pleadings prevail
with men to love him more than father or mother, wife or child as the Gospel
requires; but must acknowledge the usefulnes of these warnings to us for that
end, and the necessity of God's sharpest rods for Physic as well as his word
for food for our souls, and consequently the reason why it is the portion of
his people to suffer affliction rather than the rest of the generality of the
world.

Secondly From placing our happiness in them. Man in innocence had a mind to
know, a will to choose, and affections to delight in God as his happiness: but
since sin has broke down his image in us, such is the wretchedness of our
hearts, that usually the better God is to us, the worse we are to him; and the
more enjoyment he gives us of earthly friends the more we forget our heavenly
father. When we want and desire husbands, wives, children, friends or any
earthly comforts that we cannot obtain, we seek God for them, and when he
threatens to take them from us, we cry to him to spare us them; but when we
enjoy these, even when he denies or takes them away from others, and have most
reason to eye and own him in them, depend upon him for them, and use them as
encouragements to serve him that gives and continues them to us; we are apt to
forget him, set these up in his room, make them our God, and take up with them
as our portion; so that he is then little regarded of the most, and less than he
ought by the best. When he therefore blows upon these blessings, it is to bring
us to set them in their due place, and keep them so in subordination to
himself, and make us mind him more for the future, and them less than formerly;
lest these streams of creature comforts that should lead us to him, should draw
us from him, and drown us in perdition, For now that reason through sin has
lost its soverainty over us, sense lying so near us usually sways us; and
brings the soul not only to comply with the necessities of our present state,
in these Relations for the comfort of this life (which is lawful, being God's
institution in innocence) but to such a condescension to the body, which only
skils sensual things, that for the most part men live a mere animal life
without God in the world, not like men capable of enjoying him, much less like
Christians. How happy were it then, that as by experience we learn the worth of
these things by the want of them, so we would also their worthlesnes in
comparison of him, who is our only happiness: thus should we gain more by our
parting with them than by our enjoying them, and com to make a happy exchange.
These providence duly considered, and rightly used would recall us back again
from the creature to God, awaken conscience and make every one turn preacher to
himself, that God may have the prevailing choice. Saying, I see husband or
wife, parents or children are soon gone, all of them but vanity, miserable
comforters are ye all. I said I shall die in my nest, my beloved yokefellow
shall comfort me, this son will be the staf of my old age, that friend will be
my support: but how quickly am I disappoynted of one, and may be of all these
perishing comforts! I still thought and hoped satisfaction would arise from
these things I had a mind to, liked and loved; but find my self continually
deceived. I will therefore seek it no more in these houses of clay, where it is
not to be found, but in the living God, in whose enjoyment it is only to be
had: and then I may hope, contentment with the portion of these he gives me,
will also dwell with me, which has been all along so great a stranger. How
have I foolishly forsaken the fountane of living waters of salvation, and been
hewing out to my self one broken cistern after another of creature comforts,
when I still found as fast as I made them, they will hold no water! I have too
long dabled in these nether springs that only feed the winter brooks, which dry
up on a sudden when I most want them: I will betake me to the upper springs of
grace, that flow continually, which can only quench the thirsty desires of my
soul. Lord, whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is none upon earth I
desire in comparison of thee; all these fail me, but thou will never fail me,
therefore I choose thee for my portion, who wilt be so for ever. Ps. 73.

And lastly from our dependence upon them for support and comfort. Man fallen
from God affects a self-sufficiency, and finding the shortness thereof in
himself, in stead of looking above, and returning to him, looks about him, and
cries who will show me any good; and fixing on such earthly blessings as he
either has or hopes for, rests on them; so that God is but a cipher, and his
blessings the figure with him, till he see his mistake. God indeed has the
name, and profession of our faith; but sad experience shows us, how ready our
hearts are to depart from him, and to make the creature our confidence; and if
our projects and exspectations fail us therein, to sit down in despondency, as
if there were no remedy. Even the best of men are apt to over-reckon themselves
in their hopes, over-act their reliance on creature comforts, and lean too
much on these sensible supports: till God lets them see what broken reeds they
rely upon, and upon what sandy foundations they build vast hopes, which with
the least puff of his displeasure fall to the ground. Then the hearts of
foolish Nabals die within them: and holy David's drawn to comfort themselves in
their God. Thus the Church forbidden to trust in a friend, or those most nearly
allied, and finding the disappoyntment of such adherence, resolves I will look
unto the Lord. Micah. 7.5, 6, 7. Thus the wife depending on her husband, when
he is taken from her, and she a desolate widow trusts in God, 1 Timothy 5.5. Thus
the child of whom we say as Lamech, this same shall comfort us, being taken
away, shows us our folly, in reckoning so long before hand, and on such
uncertainties. These providence as well as the word calls to us, and says,
Let not the wise man trust and glory in his wisdom, seeing unexspected events
daily confound the wisest; nor the strong man in his strength, which every
sickness or small accident destroys; nor the rich man in his riches, which on a
sudden take to themselves wings and fly away out of his reach; nor husband and
wife, parents and children, friends and acquaintance in one another, which die
and perish we see daily: but all in the living God at all times, who it the
only rock to be relied on, all these being unstable as water, the Father of
mercies, when all these become miseries, and the God of all comfort when these
can yield us none at all. Jer. 9.23. Ps. 62.8.2 Cor. 1.3.

3 This shows us the necessity of being allways ready for death, and prepared
for the death of ours, that we may not be surprised how suddenly soever either
shall happen. The double example this day before us, summons us to this duty:
seeing then we have lost the comfort of their lives, lets not lose this benefit
of their deaths. If the warnings of God's word has not awakend us, let these
alarms of his providence do it. All grant it necessary to provide for this
great change of time with eternity: and yet how woefully is it for the most part
neglected! Men are so taken up with this world, especially the healthful, and
those that wallow in pleasure and prosperity, that they have neither list nor
leisure to think seriously and prepare for the next. As if they were
privileged from the like stroke, and had a protection from death's arresting
them, or when it does could bride it off for some time, or make such a covenant
with hell, as will secure them. So great is the security and stupidity of most,
that they regard not these warnings, nor think themselves longer concernd, when
once the funerals are over. Therefore that we may make better use of them. 1
Suppose the like or worse may befall thee or thine, whilst secure sinners still
suppose the best. Not to disquiet thy self with groundles fears, but to
prepare for all events of providence: which are so never the nearer thee, but
thou much fitter for them; unexspected crosses of all others being the
hardliest born. Say then, what befalls others may befall me also, by this
supposition as a prospective bring thy own and thy friends death near thee,
think of it frequently, and converse with it familiarly, that so neither may
surprise thee. Exempt not thy self or thy Relations from that which frequently
befalls others. How many are the acute diseases that quickly snap man's life
asunder! How many the casualties and accidents whereby men of all ranks and
conditions have perished in all ages and places unexspectedly! Plin. l. 7. c.
53. de mortibus repentinis. Val. Max. l. 9. c. 12. Zuinger Theatrum. l. 18.
To reckon those recorded by authors, and known to our selves, would take up
our whole time. 2. Flatter not thy self, that thou and thine shall live long
and die leisurely. Oh the vain and deceitful hopes that most have of living
still on and on they know not how long! The younger that have death on their
backs think they must of course live to be aged; the old that have death before
their faces, and gray hairs not only here and there upon them, but all over
them, hope still of holding out; yea when sickness is entered, and death at the
door, we still hope that we or ours shall escape with life. I have seldom met
with one so old, that hoped not to rub aut some years longer; and never with
any, to whom their years past and to com did not seem of a different length.
Looking backwards on many years past, they count them but a short time, and
usually their work therein little; but looking forwards on a few before them,
reckon them long, and what a deal of work they shall do therein; so casily
do we deceive our selves in numbering our days and measuring our work, that
will not be deceived by others in any account that is of concernment. 3 Reckon
life by days not years, seeing none know what hour the son of man will com and
call for them. Thus the best and wisest of men reckoned their lives, as Jacob,
Moses, Job, David and Solomon. Genesis 47. v. 9. Ps. 90.14. Job 14.5. Ps. 39.5
Eceles. 8 15. This right numbering our days would make us apply our hearts to
wisdom; by improving our present time and opportunities in the day of grace,
cutting off our vain hopes of future uncertainties, and looking on every day as
a new gift of God for his work Lam. 3.23. If Horace a heathen could say, Omnem
creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum; much more should a Christian believe and
live every day as his last; because it may be so, and if it be not, it is more
than any one knows. Our Lord having wisely and mercisully conceald both the
time and place of our departure from us, that our lives might not be spent in
continual madness, of mirth and vanity in our former, and of fears and
melancholy in our later days; but might be restrained from sin, and quickened to
duty; not delaying our preparations for death, but living in a constant
exspectation thereof; nor presuming of future time not in our power, but
rightly improving our present, with our Apostle dying daily, and as a good man
said, that of twenty years he had known no morrow. This divine arithmetic of
numbering our days Moses and David begd of God, and much more need have we, to
make our hearts so sensible of our frailty from these examples, that we may get
ready to follow; and may not be only unwilling to live, as many through the
troubles of life, but willing to die, which grace only enables us to when
prepared. 4 Set these examples before thee so as they may affect thy heart, and
make it restles till they be duly improved by serious consideration. That when
others are destroyed from morning to evening, or every hour of the day, it may
not be without any regarding it. Job. 4.20. Say, how soon may this befall me or
mine! How uncertain is our time here, and how certain death and eternity
hereafter! How do I loyter whilst time flies, and my glass perhaps ending and
how little of that work don, which must be don, or I am lost for ever! Am I fit
to look death in the face, or a just and holy God in judgment? have I not
delayed long enough already, and is there not danger in these delays? Is my
soul and eternal salvation of so little consequence, that my heart should still
deceive me in disregarding them? Is it not wisdom to do that first that is of
greatest consequence and necessity? Is not all my time little enough, for so
great a work as preparing for eternity, and shall I lose more? Have so many of
God's servants that have taken so much pains so long time in Religion fasting,
weeping, praying, hearing etc. confessed themselves unready for death, what shall
I be that have don so little? How dismal will death be to me, if no better
prepared for it? Will Christ stay any more for me then he did for the foolish
virgins? was it not only they that were ready that entered in with him? Or will
he when once the door of mercy is shut, open it for me alone? No, no, I cannot
exspect it, and therefore will take his counsel, and watch not knowing the day
or hour wherein he comes. 5 Make sure to be habitually prepared at least for
death, by being reconciled to God through Christ. Acquaint therefore thy self
with him and be at peace: and take heed of living in that state, wherein thou
would be loath to die. See to the soundnes of thy repentance toward God, and
faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, and the sincerity of thy obedience; as ever
thou meanest to secure the better part thy soul, and thy future happiness in
eternity. And labor after assurance, that when this earthly house of thy
tabernacle is dissolved, thou have an house eternal in the heavens, as ever
thou desire to die comfortably, The want of this makes death so dismal, to
those that are sensible what it is to die. How many that live under the Gospel
and know no more than the heathen Adrian whither they shall go at their death,
is lamentable to consider. Get thy self also as much as possible actually
prepared, by keeping up thy assurance, evenning thy accounts daily with God,
walking with him as Enoch, having thy conversation in heaven whilst on earth,
and thy fellowship with the Father and his son Jesus Christ: so shall death
never surprise thee, or affright thee, much less hurt thee; changing only thy
place, not thy company, opening the door for thy entrance into life, and being
ever with the Lord; which then thou will find bejond all thy present faith and
hopes, infinitely better than being in this world. Lastly prepare also for thy
Relations leaving thee. Our seldom thinking of this before hand, makes it
difficult for us to bear. Be sensible of and thankful for God's giving and
continuing them to thee, seeing he denies them some, and takes them from others:
use them as his left hand blessings, but enjoy them not as thy portion: depend
on him for comfort from them, and resign them to him from whom thou receivedst
them: do thy duty toward them whilst thou have them, so shall thou have
comfort when thou losest them.

4 Let this caution us from rash censuring and judging of these kind of
providence: seeing in the text God's taking away unexpectedly a good Rachel
from Jacob one of his best servants. 1 Not the just and holy God for them: In
denying him and his providence with the Atheists, Who seeing often the vilest
of men spared, as Diagoras did a perjured person; and better taken away, as
Cotta his friend Drusus, and Ovid his Tibullus, open their mouths against
heaven, in denying a God and his providence in the world. Or 2 in judging him
unjust and cruel. For he delights not in death as it is the destruction of his
creature, but as it is the exercising of judgment and righteousness in the
earth. Jer. 9.24. His works are wondrous, that though a wise man as Solomon
think to know them, yet shall he not be able Eccles. 8.17. The most inquisitive
run but into a labarynth, wherein they lose themseves at last. For how can we
possibly be able to judge of his proceedings, who are wholly ignorant of the
grounds of them? It is God only that knows men's intentions, and his own designs
that he has to accomplish, and all the links in the chain of providence: so
that where he manifests not these, we are in the dark, and incompetent judges.
Our profoundly learned Contry-man Bradwardine De Causa Dei. L. 1.0.31.
has a remarhable story to this purpose, of a devout man tempted to blaspheme
providence, to whom God sent an angel in humane shape, that commanded him to
follow him. And leads him to the house of a good man, who entertaind them very
kindly that night: from whom he secretly took a cup he valewed highly; and
going thence to a wicked man's house the second night, who treated them not so
well, gives him the cup at their departure. Having been the third night most
courteously entertaind, in the morning he threw the man's servant off a bridge
and drowns him; and coming the fourth night to an honest man that made them
heartily welcome, slew his little son that cried, and sufferd them not to sleep.
Then he acquaints his follower why he did these so strange things, saying he
was sent of God to satisfy him. I took the cup (says he) from the first a good
man for his good, because he loved it too much: and gave it the second a bad
man, that he might receive his reward at present: I drowned the servant of the
third because he had resolved the next day to slay his master, whom I preserved
from death, and his servant from committing murder, that he might be less
punished in hell: The fourth before he had a son and heir was very charitable,
and after grew penurious, therefore I took away the cause of his covetousnes,
and conveyed his sons soul to paradise So true is that of the Psalmist Thy
righteousness is like the great mountains; thy judgments are a great deep. Thy
foot steps are not known, and therefore cannot be traced by us poor ignorant
mortals Ps. 36.6. and 77.19. Nor 3 must we judge, when we see the righteous and
wicked taken alike away, that God's Providence goes blindfold to work (as the
Heathen think the fates do) and sweeps away one and another hand over head:
for so we shall neither eye God in, nor make a right use of his dealings with
us. We cannot indeed make or discern the difference, as to us sickness and sword
devours one as well as another: but this is fallacia sensus, both scripture and
reason teaches us, that there is a very particular direction in all that
befalls us from the hand of God. Every disease that happens, every bullet that
flies, every wave of the sea, and every casualty have their commission from
God, before they can touch or destroy any. If a sparrow falls not on the ground
without him, much less a man's life: and if the very hairs of our head are all
numbered, much more our days are so and determined, Math. 10.29, 30. Job. 7.1.
and 14.5, 14. Prove. 16.33. Nor lastly must we imagine. that righteousness will
exempt us from sudden destruction in common calamities with the wicked. As
Abraham seems to judge in his pleading for Sodom, Genesis 18.23, 24, 25. For tho
God will rather spare the wicked for the righteous sake, as he there declares;
and in extraordinary cases where he has past his particular promise does so,
as God gave Paul all that sailed with him Acts. 27. and makes a distinction, as
Ezekiel 9.4, 5, 6. Mal. 3.17, 18 yet in ordinary it is not so, but the green and
dry tree, denoting as it follows, the righteous and the wicked perish together
Ezekiel, 20.47. and 21.3. And no wonder, for usally the good are infected with, or
one way or other guilty of the sins of the times and places where they live,
and if they partake in sins its reasonable they also partake in plagues. Rev.
18.4. Or if not, yet being mixed with the wicked, in an ordinary way it cannot
be otherwise, as experience shows us in wars, famine, pestilence, inundations,
shipwracks and the like. Especially earth quakes, wherein many cities have been
wholly swallowed up, and many with the inhabitants in a great patt destroyed,
the histories whereof would fill a volum. Passing those of old, 12 cities of
Asia say Pliny and Tacitus, 13 says Ensebius in our Saviors days in one
night: Coloss, Laodicea, and Hierapolis in the year 63.3 in Cyprus in 77.4 in
Asia and 2. in Greece in 105.3 in Galatia in 109. Antioch, Nicomedia, and Nice
several times. Nicopolis and Caesarea in 128. Smyrna also and Corinth
afterward and 10 in Crete in one year, so 20 in Germany in later times
(besides many others, these being sufficent for my purpose) in most of which
multitudes of Christians as well as others perished. And as God takes them away
as he sees good (Ezeh. 16.50) so when some are extraordinarily delivered, that
is also ascribed to his sovereignty, and befalls the wicked as well as the
righteous, as scripture shows us. I have overthrown some of you, as God
overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah and ye were as a firebrand plucked out of the
burning, yet have ye not returned unto me says the Lord. Amos. 4.11. So that
the experience of all ages verisies Salomon's words, which ate interpretative
not exclusive of providence; and shows how things go ordinarily under its
conduct, when he says all things come alike to all, there is one event to the
righteous and to the wick^d, Eccles. 9.2. The same manner of afflictions and
death materially befalling the one as the other. By which unseeming providence
God secures his people from the rage and malice of Satan and wicked men in
this world, which would not be habitable for saints, if they were certainly
known; and keeps off the scandal of Religion, none knowing who are sincere or
only hypocritical; and men's coming to him for base ends, whereby we should have
more professors but worse Christians. It being sufficient for his people's
security, that he knows them perfectly, and makes a difference between them and
the wicked of the world, in the same providence where we can make none; in his
fatherly affection to them therein, in his intention direction and ordering
thereof for their good, and in his issuing all in their eternal salvation. 2 As
we must not judge amiss of God's proceedings, so neither must we rashly judge of
those so taken away. Either of the cause (like the Barbarians that judged the
Aposte Paul a murderer from the viper fastening on his hand, thinking he would
fall down dead suddenly) of which I have spoken in the reasons: or of their
eternal state and condition. For if the life be good, no manner of death is
bad: and if the life be bad the death is seldom good: no evil of punishment but
only of sin abates God's fatherly affection to his children, but rather
increases it; or any way lessens their interest in his favor: witness Abel and
all the Prophets to Zacharias slain between the Temple and altar, Stephen and
all the Apostles and Martyrs, and best of men in all ages. I know but one place
of scripture that looks like judging men's eternal state by temporal judgments,
and that is of Sodom and Gomorrah and the cities about them suffering the
vengeance of eternal fire, Jude. 7. Which yet is not meant of the next world in
hell (tho being the worst we read of, and not ten righteous amongst them are
damned most of them, as Christ that knew intimates, when he says Math. 11. it
shall be more tolerable for them than Corazin at the day of judgment, the
degree implying the kind) but only the duration of the judgment in this world,
and as an emblem of the day of judgment when God shall bring a diluviam ignis as
Irenaus calls it, or rain hell out of heaven upon the world that now is, and of
the punishment of the wicked, as the Psalmist alluding thereto tells us this
shall be the portion of their cup Ps. 11.6. Learn we then to go no further
than scripture, that speaks sparingly of men's eternal state, and never that I
know of concludes damnation from God's punishments here, but allways from men's
sins unrepented of: and let us make no conclusions upon such false grounds, nor
presume to ascend Christ's tribunal in condemning any to eternal punishments.
Pererius and others are too bold in asserting all the old world that were
drowned except infants were damned. For not to mention their number, that world
in all probability being as populous as the present, and granting the
generality were, even of the sons of God that had corrupted their ways; yet
scripture speaking only indefinitly, it is not for us to make it universal that
all had, or that nome repented upon the flood's approaching, allbeit God only
established covenant with Noah and his family, as afterward with Abraham and
his, as the best in their generations. Nor lastly must we censure the Relations
of any suddenly taken away, as if it were for some extraordinary sins that God
so deals with them. Which was the fault of Job's three friends. For the devil
whom God ordinarily restrains of his will more than wicked men (in regard of
his great malice and power, and his being in termino or condemnd, tho not fully
executed; whereas men are here only in via or probationers in reference to
their future judgment) having accused Job falsely, and being by God
extraordinarily permitted his pleasure on all he has, for the trial and
exercise of this noble champion: begins with his estate, knowing Job would have
valewed that less if he had before lost his children; then destroys them also
suddenly, sparing the wife that was in his power, who it should seem was none
of the best, for his second in this combat. And his friends knowing these
things and seeing his bodily sufferings also to be very great (alltho the loss
of his children seems his greatest outward affliction, his personal being
greater in his inward troubles of spirit than bodily, for tho he was greivously
sore and pained, yet not heart-sick or in dainger of death) they in stead of
comforting him, add affliction to the afflicted, censure him as unrighteous,
and think to prove him so by this argument, That he that is sorely afflicted of
God is either an open sinner or secret hypocrite: this Job denies, and disputes
it with them, and Elihu moderates, determining God's favor and afflictions to
be consistent; which God confirms, and shows his displeasure against the
others. Let this example of these good men's censoriousnes, keep us from
playing the Critics in such cases, and to judge nothing before the time either
of God or men rashly, lest he deal with us after our folly: but stay till this
dust that blinds us be blown out of our eyes, and then shall we see clearly the
reason of all, at the day of the revelation of the righteous judgment of God.
Romans 2.5.

5 For Application to those especially concernd in the loss of their dear
Relations, that they bear it Christianly. I need say the less of this, because
many have said so much; tho the practice of most is not answerable, and
especially those that are surprised. For the suddennes thereof discomposes our
minds, makes us inconsiderate, and laying aside the rule both of scripture and
reason comply with present sense: quarelling with God, as Jonah for the loss of
his guord, or any thing next us as the cause thereof, as Job's wife with her
husbands religion, and the good widow with Elijah for the sudden death of her
son, 1 Kings 17. Briefly therefore. 1 Eye God as the author and orderer of all
that befalls us. His soverainty, power, goodness, justice, wisdom etc. in the
kind, manner, measure, time and issue of afflictions. David was dumb in
silence, opened not his mouth in murmuring or complaining, because God did it.
Ps. 39.9. Peter looks only at Christ's enemies, and quarrels, Christ at God and
submits to death: the cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it,
J^b. 18.11. If Epictetus could say, I have yielded my desires to God; how much
more should we that are Christians 2 Be sensible of thy sins, and deserts for
them: so wilst thou more willingly accept, and better bear the punishment of
them. Wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his
sins? Lam. 3.39. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned
against him, says the Church Micah. 7.9. Those complain most that least know
themselves and their sins. 3 Compare our sufferings several ways, and we shall
see small reason for impatience under them of what kind soever they be. As 1
with our sins. The Church complaind, there was no sorrow like hers, yet after
acknowledges it is of the Lord's mercies, that we are not consumed, and thou
our God have punished us less than our iniquities deserve. Which is true of the
greatest punishments on this side hell. For if we had our desert, in stead of
weeping here for wives, or children, and as Rachel will not be comforted
because they are not; we might be howling there in despair, in a state for
ever uncable of the least comfort. 2 With our enjoyments. Many mercies for one
affliction: many spiritual mercies, for one temporal affliction. 3 With the
suffering of others. What are any of ours to Job's, and many of God's best
servants; whom he often strips not of one only, but of most or all their
earthly comforts at once. If all men or especially God's people should bring
their miseries together, and lay them in a common heap, none of us should have
our share by much. 4 With the good we may gather by them. As to fins, for the
discovering them to us; and making us search and try our ways and turn again
to the Lord. For the curing them in us: as security, pride, hypocrisy,
worldlines, doting on creature comforts, unprofitablnes under the means of
grace, etc. And for the preventing sin from us: Which otherwise we should he
apt to fall into, if God did not hedge up our way with these thorns So in
reference to graces. Afflictions being as fire to refine and purify them: and
make for the exercising, improving and quickening of them: as our faith, hope,
love, zeal, patience, experience, humility, heavenly-mindednes, prayer etc.
And in regard of more communion with God here, and more glory in heaven
hereafter. The loss of friends is abundantly made up in more enjoyment of God:
which his people experience frequently, who never enjoy him so much, as when
they enjoy the creature least, May not Christ say, am I not better then all
these? These all die away, but God and Christ remain the same. A good woman
when her friends died, would often say; well, however my God lives: at length
her husband dying she lamented bitterly, that her child asked her, Mother is
your God dead? at which she took up, blaming her self for her impatience. And
the Apostle declares, That our light affliction which is but for a moment
works for us (not meritoriously, but occasionally and instrumentally when
sanctified) a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. 2 Cor. 4.17. 4
Let faith and patience have their perfect work in you. Faith in God through
Christ and the promises for a holy use, and blessed effect of these sad
providence: it being He that teaches you to profit by them, making you
partakers of his holiness, and them to yield the peaceable fruit of
righteousness. Patience to bear them aright, in a holy submission and compliance
with Gods will, in the greatest crosnes of events, when you have rekond
comforts, and are arrested with sorrows. If the virtue of patience be as.
Seneca faith, a salve for all soars, much more the grace: which tho it make not
miseries none, yet keeps us from being miserable by them. In our duty it is
good to do that of choice, we must do of necessity. Quarrel not therefore with
God; for this is but like the wild and ignorant Indians, that shoot their
arrows at the sun, when it scorches them, which fall back upon their own heads.
Nor repine at his dealings; for this will but double the affliction, not remedy
it. Say not, I could bear any cross but this. For you do but deceive your
self in this plea for your impatience, being most sensible of the present,
having forgot former, and not knowing or much regarding future; as we are
allways most sensible of the present weather. And were it so as you think, it
is not for you to choose your own crosses, no more than your comforts. Check
your selves, and indulge not impatience; which discomposes and unfits you for
your duty both toward God and men; as we see in Jonah, whose prayers in that
temper are nothing but quarrelling with God. Be not so sinfully selfish as to
wish them so much to their loss as to be with you again: who have finished
their course, past the fears and pangs of death, left this troublesome world,
and got rid of their sins and Satan's temptations, and crowned with
righteousness in eternal life. Envy not the early happiness of thy wife, that is
gone to a better husband; nor of thy child that is gone to his heavenly Father:
But prepare thou to follow; and be with Christ and them in heaven, where there
will be no more parting. Now that God by the clouds gathering so thick and
black about us threatens us with a dreadful storm, we have reason to count them
more than ordinary blessed and happy, that are got safe home to their father's
house, and those heavenly mansions, out of the reach of men or devils. God's
smoking us out of these houses of clay, by these particular providence also,
may and justly should make our eyes water; but not be filld with tears, or our
hearts with sorrows too much, either in degree or duration for those gone before
us; who might say to us as Christ to the daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for
us but for your selves and your children, that are left behind in the days a
coming in a troublesome world.

And that none should sorrow for this our sister, as others which have no hope,
I might show more largely, if I had known her longer. Who tho taken from us in
an hour we thought not, yet we have reason to believe neither unthought of nor
unprepared for by her: not only in regard of the hazardous condition she knew
she was to pass through, but the tenure of her life, which was virtuous and
unblamable, her conversation having been answerable to her pious education. The
certainty of death and uncertainty of the time is not more commonly said, than
abused by the most; who in stead of being allways ready because they know not
the time, are less ready at all times; but the godly wise have not so learned
Christ, who have been taught by him to watch, because they know not what hour
he will come. To speak of that good in her, which she held in common with all
other Christians, is needles. In these loose and declining times she kept her
integrity: and was at more than ordinary pains, for the enjoyment of the
public ordinances, both in season and out of season, as God afforded
opportunity. How should her early rising to them, shame most of us for our
sloth, if we had any shame in us. She redeemed the time in these evil days for
her private devotion, not vainly spending it in pleasure, as too many do, but
improving it for eternity, making God's word her companion and counselor. Her
converse and carriage was modest and prudent; guiding both her tongue, and
affairs with discretion. Never speaking evil of any, or censoriously judging of
others; as the unbridled and licentious tongues of many that run at random; who
fear not to speak evil of dignities, and spare not uncharitably to censure
all, and often better than themselves, because they are not of their way. In
brief, she was a Mary in God's house as well as a Martha in her own. Finally
for her eternal salvation she was nether presumtuously confident, as the
ignorant; nor fearfully diffident, as the unbelievers: but in a way of duty
reposed her soul on Gods mercy, and the merits of her Savior, being wont to
say, the feared death, but not to be dead. Who seemed to be heard in that she
feared, God removing death as it were out of her sight, by those apoplectical
or convulsive fits that seized on her and made her senseles, whereby death
became less terrible to her at least, if it was any terror at all. And for a
Christian sensible of sin, and future judgment, and eternity, not to be
afraid to be dead, is to me an argument of more than ordinary faith in Christ:
and more than most of us I fear, if we were put to it, can truly say. For such
a one as Epicharmus whom Tully L. 1. Tuscul. Quaest. Emori nolo, sed me esse
mortuum nihil aestimo. q. d. mortem horreo, idque natura, verum ubi fuero
mortuus, nihil amplius faciam, quia nullus ero. Pagnini Scholia.
mentions, who neither believes the immortality of the soul or a future state,
to say so, is no wonder; but for a Christian that believes both; is rare. Let Us
then comfort our selves, that she sleeps sweetly in Jesus; and get ready, that
at what hour soever he shall call for us, we may not have our work to do, and
both fear death and to be dead; but may be fitted to give up our accounts with
comfort, and be ever with the Lord.

FINIS.

