THE PROTESTANTS Wonderment, OR, A strange and unheard of Oraison put up by the
Papists, found in the pocket of Captain James Rauley, a Rebel in Ireland:

Sent from Dublin, in a Letter of Note by Captain Edmond Hippisley, to Sir John
Hippisley Knight, a Member of the House of Commons.

LONDON, Printed for John Frank, and are to be sold at his shop next door to
the Kings head in Fleetstreet, 1642.

Sir,
THe Lord of Antrim is not in the Rebellion as yet, but is much mistrusted, he
will be by reason he is now gone to the County of Kildare, where at the first
this business was begun: the Rebels would willingly come in: if they could but
once hear of a Proclamation, that they should have the liberty of their
Conscience, for some such thing they much expect, if they be not mistaken of
their aim.

Sir, this Prayer I took out of a Rebels pocket that I killed, one James
Rauley, a Captain of the Rebels, who cried for quarter, when I had sheathed my
sword in his bowels, fearing that I should be too troublesome. I rest now what
I always was, Sir, your most obedient and most affectionate servant till death.

From Dublin this tenth of February, 1641.
THis Oraison was found on the Tomb of our blessed Lady, and is of such effect,
that whosoever will have the same, or say it daily, or carry it about him,
shall be safe from fire, water, and skirmish of battle, and also from noisome
hanting of spirits. Moreover, whosoever shall say a Pater, Ave, and Creed,
daily to the honor of holy and miraculous Virgin Mary, she will visably show
her self unto him three times before his death.

O Most sweet Lord Jesus Christ, only Son of the omnipotent Father, God of
Angels, and only Son of the most gracious Virgin Mary, help me a sinner, and
save me from all present dangers wherein I am. Most excellent and blessed
Virgin to be praised, to pray and intercesse for me a miserable sinner to thy
welbeloved Son. O chaste and honorable woman, thou art the Mother of Angels and
Archangels, help me from all present evils, and all to come. O flower of
Patriarks. O shining brightness of the Apostles, O hope of glory. O beauty of
Virgins. O high thoughts of Angels and Archangels. O most sweet woman, I most
humbly beseech thee not to forsake me at the trembling time of my death, when
my soul shall be separated from my body, whereby I may see my self in
overlasting glory by him. O flower and sweetest foundation of all sweetness. O
star of Christ. O haven of health. O Queen of penitent offenders, hope of the
faithful Archangels, thou whose conversation is the only recreation of the
Angels and Archangels. O most honorable Lady of all sweetness and fortitude,
thou art the most wholesom'st medicine of all sores. Thou are the labor of all
virtues, through thee do ever Angels and Archangels rejoice. O Mother of mercy
look on me with thine own merciful eyes. And I commit me to thy most blessed
arms, to inspire my soul and body, and my thoughts, so thus it pleases thee
and thine own beloved Son Jesus Christ.

Pater, Ave, and Creed.
MOst glorious Virgin, let thy flowing grace defend me from the danger of each
place, grant that thy merits once may make me rise from Tomb, above the
spangled Crystal Sky, grant to my Country, I may so well end, that I may
praise thee eternally.

AMEN.
I found this in the pocket of a Captain of the Rebels, Captain James Rauley.

FINIS.

