A DEBATE ON THE Justice and Piety Of the Present CONSTITUTION: UNDER K.
William.

In Two Parts.
The First relating to the State, The Second to the Church.
BETWEEN Eucheres a CONFORMIST, AND Dysoheres a RECUSANT.

By Samuel Hill, Rector of Kilmington, Author of Solomon and Abiathar.

Psalm. 7.8. Judge me, O Lord, according to my Righteousness, and according to
mine Integrity, that is in me.

Inter utrumque tene.
Obsequium amicos, Veritas Odium Parit.
LONDON, Printed for John Everingham, at the Star in Ludgate Street, 1696.

Erudito Reverendo Sanctoque
Sacerdotum Collegio,
Diaecesews Bathoniensis and Wellensis
Clero florentissimo,
Post Patrum Primaevorum in causa fidei
Vindicias,
ab imbelli praevaricatorum nequitia
Usquequaque tutas adhuc, and inconcussas,
Vestro quinetiam pro Authore Suffragio publico
Invidiae adversus and obloquii tela
Munitas pariter, ac cohonestatas;
Amicas hasce denuo,
Ecclesiae pariter ac Patriae (...),
Pacisque sacrae conciliatrices,
Pro Justitia publica, and Pietate
Contra Seditionis, Schismatis, and Erastianismi
dmissi opprobrium,
admittendique periculum,
susceptas Apologias,
Integerrima fide,
Summo studio,
Conscientiaque quam maxim casta
Votivas dicat,
Perque gratas optat
Vester S. Hill. ERRATA.
PRef. p. 1. l. 17. for dismissed r. discussed. ibid. l. ult. r. appear or
seem. Boo^ p. 21. l. 14. r. Desertion p. 22. l. 5, 6. r. Desertion p. 42. l.
32. r. Anticyrae p. 43. l. 1. r. Prosecute p. 45. l. 27. r. IVs p. 57. l. 24.
r. Construction p. 63. l. 26. r. off p. 64. l. 7. for and r. an p. 65. l. 12.
dele an p. 71. l. 8. County p. 82. l. 29. r. there can be p. 83. l. 34. r. at
full p. 87. l. 25. for tho^ r. the oath p. 91. l. 15. r. title ibid. l. 31. r.
to surmise p. 95. l. 71. r. to shi^ for p. 96. l. 33. r. the moral p. 104. l.
8. r. if we admit p. 105. l. 8. r. say p. 10^. l. 12. for of Constitions r. of
Constitution p. 110. l. 23. r. it had not been p. 15^. l. 21, 22. for excession
r. excision p. 156. l. 35. r. invert p. 163. l. 27. for fr^ r. for p. 165. l.
4. r. takes it in p. 165. l. 31. r. mart p. 168. l. 9. r. P^ p. 170. l. 27. r.
imprudently p. 172. l. 3. r. I never look ibid. l. 27. r. Possess^ p. 185. l.
9. for sending r. sounding p. 162. l. 8. r. Notion p. 162. l. 37^ comes into p.
163. l. 32. for using r. refusing p. 167 l. 23. r. presumed p. 17^ l. 17. r. on
evil p. 174. l. 10. r. a form p. 176. l. 10. r. was from p. 172 ^ 17. r. Office
p. 8. l. 31. for excuse r. execute p. 199. l. 12. dele which p. 20^ ult. r.
Frischmuth p. 205 l. 19. r. peculiarly p. 209. l. 27. r. another p. 210 ^ 8.
r. procedure p. 211. l. 30, 31. r. who thinks the Tenant for sworn for submit^
to the new Possessor p. 213. l. 30. r. all to the Secular, etc. p. 225. l. 6,
7. r. s^ any thing against him himself ibid. l. 32. r. in dubitable p. 230. l.
36. for Gase r. the Case p. 231. 32. for and r. am p. 233. l. 31. r. is it p.
235. l. ^ r. validly p. 137. l. 1. dele of p. 239. l. 18. r. Aerianism p. 248.
l. 12. ^ and r. an p. 242. l. 22. for if r. is p. 252. l. 30. after etc. dele
and p. 2^ l. 8. r. to do good p. 265. for but will r. that will ibid. l. 15. r.
Capacity to Ecch^ p. 97. l. 13. for might r. weight.

TO THE READER
I Here present thee with a Book, which either Destiny or Calumny will drag out
into the Public, whether I will, or no. The pretended University-man in his
Remarks upon my Defense of the Fathers, having descended to the humble Glory of
traducing it, and me, in his Postscript to Mr. Chiswell, by ill Characters and
false Histories, has enforced this involuntary Publication. The Character he
gives of it, is, that it is a Trifle, which he presumes of it of his own
Sagacity, without ever seeing it; that he is told by a good Hand, that it falls
on Mr. Dod -- ll's Principle with great Fury, and treats the Jacobites very
brutally; The Design herein is to preclude my Interest with the Jacobites, to
whom he says I am relapsed. His historical Account is, that it was written, and
sent up to a Bishop for Publication to divert a Storm expected on the
Vindication etc. by engaging my Lord of Canterbury, and all the Bishops against
my Adversary, that however finding the Trifle slighted, I earnestly desired
that Bishop that it might not be printed, that so if I could get it again into
my Hands, I might deny the Writing thereof to the Jacobites, as I begin to deny
the other. The Intention of this is to represent me to all the Powers as an
Apostate against the Government, Fool and Knave all over, that so I may have no
Countenance in it, but be abandoned by all Mankind.

Before therefore I offer my own true Account and Apology against this Slander,
it is easily observable, that his Passion has marred his Art of Detraction in
giving Marks of its apparent Falsehood. For what Clergyman can presume to put a
servile Office on a Bishop, or what Bishop can be imagined so unresenting as to
admit it, or after Admission to endure a Countermand from the vain Presumer?
Besides, if it were rejected as a Trifle, the Bishop cannot be supposed to
promote its Publication without Disgrace and Reproach, which none of them have
reason to incur for any of their Clergy, especially against the Sense of the
whole College Episcopal. And if so, then how could I earnestly desire the
Bishop that it might not be printed, when it had been before rejected to me as
a Trifle? He seems as vain also in hopong that that Bishop, would keep it from
me to refute my supposed denial thereof, as if a Trifle were worth a Bishop's
keeping, or, as if any Bishop can be so unjust as to detain from any Man what
has been for a while entrusted with him. I think this is rather an unhandsome
and rude Usage of that Prelate than of me, to whom I leave him to make
satisfaction.

The truth is, this Book was first written about Whitsuntide, Anno 93. before
the very Oral Discourse of Warminster it self, and while the Heat of its first
Conception (animated by the Advices of Learned Friends) lasted, was designed
then for the Press. But that Ardor being soon cooled, I designed to review it,
and procure a Friend by it (if I could) among the Fathers, not by its
Publication, but by private Oblation. Accordingly after some Deliberation, I
resolved not to present it any Bishop introduced into a deprived Diocese, lest
at the same time I should seem to flatter, and abuse him with a pretense of
bringing succor to their Cause, as if it needed any Advocateship, especially
such as mine. For truly they that write honestly for a public Constitution,
must not pretend a service to Authority, but the Benefit only of those that are
under it. So I resolved to seek a Patron among the other unconcerned Bishops,
with whom I could hope my Principles would find favor, and so adventured it
into the Hands of a Prelate, whose universal merits are superior to his
Character; by him it was recommended to my own Right Reverend Diocesan, and he
by Letters from London acquaints me with his desire of seeing it, and as my
Duty was to obey herein, I sent it him. Upon the reading of it, he greatly
inclined me to the Publication; yet withal forewarning me, that it would stir
up Adversaries, he would not press me against my own Judgment. During this
intercourse the other Book was in the Press, and almost finished, and as yet my
Diocesan knew nothing of it. Whereupon I Wrote to his Lordship, that I was
engaged for the Faith, for which I expected much trouble, and I knew not what
would become of me; but his Lordship not knowing any thing more particularly in
the matter, supposed my fears (as he reputed them) causeless. Upon which I
conceded to what his Lordship pleased to do, or have done. He thereupon puts it
under the judgment of other learned Men, and it being by them well liked,
designed (with some little variations offered me) that it should be Printed. In
the mean while the storm pursued me without any hopes or intermission, and it
was loudly given out that it was intended by the agreement of the Bishops, that
I should be suspended by my Bishop, and Prosecuted upon the ruining Statute,
except I would prevent it by Humiliation, etc. The good Offices of Friendship
that were really done me among several of my Lords the Bishops were concealed
from me, and so I expected nothing else but an Excommunication, or such a
Persecution for the Faith, as must have forced me from the present Communion,
Whereupon I had many causes to stop the Publication of this Book; for having
but bad Eyes to engage in long Studies, and against many Adversaries, and under
such prospects of Expulsion cut of this Church, I thought it not only imprudent
to draw on me more quarrels in the defense of a Communion from which I expected
ejection, but ridiculous also, which I am resolved no terrors, nor Persecutions
(by God's help) shall render me. But I must with Honor acknowledge, that all
this Authors incentives have not been able to whet my Metropolitan (nor any
others that I know of) to that Spirit of Persecution which this Postscript has
ascribed to him, so that I have no need of a Sanctuary among the Jacobites;
though I hereupon shall take occasion to let this Author know, that such as steer
by their private Interest in their choice of Parties, and are as ready to
change their Faith as their Allegiance, and dispose Men by the same Arts to
follow them in Ecclesiastical as well as Civil Turns, do make more Jacobites by
their Prevarications, and thereby become more injurious to the public Peace and
Powers by far than any the most important and importunate Remonstrants against
the Government.

I have but one thing more to add in a Apology for the Air and Structure of
this Book. I hope there is no Man (no not the raging T. B. nor the more raging
Postscriber) will be able henceforth to call the Style Brutal. I press indeed
the Arguments between the Parties and their principal Authors with the utmost
Vigor, as without any Incivility, so without any partiality to either side,
and this not only as a Disputant but as a Casuist, which ought to drive on all
considerations home through and through the Conscience. This Justice requires in a
Dialogue between Parties, where not only the reasons are to be stretched to the
utmost, but the Zeal of them also personated. In this T. B. pretended Solomon
and Abiathar to be defective and treacherous, which Accusation, though false and
causeless, yet has made me to carry on their Person here with much more
Acrimony against their Opponents than otherwise I should have done. This may
indeed displease the Learned Men concerned herein against them for ought I
know, but to convert the divided I thought it expedient to show my self
severely equal and indifferent in speaking for them in their own Spirit rather
than my own, and freely owning their Truths as well as ours. And if this does
not satisfy the great Men, whose Hypotheses are here necessarily dismissed, I
hope they will consider however, that I have a Right to defend my own
Principles in Solomon and Abiathar with as much strength and ardour as they
have asserted theirs. And they that have particularly and by name taxed that
Pamphlet, who were never touched by me for any of their Writings before, must
concede me a liberty to examine what they have said against it and it is
Principle. It is an unhappy Misfortune that two of the greatest Ornaments of
the Nation should herein run so widely to the Extremes, the one so far as to
overthrow the Right of the English Reformation, the other to the prostitution
of the Powers Hirarchical to Rapine and Violence, by laying Principles, which
yet both of them think necessary to the Churches Preservation. I have gone the
middle way between these admirable Men, (who are indeed above all the praises,
that I can give them) and since I find that a new Disputation will be moved
herein, I do most heartily beseech those two great Men calmly and heartily to
treat of their Principles and their Consequences in private first, and equally
endeavor to remove all Prejudices, and to quit whatsoever mistakes shall be
jointly discovered between them, and when that is done, show such an example of
mutual Charity and Self-denial, as may render them (if possible) more admirable
to the World than they already are, that so we may hasten with all possible
earnestness to an happy Union, or at least that the fairest grounds may be laid
for it. The Edition of this Book is indeed very uneasy to me, but since
necessity is laid upon me to publish it, and that as it was Written, I shall be
glad, if it may prevent a reen-flamed Controversy, which is threatened in Print
by a Learned Jacobite, or may offer any such notices as may contribute to their
exacter considerations. But for my own part I resolve never to appear in this
Controversy more, for as it may be easy for learned Men to refute and inform
me, so I can bear instruction not only with ease, but with gratitude also.
Whereupon I have nothing more to offer to all Authors of worth concerned, but
that they will not think themselves wronged till they have thoroughly discussed
the matters between us impartially, and if after that I shall appear to seem to
have done amiss, I do hereby proleptically beg their forgiveness, and upon the
discovery thereof will particularly retract it, and never run such an hazard
more God of his infinite mercy give us all a temper abstracted from all partial
interests and prejudices, and a sincere Charity and Equity, that may fit us for
a right understanding of the things that belong to our Peace, and Duty toward
God and Man. Amen.

To his very Passionate Adversary, T. B. HEALTH and PEACE.
SIR,
AS I gave you no provocation to such unhandsome reflections, with which you
have bespattered me, so it is the Opinion of wise and learned Men, that you are
to be neglected as incurably rude, and disingenuous. And I truly am so far of
their Opinion, that I ought not to answer you according to your Folly, lest I
become like unto you. But as little regard as is due to the Voice of the
Slanderer, the Cause of Truth, and the Consciences offended by involved
Prejudices, deserve a tender Deference and Care.

On which consideration I have thoroughly traversed all that seems pertinent in
your Letters, and some M. S. Reflections sent me (I suppose) from some other
Hand. And not only so; but I have examined some of the most exquisite
Discourses and Principles of your greatest Authors in this Controversy, as
well as those of your greatest Opponents; And I hope in all my Determinations,
between you and them, I have done impartial Justice; if not, I have exposed my
self unto public, just, and severe Correction.

Of all your criminal Imputations there is but one that seems to deserve any
notice, viz. that which taxes me for giving the Dialogists in Solomon and
Abiathar, those technical Names and Characters. Upon which your Complaint being
not only loud, but in some Degree specious, does indeed oblige me to account
herein. Nor shall I decline whatsoever is reasonable. whereupon I sincerely
protest, that I took the Names from the known Sense, each Party has of the
others Temper. For the Conformists to the present State, thinking the Recusants
thereof too hard and untractable, I from that Notion, name my Recufant
Dyscheres; And the Recusants thinking the others too easy and yielding, I from
that Apprehension call my Conformist Eucheres.

And Eucheres has the Character of a Conformist for conforming to the present
Constitution, and Dyscheres of a Recusant for refusing this particular
Conformity. And no Man of Sense can really imagine, that I had any worse
Intention, since no Man can think that I would expose the Deprived as
Fanatic's, and in the Person of Dyscheres, I introduce them making a professed
Renunciation of Popery in several Places, with which they are never charged by
my Conformist.

And now if there be any Grains of Candor and Human Tenderness left in you, can
you imagine that you used a proper Method to heal, or settle my distressed and
doubtful Spirit, who after several unanswered Letters written to some of the
greatest Doctors on both sides of the Division, and others of middle Temper,
was at last upon their neglect forced to turn a Public Supplicant to the
learned World for succor and satisfaction? If this be the way of handling
tender Consciences, if this be the Oil you pour into their Wounds, the good God
have more Mercy on the Patient, and put him under gentler Hands.

But if you had judged me an improper Object of your Humanity, yet a due
concern for the Reputation of your Cause should have influenced you unto more
Decency. For a good Cause needs no Supplies from a Scavenger's Cart, and ill
Language ever supplies and discovers Defect of Reason as well as of good
Nature, and never proselites a calm and thinking Man, but rather seals up the
Offended in their former Persuasions, and alienates mild Tempers from such
sower Communion: When you have well considered the following Debate, you will
have occasion for second Thoughts, to which in the Interim I leave you, and
subscribe,

Sir, Your Humble Servant.

The Ground of the First Part. THat whenever the Land is brought into a State
of Anarchy by any Confusions irremediable by the ordinary Rules of Law, through
the King's Incapacity to govern it, upon Departure, Oppression, or otherwise,
the Estates of this Nation may admit such a Form of Settlement for the time
being, as the Exigences of Affairs shall seem to require for the common
Preservation; and that such Settlement shall oblige the Conscience of the
Subject, till the old ordinary Rules can be fairly recovered. The Ground of the
Second Part. 1. THat though secular Laws for spiritual Censures cannot pass into
an Ecclesiastical Effect without the Consent, and Executive Concurrence of the
Church, yet the Conscience of the Church is bound to admit such Laws upon just,
and necessary Causes. 2. That Recusancy to civil Constitutions is a just Cause
of spiritual Censures, and of Laws requiring them.

A DEBATE ON THE JUSTICE AND PIETY Of the Present Constitution.
PART I. Concerning the Civil Change.
Dyscheres. BRother Eucheres, I am glad I have found you at home at this time
in which I have leisure to recei^^^ those kind Offices, which I could not admit
at (...) time of your first Invitation: And I have a^^^ another design in this
Visit; that we may Revi^^ and Reflect upon the matter of our last Conference
for though you seemed then, to pinch me somewhat hard; yet having since
imparted your Arguments to my Friends, and Consulted their Judgment upon them;
I find them not so Herculean as you fancy them, but very feeble and nerveles,
when undertaken by abler Masters.


Eucheres. You are doubly welcome on your double Errand; but have you examined
among you, the whole web, or only some shreds or fragments of that Discourse?


Dyscher. Though it be not worth my while to ransack it in every part of it,
yet I do not intend to omit any thing very considerable; and I will use my best
endeavor not to mistake your Sense, etc. T. B's. 2d. Let. p. 6.


Eucher. Be sure now be as good as your word; and withal take care not to
pervert, as well as not to mistake, my Sense; for otherwise, you will expose
both your Understanding and Integrity: and I am not yet so dull, but I may soon
discover you, how involved soever your Frauds may be: And now upon this
Premonition, I desire you to sit down, and enter upon the Debate.


Dyscher. When I told you nothing but truth, that the Present State is worse
than a Deluge of Popery, for that now the Daughter of Sion is become an Harlot,
the generailty of her Children, Apostate and Vn-churched, and that the Faith
and Communion is with the few, etc. You question, Whether Submission to the
Present Constitution. can be proved a Sin? As if breaking Lawful, and taking
Unlawful Oaths, withholding ones Right and giving it to another, the
overthrowing the constitution of the Kingdom, and violating the Laws of God,
were no Sin. Then you further say, That admit it to be a crying Sin; every such
Sin, does not unchurch single Persons or Societies: But yet however, you ought
to Repent, and not persevere in your Sin; since it is one of those Sins that
shuts out of the true Chuch of God: For if it were necessary, I could prove,
that its Principles destroy the Churches Fundamentals and Structure; if such
Principles which destroy all Morals, and all Faith and Truth among men, can be
said to do so; by which men may exclude themselves, as well as be thrown out by
others, without an Authentic Act of an Ecclesiastic Judic tory; and your
instance in the Roman Church is Insignificant, for we do not communicate with
it; but that of the Eastern Churches is still less to the purpose; for I am not
satisfied, that either they have condemned us, or we them, as Schismatics; and
Dr. Basier, was desired by some of the Greek Clergy, to Communicate and
Minister among them, neither did he refuse it. T. B.'s 2d. Let. p. 10, 11.


Eucher. But, Brother, it is not enough to call things by hard Names; but it is
necessary to show, wherein the iniquity consists, and by what Law. For
submission to a Civil Constitution after its settlement is no Perjury, Robbery,
Rebellion nor Impiety, if men contribute no antecedent Evil to the Change; and
it is this mere Submission which I undertook to defend, as being the only thing
that can be charged on the Ecclesiastic Body. And tho you pretend it
unnecessary, yet you can never carry your cause, that we are Self Excommunicate
upon the malignity of our Principles, except you prove it, and show that our
Maxims destroy all Morals, and all Faith and Truth among Men; since you load us
with such an heinous and general charge; and I know not to what purpose you
discoursed me last, or discourse me now, except it be to convince me of the
Reality, and Anathematizing guilt of our Sin in this Submission. Here then you
must to the Law, and to the Testimony, and make up a very exact proof in order
to Conviction; for Men are not to be harangued into condemnation, by mere
unproved and general clamor, but by very articulate evidence only, which
therefore I shall expect from you in the course of this Conference. In the mean
time, when I alleged, that we own the Roman and Greek Churches, to be
Churches, notwithstanding their far greater Pollutions and Confusions than can
be imagined in our present Ecclesiastical Change (that hence I might evince us
not to be Unchurched; i. e. cut off from being Members of the Church Catholic,
as not having been condemned out of it by any Ecclesiastical Sentence) it is
strange you should censure this instance for impertinent, upon these
pretensions, that we refuse the Roman, but admit the Greek Communion: for by
your favor, in order to Unchurching (which very intelligibly is the making us
no Church of Christ) you must have proved our Change more censurable, than all
the Pollutions of the Roman and Greek Churches. And since you accuse us as
Self-Excommunicate, and therefore incapable of your Communion, which yet you
deny not to the Greeks, as being with you no Schismatics, the instance of that
Churches. Corruptions was not less, but far more pertinent to our Cause; for if
their Corruptions are far greater than ours, and yet cut them not off from the
Right of Catholic Communion; I think we are as much entitled to that
Communion, who have far less and fewer Irregularities: So that except you can
prove our Change more Irregular than the State of the Greek Church, you cannot
out us of that Communion you assert to them. Here indeed you saw your self
pinched, and so shift off the matter with a piff, as if I would be shaken off
with an empty Scoff of Impertinence: No, no, I will sit a little closer on your
Skirts; and though I shall not exagitate, or upbraid all the known disorders in
that distressed Church; yet will I object to you the many Arbitrary Changes of
their Patriarchs, made by a Mohammedan Emperor, and admitted by them toties
quoties, whenever the Grand Seignior has a mind to ease their Purses of that
money, which the new Patriarch is to tax on the Church as the price of his
Advancement, without any other Provocation or Inducement whatsoever. Is not
this a greater corruption than any can be imagined in our Change? This you know
was what I intended, and yet you condemn not them as Schismatics; though here
are frequent Deprivations, and New Advancements admitted by the Greek Church to
the Will of an Infidel Prince, without any other crime of the Deposed, and only
for Monys sake?


Dyscher. I did indeed in our last Conference Sol. and Ab. p. 24, 29.
censure this Blemish in the Greek Church. But here I will give you the answer
of one of our most puissant Advocates concerning this disorder in the Greek
Church, with his Apology for the like frequent Depositions of the Jewis^
Highpriests. Christ. Commun. Part 2. cap. 3. p. 32.
In these alleged State-deprivations of the Jewish Highpriests, either of
Abiathar by Solomon, or after they came under Roman subjection, of the Chief
Priests by the Roman Procurators, there was only a Change of Persons, but
matters of Religion went on every thing the same, in Doctrines, Practices,
Prayers, Sacrifices and Services of the Temple, and the Synagogues; and when
these are not corrupted, Gods* faithful Ministers may yield their personal
claims to State-Deprivations, to secure Protection, and Civil Benefits to the
Church. This also clears the instance of the Submission of the Greeks on the
frequent Deprivations of their Patriarchs by the Turkish Governors. The
benefits of Incorporation, which they propose to secure thereby, are not the
most tempting, lying not so much in being privileged and beneficed by the
State, as in not being persecuted, but tolerated under it. And their submission
for keeping on this State-benefit, such as it is, is not without detriment to
the Church, (though their breaking with the State they fear would be more
detrimental) the Turks making their new Advancements for Money to be levied on
the Church by the new Patriarch, to the countenance and growth of great
Corruption, and to the bringing of the Church in debt. But as to the course of
Religious Ministrations, they are the same under both Patriarchs, in the same
Doctrines of Faith and Manners, Prayers and Public Offices. But now you know
with us here is a change in all these parts of our Religion, in teaching men to
swear falsely, to rob our King, Bishops and Priests, and to pray for Robbers and
Usurpers against the just and true Proprietors.


Eucher. But all this Charge of Alteration in Religion is downright Calumny,
incapable of any proof in any one particular. For we preach only Submission to
a Legal Change of Governors, and pray for them that are set over us by Legal
Rules of Constitution. Therefore though Governors, like the state of all things
temporal, are liable to changes, yet the Rules and Forms of our Religion and
Morals are still permanent and unaltered. And here, I think, I may seasonably
tell you, that the alteration of our Sovereigns was more legal than the change
of the Theocracy to Chaldaean, Persian, Grecian and Roman Sovereigns; yet even
for these the Jews were to offer Prayers and Sacrifices; and so is the Greek
Church, to pray for the new Grand Seigniors brought into the Sovereignty, upon
the rebellious expulsion of the former, yet surviving in Bonds and Prison,
without any scruple of Allegiance to their new Master hereupon. Now if they
ought to make an Ecclesiastical Opposition to such an Imperial Change, then
their ready conformity thereto, puts them into that same state of sinful
Religion, which you charge upon us; and how then are they in, and we out of
Right to Ecclesical Communion? But to speak truth, I could not have thought,
that men of such Primitive Rigor and Purity could Ligitimate that great
corruption in the Greek Church, which, though of it self it does not actually and
totally Unchurch them, yet it is a most deplorable profanation of the
supreamest Order in their Hierarchy, and such as a General Council, upon the
perpetual Sense and Principles of the Church Catholic, cannot but condemn for
impious and irregular. But now I am under a passionate concern for this Author,
lest this Principle of his bring him under that Heresy, which your learned
Vindicator of the deprived Bishops, if he keeps up an impregnable impartiality
against all Errors, will be apt to find in it. Sure I am here is laid a Rule
for our Church to admit from the State even the most arbitrary removes and
changes of Bishops, for no cause at all, but only to humor the State in
Tyranny, or Simony, according to Doct. Hody's Doctrine: and here is conceded
far more than was by the subscription of a Popish Convocation for fear of a
Praemunire, and more than the Pope, or Henry VIII. ever arrogated to their
Headship, or Supremacy; and to use your former words, Sol. and Ab. p. 29.
a blemish not to be endured in any Church, whatsoever it incurs for the
Opposition. But so it is, and so it will be, when men are pressed too hard in
point of Argument, that to avoid one absurdity they run into another, which is
many times worse, and more notoriously offensive.


Dyscher. Well then, we'll let alone the Greek Church herein to Gods Judgment.
But as for you, that think to shelter your selves under their shade, you are
not capable of that their Plea; For I do not know that we want an
Ecclesiastical Judge. Our Metropolitan, with his Suffragans, are a sufficient
and proper Judge; And if they have not lata sententia, (which there may be
great Reason to forbear) yet in Praxi their Judgments are sufficiently
declared, T. B's. 2d. Let. p. ^1.


Eucher. That the deprived Metropolitan and Fathers are a proper Court, or
Council of Ecclesiastical Judges upon all conforming Bishops, Clergy and Laity
of the Realm, I do utterly deny for many Reasons. In the Province of York they
have no jurisdiction; nor can they make a distinct Synod from the rest of their
Colleagues within the Province of Canterbury. So that had a Synod of mere
Bishops been called therein before any Bishops made by King William, this had
been a Synod, against which no Uncanonical Ordination or Enthronement could
have been objected, and yet the Majority of these would have condemned their
Recusancy, if we may judge of their Sentence by their Conformity.

But further by our Constitution, the Body of the Clergy are concerned in our
Synods; and which way think you would your Cause have gone in a full and
Canonical Convocation? This your wife Author of Christian Communion well saw,
and therefore would not adventure the issue Part 2. Chapter 4.
to a Synodical Determination. But yet neither have these Fathers given a
definitive Sentence of Excision upon us, which yet is necessary, where the
actual Excision passes not merely on the uncontested notoriety and malignity of
the Crime, which we suppose at present not to be our State. And let the Reasons
of their forbearing Sentence be what they will, yet as long as we are not
self-condemned, but stand upon our Defense, we are not yet actually
excommunicate by any effectual judgment of these Fathers: Nor can their
practice amount to so much, either Legally, or intentionally. Time was, and yet
is, I believe, when several of these Fathers would not censure our Submission
to the present Civil Government as criminal and heinous. And one of those
Prelates in a public Oration to his Clergy, strictly charged them to abstain
from all oblique Reflections on each other, for refusing, or admitting the Oath
of New Allegiance, but to retain Charitable Opinions each toward the other;
which being a public act of that Father's at the head of his Diocese, will not
(I hope) be denied as a Lie; nor may I be condemned for uncovering a secret,
since this was not such, nor transacted in a corner; nor need that Reverend
Father be ashamed or unwilling to own it; since it was a most Illustrious
Indication of his Excellent Piety and Moderation, but withal a clear
confutation of that pretended censure, which you place in their Practice. For
the Practice of not Swearing, may in several Men have several causes; some may
condemn the Allegiance; some may doubt only; some may have aspects on another
Revolution; others to the reproach of our, and to the esteem of another Party;
some to their former Writings or Pretensions, points of honor, or the Fatigues
of a Public Station. So that except one unanimous Sentence against the
Allegiance be judicially given, the argument from practice is very
unconcluding: But besides, the Practice of the Majority, will as much condemn
them, as theirs can us, if this be of any such importance toward a Judicial
Excommunication: So silly it is for Men to hunt after such feeble Cavils, on
purpose that they may seem to have somewhat to say, and not be born down by
that Truth against which they have formed a Faction.


Dyscher. Well, However I told you, that there is danger in your Communion; and
I should have added, that the sin is unavoidable in it, because the Secession
was on your side from us and Righteousness, we still continuing as we were: but
see I pray, what answer you made me hereupon, that I may take off the vizor,
and lay open your Hypocrisy. You say, Sol. and Ab. p. 6.
that though our Church Justly and Absolutely rejects the Roman Monarchy, yet
she will not refuse any Lawful Communion, or correspondence with it in any good
Ecclesiastical Negotiations, consistent with Integrity; saving still a Public
Remonstrance to all her Pollutions. What can be the meaning of this, but that
your Church is ready and willing to join in Communion with the Church of Rome,
as many of your Brethren take the Oath, with a Declaration. -- This, and no
other can be your meaning, else your Argument and Parallel is senseless and
insignificant: for thus it follows, so should you communicate with us in all
that is Lawful: Now it is actual Communion in all public Offices and Worship,
which you require from us, and the reason you give, why we should pay it, is in
the words before cited, the sense of which must be, that your Church is ready
with a Remonstrance to afford the same Communion to the Church of Rome, that
is, Actual Communion in Public Worship. -- So with an insignificant
Remonstrance, you can go to Mass, and are willing to do it. See this and a
great deal more such stuff in T.B's 2d. Let. p. 12, 13.


Eucher. This is indeed a notable fetch, that I should excite you to rejoice
with us for Redemption from Popery, and yet profess a readiness and desire to
communicate in it; and in that very communion to remonstrate against it. This
no doubt, would be a very pleasant way of accordance with the Roman Forms; and
yet at last, when I invited you to Communicate with us, in all that is Lawful,
I meant only, what you think Lawful, what is by us both confessed Lawful, not
to what we only think Lawful against your opinion; and to this end Sol. and Ab.
p. 3.
that you might the better heal what you think we do amiss; and so much
agreement I confess we owe to all that is good in the Church of Rome, and by us
acknowledged for such as well by them. But that I invited you not to any actual
Communion in any thing you judge Unlawful, while you judge it so, appears in
that I required not your presence to Ibid. page 15.
that Prayer of New Allegiance on the 29th of May, while you are under the
persuasions of its Impiety. But in truth, having (as I thought) proved us not
to be actually Unchurched; I willed that you should yield us so much Communion,
as may signify your acknowledgement, that we are yet of the Church of Christ,
viz. in all those Offices, which you can Judge Good and Lawful, in order to an
easier accommodation; for so I presume of this Church, and of you too, that you
would not refuse any good Ecclesiastical Negotiations (which import some,
though not a plenary Communion) with the Church of Rome, in order to a
Restitution of the Churches of Christendom to a Primitive Frame, were the
Church of Rome disposeable thereto. And they that will deny this to any corrupt
Churches, I think are not real Christians, nor so much as externally qualified
Members of the Church Catholic; and to this innocent purpose and consequence
only were my words so exactly ordered, with a design to stave off all Catches
herein, that nothing but an inexcusably wretched spite and bitterness could
have hewn out of them so perverse and undesigned a construction.


Dyscher. I am not satisfied, that you will allow our Deprivation to be a
Persecution, only on supposition, that it be for adherence to the Doctrines of
the Church, or the Laws of God. What if neither the Laws of God nor the Church
had been concerned, and they had had only occasion to stand to the Laws and
Constitutions of the Land, which forbid force against, and Deposition of Kings,
and exclusion of the Heir? I think this had been no ill Cause, etc. T. B's. 2d.
Let.


Eucher. I did not mention the Laws of the Land; because till they are
Authentically Vacated, the Laws of God, and the Doctrines of our Church, do
assert their obligation on our obedience, so far as it is in our power to
perform it; and a voluntary violation of the Laws and Constitutions of Civil
Government, is a violation of the Laws of God, which the Church Preaches in her
Doctrine. Therefore I allow you, that adherence to the permanent obligation of
the standing laws of the Land is a good Cause, for the maintenance whereof, all
Sufferings are Persecutions, and all the voluntary Agents in them, Persecutors.
But if the reason or obligation of any Law cease, or if you mis-understand
Laws, and will oppose your private Judgment on them, against the received and
constant Judgment and Practice of the Nation on our Laws, then your Sufferings
upon such Prejudices cannot come under that black Character; which is a thing
enquireable between you and me.


Dyscher. Then I take it for a very odd demand, that we must give in a very
clear proof, that we are Ejected for adhereing to the Laws of God. I pray, who
are they that ought to bring this clear proof? I have heard some say, that it
is an Axiom in Law, that they who expect the benefit, ought to make the Proof:
Now you get all into your hands, and would you give no Reason for it? And yet
it would be but to little purpose to prove to a Thief, that he has stolen my
Goods. T. B's. 2d. Let. p. 14.


Eucher. But do you not consider, that in Law and Reason, whoever accuses any
man before a Judge, ought to prove his Bill, if the Accused plead, Not Guilty?
And you by complaining to the World of the wrong done to K. James, and the
Deprived; Appeal not to them, whom you account Thieves, but to all others, to
avoid their Communion: Now to draw off all People from their Communion, it is
necessary to prove their actions Illegal according to the Laws of Tenure in the
Crown, and the Ecclesiastical Promotions; since they whom you implead,
challenge those Laws for their Justification. And further, by your leave, he
that is out of Possession; but lays a claim of Right, and expects the benefit
of it, ought to prove his Claim, and the Possession of the Adversary injurious.
For they that are in peaceable, or legal form of Possession, have no need to
make, nor consequently to prove a Claim, if not disproved. Beside, your Case is
not concerned merely in your own personal Right, but in the Consciences and
Salvation of other men's Souls, even of those whom you call Thieves; and
therefore you are obliged to convince them of the unlawfulness of such Changes,
which they think lawful, and not only so, but in the present circumstances
necessary.


Dyscher. But I will further examine your own Proposals and Concessions herein:
Sol. and Ab. p. 4.
An untainted Loyalty you approve, while the Obligation lasts, and we desire no
more. But then you think the Obligation may cease, not only by Death, or
Resignation, but also by Cession: Nor do I think it worth while to dispute this
with you, provided it be real, not forced, not falsely imputed. For so any man
that is driven out of his House, or takes a Journey from Home, may be
interpreted to have quitted his Estate by Cession. But when Cession is real, it
can only affect the Party who makes it, and ought to be no injury to the next
Heir. -- But has that person made a Cession, who, though to preserve his Life, he
fly from fraud and irresistible force, yet all the while claims his right,
calls on all persons to do him justice, and uses all honest means that may be
to recover his Right. T. B. 2d. Let. p. 15.


Eucher. I will freely allow you, that to a legal and effectual Cession, there
must be some voluntary Act of the Cedent, on which a Title in any Estate,
Office or Authority is vacated. But then such Act shall have effect against the
desires of retention in the Agent; as in two Benefices taken to be illegally
held without a Dispensation. Nor is it a pure unmixed Act of Will, free and
discharged from fear and terror, or trouble, that alone can make a Cession; but
receding from necessary Government for fear of Life, makes a real Cession; as
appears in men's quitting of Garrisons to an Enemy, (for fear of storm) either
before or after he sits down before them. Upon which Cession, and the Entry of
the Enemy, the Dependents on that Fortress are discharged from the actual Bond
of their old, upon the Enemies demand of a New Allegiance, to which they may
lawfully and honestly submit for the time being. And this holds Due on the
present Title of the new Possessior in the Dominion of such Place, though the
Cedent still (...) a claim of Right to it, and endeavors a (...) which though he
has Right to recover, yet (...) present Right in the actual Allegiance of the
Dependents so legally transferred, till he d^^^ again recover the place. Else,
if you will not allow this Doctrine, you will be but mean Favorites in the
French Court, whose new Conquests have all this form of Establishment. And I
must remark to you, that a man's leaving his Estate upon going a Journey is not
a matter parallel to leaving of Kingdoms dissolved thereby into Anarchy and
Confusion. For an Estate may lie still, and unoccupied, without harm, or
danger, and so a Rectoral Presence, or Actual Administration not be necessary
to the Tenure; but the Civil State of Nations requires a continual Course of
Government, and he that leaves it dissolved, permits it to another by a proper
Cession. And whereas you say, that such Cession, if it be real, shall not
prejudice the next Heir, this does not allways, and universally hold true, as
in the instance of deserted Garrisons, and the dependent Territories. But in
other cases, if they, that have a plenipotentiary Right of acting for an Heir
in Minority, make a Cession for him, or bring him also thereinto, then the
Subject people are discharged from adhering to such Heir also, were his Title
to the Inheritance otherwise indubitate beyond all suspicion of imposture.


Dyscher. But let us see what a kind of Cession you fix upon your King. Sol.
and Ab. p. 3.
This was, say you, such a Cession, that the Estates in Convention judged it a
virtual Abdication of the Sovereignty; and of My Words are, -- of this (being a
point of Law) they were to us, at that time, and in that juncture, the most
competent, etc.
this, you add, they were the most Competent, Authentic, and Final Judges. And
this, you tell us, Ibid. My Words are, We are the more to submit to, etc.
we are to submit to, because the Kingdom has ratified those proceedings in a
second Parliament. -- But Competent they could not be, who, for the prevailing
part of them, were, either actually in the Conspiracy against him, or joined
with the Conspirators, and refused so much as to read his Letters, or hear any
Message from him. Nor could they be Authentic Judges, who had no Law to
authorize them, or their proceedings. Nor did I ever hear, that the natural
Subjects of a Sovereign Monarch could be his Authentic Judges, unless from
President Bradshaw, the Regicides, and their Adherents. And if upon this score
you will have the Proceedings valid against the Son, you must also justify the
Barbarous Murder of the Father. And then they could not be final Judges,
because being neither Competent nor Authentic, they were no proper Judges at
all. Nor does it at all help the matter, that you call these your Judges the
Estates; and further, to countenance the matter, place them in Convention. For
how are they Estates, but with respect to the King, and Constitution? Which if
they overthrow, what becomes of their Estateships? It is the King made them
such, and they are so in subordination to him. Nor is their Convention any
thing without him; they cannot convene without his Writ. You may remember, that
your Oracle Dr. B -- tells you, that a single Defect makes an essential
nullity. So they must act under him; and all they resolve is nothing without
his assent: And by our Law, if they act against him, they are Rebels, and so
unfit for Competent, Authentic and Final Judges. T. B's. 2d. Let. p. 15, 16.


Eucher. Here is an hideous Outcry, as if the whole Machine of the World were
breaking into ruins. But yet methinks it should be no hard task to stay the
Convulsion. First then, The Objection against the Competency is never to be
proved, and it is almost, if not altogether manifestly false. For the prevailing
part must be the major number in both Houses, all which I suppose cannot be
charged as parties to the Conspiracy, or the Conspirers. The Prince in his
march did not pass through above ten Counties, and touched but little of several
of them, he saw not twenty Parliamentary Buroughs, nor sent any Agents to
concert with them; not many Peers joined him till King James disbanded, and
fled. The insurrections in the North, though unopposed, were far from general,
and the far greater part of England, and all Wales saw nothing of it, and
contributed nothing to that Commotion. How then can the Majority be all
concluded into a Conspiracy against King James before their Convention, that
thereby they should become incompetent? Besides, no man is to be taxed as a
Criminal, in order to forfeiture, or punishment, till judicially convict, or
confessed. Otherwise, if he stands upon his innocence and Capacities, his Claim
is to be admitted, and his Civil Privileges secured, against which in our
Convention no man found. Objection upon such surmise, or imputation, which yet
ought to have been made by the Innocent against the Guilty to the eviction of
their incompetency. Let us see then, whether the refusal of his Letters, or
Message renders them Judges incompetent. Now this I think rather appertains to
the Question of actual Justice in their Proceedings than to their Competency,
or Qualification for sitting in Judgment. For a Judge duly authorized may act
unjustly, and yet his judgment (till reversed) shall be authoritative and
effectual, which it could not have been, if the Judge had thereby become
incompetent. But even in this, which, till well considered, seems the hardest
case, it was necessary first to resolve the Question of Abdication before all
others; which if carried in the Negative, then his Letters must in Law and Duty
have been received as from their present King; but till that point were
determined, 'twas necessary to deny the Letters; for the Reception of them as
from their then actual King had prejudged against all the Argument for
Abdication, and had been a virtual Sentence, that he had not abdicated. And
they could not well have resumed that debate, without rejecting his Letters
after reading, and censuring their own admission of them, which would more
justly have exposed their Wisdom, and offended you, than the measures which
they observed. But after judgment past for the Abdication they could not admit
his Letters under the Royal Style, because they had judged, that he was not our
then King; and so the Admission of his Letters, as their Kings, had been a
virtual Reverse of that their Judgment in the same Session, and Breath; by
which they had rendered themselves, if not altogether incompetent, yet very
injudicious Judges. And if after Judgment against his then Sovereignty they had
sent to him under the style and salutation of late King, and have made him King
anew, had it not been a wise Transaction, much to their Credit, Thanks, and
the Nations Interest? So much then for the Conspiracy. Next for the Authority,
which you say was none, since no National Subjects of a Sovereign Monarch can
be his Judges. And by Mr. Johnson's leave, I will say so too, and did say so
Sol. and Ab. p. 4.
most expressly, though you in great sincerity take no notice of it, because it it
seems it was not considerable enough. But is it not a very considerable
Assertion, That when a King is fled from his Throne into foreign Dominions, and
does not exert any Royal Power, or presence to his People, the Estates of this
Land are the Supreme Domestic Judges upon the Tenure of the Sovereignty, which
is not to make them Judges of the Kings Person, but in the want of his Person,
of the State of the Kingdom, and the Rights of the Nation in Order to
Settlement? And can you either disprove this saying, or charge it, or me with
Regicide Principles? Clamat Melicerta periisse frontem de rebus -- may well
deserve your remembrance here; especially since I told you, Ibid. p. 9.
that King James was never in Law subject to them, or under their Power. But as
to the Authority of the Estates to convene, when there is no King actually
regnant, you may learn, if you please, that, though the Estates were created by
Kings, yet their Rights and Charters are perpetual, and constituted for a
fundamental Council to the Land, under the King, while we have one governing,
but when we have none, authoritative of themselves to resettle the Nation the
best manner they in their judgment may, or can: And this right they have in
common with all the like Orders of Estates in all other Kingdoms; otherwise the
Nation would not have been so earnest for a Free Parliament, when that liberty
was opened to them by General Monks Conduct.


Dyscher. I shall talk with you about that Parliament by and by. And when I
have told you, That your second Parliament has no more Authority than your
Hocus Pocus transubstantiating Convention, that riotous Assembly, (all whose
Acts were contrary to Law, and censurable by Law) and so cannot confirm them: I
will examine your grave Position, That when a King is fled from his Throne into
foreign Dominions, or does not exert any Royal Power, or Presence to his
People, the Estates of this Land are the Supreme Domestic Judges upon the
Tenure of the Sovereignty. -- But am I bound to follow their Judgment against
manifest Right, and my known Duty? T. B's 2d. Let.


Eucher. No, no, by no means; but in such a Crisis you have no other known Duty
toward any Settlement, but to abide by that which they establish in the Land
for the time being; for that all Rights and Duties then debatable are in such
junctures determinable by them to all Civil Effects and Obligations; and
therefore their Judgments ought not to be opposed by any slanders or factions
whatsoever, even though King James from abroad condemns them. Por a Foreign
Censure is no Civil Judgment, and by consequence of no legal validity, or
virtue. Kings sometimes suffer wrong; but whenever by these sufferings they
are removed from their People, the Estates must provide for the Nation as they
can, and as they do, we must be content; nor has the suffering King any Right
to engage us from abroad to the contrary. And this Authority even without a
King is so full in it self, that it needs no Ratification on the post-fact to
make its Acts obliging or effectual; though such a declarative sort of
Ratification, as our second Parliament made, be of use to satisfy unsettled
minds, and second a former Obligation which was what I had respect to, when I
said, We are the more to submit to the proceedings of the Convention and first
Parliament, since the Kingdom has ratified their proceedings in a second, viz.
by a Declarative Recognition, and reinforcement of their legality and virtue.


Dyscher. After all, your considerable Assertions are but a malicious
insinuation against your suffering King, as if he ran away through wantonness,
and would have nothing to do with us. T. B's 2d. Let. p. 17.

And herein Mr. Johnson seems more sincere in his wickedness than your Dawbers.
For he tells your Parliament, that there was no Desertion; Pres. to the Commons
before his Argument. p. 16.
For King James must needs go, and leaves us to understand the rest of the
Proverb by an Aposiopesis; that he was Devil driven. And so far speaks plain as
to say, That he was as much driven from England, as Nebuchadnezzar was driven
to Grass, and he claimed as he fled by the Rochester Letter. And he further
shows, Ibid. p. 19.
That no advantage could be taken of a Kings withdrawing himself from the
Government, (if it had been voluntary, as all the World knows it was not)
without a Summons sent after him to return again in forty days. And therefore
he roundly professes that the people abrogated their King after his Expulsion.
And whence is it then that he exerts not his power? You know he exerts all the
power he can, that he does not more is not his fault, but yours; you may have
both his Power and Presence among you too, if you please. But will you contrary
to your Duty and Oaths keep him out by force of Arms, and then plead your own
wickedness in your Defense? T. B's 2d. Let. p. 17.


Eucher. Mr. Johnson falsely owns the fact you charge upon the Nation for the
sake of his Principle which his spite to all Kings and Kingly Power, has cast
him into, viz. That the People may Depose their Kings as often as they judge
them Peccant, which is almost as often as they please. But it is notorious, that
the Estates judged the Throne made Vacant not by their Act of Abrogation, but
the Kings own Abdication; which if so, all the world knows it must be in some
degree Voluntary. Now here will I challenge Mr. Johnson to say out; Does that
claim of the then uncertain Rochester Letter, make the Abdication manifestly
false, since he says it makes the Disertion so? Here I doubt his Courage will
fail him, lest his Argument, and his Dedication follow the fate of the Pastoral
Letter. And yet it is manifest, that though K. James made many large and
previous steps to the Subverting our Constitution, yet the Final Abdication of
the whole Government, consisted in his Desertion, from whence the Vacancy
Commenced. and if this were no otherwise manifest, we have Mr. Johnson's own
Averment, who tells us, ibid page 29.
That we have an Act of Parliament, which declares the Realm of England to have
been Sovereign during that time, (of Vacancy between K. James's second flight,
and K. William's Admission) by ordering all Indictments, from the time of K.
James' s withdrawing, till the 13th of February, to run in their Name. It Is
true indeed, that mere Local Desertion of the Land, of which there may be many
Causes, does not ipso facto extinguish the Sovereignty, except it be judicially
interpretable to an Abdication from other concurrent Circumstances and
Indications, on want of which a demand of Return becomes reasonable, and the
neglect thereof, interprets the Recession to an Abdication; but when there are
evident tokens of yielding up a Government in the form, manner, causes, and
circumstances of such Local Desertion, then a summons of Return is not
necessary in point of Law, or National Duty, upon the antecedent forms of
Virtual Abdication, apparent in such Departure: If therefore his Act of
Disertion in its own form, made a Legal and Effectual Abdication; his Rochester
Letter imports no more, than that his words and actions are contradictory, in
quitting by deed, and claiming by word, the same Right at the same time. Upon
this Abdication therefore the Throne becoming actually Vacant, was by the Act
of the Nation, filled up with their Majesty's: And here upon whatsoever powers
K. James endeavors to Exert, as they do not reach us, nor send out their
virtue by legal ways of course, so are they too late and out of season; not to
mention, that his late ways of Exertion under French Conduct, how honest soever
you may call them, look not very natural or smiling upon English Men: If we sum
up the matter, he was ruining all the Laws and Liberties, with the Religion of
the Lands he Ruled, and they were just on the Precipice under his Exertions; so
that the Nation needed and gasped for relief under them: Upon this the Prince
of Orange having Great Interests and Legal Expectations here, comes over with a
declared Intention to set all things at Right, in such order as the English
Parliament should adjust, which was a fair and most equal design; this then was
the time for K. James to have Exerted his Royal Power, and Justice too, in
calling a Parliament for such purposes, according to the sense of the whole
Nation, earnestly recommended to him by his Prelates, Nobles and Counselors,
for a long time, by sundry Addresses, even to the last: and he having sent out
some writs thereunto, seemed a while inclined, but upon Romish Advice recalls
that purpose, and instead of doing us that Justice, was resolved to contest it
with the Sword: Hereupon his Army, which, had he called a Parliament to have
healed the Nation, would have secured him against all Foreign and Domestic
Violence, sunk their Affections, as having no maw to Fight for him against
their Native Country, Liberties and Religion, disperse by degrees, and great
part go over to that which they knew to be the Juster Cause; and he, being thus
daily weakened, retires and disbands the rest; and even not then calling a
Parliament to help himself and us out of the Confusion, he flies away to the
Grand Enemy and Terror of this Nation, and leaves us to shift for our selves
under those Aspects and apprehensions of dangers that lay before us: If then,
he would not exert a Legal Power when he might, it is too late to offer at any
Foreign ways of Exertion after a New Settlement; or it is at least
unreasonable, to demand our Reception of them to the destroying of our Redeemer
after a National Allegiance given him, for his sake, who ever pursued our
general Ruin against the Laws; his Oath, the ties of Natural Affection, and
the Sighs, Groans and Requests of his Loyal People. And whereas you say, we may
have his Power and Presence too, if we will, as lovely as that may be fancied,
it is more than you can warrant. For, if we were disposed to accept your offers,
if he should come with a French force, are you secured, that the French would
permit him to be as free and independent a Monarch as before? It Is possible
they might erect him for a Vassal titularly Royal, till their strength were
fixed, and then upon demand of Expenses, or other pretexts, pick a quarrel with
him to annihilate him for their Masters Glory. Or supposing the French King,
for once a true Friend to King James, would not his Forces make King James an
Arbitrary Monarch here, to exert more than a legal Power over all the Bodies,
and Souls, Estates, Coffers, and Purses of the Nation? If we had had any maw
for such Power, we might easily have had it, while he was here, and not have
been beholden to the French for the Commodity. But if King James should concert
privately with us to return without any French measures, or services, can you
assure us to keep this secret from the French King? Or if you fail in point of
secrecy, are you sure he will let King James go, or treat with us in neglect of
his Interests, and Pleasure? Or would he not rather Bastile him for
Ingratitude, and treat him hereupon after his usual methods of humanity? Thus
pretty are your Projects to expose the Fate and Fortunes of Nations upon, and
discover such a distemper in the Brain, as requires the Law of Bedlam rather
than any other consideration.


Dyscher. When we deny the Authority by which your Estates sat, you ask us by
what Authority was that Free Parliament called, or sat, that voted in King
Charles the Second? Sir, if you please, let another be called, and vote in King
James the Second. When things are out of Order, and good men set them to Rights
again, I do not think any man will oppose it upon the score of some small
niceties; but when subjects rebel against their Prince, and drive him away, and
make that the ground of their going on, and doing farther wickedness, I cannot
understand the Authority of this. There is certainly in every man an innate
natural Power and Authority to wish well to, and vote for Right. By virtue of
this, when things were in confusion, the Subjects of King Charles the Second,
returning to their Wits and Allegiance, send a convenient number to act for the
whole, who recall their rightful King, and if you should do so likewise, I
should not be very quarrelsom with you. But whatever name they might give it,
to put a better gloss upon the thing, they were no Parliament, till King
Charles made them so; for he, their lawful King, by an Act in Legal Parliament,
might stamp on them that Character and give them that Authority, and Force,
which they had not before; and thus several of their Acts might become Laws by
virtue of that after Ratification, not by any force of their own. But as for
calling back the King, that was not making any new Law, but enforcing the old,
and was not so much an Act of Authority, as Obedience and Duty. And if you
could find out the same way, you would be the best Friends to your Country, and
your selves. T. B's 2d. Let. p. 17, 18.


Eucher. To answer according to the way and order you lead me, as I have before
told you, we are now under no obligation to call in King James, so being under
another settlement, things are not out of Order, and Unsettled, as they were
upon the convening of that Free Parliament; and as there is no occasion, so
there is no opportunity to attempt it. But whereas you charge the Subjects in
general with Rebellion, and Expulsion of their King, it is a broad slander and
falsehood; for beside the far greater numbers of the people that never moved, it
seems that very few, that actually went over to the Prince, ever designed the
expulsion of King James, but only the secure reduction of him and his
exorbitant claims of omnipotent Prerogative to the just limits of Law and
Reason by Parliamentary ways of Composure. Which, though they could not procure,
yet did they not expel him, but he went off himself, either for fear of Life,
or obstinacy against a Parliamentary Discussion, or because of the fatigues of
an unsuitable Government. But as to the Convention it self, it rebelled not
against him; for had he continued his Presence, they would have desired to meet
by his Call, and then I believe not an Hair of his Head had fallen to the
Ground, whatsoever his too conscious fears and apprehensions were, since the
only Argument for the Vacancy of the Throne was founded in his Abdication, and
that in his Departure from us, and leaving us in a state of Anarchy; upon which
it was not possible that they could rebel against him without his Presence. As
for your innate Authority to wish and vote for Right, I allow your meaning,
though not the impropriety of your words; for an inward Right of wishing well is
no proper Authority, which imports a Superiority over Inferiors, nor are
private wishes formal votes in Civil Matters, in which an Authority to vote is
not a natural Right of every man, but a positive Power of constituting Orders.
And in Civil Negotiations all private wishes must concede to public Suffrages,
and Determinations, And the Land sent up that Free Parliament, not on their
Natural Rights, but Civil Capacities of voting, and doing the best Right they
could. And though they did well in bringing back the King de jure, having no
other King de facto established, nor any impediment to the Reduction of the
Heir Lineal, yet if there had appeared to them any such obstacle, as would have
rendered his Reduction destructive to the Nation, and its Fundamental Liberties
and Constitutions, according to the Aspects of our Case, they would have made
some other provision for the time being, with which the Nation would then, and
ought to have acquiesced, and so would a good Prince too; but there being no
difficulty in that Juncture, they did their Duty in restoring the King. And as
for the Name and Character of Parliament, whenever de jure enstamped on them,
it matters not; for they were in that Juncture, and those Circumstances a Legal
and Authentic Council of the Land, though extraordinary; and whatsoever
Settlement they had made for the time being, had been valid from their
Authority, as well as what they did had also authority both from their Duty,
and the Kings consequent Ratifications; for single Acts may have sometimes
plural Authorities, and Confirmations. But to convince you, that Conventions of
Estates in such Junctures and Confusions are by themselves authoritative to
resettle, I will discuss it with you, and I pray answer me fairly.


Dyscher. Pray try your skill.


Eucher. First then in such a State of Confusion, as that in which King James
left us, has the Nation any Right or Reason to consult for some security, order
and settlement?


Dyscher. It seems reasonable that this be allowed.


Eucher. By whom then should a National Consultation be transacted? Or who
should, or can be so regularly and efficaciously entrusted, as the old standing
Council of the Land?


Dyscher. I must confess I cannot assign any Council so proper as that, and
none else, that can be pretended legal.


Eucher. Must the Determination of this Council be allowed any public
Efficacy, or Virtue to oblige?


Dyscher. Yes, if it pass according to Right.


Eucher. But if they judge their Determination to be right, must their Judgment
take place to all Civil Effects, against all private and extrajudicial
Objections, or no?


Dyscher. Yes, except the prevarication is notorious.


Eucher. Notorious! To whom notorious?


Dyscher. To all men, to the whole Nation, to their own Consciences, as the
Exclusion of King James was.


Eucher. Then no Notoriety less than National shall justify a Recusancy to
such public Decision?


Dyscher. I were as good as allow it, for it seems so.


Eucher. But how shall we discern such a general Notoriety?


Dyscher. By the general and unanimous Censure of all Orders of Men, that
adhere to the ancient Laws of the Government, and fundamental Principles of our
Constitution.


Eucher. This will become such an intricate and endless debate, whose are the
Legal Principles that it will create an intestine War in order to a Decision.
You must therefore admit a notorious generality, or majority of the People, or
all Orders in it comprehensively, or else we shall never get out of the brake,
or be relieved by any National Consultation, if such indeterminate Surmises, or
Pretensions shall interrupt its Obligation.


Dyscher. Be it so, what then?


Eucher. Then I think I have fairly gained my Points; for these Concessions
admit, in a State of Anarchy, upon an Abdicant Desertion, a Convention of
Estates to be Lawful and Authoritative without a Kings Commission, or Presence.
Secondly, That the Acts of our Covention were, and are valid, as not being
censured for other, but admitted as such by the generality, or notorious
majority of the Nation, which is sensibly apparent by comparing the numbers
conforming with the Recusant; Conformity and Recusancy being the only proper
and legal Tests of Men's Senses hereupon: Though the Authority of our National
Council is such, as needs no after Ratification from the disfusive Multitude,
or the original Freeholders, or Burgers of the Land; because, as the Lords are
primitively Counselors for themselves, so the Trust signed to the
Representative House is total and absolute, without need of any subsequent
Ratification, or Power of Revocation by their Principals.


Dyscher. But notwithstanding all pretenses, they ought to have recalled King
James; and it being in their Pawer to do it, 'twas piacular wickedness to omit
it, and erect his Adversary; this is obvious to common Sense, and the first
simple Notions of Right and Wrong, against which no civil forms, or
combinations can oblige.


Eucher. You are no competent Judge upon them or us, what Right required them
to do in their then exigencies; and if in truth they could not do what you
would have had them, nor well and safely do otherwise than they did, then all
this black Charge turns to a blanck, and comes to nothing. Now it is true, the
Prince had no settled, or proper Jurisdiction, or legal Authority (strictly
taken) to enforce a Convention, or any thing upon it; nay, they had liberty
before the judgment of Abdication to have voted King James's Revocation. But if
they had done so, and the Prince in bar thereto had pleaded the Desertion to
have been an Abdication devolving the Title to his Princess according to the
ordinary and legal course, and so had required them to dissolve; if they had
dissolved, what could such vote have effected? If they had not dissolved, the
refusal might have opened a Scene of War between the Prince and the two Houses.
And considering how great the even minor number in the Houses, which might have
sided with the Prince, would have been, and the vast and zealous Army which he
had about him, with all the formed advantages and preparations of War, together
with the hearts of at least the general multitude, are you sure that the naked
Majority of the Convention could have safely adventured the dispute with cold
Iron? Or if upon a casual adventure they had been conquered, how could they
have evaded the Prince's Arbitrary Power? Or if, during the War, King James, or
the French had supervened, and carried it, had not all the Laws and Liberties
of the Nation, dipped and sunk under Absolute and Popish Power, and that most
probably French, or a la mode de France? All this is obvious to common Sense,
and was undoubtedly much more so to that National Assembly, which otherwise
wisely composed all Domestic Riots, as well as secured us from foreign
Inrodes, and little deserve the reproach of Riotous, or Juglers; which manners
to your own deprived Fathers, and other your Friends that sat there, should
have taught you to forbear.


Dyscher. Whereas you tell us, it is a prodigious peevishness to require a Kings
Presence, or Commission, when he is gone, and has left all in Anarchy; I hope,
Sir, you do not think I require a King to be present, when he is absent; and
then, with your good leave, I think it no such peevishness to act by his
Commission in his absence, but that it is a thing which (if it can be had)
ought rather to be done. Richard the First was engaged in the Holy War, when
his Father died; This is false, for he was King before he went, and deputed the
Bishop of Ely Chief Governor: It was Edward the First that was proclaimed King
while in the Holy Land, but he was never Prisoner.
so that he was far enough from his Throne, and unable to exert any Royal
Power, or Presence to his People: And to make the matter worse, in his return
he was taken Prisoner, and detained in Germany. In this Case, had you been one
of the Estates, you would have been for setting up another King, that would
exert his Royal Power, and Presence to his People; but they had another sense
of their Duty; they mourned under the common Calamity, caused all proceedings
to pass under his Nane, and stretched their Purses to redeem him, etc. T. B's
2d. Let. p. 18.


Eucher. But here, currente Rota, you have omitted something considerable, and
inconsiderately offered what is not so. For I only state the Case, when a King,
that was actually in the Throne, goes off from it, and resigns all to Anarchy,
which is justly interpretable to an Abdication of Government; which was not
Richard's Case, which is therefore instanced altogether impertinently. Yet in
that See Sir Richard Bakers Reign of Richard the First.
very Case, whatsoever had been the procedures of the then Estates for the time
being, the subject people must have acquiesced in their judicial
determinations, and presumed them Legal till reversed in as Legal and
Authentic Forms of Judgment, though Richard had lain for ever unredeemed;
because the multitude are incapable of judging our National Laws, Rights and
Capacities, and cannot act regularly to the recovery of Right, or performance
of a National Duty: Yet it is bold in you to say, that my Vote would have
passed against Richard's restitution, since I, that have well known the motions
and sympathies of my own Soul through all this Revolution, should certainly have
been carried by my Bowels for that unfortunate King James against the wiser and
major part of that Assembly you traduce. But besides your insincerity in this
parallel, and your Censoriousness on me, you seem to pervert, or misunderstand
my meaning, when I said, it is prodigious peevishness to require a Kings
Presence, or Commission, when he is gone, and has left all in Anarchy. For
though it is then only proper to require a King, or any person, to restore his
Presence, when he is absent, when during his Absence his presence is needed;
yet I never was so silly as to think Presence, and Absence competible, and
connecessary at once, or that a Commission in time of Absence was improper to
supply the desect of personal Presence, according to that ridiculous guise you
clap upon my words; but my apparent palpable intention was, that it is
prodigious peevishness to require a Kings Presence or Commission, as necessary
to make the Session of Estates Authentic, when he affords neither Presence,
nor Commission; for want of which all is left in supine and gasping Anarchy,
which were my express words, on purpose set to obviate this, and other like
Cavils, though honestly omitted by you for inconsiderable, though therein lies the
main force and form of my Argument, which is like to stand unmoved,
notwithstanding all the impotent flurts of unmanly peevishness.


Dyscher. At last you say, the Estates of any Nation being Sol. and Ab. p. 4.
invited by a victorious and unresisted Power, may come together, and treat
with him that thus calls them, though he has no antecedent Authority (strictly
taken) to call them. Here is a pretty fetch in the word [unresisted Power;] for
irresistible you knew it was not; and if it was unresisted, whose fault was
that? May they refuse to resist an invading Power, when they are able? And may
they make that disobedience the reason of their Compliance with him, and
casting off their own Sovereign? But if, without dawbing, you had put the Case
as it was, it ought to run thus; The Estates of any Nation, or the natural
Subjects of any Sovereign Prince may combine with, and invite in a foreign
Prince, and when he comes, though with a contemptible force, they may forsake
their lawful Prince; and then by their Treachery having left him helpless, and
hopeless, may treat with a Foreigner, drive away their own King, give his Crown
to the Foreigner, and maintain it with their Swords and Purses, without which
he could not keep his illgotten Goods. T.B's 2d. Let. p. 18.


Eucher. It confessedly seems, as I stated the Proposition, you cannot deny the
perspicuity of its Truth, and therefore you invert it to an invidious
Paraphrase, which in many parts of it is not truly applicable to that which was
the Subject of my Apology, viz. the Authority of the Convention. For all your
aggravated Invitations, Combinations, Revolts, Treacheries, and Derelictions,
allowing, or supposing them to be no other than you describe them, are not
chargeable on the whole Estates of the Land, especially when in Convention. And
even thus I will renew my Position, That by the Laws of Nations, if a foreign
Prince procure the Revolt of a vast part of another Princes Subjects, through the
terror of which the helpless Prince leaves his Kingdoms in Anarchy under the
Army of the foreign Potentate, who thereupon calls the Estates of such,
deserted Nation to treat for a Settlement, they may convene, and treat with him
upon such invitation. For it is the necessity, the subject Nation stands in for
a Settlement, that warrants and legitimates such Treaties, by what means soever
those exigencies are introduced, whether by foreign Force, or intestine
Commotions, jointly, or severally, throwing all into Anarchy, and Disorder. But
if the charge of the Revolt preclude the legality of any man's Session, that
incapacity ought to have been objected, and if overruled, protested against in
Convention, as I have already told you; which not being done, they were all in
Law, Reason, and Civil Construction, lawful Agents, and Counselors. As to the
word [Unresisted Power] I confess I used care indeed, but no trick; for it was
too hard for me to judge whether the Prince's Power were irresistible or no;
and so it is in many cases, in which Parties yield rather than run the hazard
of a Battle. But every one can tell when it is, or is not actually resisted;
and the Proposition is as true of an unresisted, as well as irresistible Power.
Though take you all the Forces foreign and domestic, joined to the Prince when
the Convention was called, you will think it hard for any Subjects to have
resisted them, when the King himself long before durst not, but disbanded, and
quitted thereby all pretensible Duties in the Subjects to take Arms. And the
Conventioners deserve to be your humble Servants, for putting them upon such an
Essay. But if you will require, where the fault of this non-resistance really
lies, I think you may find it in him, that neither could be induced to call a
Parliament, nor to fight it out. After which double miscarriage, and flight out
of the Kingdom, I think no man was obliged to resist, or take up Arms, but to
desire such a Settlement as the State of Affairs would admit. As for the Wars
we maintain with our Purses against all the Enemies of our present Settlement,
they are just according to all the Rules and Forms of Civil Laws, to which you
your selves contribute as well as we, only with more Crime, as doing that
against your Consciences, which we admit upon Principles to us appearing good.
But if you think your Exigencies legitimate, your payment of Taxes to prevent
new danger, so we think the general Exigencies of the Nation did legitimate
this Settlement, and do still justify our plenary Submission thereunto,
according to the Sense, Laws, and Usages of all Nations. As for those you call
Revolters, they were not the Subject of my Discourse, whom I therefore leave to
God, who, as he saw the provocations, so did he also every man's purposes, and
trains of thought in that Insurrection, according to which at the last day they
shall each man be judged. But for those that lay still, I know no legal summons
they had from King James to rise in Arms, to make that quietness a breach of
Allegiance, in which certainly you Jacobites are as culpable as the others, and
in one degree more, in that when you might, and upon your Principles ought to
have taken Arms for him, you would not, and now when you neither can, nor
ought, clamor for new Seditions and Commotions, by which we must inevitably
fall a prey to France, and a Burnt-Sacrifice to Rome.


Dyscher. I will now for the present intermit the Remarks I collected at
Gilman's Coffee-House, and bestow some other impartial Reflections on your Grand
State-Principle, on which you raise your other Arguments. Here then I must tell
you, That you set up new Principles, which the Church of England has always
declared to be erroncous, and grounds of Rebellion; viz. you set up the
Parliament above the King, and that we must take our measures of obedience only
from the Parliament, Sol. and Ab. p. 31.
to whose Judgment, say you, in all Civils, all Subjects must submit. And upon
this you Ground all your Superstructure, as that King James's Ibid. p. 8.
Tenure has been publicly judged by this Natition to be extinct; p. 9.
and that this Nation has justified King William 's Cause, which is to
conclude upon us. Beyond this you allow no no man to look, or enquire; The
whole Body of the Church are to be taught by the Parliament, and to have an
implicit faith in them against the King in all Cases whatsoever, so that Ibid.
p. 4.
the Churches Loyalty is to follow the Civil Judgment concerning the Object of
our Allegiance, and the Tenure of Sovereignty. And by this Rule, if a
Parliament change a King every day, the Church is bound to swear to every one;
the Parliament can solve their Oaths. But there was a time, when the Church
thought it their Duty to be Teachers, and particularly as to Loyalty, as being
a principal part of Religion, and even [against a Parliament; Here
unfortunately four or five lines were broken off the MS. Reflections, but, as I
well remember, the sense was such as is included within these brackers [].
and their Doctrine was owned by all true Sons] of the Church of England, I
mean the Old Church of England in the Reign of King Charles II. This was their
Doctrine and Practice, and generally of the whole Church of England ever since
the Reformation, as is plain in her Homilies, Articles and Canons, etc. And you
do not attempt to disprove these, but only assert the contrary, and so leave it
as a thing settled, and sure. MS. Reflections. That the Churches Loyalty, as to
the Object, is to be guided by the true Constitution of the State, I deny not;
but I shall never yield, what you would thence slur upon us, that it is to
follow every. Civil Judgment, much less the Uncivil Judgment of any Set of
Conspirators, and Traitors, into whose hand you so liberally and piously
dispose it. T.B's 2d. Let. p. 19.


Eucher. I am resolved, that no calumnious usage shall storm or transport me
into any indecent, or uncharitable passion. But though, for my own part, I might
reject your imputations of disloyalty with scorn and silence; yet for your
conviction I will calmly remind you, that I ever told you, that the Estates of
this Land are not Judges of the Kings Person, who is not under their Power; nor
in Law subject to them. And all that I any where said of their Judgment about
the Throne, amounts to no more than this, that in a state of Anarchy on a
King's Desertion, or in Arbitration between two, or more Competitors, the
Estates of this Land are the Supreme Domestic Judges, and Arbiters upon the
Tenure of the Sovereignty, and the Rights of the Nation in order to Settlement.
And that in case an irresistible, or unresisted Potentate Sol. and Ab. p. 5.
enforce himself upon the Nation for a new King, and the Subject people cannot
help it, our Laws in this concur with the Laws and Practice of all Nations, in
allowing (our Estates to determine for us in such Exigencies; Ibid. p. 4.
that in extra-ordinary interruptions, and convulsions of State, our Laws, and
Constitutions allow the Estates) such a King, as can actually be had for the
time being, for which Ibid. p. 5.
I refer to our Histories, Acts of Parliament, and Judgments of Law, under
hereditary Kings, since the Reformation, without any Remonstrance of King,
Church or State to the contrary, and at last to Bishop Overals Convocation
Book. So that if a Question arise in the disordered Kingdom, who is my King, to
whom my Allegiance is legally payable, I refer to their Judgment as the then
Supreme in all our Civils; and if you can assign any Superior, or more Legal
Judgment, to decide, and determine such national Questions, and Controversies,
I am content to give up fairly to you. And if you can produce any Homilies,
Articles, Canons or Monuments of this Church contrary to these my Positions,
then I will yield, that the Churches Authority, as far as that can go upon
Civil Questions, will lie against me. But a man's Eyes shall sooner drop out of
his Head, than discover any such counter-principles in the public
constitutions of our Church, which you would have quoted, if you could,
particularly, but since that could not be done, 'twas very feeble to make such
an hollow and causeless noise about it. And yet, if the Church in Civils had
interpreted the Laws contrary to the Judgments of the State, she had given a
null and incompetent Judgment, since we are no Authentic Doctors in these
matters, nor the Church a Court of Civil Judicature, prohibitions always justly
lying on her, whenever she admits the Pleas, and assumes the Judgment of
Civil Causes. As to the Rebellion against King Charles the First, it comes not
near our Case, for there was a King actually Regnant, who in Parliament had
redressed all their Grievances, and whose Tenure was indisputable, and
undisputed, the very Rebels owning their Arms to be for King and Parliament.
But neither was that Rebellion a judicial form of proceeding of both Houses,
(of which only I spoke as Authentic in the Actual Vacancy of the Throne, and a
state of Anarchy) but a military one, by a divided part of the Houses, assuming
the Style and Title of the whole Parliament, against a King actually Regnant,
which I had no occasion to mention, much less to justify, the Nation having
since condemned it by Act of Parliament. Nor had it been entered into by the
unanimous Vote of both Houses, had it obliged as a Law, as wanting the Royal
Assent of the King then Regnant. And the Rights of the Crown, and Duties of our
Allegiance are still the same, though Milton will still have Successors to his
Villainies arise, when their Sovereigns are involved, to tamper with popular and
seditious humors and ambitions, in order to new projected commotions. But they
who make the Convention to have proceeded on principles of Rebellion contrary
to their enacted Judgments, that hence they may draw Arguments to whiten the
Old, and to inflame New Rebellions, deserve they, and their incendiary
Pamphlets to be burnt together. Nor need you fear any such consequence from any
my Positions, as if upon these the Parliaments may change their Kings every
Day, and thereupon our Oaths; For I have asserted no Convention of Estates to
be in Name, or Thing a Parliament, if they mect contrary to the Fundamental
Laws of their Constitution. And while a King is actually Regnant, they The
Triennial Act was not pasied when this was written.
yet meet, sit, are prorogued, and dissolved at the Kings Order only. And this
being yet the form of our State, no Votes, or Bills of the Houses can pass into
an Act, or Law without the Assent of the King Regnant, at whose pleasure they
immediately are, and are not, and so can make no Legal Assembly, or public
Change, without, or against him, over whose Person they are neither Lords, nor
Judges. For though Causes of the King may come before the Lords, and be overruled
in Justice to the Subjects Right, against which they are brought thither, yet
this is no more than what we see in other Courts, which yet pretend no
Sovereignty over the Kings Person, by whose Commission they sit in Judgment. So
far am I from such wicked Principles, as Plat-thorns in the Crowns of Kings,
and set them in the most unsupportable Bondage, that Art, or Ill Nature can
contrive, but withal provoke great spirited and designing Princes to seek
avenues to an Arbitrary Power, who would have gladly been contented with a
regular and equal Sovereignty, if they could have been secured in it from the
fears, and incentives of popular insolence. But to return from this Digression,
if a King through any fear, or cause whatsoever, utterly deserts his Kingdoms,
and leaves all in Anarchy, and Confusion, that the Estates of the Land, if they
can, should then Convene, and settle the Nation the best way they can, is so
far from Rebellion, that it is most certainly both their Privilege, and their
Duty And if they are first to determine our Settlement, I am sure the Churches
Loyalty is to follow their Judgment, except we challenge an Appeal from them to
the Church, to ratify, or vacate our Civil Constitutions. And if you call this
Duty of Submission to their Civil Settlements implicit Faith in the Parliament,
it will be prone to retort, that you challenge an implicit Faith in the Church,
and that in matters not Ecclesiastical, in a latitude more Exorbitant than any
Pretensions of the Church of Rome. But the Truth is, our Duty to any such
established Settlements is not founded in an implicit Faith, whose proper
Objects are things not seen, Heb. 11.1. but in an apparent, explicit, and
authentic Determination, as all other Duties pursuant to Laws and Public
Judgments are, and no otherwise. And you that will allow the Churches Loyalty,
as to the Object, to be guided by the true Constitution of the State, but not
by every Civil Judgment, have need to explain your self, what shall he the
Supreme Civil Judgment for you concerning the Laws and Constitutions of our
State in rare, unusual and dangerous Cases of Desertion, and Anarchy. For if
you assert to every man a practical Judgment upon our Laws and Rights in such
Cases, and that even against a National Judgment, the Confusions must be
eternal; If there must be a Civil Council, I pray assign me any other like that
of the Estates in Convention, who indeed, as often as such Cases call upon
them, are the Supreme Judges of the Constitutions and Rights of the Nation, and
Arbiters of our Settlement concluded thereupon. And if you will not yield to
every such Civil Judgment, you may as well say, you will yield to none, excepe
it comports with your private Humors, or Persuasions, which is the true and
plain English of your Answer herein, if I may use the freedom you take with me,
of being your Paraphrast, or Interpreter, and is a wonderful Expedient to
settle us by eternal and unreconcilable discords in Opinion and Practice.


Dyscher. Let us now see, what a fine account you give us of the Laws and Rules
of our Succession; and hereon you tell us, Sol. and Ab. p. 4.
That the general and ordinary Rule of Succession to this Crown is Hereditary,
but in extraordinary Interruptions and Convulsions of State against the
ordinary Course, our Laws and Constitutions do allow the Estates such a King,
as can be actually had for the time being, till the ordinary Rule can be fairly
recovered. Now if a man were to speak this in plain English, it would be thus;
By our Laws and Constitutions the Crown is Hereditary; but if any Usurper, or
Traitor will not suffer it to be so, but puts by the Right Heir, and gets
possession himself, the Laws and Constitutions allow him to be King; yes marry,
and a Lawful King too; i. e. the Crown goes in a Lineal Succession, while
people are peaceable and Obedient; but if they be troublesome and rebellious,
it is catch as catch can, and he had Right and Law on his side, who gets
Possession, and so will another, and another without end, who can successively
wrest the Possession from those, who had the Right whilst they could keep
Possession. Did ever any Body hear of such a Constitution as this? Or was any
thing better fitted to produce eternal Confusions? Certainly you have a mind to
persuade us, that our Constitutions were made by the Wise Men of Goatham, or
the Wiser Men of Bedlam. T. B's. 2d. Let. p. 19.


Eucher. You frequently use a suspicious Artifice of travesteering, what cannot
be plainly answered, into farce and misshapen figures, and then expose it in
Ridicule. By which however you call upon you the Sentence of the Psalmist, What
shall be done unto thee thou false Tongue? Mighty and sharp Arrows, with hot
burning Coals. For if I may be my own Paraphrast, my Sense is, that all Estates
and Subjects are to their utmost obliged to preserve together the Sovereign and
the Sovereignty, and the established forms of Government, according to the
precise constitution of the Laws; but if these be irresistibly overborn, or the
Sovereign abdicates all to Anarchy, then it is Lawful for the Estates to settle
under such Sovereigns, as can be actually had for the time being, till the old
Rules can be fairly recovered; which being positive, must give place to a
temporal necessity. But did I ever say that Tyrants or Traitors, getting into
Possession by mere Force, had Right, and Law on their side? No sure; for they
may break all Law, Right, and antecedent Rules of Obligation, and yet the
oppressed Estates may lawfully admit the Oppressive Power, when it appears too
formidable under prospects of further inevitable Ruins. This I expressly and
cautiously told you in these words; Sol. and Ab. p. 5.
And even an unjust Potentate, though he cannot according to Legal Justice out a
King, against whom he has no Legal Cause, or right of War, yet if he does do
so, and the subject People cannot help it, and he enforce himself on the People
for a new King, our Laws in this concur with the Laws and Practice of all
Nations, in allowing our Estates to determine for us in such Exigencies, -- and
the sin shall lie only on the injurious, and not on them that submitted to an
inevitable fate of things; and again, Ibid. p. 6.
Wars and victories are many times unjust, yet they, that suffer the wrong,
lawfully submit to the unlawful and injurious demand of Submission, as in
Piracies, and other like Tyrannies. And could such a Confessor for Conscience,
Truth and Piety put lying Senses on my words without any remorses or touches of
Conscience? More integrity was due and becoming such starched or sacred
pretensions. But I have well learned, that Faction leavens the Soul, not only
with sowerness, but with insincerity also. But as I truly stated, and have now
explained the Nature and Duties of our Constitution, I assert it a Fundamental
Law to all Civil Societies, except perhaps that pair of dissyllable
Seigniories, which you mention, where the Politcks, Logicks, and Ethics suit
with your, and where, unless you will to the Antyceryae, I must leave you. And
since all Kingdoms, and Empires are by the just and adorable Counsels of Gods
Providence subject to such various Turns of Fate, all Princes, that take Crowns
upon them, take them with the Laws of their fortune, and a concession to the
regular consequences of such Change, under which they acquit the innocent
Subjects under new submissions, though they condemn, and (being reduced)
prosecuted all those that enforced the Change. But as long as the Duties of
Subjection are such as I have described, intestine changes and disorders cannot
arise from them. And while Princes minister Justice and Judgment to their
People, and make their Prosperity the Royal Care, they are seldom threatened
with Commotions. But yet it sometimes happens, that for unsearchable, though Just
Reasons, the Judgment of God permits the most innocent Princes to intestine as
well as foreign troubles, which yet however they that promote, shall not escape
Divine Vengeance. And yet after the determination of such Wars, it can be no
sin to acquiesce under those forms of Settlement, which our Estates can procure
for the time being, though different from the ordinary Course. And there is no
other Rule to recover the Civil Felicity of Nations but by these Principles,
which every Princely Spirit must be presumed to allow, in equity and compassion
to all his good Subjects, to rescue them from utter extirpation, or perpetual
misery.


Dyscher. At last you are willing to qualify the matter, and to suffer this
only, till the ordinary Rule can be fairly recovered. If this be so, why is it
not recovered? Sure you will not plead that in justification of a People, which
is notoriously their Fault, and such a Fault, as is in their Power to mend,
when they please. Let them unanimosly, as they ought, return to their Duty and
Loyalty, and the thing will do it self, and without any great pains, trouble or
danger. T. B's 2d. Let. p. 19, 20.


Eucher. But I thought I had long before strangled the life and force of this
Objection, having abundantly proved our Submission to this National Settlement
faultless. And so a breach of National Contract is no fair way to a recovery;
for an opportunity only of doing a thing legally can put us into a fair
capacity of recovering the ordinary Course, which is not, as you ^ancy, the
business of a moment, but an expectation of years and proper Conjunctures at
the hands of God, whose leisure we are to wait for without our own too violent
anticipations. Thus the Nation behaved it self thro-out all the Reigns of Henry
IV, V. and VI. whom you would have challenged for Rebels, in lingering too long
in the restitution of the Right Line. But whereas you propose to us an
universal unanimity in reversing this Constitution, I will dare undertake the
Affair for you sub poena. Capitis, when you can find me out an effectual
Expedient of making us all unanimous. Otherwise what shall the unanimous do,
that are the far less numbers, unarmed, and in no public Capacity of acting
for the Kingdom, against those settled and formed Powers, that can easily
squeeze all our little unanimities to pieces? Shall there be no end of strife?
No yielding to legal forms of Determination? And when there is but little hope
or ^wisting the Sand-rope, can your thing do it self, and that with little
trouble, pains or danger? And yet if King James Abdicated by a real Cession, as
the Nation judged, and I have proved, your project would violate, not only this
extraordinary Settlement, but your ordinary Rule also, by which in the moment
of Cession it devolves on the next Heir Lineal; and the Course cannot turn
retrograde, without the Consent of all the Heirs in being, or their proper
Curators for them.


Dyscher. But I see you relapse again, and become a zealous Advocate for your
extraordinary Kings, in whose behalf you plead Acts of Parliament made by
Extra-lineal Kings, which were confirmed (submitted to, you subtily phrase it)
by the Lineal Heirs, and these were approved by Lawyers, nor did the Church
ever remonstrate against them. And what of all this? Let the Usurpations and
Confusions be what they will, still men will eat, and drink, buy and sell, and
such like Acts. Nor do I think such a State does acquit men from the Obligation
to do (what in them lies) such things as seem absolutely necessary for the
preservation of the Society, and the real good of Mankind. And if any such
things, as are necessary for the maintenance of human Affairs, and which are
accompanied with common Justice in themselves, should now be done, or enacred,
and hereafter be confirmed by King James, I know no reason to remonstrate
against this; but I think the need of such a confirmation is a demonstration
where the Right and Authority lies. T.B's 2d. Let. p. 20.


Eucher. Since I am bound to follow the way you lead me, the first thing I am
to observe, is your mistake, or per^^^^ion of my words about the submission of
Heirs Lineal, by which you say I subtly mean their confirmation of the
Statutes of Extra-lineal Kings, which is no part or glance of my meaning, and
no man carefully heeding the Order of my words could think it to be so. For I
mention their submission to somewhat mentioned before those Statutes. And I
truly meant the long and frequent submissions of the Heirs Lineal as Subjects
^o Kings Extra-lineal actually Regnant, particularly under the Lancastrian
Reigns. And even your Edward the IVth Father Duke of York swore Allegiance to
King Henry the VIth, and kept it, till new ^^a^ses of Rupture arose between
them. So that it is a very impertinent importunity to clam^^r a^or^ (...)
subsequent confirmations, which I ^ever ^^^tioned; And instead of subtle, it
had beer too silly in me, to have called a Confirmation of an invalid Act, a
submission to that feeble thing, which is thereby enlivened. And yet, by your
leave, all After-confirmations do not suppose always an antecedent Nullity in
the Act confirmed, for they sometimes secure, sometimes continue, and sometimes
double an antecedent validity, which all the Statutes under Extralineals had in
themselves for the time being, before there could be room for those subsequent
Ratifications, and the perpetuity of their Virtue stands not in those
Ratifications, but in the Non-repeal of them. And yet however had it been
otherwise, by parity of Reason all our Acts obliged the Subject now during this
present Reign, and we are thereby acquitted in our present submission,
whatsoever nullities it may fall under in your next Revolution. But there is a
Famous Act, viz. the 11th of Henry the VIIth Chap. 1. made in an Extra-lineal
Reign, that declares it for Law and Equity, that Subjects pay their Allegiance
to the King for the time being, and indemnifies them herein against after
punishments. This Law was never since confirmed, censured or repealed by any
succeeding Prince, or Parliament, and yet stands firm in the Body of our
Statutes to all Civil Effects and Judgments, which pass ever since according to
the importance and tenor thereof. And you your self grant me enough for the
time being, that the Estates may sit in Parliament under Extra-lineal Kings, to
do, and enact things necessary for the preservation of the Society, and the
real good of Mankind, and are not acquitted from an obligation to do so through
the disorder in the Succession, and such Acts in this Reign, when hereafter
confirmed by King James, you will not condemn. Sir, your humble Servant. But
can you tell, how such Acts could, or can pass in such Parliaments, without an
Oath of Allegiance taken to such Extra-lineal Kings by all the Members? I doubt
this will put you out of your good humor again; and that is a great pity,
because you are so seldom in it. But however these honest Acts must be valid,
for the time being, upon us, till King James returns, or else the Obligation of
the present State to preserve the Society, or promote the real Good of Mankind
by them, will be but of little Virtue, or Use.


Dyscher. But, pray Sir, upon such extraordinary interruptions, did all men
ever think themselves bound to approve them? Did not they still, as opportunity
served, assist Right? Did not such proceedings cost a world of Blood and
Treasure, to none, or very ill purpose, while no Peace, or Ease could be had,
till things were brought to rights again? When matters are in trouble, or
confusion, wise and good Men think it the best way to put an end to them, as
soon as can be; But you cast out that Right that only can restore our Peace;
and when you have conjured up most horrid confusions, plead for their
continuance. I know not what could be done more by an Advocate for the Prince
of Darkness. As for what you say concerning Bishop Overals's Convocation Book,
I am sorry, that a pretender to so much modesty should be guilty of such an
impudent Assertion, when that matter has been fully cleared by so many learned
and judicious Pens. T. B. 2d. Let. p. 20.


Eucher. This is a very paronymous Caress indeed, but such as convinces me no
more than your Arguments. But I know who has taught me to give place unto
wrath, while I encounter your Reasons. First then, Is it not a Question
profoundly wise, whether all Men did ever think themselves bound to approve
Extra-lineal interruptions? For did you ever know all men in the same Opinion,
that they ought to approve any one State of things? But this is not your only
Lapse of Sense. It is not the Interruptions and Convulsions of State that I
would have you approve, for no good man can approve Interruptions in settled
Government, as such. But I require you only to submit to such National
Settlements as close up our Confusions, and so far only to approve them, as
they are Ends of Strife and War, it there appear no other Good in them. As wise
also is your second Question, Did they not still, as opportunity served, assist
Right? I pray, who are these They, but your All men just before mentioned as
the Antecedent to this Relative? But did all men, as opportunity served, assist
Right? How then came there any to be in the Wrong? Or how came all men together
to want an opportunity to do Right? Or how came there in any Disorders, and
such a general Expense of Blood and Treasure to very ill purposes? But what
think you of those, that enforced these fatal Expenses? Were they of the All
men, or no? Or did they act aright in breaking down the Settlements of the
Nation, in order to what you call Restitution of Right? For my part I would not
vindicate an Inheritance by the slaughters of poor harmless people in the
prostration of their Civil Settlement, to gain the most absolute Empire in the
whole World; For I think no one man's mear personal interest in any external
privilege is worth one innocent man's life, whatsoever your, or other Martial
Opinions may be in these Matters. But if you justify those Sanguinary
Commotions, and Barbarities against the Public Settlements heretofore for the
reduction of the Heirs Lineal, and can tell us, that we can have no Peace in
our present State, I hope henceforth your Party will not say, that I enrage the
present Powers against them, since you openly proclaim an irreconcilable War
against the Established Constitution, and blow the Trumpet for your own
destruction, if the Government were not gentle, and compassionate to your very
Ravings. But whereas you charge us for having conjured up Confusions, and
pleading for the continuance of them, I shall reply, that all the Evil, that
has been done against our Constitutions, from the time that King James began
to vacate our Laws, and to embroil us in discords, in order to an Arbitrary and
Popish Government, until the day of the new Settlement under their present
Majesty's, contributed to our Confusions, and every Party to those Evils, of
what Character soever, must account to God for it, who will admit no Plea for
those Evil Actions, or Confusions. But on the Day, in which the Prince became
King, our Confusions ended in an orderly, peaceable, and (were it not for your
unquietness) an entirely happy Settlement, for the continuance of which we
plead against those unsupportable Confusions, to which your bitterness would
reduce us. And now (as ill luck would have it) we are fallen in on Bishop
Overal's Convocation, who can have no ease neither, because of our Confusions.
But now, I pray, what have I said of that Monument they have left behind them?
No more than this; And Bishop Overal 's Convocation Book comes up to it. To
what? Why to this, that a full Settlement under Extra-lineal Kings must be
submitted to both by the Clergy and the People. And does it not come up full to
this in their First Book and 28th Chapter and Canon? Where it assigns this
Obedience to the full Settlement even of ambitious Princes, and Rebels,
procuring that through Settlement by wicked means. And in the 27th Canon of the
same Book it is resolved, If any man therefore shall affirm; -- that any
person, born a Subject, and affirming by all the Arguments, that Wit or
Learning could devise, that God had called him to murder the King do facto,
under which he lived, yea, though he should have first, procured himself to be
proclaimed, or anointed King, as Adonijah did, etc. -- he does greatly err. Now
a King de facto with this Synod is one that is in by full and legal Forms of
Settlement, as by Submission or Continuance, Lib. 1. Cap. 30, though attaining
thereto by unjust means. And such Submission to such through Settlement is what
alone I quoted this Book for; and whatsoever fate other men's Theories hereupon
have incurred, sure I am I have not declined the least from the Sense of that
Synod, who in those passages had an undoubted aspect on our several
Revolutions, and actual Settlements under those Extra-lineals, whom the Lawyers
have styled Kings de facto, by a Distinction from those that are de jure, whose
terms herein the Convocation used. Otherwise their Determinations herein could
be of no use to ratify any Settlements past, nor to direct us in time to come,
how to end our Confusions, or when to be at peace.


Dyscher. At last you very gravely give us your Opinion, that in the late Oath
of Allegiance the word [Successors] was added after [Heirs] on this very self
same Ground, that though Heirs by the Ordinary Course are the Legal Successors,
yet others legally may succeed in Cases extra-ordinary. This it is for men to
give their Opinions without Book, and without any other consideration than to
pervert the State of the Case. Had you given your self the small Trouble to
read over the Oath, you could not for shame have put this interpretation upon
it, for the express words of it are [Lawful Successors] which follow the word
[Heirs] by way of Limitation, or Restraint, to show that none shall succeed but
the Legal Heir. And thus, Sir, the words of the Oath, instead of admitting,
plainly and peremptorily exclude your extra-ordinary Successors, and
extra-lineal Kings. Thus your new invention has added a fresh absurdity,
instead of being a remedy to those many others, which your Party run into upon
Discourses of this Matter. And though you mince the matter, yet you might have
been so bold to say, the Oath requires Allegiance to unlawful Successors, as
what you have said; for while there is one in being, and claiming, to whom the
Right really belongs, what can your extra-ordinary Successors be but Tyrants,
and Usurpers? T. B's 2d. Let. p. 20, 21.


Eucher. This, I confess, is an amazing Circumvention, if my Memory has in
truth beguiled me. And it is a challenge enough to shock a greater confidence
than mine. To prove this therefore we must recur to the Form Enacted by the
Statute, Anno Tertio Jacobi Regis, etc. Also I do swear from my heart, that
notwithstanding any Sentence of Excommunication, or Deprivation, made, or
granted, or to be made, or granted by the Pope, or his Successors, or by any
Authority derived, or pretended to be derived from him, or his See, against the
said King, his Heirs, or Successors, or any absolution of the said Subjects
from their obedience, I will bear Faith, and true. Allegiance to his Majesty,
his Heirs and Successors, and him and them will defend to the utmost of my
Power, against all attempts whatsoever, that shall be made against his, or
their Persons, their Crown, and Dignity, by Reason, and Color of any such
Sentence, or Declaration, or otherwise; and will do my best endeavor, to
disclose and make known unto his Majesty, his Heirs, and Successors, all
Treasons and Traitorous Conspiracies which I shall know, or hear of to be
against him, or any of them. These are all the times the words Heirs, and
Successors are mentioned in the Oath, and in these here is no Character of
Lawful set at all. So that here you fall under the same fault you charge upon
me, of not reading the Oath, and another added in a bold interpolation thereof
at all adventure; or if you have read it, it is the greatest of all
prevarications consciously to misrender it; but whether it were the one, or the
other, it is the most frontless, and unparalled impudence to down-face an
obvious Truth with notorious Falsehood. And yet have a little patience to see
what you had gained by this remark, if it had been true. You had said, Sol. and
Ab. p. 3.
That the Oath of Allegiance binds to the King, his Heirs and [Lawful]
Successors; and I taking it for granted, that you interjected the word
[lawful], not as a part, but an interpretation of the Oath, denied it not, but
without any cavil heartily admitted it; but because I formed an Inference from
that Oath, that you like not, you interpolate the Text of the Oath by foisting
in the word [lawful], that hence you might draw a pretense, that Lawful
Successors limitedly denote the Lineal Heirs. But neither would this have held;
For had the word [lawful] been found in the Oath, my Argument had still been
good, Sol. and Ab. p. 5.
That in the late Oath of Allegiance, after the words [Heirs] the words [Lawful
Successors] were added on this very self same ground, that though Heirs by the
ordinary Course are the Legal Successors, yet others legally may succeed in
Cases extraordinary. Nay this legality of such extra-lineals had been more
fully acknowledged, had the word [Lawful] been inserted, than now it is. For
now if a man would be perverse, and were there no other Reason upon other
Bottoms, he might argue, that this Oath simply setting all Successors, without
any express Qualification of Lawful to exclude unlawful, requires Allegiance to
all Actual Successors indiscriminately, without any reserved respect to any
legality, or illegality. But whether we suppose the Quality of Lawful as
intended by the Sense, or no, the addition of [Successors] after [Heirs]
denotes, that their may be Successors, to whom our Allegiance is by Oath
secured, that are not Heirs in the strict sense of Lineal Descent; or else
after [Heirs] no word of that Importance ought to have been added. But as I was
at first candid in the Concession of the Legality, so will I here give you the
reason of that Candor. Having then observed, that all Duties respect Laws, and
that what is not Legal, can have no Legal Obligation, and withal that the Oath
obliges to the Successors of the very same Legal Sovereignty established here,
it appeared to me, that he that comes into any other form of Sovereignty over
us, has no right to our Allegiance by virtue of that Oath, or the old standing
Laws, whatsoever Title thereto he may acquire by virtue of New Laws and
Constitutions. But if he assumes a Sovereignty that is in no wise Legal, it is
Tyranny in Form and Nature, and while it is barely such, the man is an Enemy,
and no Allegiance can be due to him. Now the Legal Forms, by which Extra lineal
Kings are invested with the English Sovereignty, stand in Admission and
Recognition of our Estates, when insuparable Exigencies, or just Causes
incapacitate the Heirs Lineal to reign over us, or us to be reigned over by
them; of which Obstacles in a state of Anarchy the Estates are our Supreamest
and Final Judges.


Dyscher. But what have you to say to an Impartial Reflection, which I shall
here offer you from another hand, viz. that you maintain, See Sol. and Ab. p. 6.
That by our Oath to King James we are bound to pay Allegiance to King William,
which seems so strange a Paradox, that the defending of it must serve only to
let the World see, that there are no Words, nor Oaths possible to be framed,
for which men may not find Distinctions and Salvo's, to turn them which way
they think fit, even directly opposite to what they were at first intended. MS.
Reflect.


Eucher. Truly, Brother, this looks rather like whining under an Argument, than
an Answer to it; for men seldom make a moan under any Objection they can solve.
Yet is your Reflecters Complaint herein as little sincere, as manly. For I said
not that our Oath to King James alone obliges our Allegiance to King William,
as you from him represent me, but that Sol. and Ab. p. 4. to p. 6.
putting all together, that I had said, my concluding Opinion was, that our Old
oath of Allegiance (supposing it still in force) to the King, his Heirs, and
Successors, binds us to pay Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary, as the
present actual recognized Successors to King James upon extinction (though not
of his Life, yet) of his Sovereignty. And this you can never disprove, except
you either show, that in that Oath the word [Successors] so distinctly set
after [Heirs] three times in the same Paragraph, was purposely set to exclude
all Extra-lineal Kings for the time being, whereby all the Statutes, and former
ties of Allegiance actually owned under the past Extra-lineals will be repealed
by this Enacted Oath, and all Judgments ever since past accordingly vacated; or
else that King William and Queen Mary are not actual Successors to King James
in this Sovereignty, by the same, or as legal forms of Constitutions, as other
Extra-lineals were before them, by a National Admission and Recognition; though
somewhat more than Extralineal Forms may be challenged to Queen Mary upon her
Fathers Abdication. Now when you, or your Prompters perform either of these
Exploits, then use your invective Powers even unto hoarsness; but till then
'twill not be prudent at the same time to be censorious, rude, and insincere
too. But I will not discourage you from going on; I pray proceed in your Charge.


Dyscher. When you had asserted, that Extra-lineal Successors may in
extra-ordinary Cases be Legal, Sol. and Ab. p. 5.
I pressed you to show, how he can be Legal, that thrusts out the Legal King,
or Legal Successor? And you strained a point to make him so. -- But let us see
your fine Art of proving Right Wrong, and Wrong Right. Your Discourse of Kings
thrusting out Kings is a direct thrusting out Right, and encouraging, and
justifying Ambitious Persons in embroyling the World in perpetual Wars and
Confusions. But I shall not expose it as it deserves, because it is nothing to
the purpose of a plain known Right, and no Right. T.B's 2d. Let. p. 21.


Eucher. Sir, I think my self obliged to scrape a Leg once or twice to you for
your eminent tenderness in exposing my designs in inverting the Characters of
Right and Wrong. But, I pray, what fouler exposition had you behind the Veil,
than this, that I thrust out Right, and animate men to embroil the World in
Blood and Ruins? If your Razor be tender, yet you have a pretty close Hand,
which yet I am willing to bear, considering that your Cause is in ipsa acie
novaculae. But if I may expound your word [Expose] in your true sense, it will
signify [Answer], and then on my Conscience you were in the Right of it. For
to answer it as it deserves, is either to confute, or confess it; but you are
not ingenious enough to do one, and less ingenuous than to do the other. But
perhaps it was an inconsiderable piece of Impiety. Let us see then what was
this Draconick Incendiary Mormo of mine? Why this verily; Sol. and Ab. p. 5.
One King by a Legal War may thrust out him, that, till he was thrust out, was
Legal King of his own People. For the first offending Prince loses not his
Sovereignty to the offended, merely by the offense, till actually thrust out by
the offended. This, I think, is the general Law of the Trumpet, and allowed for
valid among all Nations. But if you doubt, let us refer the point to the French
King, whom You cannot suspect of Unfaithfulness to You, or Your Cause. But if
the War be altogether Legal, upon Offenses that will warrant all the process of
it, till the Offender leaves his Dominions in the hands of the injured
Conqueror, a Just Change may follow here without justifying Illegal Wars and
Rapins of unprovoked and injurious Powers. Which though it be a Truth most
clearly innocent, yet a calumny was necessary to keep up the Ball, and use a
Talent. But let this be. I pray, Sir, how show you, that this is nothing to our
purpose?


Dyscher. If you would make a fair answer here, you ought to give a direct
Answer to this Question; If a Person, having really no Right, does disclaim any
Right to a thing, and by public Declarations does profess, that he makes no
Pretentions to it, nor has any Design to disturb another in his Right, I say,
if this Person shall by ill Arts seize it, does this, notwithstanding all his
Protestations and Declarations to the contrary, even against all Right and
Reason, create him a Right, whether he will, or no? etc. T.B's 2d. Let. p. 21.


Eucher. Here, I confess, you have taken a secure way to enclose my Answer to
your side. And as you have set the Question in learned light, I answer to your
Hearts content, that such a Person shall hereby have no Right, either with, or
against his will. And to all such Questions I had given you a round and
comprehensive Answer before to the same purpose, though it so often escapes your
notice, belike for its inconsiderableness. Yet it being a right Answer, you
shall have it in both Ears, whether you will, or no. And it was such; Sol. and
Ab. p. 5.
And even an unjust Potentate, though he cannot according to Legal Justice out a
King, against whom he has no Legal Cause, or Right of War, yet if he does so,
and the subject People cannot help it, and he enforce himself upon the People
for a new King, our Laws in this concur with the Laws and Practices of all
Nations, in allowing our Estates to determine for us in such Exigences, as is
manifest in the long Contentions, and many Turns between the Houses of York and
Lancaster; and the sin shall lie only on the injurious, and not them that
submitted to an inevitable fate of things. And again, Sol. and Ab. p. 6.
Wars and Victories are many times unjust, yet they, that suffer the injury,
lawfully submit to the unlawful and injurious demand of Submission. So that
taking Right for a Title founded in real Justice, no man really can have Right
in the sight of God by a mere unjust Act, or Acquisition. And yet, though the
preparations to acquire new Kingdoms or Dominions be unjust, if that very
constituent Act, which transfers the Possession, does at the same time infringe
no man's present and permanent Right, such possession becomes Rightful. But all
this is nothing to the purpose. For our Question is only of who, or what is
formally legal, not what is in real honesty morally Rightful. For all
Possession, which a man obtains by legal forms of Process, either in War, or
Peace, is formally and apparently Legal to all Civil Purposes and
Constitutions, though the Cause obtaining be far from being really and morally
right. And a man by legal Judgment may de facto be put into possession of what
another man has a real Right to, so that the possessor shall have the Legal
Form of Title in what is really another Due. And in all such Cases all Affairs
belonging to such Estate follow the Legal Tenure of the Possessor, who is
therefore in Law taken as bonae fidei possessor. And even antecedently to
Judgment quiet possession in a private Estate, though slipped into by cunning
Frauds and Artifices, against which there is no Civil Law, is taken by the Law
for formally Legal, till the Occupant loses it, either by Art, or Judgment. Now
all independent Persons, and Princes, that are subject to no Judicial Tribunal,
contend by War, not Law, and what they settle themselves in by the forms
consequent upon War, they have such a formal Title to as the Laws of War and
Revolutions yield them, and no other; though whether Cause is just, and
consequently thereupon whose Possession is honestly rightful, none can
effectually judge but God amidst so many pretensions. And in such Turns the
Subject People must, or may lawfully yield to the formal Titles, or Fates of
War, since they are not authoritative Judges on the Causes, or Rights of the
Quarrel, of which men's private Opinions are most times very contrary, but can
hardly ever be sure, or unanimous. And by this Rule all Nations go, and there
is no better; though God forbid, that any man should be obliged to think all the
Spoils of War and Law to be really honest, and morally rightful. Now according
to these Rules and Distinctions I asserted that Extra-lineal Kings may be
Lawful Successors in Cases Extra-ordinary; and I will add, upon Causes really
Just, Rightful Successors too. And lest you should quarrel at this Distinction,
as of private Invention, but no public Character, I refer you to the late Oath
of Allegiance in the first Paragraph, where our late Sovereign Lord K. J. is
declared Lawful and Rightful King of this Realm, etc. that he might be taken
for not only de facto, but de jure, King. But amidst all this Dust, of what use
is a General Question or Position, except it properly affects our particular
Cases? So that in order to the Censure you design upon King William, you ought
to have charged all the Facts in your stated Question, directly upon him in the
Course of the Revolution, with exact congruity and accuracy; that you might
have evinced his Illegality, or Incapacity of Right in the Possession of this
Crown. But this you perhaps fancy every body can do. But I will in truth try,
whether it can be done, or no. I allow you then in the foundation, that the
Prince of Orange at his Descent, as he had no Right, so he pretended none to
this Crown, and declared his Intentions not to injure King James in any his
Personal, or Royal Rights whatsoever; but then I deny that the Prince seized
the Crown by ill Arts, or any breach of public Protestations. For when he came
in the Head of an armed Force, he declared, that he came not for the Crown, but
a Decision of his Cause in Parliament, to which end he sent the King fair
Articles of Truce and Treaty during the Session. But the King refuses, or
neglects the Proposals, and leaves the Kingdom in Anarchy. Now all such
Declarations in War have this natural, obvious, and perpetual intention, that
if the matters in Controversy be adjusted as demanded, the Prince demandant
will be fully satisfied, as having no design to seize his Adversaries
Dominions, if he will right the Causes of Hostility in the manner claimed; but
otherwise the very form, and Face of War, and Arms is in Fact an open
Declaration to vanquish, out, dethrone, and crush the Adversary by all Martial
and Hostile Methods whatsoever. So that King James nglecting his Demands in not
calling a Parliament to satisfy the Prince, cannot complain, that he has
broken his Faith, or Declaration in taking his Crown. And further, when the
King was gone, there appeared no Force, or Fraud in the Prince's Actions with
the Convention, to whose Judgment he fairly left the whole Cause and State of
Affairs; and they, having maturely and peaceably debated all things, judge King
James's Desertion, with respect to all antecedent passages, to be an Abdication
of the Government; and withal they judge the Prince's Succors to have merited
the Crown, which, with the amicable Concession of the two next Heirs, they
cheerfully offer up to him, which he then accepted, when a fair Capacity and
title was thus legally opened to him. So that though at first he had no form of
Title, Pretentions, or Designs for this Crown during King James his Right, yet
when this determined, and no other Legal Obstacles interposed, there was a fair
Reason to accept that then, which it was not lawful in Conscience for him
before to covet, or design.


Dyscher. Your instance in the Houses of York and Lancaster comes not up to so
plain a Case as this. Where things are obscure and dark, (as that Title was,
and perhaps still is to most men) great allowance is to be made. Lancaster had
the more obvious, York the better Title. Here T. B. very charitably makes the
excellent Bishop of Worc^ster to deserve a Gallows instead of a Bishopric. p.
22.
-- But what means this preaching up Confusion? The Nation then weltered in
Blood and Gore, till an undoubted Title put an End to that quarrel. But you
would have us obstinately maintain a bad Title, that our Miseries might have no
End. A rare Example of Justice, and Love to your Country. T. B's 2d. Let. p.
21, 22.


Eucher. It seems then, it was lawful for the Nation to admit the House of
Lancaster against the better Title in the House of York, or else what
allowances do you make upon the Obscurities of the Title? But does it follow,
that the House of Lancaster had a real Right? If so, then an extra-lineal King
may be Rightful; If not, then Allegiance may be lawfully yielded by the Nation
to extralineals, who are in by legal Forms of Settlement and Recognition, tho
not really Rightful, or Lineal Heirs. For so upon your great allowances the
House of Lancaster, when enthroned, was visibly Legal tho not lineally
Rightful; and does not this then come full up to all the purpose I designed?
For it was not mere obscurity of the Descent, though much involved before the
common World by contrary Pretensions, that warranted the People in these
Submissions, but the necessity of ending Spoils, Rapines and effusions of
Blood. For if the competitor Houses would have acquiesced in the judgment of
the Estates, they could well have determined for the better title upon a fair
Heraldry, or production of Descents. But the Families, as opportunities offered
themselves, were generally restless under the Superior House; but those stirs
were legally ended toties quoties by Parliamentary Recognitions. But the final
end was not procured by the clearness of an undoubted Title, but by the
Marriage of the Lancastrian King Henry VII. with the Lineal Heiress of the
House of York, by which all competitions closed; but Henry stood upon his own
bottom in the National Recognition through all his Reign, and neither yielded
subjection to, nor derived his Title from his Queen. But yet let us see in
dubitable cases how great your allowances would be, and particularly in the
Lancastrian Reigns? Supposing then the Title between the two Houses dubitable,
or doubted only with one part of the Nation, but certain to the rest, shall
both these Parts swear one Allegiance to the Title, which is doubted by one
Part, against that Title which the other Part is certain of? If so, then you
allow one Part of the Nation to swear against a Title, which they know to be
certainly Right; Or must the doubting Part concede to the Title, which others
know to be Right? If so, then the Lancastrian Line cannot be admitted, or
capable of any your allowances. Or must there, in this Case, be two Kings for
the two Parties, and two Allegiances in this one Realm? Or what if the
Competitors, and Doubts multiply, where shall these, and their Divisions end?
But suppose the whole Nation to doubt of the Lineal Right, will you require
them to swear Allegiance to a doubted Title? If not, then what allowances do
you concede under these doubted Lancastrian Reigns? Or what Judgment pass you
on the Allegiance then always given? For so there must have been none sworn at
all. But if you will require a Nation to swear to a doubted Title, does that
Oath import an assertion of Right, or no? If it does, then you will require a
Nation to affirm that upon Oath, of which confessedly they are not certain, and
that is one degree of Perjury. If such Oath does not (implicitly at least)
assert Right, then it is no acknowledgment of Right, nor founded on the
presumption of it, which yet however you all contend for, to render our present
Allegiance in this point perjurious. But it is hardly possible to suppose a
whole Nation in doubt, when there are Competitions; For the Competitors, and
their Accomplices, or Parties use absolutely to assert their Right without any
doubt, or pretense of doubting, and then they that doubt, though the generality,
must either suspend, or go over upon uncertain Trust, whereby they may exclude
the Right unawares. But if you will make allowances in doubtful Cases, then
what think you of the Questions arising upon King James's Desertion? Did they
afford any possible occasion, or ground for disputation, and scrutiny? If so,
then it ministered doubts to be discussed, and the Case was dubitable; But it is
a vanity for you to say, that it gave no possibility of disputation, for they
that disputed it thought otherwise, and between their and your Opinions doubts
must arise herein among the multitude, to whom therefore your great allowances
are to be made in their present Allegiance. But to deal plainly with you, I
think no Man, or Nation is to swear upon what is to them dubitable, as what is
honestly rightful may be; but what is visibly, formally, and judicially Legal
cannot be, as coming home to the Senses of the Subject by public ways of
notice, and operation; and therefore all suspences and personal doubts must
herein concede to such judicial Determinations, to put an End to all those
Miseries, with which you unjustly charge us, and maliciously threaten us.


Dyscher. As for the Cession you mention, you would do well to prove it a
little better, before you thus run away with it for granted. You know we deny
it, and have given our Reasons for it, to which I know no Answer returned,
unless it be Goals, Fines, and Pillories, and threatenings to help it with Hemp.
T.B's 2d. Let. p. 22.


Eucher. I think upon recollection you may find very full proof of the Cession
already made; but at your demand I will offer you another, which, though not
better in it self, yet will be better for you, because it is of your own
approbation.


Dyscher. I pray, what is that?


Eucher. Do you not excuse the Desertion from being a Cession, because he went
away to save his Life?


Dyscher. Yes, I do. See T. B's 2d. Let. p. 15.


Eucher. Did you not tell me at our last Conference Sol. and Ab. p. 22.
that Abiathar at Solomon's command went of to Anathoth to save his Life
thereby? And yet that his Priesthood determined by his own voluntary Cession
herein?


Dyscher. I have indeed owned, T. B's 2d. Let. p. 36.
that it was a manifest Cession on Abiathar's part, and I think it was well
proved; but then Abiathar did not oppose a claim, as King James does?


Eucher. If you mean a verbal owning the Right of the High Priesthood, it is a
hard matter to judge what Abiathar might say hereupon at Anathoth. Yet
admitting his silence under Solomon's Sentence, and his Recession to Anathoth,
to be a real Cession from his Office, in Law, this being once effectually past,
and after claim could not have nulled this Cession, any more than he Vindic. of
Depr. Bish. p. 70.
that quitted his See by leaving the Omophorion, could null that Act of
Resignation by a verbal Protestation to the contrary. For such Cession, being a
positive Act, consists in quitting an Office thereby vacant, and when that is
filled with another Officer, it is too late for the Cedent, or Deserter to renew
a Claim, and say his Desertion was no Cession, which is nothing else but a vain
Protestation against manifest fact, which is perfectly King James's Case.


Dyscher. He had need of a Case-hardned Face, that will undertake to defend
what you say, that Sol. and Ab. p. 5.
the Hereditary Succession was not violently broken, but altered by the Consent
of the next Heirs. Sir, it was broken with a witness, for there were four
before your Idol; and now there are six; and will you say, there was no
violence, when our Native Prince was close confined in his own Kingdom? -- But
now you will needs persuade us, that this was done with consent. Now you would
have done well to have produced the consent of King James, and the Prince of
Wales, who ought to be served in the first place. And then as for the two
Princesses, whom certainly you mean by those, whom you fasly call the next
Heirs, they may dispose of their own, as they please; but they ought not,
cannot give away another Right. Only as to the Princess Ann of Denmark, if she
have given up her Right, it will concern her for her safety, to make it as
public as she can; but if she have not given it away, it then perhaps may
concern her to make as much haste after her Father as may be, and to carry her
Son with her out of Herod's Clutches; for if her Sister should die, it is ten to
one it comes too late, T. B's 2d. Let. p. 22.


Eucher. I thought, when you and I began Conferences on this Subject, we should
have only talked of Casuistical Points in order to the information and conduct
of our Consciences, and not have deviated into such an Unchristian and
Seditious Railings* And it grieves me on your behalf to the very bottom of my
Soul, to experience so much disingenuous bitterness in a man of your Character.
But since you are so unhappy as to know no bounds of moderation, I must touch
your miscarriages a little lightly. After the Cession of King James, I said the
Succession was not violently broken. And in answer to this you mentioned the
Dutch Guards assigned by the Prince to attend King James before his Cession;
And this you falsely call a close confinement, for had it been such, how had he
so easy liberty of going off? But whatever this was, it was before the
Cession, and then what is this to the after proceedings of the Convention, of
which alone I was speaking as not violent? Then you as improperly require the
Consent of King James, and your Prince of Wales, who must be served first, as
antecedent in the Course of Descent. Now I must tell you, that there are among
us, some, who, through joy of our Deliverance, having forgotten that Compassion,
which I deeply have for all Royal Tragedies, would be apt to make a jest of
this, and reply upon you, that they have been served well enough in the first
place, before the Prince and Princess of Orange, who are well enough served
too, and all as they deserve. But I shall only observe your inconsiderateness
of discourse in bringing in King James into the Catalogue of his own Heirs
after his Cession, upon which I said the Succession was not violently broken,
but altered by the consent of the next Heirs. And this, I think, I may still
defend without breach of modesty, even though I should allow the proceedings of
the Convention to have been violations of his Right. For a violent Expulsion of
a Possessor may consist with the true Succession of the next Reversioners. But
admitting the Cession, or Abdication for real, what need was there to solicit
his further consent to our Establishments? And for your Prince of Wales, beside
the doubt of the Nation concerning his Descent, the late Queen brought him into
a Cession before the Cession and Abdication of the King, nor were there any
Claims entered for him before the Convention, and so he might be legally
neglected for want of Claimer. I know this has been charged on the Prince, and
the Convention for not admitting the Discussion of that Descent. But, I think,
no Law could oblige them to move it ex officio, when he was absent, and no
Promoter appeared on his behalf. But further, to enquire into the Equity
hereof, if King James at the Prince's demand had called a Parliament, that had
been one of the Principal Articles to have been judicially determined by the
Parliament between them. But King James not calling a Parliament, nor allowing
the Convention power of Judgment herein, there was no reason such a Question
should be admitted there, which, if determined against King James, and his
Prince of Wales, should not have concluded them, but, if given against the
Princess of Orange, should have confined and excluded her. As to your politic
stroke upon the Princess of Denmark, I shall reflect no more than this, that if
she will permit you to the Conduct of her Counsels, she is like to thrive
mightily by it. For you will advise her either to present flight, or sedition,
only to make way for I know not what, or how many new Princes of another
Venture, whose real Descent no one should ever know but the Men of the
Mysteries. Perhaps your Agents have laid the Seeds of Discontent between the
two Princely Ladies already, in order to form your other Projects; but I hope
that God, that has hitherto preserved them in their natural Rights, against all
the Arts of those who would have illegitimated, or intercepted their Sucession,
will still preserve her Royal Highness from the Snares you lay for her. And
since you have blurted out the Secret to the Public, she, and the whole
Kingdom have reason to take close notice of it.


Dyscher. When we object the immoralities of these proceedings, you tell us,
Sol. and Ab. p. 6.
That the internal immorality of all Actions must be carefully distinguished
from the Civil Consequences of them. -- A Son, say you, by fraudulent Arts gets
judgment in Law, and seizes his Fathers Estate, and Body by Execution, and
starves his Father in Prison; this man's immorality is damnable; -- Yet the
Judges, Sheriffs, and other Officers are innocent. It may be so, while they act
as Officers of Law, and according to the directions of Law. But if your Judges,
Sheriffs, or other Officers join with, and assist such a wicked Son, or
Daughter, to effect such an Evil Act, or do applaud and approve it, when they
know it be done by such wicked and unlawful Acts, then their being Officers of
Law will rather increase than diminish their Guilt. T. B's 2d. Let. p. 23.


Eucher. Now all this I allow too, whether done judicially, or in forms of Law,
or no. But if it be done in private, and not in Legal Forms, it is nothing to
our purpose, or my objection. But if the Judges sit in Judgment between the
Father and the Son, and very wickedly cast the Father in his Cause, yet it
being done in form of Law, the Judgment will pass into such Execution, as will
be taken for formally legal, though the Judgment be morally unjust, and contract
an heinous Guilt on the Conscience of the Judge. So that still the Subject
People are innocent in admitting the Acts of the Convention as Legal, though
really before God they had been Unrighteous Judges. Yet because you herein
sharpen a Dart against the King and Queen, though I never intended my Objection
to such a Reflection, the Case you set is not parallel to ours. For the
Convention sat not in Judgment between the Father, and Son, and Daughter, the
Father not being subject in Law, nor submitting his Cause to them; but when the
Father had left his Royal Estate, the Prince calls them together to settle the
forsaken State of the Kingdom, which they did as it now stands. And as this
Judgment was in Form, Legal, and Authoritative, so you cannot prove it immoral,
or injurious. For as the Estates were not concerned to enquire into the temper
of Spirit in the Contest between the Father and the Children toward each other,
which was not of Civil Cognizance, so they debated only the Civil Purposes of
King James's Actions, and how the state of this Land might be legally and
securely fixed after his Desertion, in which they acted as Legal Judges, and no
otherwise. What was done before, or out of Convention by any of the Members,
and the inner motions, and aims of particular men's minds there sitting during
these agitations, these are extrajudicial, and so not chargeable on the whole
Court as a Council of State, as being no parts of their formal Determinations.


Dyscher. So for your Robbers, and Pirates; a man may lawfully suffer by them,
though it were better, if he could escape it. But if you will plead, that their
Robberies and Piracies are lawful; if you say, they acquire a just Right to
what they get by such wicked means, or if you actually join with them, and rob,
and share in their Booties, you will be as very a Rogue as they; and which is
most like the Case, I leave others to judge. T. B's 2d. Let. p. 24.


Eucher. This, it seems, is your reply to what I said, Sol. and Ab. p. 6.
That Wars and Victories are many times unjust, yet they that suffer the
injury, lawfully submit to the unlawful and injurious demand of Submission, as
in Piracies, and other like Tyrannies. And is not this a pretty Refutation of
that Assertion, to say, that all that assert, assist, and share in Wrong, are
Rogues? The reason of my instance was, that such Pirates, and Tyrants often
seize on such as they have no Right of Dominion over, and may perhaps threaten
to torture, or destroy them, except they submit, and contract a perpetual
Servitude by Oath, or other forms of engagement, which they under such
Exigences may lawfully yield to. And proportionably the Estates of any Nation
may be thus pressed by an irresistible Prince, and thereupon lawfully submit to
that injurious Demand of such Prince. Nay, if any Prince and the fiduciary
Council of any Nation concert to oppress the Subject People by an unjust demand
of Submission, they, being, not only in Fact, but Legal Constition, incapable
to resist, may for the same reason contract Submission, or Legal Allegiance,
when their former Lord has left them without order, to shift for themselves,
and acts not within his Sphere as heretofore. For herein you do not injure him,
but save your self, which he has no right in such cases to deny you. And this
at least is the Case of all those, who have taken the Oath of New Allegiance,
without doing any thing else in the Revolution, though the Prince and our
Convention had really done King James and us wrong. For we could neither in
Right, nor Fact, oppose it; for our Representatives, and the Lords having
determined upon the Nation, we were inhabil to censure their Judgment, and
consequently to oppose or subvert, what we had no Authority to condemn.


Dyscher. Much such another instance is Sol. and Ab. p. 6, 7.
your Lord of a Manor. Let him look how he came to be so. I may treat with him
as Lord of the Manor, whom the Law declares to be so. But if the Lords Tenants
conspire against their lawful Landlord, and dispossess him of his Manor, and
invite a Stranger, and say, and swear he shall be Lord of the Manor, and
accordingly pay Homage and Fealty to him, Sir, you may determine for their
swearing and lying too, if you please, but I shall have nothing the better
opinion of your honesty for it. T. B's 2d. Let. p. 24.


Eucher. I observe two grand defects in this Reply; One, that it is not
supposably legal, that all the Tenants in the Manor can by Legal Forms of
Judgment dispossess a Lawful, and possess a wrong Person into the Lordship of a
Manor, because these Tenants are not Judges in Law. And any other violent and
illegal Forms of Expulsion, and Admission quadrate not with our Case.

But Secondly, It Is a very silly supposition, and never any where exemplified
in Fact, that all the Tenants (under a state of National Government) should
violently out a true, and put in a wrong Landlord vi and armis, and swear, and
pay the wrong Possessor all the Duties of the Homage accustomed, when the Lord
that is in by Law, will bring the strength of the Country to reduce them.

And Thirdly, You cannot duly apply this to our present Case of Allegiance. For
all King James's Subjects did not concur to out him, either violently, or
judicially, nor consequently to bring in the Stranger, which is the form in
which you state the Case of Rebellious Tenants. Otherwise however my parallel
holds good, that if a great many of the Tenants conspire with a Stranger, and
bribe the Judges to a corrupt Judgment against the old true Landlord, who being
thereby ejected, the Stranger comes in by forms of Law, I say still, the rest
innocent Tenants, though conscious of the Wrong, may swear Homage, and Fealty to
the New, de facto, Landlord. And so here put the Case, as you would have it, at
the worst, that never so great a part of King James's Subjects had with the
Prince of Orange actually conspired against him, and made him fly, and
thereupon a National Court assembling to sit upon the Tenure of his Estate, had
been corrupted to give wrong Judgment against him for the Prince, yet the form
of Process being legal, the innocent Subjects may, or must take him for their
Royal Landlord, that is in by Forms of Law, and swear him the customary Homage,
and Fealty. But for the justice of that Judgment I have fully advocated
already, and so in this place shall have no need to make repetition.


Dyscher. But let the Fifth Commandment look to it self; for it was never so
hardly beset. You say, Sol. and Ab. p. 7.
That from the Fifth Commandment we cannot charge King William with subjection
to King James, etc. -- But does a Nephew, or a Son in Law owe no Duty, if he
owe not that which is properly called Subjection? Or may a Man, because he is
not his Subject, spoil another of all he has? And must all persons applaud, and
approve the Act, and swear he is in the Right? T. B's 2d Let. p. 25.


Eucher. Since I must bear the penance of answering your loose and impertinent
Questions so often inculcated, know you then, that as to the point of Duty, a
Nephew owes an Uncle, and a Son in Law owes his Father in Law, Reverence on the
account of those Relations, if the Superior Relation loses not his Title to
that Reverence by ill usage, For if an Uncle shall misuse a Nephew, or a Father
in Law the Son in Law, without Cause, and will not fairly adjust, or refer
their differences upon demand, the Nephew, and Son in Law owe no respect at
all, for that such Uncle, and Father in Law is worse than a stranger, and a
most unnatural Enemy; And therefore the Nephew, and Son in Law having not
derived their Being, Maintenance nor Education from the Uncle, and Father in
Law, and being under no present dependence on them, are free to vindicate their
Gauses against such Uncle, and Father in Law, by those ways of defense, that
they are legally capable of, either by Law, Arbitration or War. As for
injustice, you know I am no Advocate for it, and therefore your Interrogation
hereupon, with your Reflection upon his Majesty, is as invidious toward me, as
injurious toward his Majesty, as I have before abundantly showed.


Dyscher. The Case of an own Daughter is still more severe; but for that you
say, Sol. and Ab. p. 7.
she is in Duty bound to follow her Husbands Fortune, Order, and Authority,
even against the Will of her Father, and that with a more plenary consent, if
she judges her Husbands Cause to be just in it self. -- But, Sir, I am not
satisfied with your bare word, that a Woman is thus bound to follow her Husband
through thick and thin; -- let her have a care how she becomes partner in his
sins. -- But does the Duty of a Wife take away the Relation of a Child? They
may indeed limit each other, so that the Father may not command the Daughter
any thing inconsistent with the Duty of a Wife; nor the Husband the Wife any
thing inconsistent with the Duty of a Child to a Parent. But yet the great end
of these Relations is to strengthen, and support, and not to destroy each
other. -- Besides your Reason is a mistake in it self as to this Case; for
could you with all your tricks of Legerdemain remove both King James and the
Prince of Wales out of the way, then there would arise another Relation, and
then he in these Dominions must follow her Fortunes, not she his. -- But to let
this pass, all that has been done is contrary to the Duties of those Relations,
which they were, and are under by the Fifth Commandment. T.B's 2d Let. p. 25.


Eucher. But all this is but noise and shuffle. For why had you not openly
denied, or yielded the truth of my Proposition, that a Wife is to follow her
Husbands Fortune, Order and Authority, against the will of her Father, if she
thinks her Husbands Case to be just? For though you will say, These words I
unawares omitted in the last Citation of T.B.
This Judgment is not worth a Farthing, except the Cause be just in it self;
Yet be it just or unjust, she must act upon her own judgment of it. And to what
purpose have you such a care that she follow him not through thick and thin in
his sins? Did I ever assert that liberty to a Wife, or to the Princess of
Orange? Do not I expressly except out of this Case, Sol. and Ab. p. 7.
all violations of all those Decencies, that are yet, notwithstanding her
Marriage, due by the Fifth Commandment to her Father, which are consistent with
her Husbands Rights and Interests, and in her Rightful Power to perform? But
this was another inconsiderable, which you in great sincerity have omitted,
that it might not justify my piety to the Fifth Commandment, and prevent all
occasion of reproach. But I think you are a very loose Casuist for a Wife
between the Authorities of Husband and Father, if you think that the Husbands
Power limits the Wife only in those Commands of the Father, that are in
themselves inconsistent with the Duties of a Wife, whether the Husbands
prohibition intervene or no; (for except this be your meaning, it is nothing to
the purpose, nor against me.) For it is not the Husbands Power, but the Law of
God, that binds the Wife from the violation of her Duties to her Husband, as it
does bind her to keep her Duties to her Parents, and all other persons, even
Subjects, that have no power over her. But by your favor, if a Father commands
a Married Daughter in any indifferent thing, importing in it self no ill to
her. Husband, she has no absolute Authority to promise, or do it, but on grant,
or just presumption of her Husbands leave; for if he forbid it at any time
before it is done, the Wives hands are in duty bound up from the performance,
and how faulty soever the Son in Law be in his perverse and needless
inhibitions, the Daughter is discharged of all Guilt in the noncompliance to
her Fa-Father. So that, strictly speaking, all Imperial Power, merely human, is
in things, that in themselves are left at liberty by the Laws of God. And now
whether I have said any thing more, or worse than this, speak out without
wrigling, and subterfuge. And yet to deal openly with you, and piously (I hope)
with the Laws of my Creator, I think there is a great latitude of equity in
this Fifth Commandment, and that it consists not in a mere indivisible point,
nor is founded merely in the Relation, but the Causes and Designs of it by the
Ordinance of God and Nature. For Parents being Vice-Gods to their Children,
while under their Family and Dominion, the more they Resemble God in their
Offices of Piety, especially toward God and their Children, the more their
Children are bound to honor them, even when they are sent off from the House
of their Parents, to found new Families, and to subsist freely by themselves.
For though the ties of proper subjection are then loosed, yet the Duties of
Honor still remain uncancelled. But if the Parents recede from their Piety
toward God, the common and Supreamest Father of all, the greater this impiety
of Parents is, the less Honor is due to them even from their own Children. And
I truly am of Opinion, that if such Impiety grow up to perfect Atheism, or
Defiance of God, from which all the long and tender Supplications of the
Children cannot reduce them, the Chidren are discharged from all the Offices of
Personal Honor toward them, though not of Pity and Compassion for them. And upon
this ground the Law of Moses does not exempt Enticers to Idolatry from the
Vengeance even of the nearest Relations, Deuteronomy. 13.6, to 11. If thy Brother, the
Son of thy Mother, or thy Son, or thy Daughter, or the Wife of thy Bosom, or
thy Friend, which is as thine own Soul, entice thee, saying, Let us go, and
serve other Gods -- Thou shall not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him,
neither shall thine Eye pity him, neither shall thou spare, neither shall thou
conceal him; But thou shall surely kill him; thine Hand shall be first upon
him, to put him to death, and afterward the Hand of all the People. And thou
shall stone him with Stones, that he die, because he sought to thrust thee away
from the Lord thy God, etc. So that all such Persons were by the Law of God
looked on as a common Pestilence, not to be honored, loved, or cherished, but
destroyed by the nearest Relations.


Dyscher. But Parents here being omitted out of this exact Catalogue of other
Relations, it shows them to be not within this Law; and therefore that this Law
does not derogate from the Honor due to Parents by the Fifth Commandment, though
they entice their Children to Idolatry; the Reason being grounded on the
Authority of Parents over Children, which would be nulled, if Children might
prosecute this Law upon their Parents. And for this Cause also by this Law the
Wife is not required to destroy her Idolatrous Husband.


Eucher. If you will literally interpret this Law only of the very Relations
that are expressed, than all other, even less Relations, will be exempt, which
is unreasonable. But if you will argue a majori ad minus, that if none of these
Relations are exempt, surely no less Relations ought to be judged discharged;
then the relation of Parents to Children being less than that of the Wife to
the Husband, and no greater than that of Children to Parents, will be concluded
within this Law. Nor could their Natural Authority indemnifie them, for all
that was from, and under God, and was ipso facto forfeit, whenever they
rejected God for Idols. Otherwise such an exempted Authority of Parents must
have been a Snare to the Children, to draw them from the Lord their God, or at
least to restrain them from asserting their God impartially against all his
Enemies. And in the same Chapter, Idolatrous Cities were to be utterly
destroyed by all the rest of the People, without regard to any Relations
dwelling in them; for when the Judgment of God was past upon them, all Natural
Relation and Authority ceased as to all consequent offices of Respect, Love, or
Honor, when the impious Apostates were convict, and doomed to excision. It Is
true indeed, that Law, being in its penal sanction but positive, local, and
judicial, does not oblige us, but the natural reason substrate thereto
supposes, and indicates all obligations of Duty from all Relations whatsoever
forfeited by Atheism, and avowed Irreligion. And accordingly Asa dishonored
his Mother in devesting her of her Royal Dignity, because she had made an Idol
in a Grove, 1 King. 15.13. 2 Chronicles. 15.16. Nor is this any breach of the Law of
Nature, but the observation of it, for the Law of Nature being nothing else but
pure Abstract Reason and Equity, whatsoever is consonant to this Equity,
comports with the Laws of our Nature. By these Laws the sins of Men-rescind
their Rights in many benefits, which had been due to them in a state of
Innocence. The Law of God requires us simply to honor all men, it being the
natural due of our beings framed after the Image of God; and yet wicked and
ungodly men are to be shunned as spots and blemishes by the Law of Nature, and
to be made Anathema by the Censure of the Church. For the Foundation of all
Authority whatsoever is God, and all Obligations to all Duties, Civil, Moral,
and Religious, are founded in him; so that an avowed rejection of God, puts men
out of all claims of Authority, which alone is originally Gods, for a
renunciation of God is an effectual renunciation of all just and real Authority
whatsoever. The Fifth Commandment therefore being not a mere positive Precept,
but a dictate of Natural Equity, is interpretable to particular Acts according
to the Rules of Equity, and must concede to superior and more important
Obligations, which will sometimes require us to hate Father and Mother (that
is, to disregard their Commands, and forsake their Persons) to keep Gods
Commandments, Luke 14.26. If a Son be a King, and the Father a Subject, he must
deal with his own Father as a Subject in Civil Causes, nay as a Malefactor, if
necessity requires. A Son is bound to defend (even by the Sword, if there be no
other way) his Wife and Children from the Sword of his Father, and to save his
Country by the Detection of his Fathers Treasons. And many such Cases more
there may be, wherein intolerable wickedness on one hand, and greater
Obligations on the other, cut off the Ties of Honor and Union, between Parents
and Children, Husbands and Wives, and all other Temporal Relations; since what
separates men from God, may well disengage them one from another. And to put a
particular Case, if a Prince marry a Kings Daughter and Heiress, and the King
after becomes suspected of an Imposture, to pervert that Daughters inheritance,
and upon demand will not refer that doubt to the Arbitration of his own Senate,
but to elude the Hopes, and just Expectations of his Son in Law, Daughter, and
his own People, in this, and other momentous Concernments, he puts all the
Laws, Liberties and Religion of his Kingdoms in a Course of Subversion and ruin
under Arbitrary and Foreign Powers, may not such a Son in Law endeavor to put
a stop to these Measures, and to force such a King to do right? And is such
Prince's Wife bound to oppose her Husband in these just Causes, to abet her
Fathers injustice and unnatural Impiety? And if the Father being thus pressed
by the Son in Law, rather than do the justice demanded, will fly for the
succor of his injustice to another unjust King, the Enemy of his People, and
in the mean time leave his Kingdom in Confusion, which shall subject it more
effectually to his Scourge upon his return with Foreign Forces, may not such
Prince, and such Kings Daughter, and a confused Nation unite, and settle it
against the ruins otherwise inevitable to them all? For if Natural Ties
sometimes give place to Civils of greater weight, here surely is as fair, and
just an instance for it, as well can be imagined, or alleged out of History.
And that Civil Obligations of greater moment do preponderate against Natural,
you your self confess, when you rightly say, had not the constitution been for
the time being lawfully altered, the Crown coming to the Princess of Orange by
mere Descent, the Prince here must have been her Subject, though by the
Matrimonial Laws of Nature he is her Lord. It is indeed a melancholy
Speculation, when the impieties of such near Relations break off all the
Natural Links of Duty and Union, which must never be receded from as long as
the Union is tolerable, and consistent with Superior Obligations; but of two
Evils the least is always to be chosen, and where two Offices are incompetible,
the more important is to be prosecuted. And yet, though this be lawful and
necessary, it is sometimes a Tragical Scene, under which even the Righteous
Parties are to mourn, and lament their infelicity in falling into such Straits
and Temptations, and are incessantly to pray, that God would put a just and
good End to the Disaster, and in the mean time to make necessary Justice and
Piety the only Rule and Reason of their Actions in such a State of Division,
and inevitable Contention. And such being the form of the present Affairs, if
you needs will censure the Morals of your Sovereigns, you ought to allow their
Measures all the Charity the Case will bear, which hitherto seems the Care of
Gods Especial Providence for us; And if it be so; it is a dangerous thing to
Curse whom the Lord has Blessed. But I have told you, these things concern not
us in our Civils, and it is therefore best to leave things secret, and above
us, unto God, the Lord and Judge of all men. But as to the Change it self, it
is an apparent delivery and blessing to the Nation in the best manner
attainable by any means less than supernatural. For a deliverance it is plain
we needed, which could never have been secured, had King James continued
undisturbed in his Reign. Now if an unrelated Prince had desired to help us,
yet he had had no Civil Interests to have grounded a defense, or rescue us from
any Civil Laws, or Laws of War. Then the Sovereignty given to a Stranger had
been a cutting off the Line Royal, which neither Atwood, or Johnson have Since
Johnson will give Richard Rich a Right.
yet asserted lawful by our Rules: It would also have been a punishing the sins
of the Father upon the Children, and inevitably have involved us in intestine
Wars. Then again, if the Princess of Orange had invaded her Fathers Kingdom and
Crown by any Hostile Forms, this would have looked more violent and unnatural,
and seems more than the Princely Lady in Temper or Duty could well or easily
have attempted. Time was, before a calm and through consideration of things,
that matters seemed hard; but I am now convinced, that no other Person under
Heaven could in human prospect be so proper a Redeemer as his present Majesty,
nor any Form of Settlement devised to fore-fend the Ruin of this Nation, upon
whose Strength the Security of all Christendom at this day principally seems
to depend. And this, and all that I have said to you, I speak with all
sincerity, which if it persuade not you, I cannot help that, but I think it is
a reasonable ground for that Allegiance, which I have not carelessly or
inconsiderately given.


Dyscher. You do us manifest injustice, when you suppose, or feign, that we
admit no Settlement under Powers procured by the breach of Gods Commandments.
And this in all reason you must do knowingly, and wilfully; because I think
there is not one, who on our behalf has concerned himself in the matter of the
Convocation-Book, but has stated this Question, and always admitted a through
Settlement whatever were the means whereby it was procured. It Is true, we
neither commend, nor encourage such wicked doings; but on the other hand we do
not think Dominion to be founded in Grace, and that a man cannot have a good
Title, unless he be a good Christian. We can mourn over the bad man, whilst we
submit to the good Title. But we complain, that we have no Settlement, nor any
thing like a good Title, to which we may submit. For who can own that to be a
good Title, against which there are prior, and better Titles in being,
contesting, and claiming? Or who can take that for a Settlement, where a bad
Title by bad means is maintained against a just and good Title? T. B's 2d.
Let. p. 25.
-- We say, that a full Settlement in one, while another, who has Right,
claims, and endavours to recover his Right, is contradictory nonsense. T.B.
ibid. p. 40.


Eucher. I very well know, and freely own, that all your Disputations upon the
Convocation-Book do in terms allow a full Settlement, however procured, though
you contradict the Convocation in your notions of a through Settlement. But it
does not therefore follow, that all of your Party think so. The most, that I
have orally discoursed, stand upon the breach of the Moral Laws, as the grand
exception against the Right, on which only they can swear Allegiance; since,
say they, Allegiance follows Right, and Right cannot be founded in Acts morally
Evil, Note, That in Sol. and Ab. p. 8. I did not make Dyscheres positively to
deny Submission to all Settlements procured by breach of Gods Commandments,
because I know they do not all deny it; but because it is the common Objection
with most of them in point of Conscience, I made Dyscheres reply, not should
say No?
and essentially injurious, and consequently by such there be be no full, or
through form of Settlement. And if you will give me leave to deliver my Opinion,
I think, if Gods Providence had not so disposed of things, as to bring that
absolutely No, but what if I Book into public Light by the hand of my Lord
Archbishop Sancroft in this very Juncture, all your Pleas would have chiefly
stuck in the Laws of God, whose violation with you should have been alone
sufficient to have nulled all Rights, and Titles. But now as it is, you are
pinched by the Authority and the Edition of that Book, and forced against your
wills to own it, and have no relief but in forced Arts of Evasion. Such is that
demure Protestation, that you do not think Dominion founded in Grace, which you
know was, and is a pretense toto coelo distant from our matter, as claiming all
Secular Rights by virtue of their Religious Character, or Election. But will
you allow, that a full and legal form of Settlement can be founded in any Act
really injurious? I would have you speak out without boggling, or clouting your
Tongue. If not, then the Defect of Plenitude in such Settlements stands in the
iniquity, and breach of moral Justice, and Gods Commandments. And in truth this
at last is the true English of all those Reasons, on which you complain, that
we have no Settlement, nor any thing like a good Title, though those Reasons are
wrapped up in forms of words chiefly relating to Civil Laws. For the sum of all
is; the Possession of another man's Right is no full Settlement, because it has
no good Title, as being a violation of Right, and Gods Commandments. Of which I
shall have occasion perhaps to discourse more anon. In the mean time, as I have
already given you part of my sense herein, so will I now deliver and settle it
as full; viz. That when several persons claim Right, then pendente lite, either
in Law, or War, the Legal Presumption of Right must be for the quiet Possessor;
but after judgment given to be in the person to whom it is adjudged, till
reverse of judgment, and all other antecedent Titles and Pretensions are to be
deemed null and cessant to all Civil Effects and Constructions, whatsoever the
Errors, or men's private Senses herein may be; and the condemned Titles must not
be taken to be good, and still in being, though new claims and contestations may
be promoted by the outed Party. Which being premised, I can easily yield you,
that that can be no good Title, against which there are prior or better Titles
[apparently] in being, contesting, and claiming, and that it is no full and
Legal Settlement, where an [apparently] bad Title is by bad means [apparently]
maintained against a Title [apparently] just and good. But this is not to be
taken in a judged Cause. But who was Judge between King James and King William,
while the former disputed the new Possession of the later with the Sword, to
determine the Civil Practice of the Nation? If none, then were we to abide by
King Williams quiet form of possession; If there were any Judge, it was
foreign, or domestic; Now there neither was, nor could be a foreign Judge to
oblige us; if domestic, it was either private, or public; if private, that
cannot oblige the whole Nation; if public, then it was in the Estates
convened; but they have judged King James's Title void and Cessant, and not in
being, and so, though extrajudicially claimed, neither just, nor good. But if you
will neither allow quiet Possession, nor public Judgment as a Rule to State
Titles Legally, but will throw up all to private Opinions, or Humors, you
dissolve all the ties of Civil Society into Eternal Wars, and Commotions. But
because you clamor that we have no Settlement, I will make further Advances,
and prove the Admission of their Majesty's by the Estates of this Land to be a
full and proper Settlement, though against King James's claim and contest, from
the Laws of this Land, the universal Usage of all Nations, natural Reason and
Holy Scripture.


Dyscher. This is a teeming Promise; have a care lest the Production be
ridiculous.


Eucher. First then I begin with the common Laws of this Nation, which are
nothing else but the constant and general Customs of England, which Lawyers
justify for good and binding upon a fair presumption of their Descent to us
from some immemorial Compositions Real and National made by our Forefathers;
whose Acts and Contracts for future Ages do by the Laws of all Nations bind
their Posterities, (that are yet in their Loins, as in the lowest degree of
minority) till they are validly vacated. And such Obligations are justified by
sacred Instances, as in the Oath of Jacob's Children to carry Joseph's Bones
out of Egypt, in the Covenants between God and Noah, Abraham, Moses, in the
League of Israel with Gibcon, and all other their National Contracts, and the
Laws of Jonadab on the Rechabites, etc. So that fidelity to the Contracts,
Ordinances, and Compositions Real of our Fathers, and Ancestors obliges us to
the Customs, that yet continue as the Common Laws of England from that supposed
Original; And thus their Legal Obligation is founded not in Force, but in Truth
and Honesty. Which being premised, I add, that our Nation in these two last
Parliaments, after a full Debate has judged their Admission of King William
and Queen Mary according to our Laws, Legal, and the second Parliament has
moreover recognized them King and Queen of Right according to those Laws. And
the first Parliament upon this Constitution fixed on them the full Allegiance
of the Subject to be secured by Oath as much as to any other Kings whatsoever,
that so they might thro'ly make this present Settlement full and entire, which
therefore they judged to be such according to our Laws, without any
concurrence, and notwithstanding the opposition of the Late King, which on his
Cession, or Abdication could in their Judgment create no defect in this present
Settlement, since the Confusion and Anarchy, we were put into thereby, did in
their Judgments give them a Legal Right to resettle as they could under the
then Exigences for the Common Preservation; nor did they judge us tied to a
State of continued Anarchy during King James's pleasure, that while he provided
for himself in France, by his own private Counsels, without the consent of the
Nation, we should be at no liberty at home to provide for our selves against a
Ruin otherwise impendent and inevitable. And if we look back to all the Changes
in the Succession ever since there have been two Houses of Parliament, the full
and final Settlement after all Ruptures, Disorders, and Disputes has
determined in the Recognitions, and Allegiances enacted by these Parliaments,
even without the consent, and against the presumed claim of the outed
Competitors, though these were sometimes Lineal Heirs, and present in the Land.
Much less then is such consent, or cessation of pretense, or claim in the
relinquishing and absent Competitors necessary to the fullness, and validity of
such Settlements. And though the Dispossessed afterward moved Stirs and Wars
against those past Settlements, that becomes no Argument against their real
plenitude for the time being in form of Law; for by those new Commotions they
designed to reduce themselves into such a full form of Settlement by
Parliamentary Recognitions, out of which, by present Wars they designed to
eject their settled Adversaries; for to a fuller Advancement they could never
raise themselves by the greatest force and successes whatsoever. Thus all the
precedent Usages in such cases lay before our Estates, first in Convention, and
since that in Parliament, and according to these have they made this Settlement
as legally full and Obligatory as 'twas possible, as judging it to be so full
in its own Nature and Reason, without any present Defects, or Capacities of
addition.


Dyscher. I wonder you cannot observe here, what you readily can, when it makes
for you, that the first Constituting Parliament did not recognize King William
and Queen Mary to be de jure, but excluded that Assertion out of the Oath. But
the second Parliament recognized their Right, though hereby, as you will say,
they added nothing of that intention to the Oath. Now then the first
Settlement, to which those being tacked, bears proportion, going no further
than a Constitution de facto, was not at the full, because it came not up to
the fuller Recognition de jure; which being judicially apparent is with you the
Legal Form of Title, and Ground of Allegiance. And so the Oath being required
to a Settlement that was not thro'ly full, cannot by Bishop Overals Convocation
Book be proved due from both Clergy and Laity, for that the Settlement to be
sworn to was herein defective. And herein even Mr. Johnson is more sincere and
honest than you, who scorns to pay Pres. to the Argument, p. 12, 13, 14.
Allegiance upon any kind of Success, or forms of Settlement, except they are
really founded upon Legal Right.


Eucher. It will be as easy for you to observe, as for me to remark, that the
Recognition is but a Declaration, not a Constitution of Right; and so adds
nothing of Right, that before was really wanting; but more fully declares the
Right, that stands and is founded in the first Constitution, which actually was
at full before, though not so fully declared; this Recognition being designed not
only to repress the Contradictions of their Majesty's Right and Title, but to
compose, as much as might be, men's Doubts and Surmises, and perhaps this your
very Objection hereupon. But whatsoever be the Rights, Titles, or Pretensions
of Princes to Crowns antecedent to the actual Settlement, they may be fair
preparations, and grounds of claim, but they enter not into the essential form,
and constituent Reason of a full actual Settlement, which commences and
consists purely in a Legal Form of Admission by the Estates of this Realm
judging for themselves, that they may lawfully admit this, or that Pretender or
Solicitor, even when they are not permitted to judge any thing on the Right of
his demand of such Admission, which belongs to the Question de jure. And to
those that are thus de facto settled, whether they had any real antecedent
Right of claiming, or no, the National Allegiance is by public Contract always
given to the full, without any distinguishing Measures, Forms, or Abatements.
And this is not only otherwise evident, but is made more so by this present
Recognition. For this second Parliament, that enacted this declarative
Recognition of Right, gave, and could give no further Allegiance than had been
before given on the mere Legal Form of Actual Settlement, which they in their
zeal would have done undoubtedly, had they judged the first Settlement any wise
deficient in it self, or its Obligations to a plenary Allegiance, which yet
however is of no other form, or virtue than that Allegiance which is always
given even to mere Kings de facto. Which shows the sense of our Nation to be,
that by our Law Allegiance is given to Kings, not on the account of an
antecedent real Title to the Crown, but on the account of the Legal Form of
Settlement into the Actual Possession thereof, upon which there is no superior
Judge to hear, nor determine Quarrels, and Claims of Titles. And you that
require more to the nature of a full Settlement, require more than the
Convocation has done, which assigns your Allegiance to the Lib. 1. Can. 27.
King de facto, Ibid. Chap. 28.
though he come into the full Settlement by wrong and injurious means, and
requires only a National Submission, or a continuance of quiet possession to
the form of Ibid. Chap. 30.
a full and through Settlement, owning the original wickedness of the seizure to
be no Legal Bar or impeachment to the Authority of their Government, into which
they are formally and fully settled. And such was the State of the Caesar's in
the Empire, when the two great Apostles required Christian Subjection to them,
not on the moral justice of their Titles, of which they could be no Judges, but
on their actual settlement in the Concession and Submission of the Senate, and
other popular Powers. And such also was the reason of subjection in those
instanced Changes, on which that Convocation wisely grounded this their now
celebrious Determination. But since you have again upbraided me with Mr.
Johnson, I cannot choose but observe how naturally men, that run into contrary
extremes, do meet in the other side of the Sphere, as you and your greatest.
Adversaries do in this present Controversy; And you both therefore fall into
the same absurdities. Now here Mr. Johnson either understands not the formal
Nature of a full Settlement, of if he does, he is inconsistent with himself.
For if (as I have proved) a National Admission constitutes a Settlement, how
can Mr. Johnson explode Settlement, when he places the Right of Kings in the
Admission of the People? But if he requires any moral justice, to make the Act
of the People Rightful, then if the People fail in that moral Justice, how can
their Constitution be really Right, by which Justice it self is violated? And
such failure in a People is no impossibility, except you will entitle them to
an infallible Sanctity in all popular Actions. As for example; Mr. Johnson
produces but one Authority Arg. 1. p. 50, 51.
out of Knyghton, to prove, that Kings acting perversely against the Laws may be
deposed, and some one of the Royal Race advanced by the Peers, and People. I
will not now strive to weaken the Authority and Credit of the Author herein,
nor the Truth of that Power, which the then Lords and Commons claimed against
their King, neither will I allege the many Changes and Statutes since, that
seem to have abrogated the popular right of Abrogation; but suppose that this
still is the Right of the Nation against their Kings, yet if the People should
on false pretenses and imputations abrogate their King, this Act could not be
morally Just and Right, though it were in form legal; and if the Subjects, that
are innocent, are not to admit what is thus externally Legal, except it be also
altogether Rightful, then are they not bound to stand by any Popular
Abrogations, which they know, or judge to be morally faulty, and consequently
may oppose all new Titles, if they are founded in the real Right of such
Abrogations. And to come close home to the Case, if King James were not really
guilty of every one of those Enormities to a Title, upon which such Statute did
legitimate the Abrogation, and the Convention had really abrogated their King
without accurate conviction of all those guilts recited by that lost or
undiscoverable Statute quoted by Knyghton, then had their Abrogation been a
nullity, as not being Rightful. But further, if men shall object, that
Knyghtons relation of a Statute, not seen by himself, but only said to be
objected by the Peers and the Commons, is not a Record, nor a valid Testimony
to any Civil Consequences, as being not upon Oath, liable to Error, and
incapable of judicial forms of Discussion, besides its singularity, where shall
we find a bottom to authorize King James's abrogation? For it is not enough to a
Judicial Conviction, or effect or surmise, that Richard destroyed that Statute
in the Tower, upon such a general crimination that he defaced Statutes, of
which there is no particular form of Conviction extant, no not in Knyghton, who
yet is the only Traditor of this Transaction; but you must bring us legal proof
for what must legally concern us. And yet nothing else that Mr. Johnson has
cited out of Law Books, nor King John's Charter in the Pastoral Letter, does
amount to a Popular Right of Abrogation, but only to a limited power of
resisting Kings on their oppression of the Laws and Constitutions. So that
whatsoever has in fact been done toward our several Changes, must not all be
taken, or sworn to as Right, but the consequent Settlements, by National Acts
must be taken for formally Legal for the time being, and submitted to under
that Notion, leaving the real Right of the procedures to Gods judgment, because
there is none other under Heaven to adjust it above the National Sanctions.


Dyscher. I did not interject the mention of Mr. Johnson to justify all his
Principles, but only to allege for our Cause those Right Concessions of our
greatest Enemies, as more candid and clear from juggling than you, even in his
greatest bitterness. I will now dismiss him, and produce you what a Friend of
mine impartially reflected on this pretended Authority in the Judicial Opinions
of Parliaments, viz. that you cannot but know, that this Power of Parliaments
is absolutely denied by that Party, against whom you dispute; and we do not
think it reasonable to be convinced without proof, viz. that what is thus done
is agreeable to the Laws of England. MS. Reflect.


Eucher. If you are not inwardly convinced of the truth of their Judgment upon
their Power, and of the lawfulness of their Constitution founded thereupon, I
cannot help that. Neither is the Care of the State so much concerned to enforce
such an inward conviction, though it is to persuade it, and to silence
Contradictions. But, as I have often told you, Judicial Opinions must overbear
all private ones to the contrary as to all Civil Consequences. This the peace
of mankind, the necessity of ending Controversies, and the fundamental Reasons
of Government do universally require; so that you must assign some Superior
Court, or Judge within the Kingdom to be determined by, if you will not stand
to their Judgment, or expose all to private judgments; the first of which is
impossible to be sworn, and the later impracticable in a Society. And to turn
the dull point of this Objection on your self; the Parliament does not think it
reasonable to be determined by Private Judgments, especially those of the
professed Enemies of their long-settled and immemorial Authority. And what if I
oppose the general Trust of the Nation in Civils to the public Judgment of our
Parliaments, rather than the contrary Decisions of some private Zealots and
Casuists, whose Senses are seldom uniform, often impracticable, and always
inauthoritative? Will you here set your Private Judgments in battle array
against the Authority and Judgment of the whole Nation, and the Public Estates
thereof? Or whether Opinion must concede in order to Public Peace? So that
here your imprudent Zeal on false Notions of Loyalty hurries you into
Principles absolutely Seditious and Destructive to the Legal Constitution of
all Governments, and particularly that, which the Kings of England have
themselves established.


Dyscher. Well, to put an End to this Disquisition upon our own Laws, what have
you to say for the Legality, or fullness of your Settlement from the Usages, or
customary Practice of Nations?


Eucher. I hope you do not require me to corrade a vast heap of Historical
Instances, National Decrees, and Determinations of Civilians hereupon. This
would be to repeat whole Libraries to an evidence of one particular Custom. But
your own reading will inform you, that under the pressing exigences of Anarchy
and Ruin, the Superiors, or Agents of all People have ever authentically
contracted a change of Government, and Governors, as to them then appeared
necessary to the Common Preservation.


Dyscher. It Is so indeed upon Conquests, which some have pretended here to the
shame, reproach, and forfeiture of their Country, as well as in contradiction
to common Sense, the pretenses of your King, and the Sense of your Parliament.
But where there are no Conquests, it is not so easy to adduce such Custom of
Nations.


Eucher. That the Nation was not conquered is most evident, yet that King
William in the Military Course grew stronger than King James, who disbanded all
his Forces, and stooped to the prevailing Prince, is as evident; nor was this
any False Doctrine in the sense of the Nation. But to assert, that hereby alone
the Right of the Crown accrued to King William, even without the consequent
Admission and Contract of the Nation, had he pleased to have taken it on the
mere Right of the Sword, is what is indeed contrary to all Law and Reason. For
the mere force, or victory of the Sword gives no Right, or Authority even over
a vanquished People, till they federally resign to the Conqueror, and then much
less does it so in a Nation not conquered. But to omit the Laws of pure
Conquests, there are instances enough of Abdications, Cessions, and Desertions
(as many, I believe, and more than of simple and proper Victories) to set out
the sense of all Nations by. For upon all such the places quitted admitted such
consequent Settlements, as the straits, they were cast into, would permit, as
is manifest in the leaving of Garrisons, Holds, or Countries. And the truth is,
there is the same reason upon all proper Conquests, and other Surrendries, that
legitimates the admission of a Change, viz. the necessity of preserving the
Public Body from ruins and devastations.


Dyscher. I do not remember indeed any ininstance to the contrary in the
practices of Nations; for they perhaps have been, and are as bad as we, ready
to for shift themselves upon any pinch, but generally careless of, and
perfidious to their unfortunate Princes Interests. But what Reason can you show
for it in our Case, which is so very plain and obvious, that we were at liberty
to have preserved our Sovereign, and our selves together, and if so, how can
this Settlement be admitted for legal, or be reputed full against the so just
Claims of our real Sovereign?


Eucher. Here again you transgress the proper limits of a private Judgment,
when you take upon you to say, that we, ( i. e. our Convention) could have
secured King James in his Throne, and this Nation in its Rights, and
Properties. But in the main point, where you stick, viz. the Consent of King
James, and your Prince of Wales, you are very unreasonable. For shall he, who
at last put all his Subjects into confusion by his leaving the Government,
hinder us from settling, till he give us his Consent? Or must the Consent of a
Infant be waited, who, if he ever was, or yet is, is in the custody and
disposal of an Enemy King, who would settle him, and us too with a witness, if
he had but a lucky Wind, and a fair Opportunity? It is possible, that an
offended Prince may meditate revenge on a People, that will not yield up all to
the insatiable claims of boundless Prerogative. And Desertion would be the
cheapest, surest, and severest way of revenge, if they must never settle again
till he please to authorize them; and this truly would be the strangest of all
Prerogatives. There are also that say, that King James's Priests counseled,
and his Queen engaged him to go off, on this very account, that we might fall
into such Plagues through our Divisions, and unsettled Looseness, as should
enable him to return with an absolute plenitude of Arbitrary Power. But not to
depend on uncertain fames with their oblique constructions, what can the legal
language of that Cession speak to his Loyal People but this? I have disbanded
my Army, and will not contest it with the Sword. I shift for my self, and must
leave you to shift for your selves and settlement as you can. Since I yield to
my fears and necessities, so may you. If even a Natural Parent, to save his own
life, leaves his Son to the mercy of his Enemies. the Son may contract Peace,
and subjection to that his Fathers Enemy for his own preservation, nor can the
mere Natural Relation and Interest of the Father in the Son vacate moral
Obligation of such Contract, till that power of his Enemy over his Son be
otherwise legally dissolved by the Laws of War, Redemption, or otherwise. So
that, though we should allow you, that all King James's Enemies sinned in
procuring this new Settlement upon us all, yet his most Loyal Subjects may most
innocently submit, from the reason of the thing, and the virtual Concession
hereunto in the voice of his Desertion, which must be supposed as made to his
faithful Adherents, though not to his Enemies. So that should he ever return
again, he could not in any justice punish the mere submission to this new
Settlement in those, who contributed nothing to it. And you that refuse it,
refuse that liberty, which his Desertion legally gave you by all Civil
Interpretations. All which put together should be of great might with you to
admit the present submission as Legal. Nor ought his resumed Contests to be
taken as Legal, or just bars to the contrary. For if there were such a Virtual
and Legal Concession in his Desertion, the Estates of his People, taking the
benefit of it, have provided for us a Settlement upon that Concession, which
being passed and confirmed, the supposed revocation of that Concession, by a
new War, or Inauthoritative Declarations, is null, void and unobliging. And so
here was, though not a Verbal, yet a Legal Censent of King James, which is as
much as you your selves can in reason require to the justifying our present
Submission, and to the plenitude of our present Settlement.


Dyscher. T. B's 2d Let. p. 21.
These are pretty tricks to catch Dotterils. But above all your most amazing
pretense for your Cause is that, which you promise me from the Scriptures. I
pray out with that too, that I may either reply to it, or send it to the
Censure of Gilman's Coffee-House, or the Impartial Reflections of a Private
Friend.


Eucher. I cannot be sullen to you, to whose Felicity and sound Judgment I wish
with all my Soul I could contribute. And you being men of Religion, that can
dare to suffer for what you think right and sacred, will be like to have
greater respect to good and clever Arguments from the Holy Oracles. We will
therefore consider the several Settlements of the Children of Israel under
Civil Forms of Government; and try whether their actual plenitude consisted in
a National Contract, or any other bottom. And in order hereunto I shall observe
two sorts of Settlements among them, one Consequent to an Antecedent Right and
Title, the other constituent of the Title to, and in the Sovereignty. And
according to this Order I begin with the former.

First, Then God, upon a good original and antecedent Title, actually settles
himself in the political Royalty, and Government of that People, (hence by
Divines usually called the Theocracy) by that Covenant at Sinai, by which he
properly and peculiarly became their God and King also, and they his peculiar
People, not only under a Religious and Ecclesiastical, but also a Civil
Relation, Exodus 19. Exodus 24. and alib. passim. When God himself, and Samuel
the Prophet in God's Name, had entitled Saul to the Throne of Israel by a
sacred Unction, yet was he afterward actually, and fully settled therein by
the Popular Engagement of true Allegiance to him, and was hence said to be
made, and chosen King, as well by the People, as by God and Samuel, 1 Samuel
chap. 9. Chap. 10. Chap. 11. Chap. 12. Thus though David's Title to that
Succession was divinely originated in the Unction of Samuel, 1 Samuel 16. yet his
full and actual Settlement over Judah consisting in his Unction by the People
in Hebron, 2 Samuel 2. and after the death of Ishbosheth he was thro'ly and
actually settled over the other Tribes by their Covenant and Unction transacted
by their Elders, 2 Samuel 5. And Solomon, though designed by God, and advanced by
David, and anointed by Zadock into the full Title unto that Sovereignty, was
yet finally and completely settled in that Throne of the Lord by the consequent
Acts and Unction of that People, as an Induction on an antecedent Presentation,
and Institution, 1 Kings 1. 1 Chronicles. Chap. 24. Chap. 25. And thus to Rehoboams
Paternal Title, the People were to add their Actual Consummation of his
Settlement in like manner, 1 King. 11. 2 Chronicles. 10. And last of all Jehu, who
by a Prophetic Unction, and Gods Designation had a Divine Right and Title to
the Sovereignty of the Ten Tribes, and began to make way to his Actual
Settlement by the slaughter of Joram, Ahaziah, and Jezabel, yet sends to the
Council at the Royal City Samaria, and bids them settle the best and meetest of
their Masters Sons on the Throne of their Father Ahab, as knowing that that had
been the usual Office of the Senate. But they, not daring to oppose Jehu, though
perhaps they knew nothing of his Prophetic Unction, reply, that they would not
make any King, i. e. any but himself; but they contract a total submission to
him, and sealed that Contract in the Blood of Ahab's Sons, and so actually
admitted him into the full Settlement and Possession of that Sovereignty, 2
Kings Chap. 9. Chap. 10. So that though these Titles to the Sovereignty were not
founded in the Grant of the People, but of God, yet the full Settlement of all
these New Kings, consequent to their Titles, did consist in the Public
Contract and Recognition of the People.

Secondly, The Peoples Concurrence was sometimes constituent of a Title merely
human, as well as a full and formal Settlement.

Thus the People would have given Gideon an hereditary Monarchy, Judges 8. as
the Elders of Gilead made Jephthah their Captain, Judges 11. and as the
Shechemites did, what in them lay, entitle Abimelech, Judges 9. The Ten Tribes
made Jeroboam King, which God, that had preingaged it by his Prophet, ratified
by an inhibition against Rehoboams recovery, 2 Kings 12. 2 Chronicles. Chap. 10.
Chap. 11. But Zimri, who reigned but seven days in Tirzah, without the full
consent of the whole People, wanted a good Title, as well as a full Settlement
thereupon, and so was opposed by the Camp at Gibbethon, who set up Omri against
him, and so he perished in a Fire of his own kindling, 1 Kings 16. And this was
that perhaps which Jezabel objects to Jehu, 2 Kings 9. Had Zimri peace, who
slew his Master. Did the people permit him a full and peaceable Settlement in
the Throne, who slow his own Sovereign? Which Omri however obtained after the
extinction of Tibni his Competitor, 1 Kings 16.22, 23. Thus in the Kingdom of
Judah, after Josiah's death, the People of the Land took Jehoahaz: (probably
the younger Brother to Eliakim) and made him King, And in that Act of the
People the fullness of his Title, as well as his Actual Settlement, seems to
have consisted, 2 Kings 23. 2 Chronicles. 36. So that in short, the Regular
Constitution of their Native Kings was, that subordinately to Gods Election the
People should settle each New Line according to the direction of the Law, Deuteronomy.
17.14, 15. When thou shall say, I will set a King over me, thou shall in any
wise set him King over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose, etc. But in
the degeneracy of the Ten Tribes they set up Kings by their own Act alone
without waiting, or consulting the Will of God, as he complains, Osee 8.4. They
have set up Kings, but not by me; they have made them Princes, but I knew it
not. Yet God's permission hereof made the usage valid to a Title merely human,
though done contrary to the Law. And therefore to Baasha, who came in this way,
God says, 1 Kings 16.2. I have exalted thee out of the Dust, and made thee
Prince over my People Israel. Now these things in fact were done as well in
injury to the Heirs-Royal, as to God; and yet the full and actual Settlement by
the People, according to their modes, gave them a form of human Title, which
was civily valid, though not, otherwise, and especially Sacred. And to conclude,
since it is recorded, that God at first granted them Kings at their request
after the manner of the Nations, 1 Samuel 8. it intimates, that this was then the
Formal Rule of New Settlements, at least among all the bordering Nations.
However this Office of the People, being always the final Act, must needs give
the last plenitude to the Settlement; and God surely, in the admission of these
Forms, must be granted to know, and judge them to be full, and final,
whatsoever else was, or might be sometimes constituent of an antecedent Title,
which the Convocation-Book does not make essentially ingredient to a full
Settlement, or the Obligations to Allegiance founded thereupon. For if a
Nations Settlement be not full under New Powers, till all the former lineal
Heirs be Extinct, or cease making their claims from Foreign Dominions, I know
not how many Ages may sometimes be necessary to fill the Settlement; and it
will be very hard, if submission thereto, for want of such a ground of
plenitude, should be Treason, and all Sanguinary Commotions against it Pious
and Loyal, till the claim of all the Succeeding Heirs Lineal shall surcease for
ever. Or if you will allow a term for Prescription against all after claims,
then you must allow that a Settlement attaining to Prescription may exclude a
Native Right, or that a Native Right ceases by such a Tract of Continuance. If
it excludes Right only, then you are no more to comport with it, than with
present Settlements exclusive; if the Right ceases, I pray show me by what
equity mere time can destroy a right in me Anno. 93. which was whole and within
Memory Anno. 92. especially since the Regestries of Lines Royal usually endure
as just Records, that will outlive the longest ocular Testimonies, and
personal Memories whatsoever? For the reason why Prescription passes Title is,
when there is no Authentic Evidence, or memorial to the contrary. And I will
further note, that the same Laws of Nations, which admit prescriptions as a
form of Title, do not therefore assert the Title really right in the original
means of procuring it, but only externally Legal for want of better Evidence;
Prescription in it self being the weakest form of Title, that must give place
to all others, if verified in foro; and its ground, or reason is only a
supposed Composition Real, I say supposed only, not Asserted. And those very
Laws of Nations do not always suppose those Compositions every way right, but
only Legally Authoritative, and Settling, and do indeed allow such present
Settlements within memory to be as Legal and Valid as those, which being out of
record and beyond memory, can but be supposed Legal, and this with more reason,
because men can better judge of what is present, than of what is past into a
Tohu, an Age in which all things are forgotten.


Dyscher. You are very long, and I am almost tired, considering the Zeal that
is in me.


Eucher. I have kept you so long under the Fatigue, because what I ever thought
has lately appeared in your Prints, that the total ground of the Schism between
us, lies in this point of Right. For you all say, that Allegiance follows a
through Settlement, but a through Settlement is founded in the Right of him that
Reigns. So that if admit the wrong, then immediately all our Prayers for him
are Immoral, Polluted; and Abominable, as containing Imprecations against the
right and justice of him that is wronged, and giving God Praise for the
Advancement of the Usurper, which we blasphemously attribute to God. Whence
there follows a necessity, that all good Bishops, Priests, and People renounce
Communion in these Liturgies, and with all that use them; and that, if hereupon
they be deprived by the Usurpers of all the Public Advantages of their
Ministry, they must keep up holy Ministrations among themselves; for so the
Rule is set, and agreed for with most prodigious Zeal, and no less Accuracy and
Learning, by your admirable Author of Christian Communion. But I wonder this
great Man did not see, how Tottering and Casual the visible State of Religion
then must be upon every turn of the secular State, and the various Competitions
for the Sovereingty. For how is it possible that Godly Pastors, and their
Flocks, can be all unanimously certain at all times whore the real Right and
Justice lies, when matters of Fact and Law are so remote from their Cognizance?
Nor will your evasion of doubtful Cases, which you allow much to, heal the
matter. For in all such cases some will assert an indubitable Right, others a
dubitable one, and that on both sides at the same time: And thus your
indubitable Men must fall into a state of Schism or Separation from each other,
upon their contrariant confidences in the Right of the opposite Claimers: And
your dubitable men must either be neuter to all Communion, or choose a
Communion with one, or other of the indubitables at all adventure, which to do
with a doubting mind is a Sin and Snare. And so it is in our present case. Some
says, it is indubitable, that K. James is King de jure, and that K. William is
not King at all; others say as indubitably, that K. James is not King at all,
but K. William is King de jure; others own K. William to be King only de facto,
and K. James de jure; others that are indubitably for his being de facto, doubt
his being de jure King. And a great number through ignorance confide, or doubt,
more, or less, in all these points, which they cannot reach. Now since Practice
must follow Principles, and rules of Conscience, how shall we settle all these
under one Religious Communion on that Authors Maxims? There is no possible way,
but by following the direction of the Convocation Book in Obeying the through
Settlement of the King de facto, made by public Submission, or continuance,
the form of which being a point of Law, not Religion, must be determined, and
defined by the Supremest Domestic Judgment we have in Civils, which Certainly
is that of Parliament, after whose Decisions we need no further Torment our
selves in vain about Antecendent questions, but consider the Right we have, as
well as Duty, to Live quiet under Public, Formal, and Judicial Settlements,
which we are to take as Gods Ordinance for the time being. By which Rule we
shall secure our selves from both Extremes, either of owning forcible Entry for
Legal Title, or proper Settlements, or of Asserting all Change of Government to
be Invalid and unobliging, as Contrary to the Law of God, who, we know,
changes Times, and Seasons, and all the Kingdoms of the Earth, and Dissolves,
and Resettles all the States of Men under proper Laws of Constitions, according
to the Just and Unsearchable Counsels of his Will. And now I will only apply
your Rules of Communion to our Case, and so dismiss this Theorie. If this
present Settlement be full, and the Judgment of the Nation herein against your
Right, then all your Prayers and Execrations against the present State are
Irreligious, Immoral, Polluted, and Abominable, and under an ipso facto
Anathema, upon which all Christians must abhor your Communion, even without any
Ecclesiastical Sentence, as being self-condemned, and cut off. And if all these
Dangers and Snares await us upon every Civil Change, upon Men's Private Cross
Opinions about Right, and Plenitude of Settlement; Christian Religion,
Ecclesiastical Union could not have continued a Twelvemonth under the Changes
of the Empire from Nero to Vespasian, but must have Expired, before it had been
Exposed to the World. And I desire the Learned Casuist to Suit his Principles,
if he can, with the Conditions, and Capacities of Human Life, and after Good
endeavors this way he will find, that these Civil Questions are not of Private
Determination. But if there be such Dreadful Dangers of Immoral Devotions on
such Contested Rights of Government, they Naturally ly on them, who in Civil
matters Oppose their Private Conceptions and Practices to Public and Judicial
Constitutions, which is a Course in its own Nature formally Seditious, and for
that cause Un-Christian, and may too truly and sadly Corrupt their Communion,
and Defile their Devotions, who will not know the ways of Peace.


Dyscher. You will needs suppose, that if it be the Life of King James, then it
is not the Breach of Gods Commandments, that Incapacitates the Prince of this
Crown. But why may not both do it? For because the Lawful King is Living and
Claiming, therefore the Commandments of God require of all his Subjects, that
they Pay him their Dutiful and Loyal Obedience. They ought by all means to
Support him in his Throne, or Restore him to it, as his Condition requires. T.
B. 2d. Let. p. 20.


Eucher. In the Murder of a Parent King by his Son and Heir Sol. and Ab. p. 8.
I proved, that the sin did not Incapacitate the Parricide, but that our
Constitutions admit him to the Crown, which you not being able to deny, I
conclude, that Breach of Gods Commandments Nulls not a Title procured thereby.
And then you Assign the cause hereof, that the Parent, and all his Rights are
Extinct by his Death, but King James's Life, and Contestation Diversifies his
Case. Then I rejoyn, that it is not the Breach of Gods Commandments, that
Incapacitates the Princes of this Crown, but the Life, and Contention of King
James. And is not this an Accurate, and an undeniable Observation? For if
Breach of Gods Commandments, either alone creates, or with other Causes concurs
to a Civil Incapacity, then such Breach does, either partially, or solely,
obstruct such capacity. And if so, the Murder of a Royal Father must be some
Bar to the Succession of the Parricide: But if it be none at all in that Case,
why should a less Sin against God Preclude a Title in another Case in
Conjunction with another Cause, which yet your selves will not dare deny to be
alone Enclusive of King Williams Title? Here then I will sift you upon this
Point. Would the continued being, and Claim of King James Incapacitate King
William of the Royal Title, if King William had never broken any Commandment of
God, or No? If you say, Yea, then the Breach of Gods Commandments Contributes
nothing to King Williams Incapacity, which alone arises by it self from the
Life and Claim of King James, it being Naturally impossible for two Men to be
Total and Separate Proprietors of the same Right at one time; a truth not at
all belonging to Ethic's, or Divinity. If you say, No, then you yield, that
King William may be Entitled to King James's his Throne without breaking Gods
Commandments, even during the permanency of King James his Life and Right. And
have not you hereby well amended the matter? But such are the results of affected
Sophistries, especially when they are Impertinent also. Now that yours are so,
will be hence Manifest; For our Question last was whether no Settlements
procured by Breach of Gods Commandments must be Submitted to, and particularly
such, as follow the Extinction of the former Proprietors Tenure, and Title,
through such ill means? And now you Answer me, that Gods Commandments do
Incapacitate King William of King James's Crown, because King James's Title is
not Extinct, but Lives with him. Which if it had been true, I should also have
denied King William a capacity to the Title, not from the Moral Law, but from
Natural and Legal Impossibility. And therefore I suppose King James's Tenure
first Extinct, when I say, Sol. and Ab. p. 8.
But if His Tenure be Extinct, as it has been Publicly judged by this Nation,
our Oath to him Ceases, though be contend never so much for the Recovery. And
there I take it for necessary, that the Judgment of the Nation must
overballance all your contrary private Opinions as to all our public Duties
and Obligations. Now when your words are disinvolved, they amount to no more
than this, that the Law of God forbids one Man to seize on another Man's
Permanent Right, and Title, in which as it is nothing to the Rhombus, so you
have no adversary. But this is not your second, or single Failure, but here
appears a third point of Ignorance, for our Question was not, what Gods
Comments do forbid, but whether the doing what God forbids, in order to the
procuring formal Titles, and Tenures in Law, by the real, or Judicial
Extinction of another Man's Tenures, does Create a Civil Incapacity or Nullity
in the Tenure so acquired This is what I deny, and I defy you to Prove. The
instance of a Royal Heir upon the Murder of his Father is an unmovable
Argument for me; for though the Laws of God forbid him to procure the Crown that
way, yet if he violates those Duties, the Laws of God do not null the Tenure
acquired by forbidden Wickedness. The Law of God forbad David to Usurp Vriah's
wife, while the Hittite's Title in her continued with his Life, and the King
might actually keep her, but by no Legal form of Tenure. The same Law of God
forbad the King to Murder Vriah with the Sword of the Children of Ammon in
order to a Matrimonial Tenure of his wife; Yet when that wickedness was
completed, the Title of the King in Bathsheba was Legal, and valid, even by
the Judgment and Ratification of God himself. Nay, when Ahab had slain Naboth
by Judicial Condemnation for falsely imputed Blasphemy, the form of Title, by
which he after enjoyed Naboths Vine yard, was Legal by Judicial Forfeiture,
though it were Morally unjust in the sight of God; for had there been a Civil
Nullity therein, it had been necessary for him to have compassed Naboths Death
by Capital Sentence in order to a Civil Title, which Jezebel procured for him
this way, to avoid the Odium of open, and formal Un-entitled Usurpation. So
that had your Loud Obloquies against their Majesty's morals been never so true,
Yet, King James's Tenure, being Extinct, does not preclude a Civil Title in
their present Majesty's, which we are now to abide by, and defend by the
greatest Suffrage of Gods Laws, Reason, and the Laws of Nations; at which
expression I have heard, that your Friend T. B. winds up his Mouth, and T. B's
2d. Let. p. 26.
thanks God he has not so Learned Jesus Christ; And it is like to be true; for
he seems to have Learned but little of him, at least in his Doctrine, Learn of
me, for I am Meek, and Lowly of heart, and ye shall find rest to your Souls.


Dyscher. To the Objection, that Allegiance seems to imply Right, which is a
Tender Point to be Sworn to, You answer, Sol. and Ab. p. 9.
that the Oath expresses no form of Affirmation concerning Right. But what if
it does not, as long as it expresses what manifestly includes Right? And this
Allegiance directly, and manifestly does. For it is the proper duty of a
Subject to his Lawful Sovereign, and contains an Obligation to the Performance
of all those Acts, which are required from every Subject, as he stands Related
to his Rightful Sovereign; It is the immediate Result of that Relation, So that
where you deny your Allegiance due, you in consequence deny the Right of the
Prince; where you Pay your Allegiance, it is as owning him to be your Prince.
And therefore when you swear Allegiance, you Tacitly swear a Right. For though
there is a sort of Obedience, or Observances which may be paid to Usurpers,
Robbers, and Pirates, yet Allegience may not be paid to them, as being the
Natural duty of the Subject, which The Laws and Constitutions have Appropriated
to their Legal Prince, and made Inseparable from him; And now I hope you will
not tell us, that the Oath does not express Allegiance. T. B's. 2d. Let. p. 26.


Eucher. The giddy ramblings in your forms of expression Create in me a just
suspicion of either your Ignorance, or Insincerity, or both. For First you
Confound the Terms Lawful and Rightful as Synonymous, even thereby to
equivocate. Secondly, You say, that Allegiance manifestly Includes Right; and
yet that he that swears Allegiance, does but Tacitly swear that Right, that is
manifestly Included in Allegiance. But if we manifestly swear a manifest
Allegiance, it is manifest that we manifestly (not Tacitly) swear all that is
manifestly Included in it. But if we do Tacitly swear the Right, then is that
Right but Tacitly Included, and prehaps so Tacitly, that the Swearers
themselves do not perceive it. But as to the distinction between Lawful and
Rightful, I have but just now explained it at Large, and Sol and Ab. p. 7. The
Actual Landlord who is visibly Legal though not Honestly Rightful.
offered it to you in our first Conference; which makes your Neglect of its
Observation so much the more Disingenuous, and Culpable, as proceeding from a
design to Ensnare.

So again you Prevaricate when You say, Where I deny Allegiance due, I in
consequence deny the Right of the Prince. For there may be two sorts of Right,
immediate and mediate; the former without, the latter upon an intermediate and
qualifying Condition. Again, an immediate Right to a Crown to be enjoyed, must
be distinguished from an immediate Right to Allegiance founded in the actual
possession of the Crown. Now he, that has a just immediate Right to a Crown
not possessed, has no immediate Right to my Allegiance; and no more at the
most can be assigned him than this, that he, having a real Right to the
unenjoyed Crown, has a real, but mediate Right to the Allegiance on the
condition of Possession, for want of which he cannot as yet claim the
Allegiance of the Subject; for whatsoever materials Right he has, the legal
Title to Allegiance consists immediately in the legal State and Forms of
Possession. Wherefore I do not deny always a real Right to a Crown, where I
deny may Allegiance legally and immediately due; for this denial of Allegiance
so due, denies only a formal Title thereto, consisting in a legal actual
Settlement in the Sovereignty; except I declare, that the Reason, why I deny a
Prince Allegiance due, is, because he in my Judgment, has no just and real
Right to the Crown he has; but then that Reason is my own private, not the
public Reason of the Law, or of legal denial of Allegiance due, which is the
want of legal Settlement. So when you go on, and say, where you pay your
Allegiance, it is owning him to be your Prince; It Is true indeed, it is always
owning him to be my Prince formally Legal, but not always Morally and Honestly
Rightful. So that it is not in your Sense always true, that when we Swear
Allegiance, we tacitly Swear a Right. But I doubt, here you forgot the
dubitable Case of the Lancastrian Reigns, to which the Nation often, and long
Swore Allegiance, and to which you have given great allowances. But did they
all Swear the Lineal Right of that House to that Crown, which it enjoyed? Or
was not such a Sense of the Oath perjurious? And if it be so, will you
vouchsafe it your great and gracious allowances, and dispensations? You have
need here of a new Rubbing-brush to cleanse your Senses, and clear up your
Memory.


Dyscher. But for all this you are certain, no such thing [as Right] was
intended [in the Oath.] For, say you, Sol and Ab. page 9.
your Estates in Parliament rejected the Motions made for an Assertion of
Right. And yet you immediately add, that they, and the ensuing Parliament
judged their admission of King William and Queen Mary, rebus sic stantibus, to
be in their Lawful Right, yet they bound not us to Swear so; T. B Sect. Let.
Page 26. What! if we are bound to Swear according to their Intention, and they,
as appears by the Act of Recognition, intend, and declare them to be de Jure;
and so have put the distinction of de facto, and de Jure out of doors? Which if
it be so hard for you to apprehend, I will put it into this fair Syllogism; The
Sense of the King and Parliament (the Imposers of the Oath) is, that King
William is King de Jure; But we must take the Oath in the Sense of the
Imposers; Ergo, we must take the Oath in this Sense, that King William is King
de Jure. Do you think, that King William and Queen Mary did intend, that you
should esteem them as a King and Queen, that had no Right? If not, then all are
perjured, who Swear to them only as King and Queen de facto, (i.e. all, that
acknowledge that Rule of Swearing according to the Intention of the Imposers.)
For the Oath was chiefly made for the satisfaction of King William and Queen
Mary; and they were the Supreme, at least the chief part of the Imposers; but
if they were only a part, (as none deny them to be in an Act of Parliament)
then their Sense is included in the Sense of the Imposers, and consequently we
must take the Oath in their Sense, or not take it according to the Sense of the
Imposers. M. S. Reflex. Or did your Conventioners, or those that followed them,
intend to bind you to any thing? If they intended to bind you to nothing, they
laid their wise Heads together to such a purpose, as never yet any Men did. But
if they did intend to bind you to your New Governors in any thing, what can
that reasonably be supposed to be, other than what they admitted them in? And
that, you say, was in their Lawful Right. They were indeed ashamed at that time
to put it into the body of the Oath; and besides, they knew it would have made
many Persons abhor it; but it is plain, this they designed, and tricked upon
you. Hence you may perceive, that your slippery Remark will not deliver you
from the Intention of the Imposer. T. B. Sec. Let. page 27.


Eucher. This Discourse is so involved, and you talk of an Imposer so like an
Imposer, that it is somewhat difficult to trace out your Sense. Yet this I will
endeavor, and if I can be lucky, I will give you my Sense of it. Here then we
are to consider the Intentions, first, of the Constituting Parliament, or
Convention; secondly, of the Recognizing Parliament; and thirdly, of their
Majesty's, in the Imposition of the Oath. First then, Sol. and Ab. page 9.
I acknowledged, that the Constituting (as well as ensuing) Parliament did
judge it in their Lawful Right, rebus sic stantibus, to admit King William and
Queen Mary. And so they always judge* that they for their part, act Lawfully
and of Right, when they admit only a King de facto, either when unlawfully
forced, or otherwise necessitated thereunto, by insuperable Exigencies. And so
Men may Honestly for their part, contract faithful Obedience to their Piratick
Masters to preserve themselves, though unlawfully brought into that Necessity.
This being done by the first Parliament, and that in their Judgment on their
part lawfully, and justly, they consider for an Oath of Allegiance, always
usual upon such new Constitutions. And hereupon a Motion was made for an
Assertion of Right to be inserted into the Oath, but it was rejected. This must
therefore in legal construction evince, that their intention in the Enacted
Oath, did not imply an Assertion of Right. For, though you can, according to the
Temper you are of, opprobriously tax the Wisdom and Gravity of that Great
Assembly, yet we are obliged only to an open and sincere Intention, not a
tricked one, especially that, which you would trick upon them, and us too, that
you might blacken and reproach our Innocence; though yet how we could be tricked
out of our Senses, if Allegiance manifestly includes Right, as you say, I
cannot divine. However, herein are two points of Right observable, one in their
Majesty's taking the Crown, and another, in the Convention, in the admission of
them thereto. And in both these, they obliged us to Swear no Assertion, but
only, as Sol. and Ab. page 9.
I told you, to promise that Allegiance due by our Laws to Kings thus actually
admitted, without any other charge upon us to Swear the Justice and Rectitude
of their Proceedings, of which there is no competent or superior Judge, or
Witness, but God. Secondly, After the Constituting, comes the Recognizing
Parliament, who added a Declaration of their Majesty's Right, in taking and
possessing the Crown, as well as of the Rectitude of our Admission; for this
makes up the Title de Jure in their Majesty's. This might be the mental
intention of the first Parliament, but it was not by them promulgate, or
recognized, which omission was therefore supplied by the second Parliament. But
notwithstanding this Recognition of Right, they neither added, nor altered any
thing as to the Oath, but that still stood, and yet stands in its first
Intention, which it received wholly and solely from the first Parliament. So
that the first Parliament discharging us from an Assertion of Right, in their
and their Majesty's Proceedings and Settlement in that Oath, and the second
Parliament doing nothing to the Oath, it does not by its Recognition charge us
to Swear more, or otherwise than the first had done. So that all the Right,
that can fairly be supposed, owned, and imported, in taking and imposing that
Oath, is, that private Subjects have a Right to Swear, and pay that Allegiance,
which the Estates have thus fixed: And here also we must distinguish between
the Intentions of Judgments, and Acts of Parliaments in all those Parts,
Points, and Articles, which the Subject Swears nothing to, and those particular
words, or points, which are directly set in the Oath, and so proposed to common
Observation. For the former only oblige the Conscience of the Subject to
exterior and civil Duties, without involving any interior Censure, or Sense,
upon the Moral Integrity, and Conscience of our Masters. But an Oath, asserting
the Moral Justice of Humane Intentions, or Procedures, is a dangerous snare in
all Cases above a Man's understanding, liable to debate, doubt, or question, as
all public Politics generally are, especially with the Vulgar. And if a Man
may be allowed with Modesty to guess at the Piety of his Superiors, it seems
it is such a snare, as the Parliament never intended to lay for themselves, and
therefore not for us, for whom they must have began the Example. For it is
rational to believe, that most of the Members, that really were of, and for the
Opinion de Jure, as well on their Majesty's Measures, as their own in this
Settlement, would not willingly have Sworn that Right absolutely, though they
would have Sworn their belief of it. For Matters of Fact, of which alone, we
can be certainly conscious, either by our outer, or inner Senses, are the only
proper Matter of Assertions, and especially legal Depositions. But Points of
Law and Right, concerning Matters of Fact, are more remote from that evidence
and clearness of Sense and Perception, than to be given upon Oath; and are
delivered by Courts as Judicial Opinions only, that pass into a Civil Effect,
though the Judges (if put to it) would not always (not any time willingly) Swear
the Infallibility of such Judgments, especially the doubtful, or dissenting
Judges, against their own private and personal apprehensions. Thus then in
Parliament the Matters of Fact appeared evident enough to the Houses; but the
Points of Law, arising upon the Facts, underwent much and long discussion, upon
which at last the Judgment for Abdication, and an actual vacancy passed; so
that in their Opinion they for their part, might in that State of Affairs,
proceed to this Settlement, and upon these Opinions they acted, as taking them
for True, Legal, and Right. Yet, considering that most of both Houses were not
Lawyers, it is not imaginable, that they could willingly have Sworn the certain
and absolute Rectitude of these Opinions, especially they, who were of contrary
Sentiments, but overruled by the majority. And hence the Assertion of Right
was rejected from the Oath. And I wish all Projectors of Oaths in points of
Law, Title, and matters without our reach or power, would follow, and reverence
the Exemplary Wisdom, and Tenderness of our Parliaments herein, that no tricks,
nor traps may be laid for Consciences in a State, and Age, in which we have
given them so profuse a liberty. But to return from this Progression; the
alteration from the old, or last Form, made in this Oath by the designed
omission of asserted Right, argues an intentional discharge of that difficulty,
or doubt, in this present Oath, which has nothing in it Testimonially
affirmative of other Men's Morals, but only promissory of each Man's legal
Subjection, which implies no positive Assent to the Moral Justice of the
Constitution. For Allegiance is not only personal, but local also, due in great
measure, as well from Foreign Sojourners, as from Natives, and what may be as
well required upon Oath of Strangers during there abode here, who yet however,
are not engaged to maintain the real Rectitude of our Establishments. And though
a Native Allegiance be a closer, and more perpetual Tie to several especial
Offices and Duties, yet while the Form of its Engagement is purely promissory,
it obliges us to look back to no further dark Originals, than the legal Forms
of actual Settlement, and Recognition. So Sheriffs by their Oath, are obliged
to Execute Royal and Judicial Orders and Decrees of State, and Courts in legal
Forms directed to them, yet do they not Swear the Rectitude of all such
Mandates, or Judgments, (which they Swear to Execute) though declared right by
the Superior Authorities. So a Tenant, Swearing Homage and Fealty to a new
Landlord obtaining by Law, does not assert the reality of his Right, though the
Jury in Verdict Swear it to be his in their Judgment, and the Judges give
Judgment accordingly upon sworn Engagements to Justice. For the Tenant may
justly suspect the Errors or Injustice of the Process, even while he Swears the
Fealty, because his Oath is not concerned in, or depends on the Original Merits
of the Cause, but the legal Forms of Judicial Assignation. But if you will take
Rightful and Lawful, for mere Civil and Regular forms of Introduction, I will
grant you, that an Oath of Native Allegiance, imports an acknowledgment of such
a kind of Rightful and Lawful Settlement, and Form of Title. To conclude this
Discourse, since Intentions do not explain the words they utter, but words
intentions; especially in obliging and legal Formularies of Contracts, we are
obliged to no more by them, than their express words do openly propose to our
apprehensions, and so pass all Judgments in Law, upon Pleas of Contract,
according to this Rule of expounding Words, Oral, or Written, in Bargains,
Testimonies, and Covenants. If then a Recognition, or Assertion of Right, be
not expressly tendered in the very words of the Oath, or jointly with it, by some
determinate Rule of Explication, we are not concluded in such Oath, to such an
Assertion, much less, if such Assertion be openly excluded from the Oath, to
prevent suspicion. But let us see, whether the Assertion of Right, so
manifestly precluded, be yet tricked into the Oath by any surreptitious
Implication: Now if it be so, it must be involved, either in the Style of King
and Queen, or in the Terms of Faith and Allegiance; but neither can be justly
pleaded, since the known Judicial distinction of Kings de facto, and de jure,
shows the Title to be in common given both to those, who come in without any
violation of our Laws, and so are in Right, and to others, who have injuriously
got, without any antecedent legal Capacity, into the legal Forms of Settlement,
and so are in Fact only Kings. And true Faith and Allegiance, is by our Laws
always given in the same, or like promissory Forms of Oath to the mere Kings in
Fact, as well as others: But this is not all; I will further ex abundanti show
you, that this closeness to the mere Sense of express words, is the
interpretative Rule of obligation in Oaths, and Contracts, not only by the Laws
and Reason of Mankind in common, but is particularly justified by precedents in
the Divine History on the sacred Judgment of God's own People. The Case I refer
to, is mentioned, Judges 21. There the Israelites in Mizpeth make this Oath,
There is not any of us shall give his Daughter unto Benjamin to wife. Here by
the word Us, they intend all the People beside the Benjamites, as presuming all
the rest engaged there against Benjamin, and really intending that Benjamin
henceforth, should never have one Wife from among the rest of Israel. After
this, it appeared, that the Men of Jabesh Gilead, had not concurred in that
Expedition, and therefore they destroyed all the Jabesites, except the Virgins,
and these they gave for Wives, to Benjamin contrary to their real Intention in
the making that Oath. Now what shall be said hereupon? Did they violate the
Oath of God, or take upon them in their Sanhedrin, to dispense with it on a
reserved Right of the Imposers? No, there was yet no Popery, nor such
dispensing Power under that Pontificate. For it appears by their Care in a
second instance, that they were very tenderly sensible of their indissoluble
obligation by the Oath, nor does the Scripture Censure them for any such
prevarication. How shall we then untie this Knot? Thus, whereas they had sworn
None of us, it was literally interpretable to a valid Obligation on those only,
(and their Daughters) who were actually present, or engaged in that War; so
that the Jabesites, though at first comprised in the general design and
intention, on presumption of their Concurrence, yet in fact not being engaged,
were easily judged not actually included in the Oath, as not really being
within the express term of the Us in Mizp^h. Moreover the Jabesites did not
give their own Daughters, as being all before (...) the Elders gave them; and
herein they, that gave them, gave not their own particular Daughters; and they
were given, tho not as the Daughters of mere Heathens, yet as Daughters of Men
aliened by the public Anathema and excession from God's People, and so not of
the Us, collectively taken for the united Community or Society of the Children
of Israel. Thus not all intentions had in the conception of this Oath did
oblige, but only what the Words thereof did expressly include. Again, when this
Expedient was found insufficient for the surviving Benjamites, a further
Consultation arises in the Sanhedrin, how to furnish them with Wives
consistently with their Oath. And at length they find this lawful Evasion from,
and contrary to their first intention. They direct the Benjamites to surprise
their Daughters in the Dances of Shiloh, and promise to pacify the Parents and
Kindred of the surprised Damsels. And herein they judged themselves free from
Perjury, because the natural Parents did not give their respective Daughters,
nor did the Sanhedrin manually deliver them as the Daughters of the People, but
only contrived, directed, consented to, and after confirmed the Surprise. Which
shows, that in the sense of that sacred Court, Oaths do not tie the Conscience
beyond the necessary Sense of the Words, though more be actually intended by the
Persons instituting, and taking the Oath in their first Conception. And then
the Rule holds much more clear, when the Swearer intends no more than the words
simply signify, and is directed by the very Imposers to use that freedom, and
discharged from all other collateral, or consequential Constructions as we are
by the rejection of the Proposals for an Assertion of Right. But I presage,
that all this procedure of the Sanhedrin, or my Accounts of it, will pass with
you for pretty juggling, who are so dextrous and hardy to reproach whole
Nations, as if you had been another Elias; though herein I would advise you to
premit your Reasons to your Censure. In the Interim we will in the third place
ascend to their Majesty's intention herein. Of which I shall in general say,
that no Man can evince, that they intended any more in their imposition of the
Oath than the Estates; but if they did, those personal intentions came not into
the Act, or Oath, and so can be of no public cognizance, or obligation, the
Oath being made to satisfy their Majesty's intentions indeed, as far as they
were uniform with the intention of the Estates, but no further, or otherwise.
And the Estates did indeed desire to satisfy their Majesty's as far as justly
they could without crucifying the Conscience of the Subject which could
contribute nothing to the interest of their Majesty's, nor to the Honor of
their Tenderness and Clemency. So that the Question properly is, whether the
joint and complex intention of their Majesty's, and the Parliament in the Oath
was, That we should judge them to be a King and Queen that had no Right? And
here I answer, that they never intended, that we should deny the Right of their
Title in Thought, Word, or Deed. Nay, I add, that in the Recognition they
designed to create an Opinion, and Belief in us of their Majesty's Right, as
far as the public Judgment of a Nation can morally conduce thereunto; and also
to silence all Tongues, and Pens to the contrary; but of what they gently
willed Men to believe, they did not presume to require a peremptory Oath, through
their excessive Tenderness for liberty of Conscience. Now the intention we are
upon, by the good leave of the Syllogism, is not the inclining will to persuade
us to a Belief, nor the authoritative will of silencing contradictions, but
that will which imposes the Oath, i. e. what they willed, and intended
peremptorily to be sworn? And this does not import so much as an assent, or
Belief, much less an absolute assertion de Jure, though King William is de Jure
in the public Judgment of the Nation. And what ground have you to fancy that
this is not satisfactory to their Majesty's? Their Right is publicly
recognized, a full Allegiance of the Subject upon Oath given, with sufficient
Laws for the Coercion of Recusants, and all that is necessary to secure them in
the Throne; and can you dare to say, they are not hereby satisfied, because
every Man is not bound to swear the Jus, which many feeble Senses may not
understand? I hope you never heard of any Complaint made hereupon by their
Majesty's, and if not, it is a bold and indecent Suggestion to object, or
surmise it; but the most frontless rudeness of all is, to say, that the Nation
was Tricked, and open Nonsense to assert this of a project of concealing an
intention of Right, in words, which you say manifestly include it.


Dyscher. No doubt both Parliaments had the same intention; and the Recognition
was but a fuller Declaration of the Sense of the former Parliament in the
Constitution. And for such Bodies to ensnare us to a Belief of K. William's
Right, while we are taking Oaths to him, is, if not to command, yet to
insinuate Perjury; since they, that are hereby tricked into that Opinion,
intend the assertion of it in the Oath; and the Opinion of Right being the
Public Doctrine, the public taking of the Oath, without an express Denial of
the Right, does either really, or seemingly, at least import an Assertion of
Right, and so gives a just Scandal to all Men of Integrity, as looking like an
Exemplary consent to, and Profession of the Right, and is as Exemplary a Snare
to the Consciences of the Ignorant. T. B. Sec. Let. p. 22.
For has not William ravished away the Rights of all the Royal Heirs in Being?
Has he not violated the standing Laws of our Succession in seizing the Crown
before his time?


Eucher. To humor you for once, let us suppose, that K. William and Q. Mary
had violated the Laws of Succession, and so were not every way de Jure
Sovereign; yet the Assertion of Right being rejected at the framing of the
Oath, a little Care will remove all prejudices in our selves, and others, by
observing that we swear no more than was expressly imposed in the form of the
Oath, with an explicit exclusion of that Assertion of Right; and that other
points, and Acts consequent fall not under our intention, by the will of the
imposers against their Will. But it is in truth a bold thing, but like you, to
take it for evident, that their Majesty's have broken the Laws of Succession,
when the whole Kingdom has judicially determined otherwise. It Is indeed
possible for a public Opinion to be Erroneous, and a private one on the
contrary true; yet nothing but an undeniable (as it were Meridian) Evidence
must practically confront a public Opinion against its Civil efficacy, which I
suppose you have not gotten against the Civil Judgment de Jure. I will not here
proceed on such Originals of Royal Title, as will justify Changes of Kings
every day; I will not cast in my Lot, nor mix my Counsels with those seditious
Men, who by cajoling the Subjects into false Notions and aims of Power, cokes
them thereby into endless Ruins and Commotions. I will only follow the good,
Ancient, and constant Rules of Order, Peace and Righteousness, which alone can
make us an happy People, and Advocate for their Majesty's Innocence toward
these. The ordinary Rule of Succession I still grant you to be Lineal, or
properly Hereditary; so that if a Prince's Tenure be extinct by Death, or
otherwise, the next Heir of ordinary Course should succeed. But if a Question
arise upon the Tenure, whether permanent, or cessant in a state of Anarchy and
actual vacancy in the Throne, or who is the next Heir, this is most properly
determinable by the Estates of the Kingdom, as being our Masters and Trustees,
to oblige, and direct our Allegiance. Here then they judged King James's Tenure
cessant by a virtual Abdication, and the Princess of Orange the next Heir. But
considering the then state of Affairs, they judged it absolutely lawful and
necessary for the time being, with the smooth concession of the two next Heirs
apparent, to invest the Order during the Prince's Life. It was therefore
changed but not violated, and a temporary Change in the Course was admitted to
secure the true Descent in a just Line for ever, as appears by the settled and
determined Series of Successors.


Dyscher. Very well; I see you and your Estates make nothing of the Prince of
Wales. But your Prince of Orange had before not only assaulted our Law, but
overturned the Government, and the Sovereign too; and can you say, that he
violated not our Laws in his way to the Crown?


Eucher. The Prince of Orange being no Subject of England, the process of his
Expedition was in him no violation of Duty by him owing to our Laws, which is
the only form of Guilt that could have attainted his Right. If then he cannot
be charged with the breach of Civil Duties incumbent on him, he is not
incapacitated of Rights by any passages in that Expedition. But moreover he
came to preserve our Laws and Forms, Liberties, and Religion, when they were
all in a fervent Course of subversion. And therefore, though during his Marches,
the Execution of the Laws for the time being was interrupted in particular
Cases, and Military Officers were by him constituted in the Countries, through
which he passed, all this was necessary, as methods of Medicine for the time to
recover the diseased state of the Patient, to the Ancient vigor of its Laws,
and soundness of Constitution. But when King James left the languishing Nation
unhealed, the Prince left all to be legally Cured, and firmly settled to the
great Council of the Land; that so no Man might have a Color for Complaint;
that he affected our Conquest, Vassalage, or Suppression in our Civil Rights by
any Arbitrary Power. For which great Service they found out a fair way, without
Violence to any ones Right, to gratify, and honor him with the Crown, or
rather to secure all we had by such a Constitution. If then the Prince of
Orange was no Subject, nor Enemy to the Nation, but Friend, and Patron to us,
and our Laws, how can he be charged with an injurious violation of them? And
her present Majesty, though more obliged to her Husband than her Father by the
ties of Nature, being a Native of England (and so the King's Subject in this
Land) never appeared here to disturb her Father, or break her Native
Allegiance. But when her Father had fled out of the Kingdom from before her
Husband, as not daring to abide a Parliamentary discussion of their Causes, and
the Estates of the Nation determined to settle her Highness with her Husband in
this Sovereignty, she, being thereupon sent to, comes over, and accepts that
Settlement, which the Nation thought so just and necessary, and to which (as
such) the Princess Ann conceded without any Remonstrance. So that neither can
her present Majesty, be charged with any breach of our Constitutions herein,
which might obstruct her Civil Title of being Queen de Jure, upon the Cession
of her Father, and her next Place in the Succession. Which is I think so fair a
Plea for the Recognition de Jure, that if it cannot annihilate all prejudices
to the contrary in all Persons, yet is a just Reason to inhibit Contradictions
in private Men, who have very little Authority to Censure Public Counsels and
Determinations. But though we have thus defended the Title de Jure, yet, as I
said before, we were not obliged to Swear it. Nor did I ever hear of any
Courts, that loaded the Oath with such an Assertion of Right, when their
directive Judgments were required thereupon.


Dyscher. This last is a lucky Hit. I am glad you have awakened my Memory of
some of your former Passages upon Interpretations of Courts, for which you
ought to be a little chastised. For you say, Sol. and Ab. page 10.
That if they took not the Oath as the Parliament intended, they took it as
directed by their Majesty's Judges. What? did their Majesty's Judges direct the
Oath to be taken otherwise than as the Parliament intended? I desire that may
be made out. Did they do it judicially in Court? I think that will not be so
much as pretended. If it be, I desire to know when, where, and how. If you say,
that a Judge did only discourse it privately, that is no more than if any
private Man had said so. But to take off the pretense of this Salvo, the Judges
are not, nor do pretend to be the Imposers. And the Imposers (King William and
Queen Mary and both Houses of Parliament) have declared what their Sense of the
Oath is, viz. that King William and Queen Mary, are King and Queen de Jure. M.
S. Reflex.


Eucher. This is no fairer in one respect, than it is convincing in any. For
you repeat me, as if I had asserted some general Sense of the Judges, given to
the Nation, plainly contrary to the Sense of the Parliament, according to which
Judicial contrary Sense, all Conformists had Sworn; and so require me to make
this out. But my Senses are not so easy to be imposed on in my own Sentiments.
My Discourse therefore, was Sol. and Ab. page 9, 10.
of the Senses of some particular Courts, given, or admitted to particular
Persons upon occasional Consultations. And I allege, that these Persons, who
were allowed an innocent Sense to Swear to, did not prevaricate with the State,
though the Courts perhaps had really misinterpreted the Law. But so far am I from
the positive Charge of any Court herewith, that I profess, I neither know, nor
believe any Court to have incurred such a failure, though this I have heard some
of them burdened with, by some of your greatest Wo^^hies. And upon supposition
of Truth in that impu^^tion, I yet assumed the Cause of the Swearers,
notwithstanding such supposed Error in such Courts, according to whose
Interpretation of the Oath if they Swore, they could not be perjured, or
prevaricate. For though the Judges of those Courts, be not the Legislative, yet
are they Ministerial, and Executive Imposers, Judges, and Interpreters for the
Legislative, to particular Persons, on all emergent Questions in Law; and what
they herein do is valid to all Civil Constructions, and Effects, and to be
taken as their Majesty's own legal determinations, of whom you too unwarily, as
well as untruly, say, that they and the Parliament have declared the Assertion,
or sense de Jure to be in the Oath; for though that be the recognized Sense of
their Title, yet it is not their declared Sense of the Oath. Which being
cleared, I need no Succor from the private Opinions of any Judges out of
Court, of which I made no mention; which can indeed have no judicial
obligations; though by your Favor they may be of great weight to the
satisfaction, or Ease of a doubting Conscience toward its Conformity with the
Laws.


Dyscher. Indeed if the real Sense of the Imposer could be avoided, and what
Sense others please, imposed, the Oath might be taken in a thousand several
Senses, and not one come up with the Sense, and design of the Imposers, which
in this Case always is the security of the Government. Besides a thousand other
Mischiefs would follow vacating all Oaths, and destructive to all Governments,
and Human Society. For if Oaths may be thus eluded, Promises and Contracts
would soon follow their Fortune, as being less Sacred. Now Sir, you would do
well to answer these, and the like Reasons, before you so peremptorily assert
any inferior Courts to be the Authentic Interpreters of Public Oaths. You
had best have a care that you be not followed with a Cry of Privilege of
Parliament. And indeed that Legislative power is little better than Ridiculous,
which may be authentically evaded, and be made quite another thing by the
inferior Ministers of it. And after all, the Interpretations of those Courts
will not excuse you from insincerity, and prevaricating with the State, as you
seem to fear. For if those Courts did give a lower, and more easy Sense than
could reasonably be thought was in ended by the Imposers, you ought not to
catch at that for an Advantage, which they had no power to give. Nor ought you
to join with them in eluding the Oath, but to take care of your selves, that
they neither cosen you, nor you others. For an Oath ought to be taken in
Judgment, Truth, and Righteousness, in all which points you will fail, if you
take this Course. T. B. Sec. Let. page 27.


Eucher. One would think by this clamor, that I had laid Gunpowder for the
ruin of the whole World, to which however I dare appeal for my Innocence. First
then, if the Sense of the Imposer be in all Cases incapable of ambiguity with
even the meanest, or unskilled People, then I confess my self on the wrong side
of the Hedge. But you were best have a care of asserting this, lest you draw
upon you the general Cry of Westminster Hall. If then some words in any enacted
Formulary happen to become ambiguous to particular private Subjects, which are
clear enough in themselves, to Men of Judgment in such matters, must the
inferior Court, where these Forms are administered, resolve the Sense of the
Law upon Questions therein moved, or no? If not, they are no Court of Justice
to direct the Subject in his Civil Duties, Rights or Obligations. If it must
determine such Questions, then that resolution must pass for Law to all Civil
Effects upon that particular Case, 'till reversed. But whereas all Courts are
subject to a possibility of Error, especially where the Case is rare, or
intricate, or the Courts through haste or heedlesness, take not the matter into
sufficient Consideration, if such mistake judicially pass, yet is it formally
valid in Law. But such Cases rarely happen, and the ambiguities of formed Words
in short Oaths, Contracts, or Declarations cannot be many, or manifold, except
we fancy them made on purpose to puzzle our Faculties, and Consciences both
together. And now I would fain have you produce any such short Oath liable to
your thousand wrong Senses. In our Oath the only Question is, what it is to
bear true Faith and Allegiance? This Courts generally interpret faithful
performance of all those Duties, which the Laws of our Subjection require to
our actual Sovereigns, the particulars of which are determined by our Common,
and Statute Laws. Now to exercise your Skill, I pray make a brisk Essay of
fixing one half thousand Senses of these words alien from this Explication,
which has been given by several Courts. Or if your Courage lowers herein, I
pray show this very interpretation to be either insidious, or erroneous. But
whereas you think the Errors of Inferior Courts may vacate all Contracts, and
Authorities; I had provided an Atlas to support them against this Ruin, had you
thought it considerable, when I offered you this Maxim, Sol. and Ab page 10.
that in such emergent Cases, What such particular Courts determine, must be
taken for Law 'till condemned by a Superior Court, or nulled by the
Legislative, which will secure our Lawgivers from the Ridicule, and leave that
Character to its own Proprietors. As dismal a Speculation is that, which you
raise about Courts, and Swearers Clubbing together to elude the Oath, which
amounts to this importance, viz. If a Knave ask a whole Court of Knaves, to
play the Knave, in interpreting the Oath, and the authorized Knaves have no
more Wit, nor Honesty but to do so, then the suborning or Consulting Knave,
finding their Judicial Knavery, must be converted to Honest of a sudden, and
take no advantage of their Knavery, but tell them they are arrant Knaves, ay,
that they are. For such I dare swear is the Judicial Interpretation of your
Mystery. But a plain unintriguing Head would have thought, that I had spoken of
Honest Men of tender Conscience, consulting the Sense of Courts, from the just
Information and Direction thereof, upon their doubts concerning the intention
of the Oath. And as such a Man would use no Arts to Corrupt a Court, so could
he not easily conceive their Opinion fallacious. And after all, if he judged it
good, he would approve it, if naught, reject it; if probable, accept it as
legal: But if a Man knew the Sense before, he had no need to try, or tempt the
Judgment of a Court, nor ought he to follow it into Immorality, if he knows it
false. And I surely never told you, that a Man, conscious of Error, or
Prevarication in a Court, might have an Advantage to elude, but in doubtful
Senses to follow that, which the Court has given to honest and innocent
purposes. And all my Sol. and Ab. page page 9, 10. Several Courts have given,
and admitted such Senses, as the most tender Recusant might have sworn to. What
prevarication is there in these tender Consciences, that Religiously took care
to have an innocent Sense authoritatively admitted, on which and no others they
would take the Oath? If these Men had made reservations in the Oath they took,
Insincerity might have been justly chargeable on them. If their Majesty's by
their Courts declared their Sense, in passing the Act, in favor to all
innocent and tender Consciences, I hope it was no insincerity to accept that
lenity and Ease.
Discourse ran upon the supposed tenderness and innocence of the Swearers in
such Consultations. Next I took care also for the Innocence and Reputation of
Ibid. Whether Courts prevaricate in their judgments, or no, private Persons
cannot judge to any Civil effect, or Obligation.
the Courts too, against all Calumnies upon their Judgments in such Cases
given. And yet all this was purposely over-look't by you, that so you might
revile the innocent tenderness of Men, and Courts, with the imputations of
Fraud and Villainy. And yet after all this Rant, you your self seem to grant,
that Men might admit a probable Interpretation, when you say, If the Court give
a lower and more easier Sense of the Oaths, than could reasonably be thought
was intended by the Imposers, you ought not to catch at that for an Advantage.
So then what Interpretation the Swearer thinks reasonably given, he may Swear
to, if the Subject matter of the Oath so interpreted to him, seem lawful. Nay,
if a Man doubts the exactness of an Interpretation, may he not tell the Court
his suspicion of their Error, but let them know that since their Opinion is
authentic, and the Oath which they accept for their Majesty's, under that
Interpretation, contracts no Evil, he thereupon takes in their Sense, as
judicially Legal and no other? This I think is no Cozening of the State in the
Swearer, but a fair sincerity before God, and the World, and answerable at any
Tribunal whatsoever. Have you any thing more to say upon this Point?


Dyscher. My Friend T. B. suggested no more matter of Arguments to me hereupon;
but only huffed and laid about him, what that innocent Sense might be, and the
double boiled Crambe of Swearing to Usurpers to maintain their Usurpations,
that while you make such a Pother about Senses, your Conscience lies snarling
within, as he does without, when he scorns your Pity, and styles you meek
For-swearers, meek Rebels, meek Traitors, meek Turks, meek Jews, meek
Renegadoes, and taxes your Merciless High Priest for want of Bowels to a poor
Boy, whom, it seems, some of his Party had employed in carrying Seditious
Libels. I will not tell you the manner of his Fury, but it so startled me, that
I thought verily I must have sent for the Doctor. Ser. J. B. Sec. Let. page
27, 28.


Eucher. But what say you to the danger of the Law, even when King James
returns, if you treasonably break your Allegiance to King William?


Dyscher. In this I find you are a Man tam Marti, quam Mercurio, otherwise
called an Ambodexter. For if you cannot persuade us, you will affright us into
the Oath, or any thing else. For you endeavor to possess us with an Opinion,
that King James (if ever he returns) will hang all them that do not Swear and
pay Allegiance to William. An hard Case, that a Man cannot be Wise and Honest
without Hanging! But why this extreme Severity? Why? Because the Lineal Heir
may hang a Man as a Traitor for breach of Allegiance to an extralineal King.
Well but if King James should hang up all that did not pay Allegiance to
William, one would think he should not spare those, who would not pay
Allegiance to himself, and this would make clear Work. When Edward the Fourth
first joined Battle against Henry the Sixth, did not you think this would have
made a powerful Speech for him to his Soldiers; Gentlemen, go on courageously,
your Cause is good, the Crown is evidently my Right; and if I can recover it by
your assistance, I will certainly hang you up every Man for fighting against
the extralineal King, Henry Sixth, who here appears in the Field against us,
and keeps me from it? -- Sir I do not believe there is any Law to hang a Man
for Loyalty, and of all Men living I least fear it from King James, T. B. Sec.
Let. page 30. And I appeal to your self, whether you can believe that
Interpretation you put upon our Laws, Sol. and Ab. page 12.
viz. That King James may Hang Men as Traitors for breaking their Allegiance to
King William? This is the same, as if King Charles the Second should have
Hanged Men as Traitors to the Commonwealth of England, who restored him to his
Crown. M. S. Reflex. But in Truth, all this Hanging stuff seems to have another
Design, not to tell what K. James may do, but what you would have others to do,
as if they were excusable for any severity toward those, who deny them that,
for which even King James himself may punish them. It is a pious hint to your
Government, and your Mob. T. B. Sec. Let. page 30.


Eucher. I was willing to have saved you, if it had been possible, out of
Error, that so I might have kept you out of Danger. But if there be no such
Danger, I am very glad of it. What King James will do I am no Arbiter, nor did
I ever assume upon me to discover his Intentions. I only minded you what by our
Laws he may do, if you are guilty of Treason against Allegiance required by our
Laws to the present Sovereign. But you, according to the sincerity of a Zealot,
repeat me to have said, that King James may hang you for not taking the present
Oath, that I may stir up the Powers, and Mobb to do so presently. But I thank
God for your sake, that though the Laws are severe upon unhappy Clergymen, that
cannot conform to the Oath, yet such Recusancy does not by any Law make Men
Traitors, as not being made Treason. If you live otherwise quietly, and
contrive no Seditions, neither I, nor the Laws can touch your Lives, either
now, or hereafter in any Revolution. But if you will incur Treason against
extralineal Kings, the Law since Henry the Seventh may be in force against you,
under the recovered Reign of the Lineal, however they stood in the Days of
Henry the Sixth. It Is true, Heirs Lineal, that promote such Treasons, may, and
no doubt always do stake Faith and Troth, not only to indemnify, but prefer
their Adherents. But in Edward the Fourth's Age and Army, the Soldiers were
not Lollards and Heretics, with whom the most Holy See, and the more Holy
Society will keep no Faith, especially to succor and secure their Heresy. He
that has seen what has been, may easily see what will be, if he will not shut
his Eyes. See the state of the Protestants in Ireland under the late King
James. And in England, among all other advances, remember the Fanatic
Commissions for enquiry into past, though legal, Prosecutions against
Conventicles, on purpose to enrage them to join their Skeems with the Papists,
to cut our Throats, who had but just before saved the Kings own Throat from the
same Hands.
But if the Old prudent C^ution (...) will produce no faith in you, I leave you
to your own Paradise Dreams, and Dotages; since the sagacious Observation of
the Poets never quadrated so well to any person, or purpose as me and mine upon
this occasion, invitum qui servat, idem facit occidenti. And yet for all my
good will, the sport you make with me, in your Edward the Fourths Martial
Oration, exposes your Principles perhaps more than my Law. For by the strai^s
you have made upon the Duties of Christian subjection, which Custom has named
Passive Obedience, Edward the Fourth's Soldiers had been bound to have fought
for him, though he had made them such an Oration, which could not have been
imprudent upon your Principles of Christian Loyalty. But if such an Oration
would have justified the consequent Revolt, or recession of his Army, then is
this Nation, and all the Protestants of King James's Army justified in their
leaving him, and going over to the Prince, since his assumed Dispensing Power,
and superlative Prerogatives, the Obedience contracted to the Sec of Rome, and
the Society of Jesus, and all his hasty steps he made to the dissolution of our
Laws, Liberties, and Religion, were a Proclamation as fatal to this Kingdom,
and his Protestant Soldiers, as the Speech you have framed for King Edward.
And they took the Language and intention of his Actions accordingly, as if he
had said; My Protestant Nobles, Clergy, Magistrates, Officers, and Soldiers,
do you actually fight for me, execute all my Commands, be passive under all my
Contrivances against your Religion, Laws, and Liberties, and when I have gained
my ends, I Will make you all sworn Slaves, and Papists, or else I^le melt your
Grease for you. But to return from this pertinent Sally; as to the Law, that I
set it rightly, as it stands at this Day from a long Descent, is notorious to
the World, from the Judicial and received Determinations in Parliament, and the
King's Courts, so often pleaded, and alleged by the Advocates for our present
Allegiance, to whom, and to whose Originals I therefore refer you. Only I think
fit here to relate the yet unpublished sense of a most judicious and excellent
Person, sent me before any Prints appeared on this Subject. His words are
these; What I principally insist on is, That our Law requires Subjection, and
Obedience to the Powers in being. To prove this, I shall here set down the
words of Sir Edward Coke, and in the Margin note the Authorities to which he
refers. Sir Edward Coke, speaking of the Statute of the 25th of Edward the
Third concerning Treason, says, that this Statute is to be understood of a
King in Possession of the Crown and Kingdom. Vid. 11. Hen. 7. c. 1.
For if there be a King Regnant in possession, although he be Rex de Facto, and
non de Jure, yet is he Seignior le Roy, 4 Edw. 4.1 Instit. part. 3. fol. 7.
within the Purview of this Statute. And the other, that has Right, and is out
of Possession, is not within this Act. Nay, if Treason be committed against a
King de Facto, and non de Jure, and after the King de Jure comes to the Crown,
he shall punish the Treason done to the King de Facto; and a Pardon granted by
a King de Jure, that is not also de Facto (mark this, for it concerns the
Nation against wheedling Declarations) is void. So to the same effect, Judge
Hales his Pleas of the Crown. page 11. This Argument (says my invaluable
Friend) I take to be of great force; because the measures of Subjection are not
the same in all Countries, but must be taken from the Laws and Customs of every
Country. Thus he. And if you will impartially reflect upon your own Words, in
which you blame me for inferring, that King James, when he returns, may punish
Men for breaking Allegiance to King William, these words concede it. For if you
admit unto me a breach of Allegiance in facts committed against King William,
you then presuppose an Obligation for Allegiance to him so broken; and to break
a Duty is punishable by the penal Sanction, or virtue of that Law that makes it
a Duty; and therefore if not punished, nor pardoned before the return of the
King de Jure, he may punish it as a Crime against his Laws. And your taking the
instance of the Oliverian Commonwealth to this your concession, impudently
admits Allegiance due thereunto, and makes the Opposers thereof Traitors, and
Legally punishable by King Charles the Second for High Treason. But in Truth,
no Laws had engaged Allegiance to O. C., or his Commonwealth, as they have to
Kings de facto. And moreover if the Estates themselves in free and (at that
time, and case extraordinary) legal Parliament upon the antecedent Expiration,
and in utter Renunciation of that Commonwealth, and all other Forms of
Democracy recalled him, it had been Treason to have opposed, and Loyalty to
have concurred in that their Restitution. But I stated the Case of O. C. so
clearly in our last Conference, that I fancy it beyond the power of T. B.
himself, as spiteful as he is, to parallel the Tenure of O. C. with that of
King William, whatsoever he may without Argument rant and rave to the contrary.
As for the Reproach of stirring up the Powers, or the Mob against you, I reply,
that you prevent me in that Intrigue your selves; and I will give you any Form
of Security, either Sacred, or Secular, upon Soul, or Body, or Goods, that I
will never provoke them against you, as much as your selves have done, and
still, for ought I see, persevere to do.


Dyscher. We are very luckily fallen in again, upon the mention of O. C.'s
Authority and Settlement over us. I pray let us review that Article. For though
T. B. for want of Argument, cries out stark shame upon you, and is once (oh
wonder!) ashamed for you (in such a sort of Civility as he never vouchsafes
himself, how much soever he needs it) because you will not be confuted by his
Brass and Impudence, and our Learned Pens, I will see what Grace may be wrought
in you by some Impartial Reflections of a softer Metal, but of great weight.
You make a pretty sort of disparity between the Tenure and Settlement of King
William and O. C. Sol. and Ab. g. 12, 13.
Because O. C. was not King; as if the Charm lay in a word. Call him Hospador,
if you will, for me. Is not the Duke of Muscovie King of that Country, because
he is called Duke? It is the Authority and Power we are speaking of, not by
what Names it is called M. S. Reflex.


Eucher. I took my self for a Conjurer, nor will I endeavor to enchant you
with words instead of things, since your Temper will not hearken to the voice
of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely. And therefore without troubling the
Peace of that great Duke, you may please to remember, that there is an old,
received, and approved distinction between the Titles, and Characters of King,
and Tyrant. The former, is he that Reigns according to the Laws, and Forms of
Civil Constitutions, and his Character, and Authority, is Grateful, and
Honorable. The latter, Rules by mere force, oppression, and bondage, without
any Civil Form of Tenure, or Settlement, by a power only potential, not
potestative, and therefore without a proper Authority. And this Character is in
most especial manner given to Usurping Rebels, as well as to Foreign Invaders;
to destroy which Tyrants, the Universal Sense of Nations ever judged it lawful,
because they have no Form of Title, but that of the Sword, Violence, and
forcible Entry. Now King William holds this Sovereignty by the former legal way
of National Contract, and Civil Establishment; but O. C. had no other Mode of
Profession, but Tyrannical; and so had no legal (which is the only Form of)
Authority. And yet beside, perhaps the very Style of King is necessary to the
real Sovereigns of England, in order to their Claims of Allegiance, by virtue
of the old Oath and Laws; though when new Laws and Constitutions extinguish the
old, a new Allegiance may be due to a new Sovereign under any other Titular
Style. But if this Style be thus necessary to oblige our Allegiance by the old
Laws, then for want of that very Character, no Allegiance was due to O. C. by
our old Laws, which was the first thing in question. But then I proceeded
further, and showed, Sol. and Ab. page 12, 13.
that he had no legal Form of Settlement in the Sovereignty by any other Laws,
to which I refer your Memory and Consideration. For the improvement of which I
will further demonstrate, that he was no King, either in Name, or Thing. For
first, he was Created even by his own Faction, not Sovereign, but Protector
only of the People. And that Office was not Royal, as appears by the third and
fourth Articles of the Instrument of his Government, instituted by his Officers
first, and after again pretendedly confirmed by his pretended House of Commons,
which he had first purged of all suspected Persons, and this, after he had
refused the Style of King, which he saw would not pass Muster in his Army. Though
therefore he Ruled by the force of his Confederacy, yet not as legal Sovereign,
nor according to any Law, or lawful ^orm of Constitution, even in that false
Authority. But if you will allow mere Force to be sufficient to a Settlement
and Constitution, then all the little Elves and Goblins of Power, that after
him pretended to sit at Helm in the whole course of those Changes, till the
Return of the Royal Family, were all worshipful Mushroom Sovereigns forsooth.
And what I have heard a Person of great Parts, Honor, and Authority, sometimes
say, that tho he is no very Old Man, yet he has seen five and twenty
Governments in England, was perhaps as severely true, as it seemed pleasantly
spoken. Have you any more Straws to pick in this Matter, or will you dismiss me
in peace?


Dyscher. No, no, Friend; you must not think to slip your Collar so. You say,
that O. C. did not, and could not pretend a National Contract, as having no
House of Lords, nor free House of Commons. Whatever he might do, I am sure,
that he did pretend, that he was advanced to the Government, by the Consent and
even Grant of the People of England. What was it else he did pretend? M. S.
Reflex.


Eucher. Though I mentioned his Non-pretension, as well as incapacity to pretend
a National Contract, to argue thence, that really he had none, yet the intended
force of my Reasoning, lies in his real want of such Contract, of which his
Non-pretension, in his Case, and care for Pretensions, is a Moral Argument. For
had he really had it, the Civil effect had been the same without a Pretension,
which alone can have no Civil Efficacy, or Obligation. But however, that I may
not seem to neglect your Pretenses, let us examine his. I allow therefore, that
he made some Pretense, but none to the Lord's House, which he utterly
cashiered, which yet however had been, and still is, necessary to a National
Contract. I allow you also, that he pretended his Advancement by the People, as
the word restrainedly signifies the Commons of England; and he had a small
Color for this, in the acknowledgment of the Usurping Pack, that pretended to
sit for the Common People of England, against all the Laws and Rights of the
People. And yet, had these been a free, fair, and full Representative, they
could not have given O. C. a Legal Dominion over the superior Estate of Peers,
because the Commons never had it themselves. But as the word People properly
comprehends all subject Orders, Estates, or Persons of the Realm, so neither
did, nor could he pretend an Advancement by the People. But the main point we
are concerned in, and which you can say nothing for, pertinent to our Debate,
is, to what State, Style, or Character he was advanced, or pretended to be
advanced by them, whom he called the People? Was it to a real Royal
Sovereignty? No, no; his Mouth Watered, his Bowels hanker'd at it, but he was
however forced to sit down, and pretend only to a Protectory Trust for the
Commons of England.


Dyscher. This, I confess, reduces me to some difficulty and unexpected
Surprise. Yet will I repeat to you the remainder of what my reflecting Friend
remarked, that, in the next place for the justice of his pretense, that he had
no House of Lords, I suppose he made that no pretense against himself, as you
would have me believe. MS. Reflex.


Eucher. Truly I never persuaded, or tempted you to believe that O. C. made any
pretense against himself: I only told you, that he neither did, nor could
pretend the Contract of the Lords House; and can you prove the contrary?


Dyscher. But he did not think a Lords House necessary to make a National
Representation. It could not be so originally. And therefore they as Lords are
no Parties in the Original Contract. We know an This is false, for there were
near 200 excluded Members that could not sit to make it an entire House.
House of Commons has Voted them useless. And at this Day the Lords do not
pretend to the Right of granting away the Money of the People; And I suppose it
is upon this Account, that they do not look upon themselves as the
Representatives of the People. MS. Reflex.


Eucher. Here I think my self obliged to do your Party right, that these are
not their common Sentiments. This was a singular Nostrum of your assuming
Emperick, to heal a diseased Cause. But by the good leave of the Lords and
Commons, whom I have no mind to set at variance, we will sift these odd
Politics. Is it then first of all likely, that O. C. did not think a Lords
House necessary to a National Contract? If he did, it is no matter, if he did
not think them National Representatives. The Language of Men herein is various;
many Men commonly assert the whole Parliament to represent the Nation, since
what is Enacted by them and the King altogether is taken for the Act of the
Nation. But strictly speaking, the Lords are no formal Representatives, nor did
I ever say they were, though you would trump the term of Representation upon me,
to ensnare me to a concession that the Lords represent. But I am not so to be
tricked. I know the Lords to be an Estate Originally Principal, acting
Personally for themselves in their own Right, and Name, not in the Name, or on
the Mission of others; and under the King they are the upper part of the
Parliament and People in the most comprehensive Sense of this word. But the
lower House only are the Representatives of their Respective Counties, Cities,
and Buroughs, in whose Name, and Right they Act for all the Commons of
England. But if O. C. knew the Lords House necessary to the King himself to
Enact the Bills even of the Commons into Laws, could he think them needless to
the legitimating his Order, or his Acts? Surely he could not, except upon this
one only supposition, that he thought nothing could legitimate it, which is
indeed not improbable; but then that exauctorates the Commons also of that
Power, by which he pretended himself advanced. But could O. C. otherwise think
the Lords needless to his Legitimation, upon this empty and impertinent
Speculation, that there could be no Lords in the Original Contract? Which can
be true neither in any other sense but this, that in the first Constitution of
Civil Government in this Land, there could be no House of Lords. No, verily;
for before, or till then, they were in a mere rustic, Pastoral, and
agricolarian Habit, Quality, and Condition. But since that there have been many
Changes of Governments, and in them of Sovereigns, by National Contract. And
hence, I say, ever since there have been Baronies, and Peerage in England, in
every settled Change of Government, and Sovereigns, made by National Contract,
the Lords were in those Acts that originated those Settlements, Titles, and
Sovereigns, and so would have been originally necessary to an Original Contract
for O. C's Constitution, tho once in a state of Rebellion, a seditious Party of
the Commons voted them useless. But I ask you fairly; Was that Vote of theirs
Truth, or Law? If so, why have the Kings and Commons ever since admitted their
Use, as well as Right? If not, why did you allege it in Bar to the Rights of
Peer rage? But supposing that wicked Vote had been at that time true; yet who
had made them so useless but they by seditious Violences? Now would you think
it reasonable to cut off a Man's Hands, and then reproach him, and cast him out
as useless? But I will beat back this dull Weapon on your own Head, and mind
you, that these County, City, and Burrough-Charters of sending Representatives,
could not be in the first Original Contract for Civil Government, as being also
of later Extraction. So that upon your Theory, O. C. must think them also
needless in order to his Constitution, who pleasantly new named Magna Charta,
Magna F -- ta. And so at last the Truth will come about unawares, that O. C.
had no form of Title from King, Lords, or Commons of England. Again, if the
Lords House should upon a critical Juncture turn Demagogue, and rabble the
Commons out of Heart, and House, would it be fair for the Lords hereupon to
vote them off as useless? It Is scandalous therefore to draw Arguments from
Confessed and notorious Violences to justify a wrong Cause; and therefore
henceforward give us in Truth, what you seem to Challenge and glory in, just
Weights and Measures; at least be not so shamefully disloyal, as to dry up in
the King that Fountain of Honor by which he Creates the Peerage, and who is
the original Founder of all Charters. As for the Lords not assuming to give
away the Peoples Money, as not being their Representatives, it is nothing to the
purpose against their concurring Interest in Contracting for new Constitutions;
though neither House can separately give away the Peoples Money, although those
Bills are by regular custom prepared in the Lower House. Nor are these Rights
of the Peerage so alien from the good of the general Body, but that we and the
better part of the lower House have sensibly owed our Peace, and Preservation
to the Integrity, Care, Wisdom, and Honor of that Upper House, when many of
our own overheated Charioteers have been furiously driving on all to the
Precipice.


Dyscher. We will then dismiss the Lords in peace, and come to the Commons, on
whom O. C. relied, and Whereas you say, O. C. had no free House of Commons, I
answer first, he did not pretend that, which is a sufficient Answer thereto.
MS. Reflex.


Eucher. Are you awaked in good sober sadness, or have you almost talked your
self into sleep, and Dreams? For though your Answer be sufficient to some
purpose, yet it is so to mine, not yours. For not having a just freedom, as well
as Title to act for the Interest and Sense of the People, their Acts were not
the Acts of the People, but either private Acts of Cowardice, or rather the
Acts of him that forced or managed them to his own Counsels, and had no more
legal validity, than what mere Force and Fraud could give them.


Dyscher. All that I will further say to this point, is, that they called
themselves free, and no Man durst say the contrary. While they had the Power,
O. C. owned them, and they owned him; and he had as Universal and seeming a
Consent of the Nation, as can well be imagined; he was obeyed at home, and
owned abroad, if not in all, yet in most of the Courts in Christendom.


Eucher. How your Discourse consents to it self, I do not well understand. Just
now you said O. C. did not pretend to have a free House of Commons; now in the
same Breath you say, they called themselves free, and no Man durst say the
contrary, and O. C. owned them. Now did he own them to be free, as they called
themselves? If so, then he pretended to have a free House of Commons contrary
to what you say. If he did not own them as free as they owned themselves, he
must then either not own them at all, or only as Vassals, and I leave it to
your Choice to take either of those Handles, for there is no way to extricate
you from the ties of Contradiction. But whatsoever freedom this knot of Men
had, it could amount to no more than the freedom of Banditi, or Rapparees, or
any unsuppressible Rout, which is but a mere impunity to do Evil, and wrong the
innocent. But the freedom we are speaking of is Civil, consisting in the
Popular liberty of Election, Session, Debates, and Votes. Yet the very House,
that Constituted him Protector, was first purged of all suspected Members, and
upon their after admission, his Constitution began to be questioned as much,
and for this O. C. dissolved them in most sacred Rage. And for the truth hereof
also I call in Testimony the Sense of the whole Nation, who, as soon as
opportunity offered it self by Monk, declared for, and after met in a free
Parliament, which before they had long wanted. And hence it appears also the
Sense of the Nation, that neither the Rights of Peerage, nor the Freedom of
Corporations had been Legally vacated by the former Tyranny. As for the
Negotiations of Foreign Courts, they are no Demonstrations of a National
Contract, or Form of Legal Settlement here. For as Foreigners are no Judges of
our Tenures, so they meddle not with them, but only treat with the actual
prevailing Powers, whether Legal or Usurpant, Tyrants or Rebels, its almost all
one to Strangers. They give them all good words to serve themselves of them,
but if disgusted, they then change the Tune into all the juster Names and
Titles of Oppression and Villainy, if they can do it safely. So that there is no
concludency in this sort of Reasoning, though yet at the best, his Accomplices and
Strangers owned him no otherwise than he styled himself, not the Sovereign, but
the Protector only of the People. But the boldest stroke of all is, that he had
as universal Obedience, and seeming a Consent of the whole Nation as can well
be imagined. For the formal consent of both Houses, sitting free from terror,
may easily seem, and be imagined much more properly, formally, and validly
National, than mere enforced silence, and patience under irresistible
domination. Nay, we as yet have no other way of National Consent but the
Parliamentary, without which all Personal Contracts, or Engagements to
intruding Powers are null, and not legally interpretable to any Civil Form, or
Obligation, and so not to be drawn into a pretense for a National Consent. But
now at last see, I pray you, the Issue of this (...), and eager desire of
Contention. For to make King William's Title no better, but worse than O. C's,
to the end that the then legal and Loyal Recusancy may legalize this of yours,
(which is the one and raging Clamor of you all) you forsooth outpitch your
self, and would prove O. C. fully settled by a N^tional Consent, as great as
can well be supposed, and by the general acknowledgments of Foreign Courts to
his real Sovereignty, though not nominally Regal. Now were this true, all the
Loyal Worthies Recusant to O. C. are Condemned for Rebels by the Convocation
Book. And then if O. C. were thoroughly settled upon such Acknowledgments at home
and Abroad, much more is King William so, and consequently by the Rules of that
Convocation, you must yield him your Allegiance. Thus Brother, in Politics, as
well as Poetics, In vitium ducit culpae, fuga, si caret art.

Upon which let T. B. blush for you as well as for me, and then we shall be
even.


Dyscher. Well then, let us pass from these Debates about the Oath to the
Office of Prayers for your King William and Queen Mary against all their
Enemies. Of which you tell us, Sol. and Ab. page 14.
That the Prayers were consented to by all the Recusant Bishops, and by them (
[For their Officers] was a misprint.
or their Officers without any Prohibition) sent to the Clergy of every
Diocese, and by them generally received. The Bishops were present at them,
directed their Clergy upon Consultation to use them; and thus things stood till
the Day of their Suspension, and no blowing of the Trumpet against Perjury. Now
if this were true, yet if the Prayers are truly chargeable with something
unlawful, and wicked; that is such a daring affront to God Almighty, that
neither any Act, or Neglect of theirs can justify either your or my Concurrence
in them. And therefore I wonder why you should make such a Lie, when it will
not serve you for a Reason. For it is well known to all, who frequented their
Communion, that they never read or used those Prayers, and that is no
improbable Argument, that they neither consented to them, nor sent them abroad.
But the truth is, that they were so far from either consenting to them, or
sending them to their Clergy, that they had no opportunity of the thing, 'till
it was done and past. And whether some Body told you this Lie, or you made it
your self, if you please to consult the Printer in the Savoy, -- he can tell
you how they were sent, and who sent them, and that those whom you call
Recusant Bishops, were purposely kept ignorant, that they might not be able to
give any obstructions to the business. And now, Sir, do not you think, that you
have acted a very mannerly Part to our Reverend Fathers, in exclaiming against
them, and comparing them to winking Watchmen, and dumb Dogs, because they do
not get up of the top of the Monument, and baul out against a thing, which they
knew nothing of? It could not be done before, and since it has been cried out
against sufficiently. T. B. Sec. Let. page 31, 32.


Eucher. If what I said of the Bishops, or Clergy herein be a Lie, I own it to
be as Villainous a Calumny as ever your malevolent Tongue, or Pen framed; but if
it be true, I think it a just Plea, not to Reproach those excellent Fathers,
God forbid! but on an undoubted presumption of their Sincerity, to infer, that
they then as well as we, did not judge those Prayers unlawful. And it is a fair
Argument in Moral Charges, used and allowed by all Orators, that we had the
Consent of those, who now dissent from us, if at least those Fathers do yet
dissent from us. But now I am brought in upon an uneasy Stage, upon which we
are not so much to Argue, as to give and take the Lie; and not only so, but to
be under Provocation to discover Secrets against Moral Inclination, or
otherwise to undergo the Censure of a Liar. Whether of the two Evils I shall
choose I wot not well. Yet, let whatsoever Opinion fall upon me, I will never
discover Persons, nor the tenth part of what I know in fact to be true herein,
to prevent all Obliquities of Censure, and Reflection. But yet notwithstanding
this necessary Civility, I think my self obliged to vindicate the Truth of what
I have asserted. Immediately upon admission of their Majesty's to the Throne,
an Order of Council passed for setting their Names and Royal Character in the
Liturgy instead of King James, and this Order was sent down to every See, and
from thence to every Parish in all the Dioceses of England. Now can any Man
think, that all this was done in Corners, and managed in the Dark, to keep the
dissenting Bishops ignorant hereof, when it was impossible to conceal the
Design from the Sense and expectation of the meanest Idiot, who must know, that
the change of Sovereigns draws after it such a certain change in the Prayers? I
cannot say this Order was sent directly to the Bishops by Name, but if not, it
was to their Officers and Registers. And were they also so much in the Secret,
as to keep their Watchful Lords in ignorance, and so closely to send the Form
to the Cathedrals, and Parishes, that these deluded Fathers should know nothing
of it? But when however these surprised Fathers were alarmed in their
Cathedrals with these new wicked Prayers, why did they continue to frequent
them, without sending the Classick to their Prohibition; 'till the Day of their
Suspension in Aug. 89? And in that interval, administer the Sacrament at the
Cathedral Altars, where these Sovereigns were then prayed for? Why hereupon had
there not been some public Remonstrance to the Dioceses, or Rural Deanries,
that the Bishops knew nothing of that Order being sent them, and that they did
not allow, but forbid it by a firm Injunction? None of this was done to
undeceive the Clergy, who received the Order as sent them by their Bishops. And
I could produce you Instances of Recusant Clergymen, who then read those
Prayers on that presumption, and allege it for their Apology, when Taxed
hereof upon their present inconformity. Here was half a Years time to have
repressed, or at least to have condemned this Service, yet all past in silence,
and in their visible Communion. During this Tract of time can any Man think,
that no Clergy Men had any Conferences with their Dissenting Bishops hereupon?
And in those Conferences did those Fathers Condemn, and forbid these Prayers,
at which themselves were daily present? No, I believe no where; and somewhere
in several instances I know the contrary, that directions have been given to
use our present Forms. But one thing I will further tell you, that these
innocent Fathers were not so gulled, as you pretend, in the first motions. For
upon the Enthroning of their present Majesty's, and the Change of the Prayers,
and Oath of new Allegiance; the Recusant Bishops met together in Consultation,
how to act in these Affairs, and after all Debates agitated, they came to this
Resolution, that they would not oppose the Prayers, for that it would seem too
invidious and uncharitable, to deny their Majesty's our Devotions, but
determined only to stick at the Oath. This I presume those Fathers will not
deny; and if any of them should hereafter challenge me for this Report, I will
give them my Author, whom I presume no Man can Impeach of falsehood, or
Detraction. But I would not have mentioned this, had not you reproached me with
the Lie, even while you endeavor to cover the most evident Truths with Clouds
and Darkness. Nor do I mention this to cast a blemish on them. For did not
their Deprivations seem to them Schismatical, I believe they would not have
repudiated our Communion upon the mere account of our Prayers, as neither did
your great Coryphaeus till the Deprivation of the Primate. All which is open
Truth, though these Fathers never read these Prayers, which I never charged on
them, since it is otherwise very rare to hear Bishops reading the Prayers in any
Church whatsoever. And this Concession to these Prayers being past on their
most serious considerations, there was no Cause why they should blow the
Trumpet against what they judged lawful. But had they really judged the
contrary, this concurrence had been worse than the neglect of winking
Watchmen, or the silence of dumb Dogs, to which I never compared them, though
your Censorious Rigours must brand this moderation with more infamous
Characters, as is evident from this Discourse of yours, and the second Chapter
of the first Part of your Treatise of Christian Communion. And having thus
vindicated their Equity and my Reverence thereof, methinks such a Man of
Manners, as you have approved your self hitherto to be, should have besprinkled
our Fathers also a little more decently, and not (as generally you do) with
Tinctures drawn from the Lake of Sodom. But to leave you to the felicity of
your own good Humors, I shall only observe, what a silly innuendo you flurt
upon the Secretaries, or Council of State, that they were in great fear, what
stirs these Bishops would make, had they not concerted with Mr. Jones at the
Savoy, to carry on this Religious Intrigue in the Blind, whereas these Fathers
expected their determined Fate with all imaginable calmness, and serenity, as
Men that well understood the patience of Saints. And in that exemplary Patience
they were impatient at those, who through too great bitterness, called our
Conformity, the Apostasy of the Church of England; for the truth of which, if
you will not believe me, I hope you will Mr. Dodwell, to whom I therefore refer
you for satisfaction. And therefore you, that would raise you a Monument out of
those Flames you kindle, by reproaching us with infamous Imputations, recede
from the pattern, and act without the direction of your Fathers.


Dyscher. Another Reason why we may lawfully join in those Prayers, is because
(as you would Persuade us)

King James and your King William are very good Friends. That King James is not
among the number of King William and Queen Mary's Enemies. MS. Reflex.
And you prove it, for that the Prayers express him not; -- and that you rank
him not among the number of King William and Queen Mrry's Enemies. For an Enemy
is one that designeth to injure a Man, and we are not sure that King James does
so design against King William. -- But do you not verily believe, that K. James
would willingly regain his Crown, if he could, and consequently dispossess King
William? Or do you think this no Injury to K. William? And no more say you, can
be intended in those Prayers (of the Liturgy for King William) than to defeat
him (King James) in that Injurious intention. For we pray for no Man's, nor
Kings Destruction, or hurt. These are * Sol. and Ab. page 14.
your reasons why no Jacobite ought to Scruple to join with you in the
Common Prayers for King William, viz. To strengthen him, that he may Vanquish
and overcome all his Enemies, because King James intends him no Injury.
Transubstantiation is easy to this. This is persuading us out of all our
Senses at once. King James and King William appear upon the Head of two Armies,
[ These two words might well have been spared, to cover, etc.
and Fight] and each calls those Rebels that adhere to the other; and yet they
are not Enemies. It is no hurt to the one, if the other get the Victory, and
therefore you may Pray for Victory to King William, without meaning any hurt to
King James. Why then are you offended at those that Pray for Victory to King
James against King William? Here is no Injury intended to King William, only
that King James may have a Victory, that is all. Is this the Argument to
persuade Men's Consciences to join in your Common Prayers? Is this the strength
of your Cause? The strong and solid Conviction of the sincerity and plainness
of your Dealing? MS. Reflex.
But supposing he will do no Wrong, yet sure he may demand and endeavor to
recover his Right. And I am apt to think, that your little ambitious Dutch
Savior would think no Man in the World so much his Enemy, as he that demands
three Kingdoms from him. Nor do we call only those Enemies, who design
Injuries, but even all, who actually oppose each other, or between whom there
is any Contest, let their Designs be what they will, or their Cause right or
wrong. And after all your daubing, he certainly is accounted the greatest
Enemy, for whose sake all others are judged Enemies. Now though the King of
France be such an abominable Enemy, he should soon he esteemed the best Friend,
if he would but renounce the Interest of K. James, and suport the Usurpation of
the Prince of Orange. T. B. Sec. Let. page 32, 33.


Eucher. In this Triumphant and fastidious Harangue, these things severally
offer themselves to our Consideration.


1st. Whether the Strength of our Cause lies in this Account of our Prayers?
2dly. Whether this be not the Sense of many Jacobites? 3dly. What is the full
importance of the word Enemy? 4thly. What the importance of Vanquishment and
overcoming? 5thly. What really is the lawful Sense of these words in the
Liturgy? 6thly. What is the Reason why Kings are particularly Named in National
Prayers? 7thly. Whether our Prayers for King William must inevitably strike at
King James?
1. Then the strength of our Cause lies not herein, nor fails in the Defects of
this Account. For in blunt Truth, if King William and Queen Mary be our
Sovereign Lord and Lady, the same Prayers in the same full Sense, are to be
used for them, in which they were used for all their Predecessors. So that if
King James comes into the Number of their Enemies, against whom the perpetual
Sense of those Prayers lies, we cannot help that, while we innocently perform
our Duties. The greatest Objection against this that I (...) know is, what your
great Author of the Christian Communion herein offers, that they that look upon
new Sovereigns only as Kings de facto, do herein pray for the Subversion of
Right, and him that has it, and these make up a great Number of the present
Conformists. But that question properly comes under dispute upon the Notion of
Enemies, and Victory in our Prayers, and on that Head it shall be considered.
The only question here is, if a King de facto can be our Sovereign Lord? This I
know you deny, and if your denial be good, it presses our Prayers much, if
offered for a King by us taken for de facto only. But if the Nation has a
lawful Right upon great Exigences to admit a Person into the Sovereignty, who
had no Right to enforce them thereto, then as to the Nations part they have
lawfully admitted him to be their Sovereign Lord, and have yielded him all that
Authority over us, that the Laws of the Land in such Necessity allow us to
concede. And such is the Case in all Submissions upon new Conquests, though
injuriously gotten. For in such Cases the submitting People, being no Authentic
Judges upon the Cause of the new Potentate, can only judge for themselves what
they may lawfully do, and leave his Cause to God, whether he on his Part takes
the Crown de jure, or no. Thus before the Recognition this Nation had de facto
admitted K. William, and every Person was bound to receive him at least for
such, and had there never been any Recognition de jure, no Man was an habil
Judge to have condemned the jus, whatsoever Men's various Opinions in private
might have been, on which they ought to have laid no stress, but to have
received him as their actually settled and constituted Sovereign Lord, and
required no more; since no more was determinately required of them. If a
Captive in Algiers, etc. be required to pray for his Lord and Master, that is
so only de facto, he may certainly do so under those Titles, and is bound to do
so upon command, if he has contracted Service. I know you will here say, this
Contract gives the Tyrant Right; But then you must grant, that the Submission
of a Nation passes Right ipso facto, and then you put the Nation de facto only
clear out of doors. Here you will reply, that such Submission cannot be de
jure, as being injurious to the present Right of another; But then so will I
say, the Captives Submission and Contract is against the permanent Right of his
Parents, or former Master, who thereby may lawfully rescue him by force of
Arms. And yet notwithstanding this the poor Slave, may thus pray for the
Captivant as his Lord; nay, even that he may vanquish and overcome all his
Enemies, even while the former Proprietors are fighting for his Rescue, in the
same Sense we intend in our Prayers for our most rightful Sovereigns, as shall
clearly appear on the fifth Head of this Answer. King William therefore being
actually our Sovereign Lord, even by our own warrantable Contract, we may
lawfully use these Prayers for him, and on his Command are bound to do so, even
though he were only King de facto in the legal Sense of this Term, and not
altogether, as we have owned him, de pleno jure; because it will appear, that
these Prayers are not levelled against any Man's Right, though they are against
all his Enemies. Now the truth is, the Relation, we lately stood in to K. James
as our then Sovereign, makes tender hearted Men pity his whole personal
History, and consequently unwilling to pray against him, if there be any fair,
or lawful way to avoid it, which there is not, if he comes not into the Number
of those Enemies, which we are to pray against. Such also is the Temper of poor
People under new Conquests toward their former Sovereigns, when obliged to pray
for the new (that appear no otherwise than de facto such) against all their
Enemies. Yet this is only an Operation of Bowels and good Nature, but not of
strict and impartial Reason, (though it influences much upon Men's Spirits) but
is to be guided, and corrected in its Excesses thereby. Hence upon the
beginning of this Change an excellent Person, that was easily satisfied in
owning their Majesty's Title Sovereign in the Prayers, yet stumbled at the
Passages about Enemies, till he received with much pleasure this very Answer,
for which you deride me. But, as I have now said, the only material Question
here is, if K. William and Q. Mary actually are our Sovereigns? for this being
granted, all the rest follows of due Course without respect of Persons,
whosoever be their Enemies without exception. But I confess I was willing to
give you as healing a Lenitive as I could, that I might not widen the Wound,
nor exasperate the Division; but, it seems, while I labor for Peace, you make
you ready for Battle.

Secondly, This seems to be the Sense of many learned Jacobites, without
which I see not how their Practices can be justified. For, not to repeat the
Consent and Communion of the Deprived Fathers in these Prayers before the Day
of their Suspension, there are yet many moderate Men among you, that read these
Prayers, though deprived for filing the Oath. Now do you think, that these Men
direct their Prayers against K. James? If they do, then upon your Principles
they break their Allegiance and Oath to him, which they judge oblige them to
this very Day. Which methinks should make you less lavish of your perjurious
Imputations upon others, whose Principles acquit them from wilful and intended
Perjury. Yet there is no way for these Men of yours to avoid this Charge upon
your Principles, but by such a Sense of Enemies, in which it is possible K.
James may not be included. But if they intend not their Prayers at K. James,
how are we charged for praying against him, when we and these Jacobites in the
same Words may sincerely use the same Sense? so that in good truth, the Account
I gave of these Prayers becomes a Plea necessary, not so much to us, as to your
own more moderate and equal Brethren, against whom therefore for the future you
must turn your Style, and Acrimony.

Thirdly, I will now proceed to justify my Sense to be the only allowable
Sense of our Prayers under any the justest Reign whatsoever, and not merely
accommodated by me to the present Juncture. This will first require me more
fully to open the principal Notions of the word Enemy, than for reasons private
to my self I did in my last Conference. The word Enemy therefore has two known
principal Acceptations, moral, and military. Morally an Enemy is one that
intends Injury, or Hurt; and so this Sense carries Malice in it. Militarily
an Enemy is an opposite of War, which innocent Princes, People, and Persons may
be forced to be, who have no Malice, or moral Enmity; as in Self-defences
against Oppression, in which it is possible, that the Defendents would not
willingly hurt any of the Oppressors, nor engage even in an advantageous
Battle, if it could be avoided, but gladly close up the War. And yet both the
injurious Aggressour, and all Neuters in the Cause by custom call these just
Defendents Enemies to the other Opposite, not charging them with moral Injury,
but respecting their military Opposition. The Greeks and Latins have two
proper distinctive Names for these two sorts of Enemies, (...), and inimicus
for the Moral; (...), and hostis for the military Enemy. Other Opponents are
most properly called Adversaries, as a Term of a more comprehensive Latitude,
reaching to the general Nature of all sorts of Contention, serious, or
sportive, good, or bad.

Fourthly, We are to examine the importance of Vanquishing, and Victory. For
this indeed seems to admit a far greater, and benigner Latitude of
signification, than you in your Reflection seem to allow. For you seem to
apprehend no Victory but in Butcheries, Ruins, and Desolations. Whereas many
successful Expeditions, (as that of General Monk) have been victorious without
Hurt; since simply, and in general to overcome is no more than to prevail
against any Opponents, or Oppositions, whatsoever fort they are of, even where
there is no Enmity, as in Games, Wagers, Votes, and Competitions. And there is
one sort of Victory more noble than any other, the overcoming Evil with Good,
which is God's especial way of vanquishing the Powers of Evil. And even in War
those Victories are most noble, where least Hurt is done, and most Mercy
showed; and thereupon the best and most noble Desires of Victory are those,
whereby we wish to prevail against our Enemy, if it be possible, without
hurting him, or his Party at all, and more than this we are not absolutely to
wish, or pray for, even against the greatest Enemies, by the Laws of our most
compassionate and holy Religion, which allows Wars only to be waged against our
Will, not with delight and bloody Affectations.

Fifthly, We are to consider against what Enemies it is lawful to pray for even
the gentlest Victories. First, then it is not lawful to pray for any Victory
against the Innocent, in the Innocence of his Cause; no, though when he stan^
(...) in his own Defense, the Custom of military Language calls him Enemy. For
if I regard Iniquity in my Heart, the Lord will not hear me. Thus it is not
lawful for Pirates to pray for success against innocent Merchants standing on
their own Defense; because here Victory in the Pirates side does not import the
Defeat of an Injurious Intention, but an Injury. It was not lawful for K. Saul
to pray for Victory over his Subject David, though at the Head of an armed Band
for Self-preservation, for the same reason. Whence it follows, that no
injurious Prince may So the fifth Senior bids Ptolemy Philadelphus to expect
Victory, (...). Ap. Arist. Edit. Oxon.
pray for success against the Innocent, whom he designs to oppress. And if so,
neither may his Subjects pray for his Victory over the Innocent, for that they
may not petition more for him, than he may for himself. Otherwise Prayers as
directly contrary as just and unjust, would be allowable and acceptable with
God. And here indeed starts up a doubt, how the opposite Devotions of warring
Nations against their respective Princes Enemies, can at the same time on both
sides be justified for lawful and religious, since one at least of the Princes
must be unjust, and for the Success of such a Prince in his Injustice all
Prayers are unjust? To the solution of which doubt it is necessary to observe,
that no religious or lawful Prayers for Temporal benefits are, though never so
earnest, simply absolute, and peremptory, but always conceived with a deference
and resignation to God's Will, either expressly, or implicitly, after our
Savior's Example in his most earnest Prayers at the Approach of his Passion,
Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me, yet not my Will, but thy
Will be done. So then our Prayers for victory to our Prince import a
reservation to God's will, if he sees fit to admit them; but we knowing that
all injustice is contrariant to the will of God, refer our Princes cause to
God's judgments, and will, against which we intend no Prayers, but ground them
all on a tacit and presuming supposition, that our Cause is right. For it would
be a very impious form of Prayer to say, give success, O Lord, to our Prince in
all his designs of ravage and oppression. So that, though the supposition of
Justice at the bottom of all such Prayers be not usually expressed to prevent
common jealousy in the Subject, yet it is reserved by decent presumption as
the proper duty of the Subject toward his Sovereign, over whose Counsels he has
no judgment. And accordingly all our public Prayers in time of War propose the
malice, pride, and oppression of our Enemies as the just causes of our
supplication, and ground of our zeal, and object of God's Indignation, acording
to the standing Forms of such devotions in the holy Scriptures. And so a moral
enmity supposed in our military Enemies, with our own presuming innocence, with
a virtual or open appeal and reference to God the Judge of all, is the only
Foundation of such Prayers, and the only Reason, that can reconcile such
opposite Liturgies of warring Nations with Religion and Innocence. And if you
think this too disloyal and cold a form of Devotion, I pray think again, what
an odd sort of Loyalty it is to your King, to contend even with God for his
injustice, and to offer him your Sacrifices after the impious manner of the
Heathen, to accept and promote the abominations of yo^^ Prince. But now upon
the Rules by me (...), a Captive may pray for his Masters Victory ^^er all his
enemies, and yet not execrate those that are in just arms against him, as being
guilty of no moral Enmity, or injury in their wars against ^^m. And so
accordingly the Case of all people under new Conquests is to be resolved as to
the like changes in their public Services, on the change of Sovereigns.

Sixthly, it is to be considered; why Princes are so particularly named above
other Orders in these national Prayers against Enemies? And the reason is
obvious, because the interest of the whole Nations is summed up in the Felicity
of their Kings. So that they that are his Enemies, are taken for the Nations
Enemies also in these Prayers. In praying therefore against K. William's
Enemies, we consider him not merely as a single solitary Person, but as our
Sovereign Head, on whose welfare our own also depends, and so in his Enemies we
pray against our own also.

Seventhly, we must enquire whether K. James must in our Prayers inevitably
come into the number of K. William's enemies, and so by civil Construction the
Nations enemies? Now when these Prayers were first ordered and received, K.
James was in no part of his old Dominions, nor in any actual sensible military
Hostility against K. William any where. For though the Irish were in Commotion,
yet K. James was not there, nor does it appear that they acted on his
Commission, but mere presumption, and that not against K. William, till his
Armies came thither, but their domestic Protestants only. It seemed a while as
if K. James had sat down, and yielded up to his fate, and state of desertion.
After the settled course of these Prayers re-animated by the French King he
enters ^^^land, and K. William follows. In the mean time ^he course and sense
of the Prayers was still the same, r^^ning in generals, and not altering by
those changes b^yond the Irish Channel, as there was no reason they should. And
so K. James was no more particularized after than before this in our Prayers.
Yet if his personal behavior toward K. William at the Boyne does not evince
the contrary, I will allow you, that then he was a military enemy. But still
the grand question is, whether also he was a moral enemy (and so within the
intention of our Prayers) by his then present breaking it off from England, and
his designs thereby to recover England? And plain it is, that the sense of our
Nation, which is valid and cogent to all Civil obligations, does conclude him
an injurious, and moral enemy to K. William, and this Realm. For Ireland
belonging through a long fixed Right to the Crown of England, it must appear
injurious, after an effectual Abdication of this Crown, and a Settlement of a
Title therein upon K. William, to invade Ireland, and so to reduce us here
under war for a recovery thereof, and a defense of our own land from his
illegal claims, and pretensions. And whereas without any sense of modesty you
say, that I assert K. James and K. William not to be enemies, but good friends,
viz. that K. James is so friendly to K. William, for that he intends K. William
no injury, you may resume your forehead, and remember, that I only said, we are
not sure that K. James designs K. William injury. But what we are not
infallibly sure of, we may verily believe, and presume from all the Rules of
humane Judgment upon acts of Hostility. And in all humane opinion his Invasion
of Ireland was injurious, but since all judicial Determinations must be left
and referred to God's Judgment, we, not mentioning K. James in the number of K.
Williams Enemies, do not pass our internal and personal Censure on the
Conscience of K. James before our God, but remit that to God the Judge of all
Kings and Nations. But if private Persons will intermix their own personal
opinions upon such superior Causes where they need not, then they, who think
K. James a moral Enemy to K. William, do use our forms against him on that
presumption of his injury; they that do not think so of K. James, do not in
this form of Liturgy pray against him. And the Liturgy, not compelling us in
the acts of our Religion to condemn K. James as morally injurious, does not
oblige any man determinately to involve him under any of our imprecations. And
whereas our Prayers are upbraided in the second Chapter of your first Book of
Christian Communion as directed against Right for the maintenance of wrong, it
hereby appears, how much mistaken that great Author was; for whosoever can but
comport with the Sovereign Style of their present Majesty's, may use these
Prayers without prejudice to any real Rights of K. James, or his own private
opinions concerning it. As to K. James's Personal hurt, or injury, let them,
that can feed an evil, wish it for me. God has disabled him from overturning
our Constitutions, and has settled us under good and equal Governors, and
that is enough; and if K. James be elsewhere happy, as long as he hurts not us,
we need no further trouble our selves, or him. And I do verily believe, their
present Majesty's as little require my Prayers for his hurt, as you do. For
time was, when he was in the hands of K. William, who, had he designed to hurt
him, might have done it, and thereby have prevented all the pretensions, that
have cost so much Blood and Treasure in Ireland. But 'twas piously done to
abstain his hands from Royal Blood, and leave the Issues of his undertakings to
the Rules of innocence, on which only he could dare to pray for, and expect
God's blessing. But further you have forgotten one Argument, perhaps because it
was inconsiderable, whereby it appears, that our prayers are not pointed
against any Rights of K. James, or to any hurt of his Person, for that we pray
for all Christian Kings, Princes and Governors, even th^se, against whom we
wage open war. And out of these Prayers we do not except even the most
Christian King, but pray for the preservation of him also in all his Rights,
our war not obstructing this practice of Piety even to our greatest enemies,
which we observe from the precept and example of our most blessed Savior. And
therefore, though it were true what you would seem to prove in form of
Argument, that K. James is accounted a greater Enemy (and if you please, add a
greater King too) than the French King, yet no Enmity ought to be great enough
to overcome our Religion and Charity in praying for our very greatest Enemies,
even while we pray against their Enmities. But let us however see, whether K.
William and his Subjects do take K. James for a greater Enemy than the French
King, who it seems to you is accounted an Enemy only for asserting K. James's
Cause. First then, if we take the moral notion of Enemy, no man can judge,
whether K. James or K. Lewis has the greater internal enmity against K.
William. If we go upon the military notion it is apparently false that K. James
either is, or is accounted a greater Enemy than he, that is the greatest in
Arms of all the Christian Monarchs. So that your axiom, from whence you form
your Argument, Propter quod unumquodque est tale, id magis est tale, though true
in Physical Causalities and Operations, yet fails in moral Influences, and
Inducements, such as are the reasons of humane Confederacies. And truly if K.
William himself would, upon reference made, deliver his sense, he would declare
K. Lewis more injurious than K. James in this war; for K. James seems to have
some color for provocation; but K. Lewis had none to engage in K. James's
quarrels. But if he engages on other Reasons, then he is not an enemy on K.
James's account, but his own. And if K. James and K. Lewis should ever happen
to come into K. Williams hands, there would be so sensible a difference in his
respects toward them, as would discover his resentments of French injuries as
greater than K. James's, though unquestionably he would show a Royal compassion
to them both.

And now I am provided with a Reason, why I dislike your Prayers for victory to
the late K. James against K. William. First, because your Prayers assert the
late K. James to be our present King, and import K. William to be the Nations
Enemy, whereby you condemn, and pray against the present Constitution, of which
by our Law, and consequently God's Law, you are subjects, not Judges, nor de
jure Adversaries. Again, you confess you pray absolutely against K. William, as
K. James's Enemy. And this you must judge of him either in the moral, or
military sense. If in the moral, you must then do it, either of infallible
certainty, or opinion only. The former the matter is not capable of, because of
the darkness of men's interior passions, and the disputable nature of Civil
Titles. But upon mere opinions you ought not to pass absolute Censure upon any
man's Conscience, and become his utter Enemy by your own choice. And yet were K.
William infallibly and certainly injurious to K. James, yet since K. James's
Cessation of war to pray for such victories of blood, which you alone account
victory, is to pray for a return of a Cessant War in order to a sanguinary
Victory, and its Consequences. If you take K. William only as a military Enemy,
he was then innocent, and so your Prayers then aimed at the ruin of the
innocent, and his Cause. But now he is no military Enemy to K. James, it is more
impious to pray for his Ruin, which K. James himself does not now attempt.
Upon which even K. James himself has opened our Church-Doors to you to join
with us in our Prayers for King William and Queen Mary. But if you take the
French War to be K. James's, we have all reason to thank you kindly for your
Prayers, in a time of such a dangerous War, as not only affects all our
Temporals, but our very Church, and Religion, the noblest Structure, and
Bulwark of the Reformation; Of which God in mercy make you truly sensible, and
even in this respect turn the hearts of the Fathers to the Children, and the
disobedient to the Wisdom of the Just. Amen.

Dyscher. Yet I find you are not so confident for all your forms of Devotion.
For Sol. and Ab. page 15.
You think there is one Prayer on the 29th. of May so dangerous, that you
graciously give us leave to forbear to be present at it. But, Sir, who gave you
Authority to dispense with terms of Communion? You have done more, I fear, than
you will receive any thanks for. None you are like to have from us, who have no
^eed of your License; and you ought not to expect it from those, who will think
their Authority hereby invaded. T. B. See Let. page 33.


Eucher. This I confess is a dangerous foyl. Nor was I well aware of that
nasute quickness, which appears in this Stricture. But as argute as you are,
was it I that thought this Prayer dangerous, or my brother Dyscheres? Was it
not you, that complained, that in that Prayer, there is a vow of Allegiance to
K. William and Queen Mary, which upon your Principles you cannot be present at,
or concede? Well then, this was so; and what said I? Then forbear to be present
at it. But must this presently be interpreted to an Act, or Power dispensing
with the Duty? Truly I intended no more but to yield, that therein you must be
left to act according to your own Principles, and Convictions, and adventure
the Displeasure of the Powers, and legal Consequences thereupon; whom, and
which I believe you would not much more exasperate by this one omission once a
year, if you constantly joined in all our other daily Prayers, and otherwise
live inoffensively. So it is ordinary to use the Imperative in a bare
permissive, without a concessive Sense; as, Do if you will; since you cannot be
persuaded, take your own Course, run your own risks, play your own game, take
your own fortune, counsels, etc. And tho I confess this is form of permission,
that merits no thanks, so neither did I court any thanks herein, either from
you, or the Public. For as for you, in this hard time you are not very liberal
in point of gratitude, as I have found by my own experience. And I pray God you
fail not in this Duty toward God for his mercies to the Nation, as you do
toward those that wish you well, because they run not with you into your
unaccountable excesses. But as to our Governors, if I have not hereby
arrogated the dispensing Power, I hope I have not much offended them; If I have
for your ungrateful sakes, I will endeavor to atone for this one offense, and
have a Care how I ensnare my self again upon your Score.


Dyscher. But yet you think we need not be so very coy as to this Prayer. For
you say, that you have been assured by a good Author, that the Recusant Bishops
did not all stick at it; but that some gave directions, and consent to the use
of it; and also before their Suspension deputed Persons to administer the Oath
in the Execution of the Authorities and Offices Episcopal. Sir, If I should say
your good Author was an arrant lying knave, I hope you would not only pardon my
bluntness, but also be more careful for the future, how you gave any credit to
such Persons. T. B. Sec. Let. page 33.


Eucher. Indeed, Sir, if you prove that excellent Person, whom you know not, to
have deceived me with a lie, I am your humble servant. But I cannot but smile
within my self, to think how, when this your treatment comes to his knowledge,
that religious and prudent person will entertain the blunt Character,
considering his most tender Compassions to the Condition of the Deprived. But
in truth the reasons of his discovering this advice and consent were not
calumnious, but conscientious, as exhibiting matter in a religious Conference
for consideration and practice in these various turns of things, humors, and
sentiments. But I have been told, that in Law negatives cannot be proved but by
inference from positives, which I doubt will hold you a tugg, though your tongue
be all teeth and jawbones.


Dyscher. As for this pretended Deputation, I will set before you the true
story; and then you, and all men may judge, how heartily our suffering Fathers
are dealt with. On the 28 of January 1689 the Bishop of London, and St. Asaph,
and some others presented themselves before your mighty K. William with a
mournful address in the behalf of our Reverend Fathers then drawing near to a
Civil Suspension, and since more than uncivilly deprived. This was the
pretense; but it is reasonable to think, that it was a complotted thing, and
that the design was to get their Authorities deputed in such sure hands, as
might effectually promote perjury, and the thrusting good men out of their
Estates, etc. and so the Addressers got themselves into their several
jurisdictions, etc. This is the real truth of the matter; and is so far from
being a deputation of their Authorities, that it does not imply any Consent,
more than what is always unavoidably extorted from every man in the like
Circumstances, etc. T. B. page 33, 34, 35, etc. Vide.


Eucher. I wonder why a man should raise such a tempest about what is nothing
to the purpose of my discourse, and, besides the greenness of the spite,
discovers much ignorance. For the day of suspension was past near half an year
before your 28th. of January 89, viz. on the beginning of the precedent August;
and the time near drawing on your 28th. of January was the Day of Deprivation
in the beginning of the following February. But the time, that I was speaking
of from the admission of their Majesty's in Feb. 88, till the day of suspension
in the August following, during which interval these Bishops were in full
unsuspended jurisdiction. But in that time upon all incidental occasions of
collations, and institutions to Ecclesiastical Promotions, the Oath of present
Allegiance was to be ministered by the ordinary and primary Officer of the
Bishops, and by no others, while they were present at their Sees, except by
their especial Deputation. So that were there no particular instance producible
for me, the truth, which I Spoke, is self-evident and notorious, that the Oath
was administered in all such Cases by the Bishops, or their Deputies. For no
person, or power could herein impose any officer upon them, while all the
Course of Ecclesiastical affairs proceeded yet in their names. But I know where
deputations were then given, and the Oath administered by those Deputies by
virtue of that Deputation. And is it not a very pertinent account to the
contrary, to tell me, what was done just before, and then after the day of
Deprivation, to disprove what I had said was done by the Bishops before their
actual Suspension? And was it not very accurate to mistake the days of
Suspension and Deprivation for one and the same, between which there was half a
year distance? But there had been no occasion for your reproaching Talent
against the Reverend Fathers of London and St. Asaph, notwithstanding their
great merits against Popery in the last Reign, if you had not fooled in this
impertinence for a show of Contradiction. But when you pervert the kind
intentions of that Address to so horrid and calumnious surmises, you ought with
grief and repentance to remember, that he that rewards evil for good, evil
shall never depart from his House.


Dyscher. I see one fire kindles another, by the heat my freedom has cast you
into; to cool which I know no present expedient, but intermission of discourse
for this time. And besides, the day is at an End, and I must retire to my
lodging, and respite the remainder of our debate till to morrow, when with your
leave we will renew our Conference, and examine the Case of the Ecclesiastical
Change.


Eucher. I would not have you take my seldom ardours for uncharitable, nor
withdraw upon any such surmise; if you please to repose your self and your
passions under my roof this night, you shall be truly and heartily welcome to a
thrifty, but friendly Hospitality.


Dyscher. I thank you, Sir, but as I am not otherwise very flexible, so my
business requires me to take leave, and wish you good Night.


A DEBATE ON THE Justice and Piety Of the Present CONSTITUTION: UNDER K.
William.

The Second Part.
The First relating to the State, The Second to the Church.
BETWEEN Eucheres a CONFORMIST, AND Dyscheres a RECUSANT.

By Samuel Hill, Rector of Kilmington, Author of Solomon and Abiathar.

Psalm. 7.8. Judge me, O Lord, according to my Righteousness, and according to
mine Integrity, that is in me.

Inter-utrumque tene.
Obsequium amicos, Veritas Odium Parit.
LONDON, Printed for John Everingham, at the Star in Ludgate Street, 1696.

A DEBATE ON THE JUSTICE AND PIETY Of the Present Constitution.
PART II. Concerning the Ecclesiastical Change.
Dyscher. ACcording to my yesterdays promise, I am returned to continue on the
Debate, which the supervening night interrupted. Let us therefore now begin
where we left off, and pursue the matters of our last Conference to their just
and utmost Issue.


Eucher. You are heartily welcome; and so let us closely apply our selves to the
Business.


Dyscher. Pass we then from the Civil to the Sacred War, in which we are
engaged by the contrariety of our Principles. And first I pray you, wherein do
you found the just and regular Right of the Ecclesiastical Deprivations?


Eucher. This I often and very expressly told you, that as to the merits of
Deprivation, they stand in the enormities of your practic principles against
the present Civil Constitution, by which you are brought into an incapacity of
a public Trust over men's Consciences, which your opinions will sharpen into
Civil Seditions, and religious Schisms. And as to the Canonical form of your
Deprivations, I placed it in the customary right, the ancient Churches used
against Bishops of false principles, by separating from them, and Appealing to
other Social Churches, and Bishops for their assistance in new Consecrations;
which course our Church has also used against the Recusant Fathers, upon the
just Commands of the State.


Dyscher. Indeed I do remember now the nature of that Charge you loaded us
with, Sell. and Ab. page 16, 17.
and it might have made an excellent Argument for Julian, or Dioclesian, by
traducing our Bishops as imposturous, and comparing them to Idolaters, for
which my friend T. B. has so sufficiently requited you, (Sec. Let. page 36)
that you cannot say he is in your Debt, or is so indigent, as to run upon tick
for calumnies and slanders.


Eucher. I was never skilled in T. B's Arts, or Conversations, and do decline
the lists, and pretentions to the faculty of evil speaking. I shall only say,
that I ever looked on those Fathers to be too rigorously pious in their unhappy
Errors in the notions, and rules of English Loyalty, though I ever acknowledged
their undoubted sincerity. But because I was aware, that you exempt all
Episcopal Causes, and Authorities from all Civil, and Laic Cognizance in
matters, and censures purely Spiritual, therefore to draw you off from that
(...), I put the Case upon the worst of Crimes, Sol and Ab. page 19, 20.
as Apostasy, Heresy, Schism, etc. and demanded, whether the Clergy and
People may desert a Bishop under such pestilential crimes, and impostures, and
procure another from Social Bishops? For if they may Canonically do this in
such Cases, then perhaps they may canonically do so in other, which though not so
designedly malignant, yet necessitate an exauctoration, though founded in mere
infirmities, and too pious prejudices, as I explained my self in those very
passages, at which, it seems, the gall of T. B. is exasperated.


Dyscher. Well; I think it not decent for us to draw hard on this invidious
subject; let us, if you please, discuss the Canonical forms of your procedure
herein, which your party generally defends from pretended precedents of Civil
Authorities over the Jewish High Priests, and the Practice of Christian
Churches in submission to Imperial Orders, especially the Greek Church under
Turkish Changes made in their Patriarchal See. Now the most famous instance
among the Jewish High Priest is that of Solomon's deprivation of Abiathar. Which
though you endeavored to parallel to our present Case, yet herein I brought you
such just exceptions, as neither you, nor all your Party will be able to take
off. For if the Crime was nothing like, if there was such a difference between
the Constitutions of the Jewish and Christian Churches, if it was a manifest
Cession on Abiathar's part, (all which I well proved) then that Instance can by
no means come up to this Case. T. B. Sec. Let. page 36.


Eucher. Though I could not deny the force of your reasonings upon this instance,
yet have I consulted my friends upon it, as well as you have done upon me. And
the chiefest of their senses I will lay before you, to which if you can make
any weighty reply, you must not thence conclude a vice, or fault in the Cause;
for if I cannot defend it my self, perhaps its proper Patrons may, who as they
have singular Opinions, so have they as singular abilities to maintain them.


Dyscher. This is a secure Caution for your own Reputation, though it betrays an
inward suspicion of the Arguments you intend to produce. But however, since it
is but just, that no personal defects should prejudice a good Cause, and that
one man's Errors should not affect another man's Estimation, I grant you your
Demand, and therefore I pray proceed.


Eucher. Have you not seen the Book entitled, The Case of Sees Vacant, etc.
whose learned Authors felicity is (...). This great man pretends to dissolve
all your machins against this grand Precedent for a Lay-Deprivation, and I will
exhibit you his Argumentations according to your, and his Order. First then he
observes, that Case of Sees Vacant, etc. Chap. 2. 2.
this perhaps may be the Plea of our Adversaries, in answer to the examples of
the Jewish High Priest, that the Office of a Bishop amonst us is much more
Spiritual, than the Office of those Highpriests. To that Plea I answer, that
he that considers the true and full import of the Question now before us, will
find it to be no other than this, whether a Person, duly invested with an
Ecclesiastical Office of God's own Institution and Ordinance, being deposed by
the Lay-power, any other can lawfully succeed in that Office? Now as to God's
particular Institution and Appointment, whatsoever otherwise the difference may
be, (which is needless for us to contend about) it is certain, that the Jewish
Highpriests were rather superior than inferior to our Bishops. 'Twas by God
himself, and that too in an extraordinary manner, that the Office of the
High Priest was instituted, and it was from God alone that he received his
Authority. If therefore a Person was accepted by God as a true and real
High Priest, though put into the room of another deposed by Civil Authority, then
a Bishop likewise may be truly a Bishop, and accordingly ought to be received,
though put into the place of a Bishop deposed by that Power. To this I add, that
the annual Expiation for the Sins of the whole People was to be performed by
the High Priest. This was the chief of the federal Rites of that Religion, and
that to which our Savior's offering himself up a Sacrifice is particularly
compared in the Epistle to the Hebrews. And this they did ex opere operato, so
that it was of the greatest Consequence to the Jews to have this Divine
Institution performed by one appointed to it by God. And though no provision was
made for Cases of necessity, yet necessity was understood to be a provision for
it self. And it is certain, these annual Expiations were accepted of God till
our Savior's days. For that is a certain Consequence of their being still in
Covenant with God, since these Expiations were the yearly renewing of that
Covenant. Nor can any of the performances of the Christian Priesthood be
compared to this, unless we believe the Power of Transubstantiating. These
examples of the Jewish High Priest alone, were there no other to be alleged,
would sufficiently warrant our submission to our present Possessors.


Dyscher. This Doctrine of that learned Doctors is very new, and amazing in
every Sentence of it, as also is his original Principle. But whether it be of
sincere Metal, or no, must be tried by the proper Touchstone. First then it is
strange, that he should affirm it certain, that the Highpriests are rather
Superior to our Bishops as to the Divinity of their Institution. For are not
Bishops instituted originally by God himself, and in a manner more
extraordinary than that of Aaron's Consecration? For this appears indeed in the
Levitical Law to be divinely solemn, and glorious, as far as external Pomp and
Ceremony could adorn it, and an Oracular Power of Judgment in things Temporal
sanctify him, but yet as the Agent for God in this Consecration was a Servant
only, viz. Moses, so the Oracular Sanctity was not purely Spiritual. But the
first Bishops were the Apostles, made so, not by the Hand of a Servant, but the
Son of God himself in our own Flesh, ordaining them with an extraordinary Power
of Miracles of all kinds, with the insufflation of the Holy Ghost, in order to
the remission, and retaining of sins upon the Soul, by the Acts of an Authority
to be ratified in Heaven. To them the Sacraments were committed, the Laver of
Regeneration, and the Mystery of our Incorporation into Christ, and
Participation of his Holy Spirit, besides the glorious Effusion of the Spirit
on them at the Feast of Pentecost, consecrating them Preachers of the
Resurrection of Christ with an amazing Glory in the sight of all Nations
gathered together at Jerusalem, in a manner more superlatively divine than any
the meaner Forms of Aaron's Investiture. Besides the Doctor may as well prefer
the Institution of the meanest Levites to that of the Highest Apostles upon the
same grounds, on which he has so superexalted the Jewish Pontiff, who was no
more divinely instituted than the lowest Orders of Levi, though he was to higher
Services. Nor is the Doctor less mistaken in his extraordinary Esteem, and
Elogy of the Annual Expiation, as more noble than any Episcopal Functions. For
notwithstanding all its Solemnities and Operations, yet its highest Excellency
was but Typical of that Grace, which was not given by Moses, but by Jesus
Christ. And all its actual present Energy reached no further than a legal
imaginary Cleansing of the Body of the Jews, and this only for one Year past,
and that only for the securing him in the Temporal benefits promised in that
Law. But our Priestly Functions are not merely Typical of Grace not yet given,
but both commemorative, and exhibitory also of that Grace, which has already
appeared for the Salvation of all Men, and consecrates the Souls and Bodies of
Men unto Immortality; not to mention the extraordinary Measure of the Spirit
collated in the especial Acts of Episcopal Ordinations. In all which interior
Sanctifications, though there is no Transubstantiation, yet is there a mystical
Union betwixt Christ and his Members by the illuminating Communion of the Holy
Spirit. For which truth it is needful that we contend, though I confess it was
needless for him to contend against it. And yet further, supposing all this had
been right, which the Doctor has dictated, yet here arises another Infelicity
in his Logic. For though God might admit an intruded High Priest, yet it does not
follow, that Men may admit an intruded Bishop; for can Man pretend to all the
Authorities of God? God is indeed superior to all his own Institutions, and may
dispense with them, or ratify Violations of them, as he did the violent
Successions in the Kings of Israel. But does it follow, that Men can lawfully,
without any Divine Dispensation given and granted, admit the Violations of his
Laws, and the perverters of that Hierarchy, which he has made organical to the
Sanctity and Salvation of his Church? Nay, further yet, the Doctor is very
unaccurate in his very State of the Question, which properly is not, whether
any Man may lawfully succeed an Ecclesiastic deposed by a Lay-power; for if we
grant that there can be any such Lay-deposition, no doubt the Succession may be
lawful; but the Question is, whether there can be any Ecclesiastical Deposition
inflicted on Spiritual Orders by a Lay-power? This is that we, and our Fathers
complain of, that the Lay-powers enact Spiritual Censures of Suspension, and
Deprivation, which your Ecclesiastics admit as regular, and valid, which were
they so, we should not quarrel at the Successions. This I am sure is our
Question, whatsoever that of the Baroccian Treatise is; if this differs from
ours; then in that respect the Treatise is impertinently adduced in our Case.
Besides the Question is not, whether a Person duly invested with an
Ecclesiastic Office of God's Institution may not be deposed by any Lay power?
For if God in the Jewish Church did subject their Ecclesiastics to a
Lay-deposition, no doubt in the Nature of the thing it might be lawful. But the
Question is, whether first God did so subject the Jewish Ecclesiastics to such
a Lay-authority? And secondly, supposing that God had so subjected their
Ecclesiastics, the next Question is whether he has in like manner so subjected
the Christian Hierarchy? For if there be any specific Difference, or
intentional Disparity in the Nature and Purposes of the Jewish and Christian
Religions, if there have been such Changes admitted by God in the Authorities
of one, which have not been so conceded upon the Authorities of the other, then
the Argument from the Jewish does not conclude upon the Christian Hierarchy.
And therefore by the Doctor's leave, not only the Divinity of the Institution,
but the Nature of the Offices, and the Rules of Tenure, and Succession
instituted by God in his Church, are to be considered in this Debate. For to
put the matter into a short Theory, I think it fairly possible to conceive,
that the Jewish Religion, in what it was peculiarly Jewish, was only of a
carnal Sanctity, in Order only to Temporal Fruitions, and so might be under the
Conduct of Temporal Powers, that are the Supreme Guardians of all Temporal
Enjoyments; but the Christian Religion is purely Spiritual, not subordinated to
Temporal Ends, and so not under the like Authority of Temporal Powers. Now
whatsoever are the civil Authorities about matters Christian, I suppose the
Essential Differences of our Religion from the Jewish, will bar the Argument
for the same Rules of Subjection. And if you please upon another Consultation
to propose the matter to the Doctor's second Thoughts, I will be at the pains
of repeating my Observations hereupon. Sol. and Ab. Page 21, 22.
First, that the whole Institution of the Levitical Law was not of a Spiritual,
but carnal Sanctity, yielded them by God, somewhat in opposition, and somewhat
in conformity to the Egyptian, or other foreign Religions, among whom the
Priesthood had been long subjected to, and perhaps first instituted by the
Scepter. And herein the Supreme Judgments in Civils upon the Law, and Oracular
Responses upon Consultations about Peace, War, and Temporal Actions, and
Successes, were essential to the Authority of the Pontificate. And yet we find
this High Priest not subject to any ordinary Power, till Kings were also given
this People after the manner of the Nations, among whom the Mitre was subject
to the Crown. All which put together makes Abiathar 's Deprivation by a
Temporal Power under that Constitution Legal. But from the beginning it was not
so. Then there were Priests who till the Flood had the Government of the World,
without any Civil or Military Power; and that Priesthood was in all its
Intentions Spiritual. So that when our Savior came not only to restore, but
even to refine upon the primitive Rules, he restored the Priesthood from
Vassalage, and founded his Hierarchy, not in Princes, but Apostles, not
inarmed, but in unarmed Powers. But if among the Nations of old the carnal
Priesthoods were subject to Arbitrary and Imperial Powers, and God conceded the
Jews Kings with such Power after that Gentile manner, the Jewish Highpriests
thereupon became Subject, not only to a Judicial, but Imperial Authority, and
so legally deprivable at the pleasure of the secular Prince, so far at least,
that these Censures might be effectually valid, though not always good, and just.
And hence all the Changes of the Highpriests, violently and arbitrarily made
by heathen Princes in the Jewish Pontificate, seem to be legally and regularly
valid, ex jure Imperii toties quoties, and so are nothing at all to the Case of
an uncanonical Deprivation, or the Doctor's purpose. But our Priesthood has
nothing Civil in it, nor is by God subjected to the Arbitrary Empire of
Princes, that so we should think our selves obliged to bow down our Faith and
Freedom to such feeble Principles of Spiritual Bondage and Pusillanimity.


Eucher. But a little to interrupt you, did you not deny Sol. and Ab. page 23.
Zadok's Title to be derived from the Kings donation, though the Scripture
expressly affirms, that K. Solomon did put Zadok the Priest in the room of
Abiathar? I Kings 2.35. And do you now on a sudden put all the power of
disposing that Priesthood in the arbitrary will of their Sovereigns, that so
you may oppose the Drs. Principles?


Dyscher. What I delivered then can well consist with my present Sentiments,
which I offer not in an itch of contradicting the Doctor, but upon the
reasonableness of the thing it self. For in Solomon's time the Genealogies were
extant, and the due course of Succession obvious; on which account I take it,
Zadok had before in David's time been admitted under Abiathar into the
communicable Offices of the Pontificate, in order perhaps to the next plenary
Succession after the death of Abiathar, which Succession now commenced on
Abiathar's remove before the time preintended, by the actual introduction of
him by King Solomon into the possession of what he had an antecedent Title to
upon the next vacancy, either by the right of Primogeniture, which the ancient
Jews have owned, from the first Patriarchs, and the Law Lev. 16.32. or upon an
ordination by the Ecclesiastic Powers of the Sanhedrin, as men of Talmudic
learning have conjectured. Now it is certain, that their native Kings of God's
own appointment were obliged to keep the Law, and every man's Rights
established by it, and the doing otherwise was really sinful and offensive,
though such unjust acts of Kings had among them the effectum juris, as appears in
the sentence of David between Ziba and Mephibosheth. If therefore Solomon had
rejected Zadok as well as Abiathar, such causeless procedure in my opinion had
been unjust, but yet valid, as being not subject to any Tribunal, and
presumable for just, and done upon reasonable, although secret Causes. But when
the Sovereignty fell into the hands of gentile Princes, not tied to the Mosaic
Constitutions, as their native Kings were, and the Genealogies were lost, and
the Legal Successors unknown, or absent the necessity of some High Priest made
the person upon each such vacancy Elective by the Supreme power, or (with the
permission thereof) by the priests and people, as appears in the Maccab^ic
History, and Josephus. Amongst which instances there is one above all most
considerable, viz. that of Simon, who was made High Priest by the Jews, and
Priest for ever, until there should arise a faithful Prophet, 1 Maccab. 14.41.
to discover the lineal Successor, as also to show them, what to do (...) the
defiled Stones of the Sanctuary. 1 Maccab. 4.46. Whence it appears the sense of
that people, from the constitution of that Priesthood in Simon and his heirs,
for want of the true Proprietary Family. First, that there was an absolute
necesity of the high priesthood; Secondly, that it legally belonged to Aarons
lineal heirs; Thirdly that in want of them, they, if they had freedom, were to
elect another Family for that Succession. All which set together discovers
Zadok to be the next regular Successor to Abiathar, since the Scriptures
impeach not the King of any irregular and despotic injuries against the Laws of
the high Priesthood.


Eucher: But what say you to that note of the Dr that it was of the greatest
consequence to the Jews to have the annual Expiation performed by one appointed
to it by God? Does not this argue the Deposition of such a one null? and yet
upon necessity God permitted the Jews to own the Successor coming in by mere
intrusion.


Dyscher. To this I answer, that if God himself allowed the Jews to admit such
intruders, then it appears, that it was not of the greatest consequence to the
Jews to have the Expiation performed by one, to whom it belonged by the
constitution of the Law. For if the Intruders Expiations were effectually
acceptable, they did the business as well as the Liturgy of the legal
Proprietor. But further, Gods admission of the Intruder after Intrusion takes
off his irregularity, ratifies his Title, and vacates that of the ejected, and
so is of Gods particular occasional appointment for the time being, though not by
the original designation of the Law, and so this is nothing to the Drs.
Hypothesis, or Cause. And this is in fact the real state of that Case in such
Changes. The State Civil first intruded Successors into the room of the
expelled, but this not creating any Plenitude, or Sanctity of Title, God made
up this defect by giving the Intruders the Spirit of Prophecy, which
supervening made them also Gods highpriests to all Sacred, as well as Civil
purposes. Which act of Gods was not a mere acknowledgment of their antecedent
Authority, but an efficient thereof to all the intents of the Levitic Law, though
the Dr. would fain persuade us to a contrary notion herein. Yet had it been a
mere consequent acknowledgment of their Priest hood held only by Intrusion, as
Case of Sees etc. Chapter 3. 3.
the Dr. intimates, it had been nothing to his purpose, because upon the
Extinction of the Genealogies, and Ignorance of the lineal Heirs, and the more
plenary Subjection therefore of that pontificate to the Gentile Sovereigns, who
were despotic, and free from all the ordinary Rules, that obliged their native
Kings, this had made these Changes of Highpriests in the potificate (being an
office carnal, and temporal even in its Religious acts) formally valid, and
authoritative, for that these Gentile powers came into the Sovereignty of their
native Kings, (or perhaps a greater) to whom God at their request had subjected
the Hierarchy after the manner of the Nations. And a great deal of this I told
you Sol. and Ab. page 24.
in our last Conference, which no doubt you consulted your Dr. upon. though he
takes no notice of it. And I then dropped another note perhaps worth a second
Rumen with you, that those Intrusions, though thus admitted by God, were signs of
a broken Church and State, hastening to its last Dissolution, and so no just
Precedent for the Christian Church to follow, which is to continue to the End
of all things, except we must yield to methods of Violation, that lead to our
Extinction. And I leave it to the pious consideration of every Religious
Conscience to judge whether those servile Submissions to Imperial violences in
the instances of the Baroccian Treatise, and the others produced by the Learned
Dr. against his Opponents, did not properly lead to the ruin of the Church,
into which the Greeks from these precedents are fallen under Mohammedan powers?
all which had been effectually obviated, had the Church stuck to the Laws and
Canons of the Christian Hierarchy and Communion against the encroachments of
wicked Emperors, against which it is the Duty of all Churches, obstare
principiis, in contempt of persecutions. Hereby, and hereby alone shall we be
able to stifle all Erastian and Antichristian Arts, with which their
concomitant persecutions will all cease and sink of Course, when once men see
we scorn them. For Shame, Conviction, and Reproach of Conscience, upon the
sense of our magnanimous and meek Patience, will naturally quench the Spirit of
persecution, and open a glorious liberty and venerable Authority to the Church
of God. But our base fears of worldly greatness on one hand, and the baser
affectation of it on the other, has universally effaced all the glories of
Religion and Piety throughout the world, and looks like a gloomy prognostic of
Ecclesiastical Ruins and Confusion.

But that This is the strain of Dr. Hody's great adversary.
Clergy men themselves should court and invite an Hierarchical servitude, and
apply the bowstring to the throat of their holy Mother, by Principles contrived
to strangle all her Apostolical Powers and Authorities, is such a daring
presumption, as needs a greater than the annual Expiation. And if the Dr.
should live to see his Principles pursued, by either Civil, or Tyrannical
Powers to the arbitrary Subversions of Gods Priests, or if otherwise he shall
live to think feelingly of that most holy Authority vested in Bishops by God
himself, whose Ambassadors, Vicegerents, and Representatives they are, the
contempt of whom affronts even Christ himself, he will not think every violent
Intruder, that like a Robber comes not in by the door, to be a regular
Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, and that the most audacious Sacrilege has
entitled him to a Divine Character, and consecrated his Authority and
Communion. He will then with sighs and unappeasable groans of Spirit
anathematize the instances and design of his Baroccian Treatise, and the ill
use of his own infinite reading, and diligence, to recommend the baseness and
villainies of degenerous Churches, concerning which at present I leave him and
his Adversaries to fight it out at Argument. In the mean time I will only note,
that though Civil power, or force may put intruding Bishops into the Palaces and
Revenues of the Bishopric's by un-canonical Violences, yet they cannot be
possessed of Spiritual Authorities by any mere secular, or incompetent Power,
or Authority, and so we on our part deny the Drs. Intruders the present
possessors of the real Episcopacy in the abused Dioceses.


Eucher. If the Dr. should hear you talk at this rate, he would not take it
very kindly, I believe. But I will make proof of your prowess against him in
the famous instance of Solomon and Abiathar. For the Dr. having asserted
Abiathar properly deposed by the mere Royal act, and power of Solomon, refutes
five or six principal opinions to the contrary, and among them yours of Cession
with such a contemptuous turn of hand, as exposes it for ridiculous. For he
utterly baffles you with the bare repetition of the LXXII. version, on which
you seem to lay the greatest stress and force of your opinion. And it is no
small impeachment of your understanding to take that as an Argument for your
Cause, which it notoriously condemns. Let me therefore clear up your eyes with
some of the Doctors Arguments. You therefore say, that Sol. and Ab. page 22.
King Solomon did not properly and judicially deprive Abiathar of the
High Priesthood, but only commanded, or required him to quit it on pain of
death. And to this purpose you quote the words of Solomon to Abiathar according
to the Hebrew, and the LXXII, which latter you paraphrase so as to infer an
option in Abiathar, whether he would with dishonor retire from his Office, or
suffer death, this latter being in the rightful Power of the King, if Abiathar
would not yield in the former. So that Abiathars Priesthood determined on his
own volutary Cession, not the Kings Ecclesiastical sure. Now how does the Dr.
cut off this? Case of Sees. page 18.
In answer to this, says he, I need but produce the words of the LXXII, (...).
This, excepting the words (...), (which are removed from the latter Clause to
the antecedent) agrees exactly with the Hebrew, and the natural Sense of these
words is no other than what we have in our English Translation, with which all
Interpreters agree, Josephus, (as is plain Case of Sees. page 18.
from his words above produced) the Chaldee Paraphrast, the Syriac, and the
Arabic, and the old Latin Translators, who, all understand the Texts of a
Positive and Authoritative ejectment. And that it was a positive command not an
Opinion proposed to Abiathar, but an absolute Deprivation, is yet more plain
from the words which immediately follow, so Solomon thrust out Abiathar, in the
Greek, (...) etc. So the Doctor.


Dyscher. It Is strange, that so Learned a man could fancy this to be an answer,
especially since I see not how he can clear himself from inconsistency, or open
error. For if it were a positive command to Abiathar, as he grants, how could
it be an absolute Deprivation, which he asserts? I owned it to be a command as
positive and requiring as the Dr. but for that very reason denied it to be a
proper Act of Judicial Deprivation, because judicial Sentences are not direct
commands on the Offenders to excuse their own punishments, but decrees of
punishments to be executed by other hands, as in Joabs Case, which so
apparently differs in Form from this of Abiathar. Besides a command of
self-execution, as it may actually, so may it lawfully be disobeyed, and
rendered ineffectual, and it is in any such man's choice, whether he will submit
to it, or no; and the truth is, no man will yield thereto, but for fear of
greater Danger. Now if there had been no other prospect of Danger, Abiathar
would not have obeyed this so positive command of Solomon, and if he had not
actually obeyed, the mere command, being frustrate by his neglect, had not been
an absolute Deprivation; that then, which in it self was no absolute
Deprivation without Abiathars consent, and obedience, which was not alone so,
as the Dr. contends, and his office became void by Cession, not mere
Deprivation. For it is a great mistake in the Dr. to imagine that positive
commands destroy Option. For though the commands of God upon our Practices are
all as absolute as possible, yet are they proposed to our option. Thus, says
God, in his * Deuteronomy, Chapter 30. v. 19. I set before you life and death,
blessing and cursing; therefore choose life, that thou and thy seed may live.
The Law and Gospel, though in the preceptive part they are most properly Laws,
yet have also, the nature, and form of a Covenant in them and the punishments
inflicted by virtue of them are justified, not only from the nature of the
crimes, but our own option. But let us see, whether this command were so
positive as these Laws? whether it were so much the declaration of the Kings
own will, as a concessive indulgence to the will of Abiathar? It is plain then
herein K. Solomon offered him an easier condition than his crime deserved, though
the Dr. to serve his Hypothesis extenuates the guilt of his Rebellion. And if
this be in fact so, then it seems rather a Concession with a mixture of
Counsel, than a mere austere command of Retirement; for so verbs of the
imperative Mood very ordinarily signify, and Solomon's kind reflection on his
Liturgies, and Sufferings in the days of David fairly appear to intend so much.
If a Traitor were thus spoken to by his Prince; never see my face more; get the
out of this place, for this shall satisfy me instead of thy forfeited life; or
[else] thou art a dead man even to day, the Traitor would interpret the
recession to be a condition of Life, rather than a precept of Civil Duty. And
his submission would be rather his choice for himself, than any Service to his
King. And certainly he might refuse such offer at his choice and peril, as
Malefactors sometimes chose the Gallows rather than Transportation. This option
proposed to Abiathar in this Form the whole Text in every version sufficiently
exhibits; but the Septuagint most expressly in the citra position of these words
(...) within the first Clause; and comes more up to the Hebrew than our
Translation; for the Hebrew and the Septuagint by [a man of death] intend the
sense of a [dead man,] and this signifies rather a Menace, or Sentence of
actual death especially when joined with these words [in this very day] than a
mere merit of death, as we render it. But such a Menace with a Concession of
voluntary exile to Anathoth, must be conditional, if he went not thither, and
so admits option. And moreover according to the Hebrew Structure of the words
we must admit this interpretation from the Drs. own Authorities. For thus
Abravanel, alleged Case of Sees. page 21.
by the Dr. out of Areschmuth, gives his formal sense upon this place. Solomon
commanded Abiathar not to stir a foot from the place assigned him, i. e.
Anathot. For otherwise, if he should dare to sally out hence, his Blood should
be on his own head, as he had also intimated unto Simei the Son of Gera. And
this is manifest from the words of Solomon; but to day I will not slay thee, as
if he should say; but I will slay thee on that day, on which thou shall dare to
go from thence any whether. Now if hereupon the Blood was to be on his own
head, if he stirred, was it not put to his option, in the sense of Abravanel,
whether he would confine himself within Anathot, or die? And if there were such
option in his Continuance, there was so in the first Recession. There are
Vindic. of Depr. Bish. page 71. Christ. Com. part. 2. chapter 3. p. 31, 32.
some of us make this act of Solomon's a Banishment, and not a proper
Deposition; the natural consequent of which Banishment was the debarring him
the exercise of the Pontifical Office, which Abiathar must be supposed to
accept as a Favor, and not insist upon his Right. But then this Exile must be
voluntary, and that makes the Cession. And I desire the Dr. if he can, to
discover any other form, or importance in the words of Solomon. For though he
says the following words, so Solomon (...) thrust out Abiathar, make it more
plainly to appear a mere absolute Deprivation by the alone act of Solomon,
without any Cession in Abiathar, yet he cannot but feel a conviction within
himself, that this note is far from Cogent For he well knows, that in all
Languages verbs Actives have a great Latitude of signification as to the Forms
and Manners of action, and denote as well a moral as a natural influence. And
here the manner of Solomon's ejecting Abiathar is at full declared moral only by
enjoining him to retire from Jerusalem to Anathoth on pain of death, and it is
in vain to strain (...) and (...) to any other conception. And truly since so
many Learned men, not concerned in our Case, have had various notions of this
procedure, I wonder why the Dr. is so earnest, to force this instance to an
absolute Deprivation. Why should he be fond of multiplying examples of Lay, or
Invalid Depositions? Are there not too many such injurious Attempts at the
fewest, but we must needs rake, and hale in more than really are, to swell the
number, and improve the mischief of ill Precedents, only to give color to an
odd and invidious Hypothesis? Is the Baroccian trifle tanti? Is there so much
of the (...) in it as to inflame the Church of England? I am afraid there is,
and nothing hinders the present accension, but dearth of paper, scarcity of
money, and the danger of unlicensed Printing. But however I hope I shall stifle
it in this instance, in which I only am engaged, let others try, and take their
Fortunes in the rest.


Eucher. But by your good leave, Sir, you shall not escape so; for your
Arguments and the Drs. drawing me contrary ways, I would gladly see my way
clear between you, and get me out of the maze, if possible.


Dyscher. Then go you on as you think fit.


Eucher. The Dr. then first of all tells us * that whatsoever is necessary for
the present Peace and Tranquillity of the Church, ought to be made use of, Case
of Sees, etc. Chap. 1.
provided it is not in it self Sinful, and the ill Consequences, which may
possibly attend it, are either not so mischievous to the Church, or at least
not so likely to happen as the Evils we endeavor to avoid. -- Upon this Maxim
the Ancients always preferred the Peace and Tranquillity of the Church to all
other things, the Essentials of Religion excepted. There was no Custom, or Law
of the Church so Sacred, or inviolable, but what they readily sacrificed,
(whenever necessity required) to the Peace and Tranquillity of it. And in
proof hereof the Dr. brings you several full Instances, and Authorities, to
which I refer you; and on which I demand your Opinion.


Dyscher. I may allow every jot of this to be true; but who shall judge for the
Churches Practtice, concerning the necessity, and the Exigences, the Evils, and
the Dangers thus to be balanced?


Eucher. For a Province the Metropolitan, and Bishops, and where the Clergy
have a Canonical Right, they also are to be admitted. In a single Diocese the
Bishop, and his Clergy, especially the Chapters; and if the Laity be concerned,
it is fit these Debates be managed in the presence of such standing and
communicant Laic's, as shall there appear in their own concernments.


Dyscher. Can any resolves be valid against the College of Bishops in a
Provincial Synod, or against the Bishop in a Diocesan Consultation?


Eucher. No.


Dyscher. Will not the College of Bishops, and the body of the Clergy think it
Essential to Christian Religion to preserve the Hierarchy and Authority of the
Priests Sacred, and inviolate against all routs and tyrannical confusions? Will
not they think a temporal distress, incurred for adherence to the fundamental
Laws of Catholic Communion, less hurtful than a general and causeless
deturbation of the pious and regular Priests of God Almighty? Can they think it
sinless to permit an arbitrary divorce of themselves from their relation to
God, and the Souls of their People, and to let in greedy wolves, who covet
nothing but the promotions of the Church, and for that Cause will pretend an
outside Orthodoxy in all other points? For put the Case in Fact, that once
again an O. C. should oppress all by the Sword, and turn out at once all the
Bishops and Clergy of this Realm, and bring in another Set into their Places,
must the Christian Laity renounce their Canonical relation to the former, and
embrace that of the imposed and irregular Ministers? Or let us look up unto
God, and enquire within our selves, whether of these will God accept for his
Servants? Must God submit to an irresistible Mob, or Hector too? Or must we
admit those for Gods Messengers, whom God never sent, and will never own? And
must this be yielded by us toties quoties, whenever our too mighty Enemies
will sport themselves upon us with such a form of persecution? I am afraid, if
this mysterious Secret had been known in the three first Centuries, the Heathen
Powers, when baffled in their other methods of hostility against the Church,
would have took up this as the most successful, because most Orthodox, and
Christian way of persecution. Now suppose such a design had been projected
against the Apostles, to deprive them of the places, and exercise of their
Apostleship, and to fill their Room with other Orthodox pretenders, would the
Apostles in Council have allowed people to reject them, and receive the
intruding Apostles? Or could any intrude, by the help of the Secular Powers,
without Sin, and Schism, and Sacrilege? Or would the Apostles have censured
these Invaders, and have still maintained their own Functions?


Eucher. As to the Office, which was peculiar Apostolic, necessity was laid
upon them, and woe had been unto them, had they not preached the Gospel, in
obedience to God, rather than man. But in that Office, as such, there could be
no successor, and so they were to be continued as foundation stones, whereas
the Episcopal Office is not peculiarly personal but successive.


Dyscher. I will not here except against the validity of this Distinction in
these Offices, but will put the Case, as you set it, Suppose the Heathen Powers
had passed Se^^ence on the Apostles, that being permitted the functions
distinctly Apostolical, they should not execute their Episcopal Authorities any
where, nor be received by the Churches as their Bishops, but that others
provided by the Heathen Enemies should be vested in their Episcopacy, would the
Apostles have quitted their Episcopacy, to which Christ gave them Commission?
When St. Paul bids the Elders of the Asian Church, to take heed to the Flock,
of which the Holy Ghost had made them Bishops, Act 20.28. must that Authority,
received from the Holy Spirit, have conceded to an enstallment of Nero, or
Domitian? Or would the Holy Ghost have truckled under the persecuting Powers,
and have hallowed the Intruders, and deserted those of his former constitution
by Apostolic designation? And would the Apostles, and their first successors,
with their flocks, have judged persecution of their bodies greater than this of
their Spirituals, that so they should concur in this, to avoid the other, and
be content to submit to the Conduct and Communion of Neronian Bishops, that had
dethroned the Apostles of our Blessed Savior, and by the heathen sword assumed
a Spiritual Jurisdiction over them? When Ignatius says, that the Bishop, and
his Presbytery are to be received as Christ, and his Apostles, with several
other earnest and Seraphic Elogies, would he have allowed them to be forsaken
at the pleasure of an Heathen Mob, or Tyrant, in exchange for others set up by
Idolatrous craft, and force? Clemens Romanus would not allow this in a domestic
Mob in the Church of Corinth, and would he concede it to a Mob of aliens and
Pagans?


Eucher. I cannot tell how to answer this; but perhaps the Dr. may, when it
shall be offered him.


Dyscher. In the mean time then I take the Bishops to be the Supreme
Ecclesiastic Judges, as well in the dispensation with, as the execution of all
secondary Canons, whenever exigences unforeseen, or more important than those
Canons, require their present Relaxation. But such dispensing Power lies not
upon the fundamental Rules of their Order and Union, to dissolve their own
being, and Authority at the pleasure of the Churches Enemies, for no other
motives but those of secular terror, for mere fear whereof no Bishop can
dispense with his union toward his Colleagues, nor Clergy, or People be
dispensed with as to the Laws of their subordination in the Ecclesiastic unity.


Eucher. Why then you must bring this admission of new Bishops, etc. violently
obtruded, upon the violent expulsion of the former, into the Catalogue of Sins,
which the Dr. excepts out of his Principle. But he withal denies such admission
to be sinful, because they are not against the Law of God, nor do they make us
accomplices to the injustice, nor violate the Obligations to our Canonical
Obedience, nor is the Ordination of the obtruded a mere nullity.


Dyscher. As to the two last Suggestions I shall say nothing to them, if the
two former are not provable against the Doctor. For my Canonical Obedience
belongs to my proper Bishop, whoever he be, and the Ordination of Anti-Bishops
is Treat. of Chapter Com. Part. 3. Chapter 6.
not censured for a mere Nullity by all our Worthies, though it is by our
Vindicator. Let us then begin with the first Consideration, whether, it be not
a Sin by the Law of God? I pray how does the Doctor make out the Negative?


Eucher. He says, That the Scripture in our Case is altogether silent. It Is
true, it bids us be obedient to our Governors, and that Command reaches as
well to the Spiritual, as to the Temporal. But when there are two that stand
Competitors, and both claim our Obedience; to which of these two our Obedience
ought to be paid, it leaves to our Wisdom to determine.


Dyscher. You ought here to observe, that our Question runs about the Duty, or
Lawfulness of admitting Intruders, upon an open and contested Expulsion of
Right, not where the Title, or Right is dubitable. Now when an Intruder
contests for the holding an Ecclesiastical Function against the Rightful
Proprietor, that is invalidly and uncanonically thrust out, does the Law of God
leave it to our Wisdom, and not to our Justice to determine, or does it leave
it to our Wisdom, to determine according to regular and confessed Justice, or
according to irregular and confessed Wrong? For the Law of God requires us to
render suum cuique every Man his due, and there is no Wisdom against Right. But
the Phrase of leaving things to our Wisdom imports a Liberty undetermined by
God, which we may use as we judge expedient, and what God has so left by the
Silence of his Word, is under no Divine Law, and consequently by this Law we
are at liberty to take, or choose whether of the two Competitours we in our
Wisdom think most convenient to the good of the Church, and hereupon as many
violent Competitors, as any Illegal Rout shall obtrude against Right, may draw
after them so many several Parties, according as they in their Elective Wisdom
shall determine. And is this the way of Ecclesiastic Peace, Unity, and
Happiness against the danger of exterior Persecutions? For if force shall put
in Competitions, I doubt the Competitions must be ended by force; where divided
Wisdom cannot fix a determinate Unity. But the Eighth and Tenth Commandments
expesly forbid men to take, or covet another Right, and leave us no liberty to
determine otherwise. So that no man ought to intrude into another Bishopric.
For a Deprivation, that is apparently invalid, cuts off no Right, or Title
before Rightly, and Authoritatively vested. And he sins whosoever puts himself
into possession of such Right, which is canonically permanent in the former
Possessor. Had the Emperors pretended a Deprivation of the Apostles Episcopacy,
had it been lawful for any other Bishop to have rejected them, or seized their
Archiepiscopacy and have subjected the Apostles to their Ecclesiastical
Government? Or will the fear of force necessitate a Man to admit an injurious
consecration to another Divine Authority? But what shall be done, if no Bishops
will confer the Sacred Order on him? What must they be also obliged by a Rout
to give the Holy Ghost to qualify the Intruder? If not, then this is what they
may refuse to sacrifice to the present secular Tranquillity of the Church. And
if the Bishops may refuse to ordain, a man may refuse to be ordained to an
Intrusion, because it is an Intrusion: And if so, the whole Church may refuse
the Intrusion. But if the Bishops are obliged hereto for fear of force, then
even the injured Bishops may be bound to consecrate others into their own
injuriously deprived Authorities; and so the Apostles had likewise been obliged
against their own Divine Commission. But if this be allowed, the result will
really be, that the Apostles, and all Bishops Authority either actually ceases,
or ought to be quitted by their own Cession, or Concession, at the command of
mere Force; out then the producer is not invalid, unjust or uncanonical in the
Ejection, and consequently agrees not with the Drs. Hypothesis. But God, that
is a God of order, not of confusion, would not permit the deturbation of Aaron,
nor the Substitution of any Intruder by the Mob, or Princes: Numb. Chapter 16. Chapter
17. Nor would the Ancients have confirmed Novatian, had he driven away
Cornelius from the Sea of Rome, upon a presumption that they were left at
discretion, or obliged to sacrifice the Laws of the Sacred Union. For they had
other Senses, and Wisdom, when they so severely provided against such forcible
Entries by the 30th. Canon Apostolic; If any Bishop, (says that Holy Canon)
making use of worldly Princes, does by them get himself possessed of a Church,
let him be Deprived, and Excommunicated; and all that Communicate with him. Now
if necessity vacates the obligations of all Canons, not excepting those of
Episcopal Constitutions; how came these Wise Men of the East to make a Canon
against irresistible necessity, if the terror of Temporal Persecution be such?
And why does Athanasius, and other Fathers object this Impiety to the Arian
Intruders? For if there were no fault in the Intrusion, but only the Arianism,
then those Fathers ought only to have upbraided them with the Arianism, not the
Intrusion. But if the Fathers justly condemn the Intrusion, then they were not
to admit what they righteously censured. And if the Fathers were not to admit
Intrusions, neither were the people to admit them, for by so doing they would
become accomplices to the Evil, and for that cause are Excommunicate by the
said Apostolic Canon. And what I pray has the Doctor to evince the contrary?


Eucher. If, says he, a Landlord, be unjustly, and invalidly dispossessed of
his Estate by an incompetent Authority; who thinks the Tenant an Accomplice to
the injustice, because he pays his Rent to the present Possessor? Should the
Clergy refuse to submit to the Bishops in possession, it could only serve to
draw down Ruin upon themselves; it cannot restore those whom the State has
Deposed. It is not our Submission to the present Possessors, that ejects the
former, for they are already irretrievably deposed, and more to this purpose
Chap. 1. Page 5.


Dyscher. Here the Dr. has out-pitch'd you two bars length between Lord and
Tenant; for Sol. and Ab. p. 6. 7.
you assign Rents, and Homage to the actual Landlord, who is visibly Legal,
though not honestly Rightful; since all Lords, and Tenants must be admitted for
such, that are in by Law. But the Dr. requires no Forms, or Formalities of Law
to warrant the payment of Rents, or Oath of Fealty. For he says, Case of Sees
etc. p. 6.
If a Lord be dispossessed of his Manor by an incompetent Authority, that
cannot be resisted, (a Conqueror suppose, or an unlawful Court) who thinks the
forsworn for submitting to the new Tenants Possessor? Who makes a difference
there between a Competent, and Incompetent Authority? Why does the Oath, which
he took to the Rightful Lord, cease to oblige him? It Is because, when he took
the Oath, he took it only on this Supposition, that the Lord was possessed of
the Manor. The Peace, and Tranquillity of the Public, and the good of Tenants
in general give that Restriction to the Oath. Now here I must set you upon the
Dr. who would never allow forcible Entry, or Possession to be legal, or valid,
and thereupon assert the Resistance of O. C. to be just, whereas the Drs.
Principles justify the Engagement to his Government against King and House of
Lord's. But now for the present I will assume your Notions, and reply upon the
Dr. First of all, that upon all Conquests a Public Settlement gives a legal
form of Title; and secondly in a Government full settled there cannot be an
Unlawful Court, nor can any Man be ejected by an Incompetent Court, if he will
legally except against the Incompetency. Otherwise, if an Alien get in by a
mere Formal Rout of Robbers, the Tenant owes him no Duty, and pays it on Peril
of Repayment, or Penalty to the Legal Proprietor; And Men are always wary upon
the Competitions of several pretending Landlords to be secured in their
Payments from the other Claimers, from which they know the mere present
Possession is not a Legal Security always. But beside, this is not a Parallel
Case; nor is there the same parity of Reason in a Real Estate, and the Personal
Authority. Here is a Man, that really was, and still Asserts himself Christ's
Ambassador, Residentiary Vicar, and Vicegerent; Comes a Tyrant, or a Rout, and
violently expells this Ambassador; This is a Crime against the Laws of Nations,
and the Rights of Royal Majesty, and is a direct affront to our Lord Christ.
But this is not all; This Tyrant, or Rout corrupts a few of other our Lord's
Ministers, and they in their Lord's name give Credential Commissions to an
impostor set up by these Enemies of our Lord, to supply the defect of the
ejected Ambassador; this augments surely, not lessens the insolence, and no
Prince whatsoever can connive thereat without severe and vindicative
Resentments. Now whether shall the Church own for Christ's Messenger, him that
he sent, but others barbarously, expelled, or him, that he sent not, but others
impudently obtruded? Does not our Savior say to them, whom he sent, as his
Father sent him, He that despises you, despises me, and he that despises
(...) d^spiseth him that sent me? And can we admit this contempt upon his
Messengers without being Accomplices therein? And what if this is necessary for
the Clergy at present to save their promotions? Must we value these before the
Divine Laws of the Hierarchy and Communion? Are we thus taught to contemn the
World indeed, as to quit all the Authorities of our Lord's Dignation rather
than loose a little Worldly Interest? When our Lord says, He that loves the
World, or the things that are in the World more than him, the love of the
Father is not in him, nor can he be Christ's Disciple? But however, if the
Clergy be not degenerous, they can preserve their Bishops in the exercise of
their Spiritual Au^^o^^ties, though not in the Enjoyment of their Estates and
Temporalities. For from what is Spiritual no Secular force can alone Depose
them, without C^us^, and the concurrence of the Church. Shall outward force
force us into Intestine Schism, or Disorder, or can no Division from our
Fathers be Schismatical admitted for fear of Temporal force? But one thing more
will I ask the Dr. whether we must admit such Deposition, as violent Power
pretends to, before a new violent filling of the Sees with others? If not, then
are we not to Sacrifice all the Secular Peace, and then the Sea being not
vacant by such pretended Deposition, either the Deposition formally consists in
the new Intrusion, and so the Intrusion must on the Drs. Hypothesis be invalid,
and so cannot oblige us to admit it; or if the Intrusion be not the Deposition,
then the former Bishop, etc. is not Deposed, and the latter, either is not
possessed, or two Anti-Bishops can be, and are jointly possessed of the same
Episcopal See, and Authority. But if we may, or must abide by the pretended
Secular Deposition before a new Intruder; then what if the Secular Tyranny will
not concede us any Bishop? Must we Sacrifice here too? No, here the Dr. is
tender, and will not Sacrifice, he will have some Bishop, or other by Mr. Mobs
favor, whether his Irrestibleship will, or no. Now then let us reduce this
Prudential Principle into Practice, and if you can bear a little teizing, I
will discuss its Virtue.


Eucher. Proceed.


Dyscher. Suppose then upon an Irretrievable Deposition of Bishops by mere
force, the Tyrannick Powers neglect to new furnish the Churches, what course
must they take for a Supply?


Eucher. Petition those Powers thereunto.


Dyscher. What if these Powers, Conscious of this your Drs. Principle, always
give fair Promises, but never intend to repair the Breach; how long must the
Church wait?


Eucher. Till such time as they see no hope of relief, and as long as the
Church can forbear, without damage to the Substance of Religion.


Dyscher. Well then, suppose the Church can forbear no longer, or the Tyranny
absolutely denies to fill the Sees, who shall then provide for the Church?


Eucher. The other Undeprived Bishops, and Clergy.


Dyscher. But while, or before they go about this the Irresistible
Irretrievably deprives them also, how shall the Cut go then?


Eucher, Then the Churchwardens must try what they can do for their People.


Dyscher. But let them be Irretreivably Deposed too, and how then?


Eucher. Then the multitude of Christian Churches.


Dyscher. Though here I could demand, how an unorganized Multitude can Act
Uniformly, yet I will not pinch you that way, but what Priests must or can they
provide, the Old that are Deprived, or New?


Eucher. The old. Case of Sees, etc. page 41.


Dyscher. What upon their Old Title, or your New Investiture?


Eucher. Here I am in a strait; but let it be on their Old Title, what then?


Dyscher. Then they may not abide by the pretended Forcible Deposition, till a
new Intrusion; nor is that Deposition Irretrievable, as the Dr. sometimes
supposes it, for an Irretrievable Deposition is an effectual one, whose effect
cannot be vacated, or reversed, while yet at another time the Dr. allows the
Deposition to be Invalid, but an Invalid Deposition is null, it is no
Deposition, whereas an Irretrievable Deposition is a most effectual and real
one as I have said.


Eucher. Well then, what if, to avoid these difficulties we allow the
reinvestiture of the former Priests by a new Title?


Dyscher. But they will not accept it, as knowing that their old Title is
permanent, and unimpaired by the null pretended Deposition, and consequently,
that a pretended new Investiture is null, because needless, and anticipated;
besides, we know, that the acts of mere Laity cannot Canonically erect an
Hierarchy.


Eucher. Let them then procure a new Set.


Dyscher. But where will they find Persons qualified, or willing to enter into
such a deposable Office, or to ordain them against Mr. Irresistibles will, who
will presently Irretrievably Depose them? To this issue of Absurdity and
Contradiction the Drs. Principle must of necessity bring him. And he were
better resolve, that the Church may admit an open and utter Dissolution of the
Hierarchy, than dwindle it away after this poor precarious manner of Sophistry.
Have you any thing more to allege from the Doctor?


Eucher. Yes, yes; If the Bishop of a Frontier Town will not own the Authority
of a Conqueror, and is therefore Deposed by that Conqueror, I desire to know
of you, whether the Clergy of that Town are Perjured if they own that Bishop,
whom the Conqueror thinks fit to set over them? Case of Sees p. 6.


Dyscher. I smell your design well enough to bring me into a snare; but I can
answer the Dr. upon your Principles. For if the Conqueror be not settled in
Form of Law, all he does is of no Validity, and the Clergy are to have no
regard to his violences upon the Bishop, nor his Illegal intrusion of another.
But if he upon Conquest has attained to a Formal Settlement, there is a just
Cause, on the Merits of which, the Recusant Bishop at the Command of the
Conqueror, may be ejected by the Church, and give way to a Successor of the
Conquerors Nomination. But this the Church is obliged to, not for mere wrath,
but also for Conscience sake toward the reason of the Cause, and the Law of
God, that requires Subjection to humane Constitutions. But the Drs. Hypothesis
puts the whole Proceeding against the deprived as injust, and formally invalid
to all intents whatsoever, and makes the act of Deposition simply Secular,
without any Concurrence of the Church.


Eucher. If a Bishop should be by the Civil Power Cond^mned to perpetual and
close Imprisonment, or be banished for ever from his Country, so that it is
impossible for him to perform the Duties of a Bishop, or should he be carried
away Captive, we know not where, or from whence we cannot redeem him; -- Nay,
suppose the Banished, the Imprisoned, the Captive Bishop should expressly
require them, upon their Duty o^ C^^onical Oath, never to accept of any other
Bishop, as long as he by the common Course of Nature may be supposed to be
living, or till they be assured he is dead, -- what must be done in such Cases,
etc? Case of Sees, page 6, 7.


Dyscher. The Church must abide by the Government of their Clergy in such
Cases; and in all Cases, where the peculiar Office of the Bishops is wanting
apply to other Bishops for their Succor, and Aid.


Eucher. But what if the Diocese be so set, or restrained, that the Church
cannot have recourse to other Bishops, (as suppose in the Isle of Man) or any
other impediments preclude a Capacity of such Negotiations with other Bishops,
who can bear such an hard saying, that the Church must not admit a new Bishop
of her own, when she may, merely because the ejected Bishop, with whom we can
have no correspondence, is ill natured, and grudges that benefit to the Church?


Dyscher. I am hard pressed here; I pray how will you steer in this dangerous
difficulty, between the quick Sands that lie on both sides, on the Drs. loose
Principles for your Cause, and the strict Rules of ours?


Eucher. Why truly I must so far concur with the Dr. as to grant, that the
Church has a Liberty to admit a new Bishop in such Cases, if he be otherwise
Canonically qualified.


Dyscher. Does Banishment, Imprisonment, or Captivity, cutting off all capacity
of commerce, vacate the Sea, and exauctorate the injured Bishop?


Eucher. It does render the Sea actually empty for the time; but yet I will
allow you, that the Bishop is not exauctorated, but that upon removal of the
impediments, his Authority would immediately exert it self, and run on in its
old Channel, and ought to be received on the Original Title, as being still
Bishop of his Diocese, except his supposed prohibition of another substitute
Bishop forfeits his Right, Title, and Authority.


Dyscher. This is odd Doctrine; If the Bishop does not forbid the Church to
substitute another, which not to do may be presumed for a Cession, then he
still continues Bishop; if he forbids a Substitution, then he quits it by
forfeiture; I pray how can you make out these Paradoxes?


Eucher. Thus; if a Bishop shall enjoin Orders to the Dissolution of
Discipline, he ipso facto becomes irregular, and forfeits. And such would be
the effect of this supposed Prohibition of a Substitute. But if he admits a
Substitute upon the necessity of Discipline not otherwise to be supported, he
still continues Bishop, and is to be received for such in full Authority
immediately upon his enlargment, and recovery.


Dyscher. This does not extricate, but involve, and double the Paradox. For
thus there may be two Bishops of the same See at once, and a Successor to a
present Proprietary; which Successor is to be again thrust out as uncanonical,
and no Bishop of such Diocese on the return of the former.


Eucher. Two Bishops there then will be at the same time of one and the same
See, though not in it. But the second will not be a proper Successor, but a
Sagan, or Vicar to the absent, and so to give place to the returning
Proprietary, till the Sea shall become wholly vacant of the Proprietary Bishop
by death, or otherwise, except there be some other exceptive provision in such
extraordinary Cases. For according to this Rule of Prudence the Church of
Jerusalem proceeded in the case of Narcissus Case of Sees, etc. Chap. 1. page 6.
alleged by the Dr. which is much like this supposed Case before us. Oppressed
with calumnious Perjuries Narcissus retires from his See to deserts, and
unknown Fields for many years, not plainly renouncing his Station however. Upon
this the Prelates of the bordering Churches fill his Place with other
Successors, in all three, before his return, never undoubtedly designing to
exclude Narcissus, if he should return, whose Glory and Innocence Heaven it
self had signally vindicated. But so it happened, that after the death of the
third intermediate Bishop Gordius, Narcissus returns, and the Church requires
him to resume the Throne Episcopal, not on a new, but his old Title. But
because through the great infirmities of his old Age he could not bear the
fatigue of his Office, it was agreed, that one Alexander should be his Sagan,
or Partner in that Prelacy, the original Authority of Narcissus being thus
derived to Alexander, and by him to be administered in ease to Narcissus.


Dyscher. But this does no Service in our case; for our former Proprietaries
are ejected, and others set in to exclude them, though present, and claiming
their proper Relation to their Dioceses. Nor does this account of yours reach
the design of those instances given by the Dr. in which the Intruders asserted
a Title against the unjustly and invalidly expelled Proprietors.


Eucher. I am not yet come to those Instances; I only tell you what may be done
in the Case of a Banished, Deprived, or Captive Bishop hereby rendered incapable
of his Functions, which I here proposed from the Dr. though I confess to you as
a Friend, that this Plea, and Case of the Drs. as well as all his Lay-instances
throughout his Book, are far more Impertinent to our present Case, than (as he
says) your Vindicators discourses were to the Baroccian Hypothesis.


Dyscher. This is pretty Inadvertency, if you can make it out.


Eucher. Why, look ye; Deprivation, or Deposition, in our Sense, and Case, is
the Divorce, or Dissolution of the spiritual Relation between Priest and
People, but Banishment, Imprisonment, and Captivity makes no such divorce; And
this the Dr. Fundamentally grants in supposing his Lay-ejections to be invalid
Deprivations, or Depositions; and though he generally calls these
Lay-ejections, and Banishments by the name of Depositions, yet upon a cogent
pinch he grants, that Banishment from a Bishopric, though inflicted on purpose
to part the Bishop from his people, is no Deposition; for so he Case of Sees,
etc. Chapter 4. page 56.
expressly asserts of S. Hilary, that he was never Deposed, but only Banished,
and allows him to be still actual Bishop of Poictiers, since there was no other
Orthodox Bishop there. Now our enquiry, as the Dr. sets it, is of an unjust and
invalid Deposition by a Lay-power, or Irresistible Force, and the Admission of
a Successor consequent thereupon. Now if Banishment (and by parity of Reason
Imprisonment, and Captivity) is not a Deposition, how are these pertinently
alleged for such in our Question? Then again, if upon Banishment the
Deposition consists in the intrusion of another, and this be unjust, and
invalid, how is the intruded a right Successor to whom the Churches obedience
is due? Or if he be not right, ( i. e. Canonical) how is this obedience due?
Must we pay obedience where it is not due? Or is there any due, where there is
no form of Right? Or is there any form of Right created by an Act not only
unjust, but even invalid, and consequently null? Then again, every one of the
Drs. instances of Lay-deprivations are nothing but mere Banishments, and
Imprisonments, and so no Depositions from their Spiritual Powers or Relations,
as he confesses in St. Hilaries case; though elsewhere he commonly calls them
Depositions without thinking of it. But if the Depositions consist in the
consequent intrusions, these being invalid, as well as unjust, oblige to
nothing, but Repentance and Restitution. And so his infinite expense of Reading
and Criticism is all at once unfortunately thrown away. But there is one thing
farther considerable in the last Question of the Dr. and that is the
impossibility of performing the Episcopal Functions, consequent to these
Lay-Banishments and Imprisonments. For if this incapacity gives those violences
the forms of Depositions, then it appears not, that all the Lay-instances
produced by the Dr. were Depositions; and perhaps none of them, since the
Episcopal conduct might be carried on by Communicatory Letters to the Dioceses,
and other Social Bishops to act for them, according to the constant practice of
Exiled and Imprisoned Bishops from the days of the Apostles. But if the
persecution be so straight as to preclude all capacity of such Pastoral care, a
new Bishop may be set to supply the defect, but not to exclude the Right of the
ejected, to govern for him, not against him, and to resign upon the return of
the Proprietor. On this account it must be resolved how the ejected Bishops
reteining their Claim or Right, mentioned by the Dr. or his Baroccian Treatise,
owned those Orthodox Persons that filled their places in their Absence. Thus
Case of Sees, etc. page 59.
Briccius might call Armentius Brother, and Bishop of Tours, while he was
returning to lay Armentius aside, upon a Presumption that Armentius never set
up against him nor would oppose his Restitution, if yet there be any credit due
to the Story. On some such confidence Case of, etc. Chapter 7. page 82.90. etc.
Elias might Communicate with John, and his Communicants at Jerusalem, not only
because John was Orthodox, but because he kept not the Sea from Elias as a
Rival, or Anti-Bishop, but only continued that Care for the Church during
Elias's Incapacity. For their Mutual Friendship is a demonstration, that John
did not still oppose Elias; and Elias ratified John's Present Government by his
Communion; which was, if not a Cession, as your Vindicator conceived, yet a
Valid Concession for the time being. For though John was one of Elias's
Expellers, yet after John had opposed, and baffled the Emperor, and therein
seconded Elias's Cause: This, with the Mediation of those Martial Monks
Theodosius and Sabas, might cool all Elias's former Resentments, and procure
his Peace, and Ratification of John's Government. That Elias was not obliged by
Canon to acquiesce is manifest, not only from many Canons to the contrary, but
the practice of many others produced by the Dr. who endeavored to recover
against the Orthodox Intruder received by the Church on the Drs. Fundamental
Law of Necessity. If then Elias acquiesced not by Law, but Choice, this made a
Ratifying Concession to John's Government, and hereupon Theodosius and Sabas
might well Communicate with both, since they both held Communion one with the
other, either by the Cession, or Concession of Elias. But here a shrewd hard
Question Intervenes; If the Church always owned the Orthodox Possessor of
another Chair without Schism, how could the Orthodox ejected Bishop rival and
contest the Intruded Possessor without Schism or injury done in challenging;
his Right, while yet his Right would be taken for quitted; if he should not
challenge it? Now during the Challenge he must renounce the Possessor, and all
Communion with him as such, whom yet the whole Church according to the Dr.
lawfully receives for the Diocesan: Now if the Ejected will be in the Communion
of the whole Church, they must own their Anti-Bishops, and so it will be their
Duty to loose their Right to Intruders, or if they may refuse the Anti-Bishops
without Fault, how can others lawfully own them, and their Possession of other
Men's Sees never validly vacated? Methinks Apparent and Confessed Right should
obtain in Judgment against possession manifestly without Right; nor is it a
Rule of Conscience, or Religious Peace, but Carnal Fear, and base Interest,
that inclines to the contrary. Hereupon I conclude, that the best Title, John
had to the Churches Communion, was from the Concession of Elias. And your
Vindicator had great reason to suppose something done on Elias's part, to the
confirming of John's Prelacy; from the Communion, that is asserted to have been
between them. For being apparently no Anti-Bishops, the Natural and Legal
Presumption must be, that Elias allowed him, and that was a Canonical ground
for the Churches regular Communion with him, though before there seems none,
except Elias had been removed beyond all Capacity of Communion, which it is
plain he was not. So then it is not the Substitution of a New Bishop in the
Chair of another, utterly latent, or removed from all possible Communication,
that makes a Schism, but when one is set up to Exclude the other, (Violently
and Invalidly Ejected) from the Administration of his Office, either at
present, or hereafter, while in a Capacity, and Readiness to perform his
Functions. Thus Pope Martin, whom the Dr. has also instanced, pronounces it
Unlawful for the Church of Rome to admit another Bishop during his Life, and
Spalatensis alleges that Authority and Rule for Canonical and Good. Yet when
he was Condemned at Constantinople, and the Church of Rome had taken him for
dead, and so chose Eugenius, no wonder that Pope Martin, receiving News of this
before his death, prayed for Eugenius thus chosen, because he knew the Romans
had not set him up as an Anti-Bishop, and could not doubt, had his return been
possible, but that his Church, and Eugenius too, would have joyfully
re-inthroned him. But in cases of Competition, as in the Ignatian and Photian
War, if the Church or the Competitors can be on both sides excused from Schism,
upon every turn and invalid Act of Lay-Power, against which a good and valid
Title is still asserted, while the people turn to both sides with the Secular
Wind, (...); And I believe no body can make it out. And I think we must make
the Proceedings of the Church at the best to follow the pretended measures of
Right and Rule, or condemn them for wrong in every Instance produced by the Dr.


Dyscher. What course then will you take to excuse the Churches, in admitting
and maintaining Anti-Bishops against the Invalidly ejected Proprietors still
claiming?


Eucher. Upon what particular Motives they did Act, it is impossible for me to
determine; but I think I can set such Rules, according to which they might act
validly, not otherwise. First then I admit, that all the Imperial Ejections
were not proper Depositions, but either Antecedents, or Consequents of them.
Now if the standing Councils of the Churches find the Bishop wickedly ejected
by the Secular Arm, or without any declared Cause, they ought not to admit any
other Bishop, without the consent of, and during a capacity of Communication
with the Ejected, or his Deputies. But upon defect of such Capacity they may
admit an Orthodox Bishop, as a Sagan, not as an Anti-Bishop to the absent, to
resign and concede at his return. Much of this Photius engaged to the Ignatians
under his hand, (if the Drs. Metrophanes be true in this particular, Case of,
etc. Chapter 14. Page 148.
)* that he would carry himself toward Ignatius as toward an unblamable
Patriarch, and neither spoke any thing against himself, nor approve of any that
should do so. But being hereupon received, it is said, he took away the Paper he
had so Subscribed, and then deposed Ignatius. He was therefore sensible, that
such a Subscription would have engaged him to Resign, whenever Ignatius should
return. It being a Contract not to stand as Anti-Patriarch against Ignatius.
But in Case the Expulsion be for Notorious Villainy incompatible with Episcopal
Sanctity, then, even without a Synodical Sentence, the Councils of the Church
may establish another Successor, as in the Case of Vindic. of Dep. B^sh. Page
71. etc. Case of Sees, etc.
Callinicus Patriarch of Constantinople, banished to Rome for open and
effectual High Treason; in whose stead Cyrus was admitted. And here your
Vindicator acknowledges, there was no need of a Synod to deprive him upon the
notoriety and heinousness of the Guilt, and the Dr. rightly observes against
him, that there was no need of a presumed Cession in Callinicus, but then the
Church, if she acted Piously, looked on more than bare possession in Cyrus,
namely to the ill Merits, as well as Fortunes of Callinicus, as the just ground
of quitting him for Cyrus. Indubitable charges of the Secular Powers removing
the impeached Prelate beyond the reach of Ecclesiastical Communication, the
standing Council of the Church may admit another for the present, reserving the
Cause of the Ejected to Ecclesiastical Cognizance, whenever there shall be
opportunity; and Equity binds the Ejected to admit these Ecclesiastical
procedures, because just and necessary. And with this Design the Councils of
the Church might admit new Bishops, when the former had fallen under Imperial,
or Civil Condemnations to remote Exiles, for Crimes charged on them by the
solemn Credit or Averment of the Secular Powers, to whose Proceedings and
Declarations in the mean time we owe a just Defference and Veneration. And if
in all those the Drs. Instances, wherein heinous crimes are pretended as the
true causes of the Exiles, the Churches had admitted the new Ones with such a
Reservation of trying the Causes perfectly upon a fair opportunity, I think
their new Admissions had been not only valid, but just too, and a charitative
Presumption of such intention in the Churches Admissions of the New Bishops,
will I believe excuse those Admissions at our Tribunal from Schism and
Invalidity. But when all comes to all, none of this Hypothesis, these
Questions, or instances are applicable to our Case; for our ejected Fathers are
not removed from the free presence of, and Communication with their Diocesses;
so that they need not any other Substitute for want of their Presence and
Authority, from whom, if there were no other Cause or Reason, we could not
recede without their Concession. And this is conclusible from Case of etc. Chapter
4.. 1. Page 41.
the Drs. own words, and instances. For, says he, should our Magistrates, like
the Persecutors those Ages, viz. the three first centuries endeavor to destroy
Christianity, by depriving us of our Bishops, and by suffering none to be
substituted in their Rooms, then those Bishops, would be our own Bishops, and
as such we should still adhere to them; As the Church of Antioch stuck to
Eustathius ejected by an Heretical Synod, and banished by the Emperor, Case of
Sees, etc. (...). 4.. 1. Page 41.
till the Catholic Bishop Meletius was settled in his See, upon which
Eustathius quitted his Episcopal Care and Government, and not before. Now from
hence it is plain, that Civil Separations are not real Deprivations, or
Depositions, and that the Admission of an Heretical Intruder thereupon does not
create a Deprivation of a Catholic Bishop from his Church. So that all the
Question remaining herein is, whether the Introduction of an Orthodox Bishop be
an effectual Deprivation? For if so, the Orthodox Church, introducing the New
Orthodox Bishop, must intend to deprive the former Good, Persecuted, Confessor
Bishop, but who can think, that an Orthodox Church will, or can do this
according to the Rules of Orthodoxy? But, then again this is no
Lay-Deprivation, and yet on the Drs. Hypothesis must be Unjust, Invalid and
Uncanonical, and yet, I pray, must it be done by an Orthodox Church according
to the Rules of Orthodoxy? Even so it must be according to the Drs. but not the
Catholic Principles. But if the Church by the introduction of a New does not
intend to deprive the Old, then the Old Bishops Title and Relation to his
Church is still retained, and permanent, and the New is no Anti-Bishop to the
Old, but must resign upon the return of the former, except it be otherwise
Canonically contracted. And in the Drs. own instance, who can think, that the
Catholic Church in Antioch by admitting Meletius did depose Eustathius, to
whom they ever had so firmly adhered during all the Arian Persecution? It must
therefore be resolved, that Eustathius directed, or admitted the Introduction
of Meletius, in that hereupon he omitted, and quitted his Episcopal Care; or
that the Church admitted him not against Eustathius but in his stead, until his
Return, and Restitution, upon which Eustathius wholly Resigned, or
discontinued, and gave place. And so the same may be well judged Case of, etc.
Chapter 17.
in the Succession of Macedonius to Euphemius in the Constantinopolitan
Patriarchate, even as the Case is Stated by the Dr. especially since
Macedonius, besides other good Offices, would not wear his Omophorion in the
presence of Euphemius, showing thereby, that he neither was, nor would be an
Anti-bishop to him, though Euphemius in begging his Protection, in his way to
Exile seems to have conceded without Remonstrance, that Macedonius should
supply the Church for him during his Exile, but not against him; upon which
joint accord they continued saithful Friends even unto Death. And hence well
might those, who refused to subscribe Euphemius's Condemnation, fairly
Communicate with Macedonius, as being no Anti-bishop to Euphemius, but in
perfect Charity and Communion with him. All which procedures are grounded on
that Maxim owned by St. Chrysostom, that the Church cannot be ( viz. well)
without a Bishop. So that it is the actual want of a Bishop for the time being
that Justifies new Admissions, not to exclude, but to supply the defect of the
Proprietor till his Recovery from Banishment, or Bondage. And to apply the Drs.
Concession to our present State, If their Majesty's had not filled the Sees
with New Bishops, the Old ones had been our Bishops still; and then how were
the Sees before vacant by the Statute of Lay-Deprivation? And how long should
we have waited their Majesty's leisure, had they continued longer the Diocese
in Suspense, before the Dr. would have remonstrated for the Old Bishops? Or how
shall the Church know, when their King's design to destroy the Church by not
yielding it Bishops, while the crafty Persecution is carried on under false
promises, and fair pretenses of care for the Churches Interest? These are
pretty hard Morsels to digest, and I leave it to the more judicious to resolve
them.


Dyscher. But to what Rules can you reduce the usage of the Greek Church in
admitting new Patriarch's erected by the Grand Seignior upon his Arbitrary
Dethroning a former, who yet is present to his People, and capable of his
Pastoral Care? For the Dr. puts us this strict Question; Case of, etc. Chapter 15.
Page 174.175.
whether an ejected; Patriarch of Constantinople would do well, if after he was
deposed, he should separate from the Communion of his Successor, and make a
Division in the Church? To this he adds another Questions; It is certain, says
he, that when the Patriarch of Constantinople is deposed by the Sultan, the
Church submits immediately to the Successor without asking the Old Patriarch
leave. -- Is now the Greek Church herein Schismatical? If the ejected Patriarch
should actually lay claim to his See, would the Church be Schismatical for
adhering to the present Possessor?


Eucher. In this point I find the Dr. and some of you very well agreed, to
excuse, and in a manner to justify this Submission in the Greek Church. This
the Dr. observes in one of his Opponents, and so have you and I in your learned
Author of Christian Communion. But herein my opinion is, that the whole Greek
Church was culpable in the first Admission of such Changes, and still is so in
continuing such submission, whic has nothing in it to Excuse it but fear of
persecution. It is true, it would be odd for one single Patriarch to refuse
such Ejection against the temper and humor of the whole Church, especially if
himself were advanced so upon the Imperial Expulsion of his Predecessor; for if
a whole Church will perversely urge her Bishop to yield to violence, and lay
down his Mitre, I think in many Cases he may do well to yield to an unjust and
inflexible importunity, as Gregory Nazianzen did; but the Churches are to
blame, that do not animate and maintain their Bishops against such Tyrannies in
their Spiritual Authorities, which ought not to lacquey it to Simoniacal and
barbarous insolences. For since the Greek Churches are, as to their Temporal
Condition, in the same State with the Primitive, they ought to do as the
Primitive Church would have bravely done, and to follow the rules of
Succession, that were observed in those purest Ages. It is true, the whole
Greek Church, having by a long and consuetudinary consent and prescription made
this Usage to themselves, as it were Canonical, would not seem Schismatical in
neglecting the claim of an Ejected Patriarch, because he himself in his first
advancement came in by the pleasure of the Sultan, and assumed the Patriarchate
under the same servile Terms and Conditions. And therefore that first Consent,
though faulty, and vicious, incapacitates him to reform, and reverse the ill
custom singly by himself, without the concurrence of his Episcopal Colleagues,
or the general Councils of that Church; at least he cannot condemn them as
Schismatical in this Customary Servility. And here I must put this Quaere,
whether this Submission of the Greek Church to such Changes be simply Sinful?
If so, then the Dr. ought not to prescribe from them, as exemplary, or
excusable. If not sinful, then Custom, and Ecclesiastical Consent has made
those deprivations and successions Valid, and Canonical, and then they are
alien to the Drs. Hypothesis, and are impertinently alleged. But as if Case of
the Greek Church now actually stands, the ejected Patriarch making no
challenges, it is no domestic Schism within themselves, tho it be a wretched
Dehonestation of that Churches Sanctity. And so, if, as the Dr. confesses,
these Patriarchs, do not merit by their Learning, or Wisdom to be guides, and
patterns to the Bishops of England, he should not urge us with their corrupt
and profane examples, to sacrifice our Hierarchies to the arbitrary lusts of
Secular Powers. For if it be not a formal Schism in the Greek, it is a radicated
vice and corruption there, and which for that reason we are to oppose, and
prevent here against all imprudent perils, that it may not become an
irremediable and common Evil.


Dyscher. You are a strange thing of a man; you will neither side with us, nor
our Adversaries, but pick out between us matters of dislike, as if you would be
of neither interest, but a certain mixed kind of (...); but this is the ready
way to lose your self with both Parties.


Eucher. I have long since learned from the Apostle, that if in such Cases of
Conscience I should seek to please men, I should not be the servant of Christ.
And truly you on your part, and those of the Baroccian Principles seem to me to
be equally in such extremes, as are destructive to the true happiness and
integrity of the Church. By which means you have the advantage of reproaching
each other for your manifest absurdities, which the defense of your principles
hurries you into, and thus are in a fair way for an eternal wrangle, but never
like to settle in a grave and impartial temper, ease, or satisfaction. And
therefore I, that have been so long a seeker between you, and but little the
Wiser amidst your contentions, and so must make the best use and practice of my
own Sentiments, till I can experience between you others more improving or
convincing.


Dyscher. I have been very calm all this while we have been upon the
Speculation of the Baroccian hypothesis; But now you remind me of your own
Principles, and Senses, I fear I shall fall into the Spirit of T. B. again, and
not use you very partially in some of my Reflections.


Eucher. I am sensible by experience of your infirmity; And since good natured
Men are sometimes passionate, I know how to bear as well as to correct a little
rudeness. I pray, good Brother, let me know, what it is now that begins to
provoke your choler?


Dyscher. When you had spent a great many Arguments drawn out with much Pomp
and Ostentation, being basted in them you grow weary with struggling, and fairly
give up all, and acknowledge that Sol. and ab. page 27.29.
an Act of State Christian cannot alone vacate a Spiritual Charge, Charge, by
any Divine Law, primitive Canon, or Prescription. This is as full as can be
worded against the Power of the State to deprive Bishops. Now see, how you come
about again in the very next words; Yet such an Act, received, and admitted by
the Church, may from her concurrence have a just and legal Effect. And then
upon this Notion the Statute of Deprivation ipso facto must be taken as a Law
upon the Church to reject the Recusants totally from their Stations. Here you
will not have the Deprivation to proceed from the Act of the State alone, but,
to save some Honor to the Clergy, you make their Deprivation valid by their
Concurrence to the Act of Deprivation. But I pray, how did they concur? Was it
otherwise than by submitting to the Act, when it was made? And is such
Submission any Authority? I thought they had been quite different things. Did
the Clergy show any signs, or make any protestations for their Right, viz. that
the Act of Parliament for the Deprivation of the Bishops was not valid without
their Concurrence? No, not a word; but when it is done, they submit to it, and
acknowledge it. And you would make a Protestation against Fact, that their
Concurrence was necessary to it, that themselves did not pretend, nor dare they
do it to this day. -- It is certain the Parliament thought their own Authority
sufficient to deprive the Bishops, and did not ask, or think they needed the
Concurrence of the Clergy to make their Act valid. On the contrary no
Clergymen have dared to dispute it, but those, who are deprived. And for
others to imagine to come in by their Concurrence into a share of the Authority,
is like the fly on a Wheel of the Chariot, that thought he contributed to the
dust that was raised, for he too gave his concurrence. It is possible such Men
as you should not see how contemptible it renders them, to pretend to an
Authority they dare not avow? And upon this Foundation to raise Arguments to
justify their proceedings, which they cannot maintain any other way! For these
Men to deny themselves to be Erastians! or ever to name any Ecclesiastical
Authority! I had almost said to call them a Church! Or to speak as Sol. etc.
Ab. Page 29.
you do, that the Church ought not to admit Deprivations on improper or
unreasonable Demands! As if the Parliament did request it from the Convocation,
or left it to their admitting, or not admitting! As if they durst dispute the
validity of an Act of Parliament for want of their Concurrence! As if any of
them durst let such a word come out of their Mouth! Behold the Ghost, the Echo
of a Church! etc. M. S. Reflex.
and that the consent, public and actual Concurrence of the Church is
necessary to give an Ecclesiastical Effect to Civil Ordinances in Matters of
the Church. Now this Concession overthrows your whole Cause, and being placed
after the main Body of your Arguments, is it self an Argument, that you had
little faith in them. -- So then our Bishops, being never Canonically Deprived,
are the yet proper Bishops of their Sees. -- But you come like a Spiritual
Jugler, and persuade us, that this has been Canonically done; For the Church,
say you, ought to empty the Sees of such Incumbents, that are dangerous to the
Civil State. But, Sir, must the Church cast out her Bishops, as often as they
will not comply with Usurpers, etc. But you say, this was done by Acts of
Separation properly Ecclesiastical, the Dean and Chapter of the Metropolitical
Church taking the Jurisdiction, till the Chapter elect, and Bishops consecrate
another, -- But, Sir, you cannot but know, that the Dean and Chapter have no
Jurisdiction over their Metropolitan, and the Sea must be vacant, before they
can proceed to Election. T. B. Sect. Page 37.38.


Eucher. I have heard with much patience, yea pleasure, all your Noble strains
of Rhetoric, and need only say, "If I have spoken evil, bare witness to the
evil, but if well, why smitest thou me? For if the Deprived assert the Churches
Concurrence necessary to give Acts of State an Ecclesiastical Effect, and I
grant it, what Cause have you to fly in my face for even that very Concession?
But for you to upbraid me with my Candor, who are so heedless in attending to
my words, as to take, or set them off in other Senses, than rationally can be
fixed on them in their clear account of this Concurrence, is neither very
courteous, nor prudential. Let us therefore again look over these oversights,
and see whether we can come again to our selves. First then I never said, that
the Concurrence of the Church was necessary, either to make an Act of
Parliament, or to make it valid in Ecclesiasticals, and particularly in Acts of
Deprivation; But I admitted your Principle so far, and no further, that her
Concurrence is necessary to give Statutes an Ecclesiastical Effect, and Issue.
For an Act of Parliament may justly require of the Church some certain
Ecclesiastical proceedings, without any joint Session, or Consultation of the
Church. And such Acts shall be just and valid of themselves to oblige the
Conscience of the Church to obedience, or executive Concurrence. As suppose, an
Act of Parliament, repealing all the Statutes of Praemunire, which cramp the
liberties of the Church in the Episcopal Successions, and Synodical
Consultations for a perfect reformation to a Primitive purity, should
consequently require our Bishops, or Convocations to proceed upon such
relaxation to provide, and execute better rules of Discipline on the morals,
and duties of the Christian Church under their care, and to renew the
Commercium formatarum with foreign Churches for a general Restitution of Piety
and Order to its Primitive State, such a Law I think would valioly oblige the
Church to Concurrence, without which however actually given it could not have
its Ecclesiastical Effect. When King Joash commanded the Priests to employ the
sacred Money to the reparation of the Lords House, it was a valid command to
oblige; but while the Priests neglected it, it had no Sacred effect. 2 King 12.
So when Moses spoke unto Aaron, Eleazar, and Ithamar to eat the meat offering
and heave shoulder according to set Rules, the precept was very valid, yet
because of their actual Omission it wanted an Ecclesiastical Effect, Lev. 10.
So when a Statute of Deprivation requires the Church to eject Recusants from
their Stations, if the cause be necessary, or just, the Statute is valid to
oblige the Conscience of the Church to an executive and concurrent obedience,
yet if the Church will by no means yield to such command of the State, whether
just or unjust, valid or invalid in its obligatory intentions, it cannot
actually pass into an Ecclesiastical Effect, and Issue, and all, that the Civil
Powers can do on the refusal, is to subject the Church to temporal Punishments.
Nay, in the same Genus of Civil Government the Decrees and Judgments of the
Kings Courts, notwithstanding their perfect justice and validity, cannot have
their Civil Effect, if the subordinate officers neglect, or refuse to execute
them. It Is true, there is a difference between the Civil obligations of
Underofficers to their Superiors in Secular Authorities, and those of the
Church to the Civil Powers in matters Ecclesiastical. For that Civil Officers
are obliged only to observe the Legal forms of process in the Orders of their
Superiors, and are not tied to enquire into the inner justice of those Orders.
But the Church, when under any Laws, or Commands of the State, may and ought to
judge for her self, and her conscience toward God, Whether the matters,
enjoined her by the Laws, be consistent with the Laws and Principles of
Christianity, and the Churches fundamental Constitution, against which she is
never to admit them to an Ecclesiastical Effect, but must bear the penal
Consequences with all meeknes and resignation. And this is not only the Right
and Duty of all Churches, as sacred Corporations, toward all humane laws in
matters moral, or Religious, but of every single Christian also. And if this be
not admitted, up goes Hobbism, and the Civil Powers may enact Deprivations,
Excommunications, and Anathema's for men's refusing the Alcoran, Paganism,
Socinianisme, and even Atheism it self, and for owning the Scriptures, Creeds,
and Sacraments. But you, that think us such a soft and waxen generation, would
have found this Right asserted even unto Martyrdom against all such
deprivations, had they been enacted upon causes apparently injurious, or
imposed on the Church. For in the late Reign not only you, but others also
opposed the growth and menaces of Popery with a burning zeal, when we had no
present prospect of any thing, but Fagots, Dragons, and most Christian Bridles.
And that all these Armies of Worthies, should all of a sudden grow base,
abject, and irreligious, cannot easily (I am sure not fairly) be presumed. But
in cases, which the Church judges equal, she may concur and submitt, and when
she may so do, it can be neither religious, or prudential to provoke, or incur
a persecution by a needles and obstinate refusal, which is our Sense upon the
Causes and Law of the present Deprivations. But is it not a pretty exception
against this Concurrence, because it is yielded by Submission, not Authority?
For did I ever assert of an Authority in the Church to refuse her Duty, against
which certainly there lies no Authority? And I told you, Sol. and Ab. page 28.
that the Church here concurs by Submission, as judging it her duty herein to
yield to the State. But in such Cases if you will needs require the Churches
Authority, I will remind you what I told you Sol. and Ab. Page 29.
last time, that the Church has an Authoritative Right to judge in such Cases,
whether she may, or must concur, or no. And hence a Right essentially belongs
to it to examine all the Causes of the Secular Demands; so that if she finds
there be no grave Reasons to move the Church to the required Severities, she
ought to disobey, as my Lord Bishop of London well did, when required to
suspend Dr. Sharp indicta Causa, etc. And for this I alleged out of Nazianzen
one of the Noblest Instances in all Antiquity, wherein the Bishops of
Cappadocia refused to depose, or reject the canonically settled Bishop of
Cesarea, notwithstanding all Julians terrors and commands, of which I wonder
Dr. Hody took no notice. But I add also, that if the Church finds those Causes
sufficient, she may, if necessary she must admit the Laws enforcing them, and
not wantonly pretend Authority against duty, nor use her liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness. And I can never imagine, that this Right of the Church was ever
suspected, much less opposed by any Powers or Legislators truly Christian.

But if Civil Powers will make irreligious Laws in matters Spiritual, will you
immediately oblige the Christian Councils to invade the Senate House, or Courts
of Civil Judicature with Protestations against their Procedures, before the
Laws come home upon us, and press us to actual Concurrence? Surely the
Primitive Christians did not so against the Edicts of Heathen Powers. For though
Christianity will warrant meek and petitionary Apologies, yet will it not
justify saucy Remonstrances and Prohibitions upon Legislators, who must pass
undisturbed and unaffronted in their measures, and we must with all meekness of
behavior wait the eventual prosecution of the Laws, if we cannot divert it by
fair atonement; and when it comes, refusing calmly the required Sins, commit
our selves, and Cause to him that judges righteously. So that all your
Harangues about running into Parliament House with Proclamations, or
Protestations for our against their Authority, are injudicious, immodest, and
seditious proposals, though we had known the demands of the State to have been
unlawful, which we yet acknowledge to be otherwise. And that we should cease to
be a Church, because we are not officiously rude to the Legislators, who may
sometimes happen to be causelessly unkind, or hard hearted to us! We are neither
to precipitate our zeal, manners, confession, or sufferings, but let the will
of God be done upon us, when his own time comes; Since even the vilest Laws of
men have this obligation and validity upon the Consciences of Subjects, to
restrain all indecencies, and disturbances against them, and the Legislative.
For if the Senate has not Authority to oblige us to evil, it has to modesty,
and abstinence from their Presence, and Consultations.

But the Parliament thought their Authority alone sufficient to deprive the
Bishops, and did not ask, nor think they wanted the concurrence of the Clergy
to make their Act valid, very well; they did not think so. And if you confine
this sufficiency to a valid Obligation on the Church to submit, and concur,
this opinion of the Parliament is very true, though I believe they ground it, not
upon any mere pretended Arbitrary Despotick Power, but upon the Weight and
Sanctity of the Causes, on which they founded the Law. But if you think it the
opinion of the Parliament, that their Acts can actually pass into an
Ecclesiastical Effect without Ecclesiastical Concurrence, you fix an opinion on
them rather to be charged with Nonsense than Falsehood. For if all the Bishops,
Priests, and Christian Laity with them will adhere to those whom the Statute
dooms to Deprivation, how can the Statute pass into an Ecclesiastical Effect?
And so the Church ought always to do if they shall apparently persecute her
Bishops for Righteousness sake, to hinder their temporal Laws from attaining an
Ecclesiastical Effect against the innocent, whatsoever afflictions they may
suffer for the opposition. And if ever Popery, Arianism, Socinianism, or
Erastianism should (which God forbid) press it self upon us by Act of
Parliament, I doubt not but our Church also will herein become Recusant against
such Laws, and seal their Integrity with their Blood. So that in our Case the
only Question herein is, whether this Law upon the Church to admit the
Deprivation be unjust, or no? If it be in the Churches Judgment, she ought to
refuse it; if not unjust, it is admissible. Now this we believe, and you the
contrary, and God must judge between us; but in the mean time the church must
act according to her present Convictions.


Dyscher. But the form of the Statute is, that the Recusants shall be ipso
facto Deprived, which must import the actual Deprivation to be completed purely
by the mere virtue of this Act antecedently to the Concurrence of the Church.


Eucher. I would willingly allow you, that this is the Sense of the Parliament,
if you can clear it from Nonsense, of which I am not willing that great
Assembly should be impeached. And I will also grant you, that the mere Virtue
of the Statute alone can deprive them of their Temporalities without the
Churches Concurrence. But perhaps all Decrees of Humane Power, in things
dubious, and future, have this tacit, yet necessary Supposition, quantum in
nobis est, as much as in them lies; for farther certainly no Power can go. And
further as to the Spiritualties, it is possible the Parliament might intend no
more than this, that the Recusants should be ejected, or quitted by the Church
upon and undoubted presumption of her submissive Concurrence, or the Recusants
own Cession, when the Temporalities were gone, and their Non-resistance to such
necessary, and valid Laws. But the Senses of Statutes I leave to the
Parliament, and the Judges, while yet you and I know our Ecclesiastical
Principles and Obligations in matters truly Spiritual and Christian, and must
act accordingly, whatsoever Laymen or Lawyers think hereupon. And agreeably
the Dean and Chapter of the Metropolitical Church, looking upon the Sees of the
Recusant Bishops de jure vacant, discharged the Recusants of their Authority,
by taking the Jurisdiction to themselves, which in such Cases they judged
lawful by the Laws of God, as well as Man, as also Canonical according to our
Constitutions; though herein they assume no ordinary, or proper form of
Jurisdiction over Bishops not fallen de jure from their Sees; and you may very
well remember, that I noted against this expected Objection in our last
Conference, Sol. and Ab. page 29.
that this was, and might be done upon judgment of Conscience for themselves,
and the Church, but not of ordinary Jurisdiction over the Bishop. And therefore
you ought not to have charged this upon us, as if we herein own such a
Jurisdiction, which we disclaim, but have proved, that the Church may not upon
just and necessary Causes desert her Bishop, over whom otherwise she
confessedly has no proper, formal or ordinary Jurisdiction. It is most
evidently plain, that, if the Causes be just, our Canonical and Legal
Constitutions not only allow, but require such a Divorce from the fallen
Bishop, and assign the Jurisdiction to the Church Metropolitical. Now if this
our Constitution be irregular and invalid, why did the Deprived ever, own it,
till now the operation of it came upon them? And therefore, whether this
imports such a formal Jurisdiction, or no, (which yet I deny) it cannot be
reproached for Uncanonical without condemning our first Reformation, and those
Models to which your selves have hitherto sworn Canonical observance.


Dyscher. What I have said saves me the pains of reflecting further on what you
say, in calling the Concurrence of some of the Clergy the Act and Concurrence
of the whole Church of England. But how the whole Church of England can be
represented, not only without the Metropolitan, and many of his Suffragan
Bishops, by anumber, no matter how many, of the inferior Clergy, in direct
opposition and rebellion against their Lawful Superiors, how this can be
justified to be a true and Canonical Repre-sentation of the Church of England,
I leave to you to explain, and to distinguish from the gainsaying of Korah. Ms.
Reflex.


Eucher. Except I much forget my self, I never asserted any number of inferior
Clergymen to be Representatives to the whole Church of England, nor yet that
the Bishops were deprived by the Representative Body of the whole Church; but
this I say, that the actual Ecclesiastical ejection is performed successively
by several Representative parts of the whole Church, as first by the
Metropolitical Church, and then the Diocesan Chapters representing their
respective Province, and Dioceses. Now upon an Act for Deprivation, the Sea
upon just causes becoming de jure vacant, the Course of our Ecclesiastical
Polity is such; The Metropolitical Church first takes and deputes the
jurisdiction, the Diocesan Chapters omit their acknowledgments of their former
Bishops, and at length upon precept proceed to a new Election, Bishops upon
this (except in mere Translations) consecrate the Elected, thence the whole
Episcopal College own the new, as do the Cathedral Clergy in their offices,
and devotions, and all the Clergy in person, and the Laity by their
representative Churchwardens in admitting the Visitations of the new Prelates,
and executing their precepts Ecclesiastical, and all Laymen personally own
them, that recieve their Confirmations, Benedictions, or any other Sacred
Ordinances from them, or with them as Bishops. All which, being uniformly and
peaceably promoted by these gradations, if of much more Weight and Efficacy
than a mere Synodical Censure, before it has attained to such an actual
consequent Reception in the whole Church. And therefore, when this Process is
complete, we may truly say, the Bishops are Ecclesiastically outed, not by the
Church representative, but by the Church original. And hence such a plenary
consent of the Church diffusive against a few Bishops and Clergy, on the
account of their Recusancy, must in legal and equitable construction be
presumed to proceed from a common uniform Sense of their notorious incapacity
and ineptitude, of guiding Consciences, and exercising Episcopal Functions and
Authorities under the present State. And upon notorious incapacities the Church
may alienate her self from the incapacitated, and recurr to other Bishops for
new Consecrations or Investitures, especially when justly required thereto by
the offended Powers. And if any incapacity of exercising the Pontifical
Authority had been upon Aaron, especially from disowning the Principality of
Moses, (which is, or comes very near your Case) and Korah had opposed him
purely on that account, that contradiction had never been recorded to his
infamy, but his praise for ever. But as to your idle Question about complying
with Usurpers, (which, like Altar against Altar, is the Incipe Maenalios of
your whole Ditty) as it has received full answers already, so here it is nothing
to our present purpose, since our discourse now is founded on a Supposition of
a due and full Settlement of Legal Powers in the State, which ought not to be
charged with formal Usurpation.


Dyscher. We will then let alone at present the Disquisition of our capacity,
and proceed further in our Enquiry concerning your Churches Concurrence. For
least the Dean and the Chapter should not be strong enough, Did they then in
their Convocation make the least scruple, or vote, that their Concurrence was
necessary to that Statute? No, not a syllable. But you tell us how they did it.
The Sol. and Ab p. 28.
Silence of the Convocation under the Statute of Deprivation argues their
opinion to be, that they were in this to yield to the State. This is according
to the old Proverb, Silence gives consent. And at this Rate the Statute of
abolishing Episcopacy in Scotland must be supposed to have it is validity from
the Concurrence of the Bishops and Clergy there, for they too are silent. And
some of the inferior Clergy there, But in good truth, have any Clergy men in
England complied to an enacted abolition of Episcopacy here?
(but not half so many as in England) have complied. I pray you to answer me in
plain terms, whether you do not think the Parliament in England to have as
great Power as the Parliament of Scotland? And consequently might abolish the
whole Order of Episcopacy in England, as they have done in Scotland? And for
their Silence, it is a strange Plea. Have they liberty to assert without
danger? I mean in England, as well as Scotland? And if Silence perforce argues
Consent, then they are the freest Subjects of the world in France, and in
Turkey, whose M^tes are happier by this Argument, and have greater Authority
than our House of Commons. I thought Authority could not be exerted by Silence.
Tho the Turk will have his Executioners to be mute, he cannot command them by
his Silence. Does the King say nothing, when he refuses a Bill? Or does he
return them a decent answer with promise of Consideration?
If the King says nothing, when both Houses present a Bill for the Royal
Assent, this is a refusal of that Bill. So that it is not in all Cases, you
see, that Silence gives consent; indeed in no Case of Authority. That was a
saying only adapted to the grant of some private favors, and is but a Jest, or
Complement at the best. When the Church saw the Bill of Deprivation pass wholly
and solely in the Name, and by the Authority of the State, they ought to have
entered their Protestation, and asserted their own Right. Their Silence in that
Case was an yielding up and betraying their Right, as it is if a Peer does not
protest against any vote that passes, his consent to it is employed. And
therefore the Churches Silence in that Case is so far from being an asserting
of their Right, that it is against the common Sense and Practice of mankind so
much as to allege it. M. S. Reflex.
you call in the Convocation for help. And first you tell us, what your worthy
Conformists did, and what was their opinion. But this is just the Proverb, Ask
my fellow, if I am a Thief? But, say you, their sending a Convocation shows
their Subjection, and condemns Recusancy as an Error. -- But the silence of the
Convocation, you think, will work Miracles; for that argues their opinion to
be, that they were in this to yield to the State. And thus we are utterly
undone with the Argument of Lovers and Fools, Silence gives consent. There must
be many other concurrent circumstances, before the least consent can be
presumed from Silence. For otherwise it is often a sign of indignation, scorn,
sullennes, yea, even of obstinate denial it self. And what they meant by their
Silence you may better guess, when you have resolved this Quaere, whether you
can reasonably think that they would have chosen him for their Archbishop, whom
they refused for their Prolocutor? But what if they were not so silent as here
you make them? It Is pity your memory is not better; for through forgetfulness you
give in evidence against your self; for you tell us of a motion in the lower
house of Convocation for the Restitution of the Bishops, and (then) suspended
Clergy. -- Now would any men take petitioning for men for appearing against
them? But what if there had been none of this? Were ever Bishops deposed by
Slence? T. B. Sec. Let. page 39.


Eucher. By what Arguments soever you are undone, that is to your selves; but I
am sure I can find in you but few Arguments of Love, or Wisdom in this
clamorous Rant, which seems designed in spite to the poor Proverb, lest your
Silence should seem to consent. But since it is now my turn to break Silence, I
will speak to this point but this once, and, if you will not, I will for ever
hereafter hold my peace. First, then I must it seems talk of Silence, of which
I am taxed, as if I had ascribed to it, not only Consent, but Authority too,
and actual Deprivation, which are two points beyond the lines of the Proverb.
Consider we then at first the proverbial Importance here in the Carriage of the
Convocation. We were Sol and Ab. page 28.
enquiring into the Sense of the Churches in common, which you excepting
against challenged a Sense of our Convocations; and I tell you, That their
Silence under the Statute of Deprivation argues their opinion to be, that they
were in this to yield to the State. But I, well observing, that bare Silence is
Non-action, and mere nothing, and in it self simply of no determinate
signification, set such other positive Acts, in Grot. de Jure, etc. l. 2. c. 4.
Parag. 5.
conjunction with which this Non-action, or Silence might legally and morally
be interpreted to a consent of yielding herein to the State. To this purpose I
premised the general Conformity of most Bishops, and Clergy, and Laity, that
our sending a Convocation at their Majesty's Precept shows, that we own
Subjection to them; and condemns the Recusancy as an [incapacitating] Error
(for so I meant by softer forms of expression, that I might not gaul you) and
so I conjoyn the Silence of the Convocation with those other positive
indications, that it might jointly ground a legal Argument, that in their
Judgment they ought to yield to the State. So that you had united Circumstances
enough to have fore-strangled your Cavils, if your prejudice had not blinded
you. On the Session of the second Convocation the Recusants were in a State of
actual Suspension, and the Day of Deprivation drew on. Now this the Convocation
in their Judgment were to yield to, or oppose, for it is impossible but they
must judge one, or the other to be their Duty. Now if they had been of opinion
for the opposition, this must have been done by Synodical Remonstrance; if
their Judgments was for the Submission, then they were to break no Silence to
the contrary. Now then is not their actual Silence hereupon a legal token that
they thought it their Duty to yield in Silence? Except we will perversely judge
them silent against the Dictates of their Conscience, which if you will, it
will lie upon you to prove it out. Whenever things are brought into such a
Strait, that either Silence, or Contradiction must become a Duty, there Silence
is as moral a Token of Consent, as Contradiction is of Dissent. And in all
cases where either Assent, or Dissent is inevitably requisite, and the Rule is,
that all Dissents must be express and protested, as the forms are in the Lord's
House, and process of Actions in the Civil Law, there Silence in Law is taken
for Consent. But here is yet more; the King had graciously conceded a liberty
to the Convocation to propose their Grievances in order to his Royal Redress;
So that though they had no Civil or Legal Liberty to remonstrate against the
Statute, yet they had an opportunity to have presented an humble Supplication
for a relaxing Expedient, or a Temperament, on just Security for the
inoffensiveness of the suspended. Yet neither did they think themselves obliged
in Duty so much as to break Silence in this manner herein; And must not the
State then conclude, that the Church by this Silence thought it fit to yield?
However I hope you do not think in good sadness, that their Silence did
signify indignation, scorn, sullenness, or denial to the State. For it is true
in cases of request and contract Silence is no grant of a Proposal, but Silence
under a Law, together with a consequent Obedience to the Precept thereof, is an
indubitable Token of Consent, which was the Churches case here, while silent in
her Convocation, and obedient in her Metropolitical and Diocesan Bodies. So
much then for Consent; next for the Authority, which you say is not asserted,
but betrayed by this Silence. But neither here can I agree with you: For as I
never said, that Silence asserts Authority, so neither does it betray it. For
your instance from the Peers does not import a Right betrayed, but only a Vote
consented to by Silence, and this confirms my Observation, and refutes you; For
as the Silence of a Peer surrenders not his Peerage, so neither does such
Silence in the Church forfeit; or vacate her Authority; No, though the Church had
had Right to have entered the Parliament House with Votes, and Protestations.
But suppose it for once, that the Churches Silence had betrayed her Right, see
upon whom the Treachery must be most unfortunately charged. Did the Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, and his other Recusant Colleagues, that had a legal
Right of Session in the Lord's House, enter, and enter a Protestation against
the Validity of that Act, as wanting their, and the Churches Suffrage, or
Synodical Concurrence? No, not a jot of this. And yet they, by their Station as
well as Cause, ought to have been the first in the Protestation; which if they
would not make for themselevs, and the Churches Rights, then according to you
they are Proditors; and so it is unreasonable in them, or you, to require the
Protestation of others, less concerned, or obliged by their Order, Cause, and
Principles. But the truth is, we had no just Cause, or legal Authority of
making such Remonstrant Protestations, and so our Silence is not perfidious,
but dutiful. Now this being so clearly stated, all your childish trifling upon
French Subjects, and Turkey Mutes is very idle, and impertinent, since Silence
does not indeed import Authority against, but Submission under Laws. Yet even
in these French, and Turkish oppressions the Silence argues an opinion, that
they, either in Duty, or Prudence, are to be silent, and quietly submissive.
And this certainly was the Sense of our Savior in his Silence, when he was led
as a Lamb to the Slaughter. But to deal plainly, these Instances pertain not to
our present Case; for here ours was Silence, and obedient Submission to the
Commands of the State, the comporting with which in Silence is a Consent to,
and Comprobation of its Justice, and is more than a mere silent Patience under
unjust Oppressions. So inartificial and improper is the Objection from these
poor Mutes, and Vassals. Thirdly, you assure me, that Silence is no
Deprivation. No verily; nor did I ever hear that it was. But, to intercept your
have, whose Silence was I speaking of? And to whom did I ascribe the
Ecclesiastical Acts of Deprivation? Why truly, I spoke of the Silence in
Convocation, as importing their Opinion, that they ought not to oppose the Laws
of the State. But I never said, that the Convocation did deprive the Deprived.
No surely; they sat not at the time, or on the Day of Deprivation. But I told
you before, that the Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Acts of Deprivation consisted
in the Metropolitical and Diocesan Alienations, effected not by mere Silence,
but Canonical Acts, and forms of procedure. And now let us see, whether my
Memory has failed me any more than my Cause. I here assert the Silence of the
Convocation, but afterward told you, Sol. and Ab. Page 34.
that a Motion for a Petition was stifled in the Lower House of Convocation, T.
B. Repeats it thus, You tell us of a Motion in the lower House of Convocation;
but leaves out the word [Stifled] fraudulently.
though you clip my words on purpose to abuse me. For a Motion may be stifled
before it is offered, by one, that knows, that it is intended to be made. But
however an actual Motion of one Member may consist with the Silence of the
whole Body. For if the Majority Vote Silence against the Motion for a Petition,
the Convocation is silent, and silenceth all its Members, as to the Petition it
self, though some brake Silence in the silenced Motion, but keep it after, through
voluntary desistence, or Canonical Order. Now here in fact a Motion was offered
by one excellent Person, but, upon the report then tendered to him of my Lord
Archbishop Sancroft's request to the contrary, he desisted in Silence, though you
however in this Conference have thus barbarously bespattered him, when there
was just reason for your Silence. But however herein you own T. B. has a very
contracted Memory too, when T. B. See Let. Page 42.
he endeavors to discredit the Story of this Motion so stifled on the said
Report. But you have one Argument, that will confound me into Eternal Silence
or Amazement, namely, that they that refused Dr. Tillotson for their
Prolocutor, would not have consented to have had him their Archbishop. Well; be
it so; what then? Perhaps, if the Election of Bishops had been freely left to
our Convocations, they would have admitted few, or none of those, whom our
Kings have advanced, but yet the Chapters electing have consented to the
Legality of those Nominations, which they have not always judged so expedient,
and the Episcopal College have consented to their Communion, with the rest of
the Clergy, as well in, as out of Convocation, as no doubt they will with the
new Archbishop at their next meeting, without breaking any Silence against him
by way of Dissent. And now at last I am come to your Questions about the
Deposition of Episcopacy. And first you say, the Bishops and Clergy of Scotland
are silent under the Abolition of Episcopacy it self, and twit me that hereby
belike they concur to that Act of Abolition. No; Brother, this does not follow
from me, but according to you their Silence is a betraying their Right. But
here again, you cannot distinguish the Case of quitting a Personal Right to an
Authority, which is our Case, from the Abolition of the Authority it self
Universally, which is the Case of Scotland. For they that can legally do the
former, may not legally do the latter. For the King can depose the Judges, but
not the Courts, and dismiss other Officers, whose Offices he cannot abrogate.
And the Church can depose Priests, and Bishops, but not the Priesthood, or
Episcopacy. And whether any Civil State has more intrinsic Power in the
Spirituals of the Church, than the Church her self ever had in most perfect
Freedom, judge you. But here I must Advocate for the Bishops and Clergy of
Scotland against your Calumnies; For though they made no formal Protestation at
Parliament, yet they assert their Episcopacy by an avowed Communion of their
own, and a renunciation of the Presbyterian Model. But as to the Civil Power of
abrogating Episcopacy here, I answer, it is as great as it is any where; but I
find not our Parliaments to pretend to the same Opinions here as they do in
Scotland, and I hope you will not require me to justify Scottish Pretensions.
I think the Constitutions of our Orders are founded on Divine Rules, and have
descended to us by Traditions truly Catholic and Primitive, which here we are
not so rude to profane, or violate by any wanton Claims of Arbitrary Power; and
in my Opinion the Scots will never acquit themselves well to God, his Church,
and the King, till they copy after us, where Episcopacy is as well secured as
the Scriptures, and Sacraments, and all the most essential Parts of
Christianity. But if any of these ever happen to be persecuted here, I hope we
shall remember Him, who on all such Occasions requires us to take up the Cross,
and follow him. And now we are upon this melancholy Speculation of the Church
of Scotland, I fear the Presages you have made from their fall, have been most
influential with you to your present Recusancy to those Powers, from whom you
expect our Dissolution. This, I confess, is a very deplorable jealousy, for
which if there had been sufficient ground, (as there was not) yet this will not
justify Recusancy to the Civil Powers. But the mischief of it is more than
Personal, and Temporary, For hereby the Deprived Fathers, who by their glorious
merits in the last Reign, might have been useful Mediators for the Scotch
Church, and Promoters of our own, are now become incapable of this second
Glory, and useless to the Churches happiness by this unfortunate Recusancy. But
herein I charge no man's Conscience, but only bewail the infelicity. And shall
pray, that the Goodness of God will so graciously dispose our Tempers, and
Affairs, as in his own good time to set all things at Right, and show us at
length the Light of his countenance.


Dyscher. But let me put these things closely to your Conscience, do you verily
believe, that your Church, and Chapters admit the Ecclesiastical Change upon
the merits of the Cause, and not merely on the fear, or acknowledged Authority
of the State?


Eucher. I do believe so in very deed just as I have spoken; and my reason is;
because, had the Act of Deprivation past for recusancy of Mahometism, etc. and
the Church would never have forsaken their Diocesans, nor elected any other
even Orthodox Bishops, the Act for Deprivation being impious, and for that
cause unobliging, and as loose as Dr. Hody's Rules, and as strait as your
Principles are, I put it close home to his, and your Consciences, whether on a
Case so put, or supposed, you can think the contrary?


Dyscher. Your jumble of Queen Mary's and Queen Elizabeth Bishops I shall not
examine, because a full answer to that, either already is, or suddenly will
come abroad.


Eucher. This is what above all I have ever greatly coveted; and I have of late
been so lucky as to meet with the Sense of Part 2. Chap. 3. Page 33, 34.
your excellent Author of Christian Communion on this point. But because you
have hinted to me my shortness of memory, I had rather have it repeated from
your memory, that we may discuss it.


Dyscher. Indeed it was almost lapsed, but now upon your Suggestion I have
recovered it, and will accordingly lay it before you. As to this Case of the
Marian Bishops, says he, or of other Popish Bishops ander Edward the Sixth,
two things are to be noted in their removal and ejection out of their
Bishoprick's. One is from the Temporalities, the Benefices, and Preferments
thereof; and these Temporal Endowments are directly subjects to the Temporal
Power, etc. The other is from the Spiritual adherence and dependence of the
People on them as on heads of Church unity and Communion for religious
ministrations. And this there was no need to deprive the Popish Bishops of, for
they had already deprived themselves of it by their own Corruptions, both in
Doctrines, and Devotions. Adulterations of Religion, and corrupt ministrations
of the word, of Prayers, and Sacraments, break the Ligaments, which tie on
People to this adherence to any Bishops, or Pastors, yea, though they were
Apostles themselves. Though we, or an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel
unto you, than that which we have preached unto you, let him be anathema, or
accursed, says St. Paul Gal. 1.8. -- When therefore any Bishops, and Pastors,
instead of heading Christian Truth, appear at the head of Unchristian Errors,
the people are discharged from their Obligation, and Dependence upon them, and
are to unite themselves as they can to others, who still keep firm to that
necessary Truth, and Gospel Worship, which they have forsaken. And this was
done by the Popish Bishops, who fed the people with false Doctrines, and
polluted Prayers, and Ministrations, which left no need of any thing more to
deprive them of the Peoples Communion, and Dependence, these Papal Corruptions
of Religious Ministrations being enough to discharge, and drive them away of
themselves. So that the reformed Bishops, when they were set at the heads of
those Dioceses, called none away, nor made them break off from any just and due
Spiritual Dependence on their former Bishops, whose own heretical Doctrine, and
corrupt Ministrations had made the people cease from depending any longer in
Conscience upon them. They wanted only to be Lawfully empowered, and regularly
ordained themselves by Episcopal Imposition of hands, as all those reformed
Bishops plainly were, -- and so were no Spiritual Intruders, nor guilty of any
Civil Usurpation, or Injustice. -- But where Bishops are Orthodox, and are
deprived for their adherence to Truth and Righteousness, both in their private
Practice and Public Ministrations, the people are still left Spiritually to
depend on them. -- And so we our selves should have thought, at least we all
seem, as if we should, if by Gods Providence the Civil State had gone on to
ddprive our reformed Bishops for sticking to the Doctrines and Worship of the
Reformation, and had set up Popish Bishops in their places, etc. Vide.


Eucher. This Doctrine of that learned Person must be admitted with a grain of
Salt, or else it will be very unwholesom, and prove very convulsive in the
Ecclesiastic Body. For tho every single Christian is to abhor, and defy all
false Doctrine, condemned by the unanimous Sense and suffrage of the Universal
Church from Divine Authorities, yet single Persons cannot distributively, and
alone reject their Bishops as not Bishops for heretical Opinions, or corrupt
Ministrations, which the general Body, and all Orders of the Church do not
uniformly censure irregular, and renounce their Authors, except a just and
regular Sentence pass in form against them. When Churches are concorporated
into Provincial and Diocesan Unions, there must be some public conduct for the
diffusive multitude, to a due discussion of Principles in order to such
Divorces. Thus of old, when grievances arose from suspected Bishops, the people
appealed to Synods to judge upon their Cause, but in Cases notorious they
addressed to other Churches, Bishops, and Synods to allow their necessary
Rejection of their irregular Bishop, and ordain them others. And this usage was
as common as useful, till the Papal Usurpations rendered it impracticable in the
Western Church, and so necessitated extraordinary forms of reformation. For
here the Prince, and the People, and a great Body of the Clergy, having an
Ecclesiastical Cause of Controversy against the Marian Bishops, unrelievable
by any fair domestic, or foreign Synod, were forced, upon the Notoriety of the
Evil, to use extraordinary measures of purgation, not by rabble, or incoherent
Partitions, but by a National Judgment in Parliament, as a middle expedient, as
well against intestine Schisms, as Romish abuses; upon which discharge of Papal
Tyranny, a way was opened to that true and uniform Sense of true Religion,
which the whole emancipated Church presently received with a glad and cheerful
Uniformity, which was a felicity however not atchievable by a loose unorganized
Multitude. Since then the whole People of this Land did in their National
Senate Vindicate the pure Religion established in former Convocations from the
Marian Bishops, the enacted Deprivation was designed more against their
Spiritual Conduct, than their Temporal fortunes, and the People followed that
public intention, not their own private counsel in the reception of new
Bishops, and the models of reformation. And herein such measures of prudence
were observed, which cannot be secured in a promiscuous multitude, which I
wonder that Author did not consider. For a Priest is not immediately upon
dropping of an Error materially heretical to be taken by all at random for a
formal and self-deprived heretic, or Anathema, but he must be previously heard,
and admonished, and only upon incorrigible Obstinacy to be rejected, with
appeal unto God, and an apology to all Churches, or Spiritual Fathers
unconcerned, and untainted. But then this is a Canonical form of exauctoration
by the Church, not a formal Self-deprivation, otherwise upon this Authors
Principle, all the Hierarchy of the Romish Communion was long self-deprived
before the Reformation, and totally exauctorated, and how then will he justify
our Episcopal Succession? For such ipso facto irregularities, that are so in
their own nature, and not by mere Canonical Ordinance, degrade as well as
deprive, from not only Order, but Communion, to which of old upon Penitence
they were wont to be restored, not as Priests, but as Laymen, for that such a
fall was an ipso facto Degradation of Order, in which there were to be no
public Penitents. But now, if we make such Deprivation the Act of the Christian
People, as we must, then it, and all the previous process thereunto must be
executed by some formed Session, or Council for the Place and People concerned;
but for the whole People of this Land we have no Council but that of
Parliament. And here it must be noted, that a Christian Parliament has as much
Spiritual Right against heretical Priests as the common Christian Multitude,
and if the Multitude may on such notorious Corruptions eject one, and procure
another Bishop, even without the Consent of civil Powers, according to this
Authors Doctrine, surely such Right much more belongs to the Christian
Legislative, to which the Care of Religion does by Divine Ordinances belong, as
well as to the Hierarchy, and common Multitude, which had a real need of their
Counsel and Conduct in so great a Difficulty. The People therefore in
Parliament did their Part in the Ejection of the Marian Bishops, and all the
Chapters, and other Ecclesiastical Orders sequaciously concurred, and completed
the Design of that Act in their Alienation from the condemned Recusants. And
though all this was done for refusing the Oath of Supremacy; yet that Recusancy
being grounded on false Principles in Religion, and maintained in Defense of
the Romish Usurpations and Corruptions, the Statute of Deprivation had not only
a civil Intention, but Religious also, and was received accordingly. But all
this while I find no Answer to that famous Passage quoted by me Sol. and Ab.
Page 32.
out of Dr. Hammond's Tract of Schism, though of so great Moment, and of so great
Strength to justify such Statutes of Deprivation for the Security of the civil
Government against Seducements and Seditions. But if you would take my Counsel,
I would advise you not to lay the Cause of this Controversy in Points of
Religion, nor make common People the Judges of them, for fear of a Snap, that
perhaps you are not aware of.


Dyscher. What, what do you mean? I am a little startled at this Suggestion,
since we are where we were, and have neither altered the old Doctrines, nor the
Practices they direct to.


Eucher. Do not you remember, that that great Man who wrote the Vindication of
the Deprived Bishops, vehemently argues, Vindic. of Depr. Bish. page 24.25, 26,
27.
that not only Errors, whether great or small, but even unnecessary Truths
become Heresies, when they are made the Causes, or Characters of different
Communions? And such all Principles and Rules of Christian Morals enforced on
peril of Sin and Damnation, not required by the word, or law of God, must in
their own nature be. And thus in the ancient Church all rigorous Doctrines,
which made sins where God has made none, draw after them inevitable
Separations, and so became Heretical.


Dyscher. Well, how does this affect us?


Eucher. I am afraid in all your Principles, which make our present Allegiance
Illegal, and Irreligious.


Dyscher. I pray form them into propositions, and make your convictive
Strictures upon them, if you can.


Eucher. I take no delight in such an Employ; It is no pleasure to me to wound,
or grieve you, but as the setting before you the danger of your Principles may
correct the precipitancy of your Zeal, I will obey, and observe your direction.
First then,


Maj. Whosoever teaches Men not to be subject to the Human Constitution, and
the Authorities that are, as Gods Ordinance, teaches practical Errors;


Min. But so you teach Men against the present Constitution, and Authorities;
Ergo.


Concl. You teach Men practical Errors.

Again in another Form;


Maj. Whosoever teaches it to be Perjury to swear Allegiance to a new settled
Sovereign upon the Desertion of the former, to whom we had sworn Allegiance,
teaches practical Errors;


Min. But such is your Doctrine, (contrary to Bishop Overals Convocation book)
Ergo. Concl. You teach practical Errors.

Again in another Form;


Maj. Whosoever teaches to disobey Princes fully settled in a Government
procured by ill means, teaches practical Errors;


Min. But so do ye in the Reasons of your present Recusancy; Ergo


Concl. You teach practical Errors.

Again in another Instance;


Maj. Whosoever teaches Men not to pray for Kings, and all that are in
Authority, teaches Men Practical Errors.


Min. But so teach most of you in the Reasons of your present Recusancy, Ergo.


Concl. Most of you teach practical Errors.

Again in another Instance,


Maj. Whosoever teaches Men presumptuously to speak evil of Dignities,
teaches practical Errors;


Min. But so do most of you; Ergo


Concl. Most of you teach practical Errors.

Again in another Instance,


Maj. Whosoever excommunicates, or teaches Men to refuse Communion with Men,
that have sworn Allegiance to Powers fully settled, acts upon, and teaches
practical Errors


Min. But so most of you act, and instruct Men against our Communion. because
we have sworn Allegiance to the Powers fully settled over us; Ergo


Concl. You act upon, and teach Men practical Errors. And now, considering all,
wherein I have answered you, what can you say hereto?


Dyscher. I answer, we do not deny any of your Major and general Propositions,
but we deny your Minors, that we teach such Doctrines for our Recusancy. But we
teach, that those Major Maxims do not affect our particular Case, for that
these are not Constitutions, Authorities, or Dignities fully settled, on which
the Church according to the Apostles requires respect, and obedience.


Eucher. This is like those prevaricating Salvo's, which your Author of
Christian Communion upbraids us with, Part 3. Chapter 5.
in eluding general Precepts from influencing in particular Cases; but to omit
this, I have however gained another advantage, and success by my Advice, viz.
that in the matter of Allegiance you must quit your Pretensions to
Ecclesiastical Doctrines as the grounds of your Recusancy, Deprivation, and
Separation; and consequently there is an End of your low and causeless Clamours
for your glorious Passive Doctrines as the Cause of your Sufferings; all the
remaining Question now being between us, whether the present Constitution be
fully settled, which is a Point of Law, not Religion, to be resolved by the
State, not the Church, by the Court Civil, not the Court Christian. And
hereupon such Civil Judgments are to be secured by Religion, and Conscience,
while they stand reversed, and so you are obliged to acquiesce in the Judgments
of our Parliaments in this Point. But while you oppose this upon Principles of
Conscience, consider the Danger of Heresy, which lies before you.


Maj. Whosoever teaches Men to oppose the Course of public Judgment in Civils
upon private Opinions to the contrary, teaches Rules of Sedition against Civil
Government it self, and in them practical Errors;


Min. But you teach Men to oppose the public Judgment of the Nation for our
full Settlement in the present State; Ergo


Concl. You teach Rules of Sedition against civil Government it self, and in
them practical Errors.

Or thus in another Form.


Maj. He that teaches Men to act against confessed Principles of Truth, ought
to be exauctorated;


Min. But you teach Men to practice Disobedience contrary to those Principles
of Truth, which you are forced to confess, Ergo


Concl. You are to be exauctorated.

Now I cannot for my part see how you can avoid this Charge, which your own
rigours against us have extorted from me. And yet I have urged it for no ill
Ends, but only to lay before you the ill Aspects of your Division, upon those
your very Principles, in which you glory. For here I can more justly enclose
you with your Vindicator's Dilemma, viz. that if you separate without
Principles, you are then Schismatical, if upon Principles, you incur Heresy.
But if this be so, the Church and State may according to your own Rules eject
you without a Synod, which I compassionately beg you tenderly to consider.


Dyscher. Well, let our Cause be what it will in Fact, or Opinion, I look upon
these Lay and Parliamentary Forms of Deprivation, to be very dangerous to the
Spiritual Franchises of the Church, though we suppose, that such servile and
gradual Concurrences of the Church do give them an Ecclesiastical Effect; for
that they destroy out of the Faith of Christians the Sense of those Spiritual
Liberties and Authorities of the Church, that by a Divine Charter, and an
Apostolic Descent, belong to her; and instill a fatal Erastianism into men's
Principles, and for that Cause ought not to be received, but censured by the
Church; for that your Party founds their Authority on this false Proposition,
that the Church and State of England are the same Society, whereas there are
many Subjects of the State, that are no Members of the Church, as Apostates,
Papists, Heretics, and all unbaptized Persons. Though yet were this Hypothesis
true, that all the same persons were equally Members of the Church and State,
yet as they are a Church, and spiritually sociated, they must be governed by a
Spiritual Authority, and as a State, by the Civil Power of the Sword; nor must
the identity of the People confound the Distinction of Powers. Besides, as we
are a Church, we are of Right sociated into the unity of the whole Catholic
Church, to be maintained by an uniform Ecclesiastical Conduct, the only
ligament of Catholic Communion; but as we are a State, the Catholic Church is
not concerned with us, to take any Cognizance of our Civil Procedures, but if
as a Church we corrupt the Ecclesiastical Government into Civil, we break off,
and excommunicate our selves from the Catholic Unity by deserting the Catholic
Forms and Ties of Union.


Eucher. As to that Principle of the Identity of Church and State, and the
Consequences Men draw from thence to assert the Right of Civil Authority in
Spiritual Processes, I leave it to them, whose Heads are clear enough to
justify it. But, for my own part allowing your exceptions to the contrary, yet
our Case has justified it self ex natura Rei. And I must further advertise you,
that this Church has long submitted to the use of such Powers over us, and that
fundamentally in Q. Elizabeth's Reformation, and in many other matters in which
the State had not so much pretense of Right, or Necessity, all which have
passed uncensured by us, but in this, whether well, or ill, God must judge. The
Subscription of a Popish Clergy to avoid a Praemunire drew after it such Acts of
Parliament, as through which we can make no provision for the Church, no^ move a
question for her good, without Royal License, nor have so much freedom in our
Concernments and Duties, as every little Corporated Borough has in it is
voluntary Councils; which, though it be a tolerable Condition under a good King,
that has a Zeal for Christianity, yet under an Irreligious King it is an
absolute Bondage, and bar to the Primitive Purity, Course, and Vigor of
Religion. In the Reign of Edward the VI. they struck out the Ordinaries names
out of all Processes Ecclesiastical, and set in the Kings, as if all Church
Power had been derived from the Crown; the non-payment of Tenths, though omitted
by mere neglect, and not on any Principle of Opinion, remains yet a Cause of
Deprivation. And those shackles, which the State of old thought necessary to
restrain us from Popery, now the reasons of that Conduct are cessant, become
great Obstacles to the Primitive and Catholic Reformation of our yet remaining
defects, of which th^s Church, upon a just liberty and Authority restored her,
would become the first Example, and the noblest Standard. Yet all this
Subjection we have born in Silence, though hereby only can Popery be reduced,
whenever a Popish Conjuncture shall arise upon us; and no Body has yet dared
to offer a good mediation with the Public for a Temperament in these things.
And if our dullness herein has not been by us, or you accounted Schismatical,
shall we be judged Schismatics in admitting these much more reasonable
Deprivations, in which the Lay-powers are concerned not only in point of Care
and Interest, but even in certain and undubitable measures of Right?


Dyscher. How so, Sir?


Eucher. As the State is the Churches Hospital, so a Corporal, or Civil
Communion is substrate to the visible Communion of the Church. For though I allow
you, what you Sol. and ab. page 25.
justly challenge to the innocent, a primitive, fundamental, and undeniable
Right to good, as well in common, as in consecrated Places, yet it is certain,
that in order to this Claim they must give all just security and assurance of
their innocence, upon Test demanded by the Civil Powers, that are Guardians of
these fundamental Liberties to all good Subjects; of which innocence an Oath of
Allegiance seems the most obvious, proper, and usual Form of security between
Subjects and Sovereigns. Otherwise the Civil Powers may restrain those
Libeties, of which they are the Trustees. Thus a Civil Sovereign may prohibit,
and punish all conversation with the Enemies, or Recusants of his Civil
Authority. Now conversation simply in it self alone is a secular communication,
but absolutely Fundamental to the Ecclesiastical, which is a visible Communion
in Spirituals. Though then the Secular Authority alone, as such, does not touch
the Spirituals, yet it may upon just and legal Causes take away all that
secular and local Communion, that is substrate to the Ecclesiastical. And he
that may upon Recusancies of Subjection forbid all personal Communication with
a Recusant, may forbid it in any certain Place, Time, Matter, or Measure, and
consequently at all such Times, and Places, when, and where the Recusant may
call upon him to attend in Spirituals. But this Right, and Authority of the
Magistrate I lodge not in arbitrary will respectively, but on the nature and
merit of the provocation. And the Right, which the Christians have to the
Liberty of their Sacred Functions, is not peculiar to them as Christians, by a
Charter altogether unconditionally exempt from Civil Powers, and so a Right of
Gods positive constitution in the Church, as a Society founded by Christ,
liable to no secular Reflections for any Cause whatsoever; but is a common, and
natural Right to all Persons of clear and unspotted innocence, as such, to do
that which is good, originally due to them from the Creation. And hence Civil
Powers, becoming Judges of our Morals and Innocence, are Guardians of that
natural Right, but may justly deny it to others, but will not approve their
innocence by due Tests to the Public Peace of the Government, to which
Recusants therefore the rightful Capacity Ecclesiastical Communion is lost,
when the natural Right to Society is, either totally, or in the proper
opportunities of sacred Communion, justly denied by the Civil Powers. And to
say true, he that by ill Principles, or Practices deserves the loss, and
deprivation of all common Society, much more deserves the deprivation of the
Spiritual, that stands as a Super-structure on the other. And therefore if our
ill merits Authorize the Powers to take away at the bottom the Foundation of
our Religious Commuion, they can, though not directly, and immediately touch, yet
undermine the spiritual Structure, by destroying its secular Foundation, which
lies within the Authority and Care of Civil Powers. So that in this respect and
form an Heathen Prince may rightly deprive seditious, or disloyal Priests of
the Privilege of actually using their Ecclesiastical Functions, by rightly
denying them so much secular Society, as is Fundamentally requisite to the
exercise of them. And thus far a Statute of Deprivation may have this Civil
obligation, that no Subject shall yield corporal Communion with Recusant
Priests, when they call him to sacred Offices any where, and Laws may shut them
out from consecrated Places, that there may be no such local Society in them.
And if such Recusancy against civil Powers be notorious, confessed, or avowed,
then is such Act of State both just, and civil only, but at the same time, the
bottom of the Recusants Ecclesiastical Offices is righteously, and validly
taken away.


Dyscher. Well, well, notwithstanding these Subtilties, yet the Temporal Powers
cannot take away the actual Relation between Priest and People, though they may
suspend, or incapacitate them hereby from the actual Ministeries of their
Orders; And so hence accrues no Right to civil Powers to impose new Bishops on
the Church.


Eucher. There are two known Canonical Causes of depriving Spiritual Persons,
Immoralities, and erroneous Principles. So that; if either of these has
merited, and drawn after it a Forfeiture and Deprivation of all that secular,
and local Communion, and Society, which is necessary to the sacred Functions,
the Church upon certain Notoriety of that Guilt, Forfeiture, and civil
Incapacity, may elect, and consecrate others, who have contracted no such
Blemish, or Incapacity. Nor needs there here the Judgment of a Synod, (as is
confessed in the like Case of Callinicus and, Cyrus before mentioned) which is
only necessary to discuss and determine things dubious in Fact, or Right. So
that in such Cases, where there is no Rule set to the contrary, the Church on
her old original Liberties may of her own accord proceed to a new Promotion,
and I think ought to do so, when the Blemish, and consequent Incapacity are
irremediable. And what the Church in freedom may do without Command, she may do
when commanded, even by those Powers, which have no direct Right to manage our
Ecclesiasticals, as Infidel, and Un-Christian Powers have not. Yet indirectly,
I grant, a new Settlement in the Church may be necessary to the weal of an
Un-Christian State, which then has an indirect Right to command the Church
within it to fill the Vacancies, and then she is in Duty bound to obey, not
only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake, whenever so commanded, as
having no Authority to oppose those actual Reasons, or the civil Causes of such
the secular Commands, so that in the lawful Vacancy she must be obedient. And
if this be a just Rule for the Christian Church under Un-Christian Princes,
much more ought it to be so under Christian ones, to whom, as nursing Fathers,
you know our Church gives great Homage, and Deference. Have you any thing more
to object?


Dyscher. Nothing at all, except you will hear me repeat the three last Pages
of T. B. spent wholly in charging you with soliciting our total Ruin, and
Misusage of your deprived Metropolitan, and Diocesan, on their refusal of a
Petition, with the same pernicious Design; but because I must confess you were
most carefully tender of censuring the Counsels of those Fathers, and T. B.
discovers himself too openly calumnious in those Impeachments, I have done, and
commend us all to God's Grace and Mercy.


Eucher. T. B. is one of those Men, who love to speak evil of Dignities, and
the things they know not, supplying the Narrowness of his Understanding with
Rage and Bitterness, for which I heartily remit him to God's Mercy.

But as for your Fathers, and all the venerable Numbers of good Men fallen in
this Change, I compassionately beseech them tenderly to lay these things to
heart, and unanimously to think of some healing Expedient for our mutual Peace,
and Joy. There have been, who, upon the bare dry Inferences of their Arguments,
have desired them to desist, and quit claim only, which is to ask, not show
them Charity. But might it not be thought too assuming, I think, I could
propose such a certain Scheme of Resolutions, as would so effectually close up
our present Wounds, as to turn all our Sighs and Sorrows into Joys, and the
Voice of Melody. But being conscious of my Station, and Measures, and doubtful
of your Misapprehensions, I forbear, and leave you, and your Counsels to the
Divine Conduct, and your own Piety, that you may happily recover that Union,
from which your Errors and Infirmities have too much alienated you, being
willing to hope, that (as St. Paul said of Onesimus) Perhaps you are departed
from us for a Season, that we should receive you again for ever. Amen.


ADVERTISEMENT.
WHereas T. B. Sec Let. page 29. and the impartial Reflecter, vehemently
contend against my Suggestion in Sol and Ab. page 11. that K. James's
Dispensation with the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy might look like a
Concession to us to transfer our Allegiance, they dealt with me disingenuously,
for that I made for them an effectual Answer against that Argument before, in
which my Conformist silently acquiesced. And that Answer I made is stronger and
sincerer than theirs, which I could teize to purpose, were I minded to wrangle.
But as I made Eucheres abide by just Reason then, so will I use no perverseness
now. And in truth that Passage was brought in, not with a Design to insist on
it, but only to introduce it for a smoother Passage to the Liberties granted us
by K. James's Coronation Oath. For which Cause I, laying no stress upon that
Argument from the Dispensation, have wholly omitted to contend with my
Adversaries on it in this Debate.

I hope the wicked Surmise of T. B. that His Majesty would murder the Princess
of Denmark and the Duke of Gloucester, (Sec. Let. p. 22) if her Royal Highness
should outlive the Queen, is now fully refuted since her Excellent Majesty's
Death, and it will become T. B. torepent for it in Dust and Ashes.

A Postscript to Mr. Richard Chiswell.
SIR,
SInce I was once an Author of yours in Solomon and Abiathar which you Printed,
and this very Debate was offered to your Edition once Anno 93, which you
declined with thanks to me however for the respect; I desire you to consider
what an ungrateful office you have undertaken in publishing a Reproach against
me and these very Books, in the University Man's Postscript to you. I am not
offended at this miscarriage in you that are a Man of Interest; but yet as you
may justly reprove your self, and your Solicitor, for this indecent way of
abusing your own Authors and Books, so I challenge you for a witness of the
Falsehood he has caused you to Print. Look upon my Letter to you sometime in the
Summer, 93. and therein you will find this Book offered you, which this
University Man tells you, (and by your Press the Nation) that it was written
since the Book remarked on to secure my self against a Storm. I shall makeshort
however, and desire you to remember my love to him, and tell him, that it is
the most und^cent sort of confidence in him of all Men living to despise any
Man's Writings for the present Government, and to accuse any Pen for Brutality
toward the Jacobites. He will know the meaning at your first suggestion by the
interpreting Conscience within him, or that part thereof that is left. And so I
dismiss you with assurance that I am

Your much obliged Servant, S. Hill.

A General Remonstrance to all Good Christians.
IN the name of God, the Sovereign Lord and Judge, I remonstrate and protest,
that I measure not any Men by their Fortunes, but their Merits, and that the
Sufferings of good Men increase my Affections toward them.

2. That I published Solomon and Abiathar, not for worldly Interest, nor with
any injurious design, nor through a vanity of Affectation; but on purpose to get
satisfaction from the learned in the Right of Communion to the avoiding of
Schism.

3. That particular provocations made that discussion, and it is publication
absolutely and inevitably necessary.

4. That after its Publication I waited two years for Satisfaction before ever
I entered into the present Communion.

5. That the Meditations in this Debate have satisfied me, that our Communion
is consistent with the most Catholic and Primitive Rules, or else I could not
have joined in it.

6. That for my own part I renounce all Ecclesiastic Servitude, and all
Principles leading thereto; and I do declare for an assertion of the Rights and
Liberties Hierarchical in contempt of all Persecutions, yet not to arrogate
that Liberty as a Cloak for Maliciousness.

7. That though Calumny urged the Publication of this Debate, yet that alone
should not have prevailed thereunto, had I not thought it of good use to
reconcile Dissensions, and to obviate many growing Prejudices.

8. That though it be a public blemish, that the great Authors of our present
Heresies are not yet censured by Authority, yet this does not illegitimate our
public Communion with the Innocent, who have no power to reform it, nor can it
in the least affect those that make their uttermost remonstrances against it.

9. That all Spiteful and Insincere Writers on the point of Communion design to
widen our Breaches, and are therefore utter Enemies to the Church of God, and
their Native Country.

10. That though I had many inducements to have collected all T. B's. Flowers of
barbarous and unparallel^d Railery into one view, yet that the odium thereof
may not reflect any prejudice on the better part of that side I have forborne,
remitting him to the friendly correction of his wiser and better Brethren, and
have so endeavored to temper this Discourse, as that all along Mercy and Truth
might meet together, that Righteousness and Peace may kiss each other. Amen.

After all, whosever is not satisfied to the full may hereby be however induced
to beware of censuring us for Men wilfully Perjured and Schismatical, since I
suppose the reasons here offered are not all contemptible, but may justify the
Author in his Design of quitting himself from the guilt of those black and
horrid Imputations, the natural Right of every suspected or accused Innocent.

FINIS.
Books Printed for John Everingham at the Star in Ludgate Street.
THE Spirit of Jacobitism or, Remarks upon a Dialogue between K. W. and
Benting, in a Dialogue between two Friends of the present Government.

A Sermon Preached before the H. of Lords at the Abbey-Church of St. Peter's
Westminster on Thursday the 30th. of Jan. 1695/6. being the Martyrdom of K. Chapter
I. By the Right Reverend Father in God Humphrey L. Bishop of Bangor.

A Sermon Preached before the House of Lords, at the Abbey-church of St.
Peter's Westminster. on Wednesday the 11th. of Dec. 1695. being the Day Appointed for
a Solemn Fast and Humiliation, by the Right Rev. Father in God James L. Bishop
of Lincoln.

Eight Sermon. Preached on sev. Occasions. 1. Of the Power and Efficacy of Faith.
2. The danger of Misinformed Conscience, or Mistaken Principles in Religion.
3. Of the Different Dispensations of Grace and of Impenitency under the best
Means of Salvation. 4. The Case of a late or Deathbed Repentance. 5. The
Straight and Certain way to Happiness. 6. Of Growth in Grace. 7. Of Murder
particularly Duelling and Self-murder. 8. Of the Shortness and Instability of
Humane Life.



