Solomon and Abiathar: OR, THE CASE OF THE Deprived BISHOPS and CLERGY,
DISCUSSED.

IMPRIMATUR.

Carolus Alston R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris Domesticis.
Junii 6. 1692.
Solomon and Abiathar: OR, THE CASE OF THE Deprived BISHOPS and CLERGY
DISCUSSED, BETWEEN EVCHERES a Conformist, AND DYSCHERES a Recusant.

En quo Discordia! -- LONDON, Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown
in St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCXCII.

THE PREFACE.
Good Reader,
I Am a Man distressed at the present Change of Bishops, that have looked on
the Fate of the Deprived Fathers as an Eclipse to the Church, a Reproach to the
Nation, and an Instance of dangerous Consequences. I have had hard Thoughts of
Them that accepted their Sees, the Chapters that Elected, and the Bishops that
Consecrated them, without any Remonstrance or Intercession for the Ejected; and
have prepared my self to lose all, rather than to acknowledge the Superinduced.
Yet fearing, on the other hand, lest I should, through an ungarded Zeal, be too
Censorious upon the Consciences of many Admirable Men concurring hereunto, I
resolved to discuss the Cause to my utmost, according to the best Notices I
could Remember or Collect; the which are here digested into a Dialogue, in
which I have set forth the Arguments of most weight (that occur to me) to the
fullest Advantage of either side, according to the Sense of the opposite
Parties. In which, where either Dialogist remains unanswered, there I my self
am at a fault, and know not how to make a satisfactory Reply to my own
Conscience. This is therefore to beg the Learned World, to succor me in these
Defects: And because the Deprived have not the Privilege of the Press, if they
on their Part will give in their Corrections or Informations to my Editor, I
shall receive the Favor with all Gratitude, and do promise them all just
Secrecy. The Design being First to be enabled and instructed hereby what to do,
to quiet my own Conscience, which is dearer to me than all worldly Interests;
and Secondly to provoke the Learned to offer such Discourses hereupon to the
Public, as may settle others, that are under the same Dissatisfactions with my
self.

Solomon and Abiathar: OR, THE CASE of the Deprived BISHOPS and CLERGY,
Discussed, between Eucheres a Conformist, and Dyscheres a Recusant.
Eucher. BRother Dyischeres, I have undertaken this Visit on purpose to invite
you next Wednesday to a small Treat, where you will meet with several your
especial Friends, among whom I promise you a very hearty Welcome.


Dyscher. I am very sorry that I cannot answer so kind an Invitation, that Day
being our Fast Day, on which we that are ejected as Offenders, with our
constant Adherents, do Solemnly humble our selves before God, to reverse his
Displeasure, provoked by the Deplorable Disloyalty and Schism of the Nation, in
rejecting the true King, and the sincere Bishops and Clergy, for their bounden
Conscience and Loyalty. It Is surely, Brother, a time for Sackcloth and Ashes,
and not for Diversions, since the Glory is departed from Israel, and the Light
of God's Countenance is gone from us.


Eucher. I do as heartily bewail all the Evils that have happened in this
Nation, on occasion of this great Revolution; but when we consider, that in the
midst of Men's Impieties, the Goodness of God has not been cessant, but (as his
way usually is) out of the Evils of Men has produced a most eminent Good in
the Redemption of his own People, and Faithful Children, and this endangered
Church, from the Inundations of Popery and Bondage; the Innocent, as they are
to deplore the National Impieties, so are still obliged to sing the Songs of
Sion in this yet happy Land, for that God has not forsaken, but visited his
People with a great Salvation, in not leading us into Temptation, but
delivering us from the Evil. And it is to you a greater Infelicity than your
Deprivations, that you have not concurred with us in these sacred Blessings,
Joys, and Exultations.


Dyscher. As if the present State were not worse than a deluge of Popery! For
then the Church would have saved her Integrity, though not her Ease. Now the
Daughter of Sion is become an Harlot; the generality of her Children apostate,
and unchurched; and the Faith and Communion is with the few, who have rather
chosen to suffer Affliction as the People of God, than to dwell in the Tents of
unrighteousness.


Eucher. Zeal is an excellent Flame of Spirit, while it is under Rule and
Moderation, but otherwise there is no Wildfire more raging. And such a kind of
Fury it is to charge our Submission to the present Constitution, to be an
Excommunication, ipso facto, even before it can be proved to be a Sin. For
admitting it to be a Sin, yea a crying Sin, yet every such Sin does not ipso
facto unchurch single Persons, or public Societies; most certainly they do
not, if the Principles of Doctrine, or Opinion, whence these Sins receive
encouragement, do not destroy the Churches Fundamentals, or Structure; which
our Conformity certainly does not: But an authentic Act must pass in order to
a state of actual Expulsion. Nay, we assert the Church of Rome still to be a
Church, notwithstanding her great Breaches made upon the Beauty of Holiness;
nor do we unchurch the Eastern Churches, notwithstanding their great Disorders
and Confusions. And can this Change in our Church parallel the Corruptions of
these, who having no Judge but God, do yet remain Churches in all their
Pollutions?


Dyscher. Admitting then that you are not actually unchurched for want of an
Ecclesiastical Judge, yet if your Apostasy merit it, so that good Men may not
maintain any Religious Communion with you, without danger of encouraging you,
or defiling themselves, or offending other Men's Consciences; this is enough to
justify our Secession. For hereupon we brake off from the Communion, as well
as Sovereignty, of the Roman Church, though in her we own the Essentials of a
Church.


Eucher. Though our Church justly and absolutely rejects the Roman Monarchy, yet
she will not refuse any lawful Communion or Correspondence with it in any good
Ecclesiastical Negotiations consistent with Integrity, saving still a public
Remonstrance to all her Pollutions. So you should communicate with us in all
that is Lawful, especially since it is possible, and by you fairly supposable,
that (if we do amiss) we do so through Simplicity, and want of Understanding,
which you might easier heal by Accommodation, than by a severe Rupture and
Separation.


Dyscher. We carefully observed this Method, while you only conformed to the
present Temporal Powers, but did not Eject your Fathers and Brethren from their
Stations in the Church; but now you have broken the very Essential Bonds of
Ecclesiastical Communion, and begun the Schism, in admitting Intruders into the
Room of them, who were ejected only for practicing the Doctrines of the Church.


Eucher. If their Ejection be only for Adhering to the Doctrines of this
Church, or the Laws of God, I will allow you, that they are persecuted, by the
Church as well as the State: But this will require a very clear proof, ere we
can be justly charged with so great an Impiety.


Dyscher. This Church has ever Taught us to preserve an untainted Loyalty to
our lawful Sovereigns, which with us come in by Inheritance; and accordingly
our Oath of Allegiance binds us to the King, his Heirs, and [Lawful]
Successors; and this Obligation cease not, till Death, or Resignation
dissolves it: Neither of which happened in this Revolution.


Eucher. If by Resignation you mean a formal voluntary Act and Deed, passing
away the Title Royal, then I deny that Death only, and Resignation, vacate our
Allegiance; for many Public Authorities are void by mere Cession, and
Desertion; which is indeed in Law equivalent to a Resignation. And such a
Cession here happened, which the Estates in Convention judged a Virtual
Abdication of the Sovereignty; and of this (being a Point of Law) they were to
us at that time, and in that juncture, the most Competent, Authentic, and
Final Judges; which we are the more to submit to, since the Kingdom has
ratified their Proceedings in a second Parliament. And though K. James abroad
condemns them, yet that is no Argument either that they were unjust, or
inauthoritative. It Is granted that this Church preaches up an indispensable
Loyalty to the Sovereign, during the Tenure of his Sovereignty; but when a King
is fled from his Throne into Foreign Dominions, or does not exert any Royal
Power or Presence to his People, the Estates of this Land are the Supreme
Domestic Judges upon the Tenure of the Sovereignty; which is not to make them
Judges of the King's Person, but in the want of his Person, of the State of the
Kingdom, and the Rights of the Nation, in order to Settlement. Nor is it a just
Exception, to deny the Authority by which they sat; for by what Authority was
that Free Parliament called, or sat, that voted in King Charles the Second?
It Is prodigious Peevishness to require a King's Presence, or Commission, when
he is gone, and has left all in Anarchy. In such Confusion, howsoever they
come together, they are the Supremest Council of the Land. And yet by the
Practice of all Nations, and the Reasons of Peace and Settlement, the Estates
of any Nation, being invited by a victorious and unresisted Power, may come
together and Treat with him that thus calls them, though he has no antecedent
Authority (strictly taken) to call them. So that the Churches Loyalty is to
follow the Civil Judgment, concerning the Object of our Loyalty, and the Tenure
of Sovereignty.


Dyscher. Supposing them then, in a state of Confusion, proper Judges of the
Tenure of Sovereignty, which they determined abdicated by K. James; yet how
could they pervert the Hereditary Law, and Rule of Succession, that is
Fundamental to this Crown?


Eucher. I answer hereunto, That the general and ordinary Rule of Succession to
this Crown is Hereditary, and in this we are very happy against the dangerous
Consequences of ambitious Competitions: But in extraordinary Interruptions, and
Convulsions of State, against the ordinary Course, our Laws and Constitutions
do allow the Estates such a King as can actually be had for the time being,
till the ordinary Rule can be fairly recovered; and in this also we are equally
Happy, if we would but know or see it. This in Fact is evident from all the
History of our Succession. The Heirs Lineal have submitted to it; the many Acts
of Parliament, yet in force, made by Extra-lineal Kings, and the concurrent
Judgment of our greatest Lawyers, under Hereditary Kings, even since the
Reformation, without any Remonstrance of this Church, or any Hereditary King,
are an Authentic Demonstration hereof; and Bishop Overal's Convocation-Book
comes up to it. And my Opinion is, That in the late Oath of Allegiance, the
word [Successors] was added after [Heirs] on this very self-same ground, That
though Heirs, by the ordinary course, are the Legal Successors, yet others
legally may succeed in cases extraordinary; for I will not be so bold as to
say, That the Oath required Allegiance to unlawful Successors. And the
nonobservance hereof has been the occasion of so many Paradoxes or Absurdities
in Discourses upon this Point.


Dyscher. What! Can he be Legal that thrusts out the Legal King, or Legal
Successor?


Eucher. One King by a Legal War may thrust out him that, till he was thrust
out, was Legal King of his own People: For the first offending Prince loses not
his Sovereignty to the offended merely by the offense, till actually thrust out
by the offended. And even an unjust Potentate, though he cannot, according to
Legal Justice, out a King against whom he has no legal Cause or Right of War;
yet if he does do so, and the Subject. People cannot help it, and he enforce
himself upon the People for a New King; our Laws in this concur with the Laws
and Practice of all Nations, in allowing our Estates to determine for us in
such Exigences, as is manifest in the long Contentions, and many Turns between
the Houses of York and Lancaster; and the Sin shall lie only on the Injurious,
and not on them that submitted to an inevitable Fate of things. And yet in our
case, upon the Cession of K. James, the Hereditary Succession was not violently
broken, but altered by consent of the next Heirs antecedent to the P. of
Orange; which shows, that the two next Heirs judged that their Father had
effectually deserted the Crown, and were content, for the Preservation of the
Nation against the Power of France, to admit before them a Prince of the Blood,
whose great Interest abroad, and whose personal Abilities of Conduct in
Counsels, and War, might be a Wall of Defense, as well to the true Royal Heirs,
as to the Religion, Rights, and Liberties of the People. Upon all which put
together, I think we are bound by the old Laws, and Oath of Allegiance to the
King, his Heirs, and Successors, to pay Allegiance to K. William and Q. Mary;
and that it is a breach of those Laws and Oath to deny it them.


Dyscher. But suppose the Violence done to the rejected Prince be in it self
essentially unjust, and unnatural, and contrary to the Moral and Eternal Laws
of God and Righteousness; can humane Compacts ratify a wrong, and justify, or
confirm what is essentially injurious? And must even the Priests of the most
High God consecrate and confirm such Rapes by Oath, and Religious Sponsions?


Eucher. What would you infer from hence?


Dyscher. Perhaps the deprived Bishops and Clergy, considering the Relation
Their present Majesty's stand in to K. James, and the Subjection due from all
Natives in this Kingdom, as well in as out of Parliament, may think this a
Breach of the Moral Laws of God, and not to be confirmed by their Oath.


Eucher. Then first I answer, The Internal Immorality of all Actions must be
carefully distinguished from the Civil Consequences of them. Now the Iniquity
is not to be justified, but the Legal Consequences may be admitted, even upon
Oath. Wars, and Victories are many times unjust, yet they that suffer the
Injury, lawfully submit to the unlawful and injurious Demand of Submission; as
in Piracies, and other like Tyrannies. A Son by fraudulent Arts gets judgment
in Law, and seizes his Fathers Estate and Body by Execution, and starves his
Father in Prison. This Man's Immorality is damnable; yet the Judges, Sheriffs,
and the other Officers are innocent, because their Offices are not concerned in
the Natural Relations, or Duties, but only in what is of Civil Importance, and
Cognizance. A Lord of a Manor (to which adheres a Court Baron) is unjustly
outed in Law by his Son, to the certain knowledge of several Reversioners.
These, when the Estates revert to them, must be sworn to the Homage and Fealty
of the Lord that is in by Law: Must these Men refuse Homage, and lose their
Estates; or may they swear it to the actual Landlord, who is visibly Legal,
though not honestly Rightful? I for my Part must determine for the Swearing,
since all Lords and Tenants must be admitted for such, that are in by the Law,
though at the same time Men are to detest the turpitude and baseness of the
Recovery. And in such Cases, the ejected Lord never blames the Tenants for
Perjury. Upon which clear Resolution in the General, I will descend to the
Particular before us; and suggest that Men should be very careful of judging
others, especially Supreme Powers, and much more how they act upon such private
Judgment, to the endangering the Peace of humane Societies. Which I offer, not
that Their Majesty's Cause needs such a Shade, but to oppose the Command of
Christ against Men's nimble Censoriousness. And indeed here it would be an hard
Task, from the Fifth Commandment, to Charge K. William with subjection to K.
James, either upon his being his Nephew, or Son-in-law, were I willing to urge,
or be urged upon that invidious Point. And the Princess of Orange was in Duty
bound to follow her Husband's Fortune, Order, and Authority; even against the
Will of her Father, and this with a more plenary Consent, if she judged her
Husband's Cause to be just, she violating no Decencies, due by the Fifth
Commandment to her Father, which are consistent with her Husband's Rights, and
Interests, and in her rightful Power to perform. As for the inner Motions and
Counsels of Their Majesty's Minds, they are not of Human, much less of Civil
Cognizance, and it is fit for us to leave them to their proper Judge, that is,
God. Though if the King's Design be what his Actions apparently tend to, to spend
himself for the Delivery of Nations from Tyranny and Bondage, against all the
Enemies of humane Liberties and Peace, he is certainly the greatest, and most
desirable, and will be by God's Blessing, the most Honorable and Glorious
Prince, that perhaps ever arose since the Days of Constantine the Great: I am
sure we feel the Blessings of his Care, for which many of us ungratefully
traduce him. And so much for that. All that we are concerned in for our selves
is, not whether in Moral Justice they might desire or accept this Crown, but
whether this Nation might, under its then Exigences, yield it them; or whether
it being yielded them by the Public Act of this Nation, private Subjects may
not, or ought not to acquiesce in this Settlement, and give assurance thereof
by Oath, or otherwise; for if we might have thus yielded in those Straits to an
unrelated Prince, we may as well to the related; because the Personal Relation
affects not otherwise our Civils, the Settlement of which we must admit, if not
as we could wish, yet as things will bear. And I ask you, whether in good
earnest you think no Settlement must be admitted, under Powers procured by
breach of God's Commandments?


Dyscher. What if I should say, No?


Eucher. Then I will say, few, or no Changes of Government must be submitted to
in the whole World; which Persuasion, as it is opposite, perhaps, to the First
Introduction of Armed Powers, so it must afterward assert them de jure
unchangeable. Since there is never any such Change without the Breach of many
Divine and Moral Precepts. Killing, Robbery, Deceit, Covetousness, false
Accusations, Lies; Pretenses, Subornations, Perjuries, Treasons, etc. are the
usual Methods, and Introductories to such Changes. And yet when Settled, all
Ages, Heathen and Christian, abide by them. By our Laws, though the next Heir
to the Crown kill the King, (though his Natural Parent) he shall not be barred
the Succession by Inheritance, though by all moral Equity, and supposable
Intentions of Royal Parents (were there no positive Constitution herein) he
should be disinherited.


Dyscher. But in such Cases, the King would be Dead, and all his Rights and
Titles with him, and the Heir without Competitour. But in our Case it is, and
'twas far otherwise, the King being alive, and pursuing the Recovery of his own
Dominions.


Eucher. Then it is not the Breach of God's Commandments that incapacitates the
Prince of this Crown, but the Life and Contention of K. James. But if his
Tenure be extinct, as it has been publicly judged by this Nation, our Oath to
him ceases, though he contends never so much for the Recovery.


Dyscher. But this new Oath obliges me to act unjustly against K. James's
Recovery, whereas the whole World knows this Crown to be his in Right.


Eucher. That it was his, the World knows; but the World is not so knowing that
it is his, neither from the Moral Justice, nor Civil Forms of Law. The Question
of Justice depends upon the first Originals, Process, and Issues of the War;
and of this there is no Authentic Judge but God between the Two Princes;
though as to us, this Nation has justified K. William's Cause, which is to
conclude upon us; and as to the Forms of Law, K. William is now legally
Invested. I do not say these things bind K. James from endeavoring a
Restitution, as being without the Power of them, never in Law subject to them;
but they bind us to defend our selves and our present Governors under this
Settlement, with the Suffrage of the greatest Laws of God, Reason and Nations.


Dyscher. But this Oath of Allegiance seems to imply an Assertion of Right to
this Crown in K. William and Q Mary, since Allegiance follows the Right, and
this you will yield to be a tender Point to be sworn to.


Eucher. But, First, it is certain, that this Oath expresses no Form of
Affirmation concerning Right, but is purely promissory of Allegiance to the
Sovereigns actually Regnant. And it is certain, that the Estates in Parliament,
imposing it, intended no more to be sworn, since they rejected the Motions made
for an Assertion of Right. And though that, and the ensuing Parliament, judged
their Admission of K. William and Q. Mary, to be in their Lawful Right, rebus
sic stantibus, yet they bound not us to swear so; but only upon Oath, to
promise that Allegiance due by our Laws to Kings, thus actually admitted; which
I here Remark, that you may not here Object the Intention of the Imposer, to
make us swear what they judged to be Right. And here also I must further
advertise you, that the Courts Assigned to Administer this Oath, being the
Authentic Interpreters thereof, and the Imposers Intention, never gave an
Interpretation Affirmative of Right (that I ever heard of) when consulted
hereupon; but on the contrary, I am very well assured, that several Courts have
given, and admitted such Senses, as the most tender Recusant might have sworn
to, and in which Men as Loyal as themselves concurred.


Dyscher. The Laws and Judgments of Men many times permit, and require
Iniquity, and the Prevarication of Courts, in the admitting Senses not intended
in the Oath, on purpose to elude it, is a mere mockery of God, Humane Powers,
and Men's Consciences.


Eucher. Whether Courts prevaricate in their Judgments, or no, private Persons
cannot judge to any Civil Effect or Obligation; and so what they determine must
be taken for Law, till Condemned by a Superior Court, or nulled by the
Legislative. And as to their inward Sincerity, God alone is to be their Judge.
But supposing the Courts may warp the Design of the Oath, and the Law, on
purpose to ease tender Consciences, what prevarication is there in these tender
Consciences, that Religiously took care to have an innocent Sense
Authoritatively admitted, on which, and no other, they would take the Oath?


Dyscher. This was a color pretended only to save their Estates; for if they
took the Oath really, they took it in the Sense of the Imposer, and not the
feigned Intention, but if they did not take the Oath at all, then is the State
beguiled by a Pretense, which is not agreeable to a Christian, much less to
Priestly Sincerity.


Eucher. If these Men had made Reservations in the Oath they took, Insincerity
might have been justly chargeable on them; but if they demanded of the Court
the Imposers Sense, and the Court gave an Innocent one; and they declared they
took it in that Sense so given in Form of Law, and no other, they certainly did
not prevaricate with the State; nay, it had been a Prevarication to have taken
it in any other Sense, than what the Court had given. And if they really took
not the Oath as the Parliament intended, they took it as directed by Their
Majesty's Judges, and could take it no otherwise; and if Their Majesty's by
Their Courts declared their Sense in the passing the Act for the Oath in favor
to all innocent and tender Consciences, I hope it was no Insincerity to accept
that Lenity, and Ease, and at once to save their Stations, and their
Consciences, and the Public Peace of Church and State.


Dyscher. But what if a Man be persuaded of the Impiety of this whole
Revolution, and thinks that the Vengeance of God will fall upon the Nation
hereupon, can he in Piety swear himself a Party to those Sins, on which he
expects God's dreadful Judgments?


Eucher. If Men's Minds be entangled in wrong Notions, they can act well no
way, neither with, nor against their Persuasions. But then such Men's
Infirmities, how pitiable soever, must not obstruct Public Constitutions. Now
if such Persuasions be well grounded, there must be a Public Rule of
Conscience to justify them. And here I demand, what Law of God manifestly
makes it a Sin, to comport with Civil Powers, settled according to the Forms
and Laws of Nations, though many Immoralities have led the way, and
Preparations to such Settlements? They, that act sinfully, to introduce such
new Powers, have Cause to expect God's heavy Displeasure but they that
contribute no evil to the Change, but submit to it, when publicly settled, are
perhaps one sort of the Meek, that shall inherit the Earth, in yielding that
active Obedience, which St. Paul requires to the Powers or Authorities in
being; and St. Peter to the Humane Constitution. And therefore were there no
other crying Sins of the Nation, The (...), 1 Per. 2.13. Denotes the Acts of
Settlement to be of Humane Law, Right, and Forms, though, the Authority of the
Persons thus Settled or Constituted be Divine: And it is very harsh to
understand it for Mankind.
this peaceable yielding to Humane Constitutions needs not be dreaded. So
little ground is there for those your Superstitious Jealousies.


Dyscher. It Is easy for Sophistry to put fair Glosses upon foul: Matters; but
if K. James ever return, these Recusants will be able to make a better Plea son
their Cause, than you will for yours. And though they may be Persecuted again
for their Religion; yet can they not suffer as Traitors, and Evildoers. And
herein they comfort themselves, though they are for Conscience sake killed all
the day long, and are counted as Sheep appointed to be slain. But you! What
will you say, when it shall be demanded of you, by what Authority you
transferred your Allegiance without his Will? When it shall be objected, That
you were sworn to him, not the Estates of this Realm; and he, not they, had the
only Right of disposing your Allegiance?


Eucher. Upon such a Turn as you mention, I grant you good Answers may have no
Reception; for Swords and Guns have no Ears: But yet a good Answer may be
given, to wit, That we had his Authentic Grant for so doing.


Dyscher. That is strange.


Eucher. Did not K. James, in his Declaration for Indulgence, Dispense with the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy to all his Subjects?


Dyscher. That was an ineffectual and null Act in it self, as being contrary to
Law.


Eucher. Must the Law then be the Rule of Civil Actions both in King and People?


Dyscher. It must so.


Eucher. Was K. James's Coronation Oath a Legal Act?


Dyscher. It was so.


Eucher. Then by that he swore to assert unto this People their Laws, Rights,
and Liberties. Which Laws and Liberties do assign our Allegiance to the King
for the time being, though extralineal. And if the Lineal Heir may hang me as a
Traitor for breach of that Allegiance to an extralineal King, by which himself
was a while excluded; whether this Law be equal, or no, (though I believe it is
very equal) yet it is equal that the Subject should not be hanged for observing
that Law, by the same Prince, who may by the Law hang him for not observing it.
And they that venture so much upon their Integrity to K. James, if they break
the Laws of Allegiance to K. William, may be hanged by K. James as Traitors,
when he returns, according to Law. A fine color for Papists to dispatch those
Protestants, that by their being intowered, blasted all their fine Projects
upon our Liberties and Religion.


Dysch. But will not this infer Subjection due to O. C? was he not settled
much more absolutely, and strongly than K. William? And yet we see upon the
return of K. Charles the Second, all his Laws pronounced null, and all his
Adherents liable to Punishment, and needing a Pardon. And those Churchmen were
in the right, who refused the Engagement, though by your new Doctrines, they
resisted the Ordinance of God in O. C. to their own Damnation.


Eucher. To which I Reply, First, That his Acts had no Legal Validity according
to our Laws, because he was not King, and no Allegiance by those Laws was due
to him. Nor yet had he any Legal Form of Settlement, according to the general
Rules of Civil Laws. For mere Possession by force of Arms is no Legal
Establishment in a Throne by those Laws, till it acquire a federal Admission
and Homage in a Nation, either virtually by long Prescription of Public
Accordance, or formally by an immediate and public Act of Submission by the
Estates, or Representatives of a Nation. Now as O. C. wanted the Plea of
Prescription, so neither could, or did he pretend a National Contract, as
having no Lord's House, nor free House of Commons. On the Sense of which
Defect, he so earnestly, but vainly, struggled by Art and Force to compass it.
So that all the Power of O. C. acquired no Form of Right, or Legal Settlement;
and consequently the Laws of Allegiance to the Royal Heir, were still in force
and obliging; to which O. C. himself was by Law and Oath Subject; and being so,
could not be Sovereign at the same time. Upon which occasion I cannot but
highly commend that Notion of Compact, (which you so frankly scout) in that it
gives us Lawful Right to Repel Tyrants and Intruders, though it cannot
palliate Treasons against lawfully settled Princes. And for the further
recommendation hereof, I could particularly show, that it was the Form of
Settlement in all the Kings of God's own People, admitted by God at their
importunity, according to the then way and manner of the Nations: But this is a
Digression, and so I forbear to say more upon it.


Dyscher. Well! Admitting these your Arguments to be true, and with you
sufficiently persuasive to Conformity, what Inference do you hereupon draw
against the Recusants, who have other Notions to them convincing, on which they
build their Practice?


Eucher. First, I infer, that there is no ground for Recusancy; and Secondly,
much less for Separation from us; and our Public Assemblies, from which we do
not exclude you; and Lastly, That the Church is not guilty of Sin, in admitting
new Bishops and Ministers into the Places of the Deprived, considering the
Authorities, Causes and Consequences of things, and the Temper, with which the
Church submits to this Ecclesiastical Change.


Dyscher. The Grounds of Recusancy to us seem real, and yours nothing but Shade
and Varnish: But Secondly, admitting them to be true, yet not being obviously,
but intricately so, they who cannot arrive to a Conviction by them, are
certainly bound not to join in those Prayers, which recommend those unto God
for Sovereigns, whom we judge not such, against him who is our Sovereign, but
ranked among the Number of K. W's. and Q. M's. Enemies.


Eucher. But how comes this Change about? The Prayers for K. William and Q.
Mary were consented to by all the Recusant Bishops, and by them (for their
Officers without any Prohibition) sent to the Clergy of every Diocese, and by
them generally received. The Bishops were present at them, directed their
Clergy upon Consultation to use them. And thus things stood till the day of
their Suspension. No blowing the Public Trumpet against Perjury; no
denunciation of Anathema against these Prayers; but a general calm and candid
Concession, in that disputable Case to every Conscience, to act upon its own
best Light. How then comes it to pass, that we are all of a sudden Perjured,
and Apostate, and yet have no Public Instrument, or Means of Conversion or
Conviction. For against this it is unworthy to object the danger of Persecution.
When the Souls of Men, and the Churches Integrity are concerned, there the
Watchman ought not to wink, there the Men of God ought not to be silent, but
first loudly forewarn, and after as loudly labor to reverse the Evil. This is
the more Rational, in that we do not seem sine ratione insanire, but have very
momentous and weighty Reasons for our Conformity, which will excuse from wilful
Perjury, and which are not refuted; though where our Apologists happen to trip,
they are animadverted on with all uncharitable severity. And as to the danger
of Praying against K. James, it is certain the Prayers express him not; and if
you Rank him among the Number of K. William's Enemies, you may best know that,
but we do not so; for an Enemy is one that designeth to injure a Man; and we
are not sure K. James does so design against K. William; and yet if he does,
it is Lawful to Pray that K. William may therein vanquish, and overcome him;
that is, defeat him in that injurious Design; for no more can be intended in
these Prayers, for we Pray for no Man's, no King's Destruction, or Hurt, but
for all Christian King's, and Governors, even those against whom we Wage open
War.


Dyscher. But in the Service of the 29th of May there is a Prayer that voweth
Allegiance to Their Majesty's K. William and Q. Mary, and how can we upon our
Principles be present at that Prayer?


Eucher. Then forbear to be present at it, though I have been by a good Author
assured, That the Recusant Bishops did not at first stick at that, but that
some gave Directions and Consent to the use of it; and also, before their
Suspension, deputed Persons to Administer the Oath in the Execution of the
Authorities, and Offices Episcopal thus deputed; which must argue, that they
did not think that Ministry unlawful, or (which God forbid us in the least to
suspect) that themselves were not sincere.


Dyscher. You must allow Men to retract their Errors.


Eucher. And expect the Reasons of such Change, and not instead thereof an
inexorable Censure upon us, for no other Actions than what themselves
deliberately and long countenanced and authorized; and in which we can yet see
no harm, lest by condemning us to Penitence, they put themselves into the same
Crime, and under the same Expiation.


Dyscher. But, to come to the main, how do you acquit your selves from Schism,
in rejecting your Fathers and Brethren, driven by the State from their Stations
in the Church, for mere Conscience sake? For admitting them to be in Error, the
Error is in Points of Law, and the Obligations of Statutes, and the Oaths
enacted by them, in which the Judgments of Lawyers vary with the turns of
State. Have they done any positive Injury? Have they violated their Innocence,
or stained the Sanctity of their Order, that they should be cast out as
Reprobate? Is Error, in entangled Laws, Heresy; and fear of Perjury, and the
appearance of Evil, Infidelity? Such Judgment, I trust, will not pass upon them
in the Day when God shall gather and bind up his Jewels.


Eucher. The Temper, with which the Church admits this, is Mild and
Compassionate, and concurrs not without reluctance, and great sorrow, and so is
not in that respect Schismatical. Nor does the Church judge their Consciences
toward God, but with great deference, and Charity hopes and thinks the best;
which moderation I wish you could imitate under your present state. But this, I
confess, we think your Principles in their Practical Consequences (considering
the inflamable Tempers of Men) as resented by the State, to be dangerous, not
only in respect of Trouble, but of Sin, even Schism, and Sedition, both in
Church, and State, by the breaking of the one against the other. Which Dangers,
when the State presses the Church to remove, by exauctorating the Patrons of
those dangerous Principles and Practices, how can the Church, that thinks this
Demand of the State just, and rational, and necessary to be yielded to, deny
the Demand? For, in cases of danger from Men's Principles, the Church has ever
been wont to judge; not upon Men's Personal Morals only, or chiefly, but the
Soundness and Tendency of the Persuasions. In which whatsoever is contrary to
sound Judgment and Unity must be condemned, and the Fautors exauctorated, how
Innocent soever their Personal Morals be. For even some Men's Principles may be
too rigorously Pious, and have no other Fault, and yet in such the Church
discards the non-returning Patrons of them, when they grow up into a Flame. The
Montanistical, Novatian, Meletian, Donatist, and Luciferian Rigours (not to
mention several others) beguiled many Pious Men out of their Order, and out of
the Church: Her Prudence always taking Care to impose no Snare nor Yoke upon
Men's Consciences, above what the Equity of the Divine Laws requires. And sure I
am, that your Maxims of Loyalty are such as the State of Mankind admits not of,
and are repugnant to all Civil Composures; and therefore dissonant to the Laws
of Christianity. I will not here digress into Particulars; but supposing our
Church, that conforms, thus to judge of your Principles, can you think she
ought to assert you, in public Conduct of Men's Consciences, to the Dissolution
of our Peace against the Command of the Sovereign Powers, that are the
Guardians of it? The public Judgment regards the Tendencies and Consequences
of Men's avowed Opinions, and promotes, permits, or inhibits their Course
according as it sees them useful, tolerable, or dangerous in the Public Weal;
and particular Persons must be content to be bounded in their Actions and
Authorities by these Rules and Measures, or else farewell all public Order and
Peace. For supposing, for once, that all Recusant Bishops and Clergy had been
freely left to their own several Senses, Prayers, and Sermons in this present
State, some would have prayed, and preached up K. James, others K. William,
others neither. Diverse Parishes, diverse Prayers, diverse Sovereigns; in the same
Churches some would oppose, and some applaud the Minister with all manner of
Tumults and Disorders. And, even in those Liturgies, where no King were named,
the Prayers would be contrary under one common Equivocation; Bishop against
Bishop, Clergy against Clergy, Prayers against Prayers, Sermons against
Sermons, and People against People in the Public Acts and Duties of Religion.
And hence must follow a total breach of Sacred Union, which would speedily pass
into a Civil Sedition. So necessary it is to set Rules of Uniformity, which
those that will not stand to, may (if not must) justly be exauctorated.


Dyscher. Why then, it seems, you think our Deprivations not only Lawful, but
Necessary to avoid Schism; which we all the while charge upon you?


Eucher. Hold a little! I do not give you my own Judgment, nor yet simply the
Sense of the Church upon the Matter antecedent to, and abstracted from the Will
of the State. But this is the Sense of the Church, That since the State, to
avoid the above mentioned Confusions, decrees the Recusants to be deprived,
She, that thinks the Deprivation simply Lawful, does, upon Demand of the Civil
Powers, think it necessary; for that the Church must yield to the State all
just Security to Public Peace and Order; which cannot be, if she assert Men in
Authority, whose Principles must destroy it.


Dyscher. But what will you think, at lowest, equal, if the State had not
exacted Deprivation?


Eucher. That Is no great matter what I think, yet between you and me I will
draw out my Soul to you. First, I should have thought it rational, that all
Recusants should promise upon Oath not to disturb the State by Word or Deed,
but to abide by the Laws and Administrations of the Government. Secondly, That
they would Censure no Man for Conformity. Thirdly, That by themselves, or
others, they should execute the Offices of their Function according to the
present Laws, as most of the suspended Clergy did by their Curates and Bishops,
before the Day of Suspension, by their Deputies. And, upon voluntary Breach
hereof, to be deprived by an Ecclesiastical Judgment, authorized by Law. For
Order, Peace, and Uniformity there must be in all, especially Religious
Societies; and they that will not secure it, must be exauctorated, and not be
permitted a Public Power or Advantage to promote any kind of Confusion.


Dyscher. Well! But admitting the Recusancy to infer an Incapacity in the
Circumstances, and under the Restrictions that press the Church, yet they are
condemned by an incompetent Lay-Power, in a Spiritual and Hierarchical Censure;
to which, if we submit as Right, or Regular, we then give up all to
Erastianism, and a Bishop shall be but an Ecclesiastical Justice, and a Priest
a Church-Constable. To prevent which we are to stick to our Principles, that
the Judicial Power of Civil Authority is of Secular Virtue and Operation only;
but that the Spiritual Censures are not from the Swords of Princes, but
Apostolic Descent and Original.


Eucher. What sort of Censure do you hold Deprivation to be?


Dyscher. As to the Essentials of it consisting in a Divorce, and Excission of
the Priests Relation, Care, and Offices to the Souls of the People, it is purely
a Spiritual Censure, inherent only in Ecclesiastical Judicatories.


Eucher. But you cannot forget, that the Church is incorporated into the State,
from which it derives all its Temporalities; which are so intwisted with the
Spiritual Functions, by Mutual Constitution and Concord of Church and State,
that they cannot be separated. Now hereupon the State may judge in such
Matters, which appertain to it in the Church, having never quitted that Power
to the Church only.


Dyscher. It Is true, the Church Offices are thus concorporated with several
Secular External Concomitants; but the Accessory is to follow, not to lead the
Principal; and it is a bad Incorporation wherein the Body must Enslave; and not
be Subordinate to the Soul. I hope the Church in this Accord did not act
profanely, like Esau; sell her Birthright for a Dish of Portage; her
Spirituals to a Foreign Power for a few Secular Trifles. Rather therefore let
the State resume her own, and leave the Church to her own lovely Simplicity,
than usurp upon the Inheritance of our Lord.


Eucher. Will you deny all Lay-Persons a Right in all Spirituals?


Dyscher. In all Spiritual Authorities.


Eucher. Please you to define the Act of a Spiritual Deprivation.


Dyscher. Deprivation is the Effectual and Total Separation of a Spiritual
Person from his Charge, so as to make way for the Introduction of another.


Eucher. Is the Interest only of the Priests concerned in the Spiritual Charge,
or are the Souls of the People also interested in the Relation?


Dyscher. No doubt the Interest, as well as the Relation is Mutual.


Eucher. Are there any Causes which may dissolve this Relation, and vacate the
Charge?


Dyscher. Yes; all Flagitious and Pestilential Sins, as Apostasy, Heresy,
Schism, etc.


Eucher. Upon whom must the Punishment of Separation fall?


Dyscher. Upon the Guilty.


Eucher. Who must Execute it?


Dyscher. The Ecclesiastical Judge.


Eucher. But what if he be the Person Guilty?


Dyscher. Then is he to be deprived by his Superiors.


Eucher. What if he has none?


Dyscher. Then by a Synod.


Eucher. What if the Synod is to be called by him, or are confederate with him?


Dyscher. Then must they be left to God.


Eucher. But may not the Clergy and People, in the mean time, Separate from his
Authority, and his Communion, if he from the Chair recommend, or enforce his
Corruptions? or must they be bound to be humbly present at all his profane
Ministeries?


Dyscher. I yield they may go off: But who shall judge upon the Cause?


Eucher. If there be no other Superior Judge, then God is to be appealed to;
and in the mean time they must have a judgment of Conscience and Discretion for
themselves, what to do in such incorrigible Disorders.


Dyscher. Right enough! But this judgment of Conscience is not a judgment of
Authority, which is necessary to a total Separation, Deprivation, and Vacancy.


Eucher. Is it Cause enough to Separate, and to complain to other untainted and
Social Bishops of coordinate Churches, for Relief against the Spiritual
Impostor?


Dyscher. I must grant that, since this is the Original way of detecting, and
bringing Heretical Bishops to Ecclesiastical Order, or Censure; as is evident
from the most Ancient Church-Histories.


Eucher. What Relief can Social Bishops, or Coordinate Churches give in this
case?


Dyscher. If they cannot Reform, they may Condemn and Expel the Impostor.


Eucher. Have Social Bishops, and Coordinate Churches any Jurisdiction over
each other?


Dyscher. What if they have not?


Eucher. Then their Sentence is not of Authority, but only Conscience and
Discretion, and of no more Validity than that of the abused Laity and Clergy.


Dyscher. Well! How do you determine herein?


Eucher. I judge, that the People by judgment of Conscience for their own
Salvation, and the Churches Peace, may Separate from an Imposturous Bishop, and
address to other Social Bishops to consecrate them another, which they by the
like judgment of Conscience, without proper Jurisdiction, may do upon the
Notoriety and Incorrigibleness of the Evil. And this was very often and
constantly done in the Primitive Ages; and asserted for Right and Just by the
African Bishops, in the Cases of the two Churches of Asturica and Emerita, in
their Epistle extant, the 68 among St. Cyprian's Epistles, concerning the
Expulsion of Basilides and Martialis. For the Church is a great Body, whose
Health subsists by cutting off all putrid Members; in which all the Members are
unanimously to contribute: And if they, that ordinarily should thus remove the
Contagion, will not, they, that can, may, for the common Preservation of
themselves and the whole Body. I grant you, indeed, that a proper Act of
Spiritual Jurisdiction, as the Power of the Keys, Ordination, Degradation,
belongs only to the Ecclesiastical Governors, and are incommunicable to the
Laity: But it appears, that the Separation or Rejection of a Bishop, may, on
just Reasons, be Legally executed by those, that have no Jurisdiction; and the
Rectitude, or Obliquity of such Separations is to be judged, not upon the Point
of Authority, but of Merit. In all Scythia there was but one Bishop: Now,
supposing him an open Heretic or Idolater, who should deprive him? Might not
the People renounce him, and send to other Christian Provinces to consecrate,
or send them another? And might not the Prince justly eject him, and require
his People to concur in it for a new Successor?


Dyscher. But it is not the People, as a Church, in our Case do thus reject
their Pastors for Irregularity, but the Deprivation is an Act of Civil State as
such; so that these Instances and Allegations of yours come not up to us. For
they acted as Christians in the Right of Souls and Churches; this is an Act of
the Civil Power as such, and that for the pretended Security of Civil
Interests. Now what Right has the Temporal Sword to act in Spirituals, and
Matters purely Christian and Religious?


Eucher. Do not you remember, that our Church ascribes such a Power to our
Kings in Ecclesiasticals, as of Right appertained to, and was used by godly
Kings of God's own People, recorded in Holy Scripture? Which teaches us that,
as David instituted Holy Offices in the Choir, not required by the Law of
Moses, so Solomon deprived Abiathar of the High Priesthood, upon a provocation
merely in Civils.


Dyscher. To this I have many things to reply, but I will only touch those that
are most pertinent to our Case. First, That the whole Institution of the
Levitical Law was not of a Spiritual, but Carnal Sanctity, yielded them by God,
somewhat in opposition, and somewhat in conformity to the Egyptian, or other
Foreign Religions; among whom the Priesthood had been long subjected to, and
perhaps first instituted by the Scepter. And herein the Supreme Judgments in
Civils upon the Law, and Oracular Responses on Consultation about Peace, War,
and Temporal Actions, and Successes, were Essential to the Authority of the
Pontificate. And yet we find this High Priest not subject to any Ordinary
Power, till Kings were also given this People after the manner of the Nations;
among whom the Mitre was subject to the Crown. All which, put together, makes
Abiathar's Deprivation by a Temporal Power under that Constitution, Legal: But
from the beginning it was not so. Then there were Priests, who, till the Flood,
had the Government of the World without any Civil or Military Power; and that
Priesthood was in all its Intentions Spiritual. So that when our Savior came
not only to Restore, but even to Refine upon the Primitive Rules, he restored
the Priesthood from Vassalage, and founded his Hierarchy not in Princes, but
Apostles; not in armed, but in unarmed Powers.

Secondly, King Solomon did not properly and judicially deprive Abiathar of the
High Priesthood, but only commanded, or required him to quit it on pain of
death. For thus the words run, 1 Kings 2.26. And unto Abiathar the priest said
the king, Get thee to thy fields at Anathoth, for thou art a man of death: But
this day I will not put thee to death, because, etc. Verse 27. And Solomon
thrust out Abiathar from being priest unto the Lord. The LXXII render the 26
Verse thus; Get thee to Anathoth to thy field, for thou art a man of death in
this very day, but I will not put thee to death, etc. A man of death, our
Translation renders, worthy of death; but the LXXII render the words not so
much significative of Merit, as a menace according to such a Paraphrase: Get
off to Anathoth to thy field, (for [else] thou art a man of death this very
day) and I will not put thee to death. So that Abiathar here was put to his
Option, whether he would with dishonor retire from his Office, or suffer
Death; this latter being in the Rightful Power of the King, if Abiathar would
not yield in the former. So that Abiathar's Priesthood determined by his own
voluntary Cession, not the King's Ecclesiastical Censure.

Thirdly, Abiathar was not guilty of mere harmless and inseparable Error, as
our ejected Bishops and Clergy (if in an Error) must in Justice and Charity be
supposed to be; but of wilful, active, and actual Rebellion, against God, and
David, both which had before engaged and fixed the Succession in Solomon, and
so he could have no Plea or Excuse of Error, or Mistake; for which Cause he
silently submits to his Fate without Apology.


Eucher. But did not K. Solomon substitute Zadok in his stead, who was not the
Lineal Successor in the Line of Abiathar? And was not this as Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical an Act as possibly could be ministered in that Church, to which
the King's Substituting Bishops in the room of the Deprived seems Parallel?


Dyscher. When a Bishopric is Legally Vacant, we admit the King's Right of
Nominating a Successor; but we look upon his Deprivations to be Nullities, and
you have not proved Abiathar out by merely such a Deprivation. But however,
neither is Zadok's Case Parallel; who after Abiathar's Cession came in, in
Right of his own Inheritance, not the King's Donation. For you must Note, that
Zadok was the Primate of the House of Eleazar, in whose Line was the Legal
Seat, and Original Right of the Pontificate; but Abiathar was of the Line of
Ithamar, and he and his Progenitors had come into the High Priesthood, contrary
to the first Fundamental Rule and Law of Succession. Now when Abiathar quitted
the High Priesthood, he quitted it for himself and his Posterity, who had no
Claim thereto Originally Legal; whence it reverted of course to the House of
Eleazar, and therein to Zadok, without any Title from the King.


Eucher. But from hence I infer, that not only in Times of Subjection to
Heathen Powers, but even before they had any Kings in Israel, the Legal and
Ecclesiastical Rule of Succession to that Pontificate had been broken, and
another Constitution fixed, without any Schism in the Submission of the People.
For thus Eli and his Posterity, though of the House of Ithaman, enjoyed it
against all the House of Eleazar, to whose Primate however, by the Law, it did
belong. And hence I Argue, That though Bishops be unduly put into the Place of
others, unduly deprived, the People incur no Schism by submission to the
Intruder.


Dyscher. I beg your Pardon, Brother Eucheres, in this Point, since that Rule
of Succession was capable of exception in Cases of Uncleanness, Defect, or
other Irregularities. And further, God, that made that Rule, was not himself
bound by it, but had still a reserved Liberty and Authority of altering it: And
further, This Rule, did in all probability, permit a voluntary Cession or
Resignation; so far at least, that thereupon the Pontificate might change its
Subject, though the Resignation, or Cession, were a Sin of Profaneness. Now
some one of these Causes did most probably intervene to the change from
Eleazar's Line to Ithamar's; and from 1 Samuel 2.30. it should be founded in
God's Determination. But hence it follows not, that a Secular Power can pervert
a Divine Rule, and Ratify an opposite Constitution. What was done in the Age
of the Maccabees, and afterward by Secular Powers, against the Legal Succession
of the Pontificate, as sometimes it might be excused for want of the Lineal
Heirs or Genealogies; and sometimes Condemned for Bribery and Usurpation, was
yet admitted and ratified, on the post Fact by God; in giving those Intruders
the Spirit of Prophecy, Joh. 11.51. But this cannot argue for a Validity, if
the Lineal Heir had been known, present and capable, and the Intruder not
confirmed by God, the Founder of that Dignity. And I must further Remark, that
these Intrusions, though thus admitted by God, were Signs of a broken Church
and State, hastening to its last Dissolution, and so no just Precedent for the
Christian Church to follow, which is to continue to the End of the World,
except we must yield to Methods of Violation, that lead to our Extinction.


Eucher. Since then you are so hard to be moved by Scripture Instances, what
think you of the Appeal, which Constantine admitted from the Party of Donatus,
against Cecilian, after several Ecclesiastical Judgments, to which he added his
own final Sentence?


Dyscher. But surely Constantine did not admit this Appeal, with a Design to
pass a Spiritual Censure himself on the Offenders, but to Establish Justice in
Peace, by methods properly Imperial, if he should find the past Acts
Ecclesiastical insufficient thereunto. And to pre-occupate you, the same I say
of Athanasius his Appeal to the same Emperor, from the Council of Tire: For
Athanasius, in Matters of Faith, expressly denies Emperors proper Judges; and he
has other Sidemen with him therein among the Fathers.


Eucher. But in that Council Athanasius was Condemned, not for Faith, but for
pretended Immoralities; and in these Discussions, all Wise Men may be made
Judges, and Civil Powers are fit to be made such, or rather are such, in the
Right of their Civil Station; and this Athanasius must plainly own in this
Appeal.


Dyscher. But this does not hit the Point; nor does it insert, that Athanasius
believed the Emperor, being yet unbaptized, could himself either pass, or
rescind a Spiritual Censure, and that effectually; but he did thus Appeal,
either that the Emperor might punish the Offenders Imperially, or call a
greater and more equal Synod for a Rehearing, which afterward was obtained at
Sardica.


Eucher. But if the Temporal Powers, merely as such, cannot directly pass an
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Censure; yet all the necessary Externals to Sacred
Offices, as Time, and Place, etc. are in their disposal; so that they may take
away our Churches, Maintenance, Leisure, Liberty, and Place for Public
Assemblies, which amounts to all the Effects of a Judicial Deprivation; and
this perhaps is the only Power claimed by our Kings in this, and other like
Acts for Deprivation or Suspension.


Dyscher. This indeed by actual Force they may do; but this does not dissolve
our Relation to the old, nor infer a Title to a New Bishop, which is the Point
before us. Nor can they justly deny those Externals to the Church, though they
may to those that offend against her, on a just presumption of the Churches
consent, or her express Petition thereunto. And this was the Sense of St.
Athanasius, when he denied Constantius a Church for Arians in Alexandria; and
of St. Ambrose, when he and his Flock kept their Churches at Milan, against the
Commands and Terrors of the Emperor Valentinian, Junior, on the behalf of the
Arians; and of St. Chrysostom, when he at Constantinople denied the Emperor
Arcadius a Church, for Gamas his Arian General. And even in Places not
Consecrated, Place, Time, and Air, and Liberty to do good, are the Primitive,
Fundamental, and undeniable Rights of the Innocent: Else the Christians had
sinned, in using these for Christian Worship against the Laws Imperial. So that
as yet you can fix no Spiritual Powers in Secular States, that can extinguish a
Christian Man's Christian Graces, Rights and Orders.


Eucher. But our Lawyers tell us, that our Kings are mixed Persons, and not mere
Laity; and so by a joint Act of Sacred and Civil Authority, may execute
Spiritual Censures, as far as their Authority has a mixture of Spirituals.


Dyscher. The Doctrine of Lawyers is with us no Divinity; and St. Ambrose and
Theodosius the Emperor had other Senses, when the Bishop would not permit the
Emperor, being of the Laity, to come within the Chancel, or the Rails of the
Altar; and the Emperor acknowledged the Prohibition to be properly Just and
Episcopal, and the Rule Ecclesiastical, which he would never more neglect
during his Life.


Eucher. But though he is of the Laity, yet being Christian, by virtue of his
Christianity, and Civil Sovereignty too, he may have Christian jointly with his
Civil Authorities: For as Christian, he may be reputed as Head, and
Representative of the whole Christian Laity, whom you grant before at Liberty,
to separate from an offensive Bishop, and to procure another from Social
Bishops. Or if you will not admit him the alone Representative of the Laity,
then you may take in the Lords and Commons, the whole Christian Legislative,
into that Number, or Body of Representatives.


Dyscher. This Notion, as specious as it is, will not hold; for then the King
and the Legislative must be professed Members of our Churches Communion; but
they claim this Right by virtue of the Royalty, and Legislative Power, though
the King be not of our Religious Communion. They will stand by all their Acts
in or about Ecclesiasticals, though contrary to all the Canons of
Ecclesiastical Integrity, or else I will not give Twopence for the Act of
Toleration. And in this Case, before us, they deprive the Bishops on a
pretended Title of the Civil Sovereignty, for the just and necessary security
thereof; and there is the same Reason for Heathen Monarchs to deprive Christian
Bishops on the same Pretensions.


Eucher. I am almost weary with struggling; and for that Cause will admit, that
an Act of a State Christian cannot not alone vacate a Spiritual Charge, by any
Divine Law, or Primitive Canon, or Prescription; yet such an Act received, and
admitted by the Church, may from her concurrence have a just and legal Effect.
And then upon this Notion the Statute of Deprivation ipso facto, must be taken
for a Law upon the Church, to eject such Recusants totally from their Stations;
and the other Laws for Conge deslire, etc. as Commands on the Church, to admit
those the King Recommends to the Sees, which either are, or by the State are
reputed Vacant. And then the concurrence of the Church to these Laws of the
State does actually, and (upon just Causes) rightfully exauctorate those, whom
the Statute dooms to Deprivation. And to say Truth, in all Ecclesiasticals,
it is the actual Concurrence of the Church, that gives the Statutes an
Ecclesiastical Effect and Issue, and so, though the Original of the Deprivation
be Secular, yet the Form is Ecclesiastical; and in this the Essential Virtue
thereof lies, and is properly Spiritual and Christian. Though then the Laws
require, yet the Chapters, Bishops, Clergy, and Laity, do thereupon actually
reject, and deprive one and admit another Bishop, etc.


Dyscher. Then neither the Act for Deprivation, nor the Writ of Conge deslire
do alone vacate the Sees; and if not, by what Authority can Chapters proceed to
Elect, and Bishops proceed to Consecrate new ones in the stead of the actual
Incumbents?


Eucher. Because under all the Obligations Causes herein, the Church ought to
empt the Sees of such Incumbents, that are dangerous to the Civil State, by
Acts of Separation properly Ecclesiastical, and so it does; the Dean and
Chapter of the Metropolitical Church taking the Jurisdiction, till the Chapter
Elect, and Bishops Consecrate another, etc.


Dyscher. Who are the proper Judges of this Duty, to eject a Bishop at the
Command of the State?


Eucher. All Parties pressed thereunto by the Civil Powers, with a proper
Judgment of Conscience for themselves and the Church, though not of ordinary
Jurisdiction over the Bishop. For when two powers contest, and require my
concurrence, I must then judge on which side Justice lies, and to which
thereupon Duty binds me; and to that I must adhere, and do my Part to hinder
the other Party, from opposing that which I am in Duty bound to. And when
Chapters and Bishops thus acting, obtain the consequent Concurrence and
Comprobation of the whole Church; their Acts have as good an Authority from
Humane Consent, as the received Docrees of Councils, whose Validity stands or
falls with the subsequent Sense of the Churches in common.


Dyscher. The silence and yielding of the Churches in common, consequent upon
the Violences Men admit, for fear of Persecution, signifies no certain
Persuasion or Conviction, that the Deprived suffer nothing but Justice. If our
Cause had been Condemned in your Convocations, you had brought a more specious
Argument, for the Sense and Censure of the Church, than this thin Pretense,
that carries no Color nor Shadow of Probability.


Eucher. Even here I will endeavor to satisfy you, though I shall not gratify
you. The General Conformity of most Bishops, Clergy and Laity; our sending a
Convocation at Their Majesty's Precept, shows we own Subjection to them, and
Condemns the Recusancy as an Error, which of what Consequence it is, every
Man, that thinks it Error, sees. And the silence of the Convocations under
this Statute of Deprivation, argues their Opinion to be, that they were in this
to yield to the State.


Dyscher. As if this silence was not the result of Fear and Treachery, rather
than Judgment! for this we charge upon Liberius, and the Council of Ariminum,
when their concurrence with the Arians is urged in Defense of Arianism.


Eucher. Had the Convocation first stoutly decried the Statute, as Liberius,
and that Council at first did Arianism, and had upon Menaces, or Experiences of
bodily Persecution retracted their Remonstrances, then such a forced Compliance
might have been censurable for Cowardice; but here being nothing of this, but a
calm and constant quiet under the Procedures of the State, it must be resolved,
that the Sense of the Convocation judged it allowable.


Dyscher. But if the Church shall yield, without any Remonstrance, to such
Intrusions of Civil Powers upon the Churches Liberties, Censures, and
Authorities, then for Cause or no Cause, we shall be liable to Suspensions, and
Deprivations, according to the Tides of Humor and Temper in our Legislatours,
and thus fall under the Arbitrary Disposals, which the High Priesthood of the
Jews suffered under Heathen, and the Greek Patriarchals now suffers under
Mahumetan Princes; a Blemish not to be endured by any Church, whatsoever it
incurs for the Opposition.


Eucher. You may remember, that I have yielded to you, that the Consent,
Public and Actual Concurrence of the Church, is necessary to give an
Ecclesiastical Effect to Civil Ordinances, in Matters of the Church. And so
here, the Church is to Judge, whether she may, or must in Duty concur, or no;
and hence a Right essentially belongs to it, to examine all the Causes of the
Secular Demands. So that if she finds there are no Grave Reasons, to move the
Church to the required Severities, she ought to disobey, as my Lord Bishop of
London well did, when required to Suspend Dr. Sharp indicta causa: Nay, so he
ought to have done, had the King been de jure Arbitrary, and of Despotick
Power. Thus if a Prince shall trifle, and require a Bishop to Hawk, Hunt, play
at Tables, run Races, etc. up on pain of Deprivation, though none of these
things be simply Unlawful for Men in General, or for a Bishop to avoid a
Persecution; yet upon neglect of such enjoined Follies, no Man will judge a
Deprivation Just, nor the neglect a Sin; nor ought the Church to admit
Deprivations on such improper and unreasonable Demands. Thus Naz. in Epitaph.
Patr. (...).
Gregory Nazianzen the Father, in the behalf of the Church of Cappadocia, tells
Julian, That they will stand by the Bishop they had set in the Church of
Cesarea, whatsoever Law or Violence he should offer to the contrary. And I will
grant you, that the Church has this Right, against the Violence of Christian,
as well as Heathen Princes; since it is the quality of the Cause, not the
Prince, upon which the Church is to Act; Else under the Name of Christian, many
Un-Christian Pranks may be obtruded on the Church, to the Reproach and Ruin of
Christianity. And whether the Church yields to, or opposes the Laws of the
State, justly or unjustly, must not be judged alone from the Rights of Civil
Sovereignty, but upon the Reasons of the Subject Matter, in which the
Concurrence of the Church is required. And in our Case the Church judges it
Lawful and Rational, for her to admit the present Law of Deprivation, from the
Weight and Reasons thereof against the present Recusancy. And our Judgment
herein has greater Foundation than those Concurrences and Acts of the Church,
in the High Commissions Ecclesiastical had heretofore in the Suspensions,
Deprivations (in several Reigns of Reformed Princes) that were purely the
Executions of a Royal Authority, delegated to the Judges, upon little (many
times) and captious Exceptions, relating sometimes to Civils, sometimes to
Ecclesiasticals.


Dyscher. But here the chief Delegates, pronouncing Ecclesiastical Censures
were generally Bishops, though the Assessours were several of them Lay
Personages, without whose Vote or Privity nothing was to be done. And this with
good Reason, the Causes censurable being many times mixed, and so likewise the
Judgments, that is, partly of Civil, partly of Ecclesiastical Importance. But
though the King's Commission did give them License, as to Place, Matter, Form,
and time of Proceeding; yet the Ecclesiastical Censures, had their
Ecclesiastical Virtue from the Ecclesiastical Authority of the Ecclesiastical
Delegates pronouncing them, as in the Censures of Excommunication is most
Evident, this being plainly not of Regal, but Apostolic Authority, and the
Power of the Keys, which none of our Reformed Princes would assume to
themselves, or delegate to mere Lay-Judges.


Eucher. But what think you of the Deprivation past on the Bishops, etc.
Recusant to the Royal Supremacy of Queen Elizabeth, by Virtue of an Act of
Parliament; which by their Lay Power did overbear the Episcopal, and upon whose
Order herein stands our Ecclesiastical Succession from those Bishops, that
succeeded in the room of the Deprived?


Dyscher. You must note that these Recusants were guilty of the false Doctrine
of the Papal, against the Regal Supremacy: Which false Doctrine had been before
Synodically condemned in the Reign of H. VIII, and so effectually stood, though
Q. Mary martyred, deprived, and exiled both the Orthodox Bishops and Clergy,
for this really, as well as for other Orthodoxies. Therefore those deprived by
Q. Eliz. were either Apostate from the Doctrine they had before professed in
entrance into their Stations, and so were ipso facto irregular, and to be, de
jure Canonico, deserted of all; or else they came into the rooms of Men
unjustly deprived, and so were Usurpers; or into Places really vacant; which,
for not owning by Oath and Doctrine the Regal Supremacy, they were not capable
of, by the still unrepealed Canons of the Church, and so were, in truth, not
true Bishops, nor Ministers of the Places they assumed. Well therefore might
they deprive them of the Bishoprics, etc. that were in no Canonical Title the
true Proprietors. But here ours deprived were all true Proprietors, under no
Irregularity, through Apostasy, false Doctrine, or uncanonical Deficiencies.


Eucher. You frame new Notions now, not started, nor conceived then. For, upon
your Plea, they should never have sat in that Parliament, nor have been owned
as Bishops before that Act past; but yet so they were in all their Titles. And
in the Disputation at Westminster, in the beginning of the Queens Reign, the
five Popish Bishops were owned with all their Titles by the Lords of the
Queen's Privy Council, and by the Protestant Disputants themselves: Even as
Hooper also owns them for such, and the whole Popish Convocation for such, in
his Epistle that he wrote to it in the days of Q. Mary. And in that Station
they had continued upon their former Installations (except only such, who had
offended, or usurped the Places of Men yet in being, and expecting restitution)
if they would have taken the Oath of Supremacy. Here therefore the State enacts
and Ecclesiastical Deprivation; and it is all one, whether you will say on a
Civil, or Ecclesiastical Point; if on a Civil, then the Case is the same with
ours; if Ecclesiastical also, then that Parliament entered more upon
Ecclesiastical Matters, and Authorities than this has done; and yet you
condemn not that Parliament as Schismatical, nor the Church admitting it
Apostate: Why then charge you this upon our State and Church now? Here is no
doctrinal Point of Theology, which the State determines against the Right of
the Church herein, but only a mere question in Civils, who is my Sovereign to
whom my Allegiance is by Law due. Which is a Debate, not for a Synod, but a
Parliament; and to whose Judgment, in pure Civils, all Subjects must submit;
and the Church, as such, has nothing to do in the Decision. And Dr. Hammond,
whom, I suppose, Men of your Principles will not Censure for Schism, or
Disloyalty, Tract. of Schism, c. ^.
justifies Q. Elizabeth's Deprivations for that Recusancy, immediately; On the
Right and Power of the Supreme Magistrate to make Laws for the securing his
Government, and to inflict the Punishments prescribed by those Laws on the
Disobedient: And for this true Right he thinks all Government is concerned. And
concludes there was no Injustice in that Act of the Queen's, which divested
prove their Fidelity to their Lawful Sovereign.


Dyscher. The Doctor indeed thus states it; but he sticks to the Lawful
Sovereign.


Eucher. Are you obliged to enquire into the Sovereign's Lawful Title?


Dyscher. Yes, surely, in order to just Allegiance.


Eucher. What, as a Christian, or a Subject?


Dyscher. Primarily as a Subject; but, secondly, also as a Christian in a state
of Subjection; the Duties of which the Rules of Christianity require me to
perform.


Eucher. Very well! For here your Christianity refers your Obedience to the
Secular Laws and Constitutions, and gives no Laws or Rules in Civils it self.
And in truth, the Church, as such, is a Stranger, and the State its Hospital,
while she is traveling from hence to her Heavenly abodes. Now every Stranger,
hospitably received, is obliged to all the Laws of Hospitably on his part; that
is, Fidelity, and Unconcernednesss in the Oeconomick's and Interests of the
Hospital, and all reasonable Defense against Violences offered to the Master,
or His Family, etc. and is not obliged to take notice of Titles, and
Competitions. So the Church, as such, if Hospitably received by the State, is
quitted, as a Stranger, from Curiosities about the Civil Titles. But, as
Christians, are Natives, or Denisons, and so Subjects, they are to the
determined by the Civil Laws, and Judicatories, and Constitutions; else there
must be eternal Seditions, since it is not possible in Fact, or Law, that every
single Person can have Cognizance, or Unanimity. And here I will ask you one
question, relating to us, as a Church. Whether he that has unjustly gotten
into a full Settlement upon another Prince's Dominions, ought to Succor the
Church in those Dominions?


Dyscher. He ought to quit them.


Eucher. This may be in most Cases, though not, perhaps, Universally true: But,
if he does not, is he obliged to Succor the Church, during his Government?


Dyscher. He should, as it seems; for I know not how to say the contrary.


Eucher. What! Though the Church refuses Subjection, and professes Hostility to
him?


Dyscher. I am not so hardy to affirm this.


Eucher. The result then is, That if the Imperial Powers be bound to Cherish
the Church, the Church must be obliged to Secure them of her Fidelity: And if
particular Members refuse, they are Enemies to the Church, as well as to the
State: And therefore their Deprivation in the Church the more Rational, and
perhaps (as to the actual Administration of the Functions) absolutely necessary.


Dyscher. Are you at that again?


Eucher. I pray attend, and give Righteous Judgment. The Subjects of England
owe Allegiance somewhere, either to K. James or K. William, this is certain.
They then, that refuse Allegiance to K. William, reserve it to K. James; by
which, at his Command, they are to engage in an actual War against all
Conformists as Traitors and Rebels; and this People are to be Taught to do upon
pain of Damnation. The Church, in the mean time, has admitted K. William, and
given him Allegiance against all Hostilities. I am not here concerned whether
side is in the right Allegiance, but shall only observe, That no Priests can
well Execute their Ecclesiastical Functions to a People, whom, at another Man's
Pleasure, they are bound to Destroy; to the effecting, actually whereof, there
wants nothing but opportunity. I do not say, That these unfortunate good
Bishops, and Clergy would concur to, or promote such Butcheries; but am firmly
persuaded, that a Nature, better than their Politics, would govern their
Practices: But then it is certain, that Nature it self must condemn their
Principles, and their very Bowels render them disobedient to their own Laws,
and Civil Maxims; which, if pursued, must expose this Nation to an utter
Destruction at K. James's Pleasure: It Is necessary, therefore, that
Ecclesiastical Union comport with the Civil, in order to a Just and Mutual
Peace.


Dyscher. Was there no way to have healed this Rupture before it grew so wide?


Eucher. I cannot tell that; but the time assigned by the Law, and the King's
long forbearance to fill the Sees after the day of Deprivation, argues a
willingness in the State to give Men time to consider, and to allay their
Prejudices, and use means to come under the Public Shelter; of which the
Restitution and Preferment of Dr. Sherlock is a clear Instance. But the
Recusants seem against all Entreaties wanting to themselves, and an happy
Coalition. They have made no offers, no applications, but receeded further from
Sacred and Civil Communion than at first they did; which neglect must look like
a contempt, at least, if not an hatred of the Constitution. Nay, I know a
Diocese, where the Bishop utterly suppressed a Petition, signed by his Clergy;
and ready to be presented to Their Majesty's for the Restitution of the
Metropolitan, the Bishop, and the Suspended Clergy of that Diocese. And I have
it from a good Hand, that a Motion for such a Petition was stifled in the Lower
House of Convocation, upon a Report made of my Lord Archbishop Sancroft's
Request to the contrary. The Reasons of this Aversness did, no doubt, unto
them, seem Pious and Rational; nor do I condemn them: But how far this
Discharges the Clergy in their admission of new Bishops, besides the Causes
Original, God must judge; and these Fathers have reason tenderly to consider,
who would use, or admit no Means of continuing with us, but have left us in
great Distresses, for the loss of them, whom we so much love; and for the
Prejudices and Scandals, that arise upon this unhappy Occasion.


Dyscher. The state of things is very Deplorable. May the Grace of God lead us
into all Truth, Wisdom, Meekness, Gentleness, Charity, and an Universal
Conformity to his Holy Will in all our Actions and Sufferings; That no Evil
Root of Bitterness, Consoriousness, or Schism may sour or corrupt our Spirits,
but that the Love of God may guide us in the midst of all Temptations; that at
length, in this divided People, Mercy and Truth may meet together, and
Righteousness and Peace may kiss each other.


Eucher. And let all the People say, Amen, Amen.


FINIS.

