THE NECESSITY OF HERESIES ASSERTED and EXPLAINED IN A SERMON AD CLERVM.

By the Author of the Catholic Balance.

And published as a Consolatory to the Church of England in the days of her
Controversy.

Exodus 14.13. And Moses said unto the people: Fear ye not, stand still, and see
the salvation of the Lord, which he will show to you to day; For the Egyptians
which ye have seen to day, ye shall see them again no more for ever.

IMPRIMATUR, Concio haec cui Titulus [The Necessity of Heresies Asserted.]

July 14. 1688.

H. MAVRICE.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard.

MDCLXXXVIII.

1 COR. II. 9. For there must be also Heresies among you, that they which are
approved, may be made manifest among you.


HE that sedately considers the whole extraction and process of Evil, and the
more prevalent diffusion of Vice and Lewdness against all the dictates of
Virtue and Piety, while the lenity of the Divine Providence seems cessant and
unprovoked: and that discerns the strength and operation of External
Temptations unto evil, the passive easiness of our Tempers to admit them, the
prodigious looseness of motion in all our Animal Affections, and their delusive
influence upon our Understandings and our Wills: and that examines what
originals gave being to the Malice of the Apostate Legions of Darkness to
alienate them from their God, and to solicit our subversion likewise by
indiscernible methods of Imposture, must necessarily fall into Origen's
Resolution, Orig. contra Celsus, 1.4.(...)
That if any Subjects, discussible among men, be hard to be traced, the
Generation of Evil must be reckoned as one of them. And yet, as if the natural
difficulties of our understanding herein had not been sufficient, even the
Scriptures themselves seem to multiply our Perplexities, while, notwithstanding
the fundamental truth of this Religious Principle, That God is not the Author
of any moral Evil, they yet proclaim unto us, not only a natural, but a moral
necessity of Sins and Offenses. Thus our Savior preaches a natural necessity
of them: Matt. 18.7.
It must needs be that offenses come, but woe be to him by whom the offense
comes. And my Text averreth a moral necessity of Heresies and Divisions.(...),
etc. For there must be, there ought to be, there is need that there he
Heresies. Nay, that, which more astonisheth, is, that the very Mediator of our
Peace, the great Henoticon of the whole World, in reconciling all Mankind in
one Body unto God, of whose days it was prophesied, that the Lamb should lie
down with the Lion, tells his Apostles, at their first mission, Matt. 10.34, 35.
That he came not to give peace, but a sword; to set a man at variance against
his Father, and the Daughter against the Mother, etc. And when we consider the
malevolent nature of those Seeds of Discord in matters of Religion against all
Societies, either Sacred, or Secular, and the blessed means of Eternal Life
also; that these Mischiefs should become necessary, and the result of
Christianity it self, seems a stupifying Riddle, and (that which fills me with
all horror) gives color for the public allowance of all Heresies and
Blasphemies whatsoever. Since then I am entangled in a Text so intricate, and
withal so necessary to be explained, I must offer you the Petition that Origin
made to his dear Ambrose, in his adventure against Celsus, That you would give
me your Prayers to the Supreme Fountain of Wisdom, that he may so invigorate me
from above, and shed his heavenly Dews upon my present Meditations,(...), that
the savor of this Discourse may administer grace unto the Hearers, and be like
the savor of a Field which the Lord has blessed.

The weight then of this Text puts us upon a threefold Enquiry.

I. What Heresy is. II. What Necessity there is of Heresies. III. What use we
are to make of them.
I. Heresy then, literally and generally importing Division, in Philosophy,
among the Greeks, signified the separation of Men into different Schools and
Parties, upon the account of different Doctrines and Opinions, without any form
of Excommunication, Execration, or Extermination from common and friendly
Society. Among the Jews Heresy consists in varying from, and neglecting the
Traditions of their Rabbis, and is by them prosecuted with the severest Curses
and Anathemaes whatsoever. The Divisions that have appeared in the Christian
Profession, are by St. Basil the Great, in his first Canonical Epistle to
Amphilochius, distributed into three Classes, viz. Parasynagogues, Schisms and
Heresies. The first are Uncanonical Assemblies of men unto voluntary and
irregular Exercises of Religion under the pretense of a more active Zeal.
Schism is a breach of Peace, Union, and Orderly Government in the Church, under
the wanton Claims of a greater Liberty. Heresy is an insurrection against the
Church, and her Doctrines, derived from the Scriptures, and universally
received from the beginning, under the imputation of falsehood or deficiency,
and the ostentation of a purer and more perfect Knowledge. Which being the
greatest of all Religious Confusions, and by the Apostolic and Canonical
Discipline exposed to the strictest Censures of the Church, will need some
Characteristick Description, to the end, that we may at present aggravate the
doubt, how so vile a Monster should become necessary to the Church, that so
directly intends her dissolution. Tertullian charge the Heretics of his Age
with many Irregularities against both Discipline and Morals: Tertull.
Praescript. adv. Haer.
That they made no distinction between Heathens, Catechumens, or Christians,
but imparted their Mysteries equally unto all: That they reputed Simplicity to
be prostration of Discipline: That they kept Communion with all Parties against
the Church: That they were all proud, and all pretended knowledge: The very
Females, how pert, and daring to assume the very Offices of the Hierarchy! That
their Ordinations were rash, light and unconstant; that sometimes they set up
Novices, sometimes Men engaged to the World, sometimes the very Apostates of
the Church: That they had one Bishop to day, and to morrow another: That he
that was a Deacon to day, to morrow sunk to a Reader: And he that was to day a
Priest, to morrow reversed to a Layman; for that with them the Laity assume
the Services of the Priesthood: That their whole preaching was not to convert
Heathens, but pervert true Christians; not to build any thing, but destroy the
Church: That they conversed with Magicians, Juglers and Sorcerers. Thus far
Tertullian. Nay, that which is most remarkable, Heresy was at first the issue
of Sorcery; the Grandfather thereof being Simon Magus; who transmitted his
Sorcery and Heresy together to his trusty Disciple Menander, who in both
out-did his Original; and thus descended all the various Brood of the
Gnostics, and other like Vermin, who took their Names from the respective
Founders or Principles of their several Impieties. They blasphemed the Creator,
Moses, and the Prophets; vilified and corrupted the New Testament at their
pleasure; forged false Gospels and Writings for Canonical, and set up false
Prophecies as Revelations of the Paraclete: They were sometimes circumcised
with the Jews; sometimes they sacrificed with the Heathens: consecrated the
soulest Pollutions into Mysteries; and betrayed true Christians up to all
manner of Persecutions. This, and a much more dreadful, account we have of
Heresies from the Fathers and Ecclesiastical Histories. From whom let us ascend
to the Apostles, and see what they say of them. St. Jude calls the Heretics of
his time Epist. of St. Jude, v. etc.
ungodly men, that turned the grace of God into wantonness, denying the only
God, and our Lord Jesus Christ; filthy dreamers, defilers of the flesh,
despisers of Dominion, blasphemers of Dignities, clouds without water, carried
about of winds; withering fruitless trees, raging waves of the Sea, foaming out
their own shame; mockers, separatists, sensual, and without the spirit. Saint
Peter foretells of the same Heretics, 2 Pet. 2.
That their false Teachers should bring in damnable Heresies, and deny the Lord
God that bought them; men of unclean lusts, despisers of Government,
presumptuous, selfwilled, blasphemers of Dignities, having eyes full of
adultery, constant in sin, beguiling unstable Souls, having covetous hearts,
cursed children, forsaking the right way, and following the way of Balaam;
wells without water, clouds carried about with a tempest, speaking great
swelling words of vanity, and thereby alluring those who were clean escaped
from them that live in error. St. Paul says of those that made Divisions at
Rome, Romans 16.17, 18.
That they served not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly; and with good
words, and fair speeches, deceived the hearts of the simple. Of the Cretan
Heretics he instructs Titus, Tit. 2.
That they were fond of Jewish fables, being turned from the truth, and being
disorderly bablers and deceivers. He foretells Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.
That the time would come, in which they would not endure sound doctrine, but
according to their own lusts would heap to themselves Teachers, having itching
ears, turning away from the truth, and enclining unto fables: 2 Timothy 3.
That they should be lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of
good men: Traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of
God, having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof; creeping into
houses, and leading away captive silly women laden with sins, led away with
diverse lusts, ever learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth. Which, if we take one collective view of the whole aggregate of
Heretics, we shall find all these abominations universally diffused among
them: if we consider them distributively, it is not to be understood, as if
every Heretic were actually guilty of all these open Villainies, but that in
every Heretic there are more or less of these Impieties, being the proper
productions, or improvements of their several Heresies, according to the
several tempers and inclinations of Men upon which they operate; since Men
incline to different Heresies according to their previous dispositions unto
evil, in which they are confirmed by those pleasing errors which they admire
and entertain.

Now if such be the Complexion, Genius, and Original of all Heresies; if their
Extraction be so apparently from, and their tendency leads unto Hell, how falls
the Church under a Necessity of them? Why should St. Paul say there must be
Heresies? Shall we make them the issues of an Eternal Fate, or of the Anti God
of the Manichees? Or shall we father them on an Horrible Decree of God for an
irrespective and inexorable Reprobation? Or shall we dream with Lactantius,
That God originally put the Devil upon the amazing employment of scattering
Snares and Temptations among the Sons of Men? St. James cautions us against all
the least approaches to this jealousy of the Lord our God: Jam. 1.13.
Let no man say, when he is tempted, that he is tempted of God, for God cannot
be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man. Whereupon we must search out
for such a necessity of Heresies, as is imputable, not to the operative
Determination of God, but the Evils of Men: Since there must be Heresies, they
must be ours, not God's; They must derive from an unclean, and puddled, not
from a Divine Fountain, or Original: For, Let God be true, and every man a liar.

Except therefore only violent Force, All Necessity is either Natural, or
Moral: Natural, consisting in the proper tendencies of operative Causes to
their suitable Effects: Moral, in the reasonable proposals of Wisdom or Equity.
And both these kinds of Necessity are either Primary, Simple, and Absolute: or
Secondary only, and Consequential, with respect to antecedent Causes,
voluntary, or unnecessitated. Thus in Naturals: That I am, is to me of absolute
necessity; but that, under the folly of too much Wine, I talk and act idly, is
from no primary and absolute Necessity, irresistible from the beginning; but
consequential only on my Intemperance. That I can see, is from a natural
Necessity absolute and primary: but that I actually must see, is consequential
to the opening of mine Eyes. Thus likewise in Morals: That a Man love the Lord
his God with all his heart, and with all his soul, is primarily, simply, and
eternally necessary: but the moral Necessity of my Repentance is consequential
only on my Sin. That I do exact Justice to every Son of Man, is of necessity
absolutely moral: but the moral Necessity of repairing Injuries is secondary,
and introduced by my former Wrongs. Upon which preliminary distinction of the
kinds and forms of Necessity, we are now to examine, First, what Natural, and
Secondly, what Moral Necessities there are for the admission of Heresies in the
Christian Religion.

First then, The Truth and Sanctity of God require us to resolve, that there is
no natural necessity of Heresies primitive, and absolute, by the operation of
him, that made not Death, nor has any delight in the destruction of the
Living. For from the beginning, the original state of Man needed no kind of
evil to corrupt it. But all the natural necessity of them is secondary,
suppositive, and consequential to precedent Sins, and those actual too, and
most times habitual. For though other Immoralities begin to break out in the
very first essays of our tender Understandings, yet the inculcations of Heresy
have no such early influence on our Fancies, but require antecedently a longer
sense and experience of Good and Evil: To which, when a Man is arrived, he
cannot be precipitated into the guilt of Heresy, without want either of Piety
or Care. For though a Soul aspiring with all care to a great devotion, may in
the infancy of that piety be ignorant of many excellent Doctrines, yet by this
care he will espouse no Principle absolutely as fundamental, either in heart or
prosession, which neither the Voice of Nature, nor the Rules of Faith have
clearly revealed to his Understanding: nor oppose those Points that, either by
the Light of Nature, or of God's holy Word, have ever been received by the
Universal Church as Fundamentals. And he that does otherwise, lets himself
loose by his own fault: and if thereby he necessarily falls into Heresy, it is
a fatal mischief consequential to his inconsiderate negligence. What man is he
then that fears the Lord? him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose.

This then sufficiently proves the Negative, that no Heresies can be incurred
without foregoing faults: but we are here further to enquire what positive
influence there is in Sins to determine the Sinner to a consequential Heresy.
For though it is plain, that every Heretic is a Sinner; yet not that every, no
nor the foulest Sinners are always Heretics. So that upon the supposition of
Evil, it yet appears not that there is a natural necessity thence consequent,
that there must be Heresies.

To the elucidation whereof, it is to be observed, That though every Sinner is
not a professed Heretic, yet in every Apostate Conscience there are Seeds of
Heresy, that suggest thereunto false and imposturous Consolations. Thus the
Voluptuous heretically thinks his Pleasures innocent, and the boons of Nature:
The Covetous, in like manner, thinks his Disease prudence, frugality and piety
to his Offspring: The Proud and Ambitious fancies his Airs to be magnanimous:
The Severe, conceits his Cruelty to be Justice: The Hypocrite believes that God
is contented with the outside, or searches not the heart: The Violent thinks
there is no Providence, or Judgment to come: And the most Orthodox Sinners have
too easy thoughts of the Divine Lenity, as if it could, or would connive at
men's Iniquities. Thus Error is fatally interwoven with our Vices; and the Oil
that feeds the Lamp of God enkindled in our Souls, is precipitated by the
violence of our Lusts; and being thus extinguished, leaves us in night and
folly, and the shadow of death, in which we must needs plainly follow every
Ignis fatuus, every twinkling Fancy or Delusion, that occurs in all our aims
and appetites of Good and Evil. So that when so much matter for Heresy is
preparatively collected in a vicious Soul, it is naturally necessary and
consequent, that it break out into an actual flame, when our Vices are grown up
into Obstinacy and Ostentation, and are solicited to Ambition by incidental and
suitable Motives and Temptations.

For we must observe, That the natural necessity of actual and avowed Heresies
results not purely from a mere internal Vice, but also from the apposite
concurrence of external Allurements; upon which, if the vicious Soul be
absolutely intent, and a profession of Heresy be the only way in prospect to
attain them; there it is naturally necessary that the uncorrected Appetite fall
into Heresy. Thus Thebutes at Jerusalem, Novatian at Rome, and Arius at
Alexandria, (as Epiphanius reports him) and many others elsewhere, through the
eager desire of an Episcopal Character, denied them by the Church, fell into
revengeful Passions also, and thence into Heresy by a natural consequence.
Thus Liberius, Bishop of Rome, after he had witnessed a good Confession, and
for that went into Exile; yet impatience of the pressure, and an appetite to
the Glory of the Roman Chair being too predominant, hurried him into Arianism,
and a subscription to the Arimin Confession. Now here was no primary Necessity
that these Men should be ambitious, and from thence heretical: but being under
the impotency of Ambition, against which they had not duly watched; and a
profession of Heresy being a ready way to attain it, they were naturally
driven by the blasts thereof into Acts heretical by a secondary and
consequential Necessity. For when Men are once subdued to their Lusts, they are
passively hurried away to all the precipices of Evil, to which the stings of
Passion or Appetite shall at ranndom drive them. And as this gives a clear
account of that natural Necessity, by which the Vices of particular Men dispose
them to Heresy: so if we take a prospect of the general diffusion and
prevalency of Vice in the Affections of Men, in order to their secular
Interests or Pleasures, by the love of which the Powers of Darkness support
their tyranny over the Souls of Men; to destroy all which, Christianity was
instituted from above; the general reasons of things will conclude it
necessary, that the Faith in Christ Jesus must ever find many prejudiced
Adversaries, animated by Satanical Artifices and Solicitations to oppose and
deseat it: to compass which, no way is so effectual as to debauch its Purity by
perverse interpretations, and to render its Truth dubious by litigious
divisions: And Man being extremely prone to these ever since the dispersion of
Babel, it is natural to presage, that through so great enmity as Christianity
must needs meet with, by natural consequence Heresies and Divisions must be
framed against it. According to which Phenomenon, upon the general prospect
and tendency of things, and the various fermentation of Passions upon the
introduction and process of Christianity, our Savior foretold, that of
necessity, consequential to the Prejudices and Lusts of Men, there must be
Offenses, and that the event, tho not the intent of his coming, rebus sic
stantibus, would certainly determine in inevitable variances between the
nearest Relations, and blow up an unquenchable flame in the very bowels and
vitals of both Kingdoms and Families.

But, beside this natural Necessity of Heresies consequential to the sinful
state of Man, I told you that the words of the Apostle seem to import a moral
Necessity for the propagation of them.(...) etc. There ought to be, there is
need there should be Heresies. A Proposition of a strange complexion at the
first glance, and at which the weak and prejudicate may be easily offended. For
there have been Opinionists, that have thought it unbecoming the Divinity to
permit a mere possibility of moral Evil in the World, which it had been
congruous to the Supreme Wisdom and Goodness to have made a System of
immaculate and unchangeable Holiness to the Lord; not considering that such a
model would preclude the Sovereign Regalia of God's Government, and put his
Creatures out of a condition of Religious Obedience, in that whatsoever Acts
and Operations of the Creatures are not voluntary, but the passive productions
of an Almighty Influence, are not reducible to the formal Reason and Schesis of
a Legislative Empire and Government. But our question here is of a greater
difficulty. For though a possibility of Evil be fundamentally supposed in the
institution of Laws, yet what moral Necessity is there of it in any healthy or
just State of Government, especially in the State of Religion? Is it not
enough, under so pure a Theocracy, to admit a possibility of Offenses, as
the(...), or(...) the Need nots, and vain Excrescencies of Man's Life? but must
they be annumerated to the Necessaries, and adapted among the mighty
Importances of God's Providence in the Conduct of Religion? This is that that
puzzles, this drives us to the(...). O the depth of the riches both of the
Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways
past finding out!

But since all Scriptures are written for the instruction of Devout and
Religious Souls, which God Almighty communicates to all, according to their
measures, studies and benefits; I will with all sobriety offer to
consideration, what seems to be the sair and clear account of the Divine Wisdom
in this particular. In order whereunto, we are to examine three things. First,
What that is which St. Paul here calls Heresies, and of which he asserts and
moral Necessity. Secondly, What God does toward the production or propagation
of them. And thirdly, What kind and degree of moral Necessity there is to
induce God to such a form of concurrence as we shall discover in this Enquiry.

First then, When St. Paul says, There must be Heresies, he intends no
internal Principles or Passions heretical, of these he asserts no moral
Necessity in this place: but only on presupposition of these, he makes the
external eruptions of them in heretical professions to be morally useful and
necessary. This appears from the End in prospect, That they that are approved,
may be manifested. Now external Acts only can give us a distinctive sense of
Men's Qualifications, and so are only necessary to that use. So that the sense
is to be thus resolved: Since there among you men of corrupt and heretical
Principles against the Peace and Fundamentals of Christianity, with latent
Vices, whence these Errors spring, it is necessary and convenient that they
should break out into open and actual Heresies and Divisions, in order to a
detection of them, and a manifestation of the sincere. Which is the effect, not
of habitual merely, but of actual and professed Heresies.

Secondly, It is to be considered what God does, how far he concurs to the
production or increase of these actual Heresies. First then, As God instills not
the inherent Principles or Vices heretical, so neither does he promote them
into outward Acts by any influential force upon their Wills, at least not
ordinarily, nor in a manner obstructing their present power or liberty of
conversion, or suggesting greater animosity to their former prejudices. Though
otherwise, if were not unjust in Almighty God to compel an inward Heretic,
against his designs of concealment and secrecy, to discover his ulcer even by
immediate impulses on his Soul, when else the secrecy would be more injurious
to others, or more hurtful to himself, than an open detection. For so it
happens, that an undiscerned Heretic may transmit an undiscerned venom into
many Members of the Church by the advantage of an outside Communion, which he
perhaps may not in an open state of Separation; according to that wicked Maxim
in Politics, Of making ones self of that Party which he designeth to destroy.
And many times an open discovery exposes the Heretic to such shame,
condemnation, and means of conviction too, as may end in his Conversion, which
he might have no advantage of under a covert privacy. Secondly, God, not
restraining the Heretic from a liberty to return, may put him into such
occurrences of Objects, Acquaintance, or Examples, by attending unto which he
may give vent to his Thoughts and Principles, in order to the attainment of
some flattering Hopes. And in this God does no evil, because they are no
inevitable Stumbling Blocks to him, he being at liberty to recall himself, and
not yield up his Soul to the unlawful Appetites and Temptations that present
themselves before him. Thirdly, When a man has devoted himself to all Impiety,
God may justly deliver him up to the power of lying and Apostate Spirits, as he
did Ahab's wicked Prophets, to act him to all those kinds and degrees of actual
Sins and Heresies from which the hand of God shall not restrain them. Fourthly,
When Impiety is rampant, God may permit it a greater or less latitude of
acting, according as to his Infinite Wisdom shall seem expedient in the general
issue of things: by which greater or straiter limitation the Sinner shall not
be forced to any actual Crime, but only confined within such a compass, without
which he shall not be able to exert his Malice: Even as the Envy of the Devil
at Job was permitted Exercise, but with a precaution not to touch his Life. In
all which methods of God's positive, permissive, or restrictive Concurrence,
there is no tincture of the least Iniquity, not only from the just Causes, and
laudable Ends thereof; but because God infuses no evil Intention into either
the actual or habitual Wills of wicked Men, but only either infatuates,
permits, or encloses them, and their operations, as he sees requisite. For
that, which these Ways and Counsels of God are concerned in, is not the inner
Determination of the Impious Mind to the love or choice of Evil, in which alone
consists the guilt before God; but only at the most, the restriction of it in
its outward Actions, which considered separately in themselves, from all
relation to the Will that acts them, may be indeed occasionally hurtful, but
involve not in them the intrinsic guilt, which is purely seated in the Malice
of the Mind. For a Falsehood unwittingly uttered, is no Lie: and in
Manslaughter it is not Chance, but Intention makes the Murder. So that these
Divine Concurrences, touching only the bare external Acts of Heresy separately
from their Fountains, affect not the malice, nor the radical guilt of Evil, but
only the results and consequences of it (which are on this side the Mind,
wherein the guilt only lodges) with no other design, but to convert them to a
great and noble good. And if God, having dominion over the life and fate of
Man, may permit a violent Man to murder the Innocent, though the Murder be an
inevitable oppression of the Murdered, while God instills no malice into the
Mind of the Murderer; much more is the Almighty innocent in his Providential
Permissions of actual Heresies. It Is true indeed, that Heresy is the murder
of the Soul, whereas Homicide is only the destruction of the Body: but to this
I answer, That the murtherous tendency of Acts Heretical, is neither
inevitable, nor insuperable, nor irrecoverable. For the passiveness of the
Proselyte is voluntary, and so he is Felo de se, his own Murderer, though at
the temptation of a Seducer, and so cannot charge his murder wholly upon the
very Tempter, much less upon God, who did not force him to imbibe, but by his
Word, and the good motions of his Holy Spirit, forewarned to beware of the
Delusion; and in mercy to him offers him time, and means of recovery, e're the
poison determine in his eternal Death. And when to these Considerations we
shall add, That all these Procedures of Almighty God are occasioned by the
impulsive provocations of monstrous Impieties, and diffusive Corruptions, we
cannot condemn our Heavenly Father of Injustice, if he had no other end herein,
but only 2 Thessalonians. 2.11, 12.
To deliver up the ungodly unto strong delusions, that they should believe a
lie; to the end, they might all be damned who believed not the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness. But since this is not the design, but the event
only of these Divine Methods upon the finally Incorrigible; and there are many
gracious ends to the good of all Men in God's permission of actual Heresies, in
which consists this moral Necessity of them mentioned by the Apostle: We are
now smoothly brought to the third Consideration; What is the Moral Necessity
for their being in the World.

That therefore is Morally necessary, which either the Rules of Duty, or
Dictates of Wisdom recommend; and this either strictly, so that the omission
will be either a fault, or a damage: or else more freely in such a latitude,
that though the omission be not injurious, yet the observation will be
expedient: in which latter degree and sense, Moral Necessity is no more than
Rational Convenience, and amounts not to the force of a rigorous Obligation.
And both these kinds of Moral Necessity may be either absolute in the nature
and reason of the things themselves, or relative to antecedent Causes, of which
they are consequential; or to final Issues, to which they are ministerial by a
Moral influence and motion on the Mind. Which being thus premised, it is
natural to resolve, that the Moral Necessity of actual Heresies descends not
from any Laws of Duty, but from the Reasons of Wisdom: which, upon an
antecedent Supposition of wicked Men, and secret Heretics in the Church,
proposes the detection of them, in a manifestation of their Principles,
extremely beneficial and convenient. First, To the Heretics themselves, in
order to their conversion. Secondly, To the Wavering, in order to their
probation and settlement. And thirdly, To the Approved and Faithful, in order
to their glory.

First then, The permission of actual Heresies is intended by God to the good
of Heretics many ways. For first, While Men kept their Heresies close within
their secret Cells, the Catholic Doctors, not discerning the Hearts, make no
direct applications to them to reform and cleanse them. So that detection is
necessary in order to their better instruction. And secondly, During the
secrecy of Heresies within the Breasts of Men, they fondly imagine, that upon a
discovery they will take mightily in the World, and charm great multitudes of
Men into rapture and admiration, and that no Man will be able to gainsay them.
But so it always happens, that, tho Fools and Wretches may be imposed upon, yet
the Wise and best part of Mankind will despise and abominate what the Heretics
thought would ravish them: And thus collecting all their force of Truth and
Wisdom, will baffle and confound them, and hiss them off the Stage, and expose
them to the public Sense of Men as the Pests of Religion, and Agents of the
wicked One. Which Issues so defeating the false Hopes and Expectations of the
Heretic, together with the convictions of Truth to be found in the Labors of
those that refute him, the general contempt and abomination past upon him, the
reverberations of his Conscience, deserted by the Spirit of God, and scourged
by the Spirits of Darkness, whom he served, are proper and forcible motives to
Humiliation and Repentance, which naught but an habitual and obdurate Stupor
can resist. And yet if these prove ineffectual, the Lenity of God uses other
means to tire them out of their own Follies. For when men have once forsaken
the way of Truth, they travel into perplexing and endless mazes, from one Error
to another, either successive and consequential, or else casual and collateral.
For as Theodoret Theodor. de Curand. Graec. affectib. Ser. 2.(...)
observes: The ways of Falsehood are cross and intricate: so that in those that
are bewildred in them, is fulfilled that of the Psalmist; Psalm. 107.
They went astray in the Wilderness out of the way, and found no City to dwell
in: Hungry and thirsty, their Soul fainted in them. And being in such a desert
state, they will (if at all, or ever) be apt to relent, And to cry unto the
Lord in their trouble, to deliver them out of their distress, to lead them
forth by the right way, that they may go, and dwell in the City that is
refreshed with the streams and fountains of living waters.

Secondly, The diffusion of open Heresies contributes to the probation and
settlement of wavering, indifferent, and ungrounded Souls. For in times of
Ignorance, or Carnal security, many Men attend not to the force or design of
Religious Institutions, but sleep on supinely in the implicit Faith of the
fashionable Religion. In which case and state of drowsiness, no moral or
external Good is so apt to excite men to a severe enquiry and study of True
Religion, as the outrage of Heresies, which startle Men out of their heavy
Lethargy, yea, even out of their Graves, by a quick and forcible Resurrection,
crying, as it were, aloud with the voice of a Trumpet (and that a Trumpet of
War too) in the ears of every such dull and doting Christian; Awake thou that
sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. To this
end God sometime permitted false Prophets to arise, and to tempt his People to
Idolatry, that he might try and confirm them. Thus Moses: Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3.
If there arise among you a Prophet, or a Dreamer of dreams, and gives thee a
sign, or a wonder: And the sign or wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke unto
thee, saying, Let us go serve other Gods, etc. Thou shall not hearken unto the
words of that Prophet, or that Dreamer of dreams, for the Lord your God proves
you, to know whether you love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with
all your soul: viz. Permitting such Temptations to arise, not to be of equal
force with the Miracles of Moses and Prophets, but only strange enough to
startle the Careless and the Improvident, and to try them by the Prodigy, and
to provoke them to compare it with the Testimonial Fortifications of Moses and
the Prophets, and thus finally to instruct and confirm them in the Laws and
Ordinances of the God of Israel. Thus at the entrance of Christianity, our Lord
foretold, Matt. 24.11, 24, 25.
That many false Prophets, and false Christ's should arise, and show great signs
and wonders, and deceive many: Behold (says he) I have told you before; 1 John
4.1.
That we might not believe every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they are
of God, when many-false Prophets are gone out into the World.

Thirdly, the Divine Permission of Heresies is useful to the manifest
justification of the Faithful, and the Faith. For while the truth of our Faith
meets with no opposition, Men are generally content with the simplicity of its
Tradition in Creeds, and summary Abstracts of Christian Doctrine, and with the
plain sense of the obvious and easy Scriptures. But when it is attacked by
Heresies, and false Principles, pretendedly deduced from Divine Authority, this
puts the Zeal of the Faithful into a mighty fervor to trace the Sacred
Oracles, through all the Prophecies and Mysteries interspersed both in the Old
and New Testament; and by a Canonical Interpretation from the concurrent
harmony of them, to deduce a firm Catena of all the Catholic Principles of
Christian Piety, and to chase away into shame and confusion every Imposture
that exalts it self against the healing Truth and Wisdom of God. Thus as soon
as Heretics were crept into the Church, St. Jude Jud. Epist.
gave all diligence to write to them of the common Salvation, and to exhort
them to contend earnestly for the Faith that was once delivered unto the
Saints, viz. by discussing the Scriptures, which are able to make us wise unto
salvation, through faith that is in Christ Jesus. Thus Catechism makes us Babes
in Christ, but even Heresy it self makes the(...), the Approved and Faithful
perfectly mature in the Wisdom that is of God: by which he has, and will
destroy the wisdom of the Wise, and bring to naught the understanding of the
Prudent. Heresy therefore, which Celsus, and other Enemies of Christianity,
deride as the blemish of our Religion, proves the goodness of it in the
Original, and the glory of it in the End. For it was a sagacious hint of
Origin, Orig. contra Celsum, 1.3. -- (...)
That all different Heresies in all Wisdom, secular or sacred, spring from some
good and noble Original. Which, while it can be preserved virgin and inviolate,
suffers no reproach from the lascivient follies of vain and imprudent
Sciolists. And as to the Majestic glory of our Religion, it sits in the
Firmament of Heaven on high, clothed with the Sun, and the beams of Essential
Light, which all the filthy Exhalations of Spiritual Wizards and Impostors will
never be able to darken or vilify: Since Christianity ever improved by
oppositions, emerged above Heresies, and lives the more strongly by continual
Persecutions; and by its immovable perpetuity against all possible force and
fraud, becomes a Symbol and a Pledge of that Eternity, which it promises, and
to which it leads us.

Thirdly, Having thus discovered both the natural and moral Necessity of
Heresies in the World, Let us in the last place consider, what seasonable Uses,
(besides those, which are already touched on) Humane Prudence, under the
conduct of the Divine Wisdom, will suggest unto us. Upon which, being to speak
to an Auditory of a double Character, it is fit I should offer some
Considerations proper to each Order.

And here indeed, were there time to expatiate, lies a large Plain before me,
relating to the Discipline, Doctrine, and Sanctity of the Priesthood; and the
Sincerity, Humility, and Morals of the People. But a regard to your uneasiness,
the narrowness of the time, and the Laws of Modesty, must, and shall confine me.

First then, The Administration of Discipline, being in the hands of my
Superior, requires from him a Lesson of Prudence and Wisdom to me, and to us
all, and consequently enjoins me silence in this particular. And perhaps the
present State and Circumstances of the Church require no such accurate
enforcements of it in this juncture: The Counsel of St. Austin being
seasonable, Aug. de Fid. and Operib. cap. 5.
Nos vero ad sanam Doctrinam pertinere arbitramur, ut canes in Ecclesiae
propter pacem Ecclesiae toleremus: Canibus vero sanctum, ubi pax Ecclesiae tuta
est, non demus. So that I am immediately to pass to the consideration of that
Doctrine, which we ought to support, for the prevention, diminution, or
extirpation of Heresies. And here, my Brethren, you need a Draught from the
Judgment of a Superior: And if our Reverend Ordinary had thought good, instead
of making proof of me, to have filled up this place of Sacred Oratory himself,
he would have given us an excellent Copy from the Authority of the Scriptures,
and the Prudence of the Primitive Fathers. In opposition to the Follies and
Fables of Heresy, he would have admonished us in Tit. 2.7, 8.
all our Doctrine, to show uncorruptness, gravity, and sincerity; sound speech,
that cannot be condemned, that they of the contrary part may be ashamed: 2 Timothy
2.
To study to show our selves approved unto God, Workmen that need not be
ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth. In opposition to the disputatious
vanity of Heretics, he would have forbidden us 1 Timothy 6.4, 5.
to dote about questions, strifes about words, whereof comes envy, strife,
railings, evil surmisings, and perverse disputing with men of corrupt minds:
remembering the magnificent sense of Clemens Alexandrinus in this particular:
Clem. Alex. Paedag. l. 2. c. 7.(...)
Not to strive for empty victory, for that with us quietness is the designed
end of Conferences. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25, 26.
For the Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt
to teach, patient: In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledgment of the truth: And
that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the Devil: Thus Ignatius
to the Ephesians: Ignat. ad Ephesians.
In opposition to their anger, be you gentle; to their boasting, be you lowly;
to their blasphemies, oppose you your Prayers; against their Errors, stand you
firm in the Faith; against their rage, be you always mild; not aiming to
imitate them, but being emulous of the Lord. In contrariety to heretical
Innovations, he would have bid us keep close to the Faith which was once
delivered to the Saints: To magnify the excellency, and improve the use of
Catechetical Doctrines; 2 Timothy 1.13, 14.
To hold fast the Tradition of Faith, the form of sound words, which we have
received from the Apostles, and by the Holy Ghost that dwells in us, to keep
that good thing which was committed to us. For they indeed pursue a vain glory
by daring enquiries into Riddles, that tend to the subversion of the Hearers:
but St. Gregory Nazianzen gives us sounder direction; Greg. Naz.(...)
Not to despise the trite and common Principles, not to hunt out for novelties,
to gain a reputation with the multitude. In all our methods of Instruction, he
would have enjoined us to preach, not our selves, or our own Conceptions, or
mere Humane and novel Traditions, but Jesus Christ, and him crucified, and the
power of his Resurrection, and such noble Mysteries of Salvation from the sole
Authority of the Divine Oracles: Whence the Priest's lips are to preserve
knowledge, and the People are to seek the law at his mouth. And you know the
High Priest gave no Oracular Responses to the People from the Holy of Holies,
but what the Excellent Glory, that dwelt between the Cherubims, had written
with rays of purest light upon the Pectoral. In all our Doctoral Offices he
would have required of us an unwearied diligence, in season, and out of season,
not to neglect, but to stir up the gift of God which is in us, by the
imposition of the hands of our Fathers, and the Presbytery; watching in all
things, enduring afflictions, doing the work of Evangelists, making full proof
of our Ministry, that being faithful unto death, God may give us a Crown of
Life.

The last thing relating to our Order, and the great Envy of Heretics, is our
Sanctity. The Glory of which is indeed preferible to all the secular Splendour
and Power upon Earth. And had I time to describe it, not only from the Charge
and Charter of the Apostles, but from the Mystical Resemblances thereof in the
Institutes of Consecration, Portions, Offices, and Authorities of the Sons of
Aaron and Levi, it would appear, that our Order is no mean part of the Divine
Care, in which he has clothed us with so much Holinoss and Glory, to stand
before the Lord our God, and to be instead of God unto the People, and
Mediators for the People in things pertaining unto God. The White Robe of our
Solemnities represents an Angelical Purity even here, since the Angel that
attended our Lord's Resurrection appeared in Raiment as white as Snow; and an
Angelical Glory hereafter, when Rev. 3.5.
he that overcomes shall be clothed in white raiment. In which emblematick
Color St. Hierom tells us Hieron. Dialog. int. Attic. and Critob.
That the Bishops, Priests and Deacons, and all the Ecclesiastical Orders were
of old adorned: a Color recommended by Plato as representative of Men
peaceable and illuminated: agreeably whereunto St. Clemens Alexandrinus
observes of the white Vestments used by the Clergy in his time, Clem. Alex.
Paed. l. 3. c. 11.(...).
That they recommended the habit of their mind. Which I here urge with so much
remark, not that we should think our selves the more sacred for the habit,
which in it self indeed is senseless and indifferent; but to stop the mouths of
those that declaim against the solemn use of the white Robe in our Religious
Rituals, which was so early received in the most Primitive Ages as a symbol of
our present Holiness, and our future Glory: And not only to reprove them, but
to advertise our selves of that great internal purity of Soul, which not only
the weight, but the very Pontificalia, the solemn Ornaments of our Calling
recommend to our tenderest care and culture. For instead of gazing on our
Phylacteries, or Plumes of outside Honor, it is more necessary to dread the
danger of our Calling, and to tremble at the Precipice from on high. He that
reads the Apology that Nazianzen made for flying from the Episcopal Seat at
Nazianzum, will be moved long to experience his own Graces, before he enters
upon an holy Charge, closely resenting that pressing Question, Who is
sufficient for these things? And when he is initiated into the Services of the
Sanctuary, will cloth himself with fear, and humility, and subdue his Body,
lest after he has preached to others, himself become a castaway. The Sons of
Aaron, that were the(...), Judges of the Blemishes, both of the People, and
their Oblations, were themselves to be without blemish. Lev. 21.17.
Spea kunto Aaron, saying, Whosoever he be of thy Seed in their Generations
that has any blemish, let him not approach to offer the Bread of his God. For
it is but natural, that we first act the Levite and the Priest upon our selves,
before we administer these Liturgies or Operations unto others. That which our
Savior says of his Kingdom, The Kingdom of God is within you; is also true of
the Priesthood. Now the Levite was to cleanse, and keep holy the Temple and
Utensils of the Sanctuary: and the Priest therein, and therewith, was to make
the Oblations to the Most High. The Stoics have rightly set it, That every
wise Man is a Priest: in whom sobriety, like the Levite, cleanses the Temple,
Vessels, and Affections of our Body: and Devotion is the Priesthood, that
hallows, and dedicates us, and all our Actions, to the Living God. If then we
are Priests and Levites only by an Hierarchical and External Character, and not
inwardly so by Purity and Grace, what are we but whited Walls, and Sepulchers,
whose surface is indeed gay, but the inside nothing but rubbish, and
rottenness, and the Bones of dead Men, whom we have murdered and devoured by
our Sins, and which will appear in Judgment against us at the General
Resurrection of the Body? Since then we are descended into the Field, to fight
before the Armies of God against Principalities, and Powers, and Spiritual
Wickednesses in high Places, 1 Timothy 6.11, 12.
Let us follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness,
fight the good fight of faith, and thus lay hold on that eternal life whereunto
we are called.

And now, my Reverend Brethren, it is time to scatter some Religious Offers to
the Laick part of this Assembly.

And you, Good People, remember carefully, that you are in the Station of
Disciples, and are as much bound to learn, as we to teach: and in order
thereunto, to be humble, diligent, and tractable, without which no Scholar
thrives under the best Tutors. Obedience therefore to our Religious Methods and
Directions, is your indispensable duty, as well in order to your own
improvement, as our consolation. Thus the Author to the Hebrews teaches you:
Heb. 13.17.
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch
for your Souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy,
and not with grief, for this is unprofitable for you. For the neglect of this
plunges you into all manner of Sins, Schisms, Heresies, and Impieties. The
general mistake of common People is to despise the Doctrine that leads unto
Practice, and their ears itch after strange and empty Novelties, that they may
seem to know much. But a good old Father, Saint, and Martyr, gives you his
Sense; Iren. adv. Haeres. l. 2. c. 45.
That it is better to be plain Men, and to know but little, and by charity to
come near unto God, than by fancying to know much, to blaspheme against him; to
know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified, than by subtlety of
questions, and much babbling, to fall into impiety. Think not that we envy you
the glory of an excellent Wisdom. I can freely say with Moses, Would to God all
the Lord's People were Prophets; and I embrace knowledge heartily in every one
whom it puffs not up into vanity and insolence. To this the Wisdom of God
calls, to this the serene Spirit of God continually invites the wandering and
inobservant Sons of Men. But if you then will be wise indeed, learn that Wisdom
that is substantially such, that leads unto life, and teaches you the things
that belong unto your peace. The importunate Appetite of an unseasonable
Knowledge of Good and Evil had at first such an issue, as should for ever
affright us from the like wanton and precipitous Adventures. The Corinthians
coveted the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit; and St. Paul in some measure
corrects, and in some degree allows the Appetite: 1 Cor. 1^* 31. and 14.1. and
13.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
but yet he teaches them a more excellent way. What then is that? Follow after
Charity: For Charity never fails, though all other Graces cease. Charity
suffers long, and is kind: Charity envieth not, vaunteth not it self, is not
puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily
provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the
truth: Bears all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures
all things. And in distinction of true from vain Religion, St. James gives you
a clear Direction; Jam 1.26, 27.
If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, this
man's Religion is vain. True Religion, and undefiled before God, and the
Father, is to visit the Fatherless and Widows in their affliction, and to keep
himself unspotted from the World. For, What does the Lord your God require of
you, but to do judgment, and love mercy, and to walk humbly with your God?
Which care, as it would preserve us from the Snares of Heresy, so would it at
least shame and confound, if not reduce the Adversaries; whereas the
Debaucheries and Abominations of those, who pretend to the Communion of the
Church, as they are an offense to God, so do they make us a scorn and derision
to the Tabernacles of the Ishmaelites, Edomites, Moabites, Gebal, and Ammon,
and Amalek, Philistines, Tyrians, and Assyrians, and all the Enemies that are
round about us.

To conclude: The common Concernment of us all, is with all industry to purify
our selves from all filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in
the fear of God, to prepare our Souls for temptation. Perhaps the Church
needs the Fuller's Soap, or the refining Fire, and God may think it
seasonable to enter his Judgments at his own House. To endure which, an
integrity of Affections, as well as Principles, is most absolutely necessary.
Upon which previous Qualification, Jam. 1.2. 1 Pet. 3.14, 15.
Let us count it all joy, when we fall into temptation, and esteem them happy
that endure, being afraid of no terror, nor being troubled: but let us sanctify
the Lord God in our hearts, being ready always to give an answer to every one
that asks a reason of the hope that is in us, with meekness (toward Man) and
fear (toward God) rejoicing, and being exceeding glad, that we are accounted
worthy to suffer for his sake, and to bear in our Body the marks of the Lord
Jesus. For what the late Royal Martyr foretold of his own Reputation upon his
Sufferings, I can confidently presage of the Glory of this Church, as the
result of her present Afflictions, upon former Experiences: (...).
That after Owls and Bats have had the freedom of the night, and darker times,
it shall, like the Sun, rise again, and recover it self to such a degree of
splendour, as those feral Birds shall be unwilling to behold, and unable to
bear. Romans 8.18.
Nor will the Sufferings of this present time be worthy to be compared to the
Glory that shall be revealed in her. And after the dissolution of our present
Bondage, and the power of Temptations, we shall find an exceeding great Reward.
For when we have trampled upon the Adder, and Scorpion, and all the Power of
the Enemy, God, that 2 Timothy 4.18.
delivered us out of the mouths of Lions, and from every evil work, will at
last bring us to his heavenly Kingdom; To whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Robert Olavell, at the Peacock in St. Paul 's
Churchyard. 1688.
A Discourse concerning a Judge of Controversies in Matters of Religion: Being
an Answer to some Papers asserting the Necessity of such a Judge. With an
Address to wavering Protestants; showing what little Reason they have to think
of any Change of their Religion. Written for the private Satisfaction of some
Scrupulous Persons: And now Published for Common Use. With a Preface concerning
the Nature of Certainty and Infallibility. By an Eminent Author.

An Historical Description of the Glorious Conquest of the City of Buda, (the
Capital City of the Kingdom of Hungary) by the Victorious Arms of the Thrice
Illustrious and Invincible Emperor, Leopold the First, Under the Conduct of His
most Serene Highness, the Duke of Lorraine. In Nine Sheets.

The Plausible Arguments of a Romish Priest from Scripture, Answered by an
English Protestant. Seasonable and Useful for all Protestans Families.

A Plain and Familiar Discourse (by way of Dialogue) betwixt a Minister, and
his Parishioner, concerning the Catholic Church. In Three Parts, I. Showing
what is the Nature of the Catholic Church. II. That the Church of Rome is not
the Catholic Church. III. That the Scriptures, and not the Church, are the
Rule of Faith.
Which may serve as an Answer to some late Tracts upon that Argument. By a
Divine of the Church of England.

A Discourse of DUELS; showing the Sinful Nature, and Mischievous Effects of
them; And Answering the usual Excuses made for them, by Challengers, Accepters,
and Seconds. By T. Comber, D. D.

Of the Authority of Councils, and the Rule of Faith; With an Answer to the
Eight Theses laid down for the Trial of the English Reformation, in the Book
that came lately from Oxford.

The Law and Equity of the Gospel, in two plain Sermons, etc. By Tho. Pierce,
D. D. and Dean of Sarum.

The History of the English Monarchy, showing the benefit of Kingly Government,
and inconvenience of Commonwealths, etc.

An Historical Vindication of the Divine Right of Tithes, from Scripture,
Reason, and the Opinion and Practice of Jews, Gentiles, and Christians in all
Ages; designed to supply the Omissions, Answer the Objections, and rectify the
Mistakes of Mr. Selden's History of Tithes, Part I. A further Vindication of
the Divine Right of Tithes, proved by Scripture and Antiquity, and Illustrated
by the Solemn Consecration and great Convenience of them; with an Answer to the
Objections of other Authors against them, Part II. To which is added a
Discourse of Excommunication. By Thomas Comber, D. D. Precentor of York.


